Iridium is a very promising material for spintronic applications due to its interesting magnetic properties such as large RKKY exchange coupling as well as its large spin-orbit coupling value. Ir is for instance used as a spacer layer for perpendicular synthetic antiferromagnetic or ferrimagnet systems. However, only a few studies of the spintronic parameters of this material have been reported. In this paper, we present inverse spin Hall effect -spin pumping ferromagnetic resonance measurements on CoFeB/Ir based bilayers to estimate the values of the effective spin Hall angle, the spin diffusion length within iridium, and the spin mixing conductance in the CoFeB/Ir bilayer. In order to have reliable results, we performed the same experiments on CoFeB/Pt bilayers, which behavior is well known due to numerous reported studies. Our experimental results show that the spin diffusion length within iridium is 1.3 nm for resistivity of 250 nΩ.m, the spin mixing conductance g eff ↑↓ of the CoFeB/Ir interface is 30 nm -2 , and the spin Hall angle of iridium has the same sign than the one of platinum and is evaluated at 26% of the one of platinum. The value of the spin Hall angle found is 7.7% for Pt and 2% for Ir. These relevant parameters shall be useful to consider Ir in new concepts and devices combining spin-orbit torque and spin-transfer torque. Iridium is a very promising material for spintronic applications. Its properties include large spin orbit coupling The samples used in our experiments are Si-SiO 2 (300 nm)//CoFeB(5 nm)/Ir and Si-SiO 2 (300 nm)//CoFeB(5 nm)/Pt bilayers deposited on thermally oxidized silicon substrates. The double slash, //, stands for the position of the substrate. We chosed to grow samples with various iridium or platinum capping thickness (1, 2, 4, 6 and 15 nm) but keeping the same 5 nm Co 0.4 Fe 0.4 B 0.2 ferromagnetic layer thickness. All the layers were deposited by magnetron sputtering with a base vacuum pressure of 810 -9 mbar, and an argon deposition pressure of 510 -3 mbar, from pure elemental targets for platinum and iridium, and from an alloy Co 0.4 Fe 0.4 B 0.2 target. The samples grown were then patterned into rectangular slabs with electrodes at the end to measure the spin pumping voltage. The devices were structured using standard optical lithography techniques. An antenna was patterned on top of the sample, which was insulated by a SiO 2 cap of 75 nm. In this antenna we injected a GHz RF current which generates the radio-frequency field h rf on the sample. A static magnetic field ranging from 0 to 0.5 T can also be applied in plane. Depending on the value of the applied field, h rf could excite the magnetisation at resonance. Through the spin-pumping effect, the precession of the magnetisation yield to the creation of a pure transverse spin current j s that is injected from the CoFeB layer into the Ir or Pt layer. j s is generally expressed as follows Where g ↑↓ is the spin mixing conductance, m is the reduced magnetization and ω is the RF field pulsation. This spin current injected in the Heavy Metal (HM) layer is then converted into a charge current due to the ISHE which is detected by electrical means, by measuring the voltage in an open circuit, as represented in Fig. where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, μ 0 is the vacuum permeability, and M eff is the effective saturation magnetisation of the FM layer. M eff that is extracted does not change significantly with the thickness of the nonmagnetic material (here Pt or Ir) that caps the ferromagnetic layer. For all the samples grown, the value of μ 0 M eff is evaluated at 1.39 T. On the other hand, from the measurement of the spin pumping voltage as a function of the applied field (Fig. where H is the linewidth of the ferromagnetic resonance peak and H 0 is the inhomogeneous broadening. An example of such damping determination is shown in Fig. The intrinsic damping value α 0 = 7.5 × 10 -3 for t NM = 0 was obtained by Vector network analyzer (VNA)-FMR, since SP-FMR could not be an efficient detection method in that special case. Moreover, for t NM >0 we have checked that the damping values obtained using both methods were consistent. The value of the intrinsic damping was found to be slightly higher than the values given in part of the literature (4-5 10 -3 ) where g is the Landé factor (2.11 for CoFeB), g eff ↑↓ is the real part of the effective spin mixing conductance, μ B is the Bohr magneton and t FM is the ferromagnetic (CoFeB in our case ) layer thickness . Replacing our experimental values in eq. ( Finally, the spin pumping voltage measured normalized by the resistance of the FM/NM slab gives the charge current produced by ISHE. In this geometry the charge current measured can be expressed as follows where w = 10 μm is the width of the device. Here, J S eff is the effective spin current density injected in the NM layer and it follows the relationship where A(ω) = γμ 0 M eff +√(γμ 0 M eff ) 2 +4ω 2 represents the influence of the magnetic dynamics on the injected spin currents, as it was shown by Ando et al The value of spin diffusion length obtained for platinum is in agreement with the values found in the literature: the experimental values reported using SP-FMR set-up range from 0.5 nm We can observe that discrepancy with results in Fig. We can then plot the ratio Pt of this  parameter given in eq. ( The limit obtained for t NM ≫ l sf NM is the ratio of spin Hall angles. Indeed, we can represent this ratio as a function of the nonmagnetic materials thickness as shown in Fig. Nevertheless, a good agreement for nonmagnetic materials thickness superior to 2nm is obtained, and we can estimate the ratios of effective SHE efficiencies to be θ SH Ir θ SH Pt =0.26. This approach lets us evaluate the values of l sf and θ SH with precision. Besides, using our determination of the spin Hall angle of platinum at 7.6%, we can estimate the spin Hall angle of iridium to be around 2%. Literature provides a large range of values for Pt that span to more than an order of magnitude, ranging from 0.33 to 0.0067 The method that we present here enables to make a comparison by getting rid of many artefacts that seem to be the cause of a broadening of the results obtained in the literature. We can use the works in ref. In this paper, we have described an approach that enables the measurement of the spin Hall angle of a material with respect to another one. We report reliable values of spin diffusion lengths of 1.3  0.1 nm for iridium, 2.4  0.3 nm for platinum from the NM thickness dependence of the charge current (and not from damping evolution). The spin mixing conductances for both interfaces CoFeB/Ir and CoFeB/Pt have been estimated around 30 and 32 nm - 2 , respectively. The spin Hall angle of Ir has the same sign as the one of Pt and represents 26% of its value. We could obtain a θ SH value of 7.6% for Pt, from which we could deduce a θ SH value of 2% for Ir. Even though this procedure does not give by itself the value of the spin Hall characteristics of a material, it gives information about materials in same conditions, and enables a comparison between various materials. This can be an opportunity to unify the results concerning spin diffusion lengths and spin Hall angles, given the large dispersion in the results reported in the past decade. The spintronic parameters we are reporting for Ir will appeal for more applications exploiting this material in new spin-orbitronic devices such as combined spin-orbit torque and spin transfer torque effects in magnetic tunnel junctions 