In this work we study the oscillations of the skyrmion cores in a multilayer nanodot as a function of the number of skyrmions hosted in the system. When all the skyrmions in the nanodot have the same core radius, and after applying a perpendicular spin-polarized current, a relaxation process takes place towards an equilibrium configuration that is accompanied by coherent damped oscillations of the skyrmion cores, whose frequency depends on the number of skyrmions present in the nanodot. Additionally, we found that the oscillation frequency is directly related to the total energy of the system. Magnetic skyrmions are stable or metastable quasiparticles found in two-dimensional or quasi-two-dimensional magnetic systems It is well known that both the oscillations of quasiparticles and the behavior of fluctuations around them are a complex and rich phenomenon found in different physical contexts and where many factors, such as geometry, topology and the type of simulation, play a role. This is also true in magnetic systems where linear oscillations are known as spin waves In the same direction, in recent years, different research groups have faced several problems related to the oscillations of skyrmions, such as the breathing modes of individual skyrmions In this paper we are mainly interested in the natural frequency of the first internal breath mode, or uniform breathing mode This paper is organized as follows: In the second section we present the model and the equations used in the simulations. In the third section we describe the relaxation process that gives rise to the metastable states characterized by the skyrmion cluster. In the fourth section we present and discuss the oscillation process after the current injection. Finally, in the last section we present the conclusions and perspectives of the work. We consider a Co/Pt multilayer nanodot of 200 nm in diameter, which has a strong interfacial DMI that favors the appearance of Néel skyrmions in the 1 nm thick ferromagnetic layer (see Fig. where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, α is the Gilbert's damping, responsible of the alignment of the magnetization with the effective magnetic field H eff , which can be deduced from the free energy functional, U [m], as where μ 0 is the vacuum permeability. The energy depends on both the bulk and the interfaces, as well as the geometry and interaction with the external fields. In this study, we have considered the following energy density . [m] = A α=x,y,z (∇m which is related to the functional energy through In the definition of Eq. ( Once the energies involved are defined, we consider the following magnetic parameters for the multilayer Co/Pt system A spin-polarized current interacts with the magnetization of the sample by coupling the spin of the itinerant electrons that the current carries and the localized electrons that produce the magnetization where J is the magnitude of the current density, σ = /(μ 0 eM s ∆) with the Planck's constant reduced, e is the magnitude of the electron charge and ∆ is the thickness of the magnetic layer. The definition of ε is more complicated, including transport coefficients where the value of ε , commonly called secondary spin transfer term, is not yet clearly defined Once the system has relaxed to the desired magnetic configuration (with a certain number N of skyrmions), a spin-polarized current perpendicular to the nanodot plane and homogeneously polarized with p = +ẑ is introduced during 5 ns. In this work, we use a standard value of P = 0.4, obtaining an ε = 0.2 Temporal evolution of the skyrmion radius for three different configurations investigated when a spinpolarized current is applied perpendicular to the nanodot for 5 ns. The inserted snapshots represent the initial magnetic state before applying the current pulse. Once the current is turned off, the magnetic states relax to their equilibrium positions. Once the current pulse is turned off, the system relaxes until it reaches its equilibrium state again after approximately 3 ns (see Fig. To understand the effect of field-like torque on the skyrmions dynamics, in Fig. It is worth noting that the coherence in the oscillations occurs mainly due to the small size of the skyrmions and because they interact weakly with each other (for more details, see Fig. Our results are summarized in Fig. Finally, it is also interesting to explore the relation between the frequency and the total energy of the system. Fig. In conclusion, we have investigated the behavior of skyrmion clusters under a controlled situation, where the interaction between skyrmions is weak. For this, we have chosen the parameters associated with a Pt/Co multilayer nanodot and introduced an initial condition characterized by a multiskyrmion solution. By relaxing these initial conditions, we have been able to achieve stable configurations of skyrmion clusters that can be stimulated by a spin-polarized current applied perpendicular to the nanodot, which interacts with the magnetic layer through the Slonczewski torque and the field-like torque. We found that, once the current pulse is turned off, the relaxation to the equilibrium state occurs through coherent oscillations (all skyrmions oscillate in phase with the same frequency) that are exclusively related to the number N of skyrmions in the weakly interacting regime. The fact that skyrmions interact weakly with each other is crucial to obtain coherent oscillations. We have observed that in other cases, where the interaction is not negligible (N ≥ 9), the oscillations become more complex and cannot be directly related to the number N of skyrmions in the nanodot. However, these new effects will be explored in future work, where we will surely obtain rich phenomena due to the superposition and interference of the emitted spin waves. Finally, it could be interesting to explore the relation between the response frequency and the possible appearance of a response frequency by the injection of spin waves of different frequency. It is natural to suppose that this two frequencies must coincide but at this point we are not able to assure that.