Penta-Graphene (PG) was theoretically proposed as a new carbon allotrope with a 2D structure. PG has revealed interesting gas sensing properties. Here, the structural and electronic properties of defective PG lattices interacting with an oxygen molecule were theoretically studied by employing density functional theory calculations. Results show that PG lattices with a 3 -like single-atom vacancy presented higher adsorption energy than the 2 -like one. Remarkably, PG lattices with a 3 -like defect presented a clear degree of selectivity for the molecule orientation by changing their bandgap configurations. Importantly, the adsorption energies were obtained using the improved Lennard-Jones (ILJ) potential. In the last two decades, the need for environmental, industrial, and biological monitoring of O 2 concentration has stimulated the growing interest in developing new oxygen sensor technologies Pristine graphene presents a stable 2 -like hybridization of carbon bonds and null bandgap Herein, we employed DFT calculations to numerically study the effect of O 2 adsorption on the electronic and structural properties of PG lattices endowed of single-atom vacancies. Remarkably, our results point to the possibility of O 2 adsorption on PG at room temperature with reasonable adsorption energy, low recovering time, and a good degree of selectivity. The calculations performed here suggest that PG can be a promising candidate for the production of O 2 sensors and open a channel for the understanding of the adsorption mechanism of small molecules in carbon-based lattices. The structural and electronic properties of PG/O 2 complexes were studied using the DMol 3 module as implemented in Biovia Materials Studio software In Figure In our computational approach, the O 2 molecule is positioned parallel (O 2 -H) or perpendicular (O 2 -V) to the PG plane, at an initial distance of 7.0 Å (see Figure These curves were fitted using the Improved Lennard-Jones (ILJ) equation Figure We begin our discussions by presenting the adsorption energy curves that were obtained using the protocol discussed above. Figure The PG/ 2 -H, PG/O 2 -V, PG@B/O 2 -H, and PG@B/O 2 -V showed a physisorption mechanism since their curves dot not present a clearly defined potential well. In these systems, the electronic properties of the adsorbent are slightly changed in the presence of an adsorbate (as discussed later). The obtained adsorption energies ( parameter in reference Figure Table [49]), is the Boltzmann constant, and the temperature (298 K). In Figure In summary, we carried out DFT calculations to investigate the O 2 adsorption mechanism on the surface of PG lattices endowed of single-atom vacancies. Our results have revealed that the relationship between the adsorption energy and the distance between O 2 and PG yields typical potential energy curves. The PG/ 2 -H, PG/O 2 -V, PG@B/O 2 -H, and PG@B/O 2 -V showed a physisorption mechanism. On the other hand, the PG@A/O 2 -H e PG@A/O 2 -V cases present higher reactivity. The adsorption energy for the PG@A/O 2 -H case is, at least, twice higher than all the other cases. Particularly, the adsorption process in PG@A/O 2 -H system stands for a chemisorption mechanism. The recovering time values for PG@A/O 2 -H and PG@A/O 2 -V adsorption energy curves varied from 0.5 ps up to 2.5 ps. For the lowest absorption energy (PG@A/O 2 -H case) = 2.31 ps whereas for the PG@A/O 2 -V one, the highest recovering time is about 1.5 ps. These transient times were large enough to realize the interaction between O 2 and PG@A and they have allowed changes in the electronic properties of the PG@A lattice. The electronic band structure of defective PG lattices upon O 2 adsorption is substantially impacted. Their bandgap configurations show the following common trend: upon adsorption, the bandgap value is slightly decreased and some flat midgap levels , where , 2 , and ( + 2) are the total energies for isolated PG, isolated O 2 , and O 2 adsorbed on PG surface, respectively. For a more detailed description of the PG/O 2 adsorption mechanism, the case of higher adsorption energy