We investigate chemo-photothermal effects of gold nanorods (GNRs) coated using mesoporous silica (mSiO 2 ) loading doxorubicin (DOX). When the mesoporous silica layer is embedded by doxorubicin drugs, a significant change in absorption spectra enable to quantify the drug loading. We carry out photothermal experiments on saline and livers of mice having GNRs@mSiO 2 and GNRs@mSiO 2 -DOX. We also inject the gold nanostructures into many tumor-implanted mice and use laser illumination on some of them. By measuring weight and size of tumors, the distinct efficiency of photothermal therapy and chemotherapy on treatment is determined. We experimentally confirm the accumulation of gold nanostructures in liver. Photothermal effects of gold nanorods have been extensively investigated due to medical applications In some biological and photothermal applications, GNRs is preferred rather than gold nanoshells (GNSs) because of two main reasons. First, the size of GNSs having plasmon resonances in the near-infrared region is large (∼ 150nm) While doxorubicin is an anthracycline antibiotic known as one of the most therapeutic anti-tumor drugs to treat various solid malignant tumors. Doxorubicin intercalates within DNA helix in the cell nucleus. Thereby, this drug inhibits macromolecular biosynthesis and destroys DNA function There have recently been clinical trials for goldnanoparticle-based photothermal cancer therapy to ablate thermally neck, brain, lung, and prostate cancerous tumors In this work, we synthesize GNRs@mSiO 2 -DOX and investigate photothermal and chemical behaviors of nanostructures under laser irradiation. We use transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectrum to analyze structures of experimental samples. Effects of DOX loading on optical properties are determined using the absorption spectrum. Then, we inject solutions of GNRs@mSiO 2 with and without DOX molecules into 45 normal and tumor-planted mice and study chemo-photothermal activities. Based on experimental results, we quantitatively evaluate roles of individual mechanism on cancer treatments. We purchased tetrachloroauric acid trihydrate 99.5 % (HAuCl 4 • 3 H 2 O), ethanol, CTAB, ascorbic acid, and AgNO 3 from Merck. Tetraethoxylsilane and NH 4 OH (28-30 %), and NaBH 4 were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and Walko, respectively. Doxorubicin hydrochloride 2 mg/ml was provided by Ebewe Pharma. In our experiments, we dispersed materials into double distilled water. GNR@SiO 2 -DOX complex The synthesis of GNR@SiO 2 -DOX composites consists of three steps. First, we synthesized near-infrared light-responsive GNRs. Second, a mesoporous silica layer is coated on gold surfaces. A thickness of the silica layer is approximately 15 nm. Third, when dispersing DOX.HCl molecules in an aqueous solution of GNSs, the mesoporous silica surface adsorbed the biomolecules onto the mesoporous silica surface via electrostatic interactions. Finally, we obtained mesoporous silica-encapsulated GNRs (GNR@mSiO 2 -DOX) composites loading DOX molecules. Gold nanorods having dimensions of ∼ 39.2 × 10.7 nm (an average aspect ratio of 3.7) were synthesized using the seed-mediated growth method GNRs were prepared by a seed-mediated sequential growth and a reduction of gold salt in the presence of in the presence of a CTAB surfactant. A 20 ml aliquot of the GNRs solution was centrifuged and re-dispersed in 20 ml deionized water. Then, we added 0.5 ml of the TEOS ethanol solution (20 mM) to 20 mL of GNR aqueous solution (pH is adjusted to 10-11 by mixing NH 4 OH). After vigorously stirring for 24 hours at room temperature, there was a 15nm thick mesoporous silica layer forming on the surface of the GNRs through hydrolysis and condensation of TEOS. The silica-encapsulated GNRs were isolated by centrifugation, washed with deionized water and ethanol several times, and then re-dispersed in 2 ml of deionized water for later use. We added 200 μl of DOX.HCl 2-mg/mL solution to a solution of GNRs@mSiO 2 solution which has the optical density (OD) equal to 12. Then, this mixture was stirred and mixed during 75h at room temperature in the dark. Electrostatic interaction between doxorubicin molecules and the mesoporous silica surface leads to molecular adsorption at particle surfaces In the final GNR suspension, GNRs@mSiO 2 and GNRs@SiO 2 DOX were characterized by an ultraviolet/visible wavelength (UV-VIS-NIR) spectrophotometer (Shimadzu 2600) and dynamic light scattering. We examined sizes and shapes of GNRs by high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, JEM2100-JEOL). Samples were prepared by placing one drop of the GNR suspension on a 200-mesh, copper grid with carbon (SPI Supplies, West Chester, Pennsylvania), and drying in a vacuum oven overnight. We used X-Ray diffraction to determine the chemical composition and crystalline of the obtained GNRs. For in vivo experiments, we used healthy male Swiss Albino mice (810 weeks old) with weight of 18± 1.5 g. The mice had free access to food and water and were maintained on a 14/10 h light/dark cycle. The sarcoma cancer cells were subcutaneously implanted (2×10 6 cells/100 μl of Hanks solution) into the right side of mouse back. The tumor size was daily measured. These animals were examined when their average tumor size grew up to 5-6 mm diameter. We randomly divided forty five mice into nine groups (five mice per groups): one control group and eight experimental groups with two different concentrations of GNR@mSiO 2 and GNR@mSiO 2 -DOX having optical density of 5.5 and 9.2 at 808 nm under 808-nm laser irradiation. Particularly, the groups are -Control group: without tumor and no treatment. -Group 1: saline injection. -Group 2: saline injection + 808-nm laser irradiation; -Group 3: GNR@mSiO 2 OD = 9.2. -Group 4: GNR@mSiO 2 -DOX OD = 9.2 -Group 5: GNR@mSiO 2 OD = 5.5 + 808-nm laser irradiation. -Group 6: GNR@mSiO 2 OD = 9.2 + 808-nm laser irradiation. -Group 7: GNR@mSiO 2 -DOX OD = 5.5 + 808-nm laser irradiation. -Group 8: GNR@mSiO 2 -DOX OD = 9.2 + 808-nm laser irradiation. We used a 1 ml syrring 26G needle to inject directly 30 μl of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) 1x or GNR@mSiO 2 /GNR@SiO 2 -DOX solutions into each tumor center of mice. The animals were irradiated with laser (808 nm, 3.25 W/cm 2 , 1 minute, a spot size of 6 mm) immediately after tumor-direct injection. The laser was focused on the center of the tumor. We measured the temperature rise of tumor surface by an infrared (IR) camera (Chauvin Arnoux C.A 1995 IR camera IP 54). After treatment, we observed health and weight of mice. After 1 month, all mice were euthanized. We dissected their tumors and measured their weight. Average body weights of nine groups of mice as a function of time were shown in Figure Figure Figure Figure Compared to the optical spectrum of CTAB-GNRs, the longitudinal surface plasmon resonance band of GNR@mSiO 2 is slightly red-shifted about 6 nm. Meanwhile, the peak location for the transverse plasmon band of CTAB-GNRs is at 513 nm and this resonance is blueshifted about 4 nm when coating silica on the gold surface. This behavior can be explained that the refractive index of silica shell (1.45) is closer to that of water media The DOX loading of GNRs@mSiO 2 can be analyzed using the absorption spectra. As shown in Figure Free and absorbed DOX molecules can be separated using centrifugation. We removed the supernatant with a pipet and determined the concentration of the residual DOX in the supernatant by measuring its absorbance and then comparing this measured spectrum with that of known concentrations of free DOX solution. From this, we estimated that 1 μg of Au approximately absorbs 1.3 μg of DOX. Under NIR 808-nm laser irradiation with power density at 3.25 W/cm 2 for 1 minute, GNRs@mSiO 2 and GNRs@mSiO 2 -DOX in solutions absorb the light energy and convert it into heat. Solutions of plasmonic nanocomposites are fixed at the same optical density of 3.6 at 808 nm. During the laser illumination, as shown in Figure Furthermore, since the absorption spectrum of GNRs with and without a mesoporous silica layer on the gold surface have a very small variation (see Figure In our work, to test the accumulation of GNR@mSiO 2 in the liver, we used low doses (100 μl of saline buffer and GNR@mSiO 2 1.75 mg • kg -1 ) to inject into mice. For two hours after intravenous injection, mice were sacrificed and their livers were taken. The presence and influences of GNRs in the livers were determined via photothermal effects. Under the same conditions of in vivo experiments, we illuminated livers at the three different positions (P 1 , P 2 , and P 3 as depicted in Figure when tumors have GNR@SiO 2 -DOX, we combine effects of the anti-cancer drug and photothermal agents. This combination significantly enhances the efficiency and effectiveness of GNR@SiO 2 -DOX dose. Using more photothermal agents enables to absorb more optical energy to thermally devastate tumor tissue. One can deduce this conclusion from comparing group 7 and 8, which correspond injections with the optical density of 5.5 and 9.2, respectively. We have validated anti-cancer effects of the chemophotothermal therapy based on GNR@SiO 2 -DOX by in vivo experiments. We have experimentally prepared GNR@SiO 2 -DOX and examined complex structures via SEM and TEM imagine, and XRD technique. Based on absorption spectra, one can observe variations of plasmonic properties of GNRs of size 10.7 nm × 39.2 nm when coating a mesoporous silica layer on the gold surface and encapsulating DOX molecules onto this silica layer. Moreover, these optical spectra allow us to determine the amount of loaded DOX molecules. After injecting solutions of the GNR@SiO 2 and GNR@SiO 2 -DOX into mice and scarifying them, photothermal experiments are carried out in both water and livers of mice. These experiments proves that GNRs@SiO 2 are accumulated in livers. The mice liver can be approximately considered as a homogeneous medium and the injected GNRs are randomly dispersed in the liver when injected into mice. When we inject solutions of GNRs@SiO 2 and GNRs@SiO 2 -DOX into tumor-implanted mice and irradiate NIR laser light on their tumors within 1 minute immediately after direct injection, health and weight of mice are observed everyday for one month. Then, their tumors are taken to measure weight. All measurements explicitly indicate that both chemotherapy and photothermal therapy significantly reduce tumor volumes. More reduction of volumes is found when combining these two approaches.