Disordered nanostructures with correlations on the scale of visible wavelengths can show angle-independent structural colors. These materials could replace dyes in some applications because the color is tunable and resists photobleaching. However, designing nanostructures with a prescribed color is difficult, especially when the application-cosmetics or displays, for example-requires specific component materials. A general approach to solving this constrained design problem is modeling and optimization: using a model that predicts the color of a given system, one optimizes the model parameters under constraints to achieve a target color. For this approach to work, the model must make accurate predictions, which is challenging because disordered nanostructures have multiple scattering. To address this challenge, we develop a Monte Carlo model that simulates multiple scattering of light in disordered arrangements of spherical particles or voids. The model produces quantitative agreement with measurements when we account for roughness on the surface of the film, particle polydispersity, and wavelength-dependent absorption in the components. Unlike discrete numerical simulations, our model is parameterized in terms of experimental variables, simplifying the connection between simulation and fabrication. To demonstrate this approach, we reproduce the color of the male mountain bluebird (Sialia currucoides) in an experimental system, using prescribed components and a microstructure that is easy to fabricate. Finally, we use the model to find the limits of angle-independent structural colors for a given system. These results enable an engineering design approach to structural color for many different applications. A ngle-independent structural color occurs when light scat- ters from a composite material with a correlation length on the scale of visible wavelengths. Examples of such materials are the feathers of blue and some green birds (Fig. We can therefore envision replacing traditional dyes and pigments with angle-independent structural colors in applications ranging from paints, coatings, and cosmetics to electronic displays and sensors. There are several advantages to doing so. Because structural colors do not require strong absorption, they resist photobleaching and are less photoreactive. Also, because structural colors arise from scattering, different colors can be made from the same component materials by changing the sizes of the pores or particles. This property enables a new and powerful approach to formulation: first, the component materials for a particular application are chosen to meet constraints such as low toxicity or reactivity; second, the nanostructure is tuned to achieve the target color. Making this approach a reality requires a way to design materials with a target color, starting from a prescribed set of component materials and, frequently, a particular type of nanostructure. Many studies on angle-independent color deal with a less constrained design problem: given a color, determine the materials or nanostructure required to make it. A common approach to address this less constrained problem is biomimicry. Examples of biomimicry include fabricating structurally colored materials containing melanin, an absorber found in bird feathers Here we present a way to solve a more common and challenging design problem: given the materials and a simple, easy-to-make nanostructure-spherical inclusions in a matrixdetermine what colors can be made, and what structural parameters (particle size and volume fraction, for example) are required to make a given color. Compared to the problem of determining the materials and structure required to make a given color, our problem is complicated by the potential absence of solutions that meet the needs of the application. The model can therefore be used to determine the design space-or all the possible colors-for specific constraints, such as a given type of particle and matrix material. Shown are examples of the colors that can be obtained for fixed material parameters and variable structural parameters. (i) Then, given a target color that is inside the design space, we use optimization to determine the experimental parameters needed to make that color, subject to constraints of our choice, as shown in this schematic. Determining whether a solution exists requires a way to predict all possible colors for a given set of constraints. Tackling this design problem requires an accurate model for how light interacts with disordered composite materials. Such a model must account for both absorption and multiple scattering of light, which affects the color saturation. Because structurally colored samples are composite materials, each component has its own wavelength-dependent index of refraction and absorption coefficient. Even if the components are "transparent" dielectrics, a small amount of absorption can change the reflectance spectrum. As we shall show, these effects must be modeled carefully to quantitatively predict color. In what follows, we describe a Monte Carlo model of light transport in disordered packings of spherical inclusions in a matrix phase, and we show that it can make predictions that are in quantitative agreement with experiment. We then use the model to determine the design space, or all the possible colors that can be made, given the experimental constraints. We demonstrate the design of target colors in two ways: in the first, we choose target colors from the design space for specific material systems. In the second, we target a given point in a perceptual colorspace and use optimization to determine the experimental parameters that produce this color. Overall, the approach that we demonstrate (illustrated in Fig. Approach. Light propagating through a composite material is scattered when the refractive indices of the component materials differ and is absorbed when either of the materials has a refractive index with a non-zero imaginary component. The scattered waves can then interfere with one another. Furthermore, depending on the refractive indices and nanostructure, light might scatter repeatedly before exiting the material. Thus, modeling structural color requires knowing the complex refractive indices of the materials, the nanostructure, and the detection geometry. There are many approaches to modeling the relation between scattering and color. The most venerable is radiative transfer theory, and in particular the Kubelka-Munk theory with a more natural parameterization include single-scattering models based on effective-medium approximations A more general approach is Monte Carlo simulation of photon trajectories. In this approach, photon "packets" propagate through a system, taking steps that are sampled from a stepsize distribution and scattering into directions sampled from a phase function Our multiple scattering model is based on the Monte Carlo method, but we use a phase function that accounts for constructive interference and wavelength-dependent absorption, which we describe in more detail below. With this phase function and the step-size distribution, we simulate the random-walk trajectories of photon packets as they propagate through the material, as shown in Fig. We assume that the scattering occurs in an effective medium determined by the average properties of the material (Fig. Hwang, Stephenson, Barkley, Brandt, Xiao, Aizenberg, and Manoharan Our effective-medium theory, which is described in more detail in SI Appendix, is based on the Bruggeman approximation To account for wavelength-dependent absorption, we use a modification of Mie theory that accounts for absorption in both the particles and matrix. In an absorbing system, the scattered fields are absorbed as they propagate away from the scatterer, such that the differential scattering cross-section of a particle decreases with distance Modeling absorption leads to better agreement between the predicted and measured reflection spectrum (Fig. We also account for surface scattering, which can arise from the roughness inherent to most experimental samples. We model this roughness at two different scales: coarse and fine. Coarse roughness is large compared to the wavelength, such that incident light encounters a locally smooth surface that is angled with respect to the incident direction. We model coarse roughness by accounting for the refraction of light when it encounters the boundary of the film (Fig. For many of the samples we examine, such as those dispersed in a liquid, we cannot easily measure the roughness parameters. Indeed, as we note in Discussion, the roughness parameters can be viewed more generally as correcting for the failure of the effective-medium approximation at the boundary of the sample. Therefore we determine these parameters by fitting them to measurements. When we do this, we find that including coarse and fine roughness brings the model into quantitative agreement with experiment (Fig. In the validation experiments that follow, we do not fit each measurement individually; instead, because we expect the roughness values to largely depend on the sample assembly method, we fit the values to all samples fabricated with the same technique. Model validation. We validate the model by comparing the predicted and measured reflectance spectra for samples with different physical parameters (see SI Appendix for a description of the sample fabrication and characterization). In each of the simulations, we take the average of 20,000 trajectories at each wavelength. For such a large number of trajectories, the Monte Carlo uncertainty in the predicted reflection spectrum is much smaller (standard deviation 0.4%) than the uncertainty of the experimental spectrum, which is determined by taking measurements from different parts of the same sample. We first examine the effect of particle radius. We calculate reflectance spectra for packings of polystyrene particles in air for three different polystyrene radii: 94, 109, and 138 nm. As shown in Fig. Having shown previously that a small amount of absorption can alter the reflection spectrum (Fig. In addition, we explore the validity of the model over a range of film thicknesses. In the thickest sample, the thickness is much larger than its transport length, which is the length scale at which the direction of light is randomized. In the thinnest, the thickness is smaller than its transport length at all wavelengths. The model agrees with experiment when the thickness is large, but starts to deviate from experimental data in thin samples and at large wavelengths (Fig. In SI Appendix, we further validate the model on bidisperse samples (Fig. Finding the limits of the design space. With a validated model, we can calculate the limits of the design space-that is, the range of structural colors that can be made for a given set of materials or other constraints. As an example, we calculate a gamut for packings of polystyrene particles in air with added carbon black, with varying particle radius, volume fraction, sample thickness, and carbon black concentration (Fig. To describe how the colors change as a function of these pa-rameters, we use terminology from color science: hue, chroma (or perceived vividness), and luminance. Each of these can be calculated by transforming the computed reflectance spectra used to generate Fig. To demonstrate the predictive power of the model, we make three colors from these gamuts (outlined swatches in Fig. To implement this approach, we choose a target color in CIELAB coordinates, then use Bayesian optimization We choose the color of the mountain bluebird as our target (Fig. We impose a different set of constraints. Because the bluebird's "inverse" structure of pores inside a solid matrix is not as easy to fabricate as a "direct" structure of solid spheres in air or water, we design the color using a direct structure instead. Furthermore, we constrain the materials to those we have on hand: polystyrene spheres and a matrix of either air or water. We use Bayesian optimization to determine the optimal particle radius, volume fraction, film thickness, and concentration of carbon black. To ensure that the optimal values can be experimentally achieved, we set ranges for these parameters: the particle radius is 74, 101, 110, 112.5, or 138 nm; the thickness is between 20 and 150 μm; and the range for the matrix imaginary index is between 0 and 0.005i. We use the same values of roughness as in the samples in Fig. When we minimize the difference between the target color and the color obtained from the model, we find a good match in CIELAB space (Fig. We make a film with parameters as close as possible to those of the best fit. We find that both the resulting spectrum and color are close to those of the best fit, as shown in Fig. Having shown that our model can be used to design colors, we now examine its limitations and why it works despite these limitations. The central approximation is that of the effective medium: we assume that between scattering events, light propagates through a homogeneous medium with an effective refractive index. This effective index, which we calculate using the Bruggeman weighted average Their model, like ours, can predict reflectance spectra, but it is not suitable for our purposes for two reasons. First, the diffusion approximation is valid only when light scatters many times before it exits the sample, whereas in many structurally colored samples, the thickness is chosen to minimize the amount of multiple scattering To understand why our approach correctly predicts spectra despite the absence of near-field corrections, we calculate the scattering strength of polystyrene particles in air. The scat-tering strength is the ratio of the wavelength to the transport length, where the transport length is calculated using both the form and structure factors and the Bruggeman effective index. We calculate the scattering strength as a function of the ratio of radius to wavelength. We find that the peaks in scattering strength match experimental measurements by Aubry and colleagues Because our model does not account for near-field effects, we do not expect it to work at high scattering strengths, or when the transport length is comparable to the wavelength. Furthermore, the discrepancies at small and large thicknesses (Fig. However, these situations may not be relevant to structurally colored materials. Color saturation requires that multiple scattering be weak and the transport length be comparable to the thickness of the material. This is the fundamental reason why the model works so well. Furthermore, we take advantage of the limited color capacity of the human visual systemespecially at long wavelengths-because our eyes detect colors based on three receptors rather than on full reflectance spectra. Therefore, our model can be used to design perceptual colors even when the reflection spectrum cannot be matched to the target spectrum, as we have shown. We have also shown that it is necessary to model surface roughness to achieve quantitative agreement between model and experiment. When we introduced the roughness parameters, we argued that they account for the topography of the samples. But more generally, the roughness parameters account for the breakdown of the effective-medium approximation at the surface of the sample. The breakdown occurs not only because of topography, but because Mie theory does not accurately describe the initial interaction of light with the film. Mie theory is derived for a particle embedded in the same (effective) medium on all sides, whereas particles at the surface have other particles on one side and a homogeneous material on the other. Furthermore, the effective-medium approximation we use includes the effects of the structure factor, which is not well defined at the boundary of the sample. The fine and coarse roughness parameters compensate for all of these effects, and therefore topographical measurement techniques such as atomic force microscopy may not give the appropriate values for these parameters. Nevertheless, the model is still predictive even though the roughness parameters must be fitted to experimental data. Indeed, as we have shown, the parameters need not be fitted to measurements for each individual sample; instead, one can use the same values for all samples that are made with the same assembly technique. To improve the predictive accuracy, one can use an iterative design approach: first, make an initial guess for the roughness and find the model parameters that best fit a target color; second, make the sample using the bestfit parameters and fit the model to the data to improve the estimates of the roughness parameters; third, use the improved estimates to find parameters that give a better fit of the model to the target (Fig. The power of our model lies in providing a physical understanding of how the experimental parameters change the color. This insight enables a rational design approach for the nanostructure. Consider a case when the materials are prescribed-for example, polystyrene in air or water-but the structure can be varied-for example, by making composite particles. This situation arises in many applications: the constituent materials must meet certain requirements (regulatory or other), but the spatial arrangement of these materials may be unconstrained. Because there are infinite possible arrangements that differ from solid spherical particles in a matrix, finding the optimal arrangement for a target color is a very difficult design problem. We can, however, use the physical intuition provided by the model to choose a nanostructure that produces a particular color. As an example, we consider making colors that are outside the gamut of a system of polystyrene particles in air, yet use the same materials. Solid polystyrene spheres in air tend to have low saturation or chroma, particularly in the red, as shown in the gamut of Fig. To decrease this scattering, we design an alternative arrangement of the materials. First, we invert the particles into air cores with polystyrene shells (2) to reduce the scattering cross-section in the blue. Second, we place the core-shell parti- cles in a matrix of water to decrease the index contrast between the shell and the matrix (Fig. From this example, we see that loosening the restrictions on the arrangement of the materials increases the size of the design space but also makes it possible to access new colors. The physical intuition provided by the model is critical for exploring this larger design space. Engineering materials with prescribed structural colors requires a way to predict the color from the nanostructure. Doing so efficiently requires accurate predictions, so as to minimize iteration between experiment and simulation. We have demonstrated a model of multiple scattering in disordered packings of spheres that produces accurate predictions. The model is parameterized in terms of experimental quantities such as the volume fraction and material optical properties. As such, it can be used to design structurally colored materials that meet specific constraints, making it particularly useful for applications in which only certain materials can be used. The predictive power is also important for applications such as paints and coatings, where the color might change substantially as the suspending liquid dries and the refractive-index contrast increases. Compared to finite-difference time-domain and similar methods, our model addresses a smaller range of nanostructures-those involving disordered arrangements of spheres-but has two principal advantages: it is parameterized in terms of experimental quantities, and the results can be interpreted in terms of collective and resonant scattering effects. The interpretability of the results can be used to rationally design variant nanostructures with wider color gamuts, as we have shown. Furthermore, the restriction to spherical pores or voids may not be a significant limitation. A feature of angle-independent structural color is that it does not require a complex nanostructure or fabrication scheme; instead, it can be produced simply by rapidly consolidating inexpensive spherical nanoparticles. We anticipate that many applications will take advantage of this feature. We have validated the model in the regime of weak multiple scattering, that is, when the transport length is several times the wavelength, and the sample thickness is on the order of the transport length. Arguably most applications of structural color lie within this regime, including paints, coatings, and sensors. Materials that strongly multiply scatter light look white, whereas materials that have little multiple scattering look translucent. Other models-for example, the diffusion approximation in the case of strong multiple scattering and single-scattering theory in the case of very weak multiple scattering-may yield better predictions in these two regimes. Our model can be extended to more complex geometries and other illumination conditions. Here we have focused on films of spheres in a matrix, but the boundary conditions can be changed to model so-called "photonic balls" Finally, the model can be used to predict the angledependence of the color. Although the term "angleindependent" is used to describe the color, in reality there is a weak variation of color with the angle between the source and detector. This variation arises because constructive interference condition is not completely independent of the scattering wavevector (2). In the results shown above, we have simulated the diffuse reflectance spectrum, which can be used to determine how the sample would look in ambient light. But one can also simulate the reflection spectrum as a function of the incident and detected angles. This approach could help determine the fundamental physical limits of angle-dependence, chroma, and hue-as well as the tradeoffs between them-in structurally colored materials. Materials and methods can be found in SI Appendix. Hwang, Stephenson, Barkley, Brandt, Xiao, Aizenberg, and Manoharan Hwang, Stephenson, Barkley, Brandt, Xiao, Aizenberg, and Manoharan