Obesity is associated with higher fatality risk and altered distribution of occupant injuries in motor vehicle crashes (MVCs) partially because of the increased depth of abdominal soft tissue, which results in limited and/or delayed engagement of the lap belt with the pelvis and increases the risk of pelvis "submarining" under the lap belt exposing occupant's abdomen to belt loading Finite element human body models (FE-HBMs) are valuable tools to simulate occupant response and facilitate the understanding of belt-flesh-pelvis interaction during MVCs. To better facilitate the development of occupant safety countermeasures, biofidelic modeling of the belt-flesh-pelvis interaction during MVCs using FE-HBMs is crucial. Specifically, one critical method to improve biofidelity is to understand the constitutive characteristics of abdominal subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT) in the belt-flesh-pelvis loading transfer process. However, not only is there a lack of SAT constitutive models applicable to impact biomechanics modelling, no direct measurement for strains and strain rates at the tissue level is available Three types of finite element simulations with different loading and boundary conditions were performed based on the literature and post-mortem human subject (PMHS) tests, with three different FE-HBMs (Figure The belt pull simulation was based on the belt pull test previously performed at the University of Virginia Center for Applied Biomechanics (UVa-CAB) Zhaonan Sun, Bronislaw D. Gepner, Sang-Hyun Lee, Joshua Rigby, Neil Singh, Jason R. Kerrigan Determination of strain rate in modelling belt-flesh-pelvis interaction during frontal crashes GHBMC obese model with a height of 1,750 mm and a BMI of 30 kg/m 2 (GHBMC-30O) was positioned matching the pelvis and spine position from the PMHS test The rear seat simulation was based on PMHS tests performed previously at UVa-CAB The simulation environment was based on the recently completed reclined, full body, PMHS test series Upon completion of the simulations, element strains in the abdominal flesh part were extracted. Specifically, the infinitesimal strain tensor was obtained, and three strain metrics were derived from the strain tensor. The maximum principal strain (MAPS) and minimum principal strain (MIPS) were defined as the maximum and minimum numerical value among the three principal strains, which correspond to either tensile or compressive loading of the elements. Shear strain was obtained by extracting the off-diagonal element in the infinitesimal strain tensor which correspond to element shearing in the sagittal plane of the human body. The peak strains of each element were obtained by taking the peak strain value in the simulation time history based on these three strain metrics. Among these individual peak strain values, the 95 th percentile value was obtained and presented as overall peak strains to avoid numerical artifacts contributed by heavily distorted elements. Strain rate at each element was obtained by dividing the difference in element strain across two consecutive timesteps by the timestep length. Then, the peak strain rate value for each element was obtained by finding the peak value across the simulation time history. Similarly, the 95 th percentile value of peak strain rates among these individual peak strain rates in the simulation was then calculated and presented as peak strain rates. The above procedure was performed for all three simulations and the average value of the overall peak strain and strain rates was calculated across different simulations. To isolate the loading effect in the area of direct contact with the lap belt, the same procedure was repeated for the elements in the abdominal region under direct belt loading. The obtained values were compared with input conditions from material testing of animal and human SAT in the literature. In reclined seatback with GHBMC-S, despite the reclined position, the occupant's pelvis was well constrained and no pelvis submarining under the lap belt was observed. Specifically, the lap belt remained anterior to the anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS) throughout the simulation. Large deformation was observed in the abdominal flesh part while the torso was moving forward. In the rear seat simulation with GHBMC-35O, while the forward motion of lower extremities was significant, no pelvis submarining under the lap belt was observed. As a result, the flesh covering the pelvis was loaded to large deformation. In the belt pull simulation, the pelvis of the GHBMC-30O was constrained to match the PMHS test. While the lap belt in the belt pull simulation followed the initial belt trajectory observed in the experiment, it stayed engaged with the flesh covering the pelvis and failed to slide into the abdomen. Considering all elements in the abdominal flesh part, the largest peak MAPS across all simulations was found to be 0.5 in the GHBMC-S model while the largest peak rate for MAPS was 44/s, observed in the belt pull simulation with the GHBMC-35O model. Both the largest peak MIPS and peak MIPS rate was observed in the reclined sled simulation with the GHBMC-S model. Peak shear strain was found in the rear seat sled simulation while the peak shear strain rate was observed in the belt pull simulation. Overall, the average strain and strain rate MAPS response, for all simulations considering all elements in the abdominal flesh part were 0.46 and 35/s, respectively. The analyzed result using the other two metrics are presented in Table While pelvis submarining was observed in the UVA belt-pull test and rear seat sled test with PMHS, different belt-flesh-pelvis interaction patterns were observed in the corresponding simulations. One of the reasons for this discrepancy is that the FE-HBM flesh material model does not represent the constitutive behavior of human SAT The results indicate deep compression in abdominal elements, which is partially related to the computational modelling technique of the abdominal flesh. In all three FE-HBMs, severe volume change of the flesh was observed since it was modelled as compressible material with a Poisson's ratio of 0.3 whereas it is assumed that human SAT should be modelled as nearly incompressible material, similar to other soft tissues To improve the biofidelity of modeling belt-flesh-pelvis interactions in FE-HBMs, preferably a rate sensitive model applicable at high loading rates under large deformation should be implemented, capturing responses from high rate to quasi-static loading. However, most studies on human SAT were carried out with combinations of either large deformation at low strain rates, or small strain at high strain rates such as rheometer tests Since the elements in the finite element simulation are under combined loading, it is necessary to perform material testing and characterization of human SAT in different loading modes. Previous research has concluded that human SAT is primarily under compression and shear in MVCs While it is necessary to perform constitutive modelling of human SAT using data at large deformation, high rate and from different loading modes, no existing data set in the literature is available to perform such constitutive modelling for human SAT. Several studies have tested human SAT under various loading modes while none of these studies were aimed at applications similar to abdominal belt loading in MVCs. Human SAT was tested under biaxial tensile and shear tests quasistatically While this study aims to shed light into loading conditions of human SAT material testing, one underlying assumption of this work is that calculated strain and strain rates depend on the constitutive model of human SAT and the mesh quality in the FE-HBMs. Therefore, the results should be used as a baseline for a wide range of testing across different rates. Future work should also include re-estimating the amount of deformation and strain rate in the abdominal flesh part after mechanical testing and constitutive modelling of human SAT. This study demonstrated a new comprehensive approach for estimating the expected strain rates and strain levels for human SAT during MVCs. It was found that the human abdomen was under large deformation at high strain rates. Also, no existing data set is available in the literature for analytical modelling of human SAT in such loading conditions. This effort will inform future investigation of human SAT properties with the application of improved SAT modeling on existing HBMs to improve belt-flesh-pelvis interaction modelling during MVCs. This will eventually enhance the HBMs prediction of submarining injury risk and their application to designing optimized restraint systems. IRC-A- 