We realise an antibacterial nanomaterial based on the self-limited assembly of patchy plasmonic colloids, obtained by adsorption of lysozyme to gold nanoparticles. The possibility of selecting the size of the assemblies within several hundred nanometres allows for tuning their optical response in a wide range of frequencies from visible to near infrared. We also demonstrate an aggregation-dependent modulation of the catalytic activity, which results in an enhancement of the antibacterial performances for assemblies of the proper size. The gained overall control on structure, optical properties and biological activity of such nanomaterial paves the way for the development of novel antibacterial nanozymes with promising applications in treating multi drug resistant bacteria. The ability of handling materials at the nanoscale allows for developing multi-functional systems with highly programmable properties for a wide range of applications including biotechnology and nanomedicine Citrate-stabilised AuNPs with nominal size of 100 nm and 60 nm were provided by Ted Pella Inc. The concentrations of the stock solutions were 9.3 pM and 43 pM, respectively. Chicken egg white lysozyme powder (purity ≥ 90%) and (3-Aminopropyl)triethoxysilane (APTES, purity ≥ 98.5%) were provided by Sigma-Aldrich. Sodium citrate buffers at pH 6.5 and pH 4.0 were provided by Merk Millipore. The components of the system were characterised by Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS) measurements, in terms of ζ-potential and hydrodynamic diameter distributions, and UV-Visible absorption spectroscopy in the pH conditions employed for the experiments. The centre values of ζpotential and hydrodynamic diameter (2RH) distributions are reported in Table Samples were prepared at room temperature. At first, lysozyme was dissolved in 20 mM sodium citrate buffer to obtain solutions with different concentrations at controlled pH. Lyz-AuNPs colloids were therefore prepared at different protein-AuNP molar ratios x by adding to each protein solution the same volume of AuNPs stock solution and incubating for 2 minutes at room temperature. The final concentration of citrate buffer is therefore of 10 mM in all samples. Preliminary control experiments have been performed by UV-Visible absorption spectroscopy to determine the optimal citrate buffer concentration that maintains the pH at the selected value without altering the AuNPs capping (i.e., without inducing shifts in the LSPR). Measurements as a function of pH were performed according to the following protocol. Lyz-AuNPs solutions were prepared at pH 4. The pH of each solution was then changed to pH 6.5 by adding NaOH. The pH was brought back to 4 by adding HCl. For DLS measurements we employed a NanoZetaSizer apparatus (Malvern Instruments LTD), equipped with a 5 mW He-Ne laser (633 nm wavelength). Experiments were performed at 25°C. To obtain the intensity weighted distributions of the hydrodynamic diameter (i.e., the diameter of a sphere with the same diffusion coefficient of the particle), the intensity autocorrelation functions were acquired at an angle of 173°. Correlograms were analysed with the CONTIN algorithm to extrapolate the associated decay times (Section S1 of ESI). Decay times are used to determine the distribution of the diffusion coefficients D of the particles, which in turn are converted in a distribution of hydrodynamic diameters 2RH using the Stokes-Einstein relationship RH = kBT/6πηD, where kBT is the thermal energy and η the solvent viscosity. The ζ-potential was obtained by combining laser Doppler velocimetry and phase analysis light scattering to accurately determine the average electrophoretic mobility μe and its distribution. The measured values were converted into the ζpotential using the Smoluchowski relation: where ε is the solvent permittivity. The data analyses performed to extrapolate hydrodynamic diameter and ζ-potential distributions were performed using the Zetasizer software provided together with the instrument. The reported values are obtained by averaging the centre values of at least three distributions measured independently. The associated error is the corresponding standard deviation. For UV-Visible-NIR absorption spectroscopy we employed a v-570 double ray spectrophotometer (Jasco), with a resolution of 0.1 nm in the UV-Visible region and 0.5 nm in the NIR region. The spectrophotometer is equipped with a Peltier thermostat ETC-505T (Jasco) to keep the sample temperature at 25°C. The reported extinction spectra are normalised to the absorbance at 400 nm. At this wavelength the absorption coefficient is proportional to the molar concentration of Au(0) in the sample and is assumed to be independent on the AuNPs size Samples for near-field microscopy imaging were prepared at room temperature, by incubating 50 μL of sample solution for 10 minutes onto a silicon substrate previously functionalised with APTES. The deposition procedure based on the substrate derivatisation was chosen and accurately optimised with respect to deposition time in order to minimise possible modification of the aggregates structure during adhesion to the silicon surface Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) images were recorded using a Dimension Icon Bruker microscope in tapping mode, with a scan rate of 0.5 Hz. A cantilever with a spring constant of 42 N/m and a tip with a nominal radius of curvature of 2 nm was employed. AFM images were analysed by Gwyddion software, version 2.52. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) images were recorded using a Zeiss Auriga 405 Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope. For the evaluation of the inter-particle distances in the deposited Lyz-AuNPs clusters, whose details are reported in ESI, SEM images have been analysed by ImageJ software, version 1.48v. Synchrotron Radiation FTIR microspectroscopy (SR-microFTIR) was performed at the SMIS beamline of SOLEIL Synchrotron facility (Saint-Aubin, France). Lyz-AuNPs samples for SR-microFTIR measurements were separated from non-adsorbed lysozyme by centrifugation, deposited by drop-casting procedure onto a double-polished silicon substrate and dried at room temperature. IR spectra of selected areas were measured in transmission with a Continuum XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific) IR microscope equipped with a liquid nitrogen cooled MCT detector, a 32× Schwarzschild objective, a motorized aperture and stage. The microscope was coupled to a Nicolet 5700 FTIR spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). We used an aperture of 8 μm × 8 μm, a spectral resolution of 4 cm - 1 and 200 scans for each acquisition. A background spectrum was collected for every batch of spectra through a clean area of the silicon substrate. Spectra reported in the present paper are the average of at least 5 acquisitions and are presented after baseline subtraction, smoothing procedure by the Savitzky-Golay algorithm (2 nd order polynomial, 8 data points) and normalisation to the maximum absorbance value. Spectral analysis was performed using Origin 8.1 software. The antibacterial activity of samples was assayed at pH 6.5 and 25°C by employing a commercial kit (Sigma Aldrich). A cell suspension was prepared by dissolving lyophilised Micrococcus lysodeikticus bacteria in a potassium phosphate buffer at 0.01 % (w/v). For each experiment, 30 μL of the sample were added to 800 μL of bacteria suspension. A turbidimetric assay was performed to evaluate the lytic activity ρ by recording the decrease in time of the absorbance at 450 nm A450 with the Jasco v-570 double ray spectrophotometer. Typically, kinetic runs were followed for 15 minutes. The activity rate was determined by the slope dA450/dt of the initial linear region of the absorbance trend, according to the formula where ρLyz-AuNPs, ρsupernatant and ρfree protein are the activities of the Lyz-AuNPs overall sample, of the non-adsorbed proteins and of the free protein, respectively. The reported values are obtained by averaging at least three measurements. The associated error is the corresponding standard deviation. Data analysis was performed with Origin 8.1 software. It is well known (see for example ref. The theory of Velegol and Thwar for charge-patch interactions is based on the Derjaguin approximation where a1 and a2 are the two radii of curvature of the particles, and W(h) is the interaction potential between two flat surfaces at the same distance. This expression highlights that the particles sizes contribute only through a scaling factor and do not affect the functional form. To calculate the pair interaction potential V(h), which reduces to W(h) for flat surfaces (i.e., for infinite radii of curvature a1, a2 → ∞), the theory assumes a random distribution of the charge patches on the colloids surfaces. In the case of identical particles (a1 = a2 = a), V(h) can be expressed in terms of their average surface potential ζ and of the corresponding standard deviation σ: where ε is the permittivity of the dispersing medium and κ -1 is the Debye screening length. The interaction potential combines two terms: a repulsive monopole and an attractive multipole, which depend on ζ and σ, respectively In our case, the spherical particles are the Lyz-AuNPs, whose average surface potential has been evaluated by ζ-potential measurements. The non-uniformity of the surface charge distribution is due to the adsorption of lysozyme, which sparsely decorates the colloids surface. If the net charge carried by each protein is higher than that of the portion of the AuNP surface on which the molecule adsorbs, the resulting patches bear a net charge which is opposite in sign to that of the bare particle surface. The standard deviation of the surface potential is defined as: where Φ is the surface coverage of the colloids (i.e., the portion of the AuNPs surface covered by the adsorbed proteins), while ζ0 and ζcov are the values of the surface potential in correspondence of the non-covered and covered portions of the particles surface, respectively. Thus, assuming that the surface charge density of the non-covered regions is not affected by the protein adsorption, ζ0 can be evaluated by the ζ-potential of the bare colloids and the variation Δζ of the average surface potential is proportional to Φ: Combining equation 7 and 8 and defining Δζmax = ζcov -ζ0 the two equivalent analytical expressions for σ are obtained: The first expression is equivalent to that previously reported The assembly of citrate-stabilised AuNPs upon mixing with a lysozyme solution was studied with the aim of gaining a fine control on the different features (optical response and catalytic activity) involved in the antibacterial activity of the resulting system. A scheme of the assembling strategy adopted and of the investigation performed is reported in Figure The colloidal aggregation of AuNPs upon adsorption of lysozyme was studied at varying the different experimental parameters affecting the inhomogeneity σ of the surface potential, which gives rise to the attractive component of the interaction potential of equation 5. Focusing on the geometrical contributions to σ (see equation 9), we varied the AuNPs surface coverage Φ by acting on the number of adsorbed molecules through the molar ratio x between proteins and colloids, and on the area ratio between the fingerprint of a single adsorbed lysozyme molecule and the total surface of each colloid by using two sizes for AuNPs, 100 nm and 60 nm. It is worth nothing that the colloids size also affects the scaling factor of the interaction potential. In both cases the AuNPs size is one order of magnitude higher as compared to the protein allowing for finely tuning the charge inhomogeneity on the colloids surface. The hydrodynamic diameter and ζ-potential trends of Lyz-AuNPs as a function of x are reported in Figure Hydrodynamic diameter is commonly employed as reliable indicator of size evolution trends for fractal systems When the ζ-potential values approach zero, the hydrodynamic diameter distributions show the tendency to become broader and unstable. Correspondingly, aggregates reach the maximum values of the hydrodynamic diameter of 640 ± 30 nm for 100 nm AuNPs and 760 ± 60 nm for 60 nm AuNPs. For the highest molar ratios (starting from x ≈ 500000 for 100 nm AuNPs and from x ≈ 100000 for 60 nm AuNPs) a slight overcharging, that is the inversion of the complexes charge sign with respect to that of the bare colloids, is also observed, with positive ζ-potential values always lower than 10 mV. In this range, both the hydrodynamic diameter and ζ-potential distributions do not evolve anymore at increasing the molar ratio. This could be explained by the hindering of the adsorption of more lysozyme molecules onto the AuNPs due to both steric hindrance and/or electrostatic repulsion between the approaching lysozyme molecules and those already adsorbed. AuNPs. The repulsive contribution to the interaction energy between colloids is therefore of the same order of magnitude. The attractive contribution is also similar in the two cases. In fact, the ratio x100/x60 = 2.3 ± 0.5 is consistent with the ratio between the surface areas of the two colloids (equal to 2.8). Assuming that the number of adsorbed molecules only depends on the protein concentration in solution (i.e., the adsorption of a molecule is not affected by the presence of other molecules onto the gold surface), the inhomogeneity degree on the colloids surfaces (i.e., the portion of the surface covered with proteins) is roughly the same at the aggregation onset. A second point regards the maximum hydrodynamic diameter, which is slightly larger in the case of the smaller AuNPs. This finding is consistent with the theoretical models (see equations 4 and 6), noting that the limiting size above which two approaching clusters do not aggregate anymore is reached faster when the primary particles are larger. A quantitative analysis of the aggregation phenomenology can be carried out from the ζ-potential values measured on the nonaggregated Lyz-AuNPs, as discussed in Section S2 of ESI. We derived the number Nlyz of proteins adsorbed to each AuNP, the surface coverage Φ, the standard deviation σ of the surface ζpotential, and the height Vmax of the potential barrier. Notably, for both AuNPs sizes, at the onset of the aggregation process the surface coverage is lower than 5%, while the calculated values of Vmax approach the thermal energy (∼ 25 meV at 25°C), as highlighted in Figure To gain more insight on the morphology of the Lyz-AuNPs, AFM measurements were performed on clusters deposited and dried on silicon substrates. Representative images are reported in Figure To further assess charge-patch interactions as the driving mechanism for the aggregation phenomenology, we studied the process in a solution with pH 4, focusing on 100 nm AuNPs. In such conditions we would expect variations in the aggregation behaviour, due to the pH-dependent charge of both proteins and AuNPs. Below the isoelectric point, in fact, the overall protein charge shows a clear dependence on the pH We measured a ζ-potential of -48 mV at pH 4 and of -54 mV at pH 6.5 (Table The ζ-potential and hydrodynamic diameter as a function of the lysozyme-AuNP molar ratio measured at pH 4 are compared with the corresponding quantities measured at pH 6.5 in Figure In the previous Section we demonstrated that the protein-mediated assembly of AuNPs represents an efficient route for the fabrication of clusters with controllable finite size. Proceeding from this, we investigated in detail the optical response of the obtained aggregates aiming at tailoring their plasmonic response (i.e., the LSPR), which is directly involved in the intrinsic antibacterial function of AuNPs x, according to the aggregation trends of Figure For both the AuNP sizes the spectra show similar evolution, depending on the Lyz-AuNPs molar ratio. At low x values, the peak corresponding to the LSPR of AuNPs shows a progressive intensity quenching and a redshift compared to that of the stock solution. Starting from x ≈ 2500 for 100 nm AuNPs and from x ≈ 1100 for 60 nm AuNPs, a shoulder at higher wavelengths appears in the plasmonic profiles, together with a further broadening and shift of the LSPR of the primary colloids. The spectral changes proceed at increasing the molar ratio with the rise of a wider band wellextended into the NIR region, more extensively for 100 nm AuNPs, up to an asymptotic condition (starting from x ≈ 50000 for 100 nm AuNPs and from x ≈ 10000 for 60 nm AuNPs). A strict correspondence can be recognised between the evolution of the Lyz-AuNPs extinction spectra and the stages of the colloidal aggregation discussed above. The initial redshift and quenching of the LSPR peak are consistent with changes in the dielectric environment at the AuNPs interface induced by the adsorption of lysozyme The trends as a function of the Lyz-AuNPs molar ratio obtained using the normalised area show a strict accordance with those of Figure Exploiting the dependence of the resonance wavelength on the effective refractive index at the nanoparticle interface, we derived an expression for the redshift induced in the LSPR by a nonuniform adsorbate layer, as a function of the surface coverage Φ. The detailed calculation, reported in Section S5 of ESI, proceeds from the quasi-static approximation for the localised electric field Focusing on the spectra corresponding to the aggregation onset, the observed changes are ascribable to the formation of dimers and small aggregates The systematic study of the optical response of Lyz-AuNPs was conducted also on samples prepared at pH 4. Selected extinction spectra are reported in Figure From the above analysis, a clear correspondence between the optical behaviour of the system and the size and the morphology of the Lyz-AuNPs clusters emerges, unveiling the potentiality of our route to synthesise in solution nanomaterials with the desired optical properties. Noteworthy, especially in the case of the larger AuNPs, the aggregation bands are very prominent in the NIR spectral region, making the system intriguing for in vivo applications Lysozyme is an antimicrobial enzyme catalysing the cleavage of peptidoglycan, the major constituent of gram-positive bacterial cell wall The spectroscopic analysis of the lysozyme folding was performed by comparing SR-microFTIR spectra of Lyz-AuNPs and free lysozyme as reported in Section S10 of ESI. The analysis of the Amide I band, based on the deconvolution of the spectral components associated to the different secondary structures of the protein To better investigate this aspect, we tested the enzymatic activity at varying the lysozyme-AuNP molar ratio. For each sample, we also measured the activity of non-adsorbed proteins, separated from the Lyz-AuNPs complexes by centrifugation, and that of free lysozyme at the same concentration used in the synthesis protocol. Representative absorbance trends for all the samples are reported in Figure In fact, employing nanoparticles of different materials, the lysozyme concentrations at which significant activity has been observed are of the order of 1 μg/mL in the case of Ag To quantify the antibacterial performances of Lyz-AuNPs in comparison to the free protein, we defined in equation 3 an experimental parameter, namely the normalised activity, as the ratio between the complexes activity and that of the same amount of free lysozyme. The calculated values are reported in Figure We realised a plasmonic active nanozyme with antibacterial properties based on the controlled aggregation of lysozyme decorated gold nanoparticles (Lyz-AuNPs). We demonstrated the aggregation-dependent modulation of the antibacterial activity of the nanomaterial and highlighted the possibility of acting on the assembly process to reach the tunability of both the optical response and catalytic activity. In this respect, we exploited the key role of charge-patch interactions in generating self-limiting clustering of the colloids for carrying on a detailed analysis and a comprehensive rationalisation of the synthesis of Lyz-Au NPs assemblies, that allowed us to obtain a dispersion of stable clusters with selectable size. We therefore focused on the antibacterial properties of the nanomaterial in relation to the assembly process. Specifically, the spectroscopic study of the extinction profiles assessed the strict correspondence between the clusters morphology and their plasmonic response, and pointed out the possibility of exploiting plasmon hybridisation to spread the extinction bands up to the near infrared, which is particularly suitable for in vivo application due to the high transmission of biological tissues in this spectral range. The catalytic efficiency of the system was investigated on living bacteria, pointing out its aggregation-dependent modulation and highlighting an enhancement of the performances for assemblies of the proper size. Our integrated study represents an important advancement in the synthesis of nanozymes as compared to currently published literature 