Two-dimensional (2D) materials are outstanding platforms for exotic physics and emerging applications by forming interfaces. In order to efficiently take into account the substrate screening in the quasiparticle energies of 2D materials, several theoretical methods have been proposed previously; but only applicable to interfaces of two systems' lattice constants with certain integer proportion, which often requires a few percent of strain. In this work, we analytically showed the equivalence and distinction among different approximate methods for substrate dielectric matrices. We evaluated the accuracy of these methods, by applying them to calculate quasi-particle energies of hexagonal boron nitride interface systems (heterojunctions and bilayers), and compared with explicit interface calculations. Most importantly, we developed an efficient and accurate interpolation technique for dielectric matrices that made quasiparticle energy calculations possible for arbitrarily mismatched interfaces free of strain, which is extremely important for practical applications. Two-dimensional (2D) materials and their interfaces have shown unprecedented rich physics and promising applications in many areas, such as opto-spintronics 1,2 , quantum information Currently, widely-used electronic structure methods such as the HSE06 hybrid functional On the other hand, many-body perturbation theory (MBPT) Therefore, several approximate methods have been proposed to compute the quasiparticle properties of interfaces at the cost of primitive cell calculations of the subsystems composing the interface Most importantly, previous methods can not be applied to arbitrarily lattice-mismatched 2D interfaces, namely an integer relation between lattice constants is necessary (L • N = L • Ñ , where L and L are the primitive lattice constants of the two systems at interfaces, and N ( Ñ ) is an integer number). Forcing lattice-matching or the fulfillment of the above relation is typically required for interface calculations. These constraints either limit the choice of interfaces that can be studied or require applying artificial strain that may strongly modify the electronic structure. In this work, we develop a reciprocal-space linear-interpolation method in the entire q + G space to approximate interface dielectric matrices of arbitrarily mismatched systems. This approach makes MBPT calculations of general interfaces possible and free of strain. In order to demonstrate the accuracy and efficiency of this new methodology, we will consider applications to interfaces involving hexagonal boron nitride (hBN). This material has a wide band gap in ultraviolet region, with promising applications in deep ultraviolet light-emitting devices For the rest of the paper, we first analytically derived the connection among different approximations of dielectric matrices with substrate screening In this section, we will discuss the different methods and concepts used in this paper, which are summarized in the Table The interactions among quasi-particles within the GW approximation is described by the screened Coulomb potential W = -1 v C , where v C is the bare Coulomb interaction and is the dielectric matrix. The inverse dielectric matrix is defined by -1 = 1 + v C χ within the random phase approximation (RPA) For the purpose of our discussion we first partition the total ("tot") vdW interface systems into material ("m") and substrate ("s") subsystems where δn is the density response, and the reducible polarizability χ is defined as the density-density response function to an applied potential. If we consider the material subsystem ("m") as the probe, the total external potential includes the external applied potential (δV ext ) and the Coulomb potential from the charge response δn s in the substrate (v C δn s ). (We assume the material and substrate are connected only through interlayer Coulomb interactions, with minimum wavefunction overlap between material and substrates, i.e. interlayer hybridization.) Then we define an effective polarizability χ eff as a density response function of one subsystem to only the external applied potential (δV ext ), i.e. χ m/s eff = δn m/s /δV ext . More precisely, χ m/s eff can be given in terms of χ m/s through Eq. 1: When subsystems have negligible interlayer wavefunction overlap (i.e. hybridization), the total density response (δn tot ) can be written as δn tot = δn m + δn s and then the total polarizability χ tot of entire interface systems is In summary, this approach uses the reducible polarizabilty of each subsystem (χ m/s ) where the Coulomb potential from the other subsystem is considered part of external potential in Eq. 1, to construct the effective reducible polarizability χ m/s eff of each subsystem where such potential is excluded from external potential in Eq. 2. Then we sum up χ m eff and χ s eff to obtain total reducible polarizability of interface systems χ tot in Eq. 3, which will be denoted as "χ eff -sum". As we noted above, interlayer wavefunction overlap or hybridization effect is not taken into account in the method described above. The hybridization effect can change the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions at the DFT level which then change the Green's function (G) and dielectric matrix (in W) in the GW calculations. Therefore, for systems with strong interlayer hybridization, we can add the hybridization effect step-by-step. We can add corrections from ground state eigenvalues of interfaces to the χ eff -sum methods, namely "χ GSC eff -sum" method, which partially take into account the effect of interlayer hybridization on eigenvalues at the DFT level. Furthermore, we can also include interface ground state wave-function ("FWF") and eigenvalues as inputs for Green's function (G), denoted as "χ F W F eff -sum" method. This method is close to GW calculations of an explicit interface except with approximate dielectric matrix by Eq. 3. From another perspective, if the interlayer hybridization or wavefunction overlap is negligible (similar to the condition required above for δn tot ) which we denote as "χ 0 -sum" method. To further understand the theoretical connection between different methods, we rewrite Eq. 1 with χ 0 through relation χ = χ 0 + χ 0 v C χ as: ( Here χ 0 as the irreducible polarizability is the density response function to total field δV tot , which includes the applied field and bare Coulomb potential of the total interface system, namely δV tot ≡ δV ext + v C δn tot . Using the above condition δn tot = δn m + δn s for the interface, summation of the two equations of subsystems in Eq. 5 results in δn tot = χ tot 0 δV tot = (χ m 0 +χ s 0 )δV tot , which gives Eq. 4. This indicate that the χ eff -sum method and χ 0sum method are equivalent under RPA. However, χ effsum method and χ 0 -sum method are not equivalent when the diagonal approximation is applied, i.e. neglecting offdiagonal elements of χ in the former or χ 0 in the latter, as we will discuss in the Sec. II.B. Therefore we primarily used χ eff -sum method in this paper. If we further neglect the interlayer Coulomb interaction, this will set v C δn m/s to zero in Eq. 1 and lead χ eff → χ. This is at the non-interacting limit between two layers, where and we name it as "χ-sum" method. In Sec. IV A, we will compare the quasiparticle energies of interfaces with the above approximated dielectric matrices with explicit interface GW calculations. For simple metals which may be treated as "jellium", the nearly translational invariance justifies the dielectric matrix may be diagonal in reciprocal space While the effect of off-diagonal terms in intrinsic dielectric screening has been systematically studied The -diag approximation has been used for substrate dielectric screening in the past work The construction of interface structure models is often complicated by the problem of lattice matching between two subsystems. One of the main objectives of this work is to propose a general approach that can be applied to subsystems with rather different periodicity and crystal symmetry, and does not require the application of strain to force the lattice matching at the interface. In general, in order to directly sum the subsystem contributions to obtain the polarizability (and dielectric matrix) of the full interface, one needs an exact correspondence of the q + G vectors between the material and the substrate. This requires finding two integer numbers N and Ñ such that the lattice constants L (substrate) and L (material) satisfy the relation L • N = L • Ñ . If N and Ñ can be chosen to be reasonably small, calculations can be directly performed for supercells containing N and Ñ repetitions, although this approach often requires the application of a small percentage of strain. However, if the required N or Ñ are large, several methods have been proposed to make this type of calculations practical In this work we propose a general method for arbitrarily lattice-mismatched interfaces where it is not possible to map the q + G vectors between the two subsystems. This approach applies a linear interpolation of the matrix elements on the substrate grid (q + G, q + G ) to obtain their representation on the material grid (q + G, q + G ), as shown in Figure By applying the interpolation method, we can obtain substrate v C χ matrix elements at the material's q + G FIG. grids, without any artificial strain interface, at two systems' natural lattice constants, with the χ eff -sum method. The workflow of GW calculations for the interface is structured as follows. We first compute the reducible polarizabilities (χ) for each subsystem separately and then we use them to obtain the effective polarizabilities (χ m/s eff ) using Eq. 2. In case of lattice mismatch between the two subsystems, the matrix elements of the polarizability χ of the substrates are obtained on the same reciprocal space grid of the material (ML hBN in the practical applications of this work) by using the linear interpolation method described above. Next we sum them to obtain χ tot (i.e. the χ eff -sum method). Finally, in order to include the screening effect of the substrate on the material, the GW calculations are performed for the standalone hBN ML with the χ tot obtained in the previous step. As we will discuss later, one can achieve further improvement for interfaces with strong hybridization by including corrections from ground state eigenvalues and wavefunctions of explicit interfaces. In this work, we mainly focus on the quasiparticle energies of monolayer hBN/substrate interfaces as prototypical systems (where as substrates we will consider monolayer hBN itself and monolayer SnS 2 ). Density functional theory (DFT) ground state calculations based on the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchangecorrelation functional GW calculations with the Godby-Needs plasmon-pole approximation The distance between the nearest periodic repetitions along the vacuum direction was set to be 20 Å. In order to speed up convergence with respect to vacuum sizes, a 2D Coulomb truncation technique was applied to dielectric matrices and GW self-energies For each free-standing monolayer ("ML") unit cell, the GW self-energy cutoff is set to 15 Ry. The number of bands is set to 1000 (1500) for hBN (SnS 2 ) unit cell calculations. The exchange self-energy cutoff is set to 40 Ry. We use a 30 × 30 × 1 (20 × 20 × 1) k-points sampling for ML-hBN (ML-SnS 2 ) unit cell calculations, unless specified. GW calculations for the full explicit heterointerfaces have also been performed to obtain "exact" reference results to benchmark the different methods for the substrate screening effects (see Sec. IV A). The computational parameters for the full interface are set to keep consistency between supercells and unit cell calculations. Additional computational details and convergence tests can be found in SI 68 . After presenting in Sec. II with different approaches to approximate the total dielectric screening of an interface between two weakly interacting subsystems, in this section we discuss their accuracy in practical GW calculations. Results for explicit interfaces will be used as a reference. Specifically, we computed the GW quasiparticle bandgaps of three interfaces: hBN/SnS 2 , 2L-AB stacking hBN with two layers' atoms misaligned, and 2L-AA stacking hBN interface with two layers' atoms aligned (the corresponding atomic structures are shown in Figure From the explicit interface results in Figure Secondly, we find that the effective polarizability approach results ("χ eff -sum" method, blue circle) are consistently in good agreement with the ones from explicit interface GW calculations ("Direct", black cross), i.e. within 0.2 eV. We improve the agreement by 50 meV with additional corrections from ground state eigenvalues of interfaces ("χ GSC eff -sum" method, red triangle), which partially take into account the effect of interlayer cou-FIG. plings on eigenvalues at the DFT level. Moreover, by using interface ground state wavefunctions and eigenvalues ("FWF") as inputs for Green's function calculations, the results of the effective polarizability approximation ("χ F W F eff -sum" method, green square) are further improved, i.e. with only 10 meV difference from the explicit interface GW calculations. While a similar approach was used in Ref. 44, the χ F W F eff -sum method has a computational cost similar to that of the full interface GW calculation (although the evaluation of the dielectric matrix is more efficient) and is much more demanding than the other methods in Figure In sharp contrast to the methods discussed above, the non-interacting interlayer method based on Eq. 6 ("χsum" method, black diamond) gives results far from the explicit interface reference (e.g. with an error of about 0.6 eV). This indicates that the interlayer Coulomb interaction plays a dominant role in the electronic bandgap reduction by substrate screening. FIG. In this section we will compare different diagonal approximations for the screening considering different numerical examples. With "in-plane -1 -diag" we will denote an approximation that discards the in-plane offdiagonal elements of reducible polarizability χ in reciprocal space, i.e. χ GG (q, ω)δ Gx,G x δ Gy,G y . Similarly, "outof-plane -1 -diag" will denote an approach that does not include the out-of-plane off-diagonal elements of polarizability in reciprocal space, i.e. χ GG (q, ω)δ Gz,G z . Analogous definitions will be used for -diag. The GW quasiparticle gaps with different diagonal approximations for the hBN bilayer in two different confomations (AA / AB) and the hBN/SnS 2 interface are shown in Figure Besides the overall difference of diagonal approximation along different directions, we also distinguish the difference between -1 -diag and -diag approach in each case. 1) Along the in-plane direction, the difference between different approaches is negligible, i.e. less than 10 meV. 2) Along the out-of-plane direction, the outof-plane -1 -diag results (dark blue right triangle) are much closer to the full dielectric matrix results (black cross) than the out-of-plane -diag results (light blue left triangle) in Figure In order to benchmark the reciprocal-space linearinterpolation method introduced in Sec. II C and Table labelled by "N k 20 mapping"). To apply our interpolation technique, it is not necessary to use commensurate grids and we compare instead the results for two different choices of the q-point sampling for SnS 2 . Specifically, in Figure Finally, we use our new interpolation method to better understand the effect of the strain on quasiparticle energies. In Figure We note that for a proof of principle and benchmark purpose, we chose systems with similar crystal symmetry, i.e. hexagonal lattice, in this work. However, our interpolation method can be applied to general interfaces with very different crystal symmetry, e.g. interface between hexagonal and rectangle lattices, as the example of hBN/phosphorene interface shown in SI Figure In this work, we theoretically and numerically examined the existing methods to approximate substrate dielectric screening effect on quasiparticle energies, through hBN heterostructures as prototypical examples. We clarified the theoretical equivalence between the sum of effective reducible polarizability approach (χ eff -sum) and sum of irreducible polarizability of interface systems (χ 0 -sum), at the RPA level. We numerically compared the GW calculations of 2D interfaces with several approximations, and found excellent agreements between χ eff -sum and the explicit interface calculations. Further improvement can be achieved by including the ground state corrections of eigenvalues (and wavefunctions) from explicit interfaces. We further evaluated the importance of non-diagonal elements of and -1 from substrates on quasiparticle energies of 2D interface. Most importantly, we developed an accurate reciprocal-space linear-interpolation technique for arbitrarily lattice-mismatched interfaces, which can be used to compute the interface polarizability for GW quasiparticle energies without any artificial strain, at the cost of only primitive cell calculations.