Exciton problem is solved in the two-dimensional Dirac model with allowance for strong electronhole attraction. The exciton binding energy is assumed smaller than but comparable to the band gap. The exciton wavefunction is found in the momentum space as a superposition of all four two-particle states including electron and hole states with both positive and negative energies. The matrix element of exciton generation is shown to depend on the additional components of the exciton wavefunction. Both the Coulomb and the Rytova-Keldysh potentials are considered. The dependence of the binding energy on the coupling constant is analyzed for the ground and first excited exciton states. The binding energy and the oscillator strength are studied as functions of the environmental-dependent dielectric constant for real transition metal dichalcogenide monolayers. We demonstrate that the multicomponent nature of the exciton wavefunction is crucial for description of resonant optical properties of two-dimensional Dirac systems. In recent decade, a new family of condensed-matter systems is being investigated which is classified as Dirac materials Strong Coulomb interaction in the Dirac materials makes invalid the traditional theoretical approach to the exciton problem based on the parabolic band approximation. Hence, it is insufficient to consider the exciton problem assuming the Coulomb interaction as a small perturbation as it has been done in Refs. A correct approach has been used in Refs. In this work, the theory of excitons in the 2D Dirac materials is developed accounting for the exciton binding energy being comparable (but smaller) than the band gap and the exciton oscillator strength is calculated as a function of the electron-hole coupling strength. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we present equations for the four-component exciton wavefunction and derive a general expression for the oscillator strength. In Sec. III we calculate and discuss the binding energy and oscillator strength for both the 2D Coulomb and Rytova-Keldysh potentials. Concluding remarks are presented in Sec. IV. We consider here the 2D Hamiltonian describing the behaviour of electrons in the two valleys K and K related by the time inversion operation T . The single-electron effective Hamiltonian in the K valley has the form where k = (k x , k y ) is the 2D wavevector counted from the K point of the 2D Brillouin zone, σ x,y,z are the pseudospin Pauli matrices acting in the basis of two Bloch functions ψ K 1 , ψ K 2 at the K point (k = 0), and v 0 , E g are the Dirac velocity and the energy gap. The eigenenergies are given by The corresponding eigenfunctions can be written as a sum of two products of envelopes depending on k and the Bloch functions at k = 0: where ρ = (x, y) is the 2D radius-vector. According to Eq. ( where u K λ,k are eigencolumns of the Hamiltonian (1) Here φ k is the azimuth angle of the vector k, and The exciton is a two-particle electron-hole state. For definiteness, we consider excitons formed by an electron belonging to the K valley and a K valley hole representing the missing electron also in the K valley. The exciton wavefunction satisfies the Schrödinger equation where ρ is the difference ρ e -ρ h , V (ρ) is the attractive (negative) Coulomb potential, Ψ exc (ρ e , ρ h ) is a column consisting of four components (ψ ++ , ψ +-, ψ -+ , ψ --) dependent on the electron and hole coordinates, respectively x e , y e and x h , y h , k is the differential operator -i∇, H K ( ke ) and H h,K ( kh ) are the electron and hole effective Hamiltonians, and we use the index notation ++, +-, -+, --instead of AA, AB, BA, BB A. Relation between the K and K valley states The states in the K valley are related with those in the K valley by the time reversal operator with K 0 being the complex conjugate operation and σ 2 being the second spin Pauli matrix. Particularly, the energy spectrum in the K valley is also described by Eq. ( In this case the indices j, j can be conceived as the spin components ±1/2. In the chosen basis the effective Hamiltonian in the K valley reads For simplicity, we omit in Eq. ( The single hole states are defined as the empty electron states as follows: the missing electron state |e, K, -λ, -k with the energy -λ,-k = -λ k in the K valley is equivalently described by the hole state |h, K , λ, k with the energy λ k in the opposite K valley. In the symbolic form the relation between the electron and hole representations can be written in the following way For the relation In this work we take the electron-hole total momentum (k e +k h ) to be zero which allows us to set k e = -k h ≡ k and to seek the exciton wavefuncion dependent on ρ. In this case the exciton wavefunction expansion in the states of noninteracting electron-hole pairs |e, λ e , k e ; h, λ h , k h is written as follows where C λeλ h are the expansion coefficients dependent on the k vector. In what follows, in order to simplify the normalization procedure, we set the sample area to unity. The expansion coefficients satisfy a set of four coupled equations + where the Coulomb scattering matrix element is formally given by = e, λ e , k; h, λ h , -k|V |e, λ e , k ; h, λ h , -k . Bearing in mind the relation between the hole state and the missing electron state we can present where q = kk and V (q) is the 2D Fourier-image of the potential V (ρ). Substituting (4) into the integrands we obtain instead of Eq. ( By using the identity we can rewrite the last term in Eq. ( It is convenient to introduce the coefficients The set of equations for C λeλ h (k) coincides with the set We note that the exciton is formed by the free electronhole pair states with a sum excitation energy (λ e + λ h ) k which takes not only values 2 k but also zero and -2 k . This accounts for both intra-and inter-band scattering of free carriers by the potential V . We take the electron-photon interaction in the form V e-ph = -c -1 j μ (ρ)A μ (ρ, t)dρ, where A(ρ, t) is the vector-potential of the plane electromagnetic wave of the frequency ω, and j(ρ) is the operator of the electric current density. Then the exciton excitation matrix element can be written as where M is the current density matrix element A, e are the amplitude and the polarization unit vector of the electromagnetic wave, and j(0) is the Fourier component of the electron current density operator taken at zero wavevector. The matrix element of the electron-hole pair excitation is written in the electron representation as e, λ e , k; h, λ h , -k|e • j(0)|0 = e e, K, λ e , k| (e , where the velocity operator As a result, we obtain instead of Eq. ( We remind that for the right and left circular polarizations the unit vector e reads where êx and êy are the unit vectors pointing in the directions x and y. So far as we know, it is the first time when the expression for the exciton optical matrix element contains all the four terms rather than only one term with λ e = + and λ h = +. The following calculation shows that the additional terms remarkably contribute to the exciton oscillator strength if the exciton binding energy is not very small as compared to the band gap. While solving the two-body problem in graphene in the real space, Sabio et al. the equation set for C λe,λ h is split off into a single equation for C -and a reduced system of three interconnected equations for C ++ , C --and C + . We define a three-component vector C(k) with the components Here H 0 (k) is the diagonal 3×3 matrix and the 3×3 matrix F l (k, k ) is a product of the 3×1 matrix (a column) S l (k) and the transposed matrix (a row) S T l (k ), where and the coefficients T ± (k) are introduced in Eq. From symmetry considerations of the studied twovalley band structure the motionless excitons should have a certain value of the angular momentum component where m = 0, ±1, ±2 . . . Substituting C + and C -instead of C +-, C -+ in Eq. ( where e ± = e x ± ie y and Particularly, it follows from here that for the circularly polarized light one has We see that it is the exciton state with the angular harmonics m = 1 which is optically active in the σ + polarization. We seek for the exciton eigenenergies and oscillator strength for two forms of the attractive electron-hole interaction relevant to the 2D Dirac materials and modeled by (i) the standard 2D Coulomb potential and (ii) the Rytova-Keldysh potential Here κ is the half sum of the dielectric susceptibilities of materials surrounding the 2D layer, and r 0 = l/κ is the screening radius with the length l determined by the susceptibility of the 2D layer It should be noted that here we do not perform renormalization of the parameters v 0 and E g by the electronelectron interaction assuming they are already taken into account. This problem has been intensively studied in graphene Let us start from the Coulomb potential with the Fourier image V C (q), Eq. ( First of all we will analyze the equation ( Thus, the exciton envelope function in the effective mass theory is related to C ++ by We see that the angular momentum component, , of the exciton envelope is related with the integer m in Eq. ( For the stationary Schrödinger equation (33) the bound state energy levels are of the form, e.g. where the binding energy of the ground exciton state is The ground state level n = 0 is nondegenerate and has zero angular momentum component = 0 (or m = 1) while the first excited level is triple-degenerate with = 0, ±1 (or m = 0, 1, 2). Figure With increasing the interaction strength (32) one should take into account the nonparabolicity of the electron energy dispersion and the Coulomb-scattering induced mixing of the coefficients C λeλ h in Eq. ( For the exact solution of the relativistic equation ( and the 2D vectors Q, Q determined by the absolute values Q, Q and the azimuth angles φ, φ . Then dividing the left-and right-hand sides of Eq. ( F l (gQ, gQ )e il(φ -φ) Here the diagonal matrix H 0 (Q) and the matrix F l (gQ, gQ ) = S l (gQ)S T l (gQ ) are obtained from those in Eq. ( We see that the modified equation is controlled only by one parameter, the strength g. In order to solve the vector equation ( where γ is a constant of the order of unity. The blue dashed line in Fig. In Fig. Here and g 0 = e 2 /( v 0 ). The parameters for four dichalcogenides are given in Table We define the exciton oscillator strength as (42) In the non-relativistic limit, E (2D) B E g , and for the 2D Coulomb potential (30), the absolute value of the matrix element M (σ + ) for the exciton ground state n = 0 is given by with a being the Bohr radius of a 2D exciton Estimates show that, for all the four TMD monolayers in Table As compared with the Coulomb potential, the Rytova-Keldysh attraction leads to a smaller exciton binding energy and, therefore, to a weaker oscillator strength. Figure The effect of screening-induced suppression of the absorption efficiency is clearly seen: for the screening radius r 0 = 2a the ratio drops by an order of magnitude. Dashed lines show the partial contributions of the three components C ++ , C + and C --in Eq. ( Our calculation, Fig. makes a remarkable contribution which is missed in the equation ( Beginning from 1960-s it has been recognized that, if the band gap E g of an intrinsic semiconductor is smaller than the exciton binding energy E B , the crystal becomes unstable, and a new phase, "excitonic insulator", emerges with ∇ 2 being the 2D Laplace operator ∂ 2 x + ∂ 2 y . The correction to the binding energy is given by the average U = ψ 0 (ρ)U ψ 0 (ρ)dρ which can be reduced to The first term is singular at ρ = 0, and the contributions from the other terms can be neglected. Assuming its integration to start from ρ min = γ -1 ( v 0 /E g ) = g 2γ a 