Effects of steel alloying elements on the formation of the surface oxide layer of hot-dip galvanized press hardened steel after austenitization annealing were examined with various advanced microscopy and spectroscopy techniques. The main oxides on top of the original thin Al2O3 layer, originating from the primary galvanizing process, are identified as ZnO and (Mn,Zn)Mn2O4 spinel. For some of the investigated steel alloys, a non-uniform, several nanometer thick Cr enriched, additional film was found at the Al2O3 layer. At a sufficiently high concentration, Cr can act as a substitute for Al during annealing, strengthening and regenerating the original Al2O3 layer with Cr2O3. Further analysis with secondary ion mass spectrometry allowed a reliable distinction between ZnO and Zn(OH)2. In recent years, lightweight ultra-high strength steels (UHSS) have drawn increasing attention. With challenges such as emission reduction, stringent safety requirements and the new focus on e-mobility, ever-lighter construction of structural car body parts is essential for low-cost and high-value manufacturing. Hot-dip galvanized press hardened steel (PHS) provides excellent galvanic corrosion resistance, while maintaining the mechanical capabilities of hot-formed ultra-high strength steels Sagl et al. In principle, Zn coatings for PHS are either continuously hot-dip galvanized (GI) zinc (Zn) coatings with low Al additions (< 0.5 wt.%) or galvannealed (GA) zinc-iron (ZnFe) coatings with even less Al (< 0.16 wt.%) added to the Zn bath. During hot-dipping in the liquid Zn bath, Al reacts with Fe from the steel strip surface and forms a Fe2Al5 inhibition layer. In Zn coatings, this layer prevents interdiffusion of Fe and alloying elements from the steel and the Zn coating. In ZnFe coatings however, the lower amount of Al in the Zn-bath results in no detectable inhibition layer during inductive heat treatment, where the steel strip with Zn on top is heated up to 550 °C A detailed overview of the coating evolution during annealing is given by Kang et al. The results of these works indicate a strong influence of the alloying elements on the final coating structure and especially on the oxide formation. The quality of post-annealing processing techniques like spot welding, adhesive bonding, painting or application of further (organic) coatings are influenced by the oxides on the surface of the coated steel. Therefore, we investigate the uppermost oxide layer after press-hardening austenitization annealing of four industrial steel grades commonly used for PHS applications. In order to get a complete picture of the surface oxide distribution a correlative characterization The different elemental compositions of the investigated steel substrates are given in Table A continuously hot-dip galvanizing process includes a strip surface cleaning step and a recrystallization annealing step at temperatures from 700 to 850 °C in a radiant tube furnace under HNX atmosphere. During the heat treatment, selective oxidation within the steel matrix occurs, which defines the wettability of the steel strip surface. After hot-dipping in the liquid Zn bath at about 450 °C, excess Zn is removed by gas knifes. If the coating received the additional galvannealing heat treatment, the coated steel strip enters the induction furnace right after hot-dipping and wiping. The desired temperature of about 500 °C is reached within seconds, which allows the transformation of a pure Zn coating to a ZnFe coating with 8 to 12 wt.% Fe. Subsequently, the galvanized steel strip is cooled for a complete solidification. GA 90/90 0,20 -0,25 0,5 2,5 0,02 -0,30 0,50 0,05 0,002 -0,005 For our investigation sheets of (297 × 210) mm2 were cut from the coated steel strips and austenitization annealed in a Nabertherm N41/H lab oven with a final annealing temperature of 910 °C (see Fig. Small pieces with the dimension of (8 × 5) mm2 were cut from the hardened steel plates. Before each measurement, each specimen was cleaned in an ultrasonic bath in various solvents (ethanol, 99.9%; acetone 99.9%; isopropanol 99.9%; tetrahydrofuran 99.9%) to remove surface contaminations resulting from the production process and sample handling. This is especially necessary for AES investigations due to the very high surface sensitivity, as similar investigations on ZnMgAl coated specimen have shown Sample preparation of focused ion beam (FIB)-thinned TEM lamellas is a challenging process due to the complex morphological structure and heterogeneous phase mixture of the coating. After austenitization heat treatment, large cavities underneath the porous and sometimes loose oxide layer had a negative influence on the stability of the lamellas during FIB thinning. Those structural factors resulted in milling artifacts, leading to non-uniformly thinned TEM-specimen A sample on which this adhesive application was used is shown in Fig. Cross sections for SEM and helium ion microscope (HIM) investigations were prepared by manual mechanical grinding with SiC grinding paper and polishing with diamond paste with a grain size down to 1 μm. After cleaning, the final polishing was done by Ar + sputtering in a cross section polisher (CSP) Leica EM TIC 3X with 8 kV accelerating voltage at -100 °C. The sputtering process at cryogenic temperatures with three converging aligned ion guns reliably produced a smooth, hardly damaged surface for AES, EDX and SIMS measurements. In order to protect the coating from redeposition during Ar + sputtering a protective layer had to be applied. For this purpose, either the epoxy adhesive was sufficient or an additional ink layer from a black felt tip pen was applied. The prior application of the epoxy adhesive proved to be superior to the black pen, as it smoothened the cracks and cavities in the cross sections, resulting in almost no curtaining effects of the Ar + sputtering. In the scope of this work, several electron and field ion microscopes have been used. A Zeiss Supra 35 was used for EDX investigations with an X-Max N 80mm 2 detector from Oxford instruments on cross section polished specimen. Auger electron measurements were performed in an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) Jeol JAMP 9500F field emission Auger electron spectroscope. The Auger microprobe uses a hemispheric analyzer, which provides a spectral range from 0 to 2500 eV. The instrument is operated with a primary electron energy of 30 keV and currents of 10 to 20 nA and supports recording of scanning Auger elemental mappings in constant analyzer energy mode. Additionally, an Ar + ion gun is available for sputtering of the specimen surface with ion energies of 0.2 to 3 keV. Elemental mappings are recorded first for carbon, followed by oxygen and afterwards the other elements according to their atomic number. This procedure ensures reliable C and O mappings, due to higher C contamination with increasing measurement duration. A Zeiss 1540XB CrossBeam was used for imaging of the original sample surfaces. Additionally, the FIB column of the Zeiss 1540XB was used for TEM sample preparation, where an accelerating voltage of 30 kV and milling currents from 100 pA to 20 nA, were used for imaging and sample milling of the investigated specimen. TEM measurements were performed on a Jeol JEM-2200FS, where a Schottky Field emission gun was operated at 200 kV acceleration voltage. The microscope can be used in standard TEM or in scanning TEM mode (STEM). In STEM mode, a bright field (BF) detector as well as a high angle annular dark field (HAADF) detector were used. Attached to the microscope column is a silicon drift detector X-Max N 80T from Oxford Instruments for nanoscale EDX investigations. The helium ion microscope (HIM) Orion NanoFab by Zeiss, was operated at 30 keV with neon as primary ion source and attached with a custom designed ToF-SIMS setup Detailed investigations with SEM-EDX were made on CSP samples with the pre-applied adhesive stabilization (see Figure In order to achieve a sufficiently high lateral resolution to reliably locate the small Al2O3 particles of the layer, a primary electron energy of 5 keV was used. A downside of the low excitation energy is the restricted spectral response, limiting the detectable spectral lines to low energy X-rays. This constraint affected the measurement adversely while monitoring Cr combined with O, as the Cr L line is overshadowed by the strong O K line. Therefore, the Cr signal cannot be separated from the O signal and the measured Cr distribution is highly related to O. Complementary to the SEM-EDX measurements, scanning AES is also used for elemental mappings of cross sections. A major advantage of AES over EDX is the low information depth and interaction volume as well as a high lateral resolution. However, the high surface sensitivity requires special care while cleaning the samples. The prior application of the epoxy adhesive results in an ever increasing surface carbon layer during measurements due to electron beam induced deposition and surface diffusion processes. Figure The same cross section polished specimen was further investigated with the Ne powered HIM. The results of a ToF-SIMS measurement depicted in Fig. The SE image in Fig. In positive bias mode, metals have high relative sensitivity factors (RSF), as seen in the spectral response in Fig. A closer look at the sum spectrum in Fig. The sum spectrum for the negatively biased measurement is displayed in Fig. The different yields of the detected elements are directly related to the RSF of said elements As the results from SEM and HIM have shown, further investigations on a higher magnification are necessary to allow a better description of the oxide layer, especially of the finely structured interface between Zn-Fe and oxide. During FIB preparation of the lamella, the focus of the thinning process was to ensure a homogeneously thin electron transparent window at the interface region between oxide and intermetallic phases. The shape of the final TEM-lamellas is influenced by residual strain within the material (see Fig. As a result, the upper oxide layer is partially sputtered away and an increased curtaining effect can be observed as displayed in the micrograph in Fig. A more detailed view on the elemental composition is given by STEM-EDX analysis of the GA coated 45 s hardened 22MnCrB8-2 depicted in Fig. A detailed EDX mapping with high magnification of the interface region in Fig. For a better insight into the different elemental distributions of the involved phases, Table Fig. Based on our microscopy and spectroscopy characterization, we gained a number of insights on the role of steel alloying elements in the formation of specific oxides. Chemical analysis with SEM and AES on a μm scale left some oxide phases unidentified due to the limits of the spectroscopic techniques in the uppermost coating layer. Complementary, high magnification TEM investigations on nm-scale showed complex oxide formations along the interface between the oxide and the Zn-Fe intermetallic phases. The main question is how the different alloy compositions influence the formation of the surface oxide layer during the annealing process. With a focus on the differences in the alloy and coating compositions, the investigated specimens can be divided into 2 × 2 groups. A first distinction can be based on the coating type (GI or GA). A second distinction can be made by respecting the alloy composition. HX340LAD and 20MnB8 are steel grades with no Cr as alloying element, while 22MnB5 and 22MnCrB8-2 contain low amounts of Cr. The brittle ZnO layer is lifted off the intermetallic Zn-Fe phase creating large cavities with diameters of several μm. Aluminum is necessary as part of the galvanizing bath but not necessarily a desired element in the alloy composition. After hot-dipping, a faint Al2O3 layer is immediately formed on top of the Zn coating A common addition in hot-forming steel alloys is chromium, which further changes the austenitization condition similarly to Mn. In the bare steel sheet, Cr forms an oxide acting as corrosion protection close to the surface. Its most common native oxide is Cr2O3 in corundum form, which is also the only oxide stable at the annealing temperature of 890 °C Although silicon occurs only in low concentrations as an alloying element, SiO2 is a common product on top of the Zn coated steel sheets. Similar to Cr, Si acts as a deoxidizer in the steel matrix. Due to the very high stability of SiO2, the heat treatment has no effect on the oxide and precipitates can move freely in liquefied Zn(Fe) coatings. Eventually, these precipitates will appear on top of the intermetallic Zn-Fe phases and form small structures underneath the Al2O3 separation layer (see Fig. Other low content additions like niobium can be found as sub μm sized oxide particles trapped at the Al2O3 layer. It can be that the Nb oxide is the most common compound Nb2O5, which is thermodynamically stable below 1512 °C HIM-ToF-SIMS investigations on GA coated specimen revealed the coexistence of oxides and hydroxides as part of the uppermost layer as predicted by Lindström and Wallinder Based on the presented observations and assumptions, we developed a schematic model to describe the oxide formation (see Fig. Before heating up in the press hardening furnace (Stage I), the layered structure consists of the steel substrate, containing alloying elements like Si, Cr or Mn and the coating consisting of Al and Zn. Due to the proximity to the steel-sheet surface, these elements are mainly oxides as a result from selective oxidation from the hot-dip galvanizing annealing process. The steel matrix is separated from the Zn coating by a thin Fe2Al5 inhibition layer, which acts as a diffusion barrier. Due to the low Al additions in the liquid Zn bath and the high affinity of Al to O, a several nanometers thick Al2O3 layer covers the coating. Stage II depicts the diffusion of Fe and alloying elements into the Zn coating, either through galvannealing (in the hot-dip galvanizing process) or during heating up in the press hardening furnace to about 550 °C. This results in a transformation of Fe and Zn into intermetallic Zn-Fe phases. In most cases liquid Zn is completely transformed into solid Zn-Fe phases also deforming the outermost surface. During the phase transformation, small alloy particles can move through the whole coating, eventually reaching the Al2O3 layer. After the specimen reaches a temperature of 665 °C, a transition from to -phase happens (Stage III). A consequence of the phase transformation and the heating rate is a volume change of the coating, deforming the Al2O3 layer At the final annealing temperature of 890 °C (Stage IV), the Zn-Fe phase is already decomposed at 780 °C into Zn saturated -Fe and liquid Zn. The -Fe grains start to grow from the steel substrate toward the surface and push the alloying elements and their oxides in the same direction. The liquid Zn can protrude through the broken Al2O3 layer and will react with ambient O to form ZnO. The Mn containing liquid Zn is transported above the Al2O3 layer. There, Mn and Zn react with oxygen to form the spinel (Mn,Zn)Mn2O4, depending on the availability of Mn. When Mn is depleted in the fluid, another layer of ZnO is typically formed, covering most of the spinel. The high thermodynamic stability and low density of SiO2 lead to an expulsion from the liquefied Zn coating. Therefore, SiO2 can be found on top of the final Zn-Fe intermetallic phases but will not surpass the Al2O3 layer. Cr2O3 is extremely stable with a melting point of 2435 °C, and thus is unaffected by the annealing process. Cr2O3 shares the same corundum crystal structure with Al2O3, explaining the high attraction of Cr2O3 to the initial Al2O3 layer. If this layer is unharmed, Cr2O3 is accumulated on the steel side, increasing and strengthening the former pure Al2O3 layer. But if fracturing happened during the previous stages and Cr is available in sufficient concentration, Cr2O3 can regenerate the interface by replacing missing Al2O3. A similar behavior was found in Fe-20Cr-25Ni-Nb austenitic stainless steel by Chen et al. In this work, the oxide composition of eight different Zn-Fe coated steel sheets with either 45 s or 200 s austenitization holding time were analyzed by AES and EDX in a SEM, ToF-SIMS in a HIM and EDX and SAD in a (S)TEM. All specimens were hot-dip galvanized and half of them were additionally galvannealed. The used techniques allowed us to investigate the oxide distribution on a range from several μm down to a few nm. The presented results show that the main part of the oxide layer consists of ZnO, which eventually will transform to Zn(OH)2 over time in ambient atmosphere. The dominant polycrystalline ZnO layer is accompanied by a spinel oxide (Mn,Zn)Mn2O4, where Mn and Zn can substitute each other. Additionally, low amounts of Fe from the steel substrate are found along the spinel phases. The primary oxide layer is usually separated by a thin Al2O3 film, originating from low Al additions in the Zn bath during hot-dip galvanization. The main oxide layer is often lifted off the subjacent intermetallic Zn-Fe phases, where the faint Al2O3 layer is typically attached to the bottom side of the oxide layer but not onto the intermetallic Zn-Fe phases. Additionally, phase transformations during austenitization annealing leads to volume changes, which can damage the otherwise closed Al2O3 coating. Remnants from these cracks are clusters of small Al2O3 particles and can be found in the -phase. If Cr is available from the steel alloy, it will act as an addition and enhancement for Al, attaching to the Al2O3 layer and oxidizing to Cr2O3. As Cr typically is not found on the surface, it can be assumed that it was already oxidized before annealing (e.g. by selective oxidation). During annealing, the (Al, Cr)2O3 layer behaves like a filter in the liquid Zn, which allows only Zn and Mn to pass through and form oxides above, but traps precipitates of other elements like Nb.