Protein-stabilised emulsion gels can be studied in the theoretical framework of colloidal gels, because both protein assemblies and droplets may be considered as soft colloids. These particles differ in their nature, size and softness, and these differences may have an influence on the rheological properties of the gels they form. Pure gels made of milk proteins (sodium caseinate), or of sub-micron protein-stabilised droplets, were prepared by slow acidification of suspensions at various concentrations. Their microstructure was characterised, their viscoelasticity, both in the linear and non-linear regime, and their frequency dependence were measured, and the behaviour of the two types of gels was compared. Protein gels and droplet gels were found to have broadly similar microstructure and rheological properties when compared at fixed volume fraction, a parameter derived from the study of the viscosity of the suspensions Emulsion and protein gels form the basis of many food products, such as yoghurt, soft cheese or tofu, where the flocculation of a vegetable or animal milk leads to the formation of a soft solid via aggregation of proteins and fat droplets. This process has been used for millenia in traditional cooking, but a deep understanding of the mechanisms of the physical transformation occurring in these systems only came in recent decades with the study of colloidal gels The gels of interest here typically exhibit a fractal microstructure that can be described by a fractal dimension D f It has been shown that the exponent A can be related to the fractal dimension of the gels, with the relationship depending on the gelation regime. For gels formed via diffusion limited cluster aggregation, generally at low volume fractions, it was found that A = (3 + D b )/(3 -D f ), where D b is defined as the bond (or backbone) dimension of the network , where ∈ [0; 1] depends on the type of regime Caseins are the most common proteins in cow's milk. They have attracted considerable attention for the last 40 years, mainly because of their widespread use as food ingredients in numerous commercial products (processed cheese, ice-cream, coffee whiteners, cream liqueur, etc). In this study, sodium caseinate, which is derived from the caseins in milk, was used both as gelling agent and as emulsifier. Sodium caseinate, when suspended in water, forms naturally-occurring aggregates, that are thought to be elongated with a length around 20 nm Previous work using confocal microscopy has highlighted their fractal structure, which was found to be dependent on the pH, ageing time and addition of other components Besides gel formation, sodium caseinate is widely used to form oil-inwater emulsions As with caseinate gels, the acidification of sodium caseinate-stabilised emulsions, and of purified droplet suspensions, leads to the formation of fractal gels called emulsion gels Emulsion gels have been studied in the past and compared to protein gels To this end, the present study investigates the similarities and differences between caseinate gels and pure caseinate-stabilised droplet gels over a wide range of concentrations. It focuses more specifically on the microstructure and on key rheological features of these systems, namely the linear and non-linear viscoelasticity and the frequency dependence, as well as on their variations with the concentration in colloidal species. This comparison between caseinate gels and droplet gels draws on the re-sults of a previous study of the viscosity of the suspensions that are used to prepare these gels Suspensions of pure sodium caseinate (hydrodynamic radius 11 nm) and of pure sodium caseinate-stabilised droplets (hydrodynamic radius 110 nm) were prepared at a range of concentrations, as described previously In the following, concentrations of both the protein and droplet samples are given in terms of the effective volume fraction φ ef f . This was determined from intrinsic viscosity measurements on dilute samples as detailed in Ref. The decrease in pH required for the gelation of the suspensions of sodium caseinate and of pure sodium-caseinate stabilised droplets to occur was achieved by the slow hydrolysis of glucono δ-lactone (Roquette), as detailed in Section 1.2 of the supplementary material. The gels were imaged using laser scanning confocal microscopy, here a setup based on an LSM 780 microscope on inverted Axio observer (Zeiss). It has to be noted that the resolution of confocal microscopy (limited to ≈ 200 nm by light diffraction) does not allow imaging of the single protein aggregates, or single droplets. Instead, the lengthscale accessible by this imaging technique corresponds to the structure over a few colloidal particles, and is thus suitable for the description of colloidal aggregation and gelation. Rhodamine B (Sigma Aldrich) and Bodipy 493/503 (Molecular Probes) were added to the samples of protein and droplet suspensions, that were then mixed with glucono δ-lactone, as detailed in Section 1.3 of the supplementary material. The image analysis of 2D micrographs was performed using the image processing software ImageJ The Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) analysis was applied to the image after Hanning windowing. The image in the Fourier space was then radially averaged to obtain the spectrum I(q). The wave vector q represents a spatial frequency, it is a function of the distance from the centre in the Fourier space and of the image size, and is expressed in μm -1 . The image is multiplied by a Hanning window of the same size before the Fast Fourier Transform is calculated. The spectrum I(q) is obtained using the plugin Radial Profile to perform a radial average of the Fourier transform. The decrease of the spectrum I(q) is then fitted by a power law, linear in double logarithmic scale. Its intersection with the plateau defines the critical spatial frequency q c . The variations of I(q) can be described by several parameters. The position of the shoulder q c was chosen in this study as critical wave vector, because it can be estimated in a reproducible way by fitting the power law decrease of the peak, as opposed to the top of the peak that is slightly flattened. The determination of the position of the shoulder q c is illustrated in Figure Oscillatory rheology measurements were performed using a stress-controlled MCR 502 rheometer (Anton Paar) and a Couette geometry (17 mm diameter profiled bob and cup CC17-P6, inner diameter 16.66 mm, outer diameter 18.08 mm yielding a 0.71 mm tool gap, gap length 25 mm). To avoid slip at the wall during shearing, profiled bob and cup (serration width 1.5 mm, serration depth 0.5 mm) were selected as measurement tools. The temperature was set by a Peltier cell at 35 • C during the entire measurement sequence. The operating temperature was chosen to ensure that the gelation occurs in the time scale of thousands of seconds for all the samples studied here. To prevent evaporation, a thin layer of silicon oil of low viscosity (10 cSt) was deposited on the surface of the sample. The measurements were started immediately after mixing of the sample with glucono δ-lactone and subsequent loading in the instrument. As represented in Figure For each sample, 3 measurements of the same batch of sample were performed and the values of each data point were averaged. The comparison of pure caseinate-stabilised droplet gels and caseinate gels was performed by studying each type of system over a wide range of concentrations, scaled by the effective volume fractions φ ef f . This extensive characterisation of each type of system ensured that the similarities and differences observed derived from the intrinsic differences in size, structure and softness between caseinate assemblies and caseinate-stabilised droplets. This precaution distinguishes the present study from previous comparisons of emulsion gels and protein gels Confocal microscopy is a commonly used technique to observe the structure of colloidal gels at the micron scale As can be seen, the micrographs are similar for protein and droplet gels, especially at lower volume fraction. Indeed, in both cases, the fractal structure typical of colloidal gels is present, with interconnected networks of particle aggregates (in colour) and water-filled pores (in black). At high concentrations, these networks are denser in particles, with the pores of the droplet gels appearing to be smaller than for the protein gels. For each point, L C was obtained by performing a FFT of one micrograph and extracting the position of the peak in the spectrum I(q), as described in Figure In addition, the characteristic lengthscales L C are of the same order of magnitude for the two components, and their values range between 5 μm and 20 μm for all the gels presented here. The variation of L C as a function of the volume fraction cannot be interpreted quantitatively because of the significant noise in the data. This is partially related to the fact that the features picked up by the Fast Fourier Transform are probably a combination of the size of the aggregates and the size of the pores. Thus, although the individual droplets are one order of magnitude larger than the individual protein assemblies, the gels formed by these two types of colloidal particles present a very similar fractal structure at a given effective volume fraction φ ef f . It would also be interesting to perform a more thorough investigation of the dependence of the characteristic length scale L C of the network on the effective volume fraction φ ef f , by using higher quality confocal micrographs and a more precise image analysis technique, for example texture analysis microscopy In order to investigate further the comparison between protein gels and droplet gels, it is interesting to characterise their rheological behaviour. As detailed in Figure The gelation of sodium caseinate and sodium caseinate-stabilised droplets is presented in Figure The visoelastic behaviour of gels was arbitrarily compared at t/α t = 1.4. This value was chosen because it is the highest reached by all the gels studied, even those with a very slow gelation. Because the kinetics that determine α t remain the same post gelation, the rise in elastic modulus G with t/α t is similar for all samples. Thus using G at constant t/α t is appropriate for comparison of different concentrations. The elastic modulus G and the loss modulus G of the two types of gels at t/α t = 1.4, measured at 1 Hz, are presented in Figure As can be seen in Figure Our result differs significantly from a previous study on caseinate-stabilised emulsion gels More generally, the weight concentration is unlikely to be a relevant parameter to compare gels made of colloidal particles of a very different nature, such as caseinate assemblies and droplets -the former being water-swollen and soft, while the latter are filled with oil and more rigid. The same is true for the use of the protein concentration, as shown in Ref. Consequently, we find that there is little difference between the two types of gels, provided that the comparison is drawn between samples at the same effective volume fraction φ ef f . Furthermore, the variation of the viscoelas- and loss (G , (d)) moduli at 1 Hz of protein-stabilised droplet gels (circles, cyan) and of protein gels (squares, navy blue) at t/α t = 1.4 as functions of the effective volume fraction of the gel φ ef f . A fit (Equation The horizontal error bars arise from error propagation upon calculation of the volume fraction, as detailed in Section 3 of the supplementary material, while the vertical error bars arise from the uncertainties in determining the shift factors α G and α t . ticity with the volume fraction for the protein gels and the droplet gels can be quantified by using a fit to a power law, as discussed below. Power-law increase with volume fraction. As can be seen in Figure Where the pre-factor of the power-law G 0,φ and the exponent α are two parameters to be determined. The values found by fitting G (φ ef f ) and G (φ ef f ) with Equation The power law dependence of the elastic modulus G is a feature of fractal colloidal gels, as previously observed experimentally and numerically The study of the gel moduli as a function of their composition, described both by the nature of the elementary particles and by their volume fraction, thus offers some information on the mechanical properties of caseinate gels and caseinate-stabilised droplet gels. The behaviour of the two types of gels is very similar and reminiscent of those of more model colloidal gels. In addition to this static view of protein and emulsion gels, it is important to compare their dynamic properties. The moduli of the newly formed gels were then measured over a wide range of frequency. This measurement of the frequency dependence makes it possible to probe the dynamics of the gels. Because these exhibit a solid behaviour in the linear viscoelastic range, this aspect is limited to fluctuations within the gel network, for example rearrangement of the particle bonds, relaxation of the stress bearing strands, or motion of non-stress bearing strands like dangling chains. Comparison between protein gel and droplet gel. In order to compare similar gels of proteins and of protein-stabilised droplets, gels of equal volume fraction (φ ef f = 0.53) are displayed in Figure Both the protein gel and the droplet gel exhibit an increase of their viscoelasticity with the angular frequency ω, in agreement with previous studies on colloidal gels In addition, as can be seen in Figure In order to quantify the difference in variation of the storage modulus G with the angular frequency ω for the two types of gels, its behaviour can be modelled by a power law The value of the exponent β for caseinate gels is slightly higher than in previous studies. Indeed, for acid-induced casein gels at 30 • C, β was measured to be 0.15 No comparable data could be found for the frequency dependence of gels Table Gel type G 0,ω β Protein gels 0.5 kPa 0.22 Droplet gels 1.2 kPa 0.10 made of pure protein-stabilised droplets, but the comparison between protein gels and gels of mixtures of proteins and droplets was performed and appears to be system-dependent. On one hand, the exponent β was found to be identical for acid-induced gels of caseinate emulsions and for caseinate gels, i.e. 0.15 Influence of the volume fraction on the frequency dependence. This analysis of the frequency dependence can be extended to gels at all concentrations, as the curves display a similar power-law variation. These can be found in Figure As can be observed, there is little influence of the volume fraction on the variation of the elasticity of the gels with the frequency. This indicates that over the range of concentrations studied, the dynamical behaviour of the gels is the same. By contrast, the viscosity of the suspensions increases dramatically over the same range of volume fraction, as discussed in a previous study Consequently, the difference in dynamic behaviour between protein gels and droplet gels observed in Figure Furthermore, the non-monotonic behaviour of the loss modulus G with the frequency ω observed for the droplet gel in Figure Finally, these results of the linear viscoelasticity of colloidal gels can be compared with another sort of arrested state of colloidal particles, such as glasses of soft colloids like microgels The oscillatory strain sweep performed on the protein and droplet gels after formation and frequency sweep, as shown in Figure As can be seen, the nature of the non-linear regime varies with the type of gel formed and its volume fraction in proteins or droplets. The behaviour of gels at each concentration range is discussed separately below. First, for gels prepared with suspensions of moderately low volume fraction of both proteins and protein-stabilised droplets, an increase of the normalised storage modulus G /G 0 is observed when larger shear amplitudes are applied. This phenomenon is known as strain stiffening, and this result is in correspondence with previous studies of low-concentration gels, both experimental The strain stiffening is more pronounced, and is present on a wider range of volume fraction, for gels made of protein-stabilised droplets than for protein gels. Because strain stiffening is related to the structural heterogeneities within the network, this result may indicate that the proteins form gels that are overall more homogeneous than the droplet gels at low volume fraction, making these networks less prone to stress redistribution. The decrease in strain stiffening with the volume fraction for the two types of gels studied here is also in agreement with this phenomenological explanation. As no difference in the homogeneity of the gels is visible in the micrographs in Figure In addition, for gels at higher concentrations, the protein gels show a slight softening in the non-linear regime, over one order of magnitude of strain amplitude, before fracture of the material. This effect is absent in the gels made of protein-stabilised droplets, where concentrated gels break at the end of the linear regime. This difference in the stress-bearing behaviour of concentrated gels may arise from structural differences between the networks; which is similar to more dilute gels. Indeed, it seems that the breakage of some bonds in the dense protein gels is not critical to the elasticity of the overall network, and leads only to a moderate decrease of G as the shear amplitude increases. On the other hand, for the dense droplet gels, the immediate drop in elasticity seems to indicate that the integrity of the whole structure is degraded upon application of a critical shear stress σ c . This suspected difference in the structure of the two networks would thus possibly explain the different non-linear behaviours for protein gels and droplet gels. To test this hypothesis however would require imaging each of the gel samples over a wide range of lengthscales to quantify the structural heterogeneity not only over the scale of the fractal clusters, but also over the scale of the stress-bearing backbone. Finally, a common feature of all the protein and droplet gels is the fracture of the material at very high shear, indicated by the decrease in their elasticity. The subsequent application of low-amplitude oscilllatory shear on the gels led to no time-dependent recovery of the viscoelasticity, as presented in Figure The full sequence of rheological measurement presented in Figure The first notable result is the similar properties of the two types of gels as a function of volume fraction φ ef f , derived from the viscosity of semidilute suspensions When comparing the behaviour of protein gels and droplet gels in more detail, some differences appear between the two types of system. First, at fixed volume fraction, the droplet gels present a slightly higher elasticity than protein gels, as can be seen by the slightly higher value for the storage modulus G and the lower phase angle. Then, the viscoelasticity of protein gels is more frequency-dependent than for droplet gels, as both the storage G and the loss G moduli vary more with frequency. The phase angle of droplet gels also displays a non-monotonic behaviour with frequency that is not seen for the protein gels. Finally, if the two types of gels at low concentrations display strain stiffening at moderate shear amplitude, this behaviour is more marked for the droplet gels, while for concentrated gels, the non-linear regime is more extended for protein gels than for droplet gels. These minor differences seem to indicate that the theoretical framework of colloidal gels may not be sufficient for an entirely accurate description of casein gels and casein-stabilised droplet gels. It may thus be necessary to take into account some system-specific characteristics. It is possible that droplets and protein assemblies have a different inter-particle interaction, as it is believed that the single proteins adsorb at the surface of the droplets upon emulsification, and these proteins change conformation as the hydrophobic parts of their chains are anchored in the oil. Another possible explanation is that the size difference between protein assemblies and droplets leads to a different mobility of these two colloidal elements during gelation, which could be the reason for a discrepancy of microstructure and consequently of rheological behaviour. Finally, it is possible that a role is played by the softness of the particles, as the protein assemblies are soft and water-swollen, while the droplets have an incompressible oil core below the soft layer of adsorbed proteins.