The bandgap tunability of mixed-halide perovskites makes them promising candidates for light emitting diodes and tandem solar cells. However, illuminating mixed-halide perovskites results in the formation of segregated phases enriched in a single-halide. This segregation occurs through ion migration, which is also observed in single-halide compositions, and whose control is thus essential to enhance the lifetime and stability. Using pressure-dependent transient absorption spectroscopy, we find that the formation rates of both iodide-and bromide-rich phases in MAPb(BrxI1-x)3 reduce by two orders of magnitude on increasing the pressure to 0.3 GPa. We explain this reduction from a compression-induced increase of the activation energy for halide migration, which is supported by first-principle calculations. A similar mechanism occurs when the unit cell volume is reduced by incorporating a smaller cation. These findings reveal that stability with respect to halide segregation can be achieved either physically through compressive stress or chemically through compositional engineering. Halide perovskite semiconductors have recently gathered significant attention due to their excellent optoelectronic properties combined with low-cost and simple fabrication method. In addition, the bandgap of these perovskites can easily be tuned by mixing halides in different ratio However, methylammonium(MA)-based mixed-halide perovskites, MAPb(BrxI1-x)3, lack longterm bandgap stability under standard solar cell operating conditions Phase segregation of mixed-halide perovskites involves the migration of halide ions. In fact, even single-halide perovskite systems (e.g. MAPbI3) suffer from ion migration Here, we investigate the dependence of the kinetics of phase segregation on structural parameters in mixed-halide perovskite MAPb(BrxI1-x)3 by using pressure-dependent transient absorption spectroscopy. The measurements are performed at hydrostatic pressures ranging from 0 (ambient pressure) to 0.3 GPa using an additional light beam to induce phase segregation. Previously we established that pressure changes the thermodynamic landscape for phase segregation by finding the final mixing ratio of the segregated phases to be closer to the one of the mixed-phase upon increasing pressure MAPb(BrxI1-x)3 thin films with x = 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.7 and 1 were prepared by spin coating the precursor solutions onto quartz substrates as reported elsewhere The change in unit cell volume calculated by using the bulk moduli To derive the relation between the segregation rate and the activation energy for ion migration we use the definition of the diffusion coefficient Where Δ ‡ S ° is the changes in the entropy of a single ion migration step, kB is the Boltzmann constant, υ0 is the attempt frequency for an ion to hop, d is the ionic hopping distance, Ea is the activation energy, q is the elementary charge, ε pero is the permittivity of the perovskite, ε 0 is the permittivity in vacuum and N is the doping density. These terms can be approximated (see Supplementary Note 1 for discussion) such that the natural logarithm of the migration rate, which in our experiments correspond to k seg , is proportional to the activation energy for the migration process as follows: -ln(k migration ) ∝ E a (Eq. 2) For simplicity, we define the experimental -ln(k seg ) as the effective activation energy E a * . Typical activation energies for halide migration in these perovskites are in the order of 100-200 meV (see Transient Ion Drift (TID) measurements below) Ion migration plays a large role in the degradation of perovskite thin films, and the effect of strain shimmers through many observations related to perovskite stability. For example, residual tensile strain in perovskite films resulting from the thermal expansion coefficient (TEC) mismatch of perovskites with commonly used substrates Our observation that the rate of phase segregation strongly depends on the physical pressure demonstrates the large role that strain plays for ion migration. We hypothesize that pressure-induced compressive stress counteracts the effect of thermal expansion induced by light. Therefore, by strengthening the Pb-X bonds, pressure mitigates the reduction of the activation energy for halide migration. As a result, we expect the total tensile strain at high pressure to be lower and the activation energy for the halide migration to be higher compared to ambient conditions. A scheme of the proposed mechanism at the microscopic and macroscopic level is shown in Figure Our measurements can also give insight into the mechanism of phase segregation. The formation rate of the low-energy iodide-rich phase appears to be faster than the high-energy bromide-rich phase for all the compositions and pressures explored. The total mixing ratio before light-soaking at ambient conditions calculated from the area and the energy position of the bleach is 0.531 ± 0.001 for x = 0.5. Now that we know the x-values of the segregated phases calculated from the bleach energy positions, and their relative peak areas, we can calculate whether the total mixing ratio has changed during the segregation. After 20 minutes of light-soaking, the mixing ratio is 0.46 ± 0.01, suggesting iodide-enrichment of the illuminated area. Although most of the halide ions move within the illuminated area, the decrease in the total mixing ratio suggests that some iodide ions have moved from outside the illuminated region. At high pressure, a similar trend is observed (x = 0.47± 0.01 after light-soaking). This similarity in total mixing ratio suggests that despite the changes in segregation rate and final composition, the total number of iodides moving into the probed area does not change with pressure. Furthermore, while both the segregation rate and the final composition of the iodide-rich phase are heavily affected by physical pressure ). The rate of the evolution of the iodide peak area can be ascribed to two competing processes regulating the change in the area of the peak, from one hand it increases due to diffusion of iodide to the illuminated areas of the sample and on the other hand, it decreases because of reduction in the volume due to loss of bromide species. We postulate that all these observations are consistent with the formation of local, small iodide-rich islands (low-energy phase) with a well-defined composition from a small portion of the film which does not substantially affect the highenergy phase. Then, once those islands are formed, the bulk of the halides segregate via the migration of iodide ions into the initially-formed islands, growing the volume of these domains Increasing pressure, the rates extracted from the peak energy and the peak area come closer until coinciding. We attribute this trend to the reduction of the light-induced tensile strain, which therefore increases the activation energy for halide migration and the formation energy of these islands under illumination with consequent reduction of the phase segregation rate. It is important to note that the different rates extracted from the areas can also be the result of different dynamics before 15 ps for the low-and high-energy phase. Therefore, the interpretation is not trivial. In addition, we observe that during halide segregation, the total area of the two bleaches over time (see Figure To conclude, we used pressure-dependent transient absorption to investigate the dynamics of phase segregation by tracking the iodide-and bromide-rich phase formation over time. We have shown that phase segregation in several mixed-halide MAPb(BrxI1-x)3 (x = 0.25, 0.5 and 0.7) becomes substantially slower under pressure. We attribute the reduced segregation rate to a pressure-induced increase in the effective activation energy for the halide migration process. First-principle calculations support this explanation. We show that chemical compression of the unit cell achieved via partial or complete replacement of the MA + cation by the smaller Cs + cation results in a comparable slowing down of the phase segregation. Hence, this observation suggests that chemically tuning the unit cell at ambient conditions (instead of applying physical pressure) may be used to kinetically suppress ion migration/phase segregation. Mechanistically, our findings suggest the local formation of small, iodide-rich domains that precede the growth of these islands leading to the final phase segregation. While kinetic stabilization alone may not be a feasible route for long-term stability 