Recently, two-dimensional layered electrides have emerged as a new class of materials which possess anionic electron layers in the interstitial spaces between cationic layers. Here, based on first-principles calculations, we discover a time-reversal-symmetry-breaking Weyl semimetal phase in a unique two-dimensional layered ferromagnetic (FM) electride Gd 2 C. It is revealed that the crystal field mixes the interstitial electron states and Gd 5d orbitals near the Fermi energy to form band inversions. Meanwhile, the FM order induces two spinful Weyl nodal lines (WNLs), which are converted into multiple pairs of Weyl nodes through spin-orbit coupling. Further, we not only identify Fermi-arc surface states connecting the Weyl nodes but also predict a large intrinsic anomalous Hall conductivity due to the Berry curvature produced by the gapped WNLs. Our findings demonstrate the existence of Weyl fermions in the room-temperature FM electride Gd 2 C, therefore offering a new platform to investigate the intriguing interplay between electride materials and magnetic Weyl physics. In the past decade, two-dimensional (2D) layered materials have attracted tremendous attention because of their promising opportunities in both fundamental research and technological applications Because of the loosely bound nature of interstitial electrons away from the cationic layers, 2D layered electrides tend to have the corresponding bands near the Fermi energy E F In this Letter, using first-principles calculations, we discover a WSM phase in the FM electride Gd 2 C that was recently synthesized We first optimize the structure of Gd 2 C using the DFT + U calculation without including SOC In contrast to usual nodal lines residing on 2D mirror planes of the Brillouin zone , along a closed loop encircling any of the present WNLs. Here, A(k) = -i<u k |∂ k |u k > is the Berry connection of the related Bloch bands. We obtain ζ 1 = ±1 for the WNLs, indicating that they are stable against the lattice deformations conserving P symmetry. Next, we calculate the band structure of Gd 2 C using the DFT + U calculation with including SOC. We find that SOC lifts the degeneracy at the band-crossing points along the LA and BZ lines [see Fig. The search for room-temperature magnetic WSM materials has lately been very demanding of attention because of their novel magnetic responses that may be used for future spintronics technologies 