Absorption and scattering of the impinging electromagnetic waves are the two fundamental operations describing the energy exchange of any, organic or inorganic, particle with its environment. In the case of virion cells, substantial extinction power, counting both absorbing and scattering effects, is a prerequisite for performing a variety of coupling actions against the viral particles and, thus, a highly sought-after feature. By considering realistic dispersion for the dielectric permittivity of proteins and a core-shell modeling allowing for rigorous formulation via Mie theory, we report optical extinction resonances for corona-virions at mid-infrared range that are not significantly perturbed by changes in the objects size or the background host. Our findings indicate the optimal regime for interaction of photonic radiation with viral particles and may assist towards the development of equipment for thermal damage, disintegration or neutralization of coronavirus cells. The energy exchange between an impinging light beam and virus particles is a cornerstone in several biophotonic operations with important applications in Microbiology, Pharmacology, Medical Physics and Biochemistry. The study of this interaction between virions and electromagnetic fields has been greatly assisted by a large set of analytical methods and physical concepts reported for inorganic particles Mie theory However, analytical modeling via Mie theory is very rarely As shown in the illustrative sketch of Fig. where 0 < s < 1 is the filling factor indicating the percentage of the corona volume occupied by the spikes. We could follow alternative and more accurate approaches to model the photonic setup of the virion, like approximating the shell by quasi-homogeneous multilayers The solution of the wave equation into such a medium involves cylindrical Bessel functions J ν ,Y ν of orders for n ∈ N * . However, the size of the virion is small (average radius b ∼ = 60 nm) and the regarded wavelengths large (average λ ∼ = 3500 nm, mid-infrared); accordingly, the incoming beams are not expected to "feel" a more advanced setup emphasizing on the geometry details. In other words, a very slowly moving wave will perceive the very complicated actual structure of the protein spikes in the same way as a homogeneous cladding of texture determined by (1). Thus, we advocate that the model in 1(b), where the core (permittivity ε c ) of radius a is engulfed by the shell (permittivity ε s ) of size (ba) and host into a homogeneous background (permittivity ε b ), captures sufficiently the electromagnetic interactions and the underlying photonic power interplay between the incident fields and the particle. Note finally that the Bessel order (3) becomes complex if the permittivities (1),( We assume that the virion of Fig. After imposing the necessary boundary conditions, the scattered fields for r > b (electric field vector of TE set and magnetic one for TM set), are written as where p n (θ ) = P 1 n (cos θ ) is the Legendre polynomial of first order, degree n and argument cos θ ; in addition, h n is the spherical Hankel function of order n and second type. The symbol stands for the wavenumber into the background medium and η 0 = 120π Ω the wave impedance into free space. The coefficients S T E/T M n , are complex dimensionless quantities and not shown here for brevity The power P scat carried by the TE and TM scattered component, which constitutes a self-consistent electromagnetic field into the background host, expresses how much the sphere perturbs the background field distribution externally to it. It can be easily computed with use of Poynting's theorem and expansions of h n (k b r) for large arguments k b r 1 (in the far region), as follows where > 0 is a quantity measured in Watt and k 0 is the free-space wavenumber. The power absorbed by the particle, given the presence of lossy constituent media, is evaluated by applying again Poynting's theorem but for the total field this time. Indeed, if we integrate the power spatial density across any sphere of radius r > b (even the infinite k b r → +∞ one), we obtain: Obviously, P scat , P abs > 0, which means that the series in (5) should converge to negative values smaller than (-P scat /P 0 ). In the absence of any losses, we have P abs = 0 and the aforementioned sum equals to (-P scat /P 0 ). The data is obtained from wellestablished source Before proceeding to the numerical results and the discussion, let us first clarify the value ranges of the parameters incorporated into our model. In particular, the incident electromagnetic pulse is taken with a free-space central wavelength λ belonging to extensive band spanning from hard ultraviolet short waves (λ = 150 nm, UV-C) to long infrared radiation (λ = 15 μm, IR-C). In addition, we consider an external radius for the virion varying into the interval: 30 nm < b < 100 nm, representing an assortment of various sizes The variation for the dispersive permittivity for the homogeneous core ε c = ε c (λ ) is depicted in Fig. When it comes to the output of the system, we normalize the absorbed and scattered power by the power of the incident illumination passing through the geometrical cross section of the scatterer, namely ; in this way, the response of the virion becomes more meaningful. The most important quantity, however, is the extinction power P ext ≡ P scat + P abs , namely the sum of scattering and absorption from (4), (5), so it represents the total effect of the particle on radiation traveling into the background medium; thus, the basic metric of our study is given by: The series ( In Fig. Given the fact that Fig. After having understood the influence of structural (a/b, s), textural (several background) and spectral (λ ) parameters on the way that corona-virions interact with the incident beams, it would be meaningful to show the spatial distribution of electromagnetic power inside and outside the core-shell particle for characteristic cases. In Fig. To show that the bright spots of Figs 5(a),5(b) are not easily achieved, in Figs 5(c),5(d) we show the distribution of |E/E 0 | 2 when the incoming wavelength is arbitrarily picked (λ = 2.2 μm). Despite the fact that the pulse is faster making the virion look larger and admitting it to develop more complex dynamics, the field into the object is lower than the background level forming a bipolar pattern; as a result, the ability of the primary excitation to engage with the particle is severely diminished compared to the optimal case of Fig. In Fig. A single corona virion is modeled as a homogeneous spherical core surrounded by a conformal isotropic shell, under illumination from electromagnetic pulses. Rigorous Mie theory is applied to obtain the analytical solution of the formulated boundary value problem and compute the total extinction power of the particle. This quantity indicates how successfully the considered cells interacts with the incoming fields and is found to be maximal at a specific mid-infrared resonance that is independent from the structural characteristics or the background host. A substantial power exchange between impinging beams and the object is necessary for a series of actions dealing with the virion from thermal damage and dissolution to neutralization and isolation; therefore, the reported findings may pave the way to more efficient radiation treatments against SARS-CoV-2. The proposed model can be refined to include anisotropic multilayers both at the core for more detailed description of the engulfed genome and at the shell to take into account the radial distribution of the protein spikes. Such a process will involve complex-ordered Bessel functions calling for careful computation 