High-energy incident particles from both pulsed and continuous radiation sources can induce significant damage to the structure of a material by creating vacancy-interstitial pairs and other more complex defects, and this leads typically to localized melting. In this work, we present evidence via molecular dynamics simulations of a superheated solid state in BCC tungsten induced by single PKA events of ∼ 1.5 keV of energy. Despite the striking difference between this highly inhomogeneous energy injection and homogeneous melting, the lifetime of the obtained superheated solid state, reaching up to 200 ps, is described through a waiting time distribution in agreement with previous studies on superheating in the Z-method methodology. The study of damage to structural materials produced by irradiation is a long-standing research topic On the other hand, nonequilibrium melting can also be studied as a perfectly homogeneous process, where a total amount of kinetic energy is given to a perfectly ideal crystal. A well-known computational example of this methodology used to determine the melting curves of materials is the so-called Z-method In this work, we study the kinetics and microscopic mechanism of melting from PKA events, compared to the kinetics of the homogeneous melting. We report the counterintuitive observation that a superheated, metastable state in BCC W can be produced by a single, high energy collision, in a reproducible manner. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the molecular dynamics and statistical analysis methodologies used, while Section III presents the main results and their interpretation. Finally, we close with some concluding remarks in Section IV. Computer simulations were performed using the LAMMPS software package The initial background temperature of the system, before the PKA event, was set to T BG =0.001 K. The interatomic potential chosen to describe W under the effect of high-temperatures and its response to radiation is the SNAP interatomic potential for W by Wood et al The constant-volume caloric curve (Z-curve), using the Z-method where Φ 0 is the potential energy of the ideal crystal. In the case of PKA simulations such as the ones described in the rest of the paper, the total energy in a simulation is instead given by We considered an initial PKA energy E PKA =1.478 keV, choosing the displaced atom (as PKA) randomly, so that after receiving the energy from the PKA event the crystal structure reaches a total energy slightly above the limit of superheating, in this case, E = -9.318 eV. This energy of 1.478 keV corresponds to a value on the lower-end of radiation damage collision energies considered on other works The lifetime of the metastable phase (waiting times until the collapse of the crystal) is observed in Fig. geneous superheated state Figure Additionally, Figure We have found that, after a single primary knock-on atom (PKA) event on a bcc W crystal, is possible to drive it into a critical superheated solid phase, which is metastable and decays after about 200 ps. The existence of the metastable state is verified by the melting waiting times, whose statistical distribution is shown to be similar to that of the superheated state observed in homogeneous melting via the Z-method. Characterization of the metastable structure, and a detailed description of both states were presented using a selected subset of simulations, which suggests the presence of particular triplets in the CNA analysis that might serve as precursors of melting. Our results provide an additional mechanism to study the microscopic dynamics leading to melting from an ideal crystal. These distorted triplets are also related to liquid and liquid-like phases 