Andreev bound states (ABSs) are studied in quantum dot coupled to conventional BCS superconducting leads on the basis of effective slave boson Hamiltonian in an infinite-U (Coulomb interaction) limit followed by Green's function technique. From the relevant Green's function, density of states (DOS) is analyzed at different superconducting phase differences. On the basis of numerical computation, it is pointed out from DOS plot that ABSs (sub-gap states) arise due to the phase difference between left and right superconducting leads. Due to the dependence on superconducting phase difference, ABSs are current carrying states. We have also analyzed the energy of ABSs as a function of phase difference between left and right superconducting lead for electron hole symmetric as well as non symmetric cases at various dot-lead coupling strengths. It is also pointed out that a finite internal gap arises between upper and lower Andreev bound states in the absence of electron-hole or left-right symmetry. These results are viewed in the light of existing theoretical analysis. Josephson transport across quantum dot junction has been widely used in nanoelectronic devices such as in superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDS) For odd number of electrons occupation , QD acts as a magnetic impurity, and spin of quantum dot gets coupled to spin of one electron of the Cooper pair from the leads with a characteristic binding energy k B T k , where T K is the Kondo temperature. Kondo temperature for normal metallic lead varies as ρJ , where J is the exchange interaction between spin of QD and spin of one of the electron of metallic lead Although for superconducting leads, there is an attaractive interaction between two electrons to form a bound Cooper pair. Therefore, interplay arises between multiple Andreev reflection and Kondo effect in S-QD-S junction It is observed experimentally that for T k > ∆, where ∆ is binding energy of Cooper pair, there is always likelihood of formation of ABSs in the dot. It give rise to sharp increase in DOS within superconducting gap at +ω s and -ω s , where ω s corresponds to energy of Andreev bound states. Therefore, the ratio ∆/T k is an important parameter for the transmission of Cooper pair from left to right lead As depicted in Fig. BCS term is introduced to take care of superconducting leads. where contribution of leads is given by where kασ denotes the energy of an electron with spin σ (σ =↑, ↓ denotes spin of spin up and spin down electrons respectively) in the k th energy state of lead α (α = L, R corresponds to left and right lead). ∆ kα = |∆ kα | e iφ kα is complex superconducting order parameter in which φ kα is phase correponding to lead α. For BCS, S-wave superconductor, superconducting order parameter does not have k dependency. Quantum Dot contribution is given as follows. d is the energy level of the quantum dot. Coupling between dot level and superconducting lead is of the form where h kα is coupling strength between dot and lead. To diagonalize the Hamiltonian Bogoliubov transformation is used, defined as follows where After Bogoliubov transformation, Hamiltonian takes the form as follows. where Now to study the system at infiite-U employing slave boson mean field approach, auxiliary fermionic operators f σ and f † σ are introduced in terms of auxiliary boson field operators b and b † . Due to infinite-U, single electron occupancy will be there on QD. Condition for single occupancy is given as This condition allows to apply the slave-boson technique. Hamiltonian now takes the form as where λ is Lagrange multiplier. In mean field approximation we replace Boson operators by their expectation values, b † (t) = b(t) = b. Effective Slave Boson mean field Hamiltonian finally comes out to be as where ̃ d (= d + λ) is renormalized QD level and hKα (= bh kα ) is renormalized dot lead coupling strength. Now, employing Green's function equation of motion, set of coupled equations is obtained. Solving above coupled equations from equation ( where To obtain the parameters b and λ, we followed the minimization of free energy function, which can be described in terms of density of states [ρ f (ω)] as follows. For a wide flat conduction band of width 2D, change in free energy due to impurity is given as follows where Λ is renormalized hybridization given as follows For flat conduction band, dot-lead coupling becomes k-independent. It is clear that for b=1 and λ = 0 , Λ reduces to that of non interacting hybridization. Minimization of free energy with respect to parameters b and λ , give rise to two coupled integral equations described as follows. In equations ( We have used zero temperature for our calculation. To analyse the DOS and energy of ABSs, we need to solve equations ( On the basis of SIAM, we have used Bogoliubov transformation followed by infinite-U slave Boson mean field approach to get the relevant Green's function. From Green's function, density of states of quantum dot is calculated as follows. where, Green's function G f (ω + ) is given by equation In Further, the energy of ABSs is calculated from poles of the Green's function ( flows across the S-QD-S junction even at infinite on dot Coulomb interaction limit. These results are in accordance with the works pointed out in other theoretical works, where sub gap states in S-QD-S system is studied Employing the infinite-U slave Boson mean field approach for Single impurity Anderson model of superconductor representing S-QD-S junction, sub gap states (Andreev bound states) are observed within the superconducting gap. These sub gap states are found to depend on the superconducting phase difference between two leads as well as left lead-dot coupling to right lead-dot coupling ratio. Due to dependence on phase difference, these states are current carrying states. This formalism can be extended to multilevel quantum dot and also to multi coupled QDs connected to superconducting leads. More, works is required for these types of system because of their potential application in nano electronic devices and hence we are attempting the works in this direction. One of the authors, Tanuj Chamoli would like to thank Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD), Government of India for financial support, received as a research fellowship.