The anomalous proximity effect in dirty superconducting junctions is one of most striking phenomena highlighting the profound nature of Majorana bound states and odd-frequency Cooper pairs in topological superconductors. Motivated by the recent experimental realization of planar topological Josephson junctions, we describe the anomalous proximity effect in a superconductor/semiconductor hybrid, where an additional dirty normal-metal segment is extended from a topological Josephson junction. The topological phase transition in the topological Josephson junction is accompanied by a drastic change in the low-energy transport properties of the attached dirty normal-metal. The quantization of the zero-bias differential conductance, which appears only in the topologically nontrivial phase, is caused by the penetration of the Majorana bound states and odd-frequency Cooper pairs into a dirty normal-metal segment. As a consequence, we propose a practical experiment for observing the anomalous proximity effect. Majorana bound states (MBSs) in topological superconductors One of the most striking phenomena caused by MBSs is an anomalous proximity effect in dirty superconducting junctions. When a dirty normal-metal (DN) is attached to a topological superconductor, the MBS penetrates into the attached DN and induces various anomalies including the formation of a zero-energy peak in the local density of states of the attached DN In this study, we focus on a planer topological Josephson junction (TJJ) Notably, the proposed system is fabricated on a thin film semiconductor, the microfabrication techniques of which are well established. Moreover, the conductance spectrum changes drastically through a topological phase transition, which is driven simply by changing the super- conducting phase difference. As a consequence, we propose a practical experiment for observing the anomalous proximity effect, which is a crucial subject in the physics of both MBSs and odd-frequency Cooper pairs. Model. In this study, we consider a semiconductor/superconductor hybrid, as shown in Fig. where c † r,σ (c r,σ ) is the creation (annihilation) operator of an electron at r with spin σ (=↑, ↓), t denotes the nearest-neighbor hopping integral, and μ is the chemical potential. The strength of the Rashba spin-orbit coupling is represented by λ. The Zeeman potential induced by the externally applied magnetic field in the x direction is given by V Z . The amplitude of the pair potential is denoted as ∆, where φ represents the superconducting phase difference between the two superconducting segments. The Pauli matrices in the spin space are represented by σ ν (ν = x, y, and z). The DN segment is described using where v(r) is the disordered potential given randomly within the range of -X ≤ v(r) ≤ X. The lead wire is described as follows: where t ′ , μ ′ , and V ′ Z represent the hopping integral, chemical potential, and Zeeman potential in the lead wire, respectively. We denote the hopping integral between the lead wire and the DN segment (i.e., the hopping integral between j = 0 and j = 1) as t int . A more detailed expression for the BdG Hamiltonian is given in Supplemental Material [47]. In the following calculations, we fix the parameters as t = t ′ = 1.0, t int = 0.1, μ = -3.5, μ ′ = -3.0, λ = 0.5, ∆ = 0.1, X = 1.0, W S = 18, W N = 4, W DN = 10, and L DN = 20. In addition, we assume that the relation of V Z = V ′ Z holds. For the random ensemble average, 10 4 samples are used. Before discussing the anomalous proximity effect, we briefly summarize the topological property of the TJJ According to the bulk-boundary correspondence, we can expect the |w| MBSs at the interface between the TJJ and DN (see Fig. where r ee ζ,ζ ′ and r he ζ,ζ ′ denote a normal and Andreev reflection coefficient at energy E, respectively. The indexes ζ and ζ ′ label an outgoing and incoming channel in the normal lead wire, respectively. These reflection coefficients are calculated using lattice Green's function techniques with F (r, r ′ , ω) being the anomalous part of the Matsubara Green's function with a Mastubara frequency ω. The other possible Cooper pair belongs to the odd-frequency spin-triplet even-parity (OTE) pairing symmetry, the pair amplitude of which is given by the following: Because of the internal spin degree of freedom of the spintriplet Cooper pairs, we have the three following components: F ν ote (r, ω) for ν = x, y, z. In Figs. 5(a) and 5(b), we demonstrate the pair amplitudes at a low-frequency (ω = 10 -4 ∆) as a function of the Zeeman potential and superconducting phase difference. Here, we show the absolute values of (a) F x ote (r, ω) and (b) F ese (r, ω), where the pair amplitudes are averaged in terms of the lattice sites in the DN segment. As shown in Fig. Discussion. In summary, we demonstrated the anomalous proximity effect of a planer TJJ. Notably, a TJJ itself has already been realized experimentally where c † r,σ (c r,σ ) is the creation (annihilation) operator of an electron at r with spin σ =↑, ↓, t denotes the nearestneighbor hopping integral, μ is the chemical potential. The strength of the Rashba spin-orbit coupling is represented by λ. The Zeeman potential due to the externally applied magnetic field in the x direction is given by V Z . The amplitude of the pair potential is denoted with ∆, where φ represents the superconducting phase difference between the two superconducting segments. The Pauli matrices in spin space are represented by σ ν for ν = x, y, z. The second term in Eq. ( where v(r) is the disordered potential given randomly in the range of -X ≤ v(r) ≤ X. The third term of Eq. ( where t ′ , μ ′ and V ′ Z represent the hopping integral, chemical potential, and Zeeman potential in the normal wire, respectively. The last term of Eq. ( where the hopping integral between the lead wire and the DN segment is given by t int . In this section, we discuss the symmetry properties of the TJJ. We here remove the DN segment and lead wire from the TJJ. By applying the periodic boundary condition in the x direction, the BdG Hamiltonian of the TJJ, which is given in Eq. where c † kx,m,σ (c kx,m,σ ) is the creation (annihilation) operator of an electron at y = ma 0 layer with momentum k x and spin σ. Ā ( Ã) represents a W all × W all (W S × W S ) matrix. Ī and O N represent the W all × W all unit matrix and W N × W N zero matrix, respectively.