The constant phase element (CPE) with a frequency-independent negative phase between current and voltage is used extensively in e.g. the bioimpedance and electrochemistry fields. Its physical meaning is only partially understood. Here we show that the responses of both the common capacitive CPE as well as the inductive CPE are exactly the same as those of simple RL and RC circuits where the inductor's or capacitor's value increases linearly with time. The resulting step and impulse responses are found and verified by simulation with the Micro-Cap simulation program. The realization with time-varying components correlates with known time-varying properties in applications. The constant phase element (CPE) is a capacitive impedance with a phase angle in the range -π/2, 0 which is independent of frequency. It was first introduced by Cole in connection with the electrical impedance of suspensions of spheres The constant phase element is applied for modeling experimental data and here in particular the bioimpedance and electrochemical impedance fields will be highlighted. In the first field, the CPE is a common model [6, Ch. 9.2.5] along with the related Cole impedance model In electrochemistry, CPE behavior is also commonly observed experimentally, and has been interpreted as a statistical distribution of time constants due to for example crystal orientation, surface roughness, and resistance distribution in an oxide layer at the surface Here we show that CPE behavior can result from simple circuits with time-varying component values. The common capacitive CPE with a negative phase angle will have the same current response to an input voltage impulse or step as a resistor in series with an inductor that increases linearly with time. An inductive CPE with a positive phase angle will have the same voltage response as a resistor in parallel with a linearly increasing capacitor. The models are inspired by similar ones in linear viscoelasticity The paper starts with defining the CPE and connects its frequency and time responses with the fractional derivative description. The proposed linearly time-varying circuits are then analyzed analytically and both exact and approximate solutions are found. The results are confirmed by simulation with Micro-Cap 12. Here, tilde is used to denote a Fourier transform so a function f (t) has a Fourier transform f (ω). The capacitive constant phase element has an impedance given by where C α is the CPE parameter in F • s α-1 and α is the order. The impedance has a negative phase angle of -απ/2 which varies from 0 to -π/2. The value α = 1 gives an ordinary capacitor, a = 0 is a resistor, and a = 0.5 corresponds to the Warburg element used to model diffusion processes. The CPE model corresponds to an equivalent complex relative permittivity where d and A are the equivalent plate distance and plate area of the capacitor respectively and ε 0 is the permittivity of vacuum. The inverse Fourier transform of ( The step response is the integral of the impulse response and is also a power law function: This is the Curie-von-Schweidler law As a power law in the frequency domain is one way of defining a fractional derivative, the CPE of ( An inductive constant phase element where the impedance has a positive phase angle απ/2, can be described by where L α is in units of H • s α-1 and α = 1 gives an ordinary inductance. The voltage is a fractional derivative of the current: Both the capacitive and the inductive CPEs are included in the definition of the fractance found for instance in We model the CPE using time-varying inductors and capacitors. They don't necessarily exist as physical devices although some devices may approximate them. Building on circuit theory where the usual definition is that magnetic flux is the product of inductance and current, the current-voltage characteristics is: where L(t) is a time-varying inductance. In a time-varying capacitor current will have a similar relationship with charge. This is different from the field of linear viscoelasticity which has inspired this paper. There the relationship is defined by the first term only where σ is stress, ε is strain and η(t) is the apparent time-varying viscosity as used in This ambiguity is reflected in how time-varying inductors and capacitors are implemented in circuit simulators. Micro-Cap from Spectrum Software implements both terms of (8). On the other hand OrCAD PSpice only implements the first term and this is seen as a problem in where θ has unit H/s = Ω. The only effect of including the second term of (8) in the definition of time-varying inductance is that θ contributes to the effective resistance. A second time variable, t 2 is used here as the time of the input impulse, t, and the time when the inductance starts changing, t 2 , in general are independent of each other. We will however assume that the variable inductor starts changing at the exact moment when the input impulse is applied so t 2 = t. The voltage-current relationship is then: By applying a voltage impulse as input at time t = 0, the current will follow: Following [14, App. 1], integration of ( where K is a constant determined by the initial conditions. Assume now that the initial value of the inductance, L 0 , is zero. Taking the exponential of the previous equation then gives: The constant of proportionality can be determined by considering a practical case related to the following simulation in Micro-Cap. If the input unit impulse is implemented by exciting one sample of duration t s with a voltage of 1/t s then the initial condition is that i(t s ) = 1/(Rt s ). Thus the final result will be Surprisingly this simple circuit has exactly the same response as the CPE of (3) for all positive values of time. As it may be hard to imagine a practical time-varying circuit where a component value starts with value zero, we will now let L 0 > 0. Then the solution is: Assuming that t τ so that the second term in the parenthesis dominates this is This is also equivalent to (3) and therefore this time-varying circuit approximates a CPE. The results of ( (3) to (4). The right-hand circuit of Fig. where the time-varying component is now a capacitor and θ has unit F/s = S. Therefore when C 0 = 0 the response will parallel that of (15) and be: Further, it will have a voltage response to an impulse in current which will be of the same form as Micro-Cap version 12 In this figure as well as the two next ones, a comparison is also made with a time-invariant circuit with R = 1, L = 1 with an exponential response. Equations ( computed in Matlab. Grid lines are the same as in Fig. Modeling of the capacitive and inductive constant phase elements with time-varying circuits does not critically depend on whether the second term of ( There are several examples of time dependent electrical parameters in biological mate- rials justifying the modeling of the CPE with a time-varying circuit. One candidate is the memristance displayed for example by human skin Another example of a system that resets itself for every polarity change is the charging of a double-layer in an electrochemical system due to an imposed signal. In each period, the applied signal leads to movements of ions in the solution towards or away from the electrode surface. During charging, ions move towards the electrode, and give electrostatic resistance to subsequent movement of ions. Similarly, during discharge, the ions move away from the electrode and give resistance to the discharge process which varies with time. These properties open the possibility for finding the equivalent of a steady-state transfer response. The challenge is to justify elimination of the second temporal variable t 2 in Finally, a goal is often to translate the non-ideal CPE element into an equivalent capacitor, notable examples being the Brug equation We have shown that the capacitive constant phase element (CPE) has exactly the same current response as a resistor in series with a linearly increasing inductance. Likewise the inductive CPE has a voltage response which is similar to that of a resistor in parallel with a linearly increasing capacitance. These forms of CPE are both subsets of what has recently been called a fractance. The Micro-Cap 12 simulation program is used to verify that the impulse responses follow the temporal power law predicted by theory. The realization with time-varying components correlates with known time-varying properties in applications, but this property will need to be explored and established more firmly in future work.