Epitaxial films of bismuth telluride topological insulators have received increasing attention due to potential applications in spintronic and quantum computation. One of the most important properties of epitaxial films is the presence of interface defects due to lateral lattice mismatch since electrically active defects can drastically compromise device performance. By describing hybrid reflections in hexagonal bismuth telluride films on cubic substrates, in-plane lattice mismatches were characterized with accuracy at least 20 times better than using other X-ray diffraction methods, providing clear evidence of 0.007% lateral lattice mismatch, consistent with stress relaxation associated with van der Waals gaps in the film structure. Semiconductor and optical industries make broad usage of thin epitaxial films and multilayers. X-ray diffraction (XRD) is an essential tool for the characterization of epitaxial thin films, giving the necessary information about composition, orientation, and structural perfection for both quality control and development of new device technologies. Structure refinement by XRD simulation is the most used approach for accurate data analysis, which is only as reliable as the quality of the best achieved fit of the data. To this purpose, all features (peaks in intensity) in a scan of intensity must be identified Hybrid reflections (HRs) from multiple x-ray diffraction are known to cause extra features in diffraction data of thin films. In general, they can be easily avoided or identified by changing the sample azimuth Bismuth telluride (Bi 2 Te 3 ) has been recently established as an archetype for the three-dimensional topological insulators HRs arise from the differences between two distinct crystal lattices that share a common interface. They are produced by sequences of successive h s k s l s reflections in the substrate and h f k f l f reflections in the film, in principle, without any specific order or number of reflections involved on each possible sequence. In reciprocal space, hybrid reflections have diffraction vectors where Q f and Q s stand for diffraction vectors on either film or substrate lattices, respectively. In real space, their scattering direction obey the same rule of any diffraction vector, making an angle (usually called 2θ) with the incident x-ray direction, Q max = 4π/λ for x-rays of wavelength λ. Regarding the outward normal direction n to the common interface, the hybrid diffraction vectors can be decomposed in terms of perpendicular Then, the x-ray incidence angle at the interface falls within the interval depending on which azimuth Q * is excited. The most relevant fact about HRs is that their occurance is a direct consequence of differences between both lattices. In other words, when film and substrate share identical unit cells and crystallographic orientations, as in homoepitaxy, there will be no extra reciprocal lattice nodes since all Q * vectors fall on top of the usual ones from both lattices. Then, the multi-scattering process implied by Eq. ( Films coherently strained to their substrates are the simplest systems where HRs can be observed It is worthwhile to reemphasize that observation of hybrid peaks depends on sample azimuth, and the axial divergence of the x-rays plays an important role in observing these peaks. Wider axial divergence results in increased chance of exciting HRs unintentionally. Formation of interface defects is the typical mechanism by which the elastic stress due to in-plane lattice mismatch relaxes Measuring off-specular-rod HRs as a function of the incidence angle has been the most reliable procedure to evidence small amount of interface defects in epitaxial films, with accuracy better than the 0.05% limit of standard methods via asymmetric reflections Bismuth telluride films have been grown on freshly cleaved (111) BaF 2 substrates using a Riber 32P MBE system that contains a nominal Bi 2 Te 3 effusion cell and two extra Te sources X-ray measurements were carried out with a Huber four circle diffractometer sourced by a fine focus copper rotating anode configured with a double collimating multilayer optics followed by a double bounce Ge 220 channel cut monochromator. Bandwidth is 2 eV for CuKα 1 (λ = 1.540562 Å). Electronic noise of the point detector is 0.08 counts/s. Adjustment arcs of the goniometer head were used to align the 222 s substrate reflection with the φ rotation axis of the diffractometer with an accuracy better than 0.01 • . As reference for sample azimuth, the substrate 313 s and film 01 20 f asymmetric reflections have been measured in co-planar diffraction geometry at the same azimuth wise. The major difference of our x-ray diffractometer regarding commercial ones for thin film analysis is the narrow axial (vertical) divergence of about 0.005 • , which is as small as the divergence in the horizontal diffraction plane. Figs. In the case of this hexagonal-on-cubic growth, the outward normal direction n has different representation in each lattice, it stands for the [001] and ) and, as far as in-plane mismatch is negligible, HRs along the specular rod have scattering angles where n = s (h s +k s +l s ) > 0 and m = f l f . By using a 0 = 6.2001 Å as the cubic lattice paremeter of BaF 2 and c = 30.497 Å as the hexagonal lattice parameter along the film [001] direction, the 2θ angles of all possible HRs along the specular rod where calculated and compared to experimental ones in Fig. Families of (n, m) hybrid peaks follow the 3-fold axis symmetry of the growth direction. High resolution azimuthal scans of 120 degrees for the two most populated families are shown in Fig. Full indexation lists and a script on how to index these hybrids are given in the supplementary material. Here it is important to indentify what are the suitable cases that can be used for studying in-plane lattice mismatch in these films. Since the in-plane component of the diffraction vectors are easily described in terms of h f k f indexes of the h f k f l f reflections of the film hexagonal lattice, a convenient way to write down the in-plane component of Q * as a function of the in-plane mismatch ∆a/a is, in a first order derivation, where the in-plane component Q f, of the film diffraction vector is calculated for ∆a/a = 0. For a pair of HRs where film and substrate reflections are equivalent but occuring on opposite sequences, Q * have the same magnitude for both HRs although with opposite signals. If such a pair is excitated at the same azimuth within the axial divergence, there will be a split of the observed hybrid peak as a function of the rocking curve angle, i.e., a split regarding the single peak seen for a sample with coherent strained film. In our diffractometer, the axial divergence is too narrow to excite more that one hybrid at the same azimuth. Then, FIG. we looked up for pairs of nearby hybrid peaks in the azimuthal scans where one of the peaks has a very small width, which in general indicates a hybrid with first reflection occurring in the substrate lattice, and hence, a possible pair with opposite sequences of equivalent reflections. The most suitable pairs we found are pointed out by numbers in the azimuthal scans in Fig. To imitate a conventional x-ray diffractometer of wider axial divergence, of about 1 degree, we perform a θ-φ mesh scans around the hybrid peaks pointed out in Fig. It is interesting to note that the Bi 2 Te 3 film is indeed relaxed, as expected in van der Waals epitaxy From the diffraction geometry of a single reflection, it is straighforward to conclude that Q f, • k < 0 for all hybrids in which the first reflection takes place in the film, i.e. hybrids with diffraction vector Q * = Q f +Q s . Relaxation of the film implies in ∆a/a = (a f, -a s, )/a s, < 0 when considering bulk values where a f, < a s, = a 0 / √ 2 = 4.3841 Å. Therefore, in case of relaxation of the film, those hybrids with first reflection in the film such as hybrids 1, 3, and 6 shift towards smaller values of the incidence angle, ∆θ i < 0 in Eq. ( Values of peak shifting shown in Table In summary, by using a high resolution method for measuring lateral lattice mismatch in epitaxial films we have demonstrated that strain in the film lattice are easily relaxed through van der Waals gaps between monoatomic layers stacking along the growth direction, in spite of the very small mismatch. This is an important mechanism of elastic stress relaxation that can be harmless to device perfomance since the electric field around van der Waals bonds is much smaller than around covalent or ionic chemical bonds. In the film with Te deficit, one bilayer of bismuth in the van der Waals gap of every 6 or 7 quintuple layers of Bi 2 Te 3 is capable of increasing van der Waals forces, stiffening the structure, and prevent the relaxation of the film. Otherwise, this film would relax to a larger lateral lattice parameter, of about 0.6%, regarding the film without bilayers of bismuth. See supplementary material for choice of reference frame, indexation of hybrid reflections, and corrections due to refraction. The authors acknowledge CAPES (Grant No. 88881.119076/2016-01) and FAPESP (Grant No. 2016/22366-5) for financial support. Diffraction vectors Q = ha * + kb * + lc * are given in terms of the reciprocal unit cell vectors where a, b, and c are the unit cell vectors in real space and V c = (a × b) • c the unit cell volume. To project the diffraction vectors of a crystal lattice onto a convenient xyz reference frame used to describe intrumental θ and φ angles, In this frame, the incidente wavevector is written as its in-plane direction as and the diffraction vectors as To describe hybrid reflections in the Bi 2 Te 3 /BaF 2 (111) epitaxial system, we have used 0] for projecting the film diffraction vectors, whereas for the substrate diffraction vectors A = [1 1 1] and B = [0 -1 1] were used instead. As an example, consider the reflections 22 10 f of the film and 044 s of the substrate. Their respective diffraction vectors in the xyz frame are Q ′ f = 3.3098 ŷ -2.0603 ẑ and Q ′ s = -3.3098 ŷ + 4.6807 ẑ, giving rise to the hybrid 22 10 f + 044 s of diffraction vector With the purpose of simple identification of the main hybrid reflections, their relative intensities were compared on basis of products of film and substrate structure factor modules, |F f | and |F s | respectively. For a hybrid with its relative intensity is simply taken as proportional to |F f ||F s |. Along 2θ/θ scans, the positions where hybrid peaks can be observed and their relative intensities are predicted by where f and s run over all allowed film and substrate reflections of indexes h f k f l f and h s k s l s , respectively. > 0, and m = f l f . A plot of the Y (2θ) is shown in Fig. A general and very friendly script in Mat-Lab was written to index hybrid reflections in film/substrate epitaxial systems. As input, it requires the list of structure factors and lattice parameters of both film and substrate crystal lattices, as well as the instrumental θ and φ angles where a hybrid peak is observed. Then, the script projects all film and substrate diffraction vectors onto the xyz reference frame and searches in both lattices for the closest reflection in diffraction condition with the incident wavevector k. Such search is carried out by minimizing the value of ξ 1 = |k 1 -2π/λ| where Difference in film and substrate indexes of refraction for x-rays, n f and n s respectively, can shift in opposite sense the rocking curve peaks of hybrid pairs, even when there is no physical mismatch in the lateral lattice parameters. First, there is the change due to the optical lattice mismatch caused by the difference of wavelength in each material, resulting in (∆a/a) opt = (n f -n s )/n s . Second, there is the angular deviation due to different angles in which the xrays cross the film/substrate interface, as indi-cated in Fig. 