Actuation of thin polymeric films via electron irradiation is a promising avenue to realize devices based on strain engineered two dimensional (2D) materials. Complex strain profiles demand a deep understanding of the mechanics of the polymeric layer under electron irradiation; in this article we report a detailed investigation on electron-induced stress on poly-methyl-methacrylate (PMMA) thin film material. After an assessment of stress values using a method based on dielectric cantilevers, we directly investigate the lateral shrinkage of PMMA patterns on epitaxial graphene, which reveals a universal behavior, independent of the electron acceleration energy. By knowing the stress-strain curve, we finally estimate an effective Young's modulus of PMMA on top of graphene which is a relevant parameter for PMMA based electronbeam lithography and strain engineering applications. The mechanical deformation of polymers under electrostatic forces, electrostriction, ion insertion, and molecular conformation changes is a well known effect and can be exploited for creating polymeric artificial muscles In a more standard context, the mechanical deformation of resists during lithographic exposure has been widely studied in the literature, with the aim of improving the resolution and precision of the features of the polymeric masks. A number of possible deformation mechanisms have been identified and investigated, including the thermal annealing of the resist due to electron irradiation In this article, we quantitatively investigate the mechanical properties of PMMA resist under electron exposure. At first, we calibrate the PMMA stress from the mechanical response of PMMA/Si 3 N 4 cantilevers after irradiation. We also independently perform a quantitative estimation of the in-plane deformation of a PMMA layer using a low-friction substrate consisting of epitaxial bilayer graphene (BLG) on SiC. Based on these experiments, we fully characterize the mechanical response of our actuators and we derive a PMMA effective Young's modulus of (1.7±0.1) GPa, which is comparable with the values reported in the literature The measurement of the deformation of a cantilever due to a thin overlayer is a well established method to measure the internal stresses stored in the coating material during the deposition process Our analysis is based on the inverse bending radius of the cantilever, i.e. the curvature κ, which directly relates to σ 0 . The value of κ is extracted by fitting the height profiles using a second-order polynomial In order to convert the measured curvature values into stress, we used a finite-element solver (COMSOL Multiphysics) and a cantilever model composed by two different layers with perfect adhesion (see Methods section). The bottom one is a 300 nm-thick Si 3 N 4 layer with Young's modulus E SiN = 250 GPa and Poisson ratio ν = 0.23. In the case of the top PMMA layer, we carefully took into account the thinning due to the e-beam irradiation, which is known to occur at low doses ( We note that the resulting experimental uncertainty (≈ 6%) is substantially larger than the simulation error deriving from our lack of knowledge of the exact value of the Young's modulus of the PMMA overlayer. Since the value of the Young's modulus is an important parameter to predict the behavior of the actuators, we performed a complementary experiment where we estimated the PMMA lateral shrinkage as a function of e-beam energy and dose. To this end, a set of PMMA patterns were fabricated on top of epitaxial bilayer graphene (BLG) grown on SiC (0001) In each measurement, we estimated the contraction of PMMA along the two sides of the square based on the contrast profile in the SEM image and calculated the average planar strain ε. An evident PMMA shrinkage up to about 10% is observed; the resulting trend is displayed in figure and obtain that all the shrinkage-dose curves roughly collapse on a unique universal behavior, independent on the electron energy employed in the experiment (see figure Results from the previous two sections can be combined to extract an estimate of the expected free shrinkage of PMMA as a function of the applied stress, in the linear actuation regime. This allows assessing the mechanical properties of our PMMA. In figure In conclusion, we studied the mechanical response of PMMA under e-beam irradiation to extract useful parameters for the design of PMMA-based actuators. This was accomplished using two complementary methods: in a first set of experiments, PMMA was deposited on Si 3 N 4 -cantilevers and the stress vs dose response was evaluated based on the mechanical deflection of the cantilever and on finite element simulations; in a second set of experiments, the free contraction of PMMA patterned onto an epitaxial BLG was investigated. Our study highlights that the strong energy dependence we observe in the mechanical response above 2 keV can be largely explained in terms of an energy-dependent number of electron collision in the PMMA. As a result, we found an universal shrinkage-dose curve that is valid in the whole energy range relevant to the actuators. Finally, from the comparison of these two results we estimate the effective Young's modulus of PMMA patterned onto epitaxial BLG. Our work provides a benchmark for future applications of PMMA as an e-beam actuating layer for strain-engineering of 2D materials and for investigating the mechanical response of other polymeric thin films. where ν is defined in section 2.2 and ζ is the offset. The Stoney formula where t, Y and ν are thickness, Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio of the substrate (indicated with the subscript s) and the thin film (subscript f ), respectively. If the thin film thickness is comparable to the substrate one, the formula can be corrected with an extra term which depends linearly on the ratio between the two thicknesses t f /t s Even if Stoney's formula was obtained for unclamped plates, as a first approximation it can be used to describe the curvature of clamped cantilevers. Therefore, we compared the analytical results of equation ( Epitaxial BLG was grown starting from nominally on-axis Si-face polished 6H-SiC(0001) purchased from SiCrystal Gmb. The synthesis of BLG was carried out by thermal decomposition, adapting the recipe of Emtsev and coworkers 