We propose a thin, compact, broadband, polarization and angle insensitive metamaterial absorber based on a tungsten reflector, silicon spacer and a top pattern composed of a double square-like ring resonator utilizing nickel (Ni). In such a structure, a high absorption (above 80 %) bandwidth ~ 4.8 m from 3.52 up to 8.32 m corresponding to the relative bandwidth ~81% can be achieved with deeply subwavelength unit cell dimensions. Here the physical origin of the broadband absorption is associated with low Q-factor dipole modes of the top pattern inner and outer sides functioning as rectangular nanoantennas. Owing to the structural symmetry, the absorber shows a good incidence angle tolerance in the relatively wide range for both TE and TM polarizations. The effective parameters of the Ni-based absorber were retrieved using the constitutive effective medium theory and the absorption characteristics of the effective medium and metamaterial were compared. During past years, metamaterial absorbers (MMA) representing large arrays of subwavelength unit cells and aiming to efficiently absorb most of the incident electromagnetic waves have gained much attention due to several practical applications such as communication, sensing, imaging, energy harvesting, detecting, thermal sources, coding, cloaking etc. One of the important aspects of metamaterials is the absorption bandwidth (BW), which has a great influence on its practical applications. To achieve multiband Here, we propose a thin, compact, broadband, polarization and angle insensitive MMA absorber covering most of the midand long-wave infrared spectra based on tungsten-silicon (W-Si) reflector-spacer with a double square-like ring top metallic pattern composed of eight non-intersecting rectangular nanoantennas. We show that the efficient (over 80%) broadband absorption with a BW ~ 4.8 m can be achieved in 3.52-8.32 m spectrum with a Ni-based The areas of potential applications of the proposed device include sensing, detecting, light modulating, cloaking and optical buffering The structure of the considered absorber is composed of a metal reflector substrate, a middle dielectric spacer and a second metallic layer, schematic 3D view of which is shown in Fig. Numerical analysis based on the finite element method is conducted to investigate the absorber. Within all simulations, tm = 100-nm-thick W We analyzed the absorption performance of the proposed W-Si-based metamaterial absorber (MMA) with a top pattern composed of double square-like ring resonators depicted in Fig. To reveal the physical mechanisms of the broadband absorption of the MMA with double square-like Ni rings, in Fig. As the basic material for the top pattern, we chose a highly lossy Ni. However, to compare the performance of the absorber for other metals, in Fig. In Table Fig. Here k0 is the free space wavenumber, d -the total thickness of the structure, m -an integer and and signs are chosen so that 0 Z  and 0 n  . To verify our analysis and intuitively understand the underlying physics of high absorptance of the entire structure, we compared the absorptance of the structure with double square-like Ni ring to the equivalent medium with derived constitutive effective parameters [as shown in Fig. Meanwhile, positive resonances of ε" at the first two absorption peaks mean that these are electric resonances. Note that the results in the range up to 3 m are not included due to the limitations of the constitutive effective medium theory In conclusion, we investigated a simple design of an absorber structure based on W reflector, Si spacer and a double squarelike ring top pattern composed of non-intersecting rectangular nanoantennas. We showed that efficient broadband absorption over 80% throughout 3.52-8.32 m range with a bandwidth ~4.8 m can be achieved by using Ni as a metal for the top pattern, which corresponds to about 81% of the center wavelength of the absorption band. The broadband absorption in the MMA is associated with the low Q-factor dipole resonances conditioned by highly lossy optical properties of Ni. The structural symmetry results in the wide incident angle tolerance up to 65° for TM-and up to 40° for TE-polarized waves. Analyzing the case of tungsten top pattern, one sees that near-perfect triple-band absorption is possible due to lower values of the loss tangent compared to Ni. Comparison to other broadband absorbers in the mid-and long-wave infrared spectra shows that we were able to realize a thinner structure, deeply subwavelength periodicity and at the same time relatively broadband absorption. It is shown that the absorption properties of the proposed system are in good agreement to those of the effective medium, whose properties were retrieved by constitutive effective medium theory.