Predicting the mechanical failure of parts in service requires understanding their deformation behavior, and associated dynamic microstructural evolution up to the near-atomic scale. Solutes are known to interact with defects generated by plastic deformation, thereby affecting their displacement throughout the microstructure and hence the material's mechanical response to solicitation. This effect is studied here in a polycrystalline Ni-based superalloy with two different Nb contents that lead to a significant change in their creep lifetime. Creep testing at 750°C and 600 MPa shows that the high-Nb alloy performs better in terms of creep strain rate. Considering the similar initial microstructures, the difference in mechanical behavior is attributed to a phase transformation that occurs along planar faults, controlled by the different types of stacking faults and alloy composition. Electron channeling contrast imaging reveals the presence of stacking faults in both alloys. Microtwinning is observed only in the low-Nb alloy, rationalizing in part the higher creep strain rate. In the high-Nb alloy, atom probe tomography evidences two different types of stacking faults based on their partitioning behavior. Superlattice intrinsic stacking faults were found enriched in Nb, Co, Cr and Mo while only Nb and Co was segregated at superlattice extrinsic stacking faults. Based on their composition, a local phase transformation occurring along the faults is suggested, resulting in slower creep strain rate in the high-Nb alloy. In comparison, mainly superlattice intrinsic stacking faults enriched in Co, Cr, Nb and Mo were found in the low-Nb alloy. Following the results presented here, and those available in the literature, an atomic-scale driven alloy design approach that controls and promotes local phase transformation along planar faults at 750°C is proposed, aiming to design superalloys with enhanced creep resistance. Owing to their colloquial high-temperature mechanical properties, Ni-based superalloys are used in the hot section of gas turbines for energy generation and propulsion. The characteristic high-temperature mechanical properties of such alloys are largely attributed to a potent degree of precipitation strengthening of the γ matrix (disordered fcc) by semicoherent γ' precipitates (L12 structure) The next generation of high-strength, polycrystalline, Ni-based superalloys are pushed towards higher temperature capabilities. Hence, the deformation mechanisms transitions from dislocation glide in the γ channels and either looping around or shearing through the γ' precipitates as paired perfect matrix dislocations separated by an anti-phase boundary (APB) Super Energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDX)transmission electron microscopy (TEM) has been extensively used providing structural and compositional information from integrated signal through the thickness of the TEM specimen Although solute partitioning onto crystal defects has become an important factor controlling the mechanical performance of superalloys, quantitative information and fundamental knowledge at the atomic level of such partitioning behaviors remains limited. In some cases, it can be detrimental by promoting either the dissolution of γ' precipitates Recent efforts to develop advanced polycrystalline Ni-base superalloys have focused on exploiting increased levels of Ta and/or Nb to improve strength and temperature capability for next-generation disk alloys. In the present study, we investigate the partitioning at crystal defects after creep in an experimental polycrystalline Ni-base superalloys with two different levels of Nb, namely RRHT3 (low-Nb) and RRHT5 (high-Nb), whose compositions are detailed below Two alloys with a composition given in Table Pre-and post-creep metallographic samples were cut along the loading direction, grinded with SiC papers and polished with 0.04μm colloidal silica. The fully heat-treated samples were etched in a 33%HCL -33%NO3 -33%CH3COOH -1%HF solution, and highresolution microstructural observations were carried out on a JEOL JSM 6701-F field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM), with an accelerating voltage of 10 kV and current of 10 μA. ECCI analysis of the crept microstructures was performed on a Zeiss Merlin SEM equipped with a backscattered electron (BSE) detector, at an accelerating voltage of 20 kV and a probe current of 2 nA. SEM-BSE imaging was used to locate grains with a high density of defects in the samples fractured in creep. These grains were targeted for APT specimen preparation by using a dual beam SEM/focused ion beam (FIB) instrument (FEI Helios Nanolab 600i) via a site-specific lift-out protocol outlined in Ref. The initial microstructure of the two studied alloys after heat treatment and prior to creep deformation is shown in Figure The creep curves at 750°C and 600 MPa of the two alloys are displayed in Figure Given the slower creep strain rate of the RRHT5 alloy, our efforts have been focused first on understanding the interactions of solutes with stacking faults in this alloy. The composition of the dislocation is determined by the 1D composition profiles (along arrow #1 in Figure These composition profiles also provide information for the second observed plane (at around 9nm, indicated by a grey background on the graphs), which is not associated with the dislocation. In particular, the second plane is enriched in Co and Nb, with no apparent segregation or depletion of Cr and Mo. 1D composition profiles were calculated at a different location for both planes as indicated by the green arrow #2 in Figure As indicated by the 2D composition profile in Figure Therefore, it is proposed as an hypothesis that the two dislocations are a pair of partial dislocations. In particular, this is suggested based on the presence of a faulted plane delimited by these two dislocations. Following the higher amount of segregation at one of the two dislocations, the latter is identified as the leading partial dislocation (LPD), while the second one is identified as the trailing one. However, this identification is, at this point, a suggestion that merely helps naming the dislocations in the following, and does not have an impact on the proposed mechanism. Similar differences between partials have been previously observed and calculated in nickel-and cobalt-based superalloys Although in the case of RRHT3 alloy (low-Nb), the presence of microtwins is well known to accelerate deformation Figure alloy. An interface between a γ' precipitate and the γ matrix is visualized by a 10.5 at.% Cr isocomposition surface. A dislocation is connected to the interface and extends into γ'. Similarly to RRHT5, composition profiles in Figure The results presented above highlight better creep properties for a Nb-rich alloy, RRHT5, compared to a similar alloy with a 0.9 at.% lower nominal Nb content, RRHT3. The reasons of the improved creep performance of RRHT5 will first be discussed, and the outcomes will be integrated in a second part into a proposed design tool, aiming at predicting precipitation onto stacking faults, and thus improved creep properties for Ni-based superalloys. Several parameters can influence the creep properties, such as the initial microstructure or the composition. Regarding the two studied alloys, based on the SE images of Figure showing similar initial microstructures, and the related quantification of the amount of γ' precipitates (Figure Therefore, the compositional difference between RRHT3 and RRHT5 was considered to rationalize the distinct creep behaviors. Table APT analyses of crept samples reveal for both alloys segregation of Co, Cr and Mo at dislocations (see Figure EDX measurements on the single crystal MD2 alloy, crept at 800°C under a 650 MPa load, revealed an enrichment in γ-stabilizers, such as Co, Cr and Mo at both SESF and SISF However, other EDX studies on different crept superalloys reported that the segregation behavior may differ from one type of fault to another By comparing the RRHT5 alloy with LSHR, the partitioning of Cr at a fault would be the signature of a SISF, while its absence (with only the segregation of Co and Nb) would indicate that the fault is a SESF. This would also be in good agreement with the results of Barba et al. At last, this diffusion of solutes to the deformation features could occur by pipe diffusion along the LPD, diffusion along the fault (in plane diffusion) or from the rest of the γ' precipitate, with a diffusion occurring perpendicular to the fault As for Nb, its tendency to be depleted at the dislocation core rules out the hypothesis of pipe diffusion, and so Nb in SISF must come from in-plane diffusion. These results show that inplane diffusion occurs in this alloy, probably assisted by pipe diffusion for Co and Cr. Therefore, mechanisms distinct for the various solutes but working in a collaborative manner to produce the observed segregation. It is striking that the small compositional difference between the two alloys, being 0.9 at.% for Nb and 1.8 at% for Al, is responsible for such a considerable change in the deformation mechanism, and more specifically the segregation tendency to the faults. To rationalize the difference in creep behavior between the two alloys and gain some insight on how to design future alloys by exploiting such effects, an attempt was made to create a first design diagram, in Figure Smith et al. Hence, the design goal would be to promote such local transformations to ordered, hard, geometrically closed packed (GCP) phases of the Ni3X nature, especially at SESFs. The formation of ordered η-phase on a SESF would highly depend on the availability of Nb and Ta atoms in the γ' phase, and so high concentrations of these γ' forming elements seem to be desirable. However, exceeding the alloys solubility limit would promote precipitation of bulk η and/or δ Therefore a careful balance of γ' forming elements needs to be made such that the alloy lays in a metastability region that has the maximum amount of Nb, Ta and Ti relative to Al, but does not exceed a limit which would make another ordered phase more stable than γ'. The γ' composition was used for the construction of Figure shown in It should be noted that, the empirical nature of these fitting numbers requires large datasets for good accuracy, however, the challenge of extracting such details during characterization has resulted to knowledge on only a handful of alloys Figure A polycrystalline Ni-based superalloy with two different Nb levels, namely RRHT3 (low-Nb) and RRHT5 (high-Nb), were studied. Their creep properties at 750°C under a 600 MPa load were tested, and the deformation mechanisms were investigated from a solute partitioning side, to better apprehend the critical consequences of chemistry variations on the mechanical properties. The conclusions can be summarized as follows: • The RRHT5 alloy exhibits a desirable lower creep strain rate compared to RRHT3 alloy at 750°C under a 600 MPa load. • The difference in creep performance is ascribed to the different types of crystal defects and their partitioning behavior. ECCI analyses confirmed the presence of stacking faults in the γ' precipitates of both crept alloys. Detrimental microtwins were observed only in RRHT3, promoting higher creep strain rate. • APT analyses have shown that Co, Cr and Mo partition at dislocations for both alloys while Nb is depleted. • Based on the present results coupled with literature survey, partitioning of Cr, Mo, Nb and Co at SISF and Nb and Co only at SESF was measured. • Diffusion of solutes at the stacking faults, occurs in-plane with the fault as shown by APT analysis. • With a local composition at the SESF up to 14 and 11.5 at.% for Co and Nb respectively and up to 17.5, 10, 2.8 and 0.3 at.% for Co, Nb, Cr and Mo at the SISF, it is likely that local phase transformation into the η-phase at the SESF and the χphase on the SISF occurs. • The lower creep strain rate in the RRHT5 (high-Nb) alloy is hence rationalized by the combined presence of η-phase and χ-phase along the faults, hindering shearing of the γ' precipitates, and suppression of microtwinning. • Using the results presented here and alloys of the literature, a design strategy is proposed, based on the (Nb+0.5Ti+Ta) composition. It is suggested that when this composition exceeds ~0.625 times the Al content, phase transformation along stacking faults is favored. The present findings highlight that a compositional difference as small as the one between the two studied alloy, of 0.9 at.% Nb and 1.8 at.% Al, leads to drastic differences in the creep properties, that can be rationalized by the formation of ordered phases at the faults in one case, when it does not happen in the other. Future studies of various alloys, displaying or not phase transformation on SESF, will help refining the threshold of the proposed parameter, considering the (Nb+0.5Ti+Ta) composition, which could potentially be used as a criterion for the design of future superalloys with enhanced creep resistance. Uwe Tezins & Andreas Sturm for their support to the FIB & APT facilities at MPIE. We are grateful for the financial support from the Max-Planck Gesellschaft via the Laplace project for both equipment and personnel (P.K. and B.G). P.K. also acknowledges financial support from the DFG SFB TR 103 through project A4. BG acknowledges financial support from the ERC-CoG-SHINE-771602. We acknowledge provision of the materials used in this study from Rolls-Royce Corporation.