Polarized light microscopy provides high contrast to birefringent specimen and is widely used as a diagnostic tool in pathology. However, polarization microscopy systems typically operate by analyzing images collected from two or more light paths in different states of polarization, which lead to relatively complex optical designs, high system costs or experienced technicians being required. Here, we present a deep learning-based holographic polarization microscope that is capable of obtaining quantitative birefringence retardance and orientation information of specimen from a phase recovered hologram, while only requiring the addition of one polarizer/analyzer pair to an existing holographic imaging system. Using a deep neural network, the reconstructed holographic images from a single state of polarization can be transformed into images equivalent to those captured using a single-shot computational polarized light microscope (SCPLM). Our analysis shows that a trained deep neural network can extract the birefringence information using both the sample specific morphological features as well as the holographic amplitude and phase distribution. To demonstrate the efficacy of this method, we tested it by imaging various birefringent samples including e.g., monosodium urate (MSU) and triamcinolone acetonide (TCA) crystals. Our method achieves similar results to SCPLM both qualitatively and quantitatively, and due to its simpler optical design and significantly larger field-ofview, this method has the potential to expand the access to polarization microscopy and its use for medical diagnosis in resource limited settings. Polarized light microscopy is widely used as a diagnostic tool in pathology, as it introduces distinctive contrast to birefringent specimen While CPLM images are treated as the gold standard for MSU crystal detection, the effort is labor intensive as microscopes have limited fields-of-view (FOV) and therefore, mechanical scanning is required to inspect the whole sample area. In addition to having a limited FOV, the CPLM technique suffers from limitations such as requiring manual alignment of the polarizer in relation to the analyzer, limited focal depth with higher magnification objectives and limited sensitivity when being used to detect small crystals or crystals with weak birefringence. As a result, CPLM analysis is sensitive to both the concentration of the crystals in synovial fluid There are a number of alternative polarization microscopy methods which have been developed to produce quantitative images of birefringent specimen. These methods all use the same principles of operation: they collect images from two or more light paths with either the polarizer or the analyzer oriented differently in order to infer the Stokes/Jones parameters that define the birefringent specimen Recently, a technique known as single-shot computational polarized light microscopy (SCPLM) In parallel to these advances in computational polarization microscopy, deep learning has emerged as a highly effective technique for solving inverse problems in microscopy Here, we build upon these advances and present a novel deep learning-based holographic polarization microscope (DL-HPM) which can provide the retardation and orientation of birefringent specimen using a single phase-retrieved hologram that encodes one state of polarization (Figure We believe that the presented deep-learning based polarization microscopy approach could be widely used as a diagnostic tool in pathology and other fields that need to rapidly process and reveal the unique signatures of various birefringent crystals within complex specimen such as synovial fluid samples. Raw holograms are collected using a lensfree holographic microscope with a customized polarizer and analyzer. A trained neural network is used to transform the reconstructed holographic amplitude and phase images into the birefringence retardance and orientation images. (b) Schematic for single-shot computational polarized light microscopy (SCPLM). Images are collected with a four-channel pixelated polarized camera under circularly polarized illumination. Birefringent retardance and orientation channels are computed using Jones calculus, and the amplitude image is obtained by averaging the four polarization channels. SCPLM is used as the ground truth information channel, providing the network training target for DL-HPM. (c) Blind testing of DL-HPM. A new clinical sample (containing MSU crystals) collected from a de-identified patient is tested using DL-HPM. Birefringent samples are given a pseudo color using the same convention according to the compensated polarized light microscopy. Similar image quality was achieved compared to SCPLM images. Scale bar: 50 μm. We trained a deep neural network (see the Methods section) using 6 clinical samples containing MSU crystals, collected from 6 de-identified patients, to perform an image transformation, from an input holographic image (amplitude and phase) to the birefringence retardance and orientation images at the output of the network. The slides were all reviewed using CPLM (Olympus BX-51) by our clinical expert (JF) for the presence of MSU crystals. This analysis found that the majority of the birefringent crystals within these samples are needle shaped MSU crystals. Once trained, the neural network was blindly tested with 2 additional MSU slides from 2 new patients; Figure The results of this quantitative analysis are reported in Figure Our results have qualitatively and quantitatively demonstrated the effectiveness of the presented framework using multiple types of samples, also illustrating the capability of the networks to generalize from one sample type to another. However, the black box nature of deep neural networks often makes it challenging to determine how the transformation is actually performed. In this section, we perform an ablation study aiming to partially reveal the physical interpretation of the deep neural network, and demonstrate that the network is learning to perform crystal segmentation based on both the morphological information and the physical relationship between holographic amplitude/phase information and the birefringent retardance/orientation channels. For this analysis, we trained two additional networks using the MSU image dataset: 1. using only the holographic amplitude channel as the input to the neural network to blindly perform the retardance/orientation inference; and 2. using only the holographic phase channel as the input to the neural network to blindly perform the retardance/orientation inference. Examples of the blind inference performance of these trained networks are shown in Figure . 6. In general, using only the amplitude or only the phase channel, as opposed to using both channels together, significantly degrades the inference performance of the network. The amplitude only network tends to accurately predict the crystals but generates images with significant error in the orientation channel, whereas the phase only network tends to predict the locations of the crystals less accurately. One possible explanation for this observation is that the amplitude only network is learning morphological information to locate the crystals, as the holographic optical system was designed to introduce intensity contrast for birefringent samples HPM in general degraded when reducing the input channel to amplitude only or phase only information. Color bar for retardance, from black to white, represents 0 to 1 Rad. Color bar for orientation, from black to white, represents -π/2 π/2. Color bar for pseudo colored crystals, from left to top to right, represents π, π/2, 0 Rad in the orientation channel. Retardance is represented by the distance from the center of the color bar, ranging from 0 to 0.4. The evolution of the polarization state in our optical setup (Fig. where atan2(y, x) is the four-quadrant inverse tangent function for point (x, y), A recon is the normalized reconstructed amplitude, φ recon is the normalized reconstructed phase (with zero phase in the background), β represents the orientation of the linear polarizer with respect to the x-axis, and a and b are defined as: θ represents the orientation of the fast axis of the sample with respect to the x-axis, and η represents the relative phase retardance. Unlike the SCPLM method, where the retardance, η, and the orientation, θ, are encoded in symmetrical equations with a straightforward analytical solution (detailed in the Supporting Information), Equations 1-2 encode the birefringence information in a much more convoluted form. Because of the experimental challenges in obtaining an accurate estimate of β as well as the potential phase wrapping related issues, independently solving Equations 1-2 in a pixel-by-pixel manner could result in errors or spatial inconsistencies/artifacts at the output retardance and orientation images. Hence, it elevates the need for a more advanced solution and a robust method such as a deep neural network, which is trained to perform an image-to-image transformation by making use of all the information from multiple pixels within a FOV simultaneously. Stated differently, through image data, the deep neural network learns to solve Equations 1-2 over an input FOV, where all the pixels within the complex-valued input image (phase and amplitude) are simultaneously processed to generate the desired output image channels, i.e., the retardance (η) and the orientation (θ) images. We presented a deep learning-enabled holographic polarization microscope. This framework is advantageous as it only requires the measurement of a single polarization state which can be generated using a simple optical setup, and is capable of accurately reconstructing the quantitative birefringent retardance and orientation information of the specimen. These information channels can dramatically simplify the automatic detection, counting, and classification of birefringent objects within complex media. Powered with these features, our method can be the basis of a rapid point-of-care crystal and analysis instrument with automated crystal identification and classification capabilities, which could significantly simplify the clinical procedures used to diagnose diseases related to birefringent crystals, such as gout and pseudogout. The presented DL-HPM system utilizes a customized lensfree holographic polarization microscope to capture the input images (Figure To enable detection of the birefringence within the sample, a left-hand polarizer and a customized analyzer were added in the holographic imaging system In the analysis of our holographic imaging system, we assume that the sample, polarizer, and analyzer are thin and have negligible gaps between them. We further assume that the light diffracts from the analyzer onto the image sensor after being converted to linearly polarized light by the last layer of the analyzer. Therefore, after its reconstruction, the hologram becomes in-focus at the sample plane (the thicknesses of both the sample and the analyzer are assumed to be negligible). The evolution of the polarization in our imaging system can be analyzed using Jones calculus where i 2 = -1, and LHCP is defined from the point of view of the source.     where α represents the orientation of the fast axis of the λ/4 retarder with respect to the x-axis. IV. Linear polarizer: 2 linear 2 cos cos sin cos sin sin where β represents the orientation of the polarizer with respect to the x-axis. The output light field can then be expressed as: Equations 1-2 reported in the Discussion section are obtained by rearranging Equation The neural networks were trained using image pairs captured using both SCLPM and the holographic imaging systems. We used 6 clinical MSU samples for training, and 2 additional MSU samples for To ensure that the network training can generalize to new samples, the slides used to train the neural network were chosen to have different concentrations of MSU crystals (example FOVs of each slide are shown in Supporting Information Figure In order to train the neural network to learn the image transformation from a lensfree holographic imaging modality to a lens-based SCPLM system, an accurately co-registered training dataset is required. This co-registration begins by bicubic down-sampling the target polarization images by a factor of 0.345/0.373 (obtained with the benchtop microscope) to match the pixel size of the holographic microscope; the ground truth images were created using SCPLM with an effective pixel size of 0.345 μm, while the holographic images used as the network input have an effective pixel size of 0.373 μm. Next, a rough matching between the two sets of images is obtained by finding the overlapping area with maximum correlation between the amplitude channels of the images. Once the images have been roughly aligned, global matching is performed by applying an affine transformation calculated using MATLAB's multimodal image registration framework 36 . This framework extracts features from the amplitude channel of the images and matches them with the affine matrix. Next, large fields of view were cropped, and matched to each other using an elastic pyramidal registration algorithm, which allows for pixel level matching A Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) framework was used to perform the image transformation reported in this paper. In addition to this GAN loss, a mean absolute error (L 1 ) loss was used to ensure that the transformation is accurate, and a total variation (TV) loss is used as a regularization term. GANs use two separate networks for their operation. A generator network (G(·)) is used to transform the holographic images into their polarization counterparts. A second network known as the discriminator (D(·)) is used to discriminate between the ground truth images (z) and the generated images (G(x)). The two networks learn from one another, with the generator gradually learning how to create images that match the feature distribution of the target dataset, while the discriminator gets better at distinguishing between ground truth images and their generated counterparts. The overall loss function can be described as: where λ 1 and λ 2 are constants used to balance the various terms of the loss function. The L 1 loss was balanced to make up ~25% of the total loss function, while the total variation loss makes up ~0.5% of the overall loss function. The L 1 loss is defined as: where K is the number of image channels (k =1 represents the retardance channel, and k =2 represents the orientation channel), M and N are the number of pixels on each axis, and i and j represent the pixel indices of the image. The total variation loss is defined as: In order to train the discriminator a separate loss function is used, defined as: The generator network uses the U-net architecture The discriminator network (Figure Each convolutional layer uses a kernel size of 3×3 and is followed by the leaky rectified linear unit (LeakyReLU) activation function which is defined as: for 0 LeakyReLU = 0.1 otherwise In the training phase, we used the adaptable movement estimation (Adam) optimizer, with a learning rate of 10 -4 for the generator, and 10 -5 for the discriminator. The network begins with the generator being trained 7 times for each training of the discriminator, with this ratio being reduced by 1 every 4000 iterations down to a minimum of 3. The network was trained for 30,000 iterations of the discriminator. Training was performed using a single 2080 Ti (Nvidia), with Python version 3.6.0 and TensorFlow Version 1.11.0. MATLAB version R2018a was used for preprocessing.