Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) is a layered dielectric material with a wide range of applications in optics and photonics. In this work, we demonstrate a fabrication method for few-layer hBN flakes with areas up to 5000 μm 2 . We show that hBN in this form can be integrated with photonic microstructures: as an example, we use a circular Bragg grating (CBG). The layer quality of the exfoliated hBN flake on a CBG is confirmed by second-harmonic generation (SHG) microscopy. We show that the SHG signal is uniform across the hBN sample outside the CBG and is amplified in the center of the CBG. Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) is a layered material analogous to graphene However, the aforementioned applications require a reliable fabrication method to obtain large and thin hBN flakes of high optical quality and unperturbed crystalline structure. Compared to graphene and TMDs In this paper, we demonstrate a reliable method to produce hBN flakes with high optical quality, few-nm thickness, and areas that reach 5000 μm 2 , based on a method developed previously for TMDs We obtained a high yield of few-layered hBN flakes by following a previously developed method for TMDs Subsequently, the thin hBN flakes were transferred onto the final target substrate with CBGs using a wet transfer technique. For that, a 500 nm polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) film was spun onto the SiO 2 substrate. Then, the SiO 2 substrate was etched in a solution of potassium hydroxide, which would release the PMMA film floating on the surface of the liquid. Another silicon substrate was used to pick up the PMMA film and transfer it to ultra-pure water (repeated three times). Finally, the film was picked up using the target substrate (fused silica) and dried on a hot plate. Subsequently, the PMMA was removed using a warm acetone bath and further cleaned using an ultraviolet ozone treatment. Microscopy analysis was carried out on a set of hBN flakes to determine the quality of a sample set of hBN flakes following the exfoliation. Fig. To show the reliability of the fabrication approach, we measured flake size and thickness for a set of 24 flakes, as shown in Fig. After that, we proceeded with photonic integration of hBN flakes on top of a CBG resonator to study nonlinear optical performance. In this work, the use of a CBG is based on both its good emission directionality and intensity enhancement. The CBG structure was fabricated in a 200 nm SiN layer, supported on a 800 nm SiO2 layer on a Si substrate. First, an SiN layer was grown by PECVD (Oxford PlasmaPro System100 ICP180-CVD). After growth, a 400 nm ARP-6200 electron beam resist was spin-cast (4000 rpm, 60 s) on top of SiN membrane and baked at 150 • C for 3 minutes. The pattern was defined in electron beam resist by electron-beam lithography (Raith Vistec EBPG5000+ 100 kV) and then transferred into the SiN membrane using a reactive ion etching system (Oxford PlasmaPro System100RIE) with CHF3/O2 gas. Finally, the residual resist was removed by a gentle oxygen plasma RIE process. The design of the CBG consisted of a wavelength-scale central disk surrounded by an annular periodic grating acting as an antenna optimized for the wavelength of 835 nm. As shown in Fig. The polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp was made by mixing 10 parts of Sylgard 184 prepolymer with 1 part of the crosslinking agent. The solution was then spin-coated on a glass slide and cured at 60 • C overnight. Next, the stamp was treated with oxygen plasma for 10 min. Finally, a solution of Polypropylene carbonate (PPC) (15 % in anisole, 50 K, 1500 rpm) was spin-coated to obtain a 5 μm thick layer on top of the stamp. To confirm the uniform distribution of layers throughout the whole area of the hBN flake and study the quality of photonic integration with the CBG, we utilized the layer-dependent SHG response A second harmonic luminescence map was measured using the characterization setup based on a custom scanning confocal microscope, shown in Fig. The sample position was scanned using a piezo stage to measure the 2D map based on the highest SHG intensity for each pixel (Fig. Spectrally-resolved second harmonic (2ω) counts are background corrected and fitted with a Gaussian [Fig. To conclude, in this work we demonstrate the fabrication of large and thin hBN flakes, perform the study of the reliability of this method, and demonstrate hBN integration with a CBG photonic structure. We perform SHG microscopy that reveals high material and layer quality of the fabricated hBN flakes and successful CBG integration. This work opens hBN for a wide range of applications in nonlinear optics, including microscopy, spectroscopy and signal processing. In this context, hBN can enable strong χ (2) interactions in well-developed metasurface and photonic chip platforms that would otherwise lack nonlinear quadratic functionality in the visible range. Beyond nonlinear photonics, few-layer hBN flakes are also sought after for quantum tunneling devices 