Silver benzeneselenolate [AgSePh]∞ is a coordination polymer that hosts a hybrid quantum well structure. The recent advancements in the study of its tightly bound excitons (~300 meV) and photoconductive properties (recently employed in UV photodetection) makes it an interesting representative of a material platform that is an environmentally stable alternative to 2D metal halide perovskites in terms of optoelectronic properties. To this aim, several challenges are to be addressed, among which the lack of control over the metal-organic reaction process in the reported synthesis of the [AgSePh]∞ nanocrystal film (NC). This issue contributed to cast doubts over the origin of its intra-bandgap electronic states. In this article we study all the steps to obtain phase pure [AgSePh]∞ NC films, from thin silver films through its oxidation and reaction via a chemical vapor-solid with benzeneselenol, by means of UV-vis, XRD, SEM, and AFM. Raman and FTIR spectroscopy are also employed to provide vibrational peaks assignment, for the first time on this polymer. Our analysis supports an acid-base reaction scheme based on an acid attacking the metal oxide precursor, generating water as byproduct of the polymeric synthesis, speeding up the reaction by solvating the PhSeH. The reaction readily goes to completion within 30 min in a supersaturated PhSeH / N2 atmosphere at 90 °C. Our analysis suggests the absence of precursor's leftovers or oxidized species that could contribute to the intra-gap states. By tuning the reaction parameters, we gained control on film morphology to obtain substrate-parallel oriented micro-crystals showing different excitonic absorption intensities. Finally, centimeters size high quality [AgSePh]∞ NC films could be obtained, enabling exploitation of their optoelectronic properties, such as UV photodetection, in large-area applications. Low dimensional electronic materials are of wide interest for their strong light-matter interaction, 1 tunable absorption/emission, Silicon oxide (200 nm) / doped silicon substrates were purchased from Alpha Nanotech. Alkali-free boro-aluminosilicate glass were purchased from Präzisions Glas & Optik GmbH. Ag 99.99% was purchased from Testbourne LTD. Benzeneselenol 97% was purchased from Sigma. Thermal evaporation. Corning glass and SiO2/Si ++ substrates were sonicated for 5 min in acetone, then 5 min in isopropyl alcohol, then blow-dried and O2 plasma for 5 min. The 99.99% silver wire was cut and loaded into a tungsten boat for thermal evaporation, at 2*10 - 6 mbar, in a vacuum chamber, inside a glovebox. 5 nm, 20 nm, 50 nm nominal thicknesses were deposited on the chosen substrates with a rate of 0.3 Å/s. O2 plasma treatment. A Diener Electronic Femto Plasma asher was used to oxidize the silver films. Molecular oxygen was injected in the chamber at pressure of 40 mbar with a flux of 0.5 sccm and the plasma with a nominal power of 100 W was regulated with forward and reflected power in terms of percentages. The forward power plasma power was varied from 10% to 100%, keeping the backward zero, with exposure times ranging from 1 to 5 min. Metallorganic reaction. In a nitrogen glovebox, 30 l of liquid benzeneselenol were pipetted in a Teflon-lined 22 ml vial next to the pre-inserted AgO covered substrate. The sealed vial was transferred in a pre-heated oven at 90 °C. The reaction yielded pure [AgSePh]∞ phase in about 30 min based on experiments timed from 2 min up to 24 hours. We found important to seal well the vial, not allowing external oxygen to flow-in, possibly oxidizing the benzeneselenol and producing a color change in the reagent toward darker yellow. At the time-stop, the vial was then extracted from the oven and opened under a fume hood. The sample was rinsed in acetone then isopropyl alcohol to remove the unreacted organo-chalcogen reagent, and blow-dried. X-ray diffraction. Spectra were obtained with a BRUKER D8 ADVANCE diffractometer with Bragg-Brentano geometry equipped with a Cu K1 (= 1.5440 Å) anode and operating at 40 kV and 40 mA. All the diffraction patterns were collected at room temperature with a grazing angle of 2° and an acquisition range (2) between 5 and 80°; Measurements on [AgSePh]∞ NC films were performed using an angular step of 0.02° with 12 s acquisition time, whereas for the silver oxide analysis a step of 0.05° with 6 s acquisition time. UV-vis. Absorption spectra were obtain by measuring transmission spectra on a PerkinElmer Lambda 1050 UV/Vis/NIR spectrometer. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. An FTIR Bruker Vertex 70 was used in transmission mode. Silicon substrate signal was subtracted as baseline reference. The baseline was recorded prior to sample spectra acquisition. Raman spectroscopy. A micro-Raman confocal microscope (inVia Raman Microscope Renishaw) using a 50× objective and an excitation wavelength of 532 nm at 0.037 mW incident power. The detection was optics-limited at 50 cm -1 . Scanning electron microscopy. Scanning electron microscopy images were collected with a JCM-6010LV, JEOL, with a secondary electron detector and at an accelerating voltage of 2 keV for the electron beam. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. Analyzes have been carried out using a Kratos Axis UltraDLD spectrometer. Data have been acquired using a monochromatic Al Kα source, operated at 20 mA and 15 kV. High resolution spectra have been acquired at pass energy of 10 eV, energy step of 0.1 eV and take-off angle of 0 degrees with respect to sample normal direction. Analysis area: 300 x 700 microns. Energy scale calibrated on C 1s at 284.8 eV Films topography and thickness. The surface topography of the films was measured with a Keysight 5600LS Atomic Force Microscope operated in the Acoustic Mode. The thicknesses of the films were measured with a KLA Tencor P-17 Surface Profiler. We make use of a molecular self-assembly method for the synthesis of [AgSePh]∞ NC films based on the reaction of silver ions with organic benzeneselenol. The optimized reaction parameters for this process are obtained through the exposure of a 40 nm thick AgO film, obtained by mild O2 plasma oxidation of a 20 nm silver film, to a supersaturated (PhSeH)/N2 atmosphere at 90 °C. Considered previous studies and based on the evidence presented hereafter, we describe the reaction in terms of the following chemical equation: The silver oxide phase AgO is a 1:1 molar mixture of silver(I) oxide, Ag2O, and silver(III) oxide, Ag2O3. Equation ( X-ray diffraction (XRD) is used to monitor the reaction precursors and products in terms of crystallinity (Figure Then we compare the Raman signatures of [AgSePh]∞ (Figure Since the oxidation of silver is a critical step in the synthesis of the [AgSePh]∞ NC film, details regarding O2 plasma reaction are important. Indeed, considering the extreme case, without oxidation, a 20 nm thin metallic silver film promotes the growth of flat, sparsely arranged, micron-scale [AgSePh]∞ crystals over the 4 h reaction (Figure While the metallorganic chalcogenides coordination polymers are still in an early development stage, very appealing optoelectronic properties have already been demonstrated. These materials offer the possibility of bridging the gap between ionic lattices of 2D perovskites and the covalent bonds of 2D transition metal dichalcogenides. Despite some earlier works on the synthesis have been produced in the last 20 years, the systematic spectroscopic and electronic investigation of metallorganic chalcogenides polymers have been so far limited by samples morphology. We approached the material's synthesis with a strong focus on the deployment of the polymer [AgSePh]∞ to optoelectronic devices that typically require contactable continuous films. We demonstrate to reach full control over the reaction process, enabled by a quick in in-situ acid-base reaction, leading to homogenous and continuous nanocrystal films. The first vibrational modes assignment for [AgSePh]∞ is introduced, and FTIR and Raman spectroscopies used for samples purity assessment over possible unreacted precursors. These are excluded by a concerted spectroscopic analysis at X-ray and infrared light. Such observation places a constraint on the origin of the light absorption low-energy tail, important for photoluminescence applications. Our analysis suggests that this intragap states are not related with the material's chemical purity and reinforce the idea that local disorder in the crystal structure, previously observe by TEM in-situ experiments, could play a major role in this. The Supporting Information is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org. High resolution XPS and detailed spectroscopic (Raman, FTIR) comparison of precursors and products; AgO XRD peaks labelling, and silver oxidation effect on the metallorganic reaction; Silver oxidation XRD, SEM, AFM and UVvis analysis; Reaction time assessment by XRD, Raman and AFM; Film thickness variation analysis; Vibrational spectroscopy peaks assignment table.