The cesium copper halides CsCu2X3 (X=Cl, Br and I) are a class of all-inorganic perovskites with interesting and potentially useful optical properties, characterized by distinct excitonic features. We present a computational study of the optical absorption spectra of CsCu2X3, comparing timedependent density-functional theory (TDDFT) and the Bethe-Salpeter equation (BSE), using GW quasiparticle band structures as input. The TDDFT calculations are carried out using several types of global hybrid exchange-correlation functionals. It is found that an admixture of nonlocal exchange determined by the dielectric constant produces optical spectra in excellent agreement with the BSE. Thus, hybrid TDDFT emerges as a promising first-principles approach for excitonic effects in solids. Low-dimensional (quasi-2D, 1D, and 0D) hybrid organic-inorganic lead halides have been intensely investigated as promising luminescent materials Recently, all-inorganic low-dimensional Cu halides have attracted increasing attention, such as quasi-0D Cs 3 Cu 2 X 5 Due to the weakened Coulomb screening, excitons in low-dimensional Cu halides are much more strongly bound than in bulk An alternative approach is density functional theory (DFT) and its dynamical counterpart, time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) In this paper, we explore the performance of hybrid functionals for calculating the optical properties, in particular the excitons, of CsCu 2 X 3 (X= Cl, Br, I) (see Fig. We apply both empirical and nonempirical hybrid functionals, in which the admixture of nonlocal exchange is fixed or material-dependent, respectively. Comparison between different hybrid functionals and the BSE shows that nonempirical hybrid functionals that depend on the dielectric properties of the material yield accurate optical spectra for CsCu 2 X 3 . This suggests that hybrid functionals are very well suited for calculating the optical properties in all-inorganic perovskites, and more generally for calculations with large unit cells and highthroughput computations. This paper is organized as follows: in Sec. II we give an overview of the theoretical background, with an emphasis on the different TDDFT hybrid functionals. We also discuss computational details. The results for the optical spectra and excitonic properties of CsCu 2 X 3 are presented in Sec. III. Section IV then gives our conclusions and an outlook. In ground-state DFT, the central idea of hybrid functionals is to write the exchange-correlation (xc) energy functional as where E exact x is the exact nonlocal (Fock) exchange energy functional, and E sl x,c are approximate (semi)local (sl) exchange and correlation functionals, respectively. E hybrid xc contains a parameter a which mixes exact exchange with (semi)local exchange. There are hybrid functionals with two or more mixing parameters One may distinguish different types of hybrid functionals. In global hybrids, the fraction a of exact exchange is a constant throughout the system. In local hybrids, the parameter a depends on position where the first (long-range) term enters the Fock exchange, and the second (short-range) term enters the (semi)local exchange On the other hand, the ongoing effort to construct nonempirical hybrid functionals for solids has made remarkable progress. A class of dielectric-dependent hybrid functionals (DDHs) have been proposed Applications of hybrid TDDFT for optical spectra in semiconductors and insulators have begun to emerge From the point of view of generalized (TD)DFT, hybrid functionals bridge the density-based (TD)DFT and the orbital-based many-body theory via a fraction of Fock exchange, while representing the N -electron wave function as a single Slater determinant with single-particle orbitals φ i Here, the screened Coulomb potential W is given by For the range-separated DDHs, the error function erf(γ|r -r |) offers a good model for the dielectric function ε -1 (r, r ) in 3D solids. In reciprocal space, ε -1 thus becomes Thus, W (r, r ) can be evaluated using model dielectric functions in Eq. ( For excited states, one finds that generalized TDDFT is connected to the BSE in a similar way. Taking the Tamm-Dancoff approximation with momentum transfer q = 0 [87-89], the BSE can be simply expressed as Here, v denotes occupied valence bands, c denotes unoccupied conduction bands, the E k are QP energies, Y n are the nth eigenvectors, and ω n is the nth excitation energy. Equation ( is the direct interaction, corresponding to the Hartree part in TDDFT. The second part is the screened exchange kernel, where in standard BSE ε -1 G,G (q, ω) is obtained via RPA, as mentioned before. For most practical BSE calculations, the frequency dependence of the dielectric function is ignored, i.e., one uses ε -1 G,G (q, ω = 0) Here, m-BSE stands for BSE with a model dielectric function, and SXX stands for screened exact exchange Combining SXX and (semi)local exchange and correlation thus leads to a hybrid kernel for generalized TDDFT, analogous to Eq. ( where K sl x and K sl c are the adiabatic (semi)local exchange and correlation kernels, respectively. Replacing the BSE kernel K BSE with the hybrid kernel in Eq. ( × ck| e i(q+G)r |vk v k | e -i(q+G )r |c k , where f ALDA x,c,GG (q) are the local frequency-independent exchange and correlation kernels in ALDA The expressions Eq. ( which was already proposed earlier, and was found to compare well with the BSE In the following, we will assess three hybrid kernels based on the definitions in Eq. For CsCu 2 X 3 , calculating the crystal structure with relaxed atomic positions using pure DFT, hybrid functionals or even GW can lead to errors compared to the experimental lattice constants and geometries To eliminate this problem, we simply adopted the experimental crystal structures, lattice constants and atomic positions for all three materials CsCu 2 X 3 To calculate Kohn-Sham band structures, we used the LDA and PBE Starting from the Kohn-Sham band structures, we then used the Yambo code A double-grid was adopted, which includes a 4 × 3 × 8 Γ-centered k-point mesh plus 3000 random interpolated k-points. This enabled us to apply the random integration method, as well as an inversion solver for the BSEtype equations We performed convergence tests regarding the k-point grid and number of bands included in the G 0 W 0 calculations, and found that the choices detailed above lead to well-converged results for band gaps, exciton binding energies and optical spectra (see Supplemental Material We begin by comparing the band structures of the Cs-Cu halides calculated with different approaches, namely, Kohn-Sham band structures from LDA and PBE, and single-shot GW band structures on top of LDA and PBE (G 0 W 0 @LDA and G 0 W 0 @PBE). Figure In the Supplemental Material The calculated band gaps are listed in Table After QP correction, the G 0 W 0 gaps are drastically enhanced over the corresponding Kohn-Sham gaps, by about 2 eV. While LDA gives smaller band gaps than PBE, the G 0 W 0 @LDA gap is larger than the G 0 W 0 @PBE gap for all materials under study. We note that the band gaps obtained with PBE0 We also implemented the DDH1 and DDH2 functionals to calculate the band gaps; to reduce computational cost, the calculations were performed single-shot rather than self-consistently. It is found that single-shot DDH1 and DDH2 tend to somewhat overestimate the band gap compared to G 0 W 0 . These results are discussed in more detail in the Supplemental Material A special case here is CsCu 2 Br 3 , where the G 0 W 0 gaps are smaller than the experimental optical gap On the other hand, the PBE0 gap is better compatible with the experimental E opt g ; however, the PBE0 calcu-TABLE [001] a from Ref. We now discuss the optical properties of the Cs-Cu halides, beginning with the G 0 W 0 +BSE results. We compare the spectra associated with light polarization along the , where E exc is the excitation energy of the lowest bright exciton along corresponding direction. The calculated excitonic binding energies are given in Table As shown in Table Comparing the E b of the three materials in Table The main reason for the decreasing E b from CsCu 2 Cl 3 to CsCu 2 I 3 is the increasing dielectric screening. As shown in Table There is a strong anisotropy of the excitons in CsCu 2 X 3 : E b along Besides the absence of distinct excitonic peaks below the band gap, there are additional differences between the BSE and RPA spectra. First, the continuum absorption above the band gap is enhanced by including electronhole interactions, especially for CsCu 2 I 3 . Secondly, the RPA spectrum in each material always has the highest absorption edge along the [001] direction. In other words, the change of the absorption edges along [001] discussed in last paragraph is not observed in RPA. Clearly, the RPA is inadequate for calculating the optical properties of CsCu 2 X 3 . Lastly, in the rightmost column of Table , where E QP g is here the fundamental G 0 W 0 @LDA band gap and E b is the binding energy of the lowest energy exciton among all three directions. The calculated E opt g of CsCu 2 I 3 is in good agreement with experiment, but it is somewhat too low for CsCu 2 Cl 3 and CsCu 2 Br 3 (by 0.39 and 0.57 eV, respectively). These deviations may have multiple sources. The fundamental gaps of both materials could be underestimated, as we have mentioned above for CsCu 2 Br 3 . Furthermore, the exciton binding energies are likely overestimated by G 0 W 0 +BSE, which is also observed for the strongly bound excitons in LiF We now compare the optical properties obtained by different hybrid functionals with BSE. Rather than discussing the We first point out that the BSE E b along For all three materials, LDA0 underestimates E b compared to BSE. The LDA0 produces an error as large as 40% for CsCu 2 Cl 3 . This can be clearly seen in the optical spectra in Fig. For the hybrid functionals DDH1 and DDH1 we have a = ε -1 0,0 , and E b deviates less than 3.5% from BSE. As shown in Fig. Finally, we point out the very close agreement between DDH1 and DDH2. From Eqs. ( In this work, we have shown that hybrid TDDFT is a very promising alternative to the BSE for calculating the optical properties of semiconducting and insulating materials. To demonstrate this, we chose a class of perovskite materials, the Cs-Cu halides, with a relatively complex structure containing 24 atoms per unit cell. These materials have a quasi-1D structure and strong excitonic features, giving rise to light emission properties with potential for technological application. Calculating the optical absorption spectrum of a material is a two-step process. First, the equilibrium band structure must be obtained, and then the spectrum is calculated using linear response. In the many-body approach, the QP band structure is calculated using GW , followed by the BSE. TDDFT instead takes Kohn-Sham band structures as input. Generalized TDDFT, using hybrid functionals, can be viewed as a bridge between these two approaches. Strictly speaking, the consistent way to implement generalized TDDFT is to calculate the band structure and the spectrum using the same hybrid functional. In this paper, we instead chose to use the same G 0 W 0 band structures as input for both TDDFT and the BSE, because our focus was not on the performance of hybrid functionals for the band structure (which has been widely studied in the literature), but rather on the performance for calculating optical spectra with prominent excitonic effects. Using different input band structures would have made a direct comparison difficult. Furthermore, as shown in the Supplemental Material Here, we considered two different types of hybrid functionals: LDA0, which has a fixed, material-independent mixing parameter, and DDH1 and DDH2, with a mixing parameter dependent on the dielectric constant of the material. The main finding is that only the dielectricdependent hybrids can properly account for the screening effects, and they do so extremely well: both DDH1 and DDH2 (which slightly differ in the way in which local exchange-correlation is mixed with exact exchange) produce optical spectra that are very close to the BSE. The computational cost of hybrid TDDFT can be significantly lower than that of the BSE; in a previous study Dielectric-dependent hybrid functionals clearly warrant further study. Tests for additional classes of materials, including low-dimensional structures, are necessary to find the optimal form of hybrid functionals for extended solids. In particular, a systematic comparison of dielectric-dependent hybrids with and without range separation would be of interest. Another intriguing question is how dynamical screening effects, which are neglected in most applications of the BSE 