The performance of a near-field thermophotovoltaic system with a tandem-cell structure composed of thin-film p-doped GaSb and n-doped InAs sub-cells on a gold backside reflector is theoretically investigated. The temperatures of the Ga-doped ZnO emitter and the tandem cells are set as 1800 K and 300 K, while the thicknesses of GaSb and InAs sub-cells are considered as  m and 0.5 m, respectively. Fluctuational electrodynamics along with the multilayer dyadic Green's function is used to study near-field radiative heat transfer with the consideration of photon chemical potential, whereas radiative recombination and nonradiative Auger recombination are taken into account for evaluating the electrical performance of the tandem cells. At a vacuum gap of 50 nm, it is found that the tandem cells with independent charge collections achieve electrical power output 468.8 kW/m 2 at a conversion efficiency of 41%, generating relatively 87% (or 21%) more power with about absolute 5% (or 10%) higher efficiency than the single GaSb (or InAs) cell of the same 2-m thickness. The physical mechanism of near-field spectral heat transfer is elucidated with energy transmission coefficient, while the current-voltage characteristics of subcells are discussed in detail. This work will pave the way to enhance near-field thermophotovoltaic energy conversion performance with tandem or multi-junction cells. By bringing the emitter and the semiconductor cell into close proximity with distance much smaller than the thermal characteristic wavelength, near-field thermophotovoltaic (NF-TPV) systems could enhance the conversion performance from heat to electricity with the contribution of evanescent waves across the vacuum gap. Chen et al. In this study, we theoretically investigate the radiative heat transfer and power generation of a near-field thermophotovoltaic system by absorbing photons in a wide frequency range with the thin-film tandem cell structure, and demonstrate that the power output and conversion efficiency with tandem cell can greatly exceed those with a single cell for NF-TPV systems. As illustrated in Fig. The temperatures of the GZO emitter and the tandem cells are respectively fixed at Te = 1800 K and Tr = 300 K, while the thicknesses of thin-film GaSb and InAs sub-cells are respectively set as t3 =  m, and t4 = 0.5 m. GZO is selected as the emitter material due to its hightemperature stability and strong plasmonic behaviors in the near-infrared matching the bandgap of cells. Dielectric function of GZO can be described by the Drude-Lorentz model as in which ε∞ = 2.475, ωp1 = 1.927 eV, Γp1 = 0.117 eV, f1 = 0.866 eV, ω1 = 4.850 eV and Γ1 = 0.029 eV. to capture the contribution of free carriers from the doping (p3 = 0.017 eV and p3 = 0.014 eV), where j = 3, 4 or 5 indicates the GaSb, InAs or gold layer, k0 is the wavevector in vacuum, and ) -1] represents the mean energy of a Planck oscillator for the emitting layer at temperature Te, where ħ is the reduced Planck constant and kB is the Boltzmann constant. The spectral radiative heat flux from each sub-cell to the emitter can be obtained in a similar form as (2) Note that the mean energy of a Planck oscillator for each sub-cell considers the effect of photon chemical potential due to biasing with a modified expression as where e is the elementary charge, and Vj is the applied voltage on each sub-cell. Therefore, the net spectral radiative heat flux from the GZO emitter to each GaSb or InAs sub-cell should be q ω,r j = q ω,e→r j -q ω,r j →e (V j ), and that from the emitter to the entire cell structure is q ω,r = ∑ q ω,r j j=3,4,5 . Note that with high emitter temperature of 1800 K considered here, q ω,r j →e (V j ) is negligibly small compared to q ω,e→r j such that the net spectral radiative heat flux q ω,r j and q ω,r can be reasonably considered independent of bias voltages of sub-cells (see Fig. In order to understand the physical mechanisms of near-field radiative heat transfer between the emitter and tandem-cell structure across the 50-nm vacuum gap, the energy transmission coefficient j() for random thermal emission including both s and p polarizations from the GZO emitter to the each sub-cell j is obtained from InAs (j =4) sub-cell. Clearly, enhanced radiative transfer indicated by the bright contour with high energy transmission coefficient close to 2 can be observed from both sub-cells only in the areas below the vacuum light line as propagating modes (i.e., 0 < c0/ < 1) and between the vacuum and sub-cell light lines as frustrated modes (i.e., 1 < c0/ < nj). Moreover, the Fabry-Perot-like enhancement exhibits multiple fringes suggesting strong interference effect that occurs inside the thin-film sub-cell layer, which was also observed in single thin-film cell for NF-TPV but named "thermal-well" effect. In order to evaluate the electrical performance of the tandem cell, the current density inside each sub-cell can be calculated as 41 Note that F 1j denotes the electron-hole pair generation rate (per unit volume) by absorbing the photons with energy greater than the bandgap of sub-cell j emitted from medium 1 as and F j1 (V j ) represents bias-dependent radiative recombination rate (per unit volume) by emitting the photons from sub-cell j to the GZO emitter (i.e., medium 1) as and R j (V j ) is the nonradiative Auger recombination rate inside the sub-cell j calculated by where n and p are respectively the electron and hole concentrations depending on cell voltage and the doping level, Cp and Cn represent the Auger recombination coefficients, and n0 is the intrinsic carrier concentration, whose values are taken from Refs. [40,41] for GaSb and InAs sub-cells. The total power generation from the tandem cell depends on the particular sub-cell electric architecture (i.e., in-series, parallel, and independent). Here an independent charge collection is considered in this work for simplicity to demonstrate the electric performance of the NF-TPV with tandem cell, in which case the total electric power density is the summation of maximal values from each sub-cell as The heat-to-power conversion efficiency of the NF-TPV system with tandem-cell structure is where q total = ∫ q ω,r dω is the total radiative heat flux absorbed by both sub-cells and the gold backside reflector. From the calculated current-voltage curves in Fig. In Finally, the total electrical power output and conversion efficiency of the NF-TPV systems with either tandem-or single-cell structures are calculated at a few selected vacuum gap distances from 500 nm down to 20 nm. As shown in Fig. Interestingly at vacuum gap d = 20 nm, the InAs single cell actually produces 868 kW/m 2 power, 9% more than the tandem one (796 kW/m 2 ) and 135% more than the GaSb single cell (369 kW/m 2 ). As a matter of fact, as shown in Fig. In summary, we have theoretically studied the performance of a NF-TPV system with thinfilm tandem-cell structure which could convert useful photons in a wider spectral range into electricity. At a vacuum gap distance of 50 nm with GZO emitter at 1800 K, the tandem cell consisting of individually connected 1.5-m GaSb and 0.5-m InAs sub-cells produces electric power of 469 kW/m 2 at 40.9% conversion efficiency, demonstrating the improved performance over the single cell of GaSb (251 kW/m 2 and 36.3%) or InAs (388 kW/m 2 and 31.1%) with the same 2-m thickness. It is found that the GaSb sub-cell has higher open-circuit voltage than the InAs one due to radiative loss dominating the recombination with high photoluminescence quantum yield. The performance of NF-TPV system with tandem-cell structure could be possibly further improved by optimizing the sub-cell thickness-ratio, material combinations for the emitter, sub-cells, and coatings, sub-cell electrical connections, or more junctions with higher cost and complexity. 