The vibrational properties of twisted bilayer graphene (tBLG) show complex features, due to the intricate energy landscape of its low-symmetry configurations. A machine learning-based approach is developed to provide a continuous model between the twist angle and the simulated Raman spectra of tBLGs. Extracting the structural information of the twist angle from Raman spectra corresponds to solving a complicated inverse problem. Once trained, the machine learning regressors (MLRs) quickly provide predictions without human bias and with an average 98% of the data variance being explained by the model. The significant spectral features learned by MLRs are analyzed revealing the intensity profile near the calculated G-band to be the most important feature. The trained models are tested on noise-containing test data demonstrating their robustness. The transferability of the present models to experimental Raman spectra is discussed in the context of validation of the level of theory used for construction of the analyzed database. This work serves as a proof of concept that machine-learning analysis is a potentially powerful tool for interpretation of Raman spectra of tBLG and other 2D materials. Graphene, as the archetypal 2D material, has been studied extensively in the last two decades and new physical phenomena are being discovered to this day In general, tBLG can exist with any arbitrary twist angle, either in an incommensurate or commensurate form. Here, we investigate the commensurate subset Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and electron diffraction are typically used for characterization of the experimentally synthesized tBLG structures with respect to their twist angle To the best of our knowledge, a model establishing a oneto-one correspondence between one given Raman spectrum, including the peak position variations, and the underlying twist angle of tBLG is missing to date. A direct mapping be-arXiv:2007.03839v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 8 Jul 2020 tween Raman spectra and θ is of significant practical relevance as Raman spectroscopy is a fast and non-destructive method rapidly gaining popularity for characterization of other 2D materials as well Abstractly, a mapping between a Raman spectrum (y) and the atomic arrangement (x) in a tBLG sample is given by some physical (quantum-mechanical) laws (f ) as y = f (x). The twist angle θ, as a proxy to structural information In contrast, machine learning (ML) approaches are well adapted to help finding a quantitative solution to the above inverse problem of tBLG characterization using Raman spectroscopy. ML methods have experienced a surge of popularity in the fields of condensed-matter physics, chemistry, and materials science recently. They have been applied successfully to a plethora of problems, such as solutions of many-body problems In this work, we addressed the inverse-problem of linking calculated Raman spectra to the twist angle of tBLG using supervised ML regression. Specifically, non-linear regression was used to establish a continuous model of θ(spectrum) using the computational Raman spectra of a large number of tBLG structures as input features. The importance of spectral features for the training of the models was systematically explored using dimensionality reduction and an in-depth analysis of the decision-tree based regression. The ML models trained here on synthetic Raman spectra serve as a proof of concept for such an analysis being promising for spectral data of similar general shape. Thus, the present work is a first step on the path to a potentially effective characterization tool using Raman spectra of tBLGs. The construction of the database for the present analysis consists of three main steps. First, a large number of tBLG superlattices are constructed and their atomic positions are carefully relaxed. Second, the phonon eigenfrequencies and eigenvectors of the relaxed structures are calculated via diagonalization of the corresponding dynamical matrices. Lastly, Raman intensities of the calculated phonon modes are obtained using a semi-empirical bond-polarizability model The procedure used for construction and relaxation of the tBLG superlattices is detailed in Ref. Classical force-fields are used for structural relaxation and phonon calculations in the harmonic approximation. The force-fields are built as a sum of the intra-and interlayer forces. The former are modeled using the second-generation REBO potential Due to intricacies of structural relaxation of tBLG, some phonon modes of some structures in the database have complex eigenfrequencies. This happens particularly for structures with a small twist angle (i.e., large supercells) where perfect relaxation was not computationally feasible due to extremely shallow local minima in the energy landscape Finally, non-resonant, first-order Raman intensities are calculated in the Plazcek approximation Using the calculated phonon frequencies and their associated Raman intensities, Raman spectra are constructed as a sum of Lorentzian curves sampled on a wavenumber grid with step size of 0.25 cm -1 . As stated previously, frequencies below 1 cm -1 are excluded. Each Lorentzian is centered on a calculated phonon mode with the amplitude given by the calculated Raman intensity. Raw intensities smaller than 1% of the maximum intensity in a given spectrum were set to zero in order to speed up the spectrum construction. This turned out to be especially important for systems with numerous phonon modes (supercells with many atoms). The same FWHM of 0.5 cm -1 is used for all Lorentzian peaks. The full Raman spectrum of each system is normalized to the strongest feature and is thus assigned an arbitrary intensity of 1. Thus, the relative intensities between different peaks in a given spectrum is preserved. Note that this normalization procedure results in the loss of information about relative intensities between spectra of systems with different twist angles. It should also be noted here, that the relative intensities within a spectrum given by the semi-empirical bond polarizability model might not be very reliable for reproducing absolute experimental intensities (a more in-depth discussion of the theory validation is given in Sec. III E). However, the purpose of this approach is the identification of Raman active phonon modes rather than a full experiment replication. Different ML regression algorithms, as implemented in the python library SCIKIT-LEARN The present analysis consists of the following key steps: Visual inspection of the generated spectral database, principal component analysis (PCA) of the database, training of different machine-learning regressors (MLRs) and comparison of their performance, and the discussion of the importance of features for the solution of the posed inverse problem. Finally, we discuss challenges of transferring the models for analysis of experimental Raman spectra. Figure Visual inspection of figure Figure PCA is an unsupervised learning technique that does not have the goal of predicting a response. Instead, it provides a useful tool for data visualization via dimensionality reduction, i.e., construction of a smaller number of representative features out of the complete input-features set. The new representative features are designed to explain most of the variability of the input features with the coefficients φ i1 being the so-called loadings of the first PC. These loadings are elements of the first PC loading vector φ 1 , normalized as p i=1 φ 2 i1 = 1. The coefficients φ i1 are obtained through optimization such that the variance of all possible linear combinations is maximized across the samples. In geometrical terms, φ 1 defines the direction in feature space along which the data vary the most. The second and all the following PCs are constructed subsequently in an analogous fashion with the constrain that they are orthogonal (i.e., uncorrelated) to the previous components Here, the features X i correspond to vectors containing the spectral intensities at a given wavenumber for each twist angle θ (represented along the vertical lines through Fig. Figure The points in subplots a) and b) are color-coded by three groups: θ <= 10 • (red), 10 • < θ <= 20 • (green), and 20 • < θ <= 30 • (blue). Overall, there is a sizable level of clustering by color. The three resulting clusters are well separated, although there is some overlap between the groups of angles. Comparing the full (Fig. An additional metric of the PCA is the proportion of explained variance for each PC and the cumulative proportion of explained variance as a function of the number of PCs (see Fig. Finally, Fig. All non-linear models perform very well with an average R 2 coefficient of 0.98. The accuracy of each model is at least 2 • or better. In contrast, the linear model resulted in weaker performance compared to non-linear models. Thus, the relationship between input Raman spectra and target twist angles is better described by a non-linear function. Furthermore, all the non-linear models performed very well on the hold-out test set with a R 2 score of 0.99. However, the high-test score is not an indicator of how well the models would perform on other test sets, and is partly accidental and partly explained by the fact that our data set is overall very homogeneous. To further analyze the models reported in table I, we inspected the learning curves for each model. Figure Even though RFR might be prone to overfitting, its relatively simple "mechanics" allow for a view inside the model to understand what features are most important for learning the twist angle from Raman spectra. Figure Each box in the decision-tree plot indicates a decision node with the feature used for dividing the feature space indicated at the top. In this example, feature #188 of the input vectors (a particular intensity at the given location) is used and based on whether it is larger than 0.05 or not, the systems are divided into two groups. Analogous procedure continues at each node with decreasing mse between the predicted and the actual target value. The whole forest consists of many such trees, but with different features at each node. The decision tree structure allows to intuitively track how the model learns the twist angle from the input Raman spectra. The overall five most important features all correspond to intensities in close neighborhood of the G-band location. The error bars are given by std of importance across the forest. Among the five most important features, feature #188 is the most informative, while the last two features #168 and #167 contain the least information. Mapping the feature index onto the wavenumber space shows that the most important feature corresponds to the intensity profile at 1672 cm -1 , only 5 cm -1 up-shifted from the location of the G-band in pristine BLG. However, the intensity directly at the G-bands location for θ = 0 • , feature #168, is not significant. Plotting the most important feature #188 and feature #168 as a function of the twist angle reveals some interesting patterns. These patterns were already partly visible in Fig. The most important features above can be used to reduce the dimensionality of the feature space. For example, RFR trained using only feature #188 results in an average R 2 in ten-fold CV of 0.84 ± 0.06 and RMSE 3.29 ± 0.72. Including the first three most important features improves model performance to 0.93 ± 0.06 with RMSE 2.13 ± 0.88. Thus, using a very limited number of key features still results in a fairly good performance, but to achieve higher angle resolution as in table I more spectral features have to be included. The MLRs were trained on theoretical Raman spectra obtained computationally using a semi-empirical level of theory. Several aspects have to be discussed when it comes to the transferability of these models to experimental Raman spectra including the effect of noise in spectral data, the possibility of training ML models on associated phonon frequencies instead of intensities, and, most importantly, theory validation. First, we tested the effect of noise on the MLRs' performance. Noise in experimental Raman spectra originates from multiple factors, mainly due to sample preparation and various aspects of the apparatus Next, artificial noise can be introduced directly during training in an attempt to make the models more robust. The resulting R 2 scores for σ train = 0.03 as a function of noise in the test data are labeled by circles in Fig. Experimentalists typically process Raman spectra via peak fitting procedures in order to extract the frequencies of associated phonon modes. This approach was mimicked here by extracting the position of the most intense band as a function of twist angle, shown in Fig. Finally, one can test the possibility of analogously training MLRs using only spectral information in the LF region. As demonstrated earlier, relative to the strong G-band, the Raman intensities of lower-frequency phonon modes are essentially zero and thus carry no information for MLRs as demonstrated by PCA. Nonetheless, there are Raman active modes in the LF region that can now be measured with increasing accuracy. These modes (such as the shear and breathing modes) interrogate the interlayer interactions directly and are expected to probe the relative stackings between layers The above discussions provide useful insights into the robustness and flexibility of the trained MLRs. KRR with rbf kernel turned out to be the most suitable approach to solve the present inverse problem using spectral information as input features. Additionally, reducing the dimensionality of the feature space to only the position of the most intense band can still provide reasonable, if more coarse-grain, information on the twist angle. However, the key issue in using the trained models in practice is theory validation. No matter how well the models perform on synthetic data, they can hardly be transferred to analysis of experimental spectra if the training data does not capture the experimental reality. Indeed, as briefly mentioned in the introduction, experimental Raman spectra of tBLG are quite complicated. Below, the Raman spectra calculated here are compared with experimental ones, focusing on the most prominent features, the G and the 2D bands. First, we start by noting the aspects that the present level of theory seems to capture. Experimentally, the G-band's position is said to remain practically constant with θ. For this reason, the corresponding phonon frequency was set as a constant to the experimental value in previous theoretical studies There are several experimental aspects that are not included in the present theoretical description. The Raman active phonons in our database with frequencies above the Gband frequency should not be identified as the experimental R' bands with one-to-one correspondence In addition to the aforementioned difficulties in describing the phonon dispersion of the high-frequency branches Next, several experimental aspects of the Raman intensities are not included in the theoretical description provided by the semi-empirical polarizability model. In relation to the Gband, its experimental intensity variation with θ is not well described. The relative intensity information between varying twist angles has been removed during spectra construction and normalization, see Sec. II C. The normalization can be adjusted to preserve this information (by normalizing relative to the system's size). In this case, spectra belonging to structures with θ < 5 • dominate the depiction of all the spectra analogous to Fig. Another part of experimental Raman spectra of tBLG entirely missing in the present description is related to highorder peaks such as the 2D peak together with all its spectral properties position, laser-energy dependent intensity and width. These features of the 2D band exhibit even stronger variations with θ than the G-band Given the many experimental aspects missing from the present theoretical description, the trained MLRs cannot be reliably applied for analysis of experimental Raman spectra as is. Thus, it is necessary to employ more accurate methods for generation of the computational Raman spectra database. These results of these methods should then also be carefully compared with experimental observations. However, using more accurate theoretical models might prove difficult in practice, because of the rising computational expense that accompanies the complexity of the methods. Similar problems of theory validation have been encountered in the simulation and machine learning of theoretical x-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) spectra for classification of local chemical environments We presented a computational framework for identifying the twist angle of tBLG systems from their Raman spectra corresponding to an inverse-problem solution. In addition to the construction of a structural and spectral database, the key goal of the present study was to establish the relationship between Raman intensities and the underlying twist angle of a graphene bilayer structure using machine learning regressors. All non-linear MLRs achieved high R 2 scores of 0.98 ± 0.04 and an average RMSE of 0.70 • ± 0.93 • and thus provided a continuous model of the twist angle with at least 2-degree res-olution. Moreover, the feature-importance analysis unraveled that the intensity in the vicinity of the G-band of untwisted bilayer graphene is the most important feature for the trained ML models. In contrast, removing the intensities in the lowfrequency regime did not affect model performance. Furthermore, the relative model's robustness upon the introduction of noise to the test data was tested. KRR with rbf kernel turned out to be the best performing model for this case. Despite the good performance and robustness of the MLRs trained on computational spectra, they cannot be transferred to experimental spectra as is. The relatively low level of theory that was used for database construction does not allow for description of key experimental features of tBLG systems. Nevertheless, this study provides a proof of concept showing that Raman spectra of the general shape similar to the calculated ones can be processed via MLRs in principle. Further improvements including higher-level theoretical descriptions and potentially the construction of a hybrid database containing both computational and experimental data are necessary to unambiguously obtain the twist angle of tBLG from experimental Raman spectra. Once accurate ML models that correctly capture the experimentally relevant features are available, the final framework would work as an executable black box. This black box would take in a measured Raman spectrum as input and return the underlying twist angle of the sample as identified by the ML model.