We evaluate the transient response of an optically tunable meta-atom composed of an electric inductor-capacitor resonator that is loaded with a piece of high-resistivity silicon and perform a proof-of-concept experiment to demonstrate the storage and release of electromagnetic waves using this meta-atom in the microwave region. The transient time of the meta-atom immediately after commencing laser light illumination of the silicon in the meta-atom is found to be inversely proportional to the incident laser power. The transmittance of the meta-atom at the resonance frequency increases to ten times that obtained without laser illumination at 5.2 ns after the start of laser illumination for a laser power of 1600 mW, a laser spot size of 2 mm × 1 mm, and a laser wavelength of 447 nm. In contrast, the transient time after turning the laser light off is dependent on the carrier lifetime of silicon and is measured to be several tens of μs. Based on the results of evaluation of the transient response of the meta-atom, we propose a method for the storage and release of electromagnetic waves using a Fabry-Perot resonator that includes the meta-atom as one of its mirrors. The electromagnetic wave that is stored in the Fabry-Perot resonator for a few tens of ns is then successfully released by illuminating the silicon in the meta-atom with the laser light. It is also possible to use this method in the higher frequency region because metamaterials with semiconductor elements can even be used as active metamaterials in the optical region as long as their bandgap energy is higher than the signal photon energy. Various studies of the active manipulation of electromagnetic waves using metamaterials have been undertaken to date. Active metamaterials can be fabricated by simply introducing active elements such as pn junctions, graphene, liquid crystals, semiconductors, phase transition materials, movable components, and nonlinear materials into the metamaterial structures 1 . To date, using active metamaterials, processes such as amplitude and/or phase modulation The storage of electromagnetic waves is one of the most important topics in the active manipulation of electromagnetic waves. Electromagnetic wave storage has been realized using electromagnetically induced transparencylike metamaterials We investigate the transient response of the meta-atom shown in Fig. Figure Figure To estimate the conductivity of the silicon under continuous-wave laser illumination, we used COMSOL Multiphysics software to calculate the transmission spectrum of the meta-atom placed in the waveguide while varying the conductivity of the silicon. In the numerical analysis, the conductivity σ of the top layer of the silicon with a layer thickness of 1 μm, which is the approximate penetration depth of silicon for the wavelength of 447 nm, was assumed to be a uniform value for simplicity and was varied to several values. The conductivity of the bottom layer with a layer thickness of 349 μm was assumed to be 10 -2 S/m. Because the laser spot size at the silicon surface was 2 mm × 1 mm in the experiment, l s was set to be 2.0 mm in the simulation. The real part of the relative permittivity of the silicon piece was assumed to be 11.7 and the complex relative permittivity of the FR-4 substrate was assumed to be 4.5(1 + i0.02). The copper was modeled as a perfect electric conductor with a vanishing thickness. Figure Next, to evaluate the transient response of the metaatom, we measured the envelope of the transmitted wave when the silicon was illuminated using pulse-modulated laser light with a pulse width of 20 μs, a risetime/falltime of approximately 1 ns, and peak power of P peak . In this experiment, a continuous microwave signal with a frequency of 3.39 GHz, which is the meta-atom's resonance frequency, was incident on the meta-atom. Figure To provide a better understanding of the observed results, we now analyze the carrier density in the silicon using a rate equation. Assuming that the silicon can be modeled as a two-level nondegenerate system, the rate equation is written as where N 1 (N 2 ) is the electron density in the valence band (conduction band), A (B) is the Einstein A coefficient (B coefficient), and W is the energy density of the incident laser light where This equation shows that the electron density in the conduction band is proportional to the product of the laser peak power and the laser illumination time. Assuming that the condition (A + 2BW )t ≪ 1 is satisfied in the region shown in Fig. where N 20 is the carrier density in the conduction band at t = 20 μs and τ = 1/A is the carrier lifetime in silicon. We compare the result obtained using this equation with the experimental result for P peak = 100 mW. As described above, the conductivity σ of the top layer of the silicon for continuous-wave laser power of 100 mW is of the order of 10 3 S/m and σ without laser illumination is 10 -2 S/m. It is found from Eq. ( It was found in the previous section that the transmittance of the meta-atom at the resonance frequency can be increased to ten times the value obtained without laser illumination within several nanoseconds for a peak laser power of the order of 1 W, while the relaxation process takes several tens of microseconds. Therefore, it is difficult to use such a meta-atom to realize the idea of storage of electromagnetic waves given in Ref. As shown in Fig. We examined the storage and release of microwave signals using the fabricated Fabry-Perot resonator. The experimental procedure was as follows. First, a microwave signal with a frequency of 3.39 GHz was incident on the Fabry-Perot resonator. After the steady state was reached, the incident microwave signal was turned off. The laser light with P peak = 1600 mW and a pulse width of 1 μs began to illuminate the silicon at a time t d after the microwave signal was turned off. Figure Figure To evaluate the dependence of the properties of the storage and release of electromagnetic waves on the reflectance of the front mirror, we replaced the copper slit with another slit with d = 27 mm, which has a numerically calculated reflectance of 0.58 at 3.39 GHz, and performed the experimental storage and release of microwave signals again. The measured results are shown in Fig. When the cavity length was 1173 mm and the reflectance of the front mirror was 0.89, the width of the released microwave pulse was measured to be approximately 20 ns. Although the observed pulsewidth was greater than the round-trip propagation time in the Fabry-Perot resonator because the transmittance of the meta-atom did not increase to unity on laser illumination, it is natural to consider that the pulsewidth may be dependent on the cavity length. To investigate the dependence of the width of the released microwave pulse on the cavity length, we fabricated another Fabry-Perot resonator with a cavity length of 533 mm and performed the experimental storage and release of microwaves again. Because the resonance frequency of the Fabry-Perot resonator with this cavity length of 533 mm was measured to be 3.48 GHz, we also fabricated another meta-atom with l e = 13.0 mm, which had a measured resonance frequency of 3.48 GHz. The envelope of the transmitted microwave signal for this condition is shown in Fig. Finally, we discuss the peak power of the released microwave pulse. Assuming that the power of the released microwave pulse reaches a maximum at t = t p , the ratio of the peak power to the transmitted power without the laser illumination at t = t p should be equal to the ratio of the transmittances of the meta-atom with and without the laser illumination at t = t p if t p is smaller than the sum of t d and the round-trip propagation time in the Fabry-Perot resonator. However, t p is larger than the sum of t d and the round-trip propagation time in this experiment because the laser power is not so high. In this case, the ratio of the peak power to the transmitted power without the laser illumination at t = t p becomes smaller than the ratio of the transmittances with and without the laser illumination because of the decrease in the lifetime of the Fabry-Perot resonator caused by the laser illumination. The power of the released microwave signal depends on both the increase of the transmittance of the meta-atom and the decrease in the electromagnetic energy in the Fabry-Perot resonator that are caused by the laser illumination. In such a condition, it is difficult to quantitatively discuss the peak power of the released pulse. Thus, we merely compare the ratio of the peak power of the released pulse to the transmitted power without the laser illumination at t = t p with the ratio of the transmittances with and without the laser illumination at t = t p . Let us look into the case of t d = 0 s. In the case of Fig. We investigated the transient response of a meta-atom composed of an ELC resonator that was loaded with a piece of high-resistivity silicon when light emitted from an LD illuminated the silicon. We also performed experiments demonstrating the storage and release of microwaves using this meta-atom. The transient time when the laser light begins to illuminate the silicon is inversely proportional to the incident laser power. The transmittance of the meta-atom at the resonance frequency increases to ten times the value obtained without the laser illumination at 5.2 ns after the laser light illumination commences for P peak = 1600 mW; in contrast, the transient time of the meta-atom after turning the excitation laser off is dependent on the carrier lifetime of the silicon and is of the order of 10 μs. Based on the results of evaluation of the transient response, we proposed a method for storage and release of electromagnetic waves (microwaves) using a Fabry-Perot resonator that included the meta-atom as one of its mirrors. We confirmed that the microwaves stored in this Fabry-Perot resonator could be released by illuminating the silicon in the meta-atom with laser light emitted from an LD. In this study, a Fabry-Perot resonator was used to realize the storage and release of electromagnetic waves; however, use of a Fabry-Perot resonator should not be essential and is merely one of the possible solutions for realization of the storage and release of electromagnetic waves with an optically tunable meta-atom. Using this study as a basis, it will be important to develop methods to achieve the storage and release of electromagnetic waves using more compact systems with low losses, such as a system composed of only one optically tunable metasurface with a high-Q resonant mode, in future studies. It should be noted that this experiment can also be regarded as the compression of a continuous wave into a pulse wave, i.e., power conversion of electromagnetic waves. A. M. Shaltout, V. M. Shalaev, and M. L. Brongersma, Spatiotemporal light control with active metasurfaces, Science 364, eaat3100 (2019).