Superconductivity induced by a magnetic field near metamagnetism is a striking manifestation of magnetically-mediated superconducting pairing. After being observed in itinerant ferromagnets, this phenomenon was recently reported in the orthorhombic paramagnet UTe 2 . Under a magnetic field applied along the hard magnetization axis b, superconductivity is reinforced on approaching metamagnetism at μ 0 H m ≈ 35 T, but it abruptly disappears beyond H m . On the contrary, field-induced superconductivity was reported beyond μ 0 H m ≈ 40-50 T in a magnetic field tilted by ≃ 25-30 ° from b in the (b,c) plane. Here we explore the phase diagram of UTe 2 under these two magnetic-field directions. Zero-resistance measurements permit to confirm unambiguously that superconductivity is established beyond H m in the tilted-field direction. While superconductivity is locked exactly at fields either smaller (for a H || b), or larger (for H tilted by ≃ 27 ° from b to c), than H m , the variations of the Fermi-liquid coefficient in the electrical resistivity and of the residual resistivity are surprisingly similar for the two field directions. The resemblance of the normal states for the two field directions puts constraints for theoretical models of superconductivity and implies that some subtle ingredients must be in play. Unconventional superconductivity is observed in an ever-growing number of correlated electron systems In UGe 2 under pressure, a magnetic field along the easy magnetization axis a leads to a metamagnetic transition between two ferromagnetic phases, in the vicinity of which superconductivity is reinforced, as indicated by a S-shape in the temperature dependence of the superconducting critical field H c2 Recently, superconductivity was found to develop in the paramagnetic heavy-fermion material UTe 2 at temperatures below T sc = 1.6 K In the present work, we focus on a systematic study of the superconducting phases induced in UTe 2 at ambient pressure, under a magnetic field applied either along b, or tilted by an angle θ ≃ 27 ± 5 ° from b towards c. We benefited from a unique combination of extreme conditions offered at the LNCMI-Toulouse, allowing high-magnetic-field electrical resistivity measurements under almost isothermal conditions: long-duration (rise = 70 ms, fall = 300 ms) pulsed magnetic fields up to 60 T, combined with temperatures down to 200 mK. Our results in UTe 2 unambiguously show zeroresistance in the SC-PPM phase, confirming its superconducting nature. We extracted the full magnetic-field-temperature phase diagrams of UTe 2 for H || b and H tilted by θ ≃ 27 ° from b to c. From a Fermi-liquid analysis of the resistivity we determine the field dependence of the residual resistivity ρ 0 and estimate the variation of the effective mass m * The magnetic-field variation of the electrical resistivity ρ of UTe 2 single crystals, measured with a current injected along the a-direction, is presented in Figure Figure Figure In many heavy-fermion magnets, a maximum of the effective mass is observed in the vicinity of a magnetic instability. It is commonly understood as resulting from the quantum critical magnetic fluctuations, coupled or not with a Fermi surface instability Differences between the two field-directions are visible from plots of A and ρ 0 versus H/H m [Figures The ultimate goal would be to provide a full microscopic description of the different superconducting phases and their pairing mechanisms in UTe 2 . We are still far from this objective, but the experimental data presented here, in complement to those from A rough estimation of the field-dependence of the pairing strength can be obtained from the Fermiliquid analysis done above, where a maximum of the quadratic coefficient A at the metamagnetic transition indicated an increase of the effective mass m*, presumably controlled by critical magnetic fluctuations. In a simple picture, the effective mass can be related by m*∼1+λ to the superconducting pairing strength λ Figure In relation with the ladder structure, magnetic frustration has been invoked as a possible origin of the paramagnetic ground state in UTe 2 at zero field and ambient pressure, and a competition between ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic configurations has been discussed The different superconducting regimes may correspond to different order parameters, with different sensitivities to a magnetic field. It has been generally assumed that all the superconducting phases in UTe 2 have a triplet order parameter, mainly because of high values of the superconducting upper critical field, a small decrease of the NMR Knight shift below T SC Although the measurements presented here and in other works start to bring a clear picture of the complex phase diagram of UTe 2 , which includes multiple superconducting and magnetic phases, we are still far from a deep understanding of its electronic properties. A target is now to perform microscopic studies to identify the nature of the magnetic fluctuations, their change through H m , and the superconducting order parameters. Theoretical developments are also needed to determine the superconducting pairing mechanism(s). This is a stiff challenge but the rare flurry of stunning phenomena observed in UTe 2 fully justifies such forthcoming efforts. Samples. Single crystals of UTe 2 were prepared by the chemical vapor transport method with similar parameters as described in Ref. Pulsed-field experiments. Magnetoresistance measurements were performed at the Laboratoire National des Champs Magnétiques Intenses (LNCMI) in Toulouse under long-duration pulsed magnetic fields, either up to 68 T (30 ms raise and 100 ms fall) and combined with an 4 He cryostat offering temperatures down to 1.4 K, or up to 58 T (55 ms rise and 300 ms fall) and combined by a home-developed dilution fridge made of a non-metallic mixing chamber offering temperatures down to 100 mK. A standard four-probe method with currents I || a, at a frequency of 20-70 kHz, and a digital lock-in detection were used. Resistivity data were normalized so that the maximal value, at a temperature of ≈ 65 K and at zero-field, reaches 450 μΩ•cm (a different normalization lead to a maximum of 650 μΩ•cm in a previous work 