Among the existing elemental characterization techniques, Particle Induced X-ray Emission (PIXE) and Energy Dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy are two of the most widely used in different scientific and technological fields. Here we present the first quantitative laser-driven PIXE and laser-driven EDX experimental investigation performed at the Centro de Láseres Pulsados in Salamanca. Thanks to their potential for compactness and portability, laser-driven particle sources are very appealing for materials science applications, especially for materials analysis techniques. We demonstrate the possibility to exploit the X-ray signal produced by the co-irradiation with both electrons and protons to identify the elements in the sample. We show that, using the proton beam only, we can successfully obtain quantitative information about the sample structure through laser-driven PIXE analysis. These results pave the way towards the development of a compact and multi-functional apparatus for the elemental analysis of materials based on a laser-driven particle source. Analytical techniques of X-ray emission spectroscopy play a crucial role in many fields of materials science. They rely on the irradiation of samples with ionizing radiation and the detection of the emitted characteristic X-rays. The elements are recognized according to the X-ray energies, while their concentrations are retrieved from the number of counts. The analytical capabilities of a specific technique depend on the type of incident particles. A widespread technique which exploits keV energy electrons is Energy Dispersive X-ray (EDX) (1) spectroscopy. EDX is a fast method for the multielemental analysis of solid homogeneous samples. Conventional EDX is performed only in vacuum and the probed thickness is of micrometers. Another powerful non-destructive technique is Particle Induced X-ray Emission (PIXE) (2, 3). Exploiting MeV energy protons, PIXE provides both elemental concentrations of homogeneous samples and stratigraphic structures of complex artifacts down to few 10s μm. Unlike EDX, PIXE can be performed also in-air. Since its birth, the extensive use of PIXE has been limited by the use of large accelerators. Both EDX and PIXE are widely exploited in semiconductor industry (4, 5), environment monitoring (6, 7) and cultural heritage preservation (8, 9). These fields could substantially benefit from the adoption of a flexible, multi-particle tool for X-ray emission spectroscopy with different capabilities. Laser-driven sources In both LD-PIXE and LD-EDX setups, the 200 TW Vega-2 laser pulse interacts with a micrometric aluminium foil to accelerate electrons and protons toward the sample placed in the vacuum chamber. We interpose a second aluminum sheet between the laser-driven particle source and the sample in order to stop the debris produced by the laser-target interaction. The sample has the same composition in both setups. It is made of a 2.2 μm thick m thick layer of chromium deposited onto a 1 mm thick substrate of pure copper. Oxygen is present as a contaminant (< 10 %) in the Cr layer. The film density is equal to 5.3 g/cm 3 . A cross section view of the sample is shown in Fig. We start by discussing the LD-EDX spectrum. The goal is to perform elemental analysis, i.e. the identification of the elements present in the sample. Then, we focus on the quantitative characterization of the sample structure through LD-PIXE analysis. We call this procedure stratigraphic analysis, aimed at determining the Cr layer thickness. We irradiate the sample with 42 particle bunches (i.e. shots) in the LD-EDX setup. The corresponding X-ray spectrum per unit of shots is presented in Fig. Unlike the elemental analysis, the stratigraphic analysis requires a model that relates the X-ray yields, the material composition and the energy of the incident particles. As far as LD-EDX is concerned, the electron spectrum characterization is not trivial. Moreover, no analytical models to describe the X-ray emission induced by high energy electrons are available. Therefore, the X-ray spectrum obtained by LD-EDX can not be directly interpreted to retrieve stratigraphic information. To obtain the latter, both reference samples and prior knowledge of the accelerated electron spectrum would be needed In light of the results presented in the previous section, a proper characterization of the system exploited to remove the electrons in the LD-PIXE setup is necessary. Indeed, the thickness obtained from LD-PIXE analysis (i.e. 2.01 μm) underestimates the actual thickness (i.e. 2.2 μm) of about 10%. We can suppose that even in presence of the magnet, in the LD-PIXE setup, a residual fraction of electrons can reach the sample. Therefore, the fraction of X-rays due to the electrons irradiation compared to the amount induced by protons must be properly estimated. Thus, we performed Geant4 (34) Monte Carlo simulations of the charged particles propagation, their interaction with the sample and X-ray generation. We simulate LD-EDX and LD-PIXE analysis considering both protons and electrons as primary particles. The simulated setups are shown in Fig. )) is equal to 8.6. Neglecting the proton contribution in LD-EDX (i.e. Y LD-EDX , p ), we can provide a conservative estimation of the residual X-ray yield due to the electron irradiation in the LD-PIXE experiment (i.e. Y LD-PIXE ,e /(Y LD-PIXE , e +Y LD-PIXE , p )). We find that <17% and <30% of the X-rays in the LD-PIXE setup are related to surviving electrons instead of protons for the 0.67 MeV and 1.0 MeV electron temperatures, respectively. This is coherent with a 10% underestimation of the thickness as found in the previous section. In Fig. We show that a laser-driven particle source can be exploited as a powerful tool to characterize samples of unknown elemental composition. Since this unconventional acceleration scheme provides both high energy electrons and protons, the experimental setup can be adjusted to perform both LD-EDX and LD-PIXE analyses. We show that LD-EDX can be used to successfully identify the elements with fewer shots compared to LD-PIXE. Remarkably, LD-EDX prospects the possibility, not achievable with traditional EDX, to analyze large artifacts in-air and to probe the presence of heavy elements at millimeter depths. Besides, we experimentally demonstrate that LD-PIXE can be used to perform quantitative stratigraphic analysis of a non-homogeneous sample. Thus, LD-EDX and LD-PIXE prove to be complementary techniques for elemental characterization of a sample. Finally, based on our results we suggest that the analyses carried out with a 200 TW laser might be performed also with compact 10s TW class lasers and advanced targetry solutions. Our results represent a significant step towards the development of a compact and versatile laser-based radiation source for multiple materials science investigations. The Cr film was grown on a pure Cu substrate exploiting an High Power Impulse Magnetron Sputtering Deposition System (38) located in Politecnico di Milano. The deposition was performed in Direct Current (DC) mode. This technique allows to obtain planar films on large surface areas (several cm 2 ). In order to avoid the delamination of the film due to the strong stresses (39) induced by a long deposition time, we broke the deposition process in several steps. For a complete list of the deposition parameters, see the Supplementary materials. CCDs are standard diagnostics for spectroscopy in laser-plasma interaction experiments The Vega-2 laser pulse has 30 fs pulse duration and P-polarization. The energy is 3 J on target and the intensity is ~2 10 20 W/cm 2 . The spot size FWHM is 7.0 μm thick m. The angle of incidence with respect to the target normal is 5°. The thickness of the aluminium target and the protective sheet are 6.0 μm thick m and 10.0 μm thick m, respectively. As far as the sample is concerned, the chromium film was grown directly on the copper substrate via Magnetron Sputtering (see previous sub-section). The actual composition is 93% of chromium and 7% oxygen (expressed as mass fraction). The reported film density equal to 5.3 g/cm 3 has been measured by means of conventional EDX A Time-of-Flight (ToF) spectrometer has been used to characterize the proton spectra. Its location in the experimental setup is shown in Fig. For the specific case considered in this work, the mass thickness of the Cr layer (ρt)t) Cr can be evaluated solving the following equation. where Y Cr /Y Cu is the ratio of Cr and Cu X-ray yields obtained experimentally (blue cell in Fig. In order to combine the uncertainties on the incident proton spectrum fp(Ep) and on the yields ratio Y Cr /Y Cu , the measurement error on the layer thickness is evaluated with a Monte Carlo approach. Briefly, we calculate several times the thickness of the sample by means of equation ( The electron temperatures of 0.67 MeV and 1.0 MeV exploited in the Monte Carlo simulations are evaluated considering two different approaches. The first value of 0.67 MeV is calculated from the actual laser parameters and the following extended ponderomotive scaling Where a 0 =0.85 √ I λ 2 /(10 18 W cm -2 μm 2 )≅ 9.5 is the normalized laser amplitude, θ is the laser incidence angle, f =1+√ 1-η is the reflection amplification factor with η ≈ 0.1 the conversion efficiency of laser energy into hot electrons (which is a reasonable value in our conditions). The second value of 1.0 MeV is obtained by matching the maximum proton energy measured in our experiment (i.e. 6.35 MeV) with its estimation obtained through the quasi-static model described in ref. where n h 0 =5× 10 20 cm -3 is the hot electron density and ñ=3.4 ×10 17 cm -3 is a fitting parameter (both computed following, again, the reasoning presented in ref. We simulate the 3D static magnetic field created by the structure shown in Fig. Exploiting Monte Carlo simulations, the ratio between the copper X-ray yields due to electrons in LD-PIXE and and the corresponding copper X-ray yields ratio results 0.025±0.017. This point is also reported in Fig. 