We have investigated various physical properties including phonon dispersion, thermodynamic parameters, optical constants, Fermi surface, Mulliken bond population, theoretical Vickers hardness and damage tolerance of anti-perovskite A 3 BX phases for the first time by employing density functional theory (DFT) methodology based on first principles method. Initially we assessed nine A 3 BX phases in total and found that only three phases (Ti 3 TlN, Ni 3 SnN and Co 3 AlC) are mechanically and dynamically stable based on analysis of computed elastic constants and phonon dispersion along with phonon density of states. We revisited the structural, elastic and electronic properties of the compounds to judge the reliability of our calculations. Absence of band gap at the Fermi level characterizes the phases under consideration as metallic in nature. The values of Pugh ratio, Poisson's ratio and Cauchy factor have predicted the ductile nature associated with strong metallic bonding in these compounds. High temperature feasibility study of the phases has also been performed using the thermodynamic properties, such as the free energy, enthalpy, entropy, heat capacity and Debye temperature. The Vickers hardness of the compounds are estimated to be  4 GPa which is comparable to many well-known MAX phases, indicating their reasonable hardness and easily machinable nature. The static refractive index n(0) has been found around  8.0 for the phases under study that appeals as potential candidate to design optoelectronics appliances. The reflectivity is found above 44% for the Ti 3 TlN compound in the energy range of 0-14.8 eV demonstrating that this material holds significant promise as a coating agent to avoid solar heating. One of the biggest challenges in designing the structural materials is that it should have high stiffness (i.e., should be reasonably hard materials) associated with damage tolerant behavior. Ductility assessment is one of the ways to define a material as damage tolerant. Usually, ceramics possess excellent high temperature mechanical properties, high elastic moduli and oxidation and corrosion resistance but they are brittle in nature The detail theoretical understanding of physical properties of the materials is essential to select compounds to be used in various technological applications. Dynamical stability check is also required before approval of the materials for practical application under external pressure and temperature conditions. Furthermore, the materials' response to high temperature and pressure can be understood by the study of their thermodynamic behavior that is considered as the root criteria for many industrial applications We have investigated nine promising damage tolerant ceramics (Ti 3 AlN, Mn 3 CuN, Ti 3 TlN and Ni 3 SnN that are predicted to be soft and Mn 3 NiN, Mn 3 GaN, Mn 3 SnC, Cr 3 SnN and Co 3 AlC that are supposed to have high elastic moduli) from the predicted anti-perovskite A 3 BX family The ground state electronic structure with equilibrium crystal structure have been investigated using the CAmbridge Serial Total Energy Package (CASTEP) code The electronic exchange correlation energy is modeled under the Generalized Gradient Approximation (GGA) method in conjunction with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) formalism The tolerances for geometric optimization are selected as follows: total energy within 5.0×10 - maximum stress of 0.02 GPa. The elastic constant tensors, C ij have been calculated by the 'stress-strain' method in-built in the CASTEP program that is also used to evaluate bulk modulus B and shear modulus G of the compounds of interest. The structure of A 3 BX phases crystallizes with the space group Pm-3m (221) belonging to the cubic system The study of mechanical properties such as stability, elastic moduli, stiffness, brittleness, ductility, and elastic anisotropy of a material provides with fundamental information required for selected engineering applications. The linear finite strain-stress method within the CASTEP code In most of the cases, contour plots (3D) and their two dimensional (2D) views are very effective to visualize the anisotropic mechanical behavior of materials and for better understanding of elastic responses as well. We have calculated the Young's modulus (Y), shear modulus (G) and Poisson's ratio and plotted them in 3D contour plots and in their 2D projections It is seen from the Table The single crystal elastic constants, C ij and respective compliance tensors and υ = (3B H -Y H ) 6B H The electronic charge density distribution mapping in the contour form (in the units of e/Å ash color) sheet is spherical in shape along the Γ-M direction, second sheet is octagon shaped in the middle of the cubic plane along the Γ-R direction and third (outer most) sheet is ribbon-like tubes located in each corners in the Γ-R direction (Fig. Distribution of electron density in different bonds can be explained by the Mulliken bond population analysis. The bond-overlap population (BOP) analysis provides with quantitative measures of bonding and anti-bonding strengths The hardness provides a significant role for understanding mechanical behavior of the materials and assists one to select them for specific engineering applications. We have calculated the hardness of the studied phases using established formalism The materials' structural stability and vibrational contribution to the thermodynamic properties such as thermal expansion, Helmholtz free energy and heat capacity can be understood by the study of phonon dispersion curve (PDC) and phonon density of states (PHDOS). The PDC and PHDOS have been calculated of the phases TTN, NSN, and CAC along the high symmetry directions of the Brillouin zone (BZ) using the density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) based linear-response method Temperature-dependent thermodynamical potential functions namely Helmholtz free energy F, enthalpy E, entropy S, and the phonon specific heat C v and the Debye temperature Θ D at zero pressure have been calculated using quasi-harmonic approximation considered here. The Helmholtz free energy (F) of the three phases is found to decrease gradually with increasing temperature as depicted in Fig. The temperature dependence of the Debye temperature Θ D has also been calculated using the PHDOS curves as illustrated in Fig. Time dependent perturbations to the electronic ground states are used to define the interaction between the photons and valence and conduction electrons of a system. Electronic transitions occur between occupied states below the E F to unoccupied states above the E F due to the electromagnetic field that shines onto a material with sufficient energy. Therefore, the optical properties of the materials are mainly due to the interband and intra-band contributions with the later coming from the low energy infrared part of the spectra in metal and metal-like systems. An energy smearing of 0. The optical properties of TTN, NSN and CAC are determined using the frequency-dependent . The imaginary part of dielectric function,  2 (ω) is calculated from the transition matrix elements between the occupied and unoccupied electronic states as Here  is the light frequency, u is the vector defining the polarization of the incident electric field, e is the electronic charge, c k ψ and v k ψ are the conduction and valence band wave functions at k, respectively. The real part of dielectric function ( 1 ) can be evaluated using the Kramers-Kronig equation which relates the real part with the imaginary part. The higher negative value ε 1 (ω) implies a Drude-like behavior of the materials which is consistent with our discussion in Section 3.3. The imaginary part, ɛ 2 (ω) of the compounds are depicted in Figs. 7b. The ε 1 (ω) shows zero value from below at around 15.5, 21.5 and 22.3 eV (Fig. The frequency dependent refractive index n and the extinction coefficient k have been presented in Fig. The energy loss of the light passing through materials can be measured by the absorption coefficient. The energy dependence of absorption coefficient,  have been evaluated and are shown in Fig. The  is high in wide energy range that could be used in optoelectronic devices in both visible and ultraviolet regions. As expected, due to the metallic nature of studied compounds, the photoconductivity starts at zero photon energy as shown in Fig. The reflectivity (R) spectra as a function of energy for the studied phases are illustrated in Fig. The important feature of loss spectrum can be understood using the dielectric function that defines energy loss of an electron passing through the material. There is no loss observed up to 13 eV for all the studied compounds. The loss peaks appeared in the energy range from 13 to 25 eV. The peaks are prominent in the energy range where the value of  1 = 0 and  2  1. The loss peaks are associated with the so called bulk plasma frequency  P that are found to be at 14.9, 21.6 and 22 eV for the TTN, NSN and CAC compounds, respectively. The  P also marks the onset of the fast drop of the reflectivity (R) of the materials under consideration, as shown in Fig. 3.3 Electronic properties eV/atom, self-consistent field within 5.0×10 -7 eV/atom, maximum ionic Hellmann-Feynman force within 0.01 eV/Å, maximum ionic displacement within 5.0×10 -4 Å, and a