Coherent phonon-polaritons have attracted a considerable amount of interest owing to their relevance to nonlinear optics and terahertz (THz)-wave emissions. Therefore, it is important to analyze the THz electric-fields of phonon-polaritons. However, in the majority of previous measurements, only a single component of the THz electric field was detected. In this paper, we demonstrate that pump-probe electrooptical imaging measurements using the Stokes parameters of probe polarization enable the phase-resolved selective detection of THz electric-field components that are associated with the phonon-polariton. We experimentally distinguish the mode profiles of ordinary and extraordinary phonon-polaritons, and clarify the excitation mechanism as optical rectification. These results are explained by numerical calculations of Maxwell equations for the THz electric field. The technique of selectively observing the THz electric field components may be useful for designing efficient THz-wave emitters. The phonon-polariton, which is a coupling mode of a terahertz (THz) electric field with a phonon in a medium LiNbO 3 offers a wide range of optical applications, such as THz-wave emitters A recent experiment demonstrated that several dynamic magnetization components were selectively resolved with pump-probe measurements, by detecting the change in the Stokes parameters of a circularly polarized probe pulse In this study, we performed a detailed analysis of the THz electric field associated with the phonon-polariton in LiNbO 3 using the phase-resolved pump-probe imaging technique. The numerical calculations of the THz electric field along the x and y axes showed good agreement with the experimental detections of the Stokes parameters S 1 and S 2 , respectively, indicating the capability of the selective detection of the THz electric field components. Moreover, we analyzed the dispersion relation and mode profiles of the excited phonon-polariton in terms of the Cherenkov radiation through optical rectification. Figure Our sample was a uniaxial LiNbO 3 (z-cut) single crystal with a point group of 3m, grown by the Czochralski method and with a thickness of 500 μm. The permittivity for the extraordinary wave polarized along the optic (z) axis was ε e = 26, whereas the permittivity for the ordinary wave polarized along the x and y axes was ε o = 41.5 in the sub-THz regime A pump pulse traveling in the z direction with a speed of c/n g generates THz electric polarization P THz through optical rectification, where c is the speed of light in vacuum and n g = 2.27 is the group refractive index at 1300 nm where I is the pump-pulse intensity, G(r) = exp[-r 2 /(2l 2 ⊥ )], l ⊥ = 25.5 μm was set for our calculation, and We note that excitation of the phonon-polariton via ISRS was not likely to occur because the pump polarization contained only the ordinary wave We numerically calculated the THz electric field E THz of the phonon-polariton to explain the experimental results. In the calculation, we referred to a theoretical framework where ∇ = (∂ /∂ r, 0, -iωn g /c) and ̃represents quantities in the Fourier space (ω). The influence of the phonon is incorporated into ε o and ε e , which we assumed to be non-dispersive, and the validity thereof is discussed in the following section. In this calculation, we neglected the propagation along the angular direction φ because the pump spot was focused circularly. Thus, according to Eq. ( where is the effective permittivity. Finally, we used the inverse Fourier transform of Eq. ( x , E THz y , E THz z ). Once the THz electric field E THz is generated by the pump pulse, birefringence is induced in the x-y plane, which modulates the polarization of the circularly polarized probe pulse via the EO effect where δ i j is the Kronecker delta, r i jk is the EO tensor Previous research The blue curve is the ordinary one expressed by where k is a wave number perpendicular to the wave front of the phonon-polariton, THz is the frequency of the E phonon at 152 cm -1 , polarized perpendicular to the optic axis and ε ∞ o = 19.5 is the permittivity of the ordinary wave at the limit of ω → ∞ where θ e is the propagation angle from the z axis, ω e /(2π) = 7.4 THz is the frequency of the E phonon at 248 cm -1 , polarized parallel to the optic axis As the spatial distribution of the pump pulse is exp[-r 2 /(2l 2 ⊥ )] according to Eq. ( for the ordinary and extraordinary photon-polaritons, respectively, where θ o and θ e are the Cherenkov angles, as schematically depicted in Fig. The group velocity of the pump pulse c/n g is faster than the phase velocity of the generated THz electric field, leading to Cherenkov radiation with angles of θ o and θ e for the ordinary and extraordinary phonon-polaritons, respectively. These angles can be obtained from equations using the variables in the panels on the right side of Fig. Finally, we discuss the possible excitation of the phonon-polariton through ISRS. The Raman tensors of the E phonon in the x-y plane are where f is a component of the Raman tensor. The driving force of the E phonon is obtained by operating the pump polarization vector on the tensors as Thus, the permittivity modulation δ ε Equation ( 