In this work, we theoretically and experimentally investigate the working principle and non-volatile memory (NVM) functionality of 2D α-In 2 Se 3 based ferroelectric-semiconductor-metal-junction (FeSMJ). First, we analyze the semiconducting and ferroelectric properties of α-In 2 Se 3 van-der-Waals (vdW) stack via experimental characterization and first-principle simulations. Then, we develop a FeSMJ device simulation framework by selfconsistently solving Landau-Ginzburg-Devonshire (LGD) equation, Poisson's equation, and charge-transport equations. Based on the extracted FeS parameters, our simulation results show good agreement with the experimental characteristics of our fabricated α-In 2 Se 3 based FeSMJ. Our analysis suggests that the vdW gap between the metal and FeS plays a key role to provide FeS polarization-dependent modulation of Schottky barrier heights. Further, we show that the thickness scaling of FeS leads to a reduction in read/write voltage and an increase in distinguishability. Array-level analysis of FeSMJ NVM suggests a 5.47x increase in sense margin, 18.18x reduction in area and lower read-write power with respect to Fe insulator tunnel junction (FTJ). Ferroelectric (Fe) materials have gained an immense research interest for their applications in electronic 1-3 and optoelectronic 4 devices due to their electrically switchable spontaneous polarization and hysteretic characteristics. Fe materials with high bandgap, called Fe-insulators, have been extensively investigated for versatile non-volatile memory (NVM) devices, such as Fe-random-access memory (Fe-RAM) 5 , Fe-field-effecttransistor (Fe-FET) 6-7 , Fe-tunnel-Junction (FTJ) 8-10 , etc. Unlike Fe-RAM and Fe-FET, where the Fe layer acts as a capacitive element, the FTJ functionality depends on the tunneling current through the Fe layer. In the FTJ, the Fe layer is sandwiched by two different metal electrodes. Due to the different properties (e.g. the screening length) of the metal electrodes, the tunneling barrier height at the metal-Fe interface of FTJ depends on the polarization direction. Thus, FTJ can exhibit polarization-dependent tunneling-resistance that facilitates the sensing of its polarization, leading to the design of a two-terminal NVM element 8 . However, as the dominant transport mechanism of FTJ is direct tunneling, to obtain a desired current density for sufficient operational speed, the Feinsulator thickness needs to be significantly low (<3nm for HZO 9 ). Unfortunately, with thickness scaling, the polarization of the Fe-insulator decreases 9 , which reduces the ratio of the tunneling-resistance 9 . Therefore, the distinguishability of the FTJ memory states decreases with the thickness scaling. In addition, most of the Feinsulators (BTO, BFO, doped-HfO 2 ) comprise of oxygen atoms and the dynamic change in oxygen vacancies can play a major role in its ferroelectric characteristics 11 . Therefore, a decrease in ferroelectricity with scaling and issues related to oxygen vacancies lead to significant challenges in the design and implementation of FTJ-based NVMs. Similar to Fe-insulator, Fe material with low bandgap called Fe-semiconductor (FeS) also exhibit spontaneous polarization which is switchable via applied electric-field Unlike FTJ, FeSMJ can provide significant current density even with a high FeS thickness and it does not require asymmetric metal electrodes for NVM functionalities To begin with, we first discuss the material properties of α-In 2 Se 3. Unit cells of the α-In 2 Se 3 monolayer are shown in Fig. Next, we analyze the ferroelectric properties of the α-In 2 Se 3 vdW stack. Fig. Here, E vdW and E FeS are the E-fields in the vdW gap and FeS layer, respectively; ε r is the relative background permittivity of the FeS layer, ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity and P is the spontaneous polarization. The above equation suggests that, E vdW and E FeS can be non-zero and hold the opposite sign if and only if the P is non-zero. Therefore, the opposite electric-field in FeS layers and vdW gaps confirms the existence of spontaneous polarization in the FeS layer. Using the calculated value of P, E vdW and E FeS , we obtain ε r =~7 for the FeS layer from Eqn. (1). Further, we calculate the total energy with respect to the change in P based on the nudge-elasticband (NEB) This leads to a higher electric-field near the FeS-M1 interface compared to the FeS-M2 interface. At sufficiently high positive voltages (~2V in Fig. So far, we have discussed the FeSMJ characteristics for T FeS = 120nm. Interestingly, in scaled FeSMJ (i.e. T FeS = 60nm), the coercive field can be achieved at a lower voltage and before the appearance of a significant density of mobile carriers. Due to low mobile carrier concentrations, the electric-field in FeS layers becomes less non-uniform (compared to T FeS = 120nm) and that leads to a complete polarization switching along with the FeS thickness. Therefore, the resultant I-V characteristics for T FeS = 60nm show significantly less asymmetric behavior (Fig. Considering a layout design by following ref. 25 for an array size of 1MB, our analysis suggests a 0.87x lower read power, 0.94x lower write power and 5x higher sense margin with an 18.18x less area for FeSMJ compared to FTJ (Fig. In summary, we show that the spontaneous FeS polarization induces a built-in potential across the vdW gap between FeS and metal contact leading to a polarization-dependent Schottky barrier for electron injection. By switching the polarization via applied voltage, the Schottky barrier height can be modulated, which leads to transitions between HRS and LRS in FeSMJ. Further, we show that in FeSMJ with high FeS thickness, the appearance of mobile carriers can lead to a partial polarization switching in FeS yielding asymmetric I-V characteristics. However, with thickness scaling, the asymmetry reduces due to complete polarization switching and at the same time I LRS /I HRS increases. Most importantly, FeSMJ exhibits a significantly higher current density due to Schottky tunneling compared to FTJ. Due to such appealing characteristics of FeSMJ and fundamental differences in the transport mechanisms compared to FTJ, FeSMJ NVM array exhibits significantly higher energy efficiency and integration density than FTJ NVM. Selenium: Se 