We present the concept of a feedback-based topological acoustic metamaterial as a tool for realizing autonomous and active guiding of sound beams along arbitrary curved paths in free two-dimensional space. The metamaterial building blocks are acoustic transducers, embedded in a slab waveguide. The transducers generate a desired dispersion profile in closed-loop by processing real-time pressure field measurements through preprogrammed controllers. In particular, the metamaterial can be programmed to exhibit analogies of quantum topological wave phenomena, which enables unconventional and exceptionally robust sound beam guiding. As an example, we realize the quantum valley Hall effect by creating, using a collocated pressure feedback, an alternating acoustic impedance pattern across the waveguide. The pattern is traversed by artificial trajectories of different shapes, which are reconfigurable in real-time. Due to topological protection, the sound waves between the plates remain localized on the trajectories, and do not back-scatter by the sharp corners or imperfections in the design. The feedback-based design can be used to realize arbitrary physical interactions in the metamaterial, including non-local, nonlinear, timedependent, or non-reciprocal couplings, paving the way to new unconventional acoustic wave guiding on the same reprogrammable platform. We then present a non-collocated control algorithm, which mimics another quantum effect, rendering the sound beams uni-directional. Controlling wave propagation in acoustic systems is an essential requirement in advanced engineering applications, such as acoustic imaging, acoustic signature cloaking, noise cancellation, vibration suppression, and more. The idea to control sound waves by artificially designing the medium in which they propagate received a considerable interest over the years, and has recently manifested itself through the emergent concept of metamaterials. Metamaterials are artificially designed structures, usually of periodic nature, composed of sub-components denoted by unit cells. For sufficiently large wavelengths, much larger than the lattice features, metamaterials effectively act as a continuous material, whose properties are determined by the collective dynamic behavior of their unit cells. As such, metamaterials can exhibit properties that are unavailable in natural materials. This capability has drawn immense attention of the scientific and engineering communities. The use of metamaterials in the control of wave propagation began with photonic crystals, demonstrating negative refraction A special class of systems that has emerged in the last few years is topological metamaterials, which draws inspiration from the condensed matter branch of quantum physics In this work we present a method to convert a bare slab into an autonomous topological acoustic waveguide. The topological properties are created exclusively by real-time feedback operation of embedded acoustic transducers, and can be tuned and reconfigured by changing a control program alone, without any structural modifications. In Sec. 2 we describe in detail the acoustic platform for the autonomous metamaterial, assuming a general feedback correlation between acoustic sensors and actuators. In Sec. 3 we derive control algorithms that realize acoustic analogues of two different quantum topological wave phenomena on this platform in real-time. In Sec. 4 we demonstrate, using dynamical simulations, the guiding of robust and back-scattering-immune curve acoustic beams in real-time, in different frequency ranges, along reprogrammable curved trajectories. The work is discussed and summarized in Sec. 5. The general principle of a feedback-based metamaterial design is that the couplings between the metamaterial sites, and its consequent dynamical properties, are determined by a reprogrammable electronic feedback controller Here c = 340 [m/s] is the speed of sound in air, ρ = 1.21 [kg/m 3 ] is the mass density of air, δ (r -R j ) [1/m 2 ] is the Dirac delta function indicating the location R j within a unit-cell, and η = A n /d [m], where A n is the area of the actuator active surface. s is a complex variable in Laplace domain, which is commonly used in control design, and is related to the frequency domain as s = iω. The control law for the velocity inputs has the general form where N a is the total number of actuators, and H i, j (s) are the controllers to be designed. This control scheme can generate a metamaterial with any desired couplings (within the hardware limits) between the sites, including non-collocated interactions. The closed-loop stability must be verified for each particular design. When control is turned off and the actuators are assumed ideal, i.e. their surface is rigid when inactive, the target system comprises fully sealed cavities, retaining the slab waveguide. In the next section we derive the controllers in (2) to realize an acoustic analogue of the QVHE. 3 Control algorithms generating topologically protected wave propagation As was discussed in Sec. 1, the QVHE belongs to a family of effects, originating from quantum physics, that support topologically protected wave propagation. Here we outline the structural conditions for a classical analogue of this effect to take place. The most basic structure that is capable to support the QVHE is a uniform honeycomb lattice, as illustrated by the gold circles in Fig. In our system, however, no passive elements are included. Any changes of spatial symmetry are achieved only via active control of the pressure field. Figure with the controller H j (s) constituting the inverse of the desired local impedance Z j (s). The j unit cell of the closed-loop metamaterial, which we create using the feedback-based design, is then governed by This hybrid system, comprising a continuous two-dimensional pressure field augmented by discretely spanned changes of impedance, which is our target system in closed-loop, does not usually appear in acoustic textbooks in the form of (4). It is mostly discussed for a one-dimensional waveguide, such as a tube, in the context of transmission and reflection of sound through the resonator Here D h represents dissipation, whereas are the equivalent acoustic mass and spring constant, respectively determined by the neck and cavity parameters, as ) are free design parameters indicating possible deviations from the nominal value, which can be used to achieve the desired pattern alternation in Fig. The resulting closed-loop system is stable as long as the target resonators include damping, i.e. D h > 0. Next we calculate the dispersion relation of ( 3.2 Dispersion analysis of the closed-loop metamaterial that imitates the QVHE Since the model in ( Next we consider a waveguide with identical impedance changes Z A (s) = Z B (s) in every unit cell of the honeycomb pattern in Fig. The distance between plates in the calculation of η in (4) was The system is now a continuous-discrete hybridization. Remarkably, introducing the periodically spanned change of impedance, even when space inversion symmetry within the unit cell is preserved, decouples the lower frequency bands from the higher bands, as illustrated in Fig. Our ultimate goal, however, is target resonators of different impedances Z A (s) = Z B (s), implying space inversion symmetry breaking in the unit cell, which we achieve here by the embedded feedback control operation. For Helmholtz resonators, the impedance of which is of the form given in The appearance of a gap due to space inversion symmetry breaking is a central feature in topological systems, as discussed next. Since the transition between the gapped states occurs only through a gap closing, together with a nonzero topological invariant carried by each band (see Appendix B), the systems corresponding to ε > 0 and to ε < 0 are topologically different. Although the gapped dispersion profile is identical for both values of ε (since for an infinite system flipping the masses is essentially equivalent to translation), the transition between the two systems is still captured in the dispersion data. Specifically, it is captured by the eigenmodes corresponding to the two frequencies at the K point, which are labeled by the red and blue dots in Figs. As was discussed in Sec. 3.2.1 and captured by Fig. Calculating the dispersion relation of this system by the Plane Wave Expansion method, as we did for the fully infinite system in Appendix A, now becomes more involved, as we need to distinguish between spatial derivatives p xx and p yy in (4). Since the y coordinate is now finite, p yy will not be eliminated, but will yield a polynomial eigenvalue problem, which is also differential. The common resort in calculating dispersion of semi-infinite systems is the Finite Element method We observe that a band gap is formed exactly at the same frequency region as for the fully infinite configuration (Fig. Here we present, without an accompanying dispersion analysis, a control algorithm that realizes an acoustic analogue of a different quantum topological phenomenon on the same platform of Fig. which relates the acoustic velocity actuators of each site in Fig. In this section we demonstrate that the feedback-based design of Sec. 2 indeed converts a slab waveguide into an acoustic metamaterial, which supports steering of topologically protected, curved sound beams. First we consider the QVHE example of Sec. 3.1-3.2, and design control programs 1 and 2, respectively corresponding to the left and middle column in Fig. In the right column we demonstrate guiding of uni-directional sound beams (mimicking the quantum Hall effect) using the strategy of Sec. 3.3, which we denote here by control program 3. We apply the controller in We presented a method to design acoustic metamaterials supporting propagation of sound beams of arbitrary reconfigurable shapes, in two-dimensional free space. The underlying platform is a slab waveguide with an embedded feedback control mechanism, which enables shaping the sound pressure field between the plates in real-time, in a way that mimics quantum topological wave phenomena. Specifically, the model includes identical acoustic actuators mounted in a periodic pattern in one of the plates, and operated according to measurements from a mirror pattern of acoustic sensors, which are processed through autonomous electronic controllers. As an example, we programmed the metamaterial to mimic the QVHE, using a theoretical model that we developed for the closed-loop system. The required spatial symmetry breaking was created by a collocated pressure feedback at each lattice site, augmenting the continuous pressure field by a discrete pattern of alternating acoustic impedances. We then demonstrated that the closed-loop metamaterial obtained a topological dispersion profile corresponding to the QVHE. We used numerical simulations to demonstrate the associated topological wave propagation. For a source of frequency in the bulk bandgap, located near the interface, robust, back-scattering-immune sound waves propagated between the plates, perfectly aligned with the interface. This is although no physical interface was present, and the space between the plates remained completely free. By reprogramming the embedded controllers, we realized trajectories of two different shapes. Since the particular couplings and the consequent dynamical properties are exclusively defined by the algorithm that is programmed into the controller, the feedback-based metamaterial is able to sustain any couplings and any dynamical properties, within hardware limits and system stability. We demonstrated this versatility by deriving a different control algorithm, involving a non-collocated pressure feedback, which turned the topologically protected sound beams into uni-directional. Here r = r 1 d 1 + r 2 d 2 is the position vector in the real lattice space, and k = k 1 b 1 + k 2 b 2 is the base wavevector in the reciprocal lattice space, defined by its expansion, where m and n are integer indices, which span across -M : M, and M is the series truncation order. Since G covers a two-dimensional grid, the total number of its entries is N 2 , where N = 2M + 1. Since p(r; s) transforms to frequency domain when s = iω, we substitute (A.1) in ( where Z A,B (ω) = iωZ A,B (iω) = -M A,B ω 2 +K A,B (for the sake of the calculation we set D h → 0). Multiplying (A.3) by e i(k+ G)•r , where G = mb 1 + nb 2 for some specific values m and n, we obtain Due to the orthogonality property of the Fourier series, we have where A c = a 2 / √ 3 is the unit cell area (Fig. Using matrix formulation, we define ∑ M m,n=-M e -i(G+ G)•R j p G = E j p G , where Following the target resonators coordinates that are given in (A.2), we obtain G • R A = 2πa(m + n)/6, and G • R B = -2πa(m + n)/6. Substituting (A.7) into (A.6) and using the explicit form of Z j (ω), (A.6) takes the form ) where E j is defined in (A.7). Rearranging (A.8) results in the following polynomial eigenvalue problem, where We then rewrite (A.9)-(A.11) in a companion form to obtain an augmented linear eigenvalue problem λ Pv = Qv, (A.12) where and v is the augmented eigenvector of length 3N 2 . The dispersion relations of the infinite closed-loop system that are shown in Fig. The topological character of systems supporting the QVHE (and its classical analogies) manifests itself through the valley Chern number where Ω v (k) is the Berry curvature The pre-factor α results from the linearization and accounts for units, as ∆(ε) is an effective gap term in units of frequency, R k is in units of 1/a, and the Berry phase is unit-less. While equation (B.2) was numerically deduced from the model, where R k can be increased up to a finite limit for the integration to encompass solely a single Dirac point, it also describes the linearized low energy model around the K and K points. For the linearized models, the limit R K → ∞ leads to, as prescribed by equation (B.1), C K ,C K → ±1/2, resulting in a non-vanishing valley Chern number and an associated topologically non-trivial phase, analogous to the QVHE. We note that when ε flips sign, the Berry curvature in In this section we derive the equivalent discrete model of the hybrid continuous-discrete target system in (4), in order to calculate the dispersion relation of the open system in Sec. 3.2.2. The only part of (4) to be discretized is the continuous twodimensional wave equation on the left hand side. We thus completely preserve the coupling of the target resonators on the right hand side. We perform the discretization in two stages. First, we limit the sound pressure wave propagation to direct routes between the target resonators locations, through, for example, artificial one-dimensional tubes, as illustrated in Here a is the same lattice constant as in the continuous case, and b is the artificial tube length. As a result, we obtain a periodic hexagonal net with two sites per unit cell, labeled by A and B, as captured within the black parallelogram. The second stage is approximating the continuous pressure field in those artificial tubes by equivalent lumped acoustic springs. The governing target closed-loop equations of the {m, n} unit cell for each of these sites, then respectively take the form B 0 p B q,l+1 + p B q,l + p B q+1,l -3p A q,l = M 0 s 2 p A q,l + M 0 B 0 η s Z A (s) p A q,l , (C.1a) B 0 p A q,l-1 + p A q,l + p A q-1,l -3p B q,l = M 0 s 2 p B q,l + M 0 B 0 η s Z B (s) p B q,l , (C.1b) where B 0 = ρc 2 /b [kg/s 2 /m 2 ] and M 0 = ρb [kg/m 2 ] are the equivalent acoustic spring and mass of each artificial tube, respectively. The design parameter is given by η = A n /A t , and is dimensionless, as expected for a one-dimensional waveguide, where A n is the target resonator opening area (as before) and A t is the cross-section area of the artificial tube. In order to fit the approximated model in (C.1) to the exact one in (4), we first calculate the dispersion relation of an infinitesized approximated system. Transforming (C.1) back into time domain, we obtain two fourth-order ordinary differential equations in time. Substituting then the traveling harmonic wave solution p = p 0 e i(k 1 ma+k2 n a-ωt) , we obtain, similarly to Appendix A, a polynomial eigenvalue problem, but this time it is quadratic. Finally, we arrive with the equivalent values for the target resonators parameter Vol eq = 1.15Vol, and the artificial tubes cross-section area A t = 7 2 A n . Keeping L n eq = L n , A n eq = A n and a eq = a, we obtain an exceptional fitting to the exact system dispersion relation, as illustrated in 