A thorough understanding of native oxides is essential for designing semiconductor devices. Here we report a study of the rate and mechanisms of spontaneous oxidation of bulk single crystals of ZrSxSe2-x alloys and MoS2. ZrSxSe2-x alloys oxidize rapidly, and the oxidation rate increases with Se content. Oxidation of basal surfaces is initiated by favorable O2 adsorption and proceeds by a mechanism of Zr-O bond switching, that collapses the van der Waals gaps, and is facilitated by progressive redox transitions of the chalcogen. The rate-limiting process is the formation and out-diffusion of SO2. In contrast, MoS2 basal surfaces are stable due to unfavorable oxygen adsorption. Our results provide insight and quantitative guidance for designing and processing semiconductor devices based on ZrSxSe2-x and MoS2, and identify the atomistic-scale mechanisms of bonding and phase transformations in layered materials with competing anions. A thorough understanding of the processing and properties of native oxides is essential for designing semiconductor devices. This is no less true for nanomaterials than it is for legacy semiconductors such as silicon, for which control and understanding of the native oxide was a seminal achievement of 20 th century materials science. Layered transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) nominally have inert, fully-passivated surfaces, but it is well-known that this is an oversimplification and that many TMDs oxidize readily. As interest grows in applications of TMDs in microelectronics, photonics, and optoelectronics, so too does the importance of developing predictive materials processing methods that take into account the native oxide. Meanwhile, MoS2 seems to oxidize not at all in air on a laboratory time scale. We quantify the oxide growth rate with sub-nm resolution using spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE). The effective dielectric constant accurately represents the material only for a uniform, semiinfinite sample with an intimate and smooth sample-air interface, hence the qualifier "effective" (see Supplementary Information, SI). The time-dependence of the data is a straightforward clue that the actual sample structure is more complicated, and changes in time as the samples are exposed to air. Comparing the results for ZrSe2 (Fig. In Fig. If freshly-cleaved MoS2 does maintain a pristine surface in air, then the effective dielectric constant is an accurate estimate of the optical properties of the material. In Fig. This value is lower than our previously-reported value of κ ≈ 0.2, which we determined from SE measurements on geological crystals from the same batch but without cleaving. were obtained from a geological MoS2 crystal that was mechanically cleaved and then exposed to ambient conditions for a year. Both SE and XPS show that the surface of MoS2 is stable and non-reactive in typical laboratory conditions, as has been reported previously. The last step in the oxidation of ZrS2 is the formation and out-diffusion of SO2. Our simulation at 800 K does not extend for long enough time to observe this process. Simulations performed at a much higher temperature of 1500 K do observe the formation and out-diffusion of SO2 molecules (Fig. 