PtSe 2 ultrathin films are used as the channel of back-gated field-effect transistors (FETs) that are investigated at different temperatures and under super-continuous white laser irradiation. The temperaturedependent behavior confirms the semiconducting nature of multilayer PtSe 2 , with p-type conduction, a hole field-effect mobility up to 40 cm 2 V -1 s -1 and significant gate modulation. Electrical conduction measured along different directions shows isotropic transport. A reduction of PtSe 2 channel conductance is observed under exposure to light. Such a negative photoconductivity is explained by a photogating effect caused by photo-charge accumulation in SiO2 and at the Si/SiO 2 interface. The family of transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), such as the most known MoS 2 , WSe 2 , WS 2 , has been heavily investigated over the last decade due to their intriguing and layer-tunable properties combined with their ease of fabrication To date, in addition to the exfoliation methods, various scalable and controllable growth techniques, mostly based on chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and laser ablation, have been developed, enabling the synthesis of large-area flakes with fine thickness control and consequent tailoring of the chemical, optical and electrical properties Different from MoS 2 , WSe 2 or other group-6 TMDs, dichalchogenides based on group-10 transition metals have just recently gained popularity and not been fully explored yet. Platinum diselenide (PtSe 2 ) and ditelluride (PtTe 2 ), along with their palladium analogues, were theoretically predicted in the sixties of the last century but have only recently been isolated and investigated as 2D materials PtSe 2 , the material under study in this paper, is a semimetal in bulk form, with slightly indirect overlap of the conduction and valence bands, that undergoes a semimetal-to-semiconductor transition when it is thinned to a few atomic layers In this work, we study the electrical conduction in multilayer PtSe 2 sheets along orthogonal directions using back-gated field-effect transistors. The electrical behavior is analyzed over a wide temperature range demonstrating semiconducting p-type conduction, with reasonable gate modulation and relatively high hole mobility. The electrical conduction along orthogonal directions does not show any significant difference and the intrinsic p-type behavior of the transistors is stable under air exposure. Laser irradiation reveals more complex phenomena than the usual current increase by photo-generation. Indeed, excitation by laser pulses unexpectedly reduces the channel conductance. We explain such a negative photoconductivity (NPC) as occurring due to a photogating effect, which arises from photocharge accumulation in the SiO2 dielectric and at the Si/SiO 2 interface. The devices were fabricated over Si/SiO 2 substrate (85 nm thermally grown oxide on p-type silicon, ρ ∼ 0.001 -0.005 Ωcm). The PtSe 2 film on SiO2 was obtained by direct selenization of a previously sputtered Pt film (nominal thickness 0.7 nm) following procedures described elsewhere The PtSe2 film was transferred using a polymer-based process from the growth substrate to a fresh Si/SiO 2 substrate The as-synthesized PtSe 2 film has a 1T crystal structure, where six selenium atoms are bonded to a platinum atom located at the center of an octahedral geometry, as shown in Figure The devices were measured in two-and four-probe configurations in a Janis Probe Station (Janis ST-500 probe station) equipped with four nanoprobes connected to a Keithley 4200 SCS (semiconductor characterization system), under different conditions. A scheme of the contacted back-gated device is shown in Figure The following analysis was conducted on two main types of devices, having the same channel length (L) and width (W) and contact leads (T) in the direction of the channel. The devices were fabricated from the same PtSe 2 sheet, simultaneously patterned to form a horizontal and a vertical channel, an example is displayed by the optical microscope images of Figure The electrical measurements were performed at a constant air pressure of 10 -3 mbar and at different temperatures, as well as in dark conditions and under irradiation from a super-continuous laser source (NKT Photonics, Super Compact, wavelength ranging from 450 nm to 2400 nm, at 30 mW/cm 2 ). Using the two-probe configuration, we studied the variation of the PtSe 2 conductance G as a function of temperature T from 400 K to near liquid-nitrogen temperature. The G-T curves for the horizontal and vertical samples, reported in Figure The I-V current-voltage characteristics, at zero gate voltage, in two-and four-probe configurations, are reported in the inset of Figure To better understand the semiconducting nature of the material, we performed transfer characteristic measurements at two extreme temperatures, 290 K and 90 K. The gate voltage was intentionally limited between -10 and 10 V to avoid the breakdown of the 85 nm gate oxide. between the two conductances for each device pair. (d) Transfer characteristics in vacuum ∼ 10 -3 mbar (grey curve) and air (magenta curve), for the vertical device. From the transfer characteristics, we evaluated the field effect mobility as μ = L WC ox V ds dI ds dV gs (V ds is the source-drain bias and C ox = 3.11 nFcm -2 is the SiO 2 capacitance per area), finding values in the range 15 -40 cm 2 V -1 s -1 at room temperature (as reported in the inset of Figure These values can be considered rather high if compared to the mobilities commonly reported for similar PtSe 2 or other TMD-based devices The electrical conductance of several pairs of horizontal and vertical devices, at room temperature and grounded gate, has been investigated and it is reported in Figure The plot shows that the conductance of horizontal and vertical devices have fluctuations up to 60% but originate distributions that are consistent with each other. Otherwise stated, Figure Finally, Figure To further investigate the behavior of PtSe 2 , we measured the electrical conduction of the device under pulsed laser irradiation, both in vacuum (10 -3 mbar) and at room pressure. Figure It is important to note that the laser beam induces reversible changes in the irradiated device. The current lowering lasts for different periods of time, ranging from minutes to several hours. The comparison of Figure The restoration of the initial state, in vacuum, is slower due to the limited diffusion of the positive photocharge accumulated at the at the Si/SiO 2 interface or in the SiO 2 layer. It becomes faster in air because of the counterdoping effect of adsorbates, such as oxygen or water, which increase the p-doping of the PtSe 2 channel. In conclusion, we investigated the electrical transport in PtSe 2 films along perpendicular directions. We PtSe 2 as the channel material of field effect transistors in back-gated configuration. The conductance vs temperature behavior confirmed the semiconducting nature of ultrathin PtSe 2 films and the transistor characterization indicated intrinsic p-type conduction. The silicon back-gate enabled channel current modulation with field effect mobility up to ∼ 40 cm 2 V -1 s -1 at room temperature. The comparison of the channel conductance along perpendicular directions for a large number of devices led to the conclusion that the conduction is isotropic being mainly dominated by the polycrystalline structure of the PtSe2 film. Finally, we found a negative photoconductivity under laser irradiation, indicating a dominant photogating effect.