The high T $ phase of lanthanum hydrides deserves special attention because this phase displays the highest observed critical temperature. We focus on the evaluation of the critical temperature, isotope coefficient and their pressure dependence of this phase (Fm3 & m phase of the LaH *+ compound). By combining the method of two coupling constants, λ opt and λ ac , and two characteristic frequencies with first-principle calculations we are able to analyze the role of the light hydrogen in the amplitude of the critical temperature in this unique compound. Specifically, the critical temperature of 254 K and the isotope coefficient of 0.45 are evaluated at high pressure, and the results are in good agreement with the experimental data. The peculiar decrease in T $ upon further increase in pressure is explained by the presence of a flat region on the Fermi surface and the appearance of a two-gap structure, which should be experimentally observable by tunneling spectroscopy. This paper is concerned with properties of the high T $ superconducting hydrides. Our study was motivated by the recent observation The initial idea The observation of the high T $ superconducting state in the H 3 S hydride was followed by intensive theoretical development. Since the pairing is caused by the electron-phonon interaction, the analysis is based on the Eliashberg equation As we know, this equation does not contain explicitly the coupling constant λ. Correspondingly, the value of the critical temperature can be found without invoking the coupling constant concept The family of hydrides is rather large and it was generally expected that further studies will result in an observation of even higher values of T $ . The recent experimental observation of record high T $ in lanthanum hydride The observation of high T $ in the H 3 S compound was followed by an intensive theoretical development. Similarly, a detail study of the LaH *+ compound is of definite interest. The paper An analysis contains ab initio calculations similar to those used by two of us with our collaborators in Structure relaxations, electronic properties, elastic constants are calculated using the VASP package Pressure is a thermodynamic parameter, and, as we know, its increase leads initially to formation of the metallic state and then, at higher pressures, to sequence of structural transitions. We will focus on the Fm3 & m phase of the LaH *+ compound with its record high T $ value (Fig. The equation has a form (at T = T $ ) V Here ∆(ω L ) is the thermodynamic order parameter (we employ the method of the thermodynamic Green's functions (see, e.g., The eqs. ( In order to obtain an analytical expression for T $ , one should introduce the coupling constant λ, which is not explicitly enters Eq.( is the average phonon frequency (see The average phonon frequency Ω k is defined by the expression: Ω k = 〈Ω ? 〉 */? ; 〈Ω ? 〉 = ? q ∫ dΩ Ωα ? (Ω)F(Ω); (4') One can select also the close value Ω k log , see The hydrides are characterized by complex phonon spectrum; it contains acoustic and optical modes. Because of the presence of light hydrogen ions, we are dealing with high frequency optical modes. As a result, the phonon spectrum is very broad. As a consequence, it is more accurate to introduce two characteristic frequencies Ω k ac and Ω k opt and two coupling constants λ opt and λ ac describing the interaction of electrons with optical and acoustic phonons, respectively Let us select the value of the characteristic phonon frequency Ω * , which separates optical and acoustic modes. As one can see from Table and corresponding equation for the renormalization factor Z. Here The values of λ ac and λ opt can be determined directly from the dependence λ(Ω) (see, e.g., Fig. and λ opt = λ max -λ ac . As for the quantities Ω k ac and Ω k opt , they are defined by the following relation: Ω k ac = 〈Ω ac ? 〉 */? ; 〈Ω ac ? 〉 = ? q ac ∫ dΩ • Ω ? m a (`)n(`) Ω k opt = 〈Ω opt ? 〉 */? ; 〈Ω opt ? 〉 = ? q opt ∫ dΩ • Ω ? m a (`)n(`) •‚ƒ `1 (8) We will be using the average values determined by the relations ( They are generalization of the definitions for the usual systems described by single coupling constant (see eq. ( Using the calculated parameters λ i , Ω k i (i ≡ opt, ac) and eq. (1'), one can evaluate the value of the critical temperature. In the important case when the main contribution comes from the optical modes (then λ opt ≫ λ ac ), one can use the following expression for T $ Here ρ = Ω k ac /πT $ + ; T $ + is the value of the critical temperature determined by the electron-phonon interaction with the optical modes only. As mentioned above, eq. ( Let us focus on lanthanum hydride. Its high T $ phase, Fm3 & m (Fig. The spectral function α ? (Ω)F(Ω) appears to be different at various pressures. As a first step, this function was calculated at P = 200 GPa, see Fig. As a next step, with use of eqs. ( One should use a different expression valid at large λ opt . We use the expression As is known, an increase in pressure results in a transition into the Im3 & m phase of the H 3 S compound A similar scenario occurs for the lanthanum hydrides. Raising the pressure up to P=200 GPa increases T $ Such a temperature dependence can be understood as follows. The decrease in T $ corresponds to a lower coupling constant λ opt which, in turn, is related to a lower value of the characteristic frequency Ω k opt at P ≃ 200 GPa (see Table Indeed, in accordance with the McMillan relation One expects that a decrease in Ω k opt leads to an increase in λ opt ; this is the so-called "softening mechanism" The phonon frequency Ω k opt can be expressed in terms of the elastic constant. The picture is self-consistent, since our calculation of the elastic constants for The electronic spectra in Fig. The evaluation of T $ presented above is based on a picture of strong electron-phonon coupling provided by wide band supplemented by an additional weak interaction (λ poc ≪ 1) with the pockets. This treatment is rigorous, selfconsistent, and is in a good agreement with the experimental data. The isotope coefficient for D → H substitution in hydrides is very sensitive to the interplay of the optical and acoustic phonon modes. The hydrides of interest form a two-component lattice, which contains both heavy and light ions (in our case M H ≪ M La ). As a result, the optical modes correspond to the vibration of the hydrogen ions, whereas the acoustic modes reflect, mainly, the motion of heavy ions (see, e.g., The isotope coefficient can be evaluated from the equation derived in The quantity ρ is defined as in Eq. ( The values of the parameters entering Eq. ( The analysis presented above, provides a totally self-consistent description of the properties of a new high T $ superconductor LaH 10 . The material has some peculiarities, but as a whole the picture appears to be similar to that for the H 3 S the corresponding equation for ionic motion. However, such an approach is not self-consistent, since the electronic and ionic motions become inseparable (polaronic effects) and this equation is not valid anymore. According to the authors In summary, we are focusing on the properties of the Fm3 & m phase of the lanthanum hydride. This phase is unique, since the compound displays the highest observed value of the critical temperature. The analysis described above allows us to evaluate the values of the critical temperature which can reach 254 K at 200 GPa. Moreover, its T c decreases with increasing pressure. We calculated also the value of the isotope coefficient which is about 0.45. The study is in a rather good agreement with the experimental data. * Wš1 + 2μ * + λ opt μ * t(λ opt )oe e* t(x) = 1.5 exp(-0.28 x) P (GPa) Ω * (THZ) λ opt λ ac Ω k opt (10 ' K) Ω k |$ (10 ? K) T $ (K, μ * = 0.13)