Metallic seals are crucial machine elements in many important applications, e.g., in ultrahigh vacuum systems. Due to the high elastic modulus of metals, and the surface roughness which exists on all solid surfaces, if no plastic deformation would occur one expects in most cases large fluid flow channels between the contacting metallic bodies, and large fluid leakage. However, in most applications plastic deformation occurs, at least at the asperity level, which allows the surfaces to approach each other to such an extent that fluid leakage often can be neglected. In this study we present an experimental set-up for studying the fluid leakage in metallic seals. We study the water leakage between a steel sphere and a steel body (seat) with a conical surface. The experimental results are found to be in good quantitative agreement with a (fitting-parameter-free) theoretical model. The theory predicts that the plastic deformations reduce the leak-rate by a factor ≈ 8. Seals are a crucial machine element used to confine a high pressure fluid to some given volume. Due to the interfacial surface roughness most seals exhibit leakage For some applications, e.g., involving high temperatures or hot reactive gases, or very high fluid pressures, rubber-like materials cannot be used. In these cases, and in ultra high vacuum systems, seals made from metals are very useful Metals are elastically very stiff (typical elastic modulus of order E ≈ 100 GPa), and unless the surfaces are extremely smooth, or the nominal contact pressure extremely high, calculations (assuming purely elastic deformations) show that large non-contact channels would occur at the interface resulting in a large fluid leakage. However, most metals yield plastically at relative low contact pressures, typically of order σ Y ≈ 1 GPa. This will allow the contacting surfaces to approach each other, which will reduce the interfacial gap to such an extent that the fluid leakage usually can be neglected. For purely elastic solids like rubber, contact mechanics theories have been developed for how to predict the fluid leak-rate, and it has been shown that they are in good agreement with experiments For elastic solids numerical contact mechanics models We have recently shown how the leakage of static rubber seals can be estimated using the Persson contact mechanics theory combined with the Bruggeman effective medium theory Experimental studies of plastic deformation of rough metallic and polymeric surfaces was presented in Ref. The topography measurements were performed with a Mitutoyo Portable Surface Roughness Measurement device, Surftest SJ-410 with a diamond tip with the radius of curvature R = 1 μm, and with the tip-substrate repulsive force F N = 0.75 mN. The lateral tip speed was Figure From the measured surface topography (line scans) z = h(x) we calculated the one-dimensional (1D) surface roughness power spectra defined by where .. stands for ensemble averaging. For surfaces with isotropic roughness, the 2D power spectrum C(q) can be obtained directly from C 1D (q) as described elsewhere The aim of the experiment is to measure the fluid (here water) leakage for a ball-seat valve as a function of the applied fluid pressure. In the present set-up we can apply fluid pressures up to 20 bar, and the pressure can be kept at a constant level even if there is leakage. In this study we are interested in the influence of the surface roughness on the leak-rate. The steel ball we use is very smooth but we use different seats with varying surface roughness produced by sandblasting. Thus the seat must be easily replaceable. In the experiments reported on below, the ball is squeezed against the seat only by the fluid pressure. However, the experimental set-up also includes the ability to create an additional normal load onto the ball. This additional force is generated by pushing a steel piston against the ball using an oil based hydraulics system. The test chamber, which contains the ball and the seat, can be seen in Fig. The method used to determine the leak-rate depends on the amount of leakage. For very low amounts of leakage the best way is to count the amount of water drops over time. The volume of a single drop can be estimated by repeated measurement of multiple drops. For higher amounts of leakage a measuring cylinder can be used. If the leakage surpasses the typical volume of a measuring cylinder, the leakage is instead determined by measuring its mass using a scale. The calculation of the fluid leakage in metallic seals involves several steps. First it is necessary to determine the nominal contact pressure profile p(x, y) acting at the interface between the two metallic bodies. This will in general involve both elastic and plastic deformations of the metals. Secondly, one must determine the separation with radius R is squeezed against a nominal flat halfspace (green). (a) If the surface roughness amplitude is very small, or the applied force very high, the nominal contact area will be determined by bulk deformations and given by the Hertz contact theory. (b) In the opposite limit mainly the surface asperities deform (but with a long-range elastic coupling occuring between them). In this limit the pressure profile is Gaussian-like. u(x, y) between the surfaces as this will determine the fluid flow channels at the interface. This problem will depend on the pressure profile p(x, y) and on the surface roughness, and the elastoplastic properties of the metals. Finally, one must calculate the fluid flow at the interface in the open (non-contact) channels from the high pressure side to the low pressure side. This is a complex hydrodynamic problem which in general cannot be solved exactly. The experimental set-up consists of a steel ball (radius R) and a conical steel body (seat) with the angle θ defined in Fig. If we assume that the contact is Hertz-like we get the pressure distribution where where E * is the effective Young's modulus defined by where E 1 and ν 1 are the Young's modulus and Poisson ratio of the steel seat, and E 2 and ν 2 the same quantities for the steel ball. Using ( and from ( Assuming that both the steel ball and the steel cone (seat) have E = 210 GPa, ν = 0.3 we get As an example, if p fluid = 20 bar, θ = 45 • , and R = 2 cm we get F N ≈ 1260 N, and p 0 ≈ 181 MPa and the halfwidth a ≈ 0.07 mm. When a cylinder with a smooth surface is squeezed against a flat smooth substrate, a rectangular contact region of width 2a is formed with a contact pressure given by the Hertz theory. However, if the substrate has surface roughness the nominal contact region will be larger than predicted by the Hertzian theory and the pressure distribution will change from parabolic-like for the case of smooth surfaces to Gaussian-like if the surface roughness is large enough. This can be easily shown using the Persson contact mechanics theory. Due to the surface roughness, if the contact pressure p is not too high the interfacial separation u is related to the contact pressure as where s 2 = γRh rms . Using (9) we get We note that (9) holds only as long as the pressure p is so small that the asymptotic relation ( Using ( For p fluid = 20 bar and s = 0.123 mm we get the maximum nominal contact pressure p 0 ≈ 57.4 MPa. Note that the asperities act like a compliant layer on the surface of the body, so that contact is extended over a larger area than it would be if the surfaces were smooth and, in consequence, the contact pressure for a given load will be reduced. In reality the contact area has a ragged edge which makes its measurement subject to uncertainty. However, the rather arbitrary definition of the contact width is not a problem when calculating physical quantities like the leakage rate, which can be written as an integral involving the nominal pressure distribution. The derivation of the nominal contact pressure profile (9) (and (2)) assumes elastic deformations. The stressstrain curve for the steel 1.4122 used for the seat shows that the stress at the onset of plastic flow (in elongation) is at about 500 MPa, which is much higher than the maximum stress p 0 (and maximum shear stress) at the surface and also below the surface in the ball-seat contact region. Thus for smooth surfaces we expect no macroscopic plastic deformations, and can treat the contact as elastic when calculating the nominal contact pressure distribution. However, the stress in the asperity contact regions is much higher than the nominal contact pressure. Thus, using the power spectrum of the sandblasted seat, and including just the roughness components with wavelength λ > 2 μm, and assuming elastic contact, gives for the nominal contact pressure p 0 ≈ 57 MPa the relative contact area However, the derivation of (9) may still be approximately valid if the asperities deform elastically on the length scale which determines the contact stiffness for the (nominal) contact pressures relevant for the calculation of In calculating the fluid (here water) leak-rate we have used the effective medium approach combined with the Persson contact mechanics theory for the probability distribution of surface separations. The most important region for the sealing is a narrow strip at the center of the nominal contact pressure profile, where the contact pressure is highest (and the surface separation smallest), but the study presented below takes into account the full pressure profile p(x). The basic contact mechanics picture which can be used to estimate the leak-rate of seals is as follows: Consider first a seal where the nominal contact area is a square. The seal separates a high-pressure fluid on one side from a low pressure fluid on the other side, with the pressure drop ∆P . We consider the interface between the solids at increasing magnification ζ. At low magnification we observe no surface roughness and it appears as if the contact is complete. Thus studying the interface only at this low magnification we would be tempted to conclude that the leak-rate vanishes. However, as we increase the magnification ζ we observe surface roughness and noncontact regions, so that the contact area A(ζ) is smaller than the nominal contact area A 0 = A(1). As we increase the magnification further, we observe shorter wavelength roughness, and A(ζ) decreases further. For randomly rough surfaces, as a function of increasing magnification, when A(ζ)/A 0 ≈ 0.42 the non-contact area percolate In the simplest picture one assumes that the whole pressure drop ∆P occurs over this critical constriction, and if it is approximated by a rectangular pore of height u c much smaller than its width w (as predicted by contact mechanics theory), the leak rate can be approximated by where η is the fluid viscosity. The height u c of the critical constriction can be obtained using the Persson contact mechanics theory (see Ref. A more general and accurate derivation of the leakrate is based on the concept of fluid flow conductivity σ eff . The fluid flow current Since the leak-rate Q = L y J x we get Note that σ eff depends on the contact pressure p con (x) and hence on x. In the present case p fluid p cont and in this case p cont ≈ p, where p(x) is the external applied squeezing pressure (or nominal pressure) given by where we have used that Q is independent of x as a result of fluid volume conservation. For the Hertz contact pressure profile, where p(x) = 0 for x > a and x < a, we get with y = x/a: where For the Gaussian pressure profile (9) using y = x/s we get where p(y) = p 0 e -y 2 /2 . From ( In the calculations presented below we have not used the critical junction theory but Eq. ( In the present study we are interested in metallic seals and in this case plastic deformation of the solids is very important. Plastic flow is a complex topic but two very simple approaches have been proposed to take into account plastic deformations in the context of metallic seals. One approach, which is simple to implement when using actual realizations of the rough surfaces (as done in most numerically treatments, e.g., using the boundary element method Another approach, which is more convenient in analytic contact mechanics theories, is based on smoothing the surface in wavevector space (see An expression for C pl (q) can be obtained as follows. Let us consider the contact between two elastoplastic bodies with nominal flat surfaces, but with surface roughness extending over many decades in length scale, as is almost always the case. Assume that the applied (nominal) contact pressure p 0 is smaller than the penetration hardness σ P of the solids. When we study the contact between the solids at low magnification we do not observe any surface roughness, and since p 0 < σ P the solids deform purely elastically at this length scale. As we increase the magnification we observe surface roughness and the (elastic) contact area decreases. At some magnification the pressure p = p 0 A 0 /A(ζ) may reach the penetration hardness and at this point all the the contact regions are plastically deformed. In general, depending on the magnification ζ, some fraction of the contact area involves elastic deformations, while the other fraction has undergone plastic deformation. Thus we can write the contact area A(ζ) = A el (ζ) + A pl (ζ). The Persson contact mechanics theory predicts both A el (ζ) and A pl (ζ) (see Ref. In ref. where A 0 pl = F N /σ P is the contact area assuming that all contact regions have yielded plastically so the pressure in all contact regions equal the penetration hardness σ P . The basic picture behind this definition is that surface roughness at short length scales gets smoothed out by plastic deformation, resulting in an effective cut-off of the power spectrum for large wave vectors (corresponding to short distances). Assuming elastic contact and using the power spectrum The smoothing of the surface profile at short length scale allows the surfaces to approach each other and will reduce the height u c of the critical constriction. By using the plastically deformed surface roughness power spectrum It is not clear which of the two ways to include plastic flow described above is most accurate. In the first approach the solids deform plastically only in the region where they make contact, but this procedure does not . The rms roughness are 1.2 μm, 1.9 μm and 0.8 μm, respectively. The rough cone has the rms slope 0.4 (isotropic), and the smooth cone 0.11 in the circumferential direction, and 0.18 in the radial direction. - conserve the volume of the solids. The second approach does conserve the volume but smooth the surfaces everywhere, i.e., even in the non-contact region. However, this does not influence the area of real contact, and it has a relative small influence on the surface separations in the big fluid flow channels, which mainly determine the fluid leakage rate (see Ref. Fig. Fig. Fig. Note that including the plastic deformation results in a drastic reduction, by roughly a factor of 8, in the (calculated) fluid leak-rate. The theory prediction with the plastic deformation included is in very good agreement with experiments. This is shown in greater detail in Fig. The leak-rate depends on the separation at the critical constriction as u 3 c . Thus the reduction in the leak-rate by a factor of ≈ 8 when including the plastic deformation imply that the separation u c decreases with a factor of ≈ 2. This is in good agreement with the result shown in Fig. Fig. We have investigated the role of plastic deformation in the leak-rate of metallic seals. We found that plastic deformation increases the area of real contact and reduces the interfacial separation at the critical constriction, which reduces the leak rate by roughly a factor of 8. Our experimental results show a nonlinear dependency of leak-rate with fluid pressure difference, due to a dependency of the applied axial force on the fluid pressure. The theoretical results, based on the Persson's contact mechanics theory in combination with the Bruggeman effective medium theory are in good agreement with measured data for the leak-rate as a function of the fluid pressure. The measured leak-rate decreases with increasing time, which we interpret as resulting from clogging of critical constrictions by impurities present in the water.