We investigate the optical properties of the normal state of the infinite-layer La1-xSrxNiO2 using DFT+DMFT. We find a correlated metal which exhibits substantial transfer of spectral weight to high energies relative to the density functional theory. The correlations are not due to Mott physics, which would suppress the charge fluctuations and the integrated optical spectral weight as we approach a putative insulating state. Instead we find the unusual situation, that the integrated optical spectral weight decreases with doping and increases with increasing temperature. We contrast this with the coherent component of the optical conductivity, which decreases with increasing temperature as a result of a coherence-incoherence crossover. Our studies reveal that the effective crystal field splitting is dynamical and increases strongly at low frequency. This leads to a picture of a Hund's metallic state, where dynamical orbital fluctuations are visible at intermediate energies, while at low energies a Fermi surface with primarily d x 2 -y 2 character emerges. The infinite-layer nickelates are thus in an intermediate position between the iron based high temperature superconductors where multiorbital Hund's physics dominates, and a one-band system such as the cuprates. To capture this physics we propose a low-energy two-band model with atom centered eg states. The recent discovery of superconductivity in the infinite-layer nickelates, Nd 1-x Sr x NiO 2 There are many experimental investigations into the infinite-layer nickelates To reach this conclusion we perform fully charge selfconsistent DFT+DMFT calculations Results: Optical Conductivity-The DFT+DMFT optical conductivity is computed with the formalism presented in Refs. The temperature(T )-dependent optical conductivity is displayed in Fig. The reduction of K DMFT /K DFT depicted in Fig. Based on the values of K DMFT /K DFT , LaNiO 2 is far from a Mott system, but close to a Hund's metal. Notice that the behavior of K DMFT /K DFT of LaNiO 2 as a function of temperature (when Ω is large) is the opposite of what is observed in canonical Mott insulating systems such as V 2 O 3 where K DMFT (Ω) (or K DMFT /K DFT ) decreases upon heating (within the paramagnetic metallic phase) Results: Orbital Character -We now turn to the orbital character of the different contribution to the optical features. First we analyze the quasiparticle weight Z as a function of T as depicted in Fig. , where i is a band index. Figures Results: Doping Dependence-Now, we turn our attention to Sr-doped LaNiO 2 , where Sr doping provides holes to LaNiO 2 . Figure The decrease in the kinetic energy originates from the fact that the low-energy carrier number, n e , defined by the volume of the Fermi surface, decreases upon doping as presented in Table It is important to distinguish the high-energy d occupancy, which is measured in x-ray spectroscopy Results: Electronic Structure-The dependence of the k-resolved spectral function with doping is shown in Fig. At x = 0.2, the hybridized band with Ni d z 2 detaches from E F . As a result, the FS at Γ disappears. Upon further doping, at x = 0.5, another FS from the hybridized band detaches from E F as well and the FS from Ni d x 2 -y 2 is solely realized. Therefore, two distinct Lifshitz transi- tions are realized upon doping Results: Two-Band Model -The multiorbital character is definitely seen in the DMFT valence histogram as depicted in Fig. To summarize, we have computed the basic electronic structure of the normal state of La 1-x Sr x NiO 2 within DFT+DMFT with a focus on the temperature and doping dependence of the optical conductivity. We find signs of strong correlations in the optical response as the ratio of the optical spectral weight to the DFT band theory (i.e. K DMFT /K DFT ) is small (this can be a feature of Mott or Hund's systems). We find that the evolutions of the optical spectral weight with (i) temperature and (ii) doping are qualitatively different from those in a canonical Mott-Hubbard system and more similar to those of an orbitally differentiated Hund's metal with a highly correlated d x 2 -y 2 and a d z 2 orbital with weaker correlations. To reveal the basic physics that govern these materials we studied the dependence of the physical quantities on the interaction parameters. We find (1) DMFT valence histogram with enhanced high spin occupation and (2) strong dependence of the coherence scale with Hund's coupling J H , both are clear signatures of the Hund's metal. This type of material is quite unique since Hund's physics is hidden at low energies due to the large crystal field splitting but noticeable at intermediate energies where the (dynamical) crystal field splitting becomes small and Hund's coupling dominates. It is in an intermediate position between the multiorbital iron based superconductors and one-band high-T c cuprate superconductors, thus opening a new research area in the theory of correlated materials. Fully charge self-consistent DFT+DMFT calculations implemented in Wien2k package [S1] are performed with formalisms described in Ref. We choose a large hybridization energy window from -10 eV to 10 eV with respect to the Fermi level E F in order to describe both low and high energies physics precisely. All the five Ni-3d orbitals are considered as correlated ones and the fully rotational invariant form is applied for a local Coulomb interaction Hamiltonian with on-site Coulomb repulsion U = 5 eV and Hund's coupling J H = 1 eV. The Coulomb parameters U and J H are confirmed by a constraint LDA (cLDA) calculation, where we constructed a 2 × 2 × 2 supercell and put a constrained number of Ni 3d-electrons, n d = 9, in the core state. It gives the effective Coulomb parameter of U eff = F 0 eff = U -J = 4.11 eV, which verifies our U and J H values in the DFT+DMFT calculations. The continuous time quantum Monte Carlo (CTQMC) [S4, S5] is adopted for a local impurity solver. We use generalized gradient approximation (GGA) In the charge self-consistent calculations, 16 × 16 × 18 k-point mesh is used for the Brillouin zone integration. In the calculations of the optical conductivity, a more dense k-point mesh of 50,000 k-points in the full Brillouin zone is adopted. The broadening factor of 0.01 eV is adopted for DFT+DMFT optical conductivity calculations. For DFT optical conductivity calculations, the broadening factor of 0.01 eV is used for both intra-and inter-band transitions. Note that we checked several different broadening factors and found that they do not affect our main conclusions. The details is provided in Section below. The electronic structures of both LaNiO 2 and NdNiO 2 are nearly identical near E F when 4f electrons in Nd are regarded as core electrons in nonmagnetic fashion (see Section ). Hence, our main conclusions remain unchanged for the low-energy physics in these rare-earth infinite-layer nickelate materials. Figure In Fig. Since the two bands cross E F , they contribute the intraband transition in the optical conductivity. In the DFT+DMFT method, the real part of the optical conductivity is computed as follows where e, V 0 , f , v μ (k), and A(k, ω) are the elementary charge, the volume of the unit cell, the Fermi-Dirac distribution function, the Fermi velocity along μ-direction, and the spectral function, respectively. Since Eq. (S1) contains the k-sum in the Brillouin zone, the Drude peak could be decomposed into each band character if the all band characters are well separated spatially in the Brillouin zone. Figure Figure Equation (S1) includes the spectral function A(k, ω) that is given by The Green's function G(k, ω) can be expressed as where δ, μ, ε DFT (k), and Σ(ω) are the broadening factor, chemical potential, DFT energy eigenvalue, and selfenergy, respectively. Therefore, the optical conductivity depends on the broadening factor δ. Note that there is additional broadening factor δ c for the correlated bands in addition to the self-energy. In the calculations, we set δ c = 0. Figures There is an issue of the effects of Nd 4f electrons in the infinite-layer nickelate NdNiO 2 When the 4f electrons in Nd is regarded as core electrons in nonmagnetic fashion, the electronic structures of both LaNiO 2 and NdNiO 2 are nearly identical near the Fermi level as demonstrated in Fig. Figure Figure We compute the optical conductivity for some different Coulomb repulsion U values. First, we provide the DMFT valence histogram for some different U values in Fig. Figure Our case for the Hund's metal type of correlations is based on a large number of additional observations besides the ratio of the optical spectral weight (i.e. K DMFT /K DFT ). We make our case for Hundness on the following additional considerations: the evolution of the optical spectral weight K DMFT with (1) temperature and (2) doping, (3) the DMFT valence histogram with enhanced high spin occupation, and (4) the strong dependence of the coherence scale with Hund's coupling J H . In addition, we found an orbital differentiation with a temperature dependence of the effective mass of the correlated d x 2 -y 2 orbital, which can be measured in optics. In fact, it is all these elements pointing towards the same picture together with the study of an easily measurable observable (optical conductivity) which makes a compelling case for the Hund's picture of the infinitelayer nickelates. Figure Figure Figure The quasiparticle weight Z and the quasiparticle scattering rate 1/τ qp = -ZImΣ(i0 + ) are depicted in Fig. Table The low-energy carrier number, n e , is defined by the volume of the Fermi surface. The dependence of the Fermi surface with doping is provided in Fig. In order to gain more insight into the role of Hund's rule correlation in the infinite-layer LaNiO 2 , we provide the DMFT valence histogram as a function of Hund's coupling J H as depicted in Fig. Figure The coherence temperature T coh manifests itself also in the T -dependent Fermi surface (FS), displayed in Fig. Figure where E imp , Σ imp (iω), ∆(iω), and E dc are the impurity level, the impurity self-energy, the hybridization function, and the double counting energy, respectively, which could be obtained from fully converged DFT+DMFT calculations. At the zero frequency, a large crystal field splitting of 2.90 eV is realized. It is due to the absence of apical oxygens. This large crystal field splitting becomes smaller as frequency becomes larger. Notice that there is the competition between the crystal field splitting and Hund's coupling within the Ni e g orbitals. Hence, Hund's physics becomes more favorable at higher frequencies. When the crystal field splitting becomes small and comparable to the strength of Hund's coupling J H ∼ 1 eV, a crossover from Mott to Hund region happens. This type of Hund's picture is also well captured in the DMFT valence histogram as shown in Fig. Figure Here we use the two-band model of Section to provide a brief qualitative understanding of the variation of the Hall coefficient R H with doping and temperature. The correlated d x 2 -y 2 band displays a coherence-incoherence crossover, whereas the uncorrelated hybridized band does not. This is reflected in the strong differentiation of the scattering rates (see Fig. This perspective is confirmed by Boltzmann transport theory calculations for the two-band model discussed above using the DMFT scattering rates of Fig. All this is in qualitative agreement with experiments [S25-S27], on the normal state R H of Nd 1-x Sr x NiO 2 . It shows a negative sign at all temperatures for x ≤ 0.15, while it undergoes a sign change for x ≥ 0.18. For x = 0.2, the sign change happens at ∼50 K. These aspects of the data are in qualitative agreement with our results. More quantitative description of the transport including the weak localization effects at low doping and low temperatures requires the inclusion of disorder effects which is outside the scope of this paper. 