The bulk-edge correspondence characterizes topological insulators and superconductors. We generalize this concept to the bulk-corner correspondence and the edge-corner correspondence in two dimensions. In the bulkcorner (edge-corner) correspondence, the topological number is defined for the bulk (edge), while the topological phase is evidenced by the emergence of zero-energy corner states. It is shown that the boundary-obstructed topological phases recently proposed are the edge-corner-correspondence type, while the higher-order topological phases are classified into the bulk-corner-correspondence type and the edge-corner-correspondence type. We construct a simple model exhibiting the edge-corner correspondence based on two Chern insulators having the s-wave, d-wave and s±-wave pairings. It is possible to define topological numbers for the edge Hamiltonians, and we have zero-energy corner states in the topological phase. The emergence of zero-energy corner states is observable by measuring the impedance resonance in topological electric circuits. Topological insulators and superconductors are one of the most studied fields in this decade We generalize this concept to the bulk-corner correspondence and the edge-corner correspondence. For definiteness we consider two-dimensional systems, although generalization to higher dimensions is straightforward 5 . In the bulkcorner (edge-corner) correspondence, the topological number is defined for the bulk (edge), while the topological phase is evidenced by the emergence of zero-energy corner states. There is a case where the topological number for the bulk is expressed in terms of two topological numbers for the two edges. It is proper to regard such a system to belong to the edge-corner-correspondence type. A typical example is given by systems having square lattice structure Here we summarize the properties whether the gap is open or closed in the trivial and topological phases in the system subject to the bulk-edge, bulk-corner and edge-corner correspondences as follows: bulk-edge: bulk-corner: edge-corner: where o and × indicate that the gap is open and closed; PTP stands for the phase-transition point. It is important to reexamine higher-order topological insulators The notion of boundary-obstructed topological phases was recently introduced In this paper, we construct a simple model realizing the edge-corner correspondence and the boundary-obstructed topological phase in order to make a clear understanding of these phenomena. The model consists of two Chern insulators with the opposite Chern numbers. We introduce pairing interactions including the s-wave, d-wave and s ± -wave pairing. The system has chiral symmetry. The topological class is BDI, which allows a topological phase in one dimension but none in two dimensions Model Hamiltonian: We start with the Chern insulator on square lattice, whose Hamiltonian is given by with Pauli matrices σ i , spin-orbit interactions λ x and λ y , and where t x and t y are hopping parameters, and μ is the chemical potential. We propose to construct a chiral symmetric model as where we assume a pairing Hamiltonian 20 in the form of with Here, ∆ 0 , ∆ d and ∆ s± are the gap parameters due to the swave, d-wave and s ± -wave pairings The Hamiltonian H has chiral symmetry, {H, τ y } = 0. The system has time-reversal symmetry, T H (k) T † = H (-k) with T = σ x τ x K, where K takes complex conjugation. The system has particle-hole symmetry, ΞH (k) Ξ † = -H (-k) with Ξ = σ x τ z K. Hence, the system belongs to the class BDI, where there is no topological phase in two dimensions Bulk: The energy spectrum of H is given by where is the energy of H Chern , and is the energy of H ∆ . The bulk-band gap is The bulk gap E never closes when the E Chern is gapped. We show the band structure for various ∆ d in Fig. Edge theory: We show the band structure of a nanoribbon for various ∆ d in Fig. We first construct the edge Hamiltonian along the y axis. We make a Taylor expansion at the Γ point and decompose the Hamiltonian (6) into the unperturbed Hamiltonian H 0 and the perturbed Hamiltonian H 1 , H = H 0 + H 1 , with where we have omitted insignificant k 2 y terms with m = μ -t x -t y . By taking an expectation value of H 1 by ψ, we obtain the edge Hamiltonian along the y axis as with where α = x, y; η x = 1 for the lower and η x = -1 for upper edges. The edge gap closes at ∆x = 0. Similarly we obtain the edge Hamiltonian for the x axis as where η y = 1 for the right and η y = -1 for left edges. The edge gap closes at ∆y = 0. Edge symmetries: The edge Hamiltonian H α has chiral symmetry, {H α , τ y } = 0. The system has time-reversal symmetry, T H (k) T † = H (-k) with T = τ x K, where K takes complex conjugation. The system has particle-hole symmetry, ΞH (k) Ξ † = -H (-k) with Ξ = τ z K. Hence, the system belongs to the class BDI, where there is a topological phase in one dimensions Edge topological numbers: The edge chiral index is defined by with α = x, y, which is a symmetry-protected-topological number associated with the chiral symmetry. With the aid of the relation it is calculated as We can differentiate the trivial and topological phases by the conditions ∆α > 0 and ∆α < 0, respectively. Corner theory: We calculate numerically the energy spectrum and show it as a function of ∆ d for square geometry in Fig. We study the corner states analytically. They are described by the Jackiw-Rebbi solutions The solution is obtained as Similarly, the zero-energy solution along the y-axis reads ψ y (y) = exp ∓(η y /λ y ) ∆y y . The wave functions are well defined when they converge, leading to the condition, The zero-energy corner states emerge only in this case. We construct the topological phase diagram in the ( ∆x , ∆y ) plane. As we have just derived, the condition for the emergence of the zero-energy corner states is given by ( We may define the topological number for the bulk, which reproduces the phase diagram determined in terms of ∆x ∆y . With the use of Γ α defined by ( where Γ xy = 1 for the trivial phase and Γ xy = -1 for the topological phase as in Fig. Electric-circuit realization: Electric circuits provide us with an ideal playground to realize various topological phases Electric-circuit realization is based on the correspondence LC so that the circuit Laplacian is identical to the Hamiltonian. Admittance is obtained by the eigenvalue of the circuit Laplacian The circuit Laplacian is explicitly given by with g 1 = iωC X e iky + (iωL X ) -1 e -iky + R -1 e ikx -e -ikx , g 2 = (iωL X ) -1 e iky + iωC X e -iky + R -1 e ikx -e -ikx , h = iωC ∆0 + iωC ∆x cos k x + iωC ∆y cos k y . It is straightforward to design electric circuits corresponding to this circuit Laplacian. We analyze the impedance Discussions: We have presented a classification of various higher-order topological phases based on the bulk-corner and edge-corner correspondences. We have constructed a simple model exhibiting the edge-corner correspondence, where topological numbers are defined for edges. It provides us with a clear picture of the boundary-obstructed topological phase transition. Furthermore, we have argued that the emergence of topological corner states is detectable by observing impedance peaks in topological electric circuit. The merit of electric circuits is that we can tune the values of elements relatively easily, which enables to realize a topological phase transition. Edge-Corner Correspondence: Boundary-Obstructed Topological Phases with Chiral Symmetry Motohiko Ezawa Department of Applied Physics, University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, 113-8656, Japan S1. Second-order topological phases in three dimensions The second-order topological phases in three dimensions are characterized by the phenomena that gapless hinge states emerge although the bulk and the surface are gapped. They are classified into the bulk-hinge-correspondence type and the surfacehinge-correspondence type according to the geometrical object upon which the topological numbers are defined. Hereafter, let us abbreviate the A-B-correspondence type as the A-B type. (i) In the bulk-hinge type, the bulk gap closes at the phase transition point. The topological number is defined for the bulk. (ii) In the surface-hinge type, the surface gap closes but the bulk gap remains to open at the phase transition point. The topological number is defined for the surface. These The third-order topological phases in three dimensions are characterized by the phenomena that zero-energy corner states emerge although the bulk, the surface and the hinge are gapped. They are classified into three types, the bulk-corner type, surface-corner type and the hinge-corner type, according to the geometrical object upon which the topological numbers are defined. (i) In the bulk-corner type, the bulk gap closes at the phase transition point. The topological number is defined for the bulk. (ii) In the surface-corner type, the surface gap closes but the bulk gap remains to open at the phase transition point. The topological number is defined for the surface. (iii) In the hinge-corner type, the hinge gap closes but the bulk and surface gaps remain to open at the phase transition point. The topological number is defined for the hinge. These 