Recently, halide perovskites have gained significant attention from the perspective of efficient spintronics owing to Rashba effect. This effect occurs as a consequence of strong spin-orbit coupling under noncentrosymmetric environment, which can be dynamic and/or static. However, there exist intense debates on the origin of broken inversion symmetry since the halide perovskites typically crystallize into a centrosymmetric structure. In order to clarify the issue, we examine both dynamic and static effects in the all-inorganic CsPbBr3 and organic-inorganic CH3NH3PbBr3 (MAPbBr3) perovskite single crystals by employing temperature-and polarization-dependent photoluminescence excitation spectroscopy. The perovskite single crystals manifest the dynamic effect by photon recycling in the indirect Rashba gap, causing dual peaks in the photoluminescence. But the effect vanishes in CsPbBr3 at low temperatures (< 50 K), accompanied by a striking color change of the crystal, arising presumably from lower degrees of freedom for inversion symmetry breaking associated with the thermal motion of the spherical Cs cation, compared with the polar MA cation in MAPbBr3. We also show that static Rashba effect occurs only in MAPbBr3 below 90 K due to surface reconstruction via MA-cation ordering, which likely extends across a few layers from the crystal surface to the interior. We further demonstrate that this static Rashba effect can be completely suppressed upon surface treatment with poly methyl methacrylate (PMMA) coating. We believe that our results provide a rationale for the Rashba effects in halide perovskites. Halide perovskites have emerged as "miracle" materials for optoelectronic applications because of their superior optical, electronic, and structural properties such as high absorption coefficient, Photon recycling requires a subgap state to cause dual-gap emission of the PL in halide perovskites. Although typical Urbach tailing can serve as a subgap state, an alternative mechanism was recently proposed to account for the dual nature in terms of additional indirect transition allowed by dynamic Rashba effect. In this paper, we aim to identify and even control the underlying mechanisms for inversion symmetry breaking that cause both dynamic and static Rashba effects in high-quality single crystals based on a series of precision spectroscopic measurements, which include nonlinear optical multiphoton absorption and harmonic generation. First, we precisely pinpointed the location of the indirect gap by fine-scale photoluminescence excitation (PLE) spectroscopy over a wide temperature range from 10 K to 300 K. The degree of Rashba splitting was assessed by the energy difference between the direct gap and the indirect gap, Our CsPbBr3 and MAPbBr3 single crystals were synthesized by the Bridgman Under the T mode, however, a completely different PL (red trace) was obtained from each sample in terms of both peak position and brightness. This drastic change in the PL arises from effective reabsorption of the main PL while traveling a macroscopic distance before exiting the sample (thickness ~2 mm). We attribute the origin for this subgap absorption to the indirect Rashba gap arising from dynamic inversion symmetry breaking in accordance with Ref. In order to determine the precise locations for λ and λ , we performed fine-scale PLE spectroscopy on our single crystals. Figures In order to study the temperature dependence of dynamic Rashba effect, we measured the PL as a function of temperature from 300 K to 10 K (Figures In Figures However, our OIHP single crystal exhibits a small but finite DOCP (~3%) near the exciton PL at 10 K as shown in Figure We have thoroughly investigated both dynamic and static Rashba effects in bromide AIHP and OIHP single crystals. Both perovskite single crystals exhibit dynamic Rashba effect as evidenced by the formation of the indirect gap via thermal distortion of the lattice. While the effect persists in MAPbBr3, dynamic Rashba splitting in CsPbBr3 disappears at low temperatures (< 50 K), which is accompanied by the apparent color change of the crystal. Based on circularly polarized PL spectroscopy, we have also examined static Rashba effect and found that only MAPbBr3 exhibits static Rashba effect with DOCP~3% at 10 K. The static inversion symmetry breaking occurs near the surface, not bulk, as confirmed by nonlinear optical harmonic generation and 2PA. We have identified that the underlying mechanism for static Rashba effect is surface reconstruction of MA cations, which was theoretically predicted and experimentally confirmed recently. 