Solution-processed quantum dots (QDs) have a high potential for fabricating low cost, flexible and large-scale solar energy harvesting devices. It has recently been demonstrated that hybrid devices employing a single monovalent cation perovskite solution for PbS QD surface passivation exhibit enhanced photovoltaic performance when compared to standard ligand passivation. Herein we demonstrate that the use of a triple cation Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.9Br0.1)3 perovskite composition for surface passivation of the quantum dots results in highly efficient solar cells, which maintain 96 % of their initial performance after 1200h shelf storage. We confirm perovskite shell formation around the PbS nanocrystals by a range of spectroscopic techniques as well as high-resolution transmission electron microscopy. We find that the triple cation shell results in a favorable energetic alignment to the core of the dot, resulting in reduced recombination due to charge confinement without limiting transport in the active layer. Consequently, photovoltaic devices fabricated via a single-step film deposition reached a maximum AM1.5G power conversion efficiency of 11.3 % surpassing most previous reports of PbS solar cells employing perovskite passivation. KEYWORDS hybrid perovskite, triple cation, quantum dots, solution-processing, solar cells Colloidal quantum dots (QDs) of semiconducting materials are a promising source for fabricating efficient photovoltaic devices offering low-cost ink processing, increased stability, and sizecontrolled bandgap tunability. exchange simplifies the process for device fabrication, and minimizes the use of solvents as compared to layer-by-layer spin-coating. Ligand exchange and perovskite shell formation. Oleic acid covered PbS QDs were synthesized via a hot injection method following a previously published recipe. Following ligand exchange and film deposition, the optical properties of the QD films were measured via UV-vis absorption spectroscopy. As can be seen in Figure . In both cases, the very thin shell of PbX2 and triple cation perovskite could not be resolved in the XRD measurements, similar to previous reports for single cation perovskite coatings. In order to visualize the triple cation perovskite shell on the QDs, we acquired high-angle annular dark-field scanning TEM (HAADF-STEM) images of the QD after ligand exchange. Figure layer was subsequently formed by single-step deposition of the CsMAFA-PbS QDs ink, followed by a 30 min annealing step at 100°C in air to complete the perovskite formation. The p-type hole extraction layer (EDT-PbS) was deposited via solid-state ligand exchange, followed by a 70 nm Au thermally evaporated electrode. The complete device structure can be seen schematically in The photovoltaic performance measured under 1 sun illumination (AM 1.5G) reveals that CsMAFA-PbS solar cells significantly outperform both the MAPbI3-PbS and PbX2-PbS reference devices. In particular, the short circuit current (JSC) and fill factor (FF) are significantly enhanced, resulting in a maximum power conversion efficiency of 11.3 % (Figure To monitor the stability of the devices, we followed the evolution of their photovoltaic performance over time. The unencapsulated devices were transferred from a nitrogen filled glovebox to ambient air for the first measurement and were stored later in air under no illumination for further testing. We observe that the CsMAFA-PbS devices show an enhanced performance after storage in air, similar to other types of PbS devices, such as PbX2-PbS. Active layer thickness optimization. In order to gain further insights into the origin of the improved current generation in the hybrid triple cation devices, we performed thickness dependent measurements of the photovoltaic performance. We varied the active layer thickness in the solar cells from 275 nm to 375 nm, in steps of 25 nm, while the bandgap of the QD active layer was kept constant. The results show an optimal thickness at around 350 nm, mainly due to the enhanced JSC (Figure CsMAFA-PbS 0.59 ± 0.01 (0.59) PbS devices to that of the reference devices: 250 nm and 325 nm for MAPbI3-PbS and PbX2-PbS devices, respectively. The current density at short circuit condition versus light intensity (Figure These results demonstrate that triple cation coating of PbS QDs results in suppression of recombination that takes place in the device's active layer. A possible explanation for this observation can be found in the core-shell energetics of the CsMAFA-PbS QDs. For this purpose, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) spectra of CsMAFA-PbS and PbX2-PbS QD solids were obtained (Figure Device Fabrication. ITO-on-glass substrates are cleaned using a sonication bath in acetone and isopropanol, followed by 10 min of oxygen plasma etching at 0.4 mbar and 100 W. Three layers of ZnO sol-gel are spin-coated on the substrate at 2500 rpm for 40 s and consecutively annealed at 100°C (first two layers, 10 min) and 300°C (last layer, 30 min). The CsMAFA-PbS active layer is spin-coated from the previously obtained dense ink at 2500 rpm for 30 s, and annealed at 100°C for 30 min. Two EDT-PbS layers are then spin coated on top to act as the hole extracting layer. The size of the EDT-PbS QDs was the same (same bandgap) as for the active layer. To form each, 20 l of OA-PbS solution (50 mg/ml) is spin-coated at 2500 rpm for 10 s, followed by adding 80 l EDT solution (1%vol in acetonitrile), and again spin-coated for 10 s at 2500 rpm. After 30 s, the surface is washed twice with acetonitrile. 70 nm of Au is then thermally evaporated to form the electrodes. The area of each solar cell is 4.5 mm 2 and there are 8 devices per substrate. UV-vis and FTIR Characterization. UV-Vis spectroscopy was performed on films using glass as a substrate in a JASCO UV-Vis V670 spectrometer. FTIR spectroscopy on single side polished Si substrates was measured with a JASCO FT/IR-4600 spectrometer. All measurements are carried out in ambient air at room temperature. J-V Characterisation. Current-density vs voltage sweeps were performed using a Keithley 2450 Source Measure Unit. J-V curves were recorded under an AM1.5G solar simulator (ABET Sun 3000 class AAA), which was corrected for spectral mismatch using a reference Si diode (NIST traceable, VLSI) and the corresponding EQE measurement. The measurements were carried out without a mask for the devices. The light intensity JV measurements were performed by using optical filters from Thorlabs with the corresponding optical densities. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured with monochromatic light from a halogen arc lamp from 350 nm to 1100 nm, using a calibration Si diode (NIST-traceable, Thorlabs). Samples were prepared on ITO-glass substrates and transferred to the ultrahigh vacuum chamber of a Thermo Scientific ESCALAB 250 Xi spectrometer. XPS experiments were performed with a XR6 monochromatic Al Kα source (hγ = 1486.6 eV) and a pass energy of 20 eV. The XRD measurements of the quantum dot films were conducted with a Rigaku SmartLab diffractometer with a 9kW rotating copper anode. 2D intensity maps were recoded using a 2D HyPix3000 detector in a coupled theta-2theta scan (beam collimator 0.5mmφ). The map was background corrected and a central profile was taken to obtain the intensity vs. 2theta diffractogram, which was normalized to account for variations in film thickness. Contributions from kβ line were stripped using the SmartLab Studio II software. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). SEM imaging of films and cross sections was performed using a JSM-7610F FEG-SEM (Jeol) at a chamber pressure <10 -6 mbar. Samples were mounted on standard SEM holders using conductive Ag paste to avoid sample charging. The top-view images were recorded using the secondary electron detector (LEI) at an acceleration voltage of 1.5 kV and the cross-sections using the SEI detector at an acceleration voltage of 5 kV. 