Space-time modulated metasurfaces have attracted significant attention due to the additional degree of freedom in manipulating the electromagnetic (EM) waves in both space and time domains. However, the existing techniques have limited wave control capabilities, leading to just a few feasible schemes like regulation of only one specific harmonic. Here, we propose to realize independent manipulations of arbitrarily dual harmonics and their wave behaviors using a space-time-coding (STC) digital metasurface. By employing different STC sequences to the reflection phase of the metasurface, independent phase-pattern configurations of two desired harmonics can be achieved simultaneously, which further leads to independent beam shaping at the two harmonic frequencies. An analytical theory is developed to offer the physical insights in the arbitrary dual-harmonic manipulations of spectra and spatial beams, which is verified by experiments with good agreements. The presented STC strategy provides a new way to design multifunctional programmable systems, which will find potential applications such as cognitive radar and multi-user wireless communications. Over the past decades, metamaterials comprising artificially engineered metallic or dielectric structures have attracted great attention owing to their customizable properties beyond the limitations of natural materials. The metamaterials have been widely investigated to provide unconventional ways to regulate the wave-matter interaction over subwavelength scale, leading to a myriad of exotic phenomena and promising applications Recently, the emergence of time-varying metasurface has extended the research to time dimension by modulating the EM characteristics in the time domain Here, we propose a new STC strategy to realize arbitrarily independent manipulations of dual harmonics and their spatial beams with the STC digital metasurface. By employing different STC sequences to the reflection phase of the metasurface, independent phase-pattern configurations of two desired harmonics can be achieved simultaneously, which further leads to independent beam shaping at the two harmonic frequencies without affecting the original power distribution of harmonics. We present a theoretical strategy of phase syntheses for arbitrary dual harmonics and introduce an analysis method of scattering patterns for wavefront shaping. Two illustrative examples are provided to demonstrate the capability of the proposed approach for independent controls of dual harmonics. The first one aims to realize orbitalangular-momentum (OAM) generation and beam steering at the +1 st and +2 nd -order harmonics, respectively; while the second example focuses on implementing different scattering patterns at the +1 st and -1 st -order harmonics, respectively. We design and fabricate a 16 × 8 STC metasurface sample loaded with varactor diodes as prototype system for experimental validation, showing good match to the theoretical results. The proposed theory and method will improve the potential of the STC digital metasurfaces in the applications of imaging, radar, and wireless communication systems. Phase synthesis method of arbitrary dual harmonics. We consider a reflective STC digital metasurface composing of M × N meta-atoms, as shown in Fig. where Γ(t) = A(t)exp [jψ(t)] is the periodic time-varying reflection coefficient of the metasurface, with A(t) and ψ(t) standing for the amplitude and phase, respectively. We remark that Eq. ( in which δ(f -f c ) denotes the Dirac delta function at f = f c . The periodic function Γ(t) can be further decomposed into a linear combination of harmonically related complex exponentials , i.e. the Fourier series, whence , where f 0 = 1 T ⁄ refers to the harmonic frequency determined by the function period T, and a k is the coefficient of the k th -order harmonic component. Therefore, Eq. ( The new equation indicates that the spectrum of the reflected wave is composed of a series of harmonics around the central frequency f c . According to the Fourier transform theory, the harmonic coefficient is given by where A k and Ψ k respectively represent the amplitude and phase of the k th -order harmonic wave at frequency f c + kf 0 . Theoretically speaking, the amplitude and phase distributions of arbitrary harmonic can be achieved with meticulously designed Γ(t). However, the strongly coupled amplitude and phase responses of the metasurface will constrain the feasibility of Γ(t) waveform, resulting in many difficulties in implementing arbitrary harmonic distributions in practice. Refs. [40, 42] introduced some feasible algorithms to realize flexible harmonic controls. Although they are capable of modulating both phase and amplitude at either the central frequency or harmonic frequency, they are still limited to only one specific harmonic. Here we refocus on Eq. ( Comparing Eqs. ( By solving the binary linear equations, the desired ψ 0 and t 0 are obtained respectively as The theoretical derivations clearly demonstrate different effects by ψ 0 and t 0 on the harmonic phases, which introduce a simple and effective method to implement the phase syntheses of arbitrary dual harmonics simultaneously. As an intuitive example, we select two harmonics (+1 st and +2 nd ) to realize 3-bit coding phases independently, where the eight digits (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7) correspond to eight phase states ( 0, 0.25π, 0.5π, 0.75π, π, 1.25π, 1.5π, 1.75π ). A parameter γ t 0 ψ 0 defined as γ t 0 ψ 0 = exp (jψ 0 )Γ(t -t 0 ) is introduced to conveniently denote the extra initial phase and time delay added to Γ(t). Accordingly, all corresponding 64 combinations of ψ 0 and t 0 added to Γ(t) for dual-harmonic independent 3-bit coding phase syntheses are listed in Table Here, E pq (θ, φ) = cos θ is the scattering pattern of the (p, q) th meta-atom at the central frequency f c , which is approximately a cosine function for simplicity where λ k = c (f c + kf 0 ) ⁄ is the wavelength of the k th -order harmonic frequency f c + kf 0 . According to the generalized Snell's law In order to realize the two matrices, e.g. Ψ m pq and Ψ n pq , the phase synthesis method proposed in Eq. ( The corresponding 2D and 3D scattering patterns at the +1 st and +2 nd -order harmonics are respectively shown in Figs. Design of the STC digital metasurface. According to previous derivations, the proposed phase synthesis method could be used to the maximum extent if the STC metasurface possesses a full range of phase tunability. Here, we use the metasurface in Ref. [30] to validate the proposed theory and method. The geometry of half meta-atom is firstly illustrated in Fig. In our experiments, the monochromic signal is generated by a microwave signal generator (Agilent E8257D) and then emitted through a horn antenna to illuminate the STC digital metasurface. As shown in Fig. From Figs. In summary, a novel STC strategy was proposed to synthesize multi-bit phases and manipulate wavefronts for arbitrary dual harmonics. Different from previous work of the STC metasurfaces that focus on generating and regulating one specific harmonic, both an initial phase and a time delay are employed in the periodic time-varying phase function to realize the flexible controls of two selected harmonics simultaneously. The novel idea has been analytically proved from theoretical analyses and two sets of dual-harmonic pairs were investigated and simulated as examples. Finally, a proof-of-concept system based on the STC metasurface was implemented