High-level first-principles computations predict blue phosphorene bilayer to be a two-dimensional metal. This structure has not been considered before and was identified by employing a blockdiagram scheme that yields the complete set of five high-symmetry stacking configurations of buckled honeycomb layers, and allows their unambiguous classification. We show that all of these stacking configurations are stable or at least metastable configurations both for blue phosphorene and gray arsenene bilayers. For blue phosphorene, the most stable stacking configuration has not yet been reported, and surprisingly it is metallic, while all other arrangements are indirect band gap semiconductors. As it is impossible to interchange the stacking configurations by translations, all of them should be experimentally accessible via the transfer of monolayers. The metallic character of blue phosphorene bilayer is caused by its short interlayer distance of 3.01 Å and offers the exceptional possibility to design single elemental all-phosphorus transistors. Since the first exfoliation of graphene and the discovery of its remarkable properties Both bluP and its arsenic congener grAs have a structure similar to graphene, which is a hexagonal lattice with their atoms alternatingly being displaced out of the 2D plane (Figure It is well-known that interlayer interactions can significantly alter the properties of 2D materials, most strikingly discussed recently for superconductivity in bilayer (BL) graphene Only a few studies addressed interlayer effects in bluP and grAs, and no details on the stacking order have been reported experimentally up to now Using block diagrams, we identify all possible highsymmetry stacking configurations of BL buckled honeycomb lattices, which are expected to yield all low-energy forms for bluP and grAs bilayers. Employing first principles calculations (densityfunctional theory (DFT), the Random Phase Approximation (RPA), and single-particle Green's function approach G 0 W 0 ), we calculated their structures, thermodynamic and kinetic stabilities, and explore their electronic structures. We discovered that the lowest-energy bluP BL was not yet reported to date and, surprisingly, it is Because both bluP and grAs crystallize in the trigonal lattice, we can describe a single layer in the subperiodic layer group P3 (#65) with the unique sites 1a = (0, 0, z), 1b = (1/3, 2/3, z 1 ) and 1c = (2/3, 1/3, z 2 ), where two sites are occupied with z 1 = -z 2 The lattice vectors ( a 1 and a 2 ) delimiting the twodimensional lattice are defined as 2 aŷ, where a is the lattice constant. Then the unit cells of any trigonal monolayer with a buckling can be represented as in Figure This block diagram is divided into three parts, and each of them specifies a site of the unit cell (1a, 1b, or 1c). The atoms occupy two of the three sites and the direction of the arrows is related to the buckling. So, to build a bilayer, one puts another block on the top. In this way, we identify the total number of different high-symmetry forms of corrugated honeycomb bilayer as five, where the stacking sequence of two of them is of AA-type, and for the remaining three it is AB-type (see block diagrams in Figure For BL bluP, only four different stacking configurations have been studied to date For all stable and metastable stacking configurations discussed in this work, full geometry optimizations yield similar structural parameters, independent on the density-functional, the choice of London dispersion correction scheme, the orbital representation (local basis functions vs. plane waves), or the underlying code (see Methods for details). In all but one case a single local minimum per stacking configuration is found. Only for the A 1 B -1 configuration of bluP we found two local minima: one minimum corresponds to a structure where the interlayer distance d is small (3.01 Å) and the structure shows small corrugation, corresponding to a smaller buckling height ∆z. We call this structure A 1 B -1 . The second structure (2-A 1 B -1 ) shows a larger interlayer distance of 4.93 Å, corresponding to weakly interacting layers, and larger buckling. Both for bluP and grAs BL the closer interlayer distance in A 1 B -1 is accompanied by a lattice constant increase of 0.1 Å and by a buckling reduction of ∆z ≈ 0.07 Å. The remainder of the struc- All investigated BL systems are significantly more stable than their ML counterparts and are unlikely to exfoliate without severe intrusion. For both bluP and grAs, the A 1 B -1 stacking configuration was found to be the most stable one. In both cases, this structure has distinct features making it quite different compared to the other configurations: It has the smallest interlayer distance and the smallest corrugation. The interlayer binding energy, defined as , exceeds 180 meV per atom in both cases (Table For bluP A 1 B -1 BL, we show an abrupt change in buckling height ∆z and the distance between layers d upon variation of lattice constant a, corresponding to the phase transition from the metallic configuration A 1 B -1 to the semiconducting configuration 2-A 1 B -1 (see Fig. While for BL bluP the configuration A 1 B -1 is by far the most stable one, for BL grAs two configurations are energetically competitive: A 1 A 1 and A 1 B 1 are only less than 26 meV per atom higher in energy. Relative energies with respect to the monolayers and with respect to the most stable bilayer forms are given in Table The phonon dispersion of the bluP and grAs MLs show the typical features of 2D materials, with two linear and one out-of-plane quadratic branches of the acoustic modes, and a clear energetic separation of optical and acoustic branches (Figure To substantiate the electronic band gaps, the electronic structures have been recalculated within the quasiparticle approach, using the single-shot G 0 W 0 approximation on top of PBE Kohn-Sham bands. Spin-orbit coupling (SOC) was included in all calculations for the grAs systems (see Table Most importantly, both DFT and G 0 W 0 identify bluP BL in the most stable configuration A 1 B -1 as a metal. All other systems are indirect band gap semiconductors, with the G 0 W 0 band gaps being considerably larger compared to those calculated by PBE. For BL bluP, electronic band gaps range from 2.39 to 2.82 eV, values that are lower than those of the ML (3.25 eV). For grAs, the A 1 B -1 low-energy form has a remarkably small band gap of 0.58 eV, while the other systems range from 1.38 eV to 2.04 eV, thus being somewhat narrower than that of the ML (2.30 eV). For all semiconducting bluP and grAs BLs we found an interesting competition of a parabolic band climaxing at the Γ point and a Mexican hat struc- ture around Γ point to become the VBM. The latter is obtained for bluP BL in A 1 A 1 and A 1 B 1 configuration (somewhat less pronounced for grAs BL). A similar Mexican hat structure has been reported for GaSe and other III-VI monolayers, and the small dispersion may be useful for small FET structures and could give rise to Landau levels We present a scheme to identify and to label all symmetrically distinct stacking configurations of corrugated honeycomb bilayers and investigate the resulting structures blue phosphorene (bluP) and gray arsenene (grAs). We discovered a new, and a the same time the most stable, configuration of bluP, which has a small interlayer distance, quenched corrugation and is a new member of the exclusive group of two-dimensional metals. Besides the most stable A 1 B -1 form, also A 1 A 1 and A 1 B 1 stacking configurations could be obtained experimentally by layer transfer techniques, as their large interlayer interaction and symmetry constraints prevent interconversion or relaxation into other structures. Lowersymmetry configurations as they are known for BL graphene are unlikely here due to the surface corrugation. This holds both for bluP and grAs. Except for the metallic bluP A 1 B -1 form, all investigated bluP and grAs bilayers are indirect band gap semiconductors and resemble the Mexican hat-type feature of the electronic bands near the valence band maximum which have been intensively discussed for III-VI-group mono-and multilayer systems. BluP shows a semiconductor-metal transition when go-ing from the ML to the most stable BL. Such transitions have been found for other 2D materials (e.g. noble metal chalcogenides To identify all potentially existing isomeric structures, we started geometry optimization with different starting structures, varying interlayer distances and buckling. All geometries have been fully optimized by means of DFT within the framework of the projector-augmented wave (PAW) method The valence states were expanded in plane-waves with an energy cutoff of 400 eV. The Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange-correlation functional was employed The same level was employed for the phonon calculations, for which we used the small displacement method as implemented in the Phon code Band structures have been calculated with G 0 W 0 Relative stabilities have been calculated from singlepoint energies of optimized structures on the grounds of PBE-MBD and PBE0-MBD, which give different stacking orders and required calculations beyond DFT (see Table 