Superconducting wires with broken time-reversal and spin-rotational symmetries can exhibit two distinct topological gapped phases and host bound Majorana states at the phase boundaries. When the wire is tuned to the transition between these two phases and the gap is closed, Majorana states become delocalized leading to a peculiar critical state of the system. We study transport properties of this critical state as a function of the length L of a disordered multichannel wire. Applying a nonlinear supersymmetric sigma model of symmetry class D with two replicas, we identify the average conductance, its variance and the third cumulant in the whole range of L from the Ohmic limit of short wires to the regime of a broad conductance distribution when L exceeds the correlation length of the system. In addition, we calculate the average thermal shot noise power and variance of the topological index for arbitrary L. The general approach developed in the paper can also be applied to study combined effects of disorder and topology in wires of other symmetries. Topological insulators hosting gapless excitations at their boundary have been the subject of intense studies during the last two decades Majorana fermion formation requires a superconductor with broken time-reversal and spin-rotation symmetries, a system of symmetry class D in the classification of Ref. Disorder, inevitably present in experimental realizations, affects the above picture in several ways. First, it may shift the position of the border between the topo-logical phases The third complication introduced by disorder is that the topological invariant q depends not only on the mean value of disorder strength but on its particular realization. As a result, for a given wire length L and for a fixed mean value of disorder strength, the topological number becomes a statistically distributed variable Direct experimental observation of quasiparticle transport in quantum wires of class D can be problematic due to shunting effects of the superconducting condensate. A possible way to address quasiparticle dynamics is by measuring thermal rather than electrical transport properties studied in a number of theoretical works The simplest description of quasiparticle transport in disordered quantum wires of class D in the vicinity of the topological transition is achieved for a single propagating transverse mode (one-channel case) where g is defined by the value of P (λ = 0): Equation ( The absence of self-averaging can be also seen by comparing the scaling of g with the stretch-exponential decay of the typical conductance, g typ = exp log g ∼ exp(-4 L/2πξ). Note that at the critical point considered, half of disorder realizations belongs to the trivial phase and another half belongs to the topological phase. At large L, the majority of realizations have an small conductance, g 1. However for relatively rare configurations (probability decreases as 1/ √ L) the sample is close to the phase transition with g ∼ 1, and these very configurations determine the average conductance g ∼ 1/ √ L, as well as all its higher moments. To understand the scaling g ∝ 1/ √ L, note that in the critical regime (μ = 0) the probability to get such near-critical configuration in the process of disorder sampling can be assessed as the ratio of the single peak width ∼ 1/L to the width of the peak centers distribution ∼ 1/ √ L (see Fig. In the multi-channel case, localization in quantum wires of class D was considered in Refs. With the contribution of other channels being exponentially suppressed, the conductance g = T 1 is determined by the most transparent channel, making this regime completely analogous to the one-channel model discussed above. Hence, in the limit L ξ, Eqs. ( A weak point of the DMPK approach is that it allows to calculate transport properties in the crossover between the Drude and localization regimes only in special cases. This happens when the underlying Fokker-Planck equation can be solved with the help of the Sutherland transformation: in class A In order to trace the dependence of conductance moments on the wire length L for class D, one should resort to a complimentary sigma-model technique In the following we will focus exclusively on the critical regime with completely suppressed kinks ( χ = μ = 0). This regime corresponds to the DMPK approach of Ref. 20 discussed above, which is characterised by an algebraic decay of the average conductance at L ξ given by Eq. ( In the present paper we make a next step in the analysis of quasiparticle transport in multi-channel quantum wires of class D at criticality and derive exact expressions for the conductance variance var g, its third cumulant, average noise power, and var det r at arbitrary L/ξ in the diffusive regime. Calculation of all those quantities requires averaging of four Green's functions that cannot be done within the one-replica supersymmetric sigma model considered in Refs. The main technical achievement of this paper is classification of radial eigenfunction of a higher-rank (several replicas) supersymmetric sigma model. We find that the straightforward approach for their construction outlined in Refs. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we summarize new physical results obtained in this work. In Sec. III we introduce the main mathematical ingredients required for construction of the heat kernel of the supersymmetric sigma model. The outlined procedure for class D with two replicas is implemented in Sec. IV, where we introduce an additional subfamily of radial eigenfunctions and discuss the behavior of eigenfunctions at particular lines needed to extract their normalization and behavior at the origin. The final expressions for the conductance variance, its third cumulant, shot-noise power and average square of the determinant of the reflection amplitude matrix are obtained in Sec. V. The technique developed and results obtained are discussed in Sec. VI. Important technical details are relegated to numerous Appendices. The results of our study are presented graphically in Figs. Figure The two-replica sigma-model also allows one to calculate the thermal shot noise power, which corresponds to counting quasiparticles irrespective of their charge and differs from a usual electrical shot noise power. We will characterise the former by the pseudo-Fano factor which is determined by the ratio of the average transport moments instead of the average ratio. The length dependence of F is shown in Fig. Here we calculate the second moment of the determinant, det 2 r , and demonstrate that it does not vanish at the critical line (where det r = 0). With the increase of the wire length L, it interpolates between 0 (short wires) and 1 (long wires), as shown Fig. In this preparatory Section, we outline the main steps towards calculation of g , g 2 , and g 3 in the sigmamodel formalism and introduce necessary mathematical concepts. Our analysis closely follows a pathway developed in Refs. In this Section, we will try to balance between generality and concreteness. On the one hand, we will keep our discussion as general as possible, without resorting to a particular basis (that will be done later in Sec. IV). Thus almost all formulas of this Section could be easily applied to other symmetry classes with an arbitrary number of replicas. On the other hand, some formulas below do rely on the particular symmetry class D with n = 2, both to illustrate the general formalism and to prepare ingredients for actual calculations in the next Sections. The sigma-model action for the N -channel quantum wire of class D in the critical regime has the usual form (ξ = 2N l is the correlation length) where Q ∈ BF ⊗ N ⊗ R is a supermatrix, which lies in the tensor product of the Bose-Fermi (BF), Nambu-Gor'kov (N) and replica (R) spaces, and is subject to the charge conjugation constraint Q = C T Q T C = -Q due to the particle-hole structure of the BdG Hamiltonian. The matrix C is orthogonal, CC T = 1, and satisfies where k distinguishes bosons and fermions and has the following structure in the BF space: k = {1, -1} BF . A special role in the theory is played by a selected matrix Λ (origin), satisfying Λ = -Λ, str Λ = 0 and Λ 2 = 1. The whole sigma-model manifold can be obtained by rotating Λ with elements T of a certain supergroup G: where Then the sigma-model manifold is a coset (symmetric space) G/K, where K is the subgroup in G that commutes with Λ: [K, Λ] = 0. For class D with n replicas, G is the supergroup SpO(n, n|2n), K is the supergroup U(n|n), so that the sigma-model manifold is the coset SpO(n, n|2n)/U(n|n). It generally consists of two disconnected submanifolds. For example, the supermanifold SpO(1, 1|2)/U(1|1) in the n = 1 case is a hyperboloid H 2 as its Bose-Bose (BB) sector and a set of two points (Z 2 ) in its Fermi-Fermi (FF) sector While the averaged conductance g can be calculated from n = 1 sigma-model, evaluation of its higher moments generally requires higher n. Nevertheless for most classes, g 2 (and hence var g) can be calculated already from n = 1 sigma-model, as in the supersymmetric approach two copies of the system (bosons and fermions) are averaged over disorder, each suitable for calculation of conductance in the noninteracting case Thus for calculation of g 2 and var g in class D one inevitably has to use the sigma model with two replicas (n = 2). Its supermanifold is SpO(2, 2|4)/U(2|2), with the BB sector being a rank-2 symmetric space Sp(2, 2)/U(2) and the FF sector being a rank-1 symmetric space O(4)/U(2) S 2 × Z 2 In the sigma-model language, the moments of conductance can be calculated by taking the derivative of the partition function with respect to an infinitesimal twist of the boundary conditions where Q L = Λ exp( θ) and the matrix of Cartan angles θ is defined in Eq. ( The number of Cartan parameters θ i depends on the number of replicas. Let N B (N F ) be the number of generators of Cartan algebra from the BB (FF) sector. For class D with n replicas, where the floor brackets • denote the integer part of a number (for even n, Eq. ( where the derivatives must be computed at the origin, θ i = 0 [higher moments would require a sigma-model with a larger n ≥ 3 number of replicas and thus more Cartan angles θ i ]. The pseudo-Fano factor ( Finally, the average squared determinant of the matrix of reflection coefficients equals the partition function in the so-called "south pole" point. As mentioned in Introduction, in the critical regime det r = 0, so that In order to calculate the averages listed above at arbitrary wire length, we will need two different parametrizations of the Q-matrix manifold: Cartan parametrization, which explicitly enters Eq. ( Cartan parametrization (also referred to as Efetov parametrization in the sigma-model context) is obtained by applying Cartan decompostion to the T matrix with respect to the involution T → ΛT Λ. That allows to decompose T = U 1 e θ/2 U , where U 1 and U commute with Λ (U ∈ K, U 1 ∈ K) and θ lies in the maximal abelian (Cartan) subalgebra of matrices from G that anticommute with Λ: {Λ, θ} = 0. Such a parametrization is redundant, so we choose U 1 to run over the whole group K and leave in U only the necessary number of parameters. The Q matrix does not depend on U 1 and acquires the form: According to Eq. ( where θ i are real on the sigma-model manifold. An important mathematical structure is the root system with respect to h i . It consists of matrices Z α , called root vectors, which are eigenvectors for all h i acting in the adjoint representation: [ θ, Z α ] = α(θ)Z α , where α is a linear function on the Cartan algebra, called a root. Positive roots are chosen as a subset R + that lies in a selected half-plane in the dual vector space. Peculiarity of supermanifolds with respect to the well-known noncompact symmetric spaces The root system is symmetric with respect to the socalled Weyl group, which is generated by reflections with respect to the planes perpendicular to each commuting root and thus acting in the dual Cartan space. Studying the action of the same group on the original Cartan space allows one to choose its minimal domain, which is called a Weyl chamber. The values of the Cartan angles θ in parametrization In the following, we will consider radial wavefunctions that depend only on θ i and obey the symmetries given by the Weyl group. In the supersymmetric case, the Weyl group consists of the BB and FF sectors. In class D with two replicas, FF part of the Weyl group ensures radial wavefunctions are even functions of θ F , while BB part is generated by sign flips of θ B1 , θ B2 and their interchange (θ B1 ↔ θ B2 ). That's why we will study radial functions only in one Weyl chamber, which we choose to be θ B1 ≥ θ B2 ≥ 0. The measure for Cartan parametrization ( where m α are roots multiplicities. Applied to class D with two replicas this formula yields: (15) Cartan parametrization is especially important since according to Eq. ( A standard method for evaluating the partition function The Hamiltonian is given by the Laplace-Beltrami operator on the sigma-model target space: where g αβ is the metrics induced by the expression dl 2 = (-1/2) str dQ 2 = g αβ dX α dX β , where X α are the coordinates on the sigma-model supermanifold The partition function which is obtained by solving it with the initial condition ψ(Q, x = 0) = δ(Q, Λ), where δ(Q, Λ) is a supersymmetric delta-function, which equals to 1 at the origin Knowledge of the eigenfunctions allows one to write down the spectral representation of the heat kernel: where summation also includes integration over continuous quantum numbers and μ ν are the coefficients of δ(Q, Λ) in the basis φ ν (Q) (see Sec. IV C). As both the Hamiltonian and the initial condition are invariant with respect to rotations by U ∈ K, so is the heat kernel: . Therefore only radial eigenfunctions of the Laplace operator (the ones that depend on Cartan angles θ i only) enter expression Then from Eq. ( The expansion of the heat kernel in terms of the eigensystem of the Laplace-Beltrami operator given by Eq. ( Fourier analysis for symmetric spaces has been developed by Harish-Chandra It is obtained by applying Iwasawa decomposition on T matrix: T = U I e ǎ/2 N , where [the generators ȟ are the same as in Eq. ( Note that choosing a particular set of positive roots breaks the symmetry between the variables a B1 and a B2 . For the choice specified in Appendix A 1 and shown in Fig. where ρ i are the components of the Weyl vector, dot product is defined by radial metrics g ij = (g ij ) -1 [see are the eigenfunctions of the radial Laplace operator: The radial eigenfunctions E. From Iwasawa to Cartan: general route zation In order to convert plane waves and solving the resulting set of equations. However, when expressed in terms of Cartan coordinates (θ, U ), the wave functions Due to the presence of Grassmann variables, the last part of Eq. ( However, as we discuss below, for class D with two replicas there exist yet another family of such exceptional "too symmetric" wave functions with one rather than three momenta that should be treated separately. This is the reason we refer to the process of radial eigenfunction construction from Iwasawa plane waves as isotropization rather than just averaging over the group K. Finally, we note that the overall normalization factor in Eq. ( The procedure of eigenfunction construction outlined in Sec. III D is generic for any symmetric space. But its implementation for a particular symmetry class requires some art of choosing the most appropriate parametrization. Moreover, the supersymmetry is known Now we specify a particular basis, which significantly simplifies further calculations. We arrange commuting and Grassmann variables according to the BF grading matrix k = diag{1, 1, -1, -1, -1, -1, 1, 1}, acting as ±1 on bosonic and fermionic variables, respectively. Following Ref. The crucial advantage of the chosen basis is that it allows for a simple and constructive solution of Eq. (30) for a(θ, U ), relying on the fact that positive root vectors can be chosen to be strictly upper triangular matrices. Then N and ΛN -1 Λ in Eq. ( e aB1+aB2-aF = sdet U -1 e θ U 1-3,1-3 . Successively applying Eqs. Radial wave functions in Cartan coordinates θ should be obtained by isotropization of plane waves e ipa(θ,U ) K over matrices U ∈ K according to Eq. To make analytical extraction of the large-θ asymptotics feasible, one has to choose a very special parametrization of matrix U ∈ K. Inspired by Helgason's derivation in the nonsupersymmetric case where U BB = e iα b1 w b1 e iβ b1 w b2 e iα b2 w b1 e iβ b2 w b2 , U g = e wg1 e wg2 = (1 + w g1 )(1 + w g2 ), the generators w b1 , w b2 , w F , w g1 , w g2 are a sum of a pair of opposite root vectors defined in Appendix A 1, and α b1 , β b1 , α b2 , β b2 , α F are real numbers, which belong to the domains α b2 , β b2 ∈ [0, π] and α b1 , β b1 , φ F ∈ [0, 2π] [the domains follow from the position of the singular points of the Jacobian (36)]. The most delicate part is to parametrise the BB sector, U BB . It appears that the proper way (allowing to obtain tractable integrals for the large-θ i asymptotics) is to act with the two generators, formed from the so-called simple roots in an alternating way (see Ref. In this parametrization the Haar measure for the group K corresponds to the following Jacobian It is this factorization of the Jacobian J U into the product of simple trigonometric functions that along with the similar integrand structure following from Eq. ( The general theory of noncompact symmetric spaces Then proper eigenfunctions are then parametrised by q 1 ≥ q 2 ≥ 0 and l = 0, 1, . . . (see Secs. IV B 3 and IV C 2). For noncompact symmetric spaces, the described procedure yields the complete basis of radial eigenfunctions An explicit expression for three-parametric functions φ q1q2l (θ) is unknown as the integral (31) over the group K cannot be calculated for arbitrary θ i . Nevertheless it is possible to demonstrate that it vanishes at a special line θ B2 = θ F = 0 due to the fact that not more than six out of eight Grassmann variables are present in every monomial of the integrand. The same is true for the line θ B1 = θ F = 0 due to the Weyl group symmetry. However, it does not belong to the chosen Weyl chamber θ B1 ≥ θ B2 ≥ 0 and thus should not be considered. Mentioned nullification means that three-parametric radial functions along with the unit function 1 do not constitute a complete basis. So, for example, δ(Q, Λ) cannot be expanded in φ q1q2l (θ) and 1 at least at the mentioned line, which is the first arising issue. The second issue is that putting q 2 = l = 0 and leaving only q 1 also nullifies the integral The modification of the parametrization should make every term in the integrand of (31) lack the same subset of Grassmann variables, so that we can omit integration over them in the process of izotropization. We achieve that by using the parametrization ( To sum up, for class D with two replicas, there exist three families of radial eigenfunctions: • three-parametric functions φ q1q2l (θ), which are obtained by averaging over the full group K (vanish at the "bosonic line" θ B2 = θ F = 0); • one-parametric functions φ q1 (θ), arising when a plane wave in Iwasawa coordinates does not depend on some Grassmann variables and integration over them is not performed (izotropization); remarkably, this family is closely related to the eigenfunctions of the transfer-matrix Hamiltonian for the sigmamodel of class D with one replica, as we show below (vanish at the origin θ B1 = θ B2 = θ F = 0); • unit function 1, corresponding to the trivial plane wave 1 in Iwasawa coordinates, which should not be integrated over Grassmann variables at all. This situation is to be contrasted with the case of class D with one replica, when the only nontrivial oneparametric family φ q (θ B ) can be obtained in a standard way by averaging over the full group K We suppose that there are no other eigenfunctions of the Laplacian. We check this statement in Appendix D. The eigenvalues of the obtained wavefunctions are given by ( As mentioned above, the functions φ q1q2l (θ) and φ q1 (θ) cannot be obtained in a closed form. Resorting to computer algebra system, we are able to calculate their values explicitly only in some particular cases, where two of three Cartan angles θ i are set to zero ("bosonic" and "fermionic" lines) and in the large-θ asymptotic regime. Below we present behavior of radial functions on these lines and discuss their asymptotic behavior at large and small θ. Expressions for these particular cases will be sufficient to calculate physical observables (conductance and its variance): large-θ i asymptotics allows to determine integration measure μ ν in Eq. ( The values at the "bosonic line" simplify determination of the measure for one-parametric wavefunctions and illuminate connection between n = 2 and n = 1 sigmamodels. 1. "Bosonic line" (θB2 = θF = 0) Three-parametric radial wavefunctions vanish at the "bosonic line": φ q1q2l (θ B1 , 0, 0) = 0. As the "bosonic line" contains only one BB angle θ B1 (like in the n = 1 case) and one-parametric functions depend only on one momentum q 1 (like in the n = 1 case), one may expect that at the "bosonic line" the sigmamodel with two replicas reduces to the sigma-model with one replica. Such a reduction indeed takes place, and it can be proved by studying the action of the Laplacian on the wave function. To this end, we substitute the expansion of the wavefunction in the vicinity of the "bosonic line" (θ B2 1, θ F 1), into Eq. ( Here ∆ (1) is the one-replica radial Laplacian with the one-replica Jacobian J (1) (θ B1 ) = coth(θ B1 /2), which can be obtained from Eq. ( where λ 1 = cosh θ B1 and P ν (z) is the Legendre function. The corresponding eigenvalues are given by Eq. ( In the asymptotical region θ B1 1 one-parametric eigenfunctions φ q1 behave as with the coefficient c q1 (Harish-Chandra c-function) This function is used to obtain the integration measure μ q1 in the heat kernel 2. "Fermionic line" (θB1 = θB2 = 0) Three-parametric radial eigenfunctions on the "fermionic line" θ B1 = θ B2 = 0 can be obtained by taking the integral Using identities for the Legendre function allows us to bring the obtained expression to a compact form: where λ F = cos θ F . For one-parametric functions at the "fermionic line" we get: 3. Asymptotic behavior at θB1 θB2 1 In the limit θ B1 θ B2 1, three-parametric wavefunctions behave as where the coefficients C q are defined in where the sum is taken over all possible sign choices [four for each term in Expression Small-θ i expansion of the wavefunctions can be regularily obtained from the integral Having identified the families of radial eigenfunctions, we can rewrite the general expression where μ q1 and μ q1q2l are integration measures that will be determined below. A few comments are in order here. First, the unit eigenfunction enters with the coefficient 1 in order to respect the boundary condition ( For noncompact symmetric spaces without Grassmann variables, the integration (Plancherel) measure μ is determined by asymptotic behavior of wavefunctions As in our convention the wavefunctions 1. One-parametric eigenfunctions, φq 1 (θ) For one-parametric eigenfunctions the generalization of the noncompact-case expression for the measure is rather straightforward: which is valid provided that φ q1 (θ) is normalized such that its behavior at the "bosonic line" is given by Eq. ( 2. Three-parametric eigenfunctions, φ q 1 q 2 l (θ) For three-parametric wavefunctions the generalization of the nonsupersymmetric formula for the measure is a bit more intricate. The suggested procedure First we need to consider completely noncompact theory by taking analytically continued asymptotics at big negative imaginary θ F . Substituting θ F = -iθ F and using asymptotical behaviour of the Legendre function at large argument one gets that at θ B1 θ B2 θ F 1 the wavefunction, accompanied by the √ J factor behaves as: which corresponds to a normalisable wavefunction at real q 1 , q 2 and l = -1/2 + l F with imaginary l F . Harish-Chandra c-function is given by where cq1q2l was defined in In the original theory with real θ F proper values of q 1 and q 2 (corresponding to normalisable wavefunctions) are also real, which justifies if the overall numerical factor in the wavefunction is chosen according to where T q = q tanh πq . Now we are in position to compute quasiparticle transport properties of the superconducting wire in class D. This is done by substituting the partition function This procedure yields the following expressions for the average conductance, its second and third moments: where the eigenvalues q and q1q2l are listed in defining the contribution of one-parametric eigenfunctions have the form: The contribution of three-parametric eigenfunctions is described by the polynomials R R where M = (l 2 + 4q 2 1 )(l 2 + 4q 2 2 ) and B m = 5 + l(4 + ml) + 4q 2 1 + 4q 2 2 . The obtained expression for the average conductance g coincides with that calculated from the one-replica sigma model The asymptotic behavior of the conductance moments in the long-wire limit, L ξ, is determined by the first term in Eq. ( where g L = 2ξ/πL. The leading asymptotics in Eqs. In the short-wire limit, L ξ, both subfamilies of the radial eigenfunctions contribute to g 2 and g 3 . However it is known to be easier to extract analytical expressions for the short-wire asymptotics not from the general formula In the process of var g calculation, two leading terms proportional to 1/L 2 and 1/L completely cancel, as expected for universal conductance fluctuations At arbitrary wire length L, the average conductance and its variance should be calculated numerically. The results are presented in Figs. The pseudo-Fano factor (4) given by Eq. ( q1q2l . (64) The resulting dependence of the pseudo-Fano factor F on the wire length is shown in Fig. As mentioned in Introduction, coinciding asymptotic values of 1/3 are explained by the fact that both limits are described by the bimodal Dorokhov function (1), giving the total density of many transmission eigenvalues at small L (Drude regime, self-averaging Fano factor) and the distribution function of one most transparent channel at large L (critical regime, strong fluctuations). The variance q1q2l . (66) The dependence of var det r on the wire length is shown in Fig. The property lim L→∞ var det r = 1 means that even in the critical regime most of the samples demonstrate insulating behaviour, being deep either in the topological or trivial phases. As var det r is determined by the heat kernel at the south pole In the present paper, we performed an extensive study of quasiparticle transport in disordered multichannel (N 1) quantum wires of symmetry class D, which can be implemented in superconductors with broken time-reversal and spin-rotation symmetries, where quasiparticles determine thermal rather than electrical conductance. This symmetry class allows for two distinct topological phases, depending on the parameters of the Hamiltonian. At large lengths both phases are subject to Anderson localization, while the critical regime realised at the boundary between the two phases demonstrates a peculiar "delocalization" behavior, in which average transport properties are determined by rare configurations, described by the Dorokhov distribution for the most transparent channel. The average conductance g in quantum wires of class D was calculated in Refs. In our work, we make a next step towards full statistical description of quantum transport in class D and generalized previous studies by calculating higher-order moments of the conductance: its variance and the third cumulant. Extracting these quantities requires the use of a more complicated nonlinear supersymmetric sigma model with two replicas (n = 2), which has never been analyzed before for the symmetry class D, to the best of our knowledge. The supersymmetric sigma model with two replicas is defined on the symmetric supermanifold of rank three (i.e. with three Cartan angles), making it possible to access conductance moments up to the third order. Interestingly, our results for both var g (Fig. The n = 2 sigma model analyzed in the present work is also suitable for describing the full distribution of transmission probabilities and hence allows to extract the full counting statistics (FCS) of the wire. The distribution of transmission probabilities can be expressed in terms of the heat kernel in the vicinity of the "supersymmetric line" θ B1 = θ B2 = -iθ F . The peculiarity of the symmetry class D is that the FCS generating function (B1) cannot be deduced from the n = 1 sigma model, whose compact sector is essentially empty and the corresponding Cartan angle is lacking. Therefore the theory with n = 2 is the minimal model for extracting the FCS. A very complicated structure of the integral representation of the eigenfunctions Finally, we calculate the variance of the determinant of the matrix of reflection amplitudes (see Fig. Average quasiparticle conductance and its moments can be accessed via heat flow measurements as in Ref. Mesoscopic fluctuations of the transport properties can be studied on a single sample by varying some external parameters such as magnetic field or gate voltage. This variation should be performed according to a special protocol to keep the system at the critical state between the two topologically distinct phases. Such a sweep will perform an effective averaging over disorder realizations and allow to gain the necessary statistics. From a technical perspective, our calculation is based on the construction of the full set of eigenfunctions of the radial Laplace-Beltrami operator on the sigma-model supermanifold of class D with two replicas. This task is accomplished by using the Iwasawa decomposition of the corresponding supergroup G and subsequent averaging of the radial plane waves in Iwasawa coordinates with respect to the rotations by the subgroup K. This approach was first proposed in Refs. We have observed that for the supersymmetric sigma model of class D with two replicas there are exist two distinct subfamilies of eigenfunctions aside from the special zero mode (identically unity on the whole manifold). One generic eigenfunction family is parametrized by three components of momentum, in accordance with the presence of three Cartan angles. The peculiarity of class D with two replicas is that all these eigenfunctions identically vanish on the special "bosonic line" θ B2 = θ F = 0. A smaller one-parameter subfamily of eigenfunctions remains finite on this line and is intimately related to the eigenfucnctions of the model with one replica. The latter model has only one Cartan angle corresponding to θ B1 and "lives" exactly on the "bosonic line". Interestingly, the spectrum of the one-parameter subfamily is gapless contrary to the three-parametric set of eigenfunctions. Hence most properties of the wire in the limit L ξ are dominated by the one-parameteric subfamily. It is instructive to compare our analysis of radial eigenfunctions of the sigma model for class D with two replicas with that for the orthogonal (AI) and symplectic (AII) symmetry classes in the one-replica case From the structure of our results we conclude that such a hierarchical organization of eigenfunctions is generic and applies to supersymmetric sigma models of all classes with an arbitrary number n > 1 of replicas. Namely, the full set of eigenfunctions in each of these models includes as special subsets eigenfunctions of the model with fewer replicas (properly extended to a manifold with a larger dimensionality). The special unit eigenfunction that exists in sigma models of all classes and is constant (independent of all Cartan angles) can be also viewed as such a special subset corresponding to the model with zero replicas. One interesting possible extension of our results include quantum wires with topologically protected channels. Physically, this corresponds to edge transport in 2D topological insulators and superconductors. Wires of symmetry classes A, C, and D can host any integer number of protected channels that corresponds to the Z topology. In classes AII and DIII the topological index is Z 2 that corresponds to a single protected channel in the case when the total number of channels is odd. The presence of topologically protected channels leads to the appearance of a Wess-Zumino-Witten (WZW) term in the sigma-model action and modifies the spectrum of corresponding eigenfunctions. Quasiclassical description of wires with protected channels was developed in Ref. 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 -1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 -1 0 0 0 0 0 -1 0 0 0 0 0 0 -1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Then the Cartan algebra can be parametrised as follows: ) The metrics g αβ on the sigma-model supermanifold is defined via the length element The radial Laplacian ( A crucial advantage of the chosen basis is that it allows to choose positive root vectors so that they are upper triangular matrices. We summarise thus selected positive roots in Table In the BB sector, a special role is played Fermionic (mα = -2) α Zα α Zα,1 Zα,1 2θB1 Ξ18 θB1 + iθF Ξ15 -Ξ38 Ξ16 + Ξ48 2θB2 Ξ27 θB1 -iθF Ξ13 -Ξ48 Ξ14 + Ξ68 2θF Ξ36 + Ξ45 θB2 + iθF Ξ25 -Ξ37 Ξ26 + Ξ47 θB1 + θB2 Ξ17 -Ξ28 θB2 -iθF Ξ23 -Ξ57 Ξ24 + Ξ67 θB1 -θB2 Ξ12 -Ξ78 FIG. We parametrise the K group (see Sec. III A) by the generators w α that are formed as a sum of a root vector Z α and its counterpart Z -α , corresponding to the opposite root -α . In other words, we make a Λ-commuting matrix from each positive root: In Sec. IV we use short-cut notations w b1 = w 2θ B2 , w b2 = -iw θ B1 -θ B2 , and w F = w 2θ F for the generators of the U group in the BB and FF sectors, and the following in the form of a series (constant term drops in all eigenfunctions except the unity) Substituting Eq. (C2) into Eq. ( (1 + 3 )a 1 + 24(a 2 + a 1,1 ) = 0, The general form of an eigenfunction (C2) together with the above relations allows to express different derivatives of φ via θ F -derivatives and eigenvalue only: where ∂ i = ∂/∂θ i , ∂ (α) = (∂ i α)g ij ∂ j denotes the derivative in the direction α, and the dot product is defined with respect to the metrics g ij [see Eq. ( The idea behind a perturbative construction of the heat kernel ψ(θ i , L) is that for L ξ relevant θ are small, and the Laplacian can be well approximated by its Euclidean version acting in the tangent plane: where both terms scale as θ -2 . If we now replace ∆ rad by ∆ E rad , the Schrödinger equation ( where H 1 = θ 2 B1 + θ 2 B2 + 2θ 2 F is the first in the family of invariant polynomials (C1). The absence of a usual prefactor ∝ L -d/2 in the heat kernel (E3) is a consequence of the supersymmetry of the theory, which makes it effectively zero-dimensional, d = 0. To improve the approximation (E3), one has to take into account the curvature of the sigma-model manifold, i.e. the difference between ∆ rad and ∆ E rad . For symmetry reasons, the heat kernel is expressed only in terms of the invariant polynomials (C1). Writing it as a series with L-dependent coefficients b i and expanding the Schrödinger equation in ∆ rad -∆ E rad , one can extract short-wire asymptotics order by order: Substitution the perturbative heat kernel (E4) to Eqs. ( 