Recently, there has been a growing interest in the usage of mm-scale composites of plasmonic nanoparticles for enhancing the rates of chemical reactions; the effect was shown recently to be predominantly associated with the elevated temperature caused by illumination. Here, we study the dependence of the temperature distribution on the various parameters of these samples, and provide analytic expressions for simple cases. We show that since these systems are usually designed to absorb all the incoming light, the temperature distribution in them is weakly-dependent on the illumination spectrum, pulse duration, particle shape, size and density. Thus, changes in these parameters yield at most modest quantitative changes. We also show that the temperature distribution is linearly dependent on the beam radius and the thermal conductivity of the host. Finally, we study the sensitivity of the reaction rate to these parameters as a function of the activation energy and show how it manifests itself in various previous experimental reports. These results would simplify the optimization of photocatalysis experiments, as well as of other energy-related applications based on light harvesting for heat generation. Metal nanoparticles (NPs) have been studied extensively during the last few decades because of their ability to confine and enhance the electromagnetic field to a sub-wavelength scale. They have found a wide variety of applications, as detailed in some recent reviews and especially those relevant for high temperatures Due to the limited availability of high resolution thermometry techniques (see e.g., discussion in More recent studies initiated a characterization of the collective thermal response arising in the presence of a large number of NPs In this Article, we re-enforce this view of the temperature distribution emanating from illuminated metal NP ensembles and deepen the related physical insights of such systems. Specifically, as a generic example, we calculate the temperature distribution in a typical sample used in plasmonassisted photocatalysis experiments. We discuss the sensitivity of the temperature rise and its gradient to various parameters. In particular, we show that for the optically-thick samples which are typical for light-harvesting applications for heating purposes, the temperature rise can be significant even for low illumination levels, and that severe temperature gradients can develop within the samples. We also show that under these conditions, differences related with particle size, shape and density all make, at most, modest quantitative changes. We further show that thermal effects are expected to provide a shallow spectral dependence of reaction rate enhancement, except for cases in which the sample is optically thin and/or the activation energy is high. Finally, we show that the steady-state temperature distribution is determined by the average illumination intensity, such that the temporal pattern, being CW or pulsed, does not affect that distribution. These results show that claims about the great importance of any of these parameters, or about differences between configurations (e.g., involving gas or liquid hosts, on-or off-resonance illumination, pulsed or CW illumination, large or small NPs etc.) being responsible for qualitative changes in the temperature distribution and reaction rate should be taken with a grain of salt, and better re-examined using quantitative thermal calculations such as those described in the current manuscript. An exception is the sensitivity to the thermal conductivity of the host, which is inversely linear, as well as to the beam radius, which is essentially linear. For the specific application of plasmon-assisted photocatalysis, our study is an important step towards a better understanding of thermal effects in conventional photocatalytic experiments especially when re-evaluating thermal effects in previous studies that argued for the dominance of non-thermal effects The paper is organized as follows. We first describe the configuration and the basic assumptions of the model, and develop the model equations for the temperature rise. We then proceed by showing the generic temperature rise distribution and its sensitivity to the various system parameters. Then, we provide a discussion of the results and a comparison to previous experimental works. Finally, we conclude the paper with a brief outlook. The typical samples used for plasmon-assisted photocatalysis usually consist of a large number (∼ 10 12 -10 14 ) of few nm metal NPs randomly distributed within a disc-shaped porous metal oxide of a few mm in size. Importantly, such systems are usually designed to be optically-thick such that all the illumination energy is absorbed; the reaction rate is then enhanced due to the elevated temperature The NPs are heated by either a CW or a pulsed illumination with a beam spot radius of ρ b . For monochromatic CW illumination (pulsed illumination), we denote the angular frequency (central angular frequency) by ω = 2πc/λ, where λ is the wavelength and c is the speed of light in vacuum; the illumination intensity (time average illumination intensity) of the laser is denoted by Under monochromatic CW illumination of low intensity, the temperature distribution can be obtained by properly summing the heat generated by all NPs in the system e -z j /δ skin (ω) |r jr i | , for NP at r i , I inc σ abs (ω) 4πκ h j e -z j /δ skin (ω) |r j -r| , for r in the host. ( Here, z i is the z-coordinate of the position of i-th NP, σ abs is the absorption cross-section of the NP, and δ skin is the skin (penetration) depth (equivalently, the inverse of the absorption coefficient) experienced by the incident beam; it can be approximated by the NP density and absorption cross-section as ( It has been shown In these cases, the overall temperature rise is larger when the particle density increases. These configurations might be useful from the physical perspective (e.g., when attempting to identify the origin of chemical reactions 3 Results We consider a configuration which consisted of a Au NP ensemble immersed in a host material with ε h = 1.44 and κ h = 50.3 mW/(m•K) corresponding to porous oxide host. Initially, we assume that the NP size has a radius of a = 6 nm, the (average) inter-particle spacing is d = 225 nm, the thickness of the NPs array is H = 1 mm, the NPs are illuminated at λ = 532 nm with I inc = 80 mW/cm 2 and an illumination spot area of πρ 2 b = 1 cm 2 . We calculate the temperature distribution of the system by a numerical solution of Eq. ( The absorption and scattering cross-sections of the Au NPs in the sample are calculated by using the permittivity from 2 NPs larger than 20 nm in radius give rise to significant scattering. In this case, if the NP density is relatively low, as in this study, one can model the light intensity in the catalyst sample by using the effective medium approach accounting the multiple scattering than at the edges because this region benefits from heat arriving from all directions, whereas in the periphery, it arrives only from the center. This temperature nonuniformity shows that a standard normalization of the reaction rates in photocatalysis by the catalyst mass (as e.g., in Then, we sum the contributions from each NP and obtain ∆T top = 44.2 K, very close to the result of the regular NPs array. This shows that the randomness of the arrangement of a very large number of NPs has an insignificant effect on the overall temperature rise, thus, justifying the effective medium approximation of the heat source. The summation over NPs in Eq. ( Here, ρ 0 = min(ρ b , D/2) represents the radius of illuminated NPs (see details in Supplementary Information Section ??) and H is the sample thickness. In experiments, the beam size is typically set to ρ b D/2 so that all the illumination energy can be absorbed. In this case, one can simply replace ρ 0 by ρ b . For the photocatalyst sample shown in Figure In contrast, for thin samples (e.g., a monolayer of NPs, e.g., in Thus, in comparison to the heating of a single NP by a plane wave, the heat generation from the additional NPs causes the enhancement of the temperature rise by a factor of 2πρ 0 a/d 2 . Eq. ( and the temperature rise is proportional to the absorption cross-section, i.e., they have the same spectral dependence. However, as mentioned in Section 2, these configuration are of less relevance to applications of plasmon-assisted photocatalysis or light harvesting. In what follows, we study the sensitivity of the temperature profile to the various parameters of the system. One can see that when d < 225 nm, δ skin /H < 0.2 such that more than 99% of the photon energy is absorbed (see Figure In a similar manner, we now study the size-dependence of the overall temperature rise by calculating the energy absorbed by the sample and ∆T top for the photocatalyst sample shown in ∆T depends weakly on the particle size when a > 5 nm (a > 15 nm) but it decreases strongly with decreasing particle size when a < 5 nm (a < 15 nm). Moreover, the NP-size-dependence of ∆T top can be again explained by the relation between absorbed energy and the ratio of the skin depth to the sample thickness via Eq. ( To study the wavelength-dependence of the overall temperature rise, we now assume that the photocatalyst sample shown in Figure The ∆T top at the plasmonic resonance wavelength is only 4% higher than the short wavelength shoulder. However, for λ > 610 nm, δ skin /H > 2, so that the illumination energy absorbed by the sample and the overall ∆T are roughly proportional to H/δ skin , thus roughly proportional to σ abs . This wavelength-dependent behavior is strictly different from the case of single particle system in which the temperature rise is proportional to the (spectrally narrow) absorption cross-section. The wavelength-dependent ∆T top obtained by the approximate analytical solution Eq. ( Accordingly, such specific simulations are not shown. The dependence of the overall temperature rise on the illumination beam radius can be separated into two distinct regimes, depending on the relative size of the beam spot with respect to the sample surface. In each regime, one can vary the beam size with either the illumination intensity or the illumination power being fixed. When the beam radius is smaller than the sample radius, i.e., when ρ b < D/2, the number of the NPs under illumination is proportional to the beam spot area such that we set ρ 0 = ρ b in Eq. ( If the illumination power is fixed, then, when the beam radius decreases, the illumination intensity increases but the total illumination energy remains the same, so that the overall temperature rise is higher, see Figure Notably, the different scaling of the temperature rise with the beam size also differ from the scaling of non-thermal effects with the beam size Unlike the weak dependence of the overall temperature rise ∆T on the parameters discussed in the previous subsections, it exhibits a strong dependence on the thermal conductivity of the host κ h ; specifically, it is inversely proportional to it (see Eq. ( We now turn attention to the temperature rise dynamics of the catalyst sample under a pulse train illumination and the sensitivity of the results to the various system parameters. We consider a pulse train illumination with (time) average intensity I inc = 80 mW/cm 2 (as for the CW case above), pulse repetition rate f = 80 MHz, pulse duration τ = 4 ps and peak intensity During each single pulse event, the inner temperature of each NP increases due to photon absorption, then the inner NP temperature decays due to heat transfer to the host. This heat diffusion from the (many) other NPs keeps the sample warm until all the thermal energy diffuses out of the sample. The spatio-temporal evolution of the sample temperature under a pulse train illumination can be obtained by the linear combination of many solutions of (time-shifted) single pulse events (see details in Supplementary Information Section ??). Since the pulse repetition rate is faster than the overall decay time to the environment, the temperature is increasing in a step-wise fashion. This heat accumulation finally slows down and the temperature reaches a "steady-state" at ∼ 45 K on a time scale of a few minutes to a few hours, as shown in Figure Figure Indeed, we show in Supplementary Information Section ?? that the rise ∆T top mp can be approximated by This prediction is found to be in excellent agreement with the numerical results, see Figure Importantly, pulsed and CW cases give the same result of temperature rise in the "steady-state" (compare Eqs. ( Eq. ( In the previous sections, we studied the parametric dependence of a simplified model using a uniform host. For realistic configurations in which the material of the catalyst sample and of its surrounding are usually different, the thermal conductivity can be highly non-uniform. In these cases, it requires numerical methods, such as finite element method, solving the heat equation to achieve accurate temperature distribution. However, as shown in Supplemental Information Section ??, the dependence of the energy absorbed by the sample on the particle size, on the inter-particle spacing and on the illumination wavelength are affected non-uniformity of the thermal conductivity. On the other hand, the non-uniformity of the thermal conductivity can affect the dependence of the temperature rise on the beam radius. This is because when the beam size changes, the heat transfer path can be modified by the non-uniform thermal conductivity However, the change of the dependence of the temperature rise on the beam size is usually small when the sample area is sufficiently larger than the beam area, see Supplemental Information Section ??. 4 Comparison to experimental studies of plasmon-assisted photocatalysis Light harvesting systems (e.g., photocatalysis pellets, water purification samples etc.) are usually designed to be optically-thick for the purpose of absorbing all illumination energy. Thus, the results described above show that generically, the temperature rise is such systems will have a weak sensitivity to the illumination wavelength, pulse duration, particle size and density. However, in the context of photocatalysis, when the chemical reaction rate is enhanced by the photo-thermal effect In order to see this, we use as an example the wavelength-dependence of the temperature rise shown in Figure where k B is the Boltzmann constant, T h,0 is the host temperature in the dark, and R 0 is a constant that depends on the details of the reactants as well as of measurement. For a fair comparison, we plot the reaction rate enhancement as the ratio of the reaction rate under illumination to the reaction rate in the dark. Figure To see this, let us consider the work of Christopher et al. In order to explain this observation, we revisit the thermal calculations we performed for this structure in The approach adopted in the current study represents a minimal benchmark for the evaluation of thermal effects in light harvesting systems. It also shows many of previous claims on parametric dependence may inaccurate, and need to be re-evaluated. Our results contribute further insights to the important task of distinguishing between the roles of thermal and non-thermal effects in plasmon-assisted photocatalysis experiments First, the identified temperature nonuniformity shows that a standard normalization of the reaction rates in photocatalysis by the catalyst mass (as e.g., in Refs. Second, while both non-thermal ("hot" carrier) and thermal effects exhibit a similar dependence on the illumination intensity and the absorption cross-section, the latter exhibits a much stronger dependence on the parameters of the system (NP size and shape, density, illumination wavelength, sample thickness etc.), at least for the typical optically-thick samples. Similarly, thermal effects exhibit a sensitivity to the thermal properties of the host which non-thermal effects naturally lack. Thus, variations of the various parameters may hint toward the mechanism underlying the enhanced chemical reactions studied. These ideas can complement the simple experimental tricks suggested already in Having said the above, we should recall that in the weak illumination limit (to which the ma-jority of plasmon-assisted photocatalysis experiments conform), thermal effects greatly dominate non-thermal effects. This was shown for a single NP in Overall, the calculations performed here are simple, but were not performed so far in the current context, at least not systematically. They can however be extended to more complicated scenarios. For example, our model can be used to study the transient temperature rise of the sample and the temporal evolution of the reaction rate. This is important when the illumination time is shorter than the time scale required for the system to reach the steady-state, especially for catalyst samples immersed in host material with low diffusivity. Our model can also be extended to account for heat convection by gas or liquid flow. However, as shown in Finally, we note that when the temperature rise is greater than 100 K, it is necessary to take into account the temperature dependence of the optical and thermal properties of the metal and the host material (see e.g., If the activation energy E a is low, then, such systems may benefit from non-thermal "hot" electron action, see For example, if the edge of the disc-shaped catalyst sample is in contact with a high thermal conductivity material, such as metal, much more heat is dissipated from the edge than from the center when the beam size becomes compatible to the catalyst sample area.