The paper presents a joint consideration of Raman spectra of sp 2 amorphous carbons alongside with the nature and type of their amorphicity. The latter was attributed to the enforced fragmentation. The fragments, presented with size-restricted graphene domains with heteroatom necklaces in the circumference, are the basic structural units (BSUs) of the solids, determining them as amorphics with molecular structure. The standard G-D-2D pattern of Raman spectra of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, sp 2 amorphous carbons, graphene and/or graphite crystal is attributed to BSUs graphene domains. The molecular approximation allows connecting the G-D spectra image of one-phonon spectra with a considerable dispersion of the C=C bond lengths within graphene domains, governed by size, heteroatom necklace of BSUs as well as BSUs packing. The interpretation of 2D two-phonon spectra reveals a particular role of electrical anharmonicity in the spectra formation and attributes this effect to a high degree of the electron density delocalization in graphene domains. Raman scattering has become an overwhelming method of testing graphene-based solid carbons. A comprehend review Nevertheless, recent detailed investigations have clearly revealed a molecular nature of sp 2 amorphous carbons (ACs) (amorphics for simplicity) The paper is composed as follows. Section 2 is devoted to the modern presentation of amorphous carbons. Specification of the ACs amorphicity is discussed in Section 3. General comments concerning vibrational spectroscopy of amorphous carbons as well as main concepts of molecular approach related to graphene molecules are considered in Section 4. Sections 5 and 6 present the interpretation of the obtained RSs in the framework of molecular approximation, concerning one-and two-phonon fractures, respectively. Conclusion summarizes main essentials received. Amorphous carbons are widely common and present a big allotropic class of bodies, both natural and synthetic. Natural amorphics are products of the activity of the Nature's laboratory during geological billion-million-year time. Exhausted geological examinations allowed suggesting a few classification schemes of carbon species, one of which, slightly changed with respect to original In the current study, our attention will be concentrated on sp 2 ACs only. Recent comparative studies According to studies Despite sp 2 ACs have been the object of study and practical use for hundreds of years, until now they have not been considered from the general concept of the solid-state physics. The amorphicity of solids was widely studied and the main concepts are accumulated in monograph As mentioned earlier, the short-range order of sp 2 ACs is provided with framed graphene molecules. The framing plays a decisive role, ensuring the formation and stability of short-range order, on the one hand, and preventing crystallization, on the other There might be various reasons for fragmentation, including mechanical impact, chemical reaction, temperature shock, exposure to hard radiation, etc., which can be easily traced by the history of the production of the ACs samples. The fragments ensure the short-range order of the solids and are characterized by large variety with respect to not only different classes of ACs provided by different history and/or technology of their production, but the same class as well. The variety concerns the BSUs size, shape, variation of chemical content, and, which is the most important, the distribution of heteroatoms in the BSU framing area ('chemical necklace') at fixed atomic percentage in average. Thus, models presented in Fig. Another distinctive feature of sp 2 ACs lies in the radical nature of their BSU fragments. As shown Raman spectroscopy of sp 2 ACs, as well as of other amorphous solids, is generally aimed at determining their short-range structure For vibrational spectroscopy to become a valuable short-range structural probe for sp 2 ACs, BSUs must be capable of being vibrationally excited independently from the surrounding amorphous matrix The molecular approach usually starts off a general consideration of the vibration spectrum of an object. Evidently, this spectrum of any graphene molecule is multitudinous and multimode due to which a certain simplification is needed to make it discussable. In the previous study Completely different feature is observed when going from polyacenes to polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) with two-dimensional (2D) π conjugated planar structure. The latter represent spatially extended compositions of benzenoid rings forming restricted graphene domains framed by hydrogens. The first objects were PAHs C78H32 Certainly, the characterization concerns the general pattern of the spectra, while I D I G ⁄ , and ∆ω D parameters were quite individual. Nevertheless, it was experimentally shown that just the presence of graphene domains in the 2D planar structure of PAHs leads to the characteristic D-G-2D shape of the RSs, which does not depend on the size and symmetry of the PAH molecules. The band triplet covers D-G one-phonon and 2D two-phonon parts of the spectrum. A profound theoretical analysis of one-phonon RSs performed by the Italian spectroscopists Polarization of molecules is highly sensitive to the vibration form. Actually, the quantity is generally described as where α is the polarizability in equilibrium position, Q's are co-ordinates of individual normal vibrations, sets {Q i } and {Q k } present vibration forms of the t th vibration, and the subscripts 0 of the differentials refer to the equilibrium position. The third and subsequent members of the power series represent the electrical anharmonicity. The intensity of one-and two-phonon Raman scattering is governed by the second and third terms, respectively. As seen from the equation, the vibration forms are directly involved into the intensity determination, differently for the Raman scattering of the first and second order. Detailed consideration of the PAHs polarizability performed in the extensive study been approved on a number of PAH molecules, whose RSs were obtained and analyzed From the very beginning of the study, Italian researchers have borne in mind RS of graphite and/or graphene crystals as a final point of the PHAs evolution by size. They extended their consideration over graphene crystal and have found that e2g mode at Г point of the first Brillouin zone is typical Я-mode while A'1 mode at K point clearly reveals A character (Fig. Figure Despite RSs of sp 2 ACs were recorded countlessly (suffice to say that Raman scattering is an indispensable participant in testing each natural and synthetic graphene material), a detailed investigation of a set of different-origin representatives of these materials under the same level of knowledge about their structure and chemical content has not yet been performed. In the current study, nine products of such kind described in Section II were examined. Raman spectroscopy was carried out with a LabRam HR800 instrument (Horiba, Jobin Yvon) at room temperature. The system was equipped with an Olympus BX41 optical microscope and a Si-based CCD detector (1024 × 256 pixels). A 50× objective (working distance ~3 mm, numerical aperture 0.75) was used. Spectra were recorded in the 100-4000 cm -1 range using a spectrometer grating of 600 g/mm, with a confocal hole size of 300 μm and a slit of 100 μm. External laser exciting radiation in the region 270-520 nm was used. The obtained RSs reveal the expected dependence on the radiation frequency typical for nanostructured graphite and or graphene (see The spectra are grouped in two columns related to natural (left) and synthetic (right) samples. Looking at this collection, we would like to start with the first features that concern finestructured spectra located in the first row in the figure. Among the latter, there are two lineaments, which require a particular attention. The former is related to the RSs of graphites while the latter to the RS of amorphous carbon black CB624. As for graphites, a scrupulous analysis of the available RSs reveals that a single G-band-one-phonon spectrum is a rarity, once characteristic for "the best" graphites such as Madagascar flakes and Ticonderoga crystals In the covalent-bond language of graphene molecules, the conversion of a single G band, corresponding to C=C stretching of an ideal graphite crystal, into a broadband D-G doublet of amorphous solids, while maintaining a honeycomb composition in the arrangement of carbon atoms, is caused by two things that result from the crystal fragmentation. The first concerns the genesis of non-zero dispersion of the C=C bonds length (bond length dispersion (BLD) below), ∆{l CC }, in restricted graphene domains. Accordingly, a solitaire optical G phonon of both graphite and graphene crystals exists in a non-fragmented structure with a strictly fixed C=C bond value at 1.42 Å only. The second is a consequence of the graphene domain symmetry lowering just resolving not only e2g, but e1u benzene-naming C=C stretchings discussed in the previous Section. Each of these groups covers a large number of C=C modes in polyatomic molecules like PAHs thus splitting the total BLD into two sets, ∆{l CC } e 2g and ∆{l CC } e 1u , related to G and D components of the doublet spectra of PAHs, respectively. As was said earlier, the former modes are of Я type and are steadily active under Raman scattering, thus providing the appearance of G bands. The latter, revealed as D band only in the presence of C=C BLD, are of A type According to the vibrational dynamics of molecules, dispersion of any valence bond length ∆{l i } is naturally transformed into that of force constants ∆{f i } related to the relevant stretching. To evaluate the BLD value related to the C=C stretchings of the studied amorphics BSUs, we perform quantum chemical calculations of the ground state structure of a set of BSU models related to commensurate small-size ACs with L CSR a of 1.4 -2.1 nm (see Table The discussed above allows drawing a general conclusion that the D-G doublet structure of the RSs of sp 2 ACs as well as their broadbandness are caused by the length dispersion of the C=C bonds that configure graphene domain structure of the relevant BSUs. There might be a few reasons for the dispersion. First, as said before, the fragmented character of the BSUs, once being graphene domains confined within a molecular size. Second, the BSU mandatory termination by heteroatoms, which clearly exacerbates the latter thus, making it dependent on a BSU size and the relevant 'chemical necklace'. Besides, it is known Let us start from the RSs of natural amorphics in Figs. Neutron and X-ray powder diffraction of shungite carbon and anthraxolite showed that the configurations of the solids stacks formed by the relevant BSUs were identical and the closest to the packing in graphite crystal (see AnthX AnthX AnthC AnthC CB632 5d from the spectra of ShC and AntX can be attributed to the changes in the relevant necklace. Nevertheless, the structure study of the latter revealed much stronger deviation of BSUs packing from the graphite one To the most extent, the influence of the turbostratic packing is seen when comparing the RS of carbon black CB632 in Fig. Basing on the conclusions, made when analyzing RSs of small-size natural amorphics and carbon black CB632, we can proceed with the interpretation of RSs of technical graphenes Ak-rGO and TE-rGO as well as carbon black CB624, related to large-size amorphics. As seen in Table Discussing RSs of natural amorphics, we referred to the spectrum of the PAH C114H30 as the reference related to small-size graphene domains. In the case of large-size domains, evidently the spectrum of CB624 in Fig. Concluding the analysis of one-phonon D-G spectra, one should focus on the connection of widely used parameter I D I G ⁄ with the real size of graphene domains. The advantage of the current study is the availability of independent data on the size of the studied BSUs obtained previously As can be seen from the table, contrary to expectations from X-ray data, L a , which should be the largest for shungites among the ScC-AnthX-AnthC-CB632 group, turns out to be the smallest obtained from Raman spectra, so the inverse X-ray dependence is observed. As seen from the table, the wished correspondence violates when the domain size is of the first tens of nanometers as well. In the present case, the situation does not seem unexpected, since, as was shown above, not only the size of graphene domain of the amorphics BSUs, but also the relevant heteroatom necklaces, as well as the BSUs packaging determine the RS intensity distribution between its constituent bands. Second-order RSs of graphene materials have a long and rich history. Initially discovered in different graphite materials in the form of doublet of bands at ~ 2720 cm -1 (strong) and 3248 cm - 1 (very weak) The second peculiarity of the 2D band concerns the surprising variability of its intensity with respect to the G band. So, in graphite crystal, the ratio of the total intensities I 2D I G ⁄ is ~ 1; in graphene crystal, it is equal to ~ 6 Despite the huge number of publications concerning RS of graphene materials and the 2D band, in particular, the relationship of the 2D band with el-anharmonicity has not been considered. At the same time, modern vibrational spectroscopy attaches great importance to both mechanical and electrical anharmonicity, a joint participation of which provides good agreement between the experimental and calculated spectral data without fitting parameters Delocalization of electron density lays the foundation of specific properties of graphene molecules This "no-one-phonon-source" feature is one more argument in favor of the el-anharmonic origin of the second-order Raman scattering of the studied sp 2 ACs. Among the studied amorphics, the spectrum of black carbon CB624 occupies a central place. Thus, its close similarity with the spectrum of ncr graphite indicates that, despite the obvious difference in size of the short-range order region in the graphite and amorphic BSU, in both cases we are dealing with well-ordered structures making it possible to consider the spectra band-shape in the quasi-particle phonon approximation (widely reviewed in Since the theory of high-order RSs of large molecules is still being formed, a rigorous interpretation of their spectra, similar to proposed for one-phonon spectra in terms of molecular dynamics Concluding the analysis, one more thing should be mentioned. The frequency range of the studied two-phonon spectra coincides with the region of characteristic group frequencies (GFs) Long-time and numerous studies of amorphous solids have led researchers to the conclusion that a confident interpretation of their Raman spectra is inseparable from the consideration of the nature and type of the solids amorphization. In the current work, these two aspects were considered together with respect to sp 2 ACs. Previous structural and analytical studies of these solids were analyzed from this viewpoint, due to which it was established that they can be attributed to molecular amorphics of a new type of amorphicity, which can be called enforced fragmentation of honeycomb canvas. Chemical reactions occurred at the fragment edges are suggested to be one of the most important causes of the fragmentation stabilization. Thus originated fragments, become the basic structural units (BSUs) of AC, are of particular kind presenting size-restricted graphene domains in the halo of heteroatom necklaces. The weak wdW interaction between the BUSs makes them the main defendants for the numerous properties of solids, including their IR absorption and Raman scattering. Raman spectra of sp 2 ACs are considered at the molecular level, which is perfectly suitable to case. The molecular approximation is confirmed by a detail similarity of the spectra of the studied solids and 2D PAHs studied earlier. The similarity itself evidences governing role of graphene domains, of both BSUs and PAHs, due to which a standard D-G-2D image of the spectra the graphene domain signature and remains until the structure is fully destroyed. The theory of Raman spectra of PAHs molecules, proposed by a team of Italian authors and confirmed in a number of computational experiments of the authors related to the PAHs experimental spectra, laid for the approach foundation. The nanometer and nano-submicron sizes of BSUs do not yet allow such experiments to be replicated in a worthy manner. Because of this, it was proposed to extend the conceptual results of the theory approved for PAHs to the case of the BUSs of the studied amorphics, supplementing analysis of their RSs by the concept of the C=C bond length dispersion (BLD), explaining the appearance of the D band as well as the spectra broadening as a whole. Besides, the available structure and chemical content data of the studied amorphics allowed suggesting an analytical triad: the size and heteroatom necklace of the BSUs, as well as the BSUs packingas an additional tool for the sp 2 ACs RSs interpretation. This approach was applied to the interpretation of the one-phonon (D-G) and two-phonon (2D) spectra of the studied solids separately. One-phonon spectra. Evaluated computationally, the C=C BLD for the studied amorphics constitutes ~0.2 Å attributing to the change of bond length from 1.5 Å to 1.3 Å. The corresponding dispersion of the C=C stretching frequencies is of ~400 cm -1 from 1300 cm -1 to 1700 cm -1 , thus covering the main spectral region of the amorphics RSs. The distribution of the bonds within the dispersion depends on the BSU size, the composition of heteroatom necklace and the BSUs multilayer structure. In light of this triad, the shape of the D-G spectra of natural amorphics and chemically reduced technical graphene is provided with the BSU size, over which a significant heteroatom-necklace effect is put on. In addition to this, the spectra of temperature-shock exfoliated technical carbon and one of the engineered carbon blacks exhibit a marked contribution of the BSU packing effect caused by turbostratic composition of the BSUs. Two-phonon spectra. The C=C BLD concept allows explanation of the broadband 2D spectra of the studied solids as well, albeit not so straightforwardly as in the case of one-phonon ones since the spectra origin is provided with the electric anharmonicity of the BSU molecules. Nevertheless, size, heteroatom necklace, and packing effects are definitely exhibited in this case as well, thus making the total D-G-2D spectra of sp 2 ACs highly characteristic graphene domain signature with respect to the solids origin, production, and storage. It is this last circumstance that connects details of the Raman spectra of the AC BSUs in question with the history of the origin and production of the studied solids. ShC 94.44 0.63 0.88 4.28 1.11 [26] 92.05 6.73 S -0.92; Si -0.20; N-0.10 [16] AnthX 94.01 1.11 0.86 2.66 1.36 [26] 92.83 6.00 S -0.85; Si -0.25; N-0.07 [16]