With the aim of the discovery of face-centered-cubic (fcc) high-entropy alloy (HEA) superconductor, we have carried out materials research on Nb or Pb-containing multi-component alloys. Although the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of some Nb-containing samples exhibited the dominant fcc phases, no superconducting signals were observed down to 3 K. Examination with an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer revealed that all samples were multi-phase, but the existence of several new Nb-containing HEA phases was found in them. It was confirmed that the synthesis of Pb-containing an HEA or quaternary alloy would be difficult, probably due to the large differences in the crystal structure and atomic radius among constituent elements, low reaction temperature and the lack of a rapid cooling process in the synthesis. Despite the negative results in this research, some hints for an improved strategy for the search for an fcc HEA superconductor are provided. Moreover, our results are useful as fundamental data for future HEA predictions or for studies of phase relations in Nb or Pb-containing multi-component alloys based on the CALPHAD (calculation of phase diagram) method. High-entropy alloys (HEAs) have attracted a great deal of attention as a new class of materials HEA superconductivity is a very new research topic which has been investigated since 2014. Transition metal-based superconductors with simple crystalline structures follow the so-called Matthias rule, showing broad peak structures at the specified valence electron count (VEC) per atom when the superconducting critical temperature Tc is plotted as a function of VEC per atom The excellent review in Nb-containing samples were synthesized by a home-made arc furnace. The constituent elements were arc-melted on a water-cooled Cu hearth in an Ar atmosphere. For a Pb-containing sample, the constituent elements were sealed in an evacuated quartz tube, which was then heated in an electric furnace. The materials used are listed in Table A powder X-ray diffractometer (XRD-7000L, Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) with Cu-Kα radiation was employed to detect the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of prepared samples. The 2θ range was between 10° and 90°. The microstructure of each sample was checked by a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, JSM-7100F; JEOL, Akishima, Japan). The atomic compositions of the samples were determined by an energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectrometer equipped to the FE-SEM. In order to confirm the diamagnetic signal due to the superconducting state, the temperature dependence of the AC magnetic susceptibility χac (T), in which the amplitude and the frequency of the AC field were 5 Oe and 800 Hz, respectively, was checked by a home-made system in a GM refrigerator (UW404, Ulvac cryogenics, Kyoto, Japan) between 3 and 300 K. The starting compositions of prepared Nb-containing samples were basically determined following the conventional design rule and where ci, ri and VECi are the atomic fraction, the atomic radius and the VEC of element i, respectively, and r is the composition-weighted average atomic radius. The parameter δ is a measure of the degree of the atomic size difference among the constituent elements. These parameters are calculated for the prepared samples and are listed in Table Table Figure Here, we discuss the fcc phase stability, viewed from the perspective of δ and VEC, which is summarized in Table As shown in Table where ΔHmix and ΔSmix are the mixing enthalpy and the mixing entropy, respectively, and T is the temperature. While a negative ΔHmix stabilizes the formation of intermetallic compounds, a large value of TΔSmix exceeding the absolute value of ΔHmix favors a homogeneous mixing of components. Therefore, the high mixing entropy tends to allow HEA formation, especially under a hightemperature condition. In the arc-melting process, high-temperature melting and rapid cooling after the melting through a water-cooled hearth can be realized, and Nb-containing HEA phases can be obtained. On the other hand, the rather low reaction temperature and lack of rapid cooling represents insufficient synthesis conditions for Pb-containing multi-component alloys, although a high melting temperature is difficult to realize due to the high vapor pressure of Pb. We have carried out materials research into fcc HEA superconductors based on two strategies, taking into account the fact that the inclusion of rather high Tc elements is advantageous. One strategy was the use of an Nb-containing HEA and the other used a Pb-containing HEA. In the studies of Nb-containing HEAs, some samples showed dominant fcc phases; however, single-phase samples could not be obtained. While we have found several new Nb-containing HEA phases in the multi-phase samples, no superconducting signal appeared in each HEA phase down to 3 K. Considering that Nb forms a bcc structure at room temperature and there are only a few examples of fcc-related Nb-based superconductors, the discovery of Nb-containing fcc HEA superconductors would be a rare event. In Pb-containing samples, even a quaternary alloy is difficult to obtain, which is partially due to the large difference in the crystal structure between Pb the other elements and the larger δ. The low reaction temperature and lack of a rapid cooling process in the synthesis might also contribute to the negative results. Our study presents some possibilities to other researchers pursuing an fcc superconducting HEA. In the research area of HEAs, the CALPHAD (calculation of phase diagram) method is rapidly used for the prediction of HEAs or the study of the phase relation between HEAs and other alloys. If the thermodynamic data of various compounds in the present Nb or Pbcontaining multi-component systems are sufficiently collected, the CALPHAD method will be able to elucidate the stability of an HEA in each system. Thus, our results will greatly assist in the evaluation of the CALPHAD method in the future.