Stress analysis of heterogeneous media, like composite materials, using Finite Element Analysis (FEA) has become commonplace in design and analysis. However, determining stress distributions in heterogeneous media using FEA can be computationally expensive in situations like optimization and multi-scaling. To address this, we utilize Deep Learning for developing a set of novel Difference-based Neural Network (DiNN) frameworks based on engineering and statistics knowledge to determine stress distribution in heterogeneous media, for the first time, with special focus on discontinuous domains that manifest high stress concentrations. The novelty of our approach is that instead of directly using several FEA model geometries and stresses as inputs for training a Neural Network, as typically done previously, we focus on highlighting the differences in stress distribution between different input samples for improving the accuracy of prediction in heterogeneous media. Our DiNN framework consists of three main modules: 1) a sample processing module that calculates the difference geometry and stress contours of each sample with respect to a reference contour extracted from the training samples, 2) an Encoder-Decoder module that predicts stress difference contours using geometry difference contours as input, and 3) a stress prediction module that combines the stress difference contours with the reference contour to construct the final prediction of stress contours. We evaluate the performance of DiNN frameworks by considering different types of geometric models that are commonly used in the analysis of composite materials, including volume fraction and spatial randomness. Results show that the DiNN structures significantly enhance the accuracy of stress prediction compared to existing structures, especially for composite models with random volume fraction when localized high stress concentrations are present. Stress analysis is an important discipline within engineering, where the primary objective is to determine stresses and strains in structures and materials subjected to external loads. Within stress analysis, we typically start with a geometrical description of a structure or material and the expected load acting on it. Typical output of stress analysis is the quantitative distribution of stresses, strains and deformations. There are several approaches for stress analysis of solids, like classical mathematical closed form solutions for partial differential equations, computational simulation, experimental testing or a combination of these methods. Among these, Finite Element Analysis (FEA) FEA is used extensively for analyzing composite materials Past researchers have shown great potential for ML and Deep Learning (DL) methods as surrogates for predicting mechanical properties in Computational Solid Mechanics and Computational Fluid Dynamics, without performing Finite Element Analysis (FEA). Earlier attempts to integrate ML techniques into FEA focus on updating model Inspired by the ability of CNN to extract high-level features In Figure The entire ML framework can be split into three main steps as shown in Figure First, several composite geometries are randomly generated and meshed using a MATLAB code. They are next numerically solved under quasi-static loading within linear elasticity using the FEA software ABAQUS Next, the meshed geometries and their nodal stress distribution contours that are output from FEA are interpolated onto a uniform global map called Cartesian Map (CM) We consider composite micromechanical models in two categories: volume fraction randomness (VR) and spatial randomness (SR). To account for these variables, we analyze eight different structures shown in Figure We consider two dimensional plane stress analysis in this paper and focus on predicting von Mises stresses as both matrix and reinforcement regions have in-plane isotropic properties. In VR models, we vary the geometries by choosing different fiber or cutout radius r, which is calculated based on different volume fractions V f using the equation . V f describes the volume percentage of one part to the whole model. We randomly generate different values of V f within a target range, where A square is the area of the bounding square region. In SR models, we choose four cutouts or fibers in each model for investigation and validation purposes. Controlled randomness implies that each circle is randomly assigned within each quarter with minimum spacing between circles to be held at 1/2 of circle radius, while uncontrolled randomness implies that only the minimum spacing constraint of 1/2 of circle radius exists. Plate with cutout designs are widely used in mechanical industries, for example airplane cabin window and screw-bolt designs. Under externally applied loads, plate with a cutout experiences high stress concentrations in the vicinity of the cutout. These high stress regions are candidate for localized damage and failure under external loads, and largely affect the mechanical performance of structures. A range between 5% to 25% for volume fraction is considered for circular cutout models due to relatively small cutout size. Sample meshed models are shown in Figure In addition to volume fraction, the spatial arrangement of cutout regions in the micromechanical models has a significant factor on the mechanical properties. To investigate Neural Network's performance on models with different spatial arrangements, we consider four random cutouts with controlled and uncontrolled randomness, as shown in Figure Fiber reinforced polymer composite (FRPC) materials are widely used in aerospace, automotive, marine and construction industries due to its higher strength comparing to pure polymer matrix. FRPCs typically consist of two parts: stiff reinforcing fibers and a less stiff binding matrix. In this paper, we choose FRPCs as a model system. One key design feature in FRPCs is the fiber volume fraction V f , which contributes directly to their mechanical properties. Fibers within FRPCs typically have diameters in the range of few micro meters, for example, carbon fibers are approximately 6 μm in diameter. Since a structure made of composite is in the order of few meters, representing each fiber in a computational domain is not practical. Often, we resolve to micromechanics for analyzing such composites. In micromechanical analysis of composites, a large composite domain can be represented by arrays of small repeating unit cells (RUC). Here, we consider two RUCs: square packed and hexagonal packed models of fibers embedded in matrix with fibers having their actual diameter and the entire fiber-matrix domain has a fiber volume fraction equal to that of the macro scale composite domain. Thus, the micromechanics models are in the order of micrometers while effectively capturing the mechanical behavior of large composites. Square-packed RUC of FRPCs has fiber in the center and a square-shaped matrix surrounding it as shown in Figure Similar to plate with random cutout model, to account for the effects of spatial arrangement, we further consider square packed composites with randomly distributed fibers as shown in Figure Hollow particle reinforced composites, also referred to as syntactic foams, are gaining traction in lightweight applications due to their low density, high compressive energy absorption capability and large strains to failure All the domains mentioned above are 2D plane stress models with the same external dimensions. Linear elastic mechanical properties of polymer matrix (E = 3.2 GPa, υ = 0.31) Using the above mentioned inputs to each domain, we perform mesh convergence analysis to determine the maximum (max) mesh size that provides converged stress predictions. From this analysis, we identify that the hollow particle reinforced composite model requires a max mesh size of 0.2 μm and the other three models require a max mesh size of 0.3 μm. By assigning material properties along with above-mentioned boundary conditions, we generate stress distribution contours using FEA static solver. An Encoder-Decoder Neural Network where, G refers to the labelled geometry difference contour. Stress prediction module shown in Figure Here, σ represents the stress difference contour. A stress processing block is added after the De-normalization block, which generates the predicted stress contours as shown in Figure For geometric models that have regions of no material, like in the case of plate with circular cutout model and hollow particle reinforced model, varying the size or position of the cutout regions can introduce undesired negative values during subtraction with the reference contours (refer to Section 5.2). Hence, we introduce an additional module called "clean module". This module performs element-wise multiplication between the target contour and material contour M , whose regions with material are labelled as '1' and regions without material (cutout) as '0'. The multiplication can be represented with Hadamard product M ij = 1, if material exists at a node 0, if material is absent at a node Here, A ij represents the input contour and C ij represents the output contour after passing through the clean module. Symbol • refers to the Hadamard product. The key difference between DiNN-N and DiNN-NC is the addition of a clean module within DiNN-NC. Specifically, DiNN-N structure can be viewed as a special case of DiNN-NC, where the material contour M in Equation 3 is a matrix with all-ones as no cutout region exists. Besides, to account for the presence of a clean module, we choose difference kernel sizes, as discussed in Section 4.4. Triangulation-based linear interpolation Here, {x i , y i } represents the coordinate of each vertex of the triangle and {x, y} represents the coordinate of a target node on the CM. Relative position of a node with respect to vertices of the triangle can be visualized in Supplementary Interpolated nodal values on the CM can be determined by Equation ) where, S is the nodal value on the CM containing geometry label or physical information like stress. S i is the i th nodal value of the triangular element within which the node on the CM falls. Next, we perform a comparison between von-Mises stress contours obtained using linear interpolation (with nearest three nodes and nearest five nodes) and Barycentric coordinate interpolation on a square packed model. It is observed (Figure From this analysis (Supplementary Figure Skewness in training data can cause imbalance problem and eventually reduce the prediction accuracy of NN by introducing unbalanced data Since geometry labels are constant for individual regions of heterogeneous media, nodal stress values are the main source of skewness. Supplementary Table As discussed in the previous section, both nodal stress contours and geometry contours for different models are interpolated onto CM for training the NN. Unique labels are assigned to each region, including cutout region, fiber region, particle ring region and matrix region. In this paper, same boundary conditions and loads are maintained in all analyses, and hence, the effects of boundary condition labelling are not discussed. To train the NN and test its performance, we randomly generate 2000 samples for each geometry considered based on different cutout or fiber volume fractions. When training for each model, 2000 samples each are randomly split into 80% for training with 10% for cross-validation and 10% for testing. Random split seed is controlled based on the pseudorandom number generator To identify different regions in each model and facilitate machine learning process, we need to assign different labels to each region. Overall labelling method is summarized in Equation We previously discussed the effect of skewness in training data on the prediction accuracy of NN in Section 5.2. We noticed that all the skewness values become positive after adding the clean module to DiNN. To determine the optimal solution for reducing the effect to positive skewness and enhancing the prediction accuracy, we introduce a skewness correction factor p. By considering different root 'p' over the stress contour values prior to training the NN, our goal is to reduce the influence of skewness on the accuracy of prediction. Element-wise root values are calculated before extracting the mean stress contour and correspondingly element-wise power is introduced after obtaining the prediction from the Deconv block. The predicted stress contour can be expressed using Equation Different values of p are considered for investigating the hidden relationships within DiNN using HP-VR model. The results of this analysis is discussed in Appendix B. We construct NN frameworks within Tensorflow 2.0.0 and train it on GPU as discussed in Section 2. To test the prediction capability of different NN frameworks for eight different geometric models considered, we use the StressNet structure for comparison. The accuracy of stress prediction within each component of composite materials, NN training duration and training loss are used for evaluating each model. We evaluate the prediction accuracy of max stress based on the max stress error rate (MER) as defined in Equation 9a and evaluate the training loss based on the mean squared error (MSE) in stress prediction as defined in Equation Here, N is the total number of samples in the testing set and n is the total number of nodes in the CM. Y i is the nodal stress predicted using the NN and Ŷi is the ground truth nodal stress mapped onto the CM from FEA. Y i,j and Ŷi,j represent the j th nodal stress values in i th sample obtained from the NN and FEA, respectively. MER estimates the maximum stress prediction error within a model, which is relevant for evaluating composite model's fracture or plasticity initiation. MSE evaluates the accuracy of the stress distribution contour prediction in the entire model, which is important for estimating effective properties, such as the effective stiffness. Training accuracy and efficiency of different NN structures on eight geometric models considered in this paper are summarized in Section 7.2. We evaluate different NN frameworks, including a baseline model (StressNet) and three types of difference-based structures developed by us: DiNN, DiNN-N and DiNN-NC, on all geometric models considered in this paper. DiNN-NC structure was used only when cutout region exists in the target geometry. We train each NN framework with 1000 and 2000 samples separately, and use stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (A) Prediction accuracy for models without cutout regions: • Table Whereas, the prediction duration per sample for DiNN-N and DiNN-NC is on average only 0.2 seconds more compared to StressNet, as stated in part (D). In this paper, we have presented a novel NN framework as a surrogate for traditional FEA approach to predict stress distribution in heterogeneous media, like composite materials. Our approach consists of a set of DiNN frameworks capable of predicting stress distributions with very high accuracy for different types of composite materials. Two main types of composites are considered: models with volume fraction randomness and models with spatial randomness. Eight different composite micromechanical models were considered for validating the performance of our NN structures. For models with volume fraction randomness, the proposed DiNN structure included a normalization module (DiNN-N) for all geometries considered, while we additionally introduced a clean module with DiNN-N, named DiNN-NC, for geometries with discontinuities. For models with spatial randomness, DiNN frameworks perform well in terms of prediction MSE, but can have mixed performance in terms of MER. Further research effort is needed to resolve unstable MER for spatially random distributed models. The DiNN frameworks presented in this paper for stress prediction in heterogeneous media can be used in future studies including mechanical property prediction and composite structure optimization at multiple length scales. Key contributions of this paper are: 1. This is the first attempt to our best knowledge that brings Convolutional Neural Network based Machine Learning for stress distribution prediction for heterogeneous media like composite materials considering volume fraction and spatial randomness. 2. We introduce a novel Difference-based Neural Network framework which utilizes a set of reference models from the training set and focuses especially on training the difference contours between the target model and the reference set. This is shown to improve stress prediction accuracy when high stress concentrations manifest within heterogeneous media, with or without discontinuities like cutouts. 3. We show that the Difference-based Neural Network framework improves the stress prediction accuracy significantly compared to existing baseline structures, especially on models with volume fraction randomness and large local stress concentrations. For models with spatial randomness, our framework guarantees a reliable prediction in terms of Mean-Squared-Error. Moreover, our proposed framework has a faster prediction speed compared to traditional Finite Element Method. (D) 