We derive exact nonlocal homogenized constitutive relations for the effective electromagnetic wave properties of disordered two-phase composites and metamaterials from first principles. This exact formalism enables us to extend the long-wavelength limitations of conventional homogenization estimates of the effective dynamic dielectric constant tensor εe(kI , ω) for arbitrary microstructures so that it can capture spatial dispersion well beyond the quasistatic regime (where ω and kI are the frequency and wave vector of the incident radiation). We accomplish this task by deriving nonlocal strong-contrast expansions that exactly account for complete microstructural information (infinite set of n-point correlation functions) and hence multiple scattering to all orders for the range of wave numbers for which our extended homogenization theory applies, i.e., 0 ≤ |kI |l 1 (where l is a characteristic heterogeneity length scale). Because of the fast-convergence properties of such expansions, their lower-order truncations yield accurate closed-form approximate formulas for εe(kI , ω) that apply for a wide class of microstructures. These nonlocal formulas are resummed representations of the strong-contrast expansions that still accurately capture multiple scattering to all orders via the microstructural information embodied in the spectral density, which is easy to compute for any composite. The accuracy of these microstructure-dependent approximations is validated by comparison to full-waveform simulation computations for both 2D and 3D ordered and disordered models of composite media. Thus, our closed-form formulas enable one to predict accurately and efficiently the effective wave characteristics well beyond the quasistatic regime for a wide class of composite microstructures without having to perform full-blown simulations. We find that disordered hyperuniform media are generally less lossy than their nonhyperuniform counterparts. We also show that certain disordered hyperuniform particulate composites exhibit novel wave characteristics, including the capacity to act as low-pass filters that transmit waves "isotropically" up to a selected wave number and refractive indices that abruptly change over a narrow range of wave numbers. Our results demonstrate that one can design the effective wave characteristics of a disordered composite by engineering the microstructure to possess tailored spatial correlations at prescribed length scales. Thus, our findings can accelerate the discovery of novel electromagnetic composites. The preponderance of previous theoretical treatments of the effective dynamic dielectric constant are local in nature and restricted to dispersions of well-defined dielectric scatterers (inclusions) in a matrix, as illustrated in the leftmost panel. In contrast to the nonlocal strong-contrast formalism presented here, earlier studies cannot treat the more general twophase microstructures shown in the middle panel (spinodal decomposition pattern disordered stealthy hyperuniform particulate composites exhibit singular wave characteristics, including the capacity to act as low-pass filters that transmit waves "isotropically" up to a selected wave number. They also can be engineered to exhibit refractive indices that abruptly change over a narrow range of wave numbers by tuning the spectral density. Our results demonstrate that one can design the effective wave characteristics of a disordered composite, hyperuniform or not, by engineering the microstructure to possess tailored spatial correlations at prescribed length scales. II. BACKGROUND A. n-point correlation functions The theoretical problem of estimating the effective properties of multiphase composite media is an outstanding one and dates back to work by some of the luminaries of science, including Maxwell Our focus in this paper is the determination of the effective dynamic dielectric constant tensor ε e (k I , ω) of a two-phase dielectric composite, which depends on the frequency ω or wave vector k I of the incident radiation In the present investigation, we derive nonlocal homogenized constitutive relations from Maxwell's equations to obtain exact expressions for the effective dynamic dielectric constant tensor ε e (k I , ω) of a macroscopically anisotropic two-phase medium of arbitrary microstructure that is valid well beyond the quasistatic regime, i.e., from the infinite-wavelength limit down to intermediate wavelengths (0 ≤ |k I |l 1). This task is accomplished by extending the strong-contrast expansion formalism, which has been used in the past exclusively for the static limit It is noteworthy that the strong-contrast formalism is a significant departure from standard multiple-scattering theory Because of the fast-convergence properties of strongcontrast expansions, elaborated in Sec. III B, their lowerorder truncations yield accurate closed-form approximate formulas for the effective dielectric constant that apply for a wide class of microstructures over the aforementioned broad range of incident wavelengths, volume fractions, and contrast ratios (Sec. IV). Thus, we are able to accurately account for multiple scattering in the resonant realm (e.g., Bragg diffraction for periodic media), in contrast to the Maxwell-Garnett and quasicrystalline approximations, which are known to break down in this spectral range. These nonlocal strong-contrast formulas can be regarded as approximate resummations of the expansions that still accurately capture multiple-scattering effects to all orders via the nonlocal attenuation function F (Q) (Sec. VI). The key quantity F (Q) is a functional of the spectral density χV (Q) (Sec. II B), which is straightforward to determine for general microstructures either theoretically, computationally or via scattering experiments. We employ precise full-waveform simulation methods (Sec. VII) to show that these microstructuredependent approximations are accurate for both twodimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) ordered and disordered models of particulate composite media (Sec. VIII). This validation means that they can be used to predict accurately the effective wave characteristics well beyond the quasistatic regime for a wide class of composite microstructures (Sec. IX) without having to perform full-blown simulations. This broad microstructure class includes particulate media consisting of identical or polydisperse particles of general shape (ellipsoids, cubes, cylinders, polyhedra) that may or not overlap, and cellular networks as well as media without well-defined inclusions (see Sec. III B for details). Thus, our nonlocal formulas can be employed to accelerate the discovery of novel electromagnetic composites by appropriate tailoring of the spectral densities Although our strong-contrast formulas for the effective dynamic dielectric constant apply to periodic two-phase media, the primary applications that we have in mind are correlated disordered microstructures because they can provide advantages over periodic ones with high crystallographic symmetries ( Such two-phase media encompass all periodic systems, many quasiperiodic media and exotic disordered ones; see Ref. The n-point correlation function n for phase i is defined by where angular brackets denote an ensemble average over realizations. The function S (i) n (x 1 , . . . , x n ) has a probabilistic interpretation: It gives the probability of finding the ends of the vectors x 1 , . . . , x n all in phase i. For statistically homogeneous media, S (i) n (x 1 , . . . , x n ) is transla-tionally invariant and, in particular, the one-point function is position independent, i.e., S (i) 1 (x 1 ) = φ i . For statistically homogeneous media, the two-point correlation function for phase 2 is simply related to that for phase 1 via the expression S which we see is the same for phase 1 and phase 2. Thus, χ V (r = 0) = φ 1 φ 2 and, assuming the medium possesses no long-range order, lim |r|→∞ χ V (r) = 0. For statistically homogeneous and isotropic media, χ V (r) depends only on the magnitude of its argument r = |r|, and hence is a radial function. In such cases, its slope at the origin is directly related to the specific surface s (interface area per unit volume); i.e., asymptotically, we have where and Γ(x) is the gamma function. The nonnegative spectral density χV (Q), which is proportional to scattering intensity where Q represents the momentum-transfer wave vector. For statistically homogeneous media, the spectral density must obey the following sum rule For isotropic media, the spectral density depends only on Q = |Q| and, as a consequence of Eq. ( where is a d-dimensional constant and β(d) is given by Eq. ( We call a packing in R d a collection of nonoverlapping particles J ν (x) is the Bessel function of the first kind of order ν, φ 2 = ρv 1 (a) is the packing fraction (fraction of space covered by the spheres), and is the d-dimensional volume of a sphere of radius a. Originally introduced in the context of point configurations For typical disordered two-phase media, the variance σ 2 V (R) for large R goes to zero like R -d V (R) goes to zero asymptotically more rapidly than the inverse of the window volume, i.e., faster than R -d , which is equivalent to the condition (1) on the spectral density. Stealthy hyperuniform two-phase media are a subclass of hyperuniform systems in which χV (Q) is zero for a range of wave vectors around the origin, i.e., where Q U is some positive number. As in the case of hyperuniform point configurations where the exponent α is a positive constant. Thus, the characteristics length of the representative elementary volume for a hyperuniform medium will depend on the hyperuniformity class (scaling). Class I is the strongest form of hyperuniformity, which includes all perfect periodic packings as well as some disordered packings, such as disordered stealthy packings described in Sec. V D. Here we explicitly state the specific functional forms of an extended Maxwell-Garnett approximation and quasicrystalline approximation for the effective dynamic dielectric constant ε e (k 1 ) of isotropic media composed of identical spheres of dielectric constant ε 2 embedded in a matrix phase of dielectric constant ε 1 . In Sec. VIII, we compare the predictions of these formulas to those of our nonlocal approximations. The small-wave-number expansions of these popular approximations are provided in the Supplementary Material Maxwell-Garnett approximations (MGAs) where 1 (x), the prime symbol ( ′ ) denotes the derivative of a function, h (1) 1 (x) is the spherical Hankel function of the first kind of order 1, and j 1 (x) is the spherical Bessel function of the first kind of order 1. The 2D analog of Eq. ( where where H ν (x) is the Hankel function of the first kind of order ν. Here, only transverse-electric (TE) polarization is considered; i.e., the electric field is perpendicular to the axis of the cylinder. As with all MGA theories, formulas ( The quasicrystalline approximation (QCA) for the quasistatic effective dynamic dielectric constant ε e (k 1 ) employs the "effective" Green's function of spherical scatterers up to the level of the pair correlation function g 2 (r) where β 21 is defined in Eq. The original strong-contrast expansions for the effective dynamic dielectric constant obtained by Rechtsman and Torquato Consider a macroscopically large ellipsoidal two-phase statistically homogeneous but anisotropic composite specimen in R d embedded inside an infinitely large reference phase I with a dielectric constant tensor ε I . The microstructure is perfectly general, and it is assumed that a characteristic heterogeneity length scale l is much smaller than the specimen size, i.e., l ≪ L. The shape of this specimen is purposely chosen to be nonspherical since any rigorously correct expression for the effective property must ultimately be independent of the shape of the composite specimen in the infinite-volume limit. It is assumed that the applied or incident electric field E 0 (x) is a plane wave of an angular frequency ω and wave vector k I in the reference phase, i.e., Our interest is the exact expression for the effective dynamic dielectric constant tensor ε e (k I , ω). Without loss of generality, we assume a linear dispersion relation in the reference phase, i.e., k , where c is the speed of light in vacuum, and thus we henceforth do not explicitly indicate the dependence of functions on ω. The composite is assumed to be nonmagnetic, implying that the phase magnetic permeabilities are identical, i.e., μ 1 = μ 2 = μ 0 , where μ 0 is the magnetic permeability of the vacuum. For simplicity, we assume realvalued, frequency-independent isotropic phase dielectric constants ε 1 and ε 2 . Nonetheless, the composite can be generally lossy (i.e., ε e is complex-valued) due to scattering from the inhomogeneities in the local dielectric constant. It is noteworthy that our results can be straightforwardly extended to phase dielectric constants that are complex-valued (dissipative media), but this is not done in the present work. Here we present a compact derivation of strongcontrast expansions. It follows the general formalism of Torquato where P(x) is the polarization field given by and is the local dielectric constant, and I (p) (x) is the indicator function for phase p [cf. Eq. ( where the second-rank tensor Green's function G (q) (r) associated with the reference phase q is given by D (q) is a constant second-rank tensor that arises when one excludes an infinitesimal region around the position of the singularity x ′ = x in the Green's function, and H (q) (r) represents the contribution outside of the "exclusion" region: where r ≡ r/|r| is a unit vector directed to r, and H ν (x) is the Hankel function of the first kind of order ν. The Fourier transform of Eq. ( Note that Eq. ( The use of Eq. ( where the integral subscript ǫ indicates that the integral is to be carried out by omitting the exclusion region and then allowing it to uniformly shrink to zero. Here F(x) is related directly to E(x) via Using the definitions ( where It is noteworthy that one is free to choose any convenient exclusion-region shape, provided that its boundary is sufficiently smooth. The choice of the exclusion-region shape is crucially important because it determines the type of modified electric field that results as well as the corresponding expansion parameter in the series expansion for the effective dynamic dielectric constant tensor. For example, when a spheroidal-shaped exclusion region at a position x in R d is chosen to be aligned with the polarization vector P(x) at that position, we have where I is the second-rank identity tensor and A * ∈ [0, 1] is the depolarization factor for a spheroid where β pq is the dielectric polarizability defined by Moreover, in these three cases, the generalized cavity intensity field F(x; A * ) reduces to respectively, where D(x) is the displacement field. Importantly, among these three cases, the original and modified strong-contrast expansions arise only when the exclusion region is taken to be a sphere, as we elaborate below. We now show that our formalism yields an exact relation between the polarization field P(x) and the applied field E 0 (x) that is nonlocal in space. It is more convenient at this stage to utilize a compact linear operator notation, which enables us to express the integral equation where we temporarily drop the superscript q. A combination of this equation with Eq. ( The desired nonlocal relation is obtained from Eq. ( where is a generalized scattering operator that has superior mathematical properties compared to the scattering operator T that arises in standard multiple-scattering theory where boldface numbers 1, 2 are shorthand notations for position vectors r 1 , r 2 . Ensemble averaging Eq. ( where the operator S depends on relative positions, i.e., S (1, 2) = S (1 -2), and angular brackets denote an ensemble average. Formally, the nonlocal relation Taking the Fourier transform of (40) yields a compact Fourier representation of this nonlocal relation, namely, where implying that the wave vector k in Eq. ( As in the static case Inverting this expression leads to the following nonlocal constitutive relation: where L (q) e (r) is a kernel that is derived immediately below and explicitly given by We are not aware of any previous work that derives such an exact nonlocal homogenized constitutive relation Note that the support l s of the kernel L (q) e (r) relative to the incident wavelength λ determines the degree of spatial dispersion. When λ is finite, the relation between P (x) and F (x) in Eq. ( . Indeed, in the static limit, L (q) e (r) tends to a Dirac delta function δ(r), expression derived earlier The nonlocal constitutive relation in direct space, Eq. ( The wave-vector-dependent effective tensor L (q) e (k q ) is postulated (see discussion in the Supplementary Material [81]) to be given by This linear fractional form for L (q) e (k) is consistent with the one derived for the static limit Comparing Eq. ( where A (p) n (k q ) is a wave-vector-dependent second-rank tensor that is a functional involving the set of correlation functions (defined in Sec. II A) and products of the second-rank tensor field H (q) (r), which is explicitly given as [see also Eq. ( where k q ≡ |k q |. Specifically, for n = 2 and n ≥ 3, these n-point tensors associated with the polarized phase p are, respectively, given by where ǫ dr ≡ lim ǫ→0 + |r|>ǫ dr and ∆ n is a position-dependent determinant involving correlation functions of the polarized phase p up to the n-point level: For macroscopically isotropic media, the effective dielectric tensor is isotropic, i.e., ε e (k q ) = ε e (k q ) I. The corresponding strong-contrast expansion for ε e (k q ) is obtained by taking the trace of both sides of Eq. ( where ó /d for n ≥ 2 and Tr[ ] denotes the trace operation. Furthermore, for statistically isotropic media, the effective dielectric constant becomes independent of the direction of the wave vector, i.e., ε e (k q ) = ε e (k q ). i. Importantly, the strong-contrast expansion ( ii. The fact that the exact expansion iii. Note that Eq. ( iv. The exact expansions represented by ( v. For d = 2, the strong-contrast expansion applies for TE polarization only. This implies that the electric field and wave vector are parallel to the plane or transverse to an axis of symmetry in a 3D system whose cross sections are identical. vi. Formally, the original strong-contrast expansions that apply in the quasistatic regime vii. For statistically isotropic media, the effective phase speed c e (k q ) and attenuation coefficient γ e (k q ) are determined by the scalar effective dielectric constant ε e (k q ): where n e (k q ) and κ e (k q ) are the effective refractive and extinction indices, respectively. The quantity exp(-2πγ e /c e ) is the factor by which the incidentwave amplitude is attenuated for a period 2π/ω. viii. The strong-contrast formalism is a significant departure from perturbative expansions obtained from standard multiple-scattering theory The form of the strong-contrast expansion parameter β pq in Eq. ( which implies that the strong-contrast expansion the coated spheres in the d orthogonal directions lead to oriented coated ellipsoids that are optimal for the macroscopically anisotropic case. The lower bound corresponds to the case when the high-dielectric-constant phase is the dispersed, disconnected phase and the upper bound corresponds to the instance in which the high-dielectricconstant phase is the connected matrix. Thus, Torquato We now show how lower-order truncations of the series (49) can well approximate higher-order functionals (i.e., higher-order diagrams) of the exact series to all orders in terms of lower-order diagrams. Such truncations of strong-contrast expansions are tantamount to approximate but resummations of the strong expansions, which enables multiple-scattering and spatial dispersion effects to be accurately captured to all orders. Solving the lefthand side of Eq. ( Expanding Eq. ( where the first several functionals B (p) n (k q ) are explicitly given in terms of n as where T n stands for n successive inner products of a second-rank tensor T . Let us now compare the exact expansion where the nth-order functional C (p) n (k q ) for any n is given in terms of the volume fraction φ p and A (p) 2 (k q ), which has the following diagrammatic representation: Here the solid and wavy lines joining two nodes represent the spatial correlation via χ V (r) and a wave vectordependent Green's function H (q) (r) e -ikq•r between the nodes, respectively. The black node indicates a volume integral and carries a factor of dε q . The first several functionals C (p) n (k q ) are explicitly given as Thus, comparing Clearly, truncation of Eq. ( Here we describe lower-order truncations of the strongcontrast expansions that are expected to yield accurate closed-form formulas for ε e (k q ) that apply over a broad range of wavelengths (k q l 1), volume fractions and contrast ratios for a wide class of microstructures. For the ensuing treatment, it is convenient to rewrite the expansions where the M th-order remainder term is defined as Truncating the exact nonlocal expansion (63) at the twoand three-point levels, i.e., setting R 2 (k q ) = 0 and R 3 (k q ) = 0, respectively, yields Compared to the quasistatic approximation All of the applications considered in this paper, will focus on the case of macroscopically isotropic media, i.e., they are described by the scalar effective dielectric constant ε e (k q ) = Tr [ε e (k q )]/d but depend on the direction of the wave vector k q . Solving Eq. ( where β pq is defined in Eq. ó /d, and F (Q) is what we call the nonlocal attenuation function of a composite for reasons we describe below. The direct-and Fourier-space representations of F (Q) are given as The exponential exp(-iQ • r) in Eq. ( For statistically isotropic media, the effective dielectric constant as well as the attenuation function are independent of the direction of the incident wave vector k q , and thus, they can be considered as functions of the wave number, i.e., ε e (k q ) = ε e (k q ) and F (k q ) = F (k q ). Then, the real and imaginary parts of Eq. ( where Eq. ( Here we extend the validity of the strong-contrast approximation (67) so that it is accurate at larger wave numbers and hence better captures spatial dispersion. This is done by an appropriate rescaling of the wave number in the reference phase, k q , which we show is tanta-mount to approximately accounting for higher-order contributions in the remainder term R 2 (k q ). Given that the strong-contrast expansion for isotropic media perturbs around the Hashin-Shtrikman structures (see Fig. which gives the Hashin-Shtrikman lower bound and upper bound if ε p > ε q and ε p < ε q , respectively. This scaling yields the following scaled strong-contrast approximation for statistically isotropic media: We now show that the scaled approximation where k e (ω) ≡ ε e (ω)ω/c = ε e (ω) /ε q k q is the effective wave number at a frequency ω, and ε e (ω) is the exact effective dynamic dielectric constant, assuming a well-defined homogenization description When the functional form of A (p) 2 (Q) or, equivalently, F (Q) is available, it is possible to solve Eq. ( We consider four models of 2D and 3D disordered media to understand the effect of microstructure on the effective dynamic dielectric constant, two of which are nonhyperuniform (overlapping spheres and equilibrium hard-sphere packings) and two of which are hyperuniform (hyperuniform polydisperse packings and stealthy hyperuniform packings of identical spheres). The particles of dielectric constant ε 2 are distributed throughout a matrix of dielectric constant ε 1 . We also compute the spectral density for each model, which is the required microstructural information to evaluate the nonlocal strong-contrast approximations discussed in Sec. VB. Representative images of configurations of the four aforementioned models of 2D disordered particulate media are depicted in Fig. Overlapping spheres (also called the fully-penetrablesphere model) refer to an uncorrelated (Poisson) distribution of spheres of radius a throughout a matrix where φ 1 = exp(-ρ v 1 (a)) is the volume fraction of the matrix phase (phase 1), v 1 (a) is given by ( where x ≡ r/2a, and Θ(x) (equal to 1 for x > 0 and zero otherwise) is the Heaviside step function. For d = 2 and d = 3, the particle phase (phase 2) percolates when φ 2 ≈ 0.68 (Ref. Another disordered nonhyperuniform model we treat is distributions of equilibrium (Gibbs) of identical hard spheres of radius a along the stable fluid branch where q = 2Qa, Using this solution in conjunction with Eq. ( Class I hyperuniform packings of spheres with a polydispersity in size can be constructed from nonhyperuniform progenitor point patterns via a tessellation-based procedure , where ρ is the number density of particle centers and a represents the mean sphere radius. In the small-|Q| regime, the spectral densities of the resulting particulate composites exhibit a power-law scaling χV (Q) ∼ |Q| 4 , which are of class I. Stealthy hyperuniform particle systems, which are also class I, are defined by the spectral density vanishing around the origin, i.e., χV (Q) = 0 for 0 < |Q| ≤ Q U ; see Eq. where and a soft-core repulsive term In contrast to the usual collective-coordinate procedure Here, we plot the spectral density χV (Q) for the four models at the selected particle-phase volume fraction of φ 2 = 0.25; see Fig. We report some general behaviors of the nonlocal attenuation function F (Q) [cf. Eqs. ( The function F (Q) depends on the microstructure via the spectral density χV (Q). Thus, assuming that the latter quantity has the power-law scaling χV (Q) ∼ Q α as Q → 0, the asymptotic behavior of F (Q) in the longwavelength limit (Q → 0) follows as where we use Eqs. ( Thus, hyperuniform media are less lossy than their nonhyperuniform counterparts in the quasistatic regime. In the case of stealthy hyperuniform media [i.e., χV (Q) = 0 for 0 ≤ Q < Q U ], the imaginary part of F (Q) defined by Eq. ( (The Supplementary Material [81] describes how the local attenuation function F (Q) derived in Ref. where ε HS is given in Eq. Figure In Ref. The general simulation setup is schematically illustrated in Fig. 1. For a given medium, we obtain the steady-state spatial distributions of electric field E y (r, ω) and electric displacement field D y (r, ω) at a given frequency ω (or the corresponding wave number k 1 ). Specifically, the planar source generates Gaussian pulses of electric fields that propagate along the x direction with wave number k 1 that spans between min[k 1 ] and max[k 1 ]. Using the aforementioned MEEP package }, where c is the speed of light in vacuum. We then compute the temporal Fourier transforms of these fields inside packings. The values of the simulation parameters (indicated in Fig. 2. At each value of k 1 , we postprocess E y (r, ω) and D y (r, ω) to estimate the effective dielectric constant ε * (k 1 , ω) of a single configuration by solving the following self-consistent equation: where , k e is a complex-valued effective wave number, and where V is a rectangular parallelepiped subregion within the composite (shown in gray in Fig. 3. Steps 1-2 are repeated for a sufficient number of configurations for disordered media. Then, we compute the effective dielectric constant at a given k 1 by ensemble averaging ε * (k 1 ), i.e., ε e (k 1 ) = ε * (k 1 ) . It is important to note that we ensure that the run times employed in step 1 are sufficiently long such that the computed effective dielectric achieve stable and accurate steady-state values. We emphasize that the result ε * (k 1 ) obtained from Eq. (87) in step 2 is nonlocal in space because it is calculated from the nonlocal constitutive relation Dy (k e , ω) = ε * (k 1 ) Ẽy (k e , ω). For periodic media, step 3 is unnecessary because all configurations are identical. In this section, we compare our simulations of the effective dynamic dielectric constant ε e (k 1 ) for various 2D and 3D ordered and disordered model microstructures to the predictions of the strong-contrast formulas as well as to conventional approximations, such as MGA We first carry out our FDTD simulations for the effective dynamic dielectric constant ε e (k 1 ) of 2D and 3D periodic packings (square and simple-cubic lattice packings), which necessarily depends on the direction of the incident wave k 1 . While these periodic packings are macroscopically isotropic, due to their cubic symmetry, they are statistically anisotropic (see Supplementary To test the predictive capacity of approximation formulas for ε e (k 1 ) for disordered media as measured against simulations, we choose to study two distinctly different models: disordered nonhyperuniform packings (equilibrium packings) and disordered stealthy hyperuniform disordered packings [i.e., χV (Q) = 0 for 0 ≤ Qa < 1.5] for both 2D and 3D. Again, we compare our simulation results to the MGAs [Eqs. strong-contrast approximation On the other hand, the scaled strong-contrast ap- proximation provides excellent estimates of ε e (k 1 ) for both disordered models, even for large wave numbers (0 ≤ k 1 a ≤ 1); see Fig. Having established the accuracy of the scaled strongcontrast approximation We now examine how the imaginary part Im[ε e ] varies with the contrast ratio ε 2 /ε 1 for the disordered models for a given large wave number k 1 inside the transparency interval for 2D and 3D stealthy hyperuniform systems. These results are summarized in Fig. We also study the effect of packing fraction φ 2 on the effective phase speed c e (k 1 ) and effective attenuation coefficient γ e (k 1 ), as defined by Eqs. ( All previous closed-form homogenization estimates of the effective dynamic dielectric constant apply only at long wavelengths (quasistatic regime) and for very special macroscopically isotropic disordered composite microstructures, namely, nonoverlapping spheres or spheroids in a matrix. In this work, we lay the theoretical foundation that enables us to substantially extend previous work in both its generality and applicability. First, we derive exact homogenized constitutive relations for the effective dynamic dielectric constant tensor ε e (k q ) that are nonlocal in space from first principles. Second, our strong-contrast representation of ε e (k q ) exactly accounts for complete microstructural information (infinite set of n-point correlation functions) for arbitrary microstructures and hence multiple scattering to all orders for the range of wave numbers for which our extended homogenization theory applies, i.e., 0 ≤ |k q |l 1 (where l is a characteristic heterogeneity length scale). Third, we extract from the exact expansions accurate nonlocal closed-form approximate formulas for ε e (k q ), relations Having established the accuracy of the scaled strongcontrast approximation The accuracy of our nonlocal closed-form formulas has important practical implications, since one can now use them to accurately and efficiently predict the effective wave characteristics well beyond the quasistatic regime of a wide class of composite microstructures without having to perform computationally expensive full-blown simulations. Thus, our nonlocal formulas can be used to accelerate the discovery of novel electromagnetic composites by appropriate tailoring of the spectral densities and then constructing the corresponding microstructures by using the Fourier-space inverse methods Previously, disordered media were often described using cluster expansions There are a variety of directions for future research. First, our formalism can be straightforwardly extended to heterogeneous materials composed of more than two phases or continuous media. Second, it is also of interest to extend our formalism to applications and phenomena (e.g., magnetic effects) relevant to the smaller wavelengths noted for metamaterials mogeneous material with a dynamic effective dielectric constant ε e (k q ), Kramers-Kronig relations immediately apply to the exact strong-contrast expansion ∞ 0 dq q Im[ε e (q)] q 2 -k q 2 , (B1) Im[ε e (k q )] = -2k q π p.v. ∞ 0 dq Re[ε e (q)] -ε e (∞) where we assume a linear dispersion relation in the reference phase (i.e., k q = √ ε q ω/c) and lim ω→∞ ε e (ω) = ε q is real-valued. The Kramers-Kronig relations may or may not be obeyed when the strong-contrast expansion is truncated at the two-point level, yielding Eq. ( We begin by rewriting either strong-contrast approximation as ε e (k q ) ≈ ε q + [a + b F (k q )] -1 , where a and b are nonzero real numbers. The general analytic proper-ties of the nonlocal attenuation function F (Q) (detailed in the Supplementary Material [81]) induce ε e (k q ) to have the following three properties necessary to satisfy the Kramers-Kronig relations (B1) and (B2): (i) ε e (k q ) is an analytic function in the upper half-plane of k q , (ii) ε(k q ) -ε q vanishes like 1/|k q | as |k q | goes to infinity, and (iii) Re[ε e (k q )] and Im[ε(k q )] are even and odd functions of k q , respectively. Property (i) is valid if a+b F (k q ) = 0, which is met for all disordered systems considered here. The fact that the strong-contrast approximations satisfy Eqs. (B1) and (B2) makes physical sense since F (Q) involves G (q) (x, x ′ ) [cf. Eq. ( of phase 1 at volume fraction φ 1 is statistically identical to that of phase 2 in the system when the volume fraction of phase 1 is 1 -φ 1 where A 2 (ω) ≡ d -1 + A 2 (k 2 ) /φ 1 + A 2 (k 1 ) /φ 2 , and we choose the physically meaningful solution from the quadratic equation. Note that in the static limit, A 2 (ω) converges to d -1, and thus Eq. (D2) reduces to the well-known self-consistent formula Examples of phase-inversion symmetric media include the d-dimensional random checkerboard where a positive quantity r 0 represents a characteristic length scale. Here, we take r 0 = a/2. Figure and