In a solid-state diffusional phase transformation involving nucleation and growth, the size of the critical nucleus for a homogeneous process ( * * homo r r = ) has been assumed to be a time invariant constant of the transformation. The strain associated with the process has a positive energy contribution and leads to an increase in the value of * r , with respect to that for nucleation from a liquid. With the progress of such a transformation, the strain energy stored in the matrix increases and nuclei forming at a later stage encounter a strained matrix. Using devitrification of a bulk metallic glass as a model system, we demonstrate that r * is not a cardinal time invariant constant for homogeneous nucleation and can increase or decrease depending on the strain energy penalty. We show that the assumption regarding the constancy of * r is true only in the early stages of the transformation and establish that the progress of the transformation leads to an altered magnitude of r*, which is a function of the microstructural details, geometrical variables and physical parameters. With the aid of high-resolution lattice fringe imaging and computations of * r , we further argue that, 'liquid-like' homogeneous nucleation can occur and that the conclusions are applicable to a broad set of solid-state diffusional transformations. The above effect 'opens up' a lower barrier transformation pathway arising purely from the internal variables of the system. A first order diffusional phase transformation proceeds by nucleation and growth. The control of nucleation and growth is of paramount importance in diverse scientific and engineering applications ) via homogeneous nucleation is given by: ( ) ( ) where, V G ∆ is the Gibbs volume free energy difference between the parent and product phases, 'V' is the volume of the product phase, 'A' is the interfacial area, γ is the interfacial energy and S G ∆ is the strain energy associated with the transformation. For a nucleus of spherical shape of radius 'r', equation The critical size for homogeneous nucleation ( * * homo r r = ) is determined by finding the extremum of the function homo ( ) G r ∆ . Two special cases of the nucleation of a crystal are noteworthy: (i) that from a liquid and (ii) that from an amorphous matrix. In the former case the strain energy term is absent and the critical size of the nucleus is: * The later case forms a model system of a solid to solid transformation, especially from an experimental perspective, due to the following attributes. (i) The degree of transformation is amenable to good control (via time and temperature). (ii) In the absence of 'interference' of the lattice fringes from the matrix, the crystallite size can be measured with relative ease, using the high-resolution lattice fringe imaging (HRLFI) technique. (iii) The isotropic properties of the matrix enable the simplification of the analysis. (iv) Sites of heterogeneous nucleation (like grain boundaries, dislocations, etc.) are absent, which can dominate over the homogenous nucleation processes in a typical solid to solid diffusional phase transformation. For the specific case of the formation of a crystalline nucleus in an amorphous matrix, the strain energy associated with the transformation can be written as ( ) ( ) where, 'f m ' is the linear mismatch between the nucleus and the glass matrix (the linear mismatch is one third of the volumetric mismatch), 'G' & 'ν' are shear modulus and Poisson's ratio respectively of the product phase, which is assumed to be isotropic in this simplified formula. Equation Where, is the misfit strain energy per unit volume. Here, the '∞' in the subscript represents to a single nucleus in an infinite matrix. Needless to point out, the shape of the nucleus will determine the magnitude of the energies involved in equation ( Experimentally, HRLFI has been the preferred technique for the study of nucleation; especially in the determination of the critical nucleus size Computational techniques like molecular dynamics and density functional theory have also been used to study the nucleation behaviour in solids The effect of an altered strain energy penalty on the magnitude of r * , has been investigated for the case of martensitic transformations with that experimentally measured using HRLFI. This work also served to validate the utility of CNT in the context of computation of r * for the devitrification of a bulk metallic glass (BMG). In an interesting study, Gómez et al In the context of nucleation in a solid-to-solid diffusional transformation, the standard analysis involves the formation of a single nucleus in an infinite matrix. With the progress of the transformation this picture is altered and nuclei forming at a later stage do so in the proximity of pre-existing grown crystallites. The strain field of these pre-existing crystallites not only interacts amongst themselves in a complex fashion; but also alters the 'energy accounting', which arises due to the altered strain energy penalty for nucleation at a specific coordinate. In the current work, we use high-resolution lattice fringe imaging (HRLFI) and finite element computations to achieve the following tasks. We use the CNT in our computations and aspects regarding its utility are discussed later in the script and in the supplementary information. The following parameters are required for the computation of the value of r * (using equation ( (ii) E strain . Further, the elastic constants of the phases and the value of the misfit strain (f m ) are required for the determination of E strain . We consider here briefly the methodology for the calculation of these quantities and details can be found elsewhere ( As alluded to before, with the progress of the transformation the stress state in the matrix becomes complex due to a overlap of the stress fields arising from individual crystallites. Model three-dimensional finite element simulations have been used for the computation of the strain energy of the system, to elucidate the effect of nucleation in the vicinity of single and multiple crystallites. Figure A plot of the hydrostatic stress contours ( hyd σ ) in the presence of a spherical nucleus (r = 1.1 nm) at a distance of 2 nm (d) from the grown crystal (R = 5 nm) is shown in Figure From the stress plot it is seen that tensile and compressive regions exist in the matrix around the large/grown crystallite. In the figure the nucleus is positioned in a compressive region of the large crystal. If nucleation occurs in the tensile region of the large crystallite, this will lead to an increase in the magnitude of r * . The converse will be true for the nucleation in the compressive region of the large crystallite. The details regarding the finite element models and the importance of the role of hydrostatic stress and other variables in the process, is described in the supplementary material. (Insert Figure A brief outline of the experimental details is considered here and further details can be found in the supplementary information. The (Cu 64 Zr 36 ) 96 Al 4 BMG is produced by arc melting followed by suction casting in a copper mold. The following heat treatments have been followed to obtain partially crystallized samples: (P1) 200°C for 120 min, (P2) 325°C for 30 min and (P3) 200°C for 120 min. The temperatures for the heat treatment are based on the nucleation and growth rate curves (supplementary material). In P1 the sample is annealed in the nucleation dominated regime to obtain a sparse dispersion of nuclei in an amorphous matrix. In P2 the nuclei are grown in the growth dominated regime to obtain crystallites in the size range of 5-15 nm. In P3, akin to P1, the treatment is carried out in the nucleation dominated regime to obtain nuclei between the larger crystallites. The above treatments are based on the following rationale: the nucleation is P1 is in a strain free matrix, with little interference between strain fields of the nuclei; while the nucleation in P3 is in the strain field of pre-existing crystallites. These crystallites have grown during the P2 treatment. A total of seven samples were investigated to obtain HRLFI from nuclei. A point to be noted here is that, BMGs in contrast to marginal glasses are produced by a slow cooling rate. The abscissa (∆E) is a measure of the strain energy cost difference between nucleation in a strainfree matrix, versus that in a strained matrix. The different configurations considered give rise to a range of ∆E values and a negative value of ∆E implies a reduced strain energy cost for nucleation. Additional insets to the figure show selected HRLFI from nuclei, which have a range of r * values. The limit of the LFI technique to measure crystallite sizes is about 0.55 nm, which corresponds to five bright fringes and is marked as a broad band in the figure. The details regarding this aspect and the computational models can be found in the supplemental material. The following salient observations can be made from a study of Figure (A-iii) The presence of multiple 'favourably oriented' crystals accentuates the effect on * r . A-i (a) implies that r * has a constant value in the absence of stress in the matrix. In a transformation, this scenario occurs at the early stages; wherein the density of nuclei is sparse and no growth has taken place. This result, additionally serves to validate the computational methodology adopted to determine the value of r * . A-i (b) implies r * is not a cardinal constant for a solid to solid diffusional transformation and that liquid like nucleation can occur in a bulk specimen. This scenario of variable r * will prevail for most parts of the transformation. A-i (c) is a natural consequence of the fact that, presented with a choice between higher a lower barrier height, the system chooses the later. In other words, since crystalline order arises in an amorphous matrix via a 'statistical fluctuation', the probability of occurrence of smaller crystal exceeds that of a larger crystal. A-ii and A-iii highlight the fact that local microstructural details dictate the increase or decrease in the value of * r and that a significant decrease in the magnitude of * r can occur in a highly strained matrix. It is noteworthy that, the computational models with elastic anisotropy, are able to capture the essential aspects of the experimental results. (Insert Figure The results obtained in the current work are for a specific system (Cu-Zr-Al system); however, given that the material properties of this system are in the typical range, we expect a broader applicability of the conclusions (i.e., for solid to solid phase transformation, including that for the nucleation of a crystal from a crystalline matrix). A detailed discussion regarding this aspect can be found in the supplementary information and an explicit validation of the same forms scope for the future work. In the current work a reasonably good explanation of the experimental observations is made via a computational methodology involving various assumptions. An analysis regarding the same can be found in the supplemental material. This includes alternatives to the CNT The following conclusions can be drawn from the current work, with respect to nucleation in a solid to solid diffusional phase transformation. (1) With the progress of the transformation the strain energy penalty for the formation of a nucleus is altered, leading to a variability in the magnitude of the critical nucleus size (r * ) (i.e. r * is not a cardinal invariant). (2) This 'time dependent' penalty is a function of the microstructural details, geometrical variables and physical parameters like anisotropy and crystallographic orientation. (3) The interaction of stress fields of the nucleus with a prior formed crystal can lead to a decrease or an increase in the value of r * . The magnitude of the depression can be significant, which can result in a 'liquid-like' nucleation in a solid state transformation. (4) The aforementioned effect 'opens up' a lower barrier transformation pathway arising purely from the internal variables of the system. ∆G (× 10 -20 For the computational plot the ordinate is the strain energy difference between nucleation in a strained versus that in an unstrained matrix (∆E). The experimental samples are of two types: one after P1 treatment and one after P3 treatment. The horizontal dashed lines correspond to * bulk r (computed), * bulk r (experimental) and * liquid r . The limit of the HRLFI technique in the measurement of crystal sizes is marked as a broad band (note that this is not the limit of HRTEM, but a practical limit of LFI in the measurement of sizes of crystals). The insets include: schematics of the computational configurations and HRLFI from Cr 10 Zr 7 crystallites. The radii for the experimental crystallite sizes are that of an equivalent circle. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was used to confirm the amorphous structure of the suction cast sample (using CuK α radiation in a PANalytical Empyrean instrument). The glass transition temperature was determined using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC, TA Instruments, model SDT Q600). DSC was performed under a flow of pure argon at the heating rate 10 K/s. The following heat treatments are used to obtain partially crystallized samples: (P1) 200°C for 120 min, (P2) 325°C for 30 min and (P3) 200°C for 120 min. The temperatures for the heat treatments are chosen based on the nucleation and growth rate curves (Section-1.2.3) and the DSC results. The sample was sealed in a evacuated quartz tube along with titanium (Ti) getter in order to minimize oxidation during the heat treatment. In the P1 treatment, the sample is annealed in the nucleation dominated regime to obtain a sparse dispersion of nuclei in an amorphous matrix. The P2 treatment is designed in such a way as to induce the growth of the nuclei which formed during the P1 treatment. This treatment, which is carried out in the growth dominated regime, is used to obtain large/grown crystallites in the size range of 5-15 nm. The P3 treatment, akin to P1, is carried out in the nucleation dominated regime; in order to obtain fresh nuclei in the regions in-between the larger crystallites. The above treatments are based on the following rationale. The nucleation which occurs during the P1 treatment is in a strain free matrix (with little interference between strain fields of the nuclei). On the other hand, some of the nuclei which form during the P3 treatment are in proximity to the grown crystals and hence form in the strain field of pre existing crystallites. A total of seven samples were investigated to obtain HRLFI from nuclei. A standard technique is used for the preparation of electron transparent samples for transmission electron microscopy To calibrate the scale bar of the transmission electron micrographs, a standard gold sample was used. The calibrated scale was used to determine the crystallite size by counting the number of lattice fringes. This was performed by measuring the distance from one bright fringe to another bright fringe. This implies that the technique has an inherent error of about one fringe spacing (i.e. if two dark fringes are present at the end of the 'representative integration line'). Additionally, given that the data is acquired via a digital CCD, an error of at least one digital pixel (~0.032nm) exists. The error bars are not marked in Figure In the computation of strain energy using the finite element method, the linear misfit is used as an input parameter. The misfit can be calculated using the volume or density mismatch between the glass and the crystal. The density of the glass has been measured using the standard Archimedes method In this section theoretical calculations are made to calculate: (i) the interfacial free-energy (γ), (ii) the Gibbs free energy for the transformation ( V G ∆ ) and (iii) the nucleation and growth rates. The negentropic model has been used for computing the interfacial free-energy The crystal-glass interfacial free energy (γ) is a difficult quantity to compute and often it is observed that the value of crystal-liquid interfacial energy is a good enough approximation and can be computed using where, α is the Turnbull coefficient which depends on the crystal structure, ). The value of V G ∆ can be determined using the prescription of Zhou and Napolitano is that due to Turnbull , where T m is the melting temperature. It is noteworthy that in the current case both these approaches give a very similar value of V G ∆ . The choice of the temperatures for the heat-treatments P1, P2 and P3, relies on the knowledge of the nucleation and growth rates as a function of the temperature. These rates can be computed using the classical nucleation theory where, v A is a constant, η is viscosity, G ∆ is the difference in the Gibbs free energy difference between the glass and the crystal (per unit volume), B K is the Boltzmann constant and σ is the interfacial energy. ( ) where, ( ) , 'l' is the average atomic diameter and 'n' is the atomic volume (l = 2.668 Å and n = 5.549 Å 3 for CuZrAl system). The Stoke-Einstein equation has been used in equation ( The plot of nucleation and growth rates calculated using equations (1,2) are shown in Figure where, Q, p T , E, R and ( ) / P dx dT are the heating rate (K/min), the peak temperature (K), the activation energy (J), the ideal gas constant (J/mole/K) and the maximum crystallization rate respectively. At the annealing temperature of 200°C the value of the exponent (n) is 4.7, thus indicating that we are in the nucleation dominated regime and hence we can be reasonably certain that the crystallites observed in the TEM are 'critical nuclei' (i.e. have not undergone any significant growth). It should be noted that, the JMAK model used is strictly applicable only in the macroscale, wherein 'random homogeneous nucleation and isotropic growth' conditions exist. Modifications to the model for thin films have been presented in literature, The properties of the glass and Cu 10 Zr 7 crystal, which are required as inputs to the finite element models, is as follows. Y glass = 96.4 GPa, ν glass = 0.355, Y crystal = 131.0 GPa & ν crystal = 0.326, ρ glass (density)= 7.17 g/cm 3 and ρ crystal = 7.64 g/cm 3 (volumetric misfit = 6.20%, linear misfit = 2.07%). The elastic constants of the Cu 10 Zr 7 crystal are: The elastic moduli for glass (Y & ν) have been determined by applying the 'rule of mixtures' and is calculated as: ; where, M & M i are the elastic constants for glass and the constituent elements respectively and f i denotes the atomic percentage of the constituent elements In the 2D axi-symmetry models the domain is meshed with linear CAX3 elements. In the 3D models the geometry is meshed with hexahedra (C3D8R) and tetrahedra (C3D10) elements. The linear mismatch (f m ) is calculated from the volumetric mismatch, which is computed using the density values of the crystal and glass phases. This misfit strain is introduced as thermal strain in the region of the domain corresponding to the crystal(s). The boundary conditions imposed in the models are shown in the respective figures (main manuscript and Section 1.3.1). The size of the domain is kept large enough in comparison to the size of the crystallites, such that it behaves practically as infinite. Mesh convergence is ensured in all cases. The numerical model implemented using Abaqus 2019 software In the main manuscript two finite element models for the homogeneous nucleation of a Cu 10 Zr 7 crystallite in an amorphous (glass) matrix were considered: (i) a single nucleus in an 'infinite' matrix and (ii) a nucleus in the presence of a larger crystal (radius = 5 nm). These two models are expected to capture the 'essential physics' related to the effect of nucleation in a strained matrix, with respect that in a strain-free matrix. In a 'real microstructure', the effects observed for the case of a nucleation in the presence of a large crystal, is expected to be either accentuated or attenuated. I.e., if the nucleus forms in a region of tensile stress, the strain energy penalty will increase; while the converse will be true for nucleation in a compressive region. The additional models considered in this section are to: (i) evaluate the effect of selected parameters or (ii) study the effect of the presence of multiple crystallites; on the magnitude of r * for nucleation. The models considered are as listed below (Models M1-M7). In some of the cases the same model is utilized with a change in the value of the pertinent parameters. The relative crystallographic orientation between the 'large crystal' (L) and the nucleus (N) is designated by specifying two parallel basis vectors of the orthogonal set (M1) Size of the pre-existing crystallite (Figure In this model the nucleation of a spherical crystal in the proximity of a grown/large crystal is considered. In the main manuscript, the size of the larger crystal was kept constant at 5 nm. In the current model, a larger grown crystal is considered (R = 10 nm, & r 1 = r 2 ). This model is the same that in Figure (M2) Elastic Isotropic conditions (Figure The matrix has an amorphous structure and hence has isotropic properties. In this model the effect of isotropic material properties for the crystal on the value of r * is evaluated. A 2D axi-symmetric finite element model is used for the computations (Figure (M3) The shape of the nucleus (Figure The shape of the nucleus is expected to affect the value of r * . In order to keep the analysis simple and tractable, only two additional shapes are considered: the oblate and the prolate ellipsoids. Two values of the ratio of r 1 to r 2 are considered to obtain a prolate and an oblate spheroidal shape. The values of r 1 /r 2 chosen are: 0.5 and 2. The relative crystallographic orientations of the nucleus and the large crystal are as shown in the figure . (M4) Hydrostatic stress (Figure The actual state of stress experienced by a nucleus in the presence of a 'microstructure of large crystals' is expected to be complex. Given that the crystal has a higher density as compared to that of the corresponding glass, the hydrostatic component of the stress imposed by the large crystal plays the key role in determining the strain energy of the system, on the formation of a nucleus in its vicinity. Keeping this in view, the model shown in Figure of the effect of stress on r * (= * hydrostatic r ). (M5) Magnitude of volumetric misfit strain (Figure A point of interest is the value of the misfit in determining the magnitude of r * . In this model a hypothetical system is considered, wherein the properties of the matrix and crystallites have been kept constant and the value of the volumetric misfit has been varied. The effect of misfit strain on the magnitude of r * is computed using the model in Figure (M6) Presence of two large crystallites (Figure The presence of two large/grown crystals in identical orientation and in proximity is expected to accentuate the effect observed for a single large crystal. The crystallographic orientation of the large crystals is identical and is as marked in the L N . The orientation of the nucleus is such that, the tensile region surrounding the nucleus is aligned in a direction parallel to the inter-crystal axis. The relative orientations have chosen so as to accentuate the effect which was observed (on the magnitude of r * ) in the presence of a single large crystallite. (M7) Presence of three crystallites (Figure In this section we present the following: (i) results from the suction cast (Cu 64 Zr 36 ) 96 Al 4 alloy (XRD pattern, TEM results, DSC results), (ii) HRLFI from the partially crystallized alloy. Figure Figure The density of glass is determined by Archimedes method is (ρ glass =) 7.17 g/cm 3 . The density of the Cu 10 Zr 7 crystal is (ρ crystal ) = 7.64 g/cm 3 . In this sub-section the results related to the finite element simulations are presented. These results are generated using the models considered earlier. The value of r * for R = 5 nm and d = 2 nm was computed to be 1.2 nm. On increasing the size of the large crystal to 10 nm (= R), keeping d = 2 nm, the value of r * decreased to 1.1 nm. The hydrostatic stress contours corresponding to these two cases is shown in Figure the region occupied by compressive stress of magnitude in the range -0.1 to -0.53 GPa is larger for the bigger crystal). Hence, the nucleus can be accommodated in the high magnitude compressive region of the larger crystal with relative ease as compared to the smaller one. This implies that with a progress of the transformation, as the size of the crystallites increases, the magnitude of r * can display a higher magnitude of decrease (for nucleation in the 'favourable' region). The plot of hydrostatic stress for the case of a nucleus in the presence of larger crystallite (R = 5 nm) was presented as an inset to Figure-1c in the main manuscript. Figure The results from Model-M6, wherein two large crystals accentuate the effect of the presence of a single large crystal, is shown in Figure ). Figure A discussion of few important points is warranted here. These pertain to: (i) alternate methods for the determination of r * , (ii) the use of an appropriate nucleation theory, (iii) the values of the material properties used in the computations, (iv) the use of HRLFI for the measurement of crystallite sizes and (v) the broader applicability of the conclusions. Ab-initio density functional theory (DFT) is an sophisticated technique for atomic level computations. However, for the systems sizes involved in the current set of computations, this approach will prove to be 'computationally prohibitive'. On the other hand, molecular dynamics (MD) can handle larger systems sizes; but, the timescales that the technique can handle is typically of the order of microseconds However, given that the timescales involved in 'rare events' like nucleation exceeds milliseconds, this requirement lies well beyond a routine computation. This is especially true for the kind of work in the current investigation, wherein more than one crystallite is involved. The availability of reliable interatomic potentials for alloys (binary and multicomponent) is another challenge with the use of MD. The fruitful use of these techniques to accurately determine the magnitude of r * (for a given microstructure), forms scope for future work. The accurate determination of the interfacial energy is a difficult task, even for a planar crystal-crystal interface. Hence, the computation of crystallite size and orientation dependent glass-crystal interfacial energy is a really challenging one. This needs to be taken up in the future to obtain quantitatively accurate values of r * . The classical nucleation theory (CNT), which is at the heart of the concept of 'statistical random fluctuations', has served as a good theory to explain nucleation in diverse systems for more than 150 years Material properties like elastic constants, interface energy, etc., are expected to be size dependent, especially in the nanoscale regime. In the current work 'macroscale'/bulk properties have been used, which has been necessitated by the lack of sufficiently accurate computations of the size dependent values of these parameters. Improvement on the assumptions used in the models, along with the use of accurate values for the material properties for the computation of r * , forms scope for the future work. As discussed in the main manuscript, the devitrification of glass serves as a model system to study nucleation behaviour, in a solid state phase transformation. One important reason for this relates to the use of HRLFI for the measurement of crystallite sizes. However, this technique imposes a lower limit to the size of a crystallite which can be measured. This lower limit is set by microscopic and crystallographic variables. A practical limit of about 0.55 nm is shown as broad band in Figure The key conclusion of the current investigation is that, the critical radius for nucleation (r * ) is a time dependent variable for a solid state diffusional transformation. assumption that r * is a cardinal constant is disproved by using the example of the formation of the Cu 10 Zr 7 crystal during the devitrification of a Cu-Zr-Al glass. This system was chosen purely as a model system for the reasons listed in the main manuscript, without any expectation or bias. This alludes to the possibility that, the conclusions drawn have a broader applicability to a variety of solid to solid diffusional transformations. Three key parameters determine if the magnitude of r * will change with the progress of the transformation: (i) the elastic properties of the parent and the product phases, (ii) the misfit between the parent and the product phases and (iii) the magnitude of interfacial energy. We have already established that isotropic elastic properties leads to an increase in the magnitude of r * and anisotropy is essential for a decrease. To test the broader applicability of the conclusions, we perform a series of model computations of * r ; a summary of which can be found in Table , where G and K are the shear & bulk moduli and the superscripts V & R refer to Voigt and Reuss averaging of the elastic constants. Other parameters have also been developed in literature to capture the anisotropy of crystals (i) As expected, an increase in the Young's modulus of either the glass or the crystal leads to an increase in * bulk r . However, the percentage increase is lower with an increasing modulus (in the presence of large crystal). (ii) As evident, an increased misfit results in an increase in * bulk r . However, with an increasing misfit a larger decrease (in %) in r* is observed for a 'favourably' positioned nucleus. (iii) An increased interfacial energy leads to an increase in the value of * bulk r (as to be expected). The relative benefit, as measured by * r ∆ decreases (i.e. the strain energy plays a bigger role for a system with a lower interfacial energy). (iv) An increase in the anisotropy leads to a larger region of compressive stress in the proximity of the large crystal. The magnitude of the highest compressive stress also increases. This implies that in lower symmetry systems, endowed with a higher anisotropy, are expected to exhibit a higher decrease in * r for a favorably positioned nucleus. It is to be noted that, even in cubic crystals the elastic properties are anisotropic, as the elastic constant is a fourth order tensor. Based on the above discussion, it is reasonable to rationalize that the conclusions drawn have a wider applicability; though further investigations are required to confirm this assertion. The primary conclusions are summarized in the main manuscript. In this section we consider additional points, which will help 'paint a broader picture'. 1) In the case of devitrification of a BMG, it is seen that the CNT gives a good results for the computation of r * . The methodology adopted for the computation of r * , in spite of the assumptions involved, captures the salient aspects of the observations-a change in the magnitude of r * due to the proximal presence of pre-existing crystals. 2) Elastic Isotropic material properties for the large crystallite and the nucleus, leads to an increase in the value of r * . This implies that anisotropic elastic properties are essential to observe a decrease in the magnitude of r * . 3) The shape of the nucleus plays an important role in determining the magnitude of r * . The order of decreasing r * for the three shapes considered is as follows: Prolate spherioid < oblate spheroid < spherical. 4) The hydrostatic component of stress plays a key role in determining the magnitude of r * . In the current example of the devitrification of a glass, the crystal is in a state of tensile stress and hence compressive hydrostatic stress in the matrix leads to a decrease in the value of r * . 5) With the progress of a solid state phase transformation, the strain field of neighbouring 'grown' crystallites starts to overlap. This implies that the resultant stress field at a given point in the amorphous matrix, arises due to overlap of the stress fields arising from multiple crystallites. In regions where the accentuation of the strain field is favorable for nucleation, the decrease in the magnitude of r * can be significant. 6) Across a range of value of parameters like Young's modulus of the matrix and glass, the interfacial energy and misfit, the magnitude of r * shows a change in the proximal presence of a large crystal. This implies that the conclusions drawn in the current manuscript are expected to be applicable for a wide variety of systems.