A backward computation method has been developed to accelerate modelling of the critical state magnetization current in a staggered-array bulk high-temperature superconducting (HTS) undulator. The key concept is as follows: i) a large magnetization current is first generated on the surface of the HTS bulks after rapid field-cooling (FC) magnetization; ii) the magnetization current then relaxes inwards step-by-step obeying the critical state model; iii) after tens of backward iterations the magnetization current reaches a steady state. The simulation results show excellent agreement with the H-formulation method for both the electromagnetic and electromagnetic-mechanical coupled analyses, but with significantly faster computation speed. Solving the FEA model with 1.8 million degrees of freedom (DOFs), the backward computation method takes less than 1.4 hours, an order of magnitude or higher faster than other state-of-the-art numerical methods. Finally, the models are used to investigate the influence of the mechanical stress on the distribution of the critical state magnetization current and the undulator field along the central axis. Research and development work on short-period and high-field staggered-array high-temperature superconducting (HTS) bulk undulators There are two main methods to compute the critical state model for type-II superconductors. Some methods calculate the critical current density directly by using complex numerical methods Recently an iterative algorithm method was proposed to compute a Jc(B,θ)-determined critical state model for ReBCO tape stacks Figure During the backward iterations the resistivity of the superconductor is set to a fixed low value (1x10 -15 Ωm) and the A-V formulation is used for fast and efficient electromagnetic analysis. The entire process follows these Maxwell's equations and the modified critical state model for which Jc @10 K is expressed as where kc,m is the mechanical degradation factor describing the Jc degradation due to the mechanical stress. The assumed values of Jc1, Jc1, BL, Bmax and y are 1.0x10 10 A/m 2 , 8.8x10 9 A/m 2 , 0.8 T, 4.2 T and 0.8, respectively. These values refer to the Jc data where γ = 0.1, β = 0.025, α = 10% and εc = 6.0x10 -4 (σc = 90 MPa, E = 150 GPa). The simulation results for three different cases are compared and plotted in figure The simulation results confirm two facts: a) applying a pre-stress on the bulk HTS can enhance its mechanical performance for the purpose of trapping high magnetic field; b) the applied pre-stress can affect the distribution of the magnetization current in the bulk HTS, thus reducing the undulator field along the central axis. In this section, the electromagnetic properties of the bulks are simulated using the H-formulation, implemented in COMSOL Multiphysics (version 5.4) using the 'Magnetic Field Formulation' interface in COMSOL's AC/DC module. Both COMSOL and the H-formulation are currently used by dozens of research groups worldwide to model bulk superconductors For the 2D H-formulation, the independent variables are the components of the magnetic field strength, H = [Hx Hy 0], and the governing equations are derived from the Maxwell's equations -namely, Ampere's (7) and Faraday's (8) laws: ∇ × H = J (7) The permeability μ = μ0, and equations ( J = [0 0 Jz] and E = [0 0 Ez] are the current density and electric field, respectively, which are assumed to be parallel to each other such that E = ρJ. E0 = 1 μV/cm is the characteristic electric field and n defines the steepness of the transition between the superconducting state and the normal state; we assume here that n = 100 to reasonably approximate the critical state model FC magnetization is simulated by setting an appropriate magnetic field boundary condition to the top and bottom outer boundary conditions such that, for 0 ≤ t ≤ 100 s, Hx(t) = 10-t/tramp, where tramp = 10 s. Thus, we have the initial condition, Hx(t = 0 s) = 10 T and the magnetic field is ramped linearly down to Hx(t = 100 s) = 0 T. On the left-and right-side boundaries, the 'Perfect Magnetic Boundary' node (n x H = 0) is used to model periodicity/symmetry. Since no net transport current flows, a constraint is applied to each of the bulks such that, at all times: Isothermal conditions are assumed while ramping down the field, so no thermal model is included. The electromagnetic model is coupled with COMSOL's 'Solid Mechanics' interface as described in Load' node such that Fpre = -pn, where p is the applied pressure. Figure The backward computation method has been proven successful to model the critical state magnetization current in the HTS bulk undulator after FC magnetization. Compared to the H-formulation it has several advantages for the electromagnetic modelling of superconductors: (a) The 2D H-formulation has degrees of freedom (DOFs) for Hx and Hy for the entire FEA model; however, the backward computation method uses the A-V formulation which requires much lower number of DOFs (AZ and V in the HTS subdomains, AZ in the air subdomain). (b) The backward computation method does not solve the eddy current in the air region, thus reducing the computation time. (c) The backward computation method solves the eddy current in the HTS subdomains by defining a fixed low resistivity. Solving an equation representing the nonlinear resistivity, such as the E-J power law, is not required. In order to demonstrate the high efficiency of the backward computation method, we conducted two identical simulations using the COMSOL H-formulation and using the ANSYS backward computation. The same number of meshing elements is achieved by using mapped meshing (with element size: 0.25 mm x 0.25 mm) for the whole FEA model. In the H-formulation, the whole FEA model consisted of linear (first-order) quadrilateral elements. In the backward computation, the HTS and its surrounding air region consisted of second-order quadrilateral elements to obtain accurate solution results in this local region and the rest of the air region consisted of first-order quadrilateral elements. The number of mesh elements and DOFs and the computation times are listed in Table To better understand the efficiency of the backward computation, we conducted two additional simulations by reducing the element size (increasing the total number of DOFs) in the HTS undulator model. As shown in Table and that benchmarking this particular problem would provide a true comparison. Nevertheless, solving such a large-scale HTS electromagnetic problem with 1.8 million DOFs within 1.4 hours is remarkably fast and was achieved using a normal PC. We have demonstrated that the backward computation method can model the critical state magnetization current in a staggered array HTS bulk undulator quickly and efficiently by running benchmark simulations using a mechanical-coupled H-formulation in COMSOL. The algorithm of the backward iterations is realized by utilizing the function of multi-frame restart analysis and the A-V formulation in ANSYS 18.1 Academic. The highly efficient computation, even with millions of DOFs, is because a nonlinear resistivity equation is not required and no eddy current is solved in the non-superconductor regions. These advantages, along with the backward concept itself, make this new method superior to many other numerical methods used to model the critical state magnetization current. Finally, we show that applying a pre-stress to the HTS bulks could enhance their mechanical performance when trapping high magnetic fields, but could result in a reduction in Jc in the outer layer of the HTS bulks, thus reducing the induced undulator field. This important information will help guide future optimization of the integral undulator field along the meters-long central axis.