Unveiling the driving force for a phase transition is normally difficult when multiple degrees of freedom are strongly coupled. One example is the nematic phase transition in iron-based superconductors. Its mechanism remains controversial due to a complex intertwining among different degrees of freedom. In this paper, we report a method for measuring the nematic susceptibly of FeSe 0.9 S 0.1 using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and an in-situ strain-tuning device. The nematic susceptibility is characterized as an energy shift of band induced by a tunable uniaxial strain. We found that the temperature-dependence of the nematic susceptibility is strongly momentum dependent. As the temperature approaches the nematic transition temperature from the high temperature side, the nematic susceptibility remains weak at the Brillouin zone center while showing divergent behavior at the Brillouin zone corner. Our results highlight the complexity of the nematic order parameter in the momentum space, which provides crucial clues to the driving mechanism of the nematic phase transition. Our experimental method which can directly probe the electronic susceptibly in the momentum space provides a new way to study the complex phase transitions in various materials. Nematic phase, a symmetry breaking phase that is translational invariant but breaks rotational symmetry, attracts great interests recently as it is tightly interwoven with high-T c superconductivity in both cuprates and iron-based superconductors Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) is a powerful technique for detecting the electronic structure of materials in the momentum space. Mechanical pressing or stretching devices have been used in ARPES measurements Here, we show how to conduct a momentum-resolved measurement of nematic susceptibility using a combination of ARPES and an in-situ strain-tuning device. The electronic nematic susceptibility is characterized by an energy shift of band induced by a tunable uniaxial strain. We found that the temperature dependence of nematic susceptibility is nonuniform in the momentum space, providing insights into the driving mechanism of the nematic phase transition. Our results demonstrate that the combination of ARPES and in-situ parameter tuning is a powerful technique that can measure the electronic susceptibly in the momentum space. Such methodology can be used to study the complex phase transitions in various materials. High quality FeSe 1-x S x single crystals were grown using a chemical vapor transport (CVT) method with a nominal doping level of x = 0.1. The T nem is around 65 K as confirmed by the resistivity and magnetic susceptibility measurements With the capability of measuring the nematic susceptibility, we now turn to its temperature dependence on the α b and β b bands. As shown in Fig. As shown in previous ARPES studies, the anisotropic energy shift of bands can be viewed as an order parameter of the nematic phase. However, it is still controversy that such order parameter, that is characterized by the band shift, is nonuniform in the momentum space The coexistence of multiple order parameters has been found in many materials. In some improper multiferroic materials and structure-distorted perovskites, it was found that one primary order parameter could drive the phase transition energetically, while the other secondary order parameters are generated through their coupling to the primary order parameter We then discuss possible driving mechanisms of the Γ and M order parameters. Regrading to the Γ order parameter, it has been proposed that the band reconstruction near Γ can be well explained by an energy splitting between the d xz and d yz bands, which is consistent with a ferro-orbital order The momentum-resolved measurement of electronic nematic susceptibly provides insights to the driving mechanism of the nematic phase in iron-based superconductors. It is intriguing to extend our study to the nematic phase in other materials including cuprates, strontium ruthenium oxides, etc. We can further study how the nematic phase interacts with other intriguing phases. For example, we can directly measure the response of superconducting gap and spin-densitywave gap to the uniaxial strain. Our results highlight the combination of ARPES and in-situ parameter tuning as a powerful technique that can disentangle multiple order parameters in the momentum space. This methodology would play an important role in exploring the complex phase transitions in other correlated materials We gratefully thank M. Yi and Donghui Lu for their helpful discussions. This work is supported by National Nat-