Thin elastic sheets and membranes are known to wrinkle when they are stretched-the associated physics is highly non-linear. The mechanics of thin films that exhibit unusual behavior upon stretching, when they possess auxetic structure, i.e. when their apparent Poisson's ratio is negative, is presented here. Wrinkling is now suppressed within the bulk of auxetic films when tensioned, whereas localized creases confined to the clamps, that decay away exponentially, appear. These edge wrinkles are characterized for their amplitude and wavelength experimentally, theoretically, and computationally, which show excellent agreement with expected trends. The scaling for amplitude, wavelength and decay rate upon film properties and tension is obtained using simple analyses based on kinematic mismatch resulting from lateral Poisson's expansion. Natural as well as engineered materials frequently appear in the form of membranes, films and elastic sheets. Synthetic skin The possibility of fabricating architectured materials has enabled the development of modern meta-materials with unusual properties that are not commonly found in naturally occurring materials. In the realm of elastic metamaterials, apparent properties leading to negative refractive index for sound propagation, negative Poisson's ratio (such material being termed as auxetic) Here we explore elastic stabilization of lattice membranes by tailoring the apparent Poisson's ratio, a property bound theoretically within the narrow range -1 < ν < +0.5 for isotropic materials, and is positive between 0.25 -0.35 for most naturally occurring materials. By apparent properties, we mean the effective properties of micro-structured film material that would have the same bulk response as that of porosity-filled film of the same shape and size. Because of their low bending stiffness, membranes are prone to wrinkling and structural instabilities such as folding and creasing. When an elastic sheet is compressed in its plane, there is a competition between the strain energy stored within the elastic solids and the potential energy of external loading, the latter being associated with the so-called "kinematic stiffness". Wrinkling of membranes under in-plane shear has also been studied Wrinkling of sheets in tension due to Poisson's shrinkage suggests that it could be suppressed within their bulk, if we could engineer the architecture of the material so that the apparent Poisson's ratio of the structured film is negative. There are several well-known auxetic microstructures. Here we consider one such lattice geometry (Figure First, we applied tensile stress in the displacement controlled mode of tensometer (see Methods) to a perforated rectangular structured film of lattice geometry shown in Figure Consider the state of stress on an elastic element close to the clamped edge (Figure Auxetic membranes expand laterally upon stretching, except at the edges where the film is restrained. This poses kinematic requirements that is just the opposite of that for stretched non-auxetic membranes which need to fold within the bulk, in order to fit the width as dictated by Poisson's shrinking. Thus, we obtain a largely wrinkle-free center for a long auxetic film stretched along its length, except at the clamped edges where the state of stress is biaxial. "Blister-like localized instability, which decays away from the clamps but ripples along the transversely and laterally fixed edge, is observed experimentally (the wrinkled film close to the clamps in Figure For the ease of analysis that could yield to a meaningful understanding of the stabilization as well as one that would enable quantitative characterization of anomalous edge wrinkling, consider a simplified clamping condition such that the film is constrained laterally (thus creating lateral Poisson mismatch when tensioned) but is free normal to the plane of the film. Although difficult to realize this in practice, the condition could be simulated easily in computational experiments. This simplification facilitates analytical treatment and gives insight into the phenomenon while deliberately compromising on realism of the transverse clamping condition but respecting the lateral clamping. Dependence of the amplitude and the wavelength of edge wrinkles upon the remote stress is theoretically characterized and computationally verified next. Strain along the longitudinally applied tensile stress σ is given by || = σ/E, where E is the apparent Young's modulus of the film. The lateral strain, far from the clamped edges, is extensional and is given by ⊥ = -ν || , where ν < 0 is the apparent Poisson's ratio of the perforated auxetic film. Wrinkles can be treated as spatially localized instability modes and be represented as sinusoidal ripples in the y-direction that exponentially decay in the x-direction, when the constraint at the ends is lateral but not transverse. Such a length-wise decaying wrinkling pattern can be represented by w(x, y) = A sin(πy/λ)e -πx/l ; where l is the associated decay length scale. The total lateral dilatation at the length-wise center of the film is the sum of the increase in lateral projections, which equals the integral over width b of the square of the y-wise slope, and can be evaluated analytically This provides us with the dependence of the lateral expansion upon the amplitude and the number of wrinkles, n = b/λ. Combining this with lateral Poisson extension far from the clamped edges, ∆b = νbσ/E, we obtain the ratio of the amplitude of wrinkles to width, A * = A/b, in terms of the applied non-dimensional tensile stress scaled with respect to the Young's modulus σ * = σ/E, as The wavelength of the wrinkles can be estimated from the vertical equilibrium of a shell is the critical buckling load for a simply supported plate strip of thickness t, and σ 1 approximately equals the applied stress σ. Inserting the expressions for curvatures after differentiating w(x, y) twice, we obtain an expression for the wavelength of the edge-localized wrinkles as Further refinement in the theoretical characterization of the anomalous edge-wrinkles is possible by recognizing that the constraint at the clamped edges sets up a biaxial stress field (Figure Wrinkles at the clamped edges can be characterized systematically in simulations that enable us to study a wide range of materials, loading and geometry. The amplitude (Figure Carrying out a 1-D analysis-in the spirit of Cerda-Mahadevan Therefore, x-wise dependence of the wrinkling amplitude is given by X(x) ∼ e -πx/l , which shows an exponential decay, if b is taken as a constant, suggesting that edge wrinkles are confined near the clamps. The decay length scale is given by l ∼ α -1 ∼ T 1/2 and is independent of the length of the film. The l ∼ T 1/2 scaling of the penetration depth with tension indicates that as tension is increased keeping everything else constant, edge wrinkles become longer-as observed qualitatively in figure 2 (f). Quantitative characterization of the decay length scale was carried out from FEA simulations on imperforate auxetic films. The results for the penetration length as a function of the applied tension are plotted on a log-log scale in figure In conclusion, laboratory experiments as well as computer simulations demonstrate that thin films can be stabilized within the bulk of a stretched film by the use of auxetic microstructuring in the bulk where wrinkles within non-auxetic films would otherwise appear. However, localized wrinkles appear at the clamps, as opposed to non-auxetic films in which clamped edges are locally taut. A simple theory is presented here, which is able to quantitatively characterize the anomalous edge wrinkles. Resistance to wrinkling, in conjunction with previously known synclastic curvature of auxetic film upon bending, make them a promising candidate for future applications such as artificial skin, cardiac patches and biomedical stretchable sensors. The phenomenon reported here could have interesting implications at smaller length scales, such as potential elastic stabilization of 2D materials and auxetic molecular sheets. Potential applications of edge wrinkling could be developed for force metrology, e.g. on the lines of 