Bacterial nanocellulose (BNC) was used to synthesize rigid polyurethane foams (RPUFs) based on its reaction with the isocyanate precursor (ISO route) and also by using the conventional procedure (POL route). The results indicated that at only 0.1 wt. % of BNC, drastic improvements of specific elastic compressive modulus (+244.2 %) and strength (+77.5 %) were found. The reaction of BNC with the precursor was corroborated through the measurement of isocyanate number and the BNC caused a significant nucleation effect, decreasing the cell size up to 39.7%. DSC analysis revealed that the BNC had a strong effect on post-cure enthalpy, decreasing its value when the ISO route was implemented. DMA analysis revealed that the RPUFs developed using the ISO route proved Rigid polyurethane foams (RPUFs) represent a material of choice when energy efficiency and industrialized building systems are taken into account The formulation of a RPUF contemplates the use of moderate to highly functional polyols with low molecular weight and aromatic polymeric diisocyanates. The final structure of the former in the polyurethane is termed as Soft Segment (SS) whereas the last one is termed as the Hard Segment (HS). The molecular structure of both components induces the formation of a highly crosslinked polymer where the HS has a main role on the final mechanical properties of the RPUF. This characteristic has a profound implication on how the RPUF is formulated. In effect, formulations which have a highly crosslinked nature will also have a higher weight percent of isocyanate precursors. A clear example of this is the Rigid Polyisocyanurate Foam (RPIR), where a very high isocyanate index is used so as to induce isocyanate trimerization As already explained by the author in a recent publication Among those NPs, nanocellulose obtained both by hydrolysis (cellulose nanocrystals, CNC) and bacterial means (Bacterial Nanocellulose, BNC) are, nowadays, fields which are intensively studied A key aspect towards the use of NPs in polymers has to do with how it is inserted and dispersed Most of the literature regarding nanostructured polyurethanes involves the dispersion of the NPs in the polyol component A Polymeric Methylene Diphenyldiisocyanate (PMDI, Suprasec 5005) was used as received. It had a functionality of 2.70 and a NCO number of 31.0. Before each experiment, the NCO number of the isocyanate batch was measured (ASTM D2572) so as to corroborate that relevant changes on the NCO number did not occur. A commercially available polyether polyol was used (Rubitherm LP18497). The physical blowing agent was the HCFC141. The formulation of the polyol component consisted of 100 parts by weight (pbw) of Rubitherm LP18497, 2 pbw of Dimethylcyclohexylamine (Rubitherm 18412) and 14 pbw of HCFC141. It is important to notice that this blowing agent is being phased out due to its high ozone depletion potential (ODP). Future research will involve the use of BAs with lower ODP. Finally, the isocyanate component was mixed at 160 pbw considering a 100 pbw basis of Rubitherm LP18497, giving an isocyanate index (NCO index ) of 1.05. Measurement of NCO number was achieved following the ASTM D2572 standard using dry toluene (Biopack, A.C.S. grade), diisobutylamine (99%, Sigma-Aldrich), isopropyl alcohol (Biopack, A.C.S. grade), bromphenol blue indicator (Biopack) and HCl (Biopack, A.C.S. grade). Bacterial nanocellulose (BNC) was produced by a strain of Gluconacetobacter xylinus NRRL B-42 gently provided by Dr. Luis Lelpi (Fundación Instituto Leloir, Buenos Aires, Argentina). Static fermentations were carried on for 14 days in Hestrin and Schramm medium A scheme of the preparation procedures of the RPUFs synthesized in this work is depicted in Fig. The POL route consisted on adding BNC micro in the polyol at concentrations of 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3 wt. % (the concentrations were taken with respect to the total mass of the formulation). Then, the mixture was homogenized (Proscientific) for a total time of 5' doing steps of 1' so as to avoid excessive heat generation. Then, the blowing agent and the amine catalyst were added and the whole mixture was homogenized for 1', obtaining a formulated polyol ready to react with the isocyanate. The ISO route consisted of adding the BNC micro into a glass reactor (Velp Scientific) with isocyanate at concentrations of 0.1, 0.3 and 0.5 wt. %. Then, the temperature of the reactor was raised to 60°C while maintaining a vigorous stirring with a magnetic bar. To avoid undesired reactions of isocyanate with water, the reactor was kept under a nitrogen atmosphere at all times. Before each experiment, the isocyanate was degassed using a dispermat LC30 mixer equipped with a vacuum system. After a total reaction time of 4 hours, the isocyanate prepolymer (isocyanate and BNC) was ready to react with the formulated polyol. Finally, for both routes, the formulated polyol and the isocyanate were poured in a HDPE cylindrical mould with an internal diameter of 70 mm and dispersed with a Cowles stirrer rotating at 2000 rpm for 30 seconds. The in-situ temperature evolution of the foaming process was measured with a K type thermocouple connected to a data logger (TES 1307). To ensure reproducibility, three samples were synthesized for each formulation studied. The BNC concentration denoted in this work corresponded to the total weight of the polyurethane formulation and not with respect to the polyol or the isocyanate components. Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) was performed with a Shimadzu DSC-60.To obtain the thermal transitions of the formulations, a full thermal cycle was implemented which consisted of three thermal cycles. The first one started at 25°C and went up to 150 °C at a scan rate of 5 °C min -1 . The second one started at 200°C and went down to 25°C at 25°C min -1 and, finally, the third one was identical to the first cycle. Compressive mechanical analysis was performed with an Instron 5985 universal testing machine, following the guidelines of the standard ASTM D1621. For each formulation, 15 samples were tested from three different foams prepared at identical conditions. Apparent density was calculated by measuring the sample dimensions and weight. FTIR absorption spectra were obtained with a Shimadzu IRAffinity using the absorption methodology. Thin sheets of 0.2 mm were extracted from the foam samples and those were used directly in the apparatus. Due to the porosity of the samples, the spectra were recorded without a significant attenuation loss. It were obtained from 40 scans at a resolution of 4.0 cm -1 and using the Happ-Genzel apodization function incorporated in the IRAffinity software incorporated in the FTIR device. The absorption spectra were normalized using the band of the phenyl group, centered at approximately 1595 cm -1 . Dynamic Mechanical Analysis was carried out with a Perkin & Elmer DMA 8000. The flexural mode was used, fixing the oscillation frequency to 1.0 Hz and the amplitude to 0.01 mm. The thermal scan started at 9°C and went up to 180°C at a scan rate of 2°C min -1 . It was corroborated that the experiments fell into the linear viscoelastic region of the material. At least three samples were tested for each formulation. Sample dimensions were typically of 10 mm in length by 10.0 mm in width and 4.6 mm in thickness. Normalization of the results consisted in dividing the specific elastic modulus by the apparent density of each sample tested. Regarding nomenclature, RPUF will refer generally to a Rigid Polyurethane Foam. If the POL or ISO route are mentioned, then, the discussion will focus on a RPUF prepared using either route. When BNC is used in the formulation, then, the foam will be termed RPUF -x wt. % BNC, whereas the x represents de BNC concentration value. Nanostructured rigid polyurethane foams with improved specific thermo-mechanical properties using Bacterial Nanocellulose as a Hard Segment A PREPRINT 3 Results and discussion The synthesis of a RPUF involves controlling chemical and physical phenomena taking place after mixing the formulated polyol and isocyanate precursors The in-situ temperature excursion, which is the in-situ temperature rise using the initial experiment temperature as baseline for the foams synthesized in this work is depicted in Fig. The apparent density of the RPUF developed in this work using both the ISO and POL routes is reported in Tab.1. The baseline RPUF pol had an apparent density of 46.4 +/-4.7 Kg.m -3 . It showed negligible changes as a function of BNC concentration, having a slight increase of its value (+5.6%) at the highest BNC concentration used for this route (0.3 wt. %). Instead, the baseline RPUF iso had an apparent density of 40.5 +/-3.4 Kg.m -3 . Its variation as a function of BNC concentration was also negligible, except for the highest BNC concentration (0.5 wt. %), whereas the apparent density decreased by 8.4%. The cell size measured in both the longitudinal growth direction (L) and the transverse one (T), as well as the anisotropy factor (AF), are reported in Tab.1. As it can be easily noticed, the L direction cell size was significantly higher than the T direction in all the cases analyzed. Such result was expected due to the fact that the foam growth was constrained in the T direction by the mould walls. For the baseline RPUF of the POL-route, the cell size in the L direction was 3.83 × 10 2 μm. This dimension decreased as a function of increasing BNC concentration (except only for the case of 0.2 wt. %), having a maximum decrease at 0.3 wt. % of -16.7%. This indicated that, from a cell size point of view, the BNC acted as a nucleation agent. For the baseline RPUF of the ISO-route, the cell size in the L direction was 5.11 × 10 2 μm. In analogy with the other route, the cell size decreased as a function of increasing BNC concentration, but to a greater extent. The maximum decrease, -39.7%, was measured at a BNC concentration of 0.3 wt. %. Finally, the AF measured for both the ISO and POL routes did not change significantly, even as a function of BNC content. The isocyanate number (NCO number ) is a measure of how many free isocyanate groups are available to react with the formulated polyol. The NCO number should not be confused with the isocyanate index (NCO index ), which is associated to the molar excess of isocyanate groups present in the formulated system. As already stated in the materials section, the isocyanate used in this work was a polymeric methylene diphenyldiisocyanate (pMDI). Due to the fact that MDI is solid at room temperature, it is usual to synthesize an uretoneimine modified MDI through the carbodiimide intermediate route The selection of the insertion route of BNC in the polyurethane system has a profound effect on the final properties of the RPUF On the other hand, the nanoparticle can be inserted using the ISOMIX route The NCO number as a function of BNC content is depicted in Fig. The absorption spectra of the RPUF obtained from the ISO and pol routes are depicted in Fig. Along with the foaming reaction, isocyanate reacts with water, releasing CO 2 (g). This gas is purposely constrained within the cells of the RPUF so as to reduce thermal conductivity. Hence, it was logical to find the CO 2 (g) absorption band in the spectra and no attempt was made to perform an atmospheric correction of the spectra, because the CO 2 (g) concentration within the cells was much higher than the one in the atmosphere of the FTIR instrument by itself. Hypothetically, the CO 2 (g) peak height can be correlated to specific foaming parameters during synthesis. Indeed, it is possible to argue that a higher height might imply that the isocyanate reacted more effectively with water, releasing a higher amount of CO 2 (g) within the cell and having a profound impact on the thermal conductivity of the RPUF. However, such attempt to quantify the spectra will only be valid if the outward diffusion of CO 2 (g) is also taken into consideration. Due to the fact that the main focus of this work was not the measurement of thermal conductivity as a function of time (ageing), such analysis will not be further discussed. An interesting aspect of the spectra depicted in Fig. As already noticed in the methodology section, DSC analyses were performed using a full thermal cycle. The Heat Flux (HF) as a function of Temperature of the RPUF for the first and second thermal cycle is depicted in Fig. For the case of the ISO route, no significant changes of the ∆Hc as a function of BNC content were measured. On the other hand, the POL route presented significant changes of ∆Hc as a function of BNC content. These results support the previously stated hypothesis that the BNC had a significant role in the cure kinetics of the foam during synthesis. In fact, as it can be deduced from the results, the BNC inserted using the POL route caused a significant inhibition of cure kinetics. In contrast, the ISO route presented a negligible effect. The results presented in the last paragraph are supported and corroborated by the other experiments performed in this work. This has a profound impact on the development of polyurethane nanocomposites and, especially, in the development of RPUFs. In industry, RPUFs are applied by industrial methods where cure is commonly performed at ambient temperature. In other words, it is not frequent to find a high temperature (>40°C) post-cure in industry. This clearly indicates that if nanocomposites are to be developed in this particular field, any substantial change in cure kinetics should be avoided, because it would not be possible to counteract this effect by performing a post-cure. Taking into account this essential aspect, it can be concluded that the use of the ISO route is a key aspect for the development of nanostructured RPUFs. If the POL route is used, the reaction kinetics would have to be increased by a change of formulation, which would probably require the use of a higher amount of stannous or amino catalysts. Such path would inevitable attempt negatively in regard of the toxicity of the final formulation. The compressive true stress as a function of deformation for the RPUF pol , RPUF iso as well as the foams nanostructured with BNC are depicted in Fig. As it can be deduced from Fig. Nanostructured rigid polyurethane foams with improved specific thermo-mechanical properties using Bacterial Nanocellulose as a Hard Segment A PREPRINT wt. %, the overall R csp value showed a deterioration of -4.00 %. A similar trend was also measured for the specific elastic modulus (E sp ) of the foams. For the case of the POL route, the BNC caused an improvement of the E sp as a function of increasing BNC content, reaching a maximum improvement of +197.3 % at a BNC loading of 0.3 wt. %. For the case of the ISO route, a maximum improvement of +244.2 % was measured for a BNC loading of only 0.1 wt. %. Another relevant aspect that needs to be addressed from FIGc and FIGd is heterogeneity. As it can be deduced from the results, a relevant statistical scattering was measured for the foams prepared with BNC. For example, for the case of the E sp of the RPUF prepared with the ISO route at a 0.1 wt. %, the scattering measured was in the order of 22%. Due to the fact that for each formulation we have synthesized three identical foams and measured its properties using a total amount of 15 samples for each formulation, we can be certain that the introduction of BNC in the system was the main cause of the measured scattering. Then, we hypothesize that such scattering can be explained by the fact that the results are very sensitive to foam growth orientation. As already measured in a previous publication of our group The previously stated results have profound implications towards the selection of a specific route of insertion of the BNC. As it can be deduced, the POL route requires higher concentrations of BNC so as to measure significant improvements in mechanical properties. On the other hand, the ISO route offered significant improvements only at the lowest BNC concentration (0.1 wt. %). It is important to highlight that the selection of the optimal insertion route does not only take into consideration the weight content of BNC in the formulation. The effect of BNC on viscosity and reactivity should also be taken into account. For example, for the case of the POL route, higher concentrations were necessary to obtain mechanical improvements. However, this had a detriment effect on the polyol viscosity. A significant increase of viscosity will not render the polyol suitable for a RPUF system. On the other hand, the ISO route caused significant improvements of the mechanical properties for small concentrations, however, the dispersion process required the use of an inert atmosphere so as to avoid undesirable reactions of the isocyanate precursor. Unfortunately, we cannot compare our results with others in literature. This is the first publication regarding the use of BNC in RPUFs. Our group recently published that the incorporation of BNC caused an improvement of specific mechanical properties of castor oil based polyurethane foams. Other works which have focus on CNC (crystalline nanocelluse), such as the one of Ragauskas et al. The specific storage modulus (E' sp ) and the damping factor (Tan delta) as a function of temperature for the RPUF pol , RPUF iso as well as the foams nanostructured with BNC are depicted in Fig. For the case of the POL route, the variation of the E' sp as a function of temperature did not present a significant variation as a function of BNC content. A slight increase of the slope of E'sp as a function of temperature was measured, caused mainly for increasing BNC contents. The damping factor (tan δ) consolidated this tendency, whereas the maximum value of the damping factor decreased as a function of increasing BNC content. As far as the absolute value of E' sp , for all BNC loadings the RPUF presented a higher E' sp , with a maximum for the case of 0.1 wt. % BNC. This result might me understood as a contradiction with respect to the results found in the compression tests above. However, it is important to highlight that the stress states were different. DMA analyses were performed under flexural conditions whereas quasi-static analysis were performed under compression. The differences found in this work are in agreement with what we have found in a previous work of our group Nanostructured rigid polyurethane foams with improved specific thermo-mechanical properties using Bacterial Nanocellulose as a Hard Segment A PREPRINT BNC nanostructured RPUFs were synthesized by the ISO and POL processing routes and using BNC concentrations of up to 0.5 wt. %. The POL route contemplated the dispersion of BNC within the polyol component while the ISO route was associated to a dispersion and reaction of the BNC in the isocyanate precursor. In-situ temperature measurements indicated that the ISO route presented a lower T max (-10.2 °C), indicating slower foam cure kinetics. The addition of BNC in the formulation had a similar effect. Isocyanate NCO numbers were measured for all the samples studied. A monotonous decrease of the NCO number was measured as a function of increasing BNC concentration (ISO route), indicating that the BNC was effectively reacting with the isocyanate precursor. Micrographic cell size analysis supported the hypothesis that the BNC had a profound nucleation effect, more pronounced in the ISO route (-39.7%) but also present in the POL route (-16.7%). No significant changes of apparent density were measured as a function of processing route or BNC content. Both the ISO and POL route presented outstanding improvements of specific compressive stress (R csp ) and elastic compressive modulus E sp . The highest improvement of E sp (+244.2 %) and R csp (+77.5 %) were found for the ISO route at the lowest BNC concentration (0.1 wt. %). DSC analysis revealed that the POL route had a significant impact on post-cure enthalpy, increasing its nominal value as a function of increasing BNC content. On the other hand, the ISO route presented no significant changes of the cure enthalpy. DMA analysis under flexural conditions supported the hypothesis that the ISO route improved the damping factor, regardless of BNC concentration. The previous results reinforce the hypothesis that, for the case of RPUFs, the most suitable processing path is the ISO route. Further research in this area should focus using this approach. Future work under development in our labs will focus on the effect of BNC nanoparticles using RPUFs obtained from soybased-polyols. Nanostructured rigid polyurethane foams with improved specific thermo-mechanical properties using Bacterial Nanocellulose as a Hard Segment Nanostructured rigid polyurethane foams with improved specific thermo-mechanical properties using Bacterial Nanocellulose as a Hard Segment A PREPRINT Figure 4: ATR-FTIR absorption spectra of the RPUFs as a function of processing route and BNC content.