The control over impurities like hydrogen and oxygen is of key importance in nitride-based semiconductors due to their unrivaled applicability in optoelectronics and high power/high frequency electronics. Therefore, it is desirable to continue the research on its diffusion and segregation in semiconductor materials. In this work, we report on a first observation on hydrogen outdiffusion from bulk crystalline gallium nitride. The extent of the hydrogen diffusion is established by secondary ion mass spectrometry. Analysis of characteristic hydrogen profile in GaN grown using ammonothermal method, led to the determination of the hydrogen diffusion coefficient at the temperature of 1045oC -a standard growth temperature for HVPE (halide vapor phase epitaxy) method. The increase of interest in research on hydrogen in gallium nitride occurred when it was attempted to create a GaN-based p-n junction. Unfortunately, the layers doped with magnesium were highly resistive despite of a very high dopant concentration. Nakamura showed that this is due to the hydrogen passivation of magnesium, which forms inactive complexes with a dopant Further experiments confirmed that, indeed, H atoms diffuse in p-type material while diffusion in n-type one is virtually suppressed. In the very first publications on this subject, deuterium was used as a diffused species. Wilson et.al. It correlates with the high formation energy and consequently the low solubility of hydrogen in n-type GaN. Theoretical calculations also predict differences of hydrogen diffusivity where: Cd is the defect concentration, N is the number of potential sites in the lattice (per unit volume) where the defect can be created, Ef is the formation energy (energy needed to create a defect), k is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature, hydrogen solubility in semi-insulating GaN under thermodynamic equilibrium does not exceed 10 15 cm -3 for octahedral and 2×10 15 cm -3 for the tetrahedral position of hydrogen atoms at the temperature of 1000 oC In this paper, an alternative approach to hydrogen diffusion in n-type GaN is considered. We report, for the first time, on the observation of hydrogen diffusion in n-type material based on outdiffusion from the bulk crystal. The crystal was grown using ammonothermal method (Am-GaN)  from the room temperature up to 600°Cfor 30 min, under N2 flow, SIMS measurement was performed with a CAMECA IMS6F system using a cesium (Cs+) primary beam, at the energy of 14,5 keV with the current kept at 200 nA. The size of the raster was about 100x100 microns and the secondary ions were collected from a central region of 30 microns in diameter. Secondary ions H ̄, Si ̄ and Ga ̄ as reference signals were detected Since the H diffusion coefficient increases accordingly to the substrate temperature during the annealing, the diffusion coefficient varies with the substrate heating-rate until the final temperature is reached. As a consequence, the erf function fitting was conducted using hydrogen depth profile iteration. The relevant iteration is done using Forward Time Center Space (FTCS) method Simultaneously, the HVPE GaN layer overgrown under equilibrium condition allows incorporation of the out-diffused hydrogen atoms, limited to the specified concentration level determined by hydrogen formation energy in n-type material. Taking into account the background hydrogen concentration (Fig. Concluding, the experimental findings of this study show for the first time a pure atomic diffusion of hydrogen in n-type GaN, described by erf function, being the exact solution to the continuity equation. The Fermi-level dependent interstitial hydrogen formation energy in GaN was also shown, based on a lack of measurable depth profile of species in the HVPE grown ntype crystal, resulting from low hydrogen solubility at the growth temperature. Finally, the diffusion coefficient parameters DO and EA of hydrogen in n-type GaN were estimated using the previously published calculation and iteratively fitted hydrogen depth profile.