Despite widespread interest, ultrathin and highly flexible light-emitting devices that can be seamlessly integrated and used for flexible displays, wearables, and as bioimplants remain elusive. Organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) with μm-scale thickness and exceptional flexibility have been demonstrated but show insufficient stability in air and moist environments due to a lack of suitable encapsulation barriers. Here, we demonstrate an efficient and stable OLED with a total thickness of ≈12 μm that can be fully immersed in water or cell nutrient media for weeks without suffering substantial degradation. The active layers of the device are embedded between conformal barriers formed by alternating layers of parylene-C and metal oxides that are deposited through a low temperature chemical vapour process. These barriers also confer stability of the OLED to repeated bending and to extensive postprocessing, e.g. via reactive gas plasmas, organic solvents, and photolithography. This unprecedented robustness opens up a wide range of novel possibilities for ultrathin OLEDs. The unique properties of organic semiconductorsin particular their amorphous and mechanically pliable naturehave enabled a wide range of flexible optoelectronic devices, including organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) Ultrathin OLEDs with impressive flexibility have been reported The situation is particularly challenging for future biomedical uses of OLEDs as these applications frequently require bio-implantation and thus resistance to aqueous environments. Early studies demonstrated TFEs based on inorganic thin films In this work, we demonstrate ultrathin, flexible, and efficient OLEDs that are resistant to air, water, various solvents, and reactive gas plasmas. The active layers of our OLEDs are sandwiched between two identical hybrid TFE barriers consisting of inorganic nanolaminates and parylene-C. As there is no need for a substrate, this approach leads to a total device thickness of ≈12 μmsimilar to the typical thickness of cling film for food packaging. The symmetric, sandwich-like structure ensures that the active layers of the device are located in the neutral plane of the device where they can flex without exposure to tensile or compressive stresses Our flexible OLEDs are composed of two ≈6 μm thick TFE barrier films sandwiching the actual device, which consists of a semi-transparent metal anode, the active organic layers, and a highly reflective metal cathode (Fig. All three tested barriers were highly transparent; their mean transmittance across the 400 -800 nm range was 94.4%, 95.0%, and 92.0% for the P/N/P, P/N/P/A, and P/N/P/N sample, respectively. Due to the low thickness of the barrier layer and the refractive index contrast between the organic and inorganic layers, the transmission spectra showed pronounced thinfilm interference (Fig. Optical modelling of the entire device stack was used to optimize the thickness of the charge transport layers in the OLED for maximum light outcoupling efficiency (Supplementary Fig. The model predicts a series of efficiency maxima for the different orders of the optical microcavity that is formed by the device electrodes. Devices with first and second order cavities were fabricated and, in line with predictions of the model, first order devices reached the highest efficiency. However, statistical analysis showed that second order devices were significantly more stable electrically, with 10 to 100-fold lower leakage currents (defined as current at 1 V, Supplementary Fig. Due to the micro-cavity effect discussed above and the additional thin-film interference from the TFE barrier, the electroluminescence (EL) spectra and angular emission characteristics of our devices were more complex than for conventional bottom-emitting OLEDs with glass substrates of millimetre-thickness. Compared with a reference OLED (same micro-cavity OLED stack deposited on a glass substrate with the top TFE barrier), the EL spectra of our flexible devices exhibited pronounced oscillations with wavelength (Fig. Overall, we found that OLEDs deposited on and encapsulated by the hybrid TFE barriers developed here showed j-V-L characteristics and efficiency that were comparable to reference devices produced on display grade glass. Furthermore, the absolute values of EQE and luminous efficacy were in line with earlier reports for similar phosphorescent p-i-n OLED stacks Despite its hydrophobic nature, parylene-C alone is not able to prevent penetration of oxygen and moisture. OLEDs fabricated on lower barrier layers formed solely by parylene-C showed good performance while still on the glass carrier substrate, but they stopped functioning almost immediately after peeling them from the carrier (Supplementary Fig. Figure Here, the difference between the three different barrier structures was even stronger than in air (Fig. To test the mechanical stability of our devices, we carried out a series of bending tests. First, the devices were bent with different radii of curvature, down to rb = 1 mm, in both outward and inward direction (defined relative to the direction of light-emission as sketched in Fig. The symmetric design of our devices places the active layers and the adjacent nanolaminates in the neutral plane of the structure where bending causes neither compressive nor tensile stress Optical simulations show that the relatively high refractive index of parylene-C (n = 1.64) and the nanolaminate (n = 1.87) has a two-fold consequence for light outcoupling in our flexible OLEDs (Supplementary Fig. A wide range of light outcoupling structures have been described in the literature The high stability and strong protection of our TFE barrier allowed us to trial a unique in situ method to create a light outcoupling structure directly within the outermost parylene-C layer of our flexible OLEDs. This was tested using a top-emitting OLED architecture (Fig. After depositing the upper barrier on the OLED stack, we exposed the top parylene-C layer to a series of O2/SF6 gas plasma treatments using a reactive ion etching (RIE) system. This led to substantial roughening of the previously smooth surface, with the formation of deep pores with sub-μm diameters (Fig. Organic semiconductors degrade in the presence of hard radiation, high energy particles and high process temperatures. This makes the use of common high-throughput physical vapour and plasma-assisted deposition processes on top of OLED stacks problematic and thus renders them less preferable for the manufacture of TFE barriers on OLEDs. In addition, for a TFE barrier to be efficient, it has to be free of pinholes, and thus it should be tolerant to inhomogeneities in the topography of the underlying layer, e.g. from particle contamination. Through the use of metal oxide ALD and CVD of parylene-C, we combined two lowtemperature, chemically driven deposition modalities that both have highly conformal coating characteristics. The majority of the barrier consists of parylene-C, which is widely used in the electronics industry and can be deposited at low cost and with high throughput. The in situ polymerization of the para-xylylene derivative that yields the parylene-C polymer film is thermally initiated, does not require a solvent or crosslinker, and generally forms no by-products, thus rendering it ideally suited for the deposition on highly sensitive organic electronics. Likewise, the reaction of metal oxide ALD precursors proceeds in a quantitative and highly controlled manner and forms very dense films. In the past, ALD has been associated with limited throughput because each deposition cycle only yields a single atomic layer and takes of order 10 s to complete in a lab-scale reactor. However, through reactor optimization, cycle times have been reduced to the sub-second scale, and emerging modalities such as spatial ALD have demonstrated even 100-fold improvements in speed over conventional ALD, thus largely invalidating these concerns The robustness, extreme form factor and mechanical flexibility of the substrateless OLEDs reported here opens up possibilities for a number of future uses. For instance, they might be laminated or affixed onto or into work surfaces, packaging and clothing, where they could be used as self-emissive indicators and labels that do not add significant weight and volume to the product. The stability of our devices under high humidity and in water makes them suited for wearable applications requiring skin-contact and for use as implants in biomedical research; for the latter we have a particular interest in using them for targeted photostimulation and optical recording of neuronal activity via optogenetics Ag (60 nm) and MoO3 (1 nm) was used as anode, Spiro-TTB doped with 4 wt% F6-TCNNQ (190 nm) as HTL, BPhen doped with 3 wt% Cs (70 nm) as ETL, and Ag (20 nm) as cathode. The other layers were unchanged from the bottom-emitting configuration. All organic materials were purchased from Lumtec. An active pixel area of 2 mm × 2 mm was defined by shadow masking of the anode and cathode contact, with in situ mask exchange under high vacuum. After deposition of the OLED stack, devices were immediately protected by the upper TFE barrier. Devices were transferred to the ALD reactor through a nitrogen filled glovebox. The acronyms of the materials used in the OLED stacks are as follows. Spiro-TTB: A removable custom-built supporting frame was used for some of the electrical characterization to avoid damage to contact pads (Supplementary Fig. Plasma etching of light outcoupling structures. The outmost parylene-C layer of complete top-emitting OLEDs was roughened by exposure to an O2 and SF6 gas plasma in a custombuilt RIE system. Under the process conditions used (power 150 W, O2 gas flow rate 50 sccm, SF6 gas flow rate 5 sccm) the etch rate was 350 nm min -1 . After etching away 2.5 μm of parylene-C, a further nanolaminate layer (30 nm) and another parylene-C layer (0.5 μm) were deposited, and a further 0.35 μm of parylene-C were etched. This protocol was found to maximize the light scattering effect, but further optimizations can likely be made. Optical simulations. Optical simulations were based on the transfer matrix formalism described in Ref. 