Photon helicity-dependent photocurrent is measured at zero magnetic field on a device based on an ensemble of InGaAs/GaAs quantum dots that are embedded into a GaAs-based p-i-n diode. Our main goal is to take advantage of the long electron spin relaxation time expected in these nano-objects. In these experiments, no external magnetic field is required thanks to the use of an ultrathin magnetic CoFeB/MgO electrode, presenting perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA). We observe a clear asymmetry of the photocurrent measured under respective right and left polarized light that follows the hysteresis of the magnetic layer. The amplitude of this asymmetry at zero magnetic field decreases with increasing temperatures and can be controlled with the bias. Polarization-resolved photoluminescence is detected in parallel while the device is operated as a photodetector. This demonstrates the multifunctional capabilities of the device and gives valuable insights into the spin relaxation of the electrons in the quantum dots. Intense investigations have been led on spin injection and spin properties in semiconductors in the last twenty years, in view of developing opto-spintronics devices Conversely, spin-optronics detectors or spin-photodiodes, for which the amplitude of the photocurrent depends on the helicity of the detected photon and on the direction of the magnetization of the ferromagnetic electrode, may be of interest for optical telecommunications based on photon polarization In this paper we propose to use p-doped quantum dots embedded in the active region of the detector in order to take benefit from the long electron spin relaxation time expected in such nano-objects The schematics of the Spin-LED structure is displayed in Fig. The sample was kept in a vibration-free closed-cycle He cryostat equipped with a superconducting coil enabling to apply magnetic fields up to ±2 T normal to the sample plane. The photocurrent measurements were performed under CW excitation with 850 nm and 910 nm wavelengths provided by laser diodes focused onto the sample with a typical spot diameter of 3 μm. The helicity of the laser diode is modulated by a photoelastic modulator (PEM) at 50 kHz. The difference between the two photocurrents under circularly right and left polarized light is labelled ∆Iph. ∆Iph is measured thanks to a trans-impedance amplifier (gain 10 5 ) followed by a lock-in amplifier. The bias applied to the structure is provided by a source-meter that also measures the average photocurrent Iph. The positive bias corresponds to inject electrons from the metal part to the semiconductor part. The laser power is kept below 20 μW to stay in the linear regime. An original point of our set-up is that the photoluminescence (PL) can be detected at the same time as the photocurrent (see Fig. The inset of Fig. Remarkably, the ensemble of quantum dot emission shows a significant circular polarization of Pc = 18 % when a DC current of magnitude 160 μA is applied. Thanks to the p-doping of the dots (one hole per dot in average), the emitting quasi-particles are positively charged excitons (trions X + ), constituted by two valence holes and one conduction electron, which are circularly polarized, contrary to neutral excitons that are linearly polarized (due to the shape anisotropy of the quantum dots) The resulting optical selection rules are quite straightforward: Pc is equal in first approximation to the electron's spin polarization Ps (Ps= (n --n + )/(n -+ n + ), where n -and n + are respectively the number of electrons with spin down and up in the ensemble of quantum dots, provided that the electron spin relaxation time within the trion is longer than the electron lifetime (which is already validated for InGaAs p-doped quantum dots In Fig. We then turn to photocurrent experiments under circularly polarized light. The ensemble of quantum dots is excited by a laser diode at 910 nm (corresponding to high energy InGaAs dots emission/absorption) and 850 nm (close to the wetting layer states energy) with comparable results. Thanks to our specific set-up, it is possible to detect the photoluminescence signal at the same time as the photocurrent detection. Fig. We define an asymmetry factor A= ∆Iph /Iph (where Iph is the average photocurrent) to quantify the helicity dependent photocurrent. In Fig. Two main reasons could explain the large increase of A under forward bias. First, a channel competing with respect to the extraction of carriers from the dots (or localized states in the wetting layer) towards the magnetic electrode is required to obtain a sizeable photocurrent contrast Finally, we have also studied the dependence of the helicity dependent photocurrent A= ∆Iph /Iph as a function temperature (Fig. Thanks to the use of an ultrathin magnetic layer of CoFeB that presents perpendicular magnetic anisotropy, and p-doped InAs/GaAs quantum dots, we have evidenced at zero external magnetic field an asymmetry of photocurrent under right and left polarized light that follows the hysteresis cycle of the magnetic electrode. The amplitude of this asymmetry at zero magnetic field is about 0.4 % at low temperature, and can be controlled by the bias. It paves the way for versatile devices operating at zero magnetic field with two functionalities (helicity dependent photodetector and circularly polarized light source). Note that the use of an ultrathin CoFeB electrode of a few atomic layers is a strong advantage compared to thicker stacks 