We have investigated photoconductive properties of single Germanium Nanowires (NWs) of diameter < 100 nm in the spectral range of 300-1100 nm and in the broadband Near Infra-red spectrum showing peak Responsivity (R) ~10 7 A/W at a minimal bias of 2V. The NWs were grown by Vapor-Liquid-Solid method using Au nanoparticle as catalyst. In this report we discuss the likely origin of the ultra large R that may arise from a combination of various physical effects which are (a) Ge/GeOx interface states which act as "scavengers" of electrons from the photogenerated pairs, leaving the holes free to reach the electrodes, (b) Schottky barrier (~0.2 -0.3eV) at the metal/NW interface which gets lowered substantially due to carrier diffusion in contact region and (c) photodetector length being small (~few μm), negligible loss of photogenerated carriers due to recombination at defect sites. We have observed from power dependence of the optical gain that the gain is controlled by trap states. We find that the surface of the nanowire has presence of a thin layer of GeOx (as evidenced from HRTEM study) which provide interface states. It is observed that these state play a crucial role to provide a radial field for separation of photogenerated electron-hole pair which in turn leads to very high effective photoconductive gain that reaches a value > 10 7 at an illumination intensity of 10 μW/cm 2 . Achieving ultra-high response in a photodetector is of great interest in a variety of photonic applications where small radiation powers need be detected. The applications of photodetectors widen if the detector can work in a broad spectral range that spans UV-Visible and Near Infrared (NIR). Recently it has been established that photodetectors made from single semiconductor nanowires (NWs) with diameters ≤ 100nm can reach extremely large photo-response with R > 10 A/W. Other than ultrahigh responsivity, another desirable aspect in a photodetector is the wide band width of detection extending from UV to NIR that opens up its applications. It is envisaged that if single nanowire broad band detectors can be made they will pave the way for integrating such wires into high performance detector arrays and may even act as detectors for on-chip optical communication systems. Among the single NW photodetectors that show very high responsivity only InAs In a photoconductor, the responsivity R is directly proportional to the carrier mobility. In this context, investigation of photoconduction in Ge NW is very important since it is a material with larger μ compared to Si and interestingly, its band gap being smaller, it is expected to perform at longer wavelengths extending well into NIR region of the spectrum. It should be noted that Ge being an elemental semiconductor can be grown with more ease compared to the difficulty in growth of complex semiconductor NWs like InAs or InGaAs where stoichiometry control is crucial. Inspite of these superior properties, Ge NW has not been investigated till date as a photodetector over a spectral range that extends to NIR region. However, crystalline bulk Ge has been studied extensively in the VIS-NIR region (upto wavelength 1800nm). In this report we show that photodetectors made from a single strand of Ge NW (diameter ~ 30 nm) can reachR > 10 7 A/W over an extensive spectral range 350nm -1100nm with a bias of only 2V. This value of R is the highest observed in single NW photodetectors till date over a broad spectral range. The peak value of R ~3x10 7 A/W is observed at a wavelength of 850 nm and low illumination intensity of 10μW/cm 2 . The detector has a finite gain down to an illumination intensity of 1μW/cm 2 which corresponds to detection of power of ~ 10 -15 W (calculated from area of the device). It is also found that the response though reduces at longer wavelength, remains substantially high at wavelengths> 1100 nm. One of the factors that contribute to the very large optical gain is the contribution of surface/interface states. We observe from electron microscopy data that there exists a layer of GeOx on the surface of the Ge NW. It is proposed that in interfaces like Ge/GeOx existence of interface states can lead to an effective radial field that acts to separate out the electron-hole pair created by the optical illumination. Ge NWs were grown by vapor phase method in a dual zone furnace using gold (Au) nanoparticle (NP) as catalyst dispersed on a Silicon substrate. The Au NPs were made by dewetting a thin film of Au grown under ultra high vacuum conditions by electron beam evaporation and subsequent vacuum annealing. Growth of NWs occurs by Vapor-Liquid-Solid mechanism with the aid of Au NPs. The details are given in a previous publication from the group. High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscope (HRTEM) was used for structural characterization, with Selected Area Electron Diffraction (SAED) pattern showing highly oriented <111>planes (figure Thus, the Ge NWs used to fabricate photodetectors are single crystalline and highly oriented. We have studied eight samples of photodetectors made from Ge NWs with diameters ranging from 30-90nm. However, in this paper we will discuss results on two wires with diameter 30 nm and 65 nm (see table 1 for summary of samples measured and experimentally obtained parameters). The results in other wires are qualitatively similar and the responsivity typically lies within the range of the 10 5 -10 7 A/W. The length in the table refers to the distance between the two electrodes (referred to as L). The contact length may also partly contribute to the total length. However, the contact length being small, the extent of uncertainty is small. The NWs grown from vapour phase are not intentionally doped. However, it has been known from previous studies ) for a given bias, illumination intensity and wavelength, I being the device current with illumination and I the device current in dark at same bias voltage. The power incident on the nanowire P for a particular intensity has been calculated from the illumination intensity I(measured in W/cm 2 ) using the relation, P = I × A, where A is the collection area of the nanowire defined as A = πLd. The power absorbed by the nanowire is less than the incident powerP. Responsivity ( R = I P ⁄ ) and Specific Detectivity (D * ). G at a given wavelength or frequency ν is defined as the ratio of the photo-generated carriers per unit time (I ) to the incident number photons of frequency (ν) in unit time (P hν ⁄ ) and is given by G = hνI eP ⁄ . The Specific Detectivity is defined as, D * = A∆f NEP ⁄ , where A is the area of the NW exposed to incident radiation, ∆f is the signal bandwidth and NEP is the power at which the signal to noise ratio is unity. (Note: The NEP includes shot noise, flicker noise and thermal noise. In most calculations of NEP, only the shot noise is calculated to determine the NEP. This is not the true value of the NEP, which should be experimentally determined as the power at which the photocurrent to dark ratio is unity.) All the relevant parameters are summarized in Table Table In Figure The (I -V) curves of NW photodetectors can be modelled as an MSM device with back to back Schottky diodes and thermionic emission (TE) as the dominant mechanism of carrier injection across the MS interface. where, I is contribution due to thermionic emission at the contacts given by AART The ratio(n + n ) n ⁄ ) has been obtained from the experimentally measured δ as mentioned before. Comparison with observation shows that the values of |Δφ| though comparable to the estimated values, are consistently lower (~ 10meV) at 1mW/cm 2 . This is expected; the calculated |Δφ| is an upper limit which assumes that all the photogenerated carriers diffuse into the contact region. In reality, a smaller fraction will diffuse in, because some part of the photogenerated carriers recombine in the depletion region and in traps. The comparison establishes that the diffusion of carriers in the MS contact region leads to changes in the chemical potentials which lower the barrier height. The reduction in φ is an important effect, which adds on to the photocurrent of the Ge NW photodetector. The major result of the present investigation is ultra large responsivity R obtained in the photodetector made from a single Ge NW. A simple measure of the sensitivity of the single Ge NW can be appreciated from the following observation. A photocurrent ~ 50 nA is detected in a single Ge NW (A1) with area of light collection ~ 10 -9 cm 2 at 2V bias in a room dimly lit with white light (from a CFL). The same photocurrent is obtained by a commercial Si photodetector with collection area of 1 mm 2 . This immediately shows that the responsivity of the nanowire detector is larger than a commercial detector by few orders which is approximately the ratio of the collection areas of the Si detector and the Ge NW detector. The Responsivity versus wavelength data is shown in Figure There are certain factors which may lead to overestimation R of which, one is the physical cross-section of a laid wire as the light collection area because of the antenna effect due to the underlying Silicon (below the 300 nm SiO2 layer). To rule out these effects we have tested the photo-response by illumination away from the NW. We find that for illumination even at a distance of 2-3 times the diameter of the NW the response is very little. Thus, any uncertainty arising from such an effect is within a factor of 2-4. Thus, a responsivity of 3x10 Enhancement of the photoconduction on illumination has also been measured through the photo-current gain as defined previously. An example of measured G versus illumination intensity is shown in Figure In Figure The extremely large value of G ≥10 7 achievable in the photodetectors is contributed by a number of factors. The enhancement of carrier concentration on illumination (Δn) is definitely a large contributing factor, as has been discussed above. However, this alone cannot enhance the gain to such high values. Another important factor is contributed by the device size where the length L (distance between electrodes) being ~1-3μm, is less than the recombination length that makes the transit time of the carrier τ = L μV ⁄ short. A short τ makes the external quantum efficiency (EQE = τ τ ⁄ , where τ is the carrier recombination time) large so that the gain G (∝ EQE) becomes large. The carrier diffusion length for both hole and electrons has been measured in intrinsic Ge NW Nanowire photodetectors differ from their bulk counterpart mainly due to the dominant role of surface. It is often taken as a recombination site and thus lowers photo response in bulk. However, in case of NWs, the surface plays a very different role and enhances the responsivity. The existence of a depletion layer on the surface of a NW (which is promoted by existence of a native oxide layer or one that is acquired during growth) plays an important role that is not seen in a bulk detector. It is the small radius that helps in using the surface states as a major facilitator where, the unsaturated intensity independent gain depends on the carrier transit time τ , α is a phenomenological fitting parameter that depends on the recombination of carriers at the trap states and τ is the carrier lifetime. The fitting of the experimental data to the above equation also gives us the value of the illumination intensity I where the gain saturates. From the value of I it is possible to obtain the value of surface trap density T using the relation, T = I hν ⁄ . The parameters obtained from the fits to equation 3 are given in table From the nature of dependence of gain on illumination intensity, we proposed presence of an oxide layer on the surface of Ge NWs. To establish and substantiate the above hypothesis, we have performed Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy (EELS) using TEM to get information on the chemical binding states of Ge and nature of the oxide layer. The EELS spectrum was analysed using multiple Gaussian peak fitting. The EELS spectrum of Ge L edge (figure The effectiveness of the photodetector in presence of noise is an important factor, which is often measured by the Specific Detectivity, D * = A∆f NEP ⁄ as defined before. The signal band-width ∆fis selectable by the user and often is limited by the parasitic capacitance. In the device configurations used by us the measured ∆f is ≤ 1 KHz. We thus take an upper limit of the band width =1 KHz. As a realistic estimate we take NEP as the power at which the signal to noise ratio just reaches unity (see supplementary information Figure The observed values of D * being larger than 10 11 cmHz 1/2 /W and reaching even 10 13 cmHz 1/2 /W for A1 is appreciable, since commercial bulk Ge detector has D ~10 12 cm 1/2 Hz/W. The value of D * is comparable to most single NW photodetectors. The detector retains a finite measureable gain even for illumination intensity of 1μW/cm 2 . Thus it can detect below 2x10 -15 W. These estimates give us a good range of the minimum energy/power the single Ge NW detector can measure and measurement of ~10 -15 Joule will be possible with these detectors, taking into consideration their NEP and detection band width. From Figure Figure We establish that photodetectors can be made from single Ge NWs that show ultrahigh responsivity exceeding 10 7 A/W (nanowire diameter ~ 30 nm) over a broad spectral range 300 nm -1100 nm with finite response extending well into the NIR region at wavelength > 1100 nm. The relatively low current noise and such high responsivity gives rise to a detector that can detect down to 10 - 15 W. The large optical gain exceeding 10 7 is achieved at a low optical illumination intensity ~ 10μW/cm 2 . One of the core enabling factors that leads to such a high gain and responsivity is the surface layer of GeOx as we have seen from extensive electron microscopy analysis, which gives rise to a depletion layer that traps electrons of the illumination generated electron-hole pair and leaves the hole free to reach electrodes without recombination. The device length ~1-3μm being smaller than the carrier diffusion length facilitates collection of carriers effectively before recombination. also acknowledge Centre For Energy Science (DST Nano mission project SR/NM/TP-13/2016). AG thankfully acknowledges SERB for funding as NPDF (PDF/2015/000179). 