We propose a solar thermal energy conversion system consisting of a solar absorber, a thermoradiative cell or negative illumination photodiode, and a photovoltaic cell. Because it is a heat engine, this system can also be paired with thermal storage to provide reliable electricity generation. Heat from the solar absorber drives radiative recombination current in the thermoradiative cell, and its emitted light is absorbed by the photovoltaic cell to provide an additional photocurrent. Based on the principle of detailed balance, we calculate a limiting solar conversion efficiency of 85% for fully concentrated sunlight and 45% for one sun with an absorber and single-junction cells of equal areas. Ideal and nonideal solar thermoradiative-photovoltaic systems outperform solar thermophotovoltaic converters for low bandgaps and practical absorber temperatures. Their performance enhancement results from a high tolerance to nonradiative generation/recombination and an ability to minimize radiative heat losses. We show that a realistic device with all major losses could achieve increases in solar conversion efficiency by up to 7.9% (absolute) compared to a solar thermophotovoltaic device under low optical concentration. Our results indicate that these converters could serve as efficient heat engines for low cost single axis tracking systems. To achieve an electricity grid based on renewable generation, intermittent sources including solar energy must be paired with storage. Thermal energy storage is a very attractive solution due to its simplicity, scalability, and low cost One type of solid-state heat engine that has received significant attention is the thermophotovoltaic (TPV) converter Despite their challenges, TPV systems have a number of beneficial characteristics, such as the ability to modify the photon spectrum and recycle unused photons back to the thermal emitter. For example, sub-bandgap parasitic absorption can be drastically reduced by using nanophotonic selective emitters storage To utilize the advantages of both TPV and TR systems, it is natural to consider a heated TR cell emitting to a cool PV cell and obtaining power from both devices We develop a detailed-balance model of the system and use this model to derive its efficiency limit of 85% under maximum concentration. We then consider a more practical configuration of an ideal one-sun area-matched absorber, TR cell, and PV cell, and we show that its efficiency can reach 45% and exceeds that of a solar TR or solar TPV converter for low to moderate bandgaps and absorber temperatures. Finally, we examine a more realistic converter with combined loss mechanisms under optical concentration and demonstrate that it can achieve efficiency gains by up to 7.9% in comparison to solar TPVs under low solar concentration. Let us consider a solar TR-PV system with the energy fluxes illustrated in Fig. where E is the photon energy, η is the optical concentration efficiency which we take as unity, C is the optical concentration ratio, f = Ω /π is a geometric factor which accounts for the limited solid angle occupied by the sun, where Ω = 6.8×10 -5 sr Some of this light will be reflected according to the absorber's spectral reflectance ρ (E), and the remainder is absorbed assuming that no light is transmitted. Some of the absorbed energy may be lost by emission of thermal radiation, convection, or conduction. Spectral emission losses are given by ε (E)q (E, T ), where ε (E) is the spectral emittance of the absorber. For an opaque surface, ε (E) is equal to the spectral absorptance α (E) = 1 -ρ (E) according to Kirchhoff's law. T here is the absorber temperature and the TR temperature. We group convection and conduction losses according to h (T -T ), where h is the loss coefficient and T = 300 K is the ambient temperature and PV temperature. All energy not reflected nor lost is transferred to the TR cell. In practice, this transfer can be achieved by thermal conduction with direct contact between the absorber and TR cell or through intermediate heat exchangers and a heat transfer fluid as is done in most concentrating solar power plants Fig. The TR and PV cells can be readily modeled with the detailed balance formalism where e is the electron charge, E , is the bandgap of the TR cell, q (E) is the net spectral radiation flux from the TR cell to the PV cell, and G is the nonradiative generation rate. Because q (E) is a net quantity, radiative generation losses are included in this expression of the current. Similarly, the current density in the PV cell is where E , is the bandgap of the PV cell and R is the nonradiative recombination rate. dE + R PV The net spectral radiative heat flux from the TR cell to the PV cell, q (E), in Eqs. ( where μ = qV for E ≥ E and μ = 0 for E < E . Because both the TR and PV cells are emitting radiation and may reflect some of that radiation back to the other device, q (E) is most easily determined from a radiation resistance network as shown at the top of Fig. where ε (E) and ε (E) are the spectral emittances of the TR and PV cells, A and A are their surface areas, and F is the view factor of the PV cell from the TR cell. We assume that the cells have equal areas and are spaced very closely in comparison to their lateral dimensions, such that F ≈ 1 and the area terms may be removed to obtain a radiation flux. The net spectral radiative flux from the TR cell to the PV cell is then calculated as The preceding paragraphs fully describe the energy flows in this solar TR-PV system. Once the optical properties (ε , ε , ε , E , , E , ), loss coefficient (h ), voltages (V , V ) and nonradiative losses (G , R ) are selected, an energy balance on the absorber and TR cell can be solved for T . Once T is known, it can be used to calculate other performance indicators such as output powers and losses. The solar TR-PV efficiency can then be calculated as where A is the area of the solar absorber and the negative signs are used because the JV product for both cells is negative. We note that while the discussion thus far has focused on energy flows per unit area, A , A , and A need not be equal. In fact, there may be advantages in having A < A , because losses from the absorber scale with its area and light can be concentrated to a smaller absorber, and because the output powers of the TR and PV cells scale with their areas We now turn our attention to the efficiency limit of a solar TR-PV system. The solar conversion efficiency can be broken down into an absorber efficiency η and a TR-PV efficiency η , with η = η η . The heat-to-electricity efficiency limit of a TR converter or PV converter alone has been shown to be equal to the Carnot limit The corresponding TR-PV efficiency is the ratio of the work extracted per photon (voltage multiplied by electron charge for each device) to the energy supplied to the TR cell per photon (bandgap energy plus potential associated with TR voltage): When considering Eqs. ( which is the Carnot efficiency. Although unsurprising, this result is nonetheless instructive as it indicates that a solar TR-PV converter will have the same limiting efficiencies as a solar TR or solar TPV device. To demonstrate the equivalent limiting efficiencies between solar TPVs and solar TR-PVs, we consider the case of a blackbody absorber. The limiting absorber efficiency is obtained in the absence of conductive and convective losses and is the ratio of the heat received by the TR cell to the incident solar radiation. This efficiency may be determined from Eqs. ( The limiting efficiency for a TR-PV system with a blackbody absorber is therefore Using Eq. ( Although 85% is a very high limiting efficiency, this is not a target that can be approached in practice for several reasons. First, the maximum solar concentration and high absorber temperature are not achievable in a real system. Second, this would require an infinitely large TR area due to the narrowband emission approximation, and real cells have an optimum nonzero bandwidth To understand the performance and potential of a solar TR-PV system, we consider a more practical idealized case: no solar concentration, an absorber area equal to the TR area, equal TR and PV bandgaps, and a step-function emittance for the absorber, TR cell, and PV cell, where ε = 1 above the cutoff/bandgap energy and ε = 0 below. As described previously, a smaller absorber area than TR area may be beneficial, but there are fabrication advantages to keeping their areas equal. Matched bandgaps in the TR and PV cells are optimal because this aids in spectral matching of the emission and absorption profiles between the two cells. The effects of conduction/convection losses, nonradiative losses, and optical concentration are neglected here but considered in the following sections. For this system, the spectral radiation fluxes are illustrated in Fig. The absorber cutoff energy E should balance the unabsorbed (reflected) solar radiation with the lost (emitted) thermal radiation from the absorber. Ideally, this cutoff is located at the intersection of the solar and absorber spectral radiation fluxes. A great deal of research has gone toward the development of selective solar absorbers, which can now achieve solar absorptances in excess of 95% and infrared emittances less than 5% With these idealized inputs, we calculate the efficiency of the one-sun area-matched solar TR-PV system as a function of the cell bandgap energy and show the results in Fig. Because real devices cannot avoid conduction, convection, and nonradiative losses, it is important to investigate how these affect system efficiency. Conduction/convection losses are included with a nonzero loss coefficient h as shown in Fig. Unsurprisingly, conduction/convection losses from the absorber in Fig. the solar conversion efficiency still reaches about 29%. This results from the fact that solar TR-PV devices operate at lower magnitude V and V than TR or TPV converters alone, and nonradiative losses tend to have an exponential dependence on cell voltage Although examining different loss mechanisms on their own is instructive to understand how they affect performance, it is clear from some of the differing trends in Fig. For the absorber, we model conductive/convective losses with a loss coefficient of h = 1 W m -2 K -1 , which is a reasonable assumption for evacuated absorbers For the TR and PV cells, we choose cell bandgaps of 0.35 eV, which is in the range where solar TR-PV converters are expected to outperform the other devices. This is also near the efficiency peaks observed in Fig. The reasons for an optimum concentration of 80 suns with this system can be understood by examining the losses in Fig. Losses (%) A B The breakdown of losses in Fig. Solar TR-PV systems display clear performance benefits compared to solar TR or solar TPV systems, which results from their ability to utilize advantages of each device. These performance enhancements occur at low to moderate bandgaps in an ideal range for solar-thermal energy harvesting. Similar to a solar TPV or solar TR device, heat losses and nonradiative losses degrade performance, but TR-PV systems can still achieve high efficiencies and outperform individual devices when these are considered. A model of a 0.35 eV bandgap solar TR-PV system with combined loss mechanisms shows that they can substantially outperform solar TPV and solar TR converters at low optical concentrations. Importantly, solar TR-PV converters can be paired with thermal storage to provide reliable electricity generation even with intermittent sunlight. A solar TR-PV device is necessarily more complex than a solar PV, a solar TPV, or a solar TR converter. This will lead to a higher cost on a per cell area basis than the other devices, which motivates TR-PV use when it can achieve substantially higher efficiencies than the other uncombined devices. For example, the TR-PV system examined in Fig. Although this preliminary analysis of solar TR-PV systems is encouraging, additional research is needed to model and test their operation in greater detail. In particular, the effect of TR temperature on nonradiative losses could be significant depending on the TR material 