To unravel pairing mechanism of a superconductor from limited, indirect experimental data is always a difficult task. It is common but sometimes dubious to explain by a theoretical model with some tuning parameters. In this work, we propose that the machine learning might infer pairing mechanism from observables like superconducting gap functions. For superconductivity within the Migdal-Eliashberg theory, we perform supervised learning between superconducting gap functions and electron-boson spectral functions. For simple spectral functions, the neural network can easily capture the correspondence and predict perfectly. For complex spectral functions, an autoencoder is utilized to reduce the complexity of the spectral functions to be compatible to that of the gap functions. After this complexity-reduction process, relevant information of the spectral function is extracted and good performance restores. Our proposed method can extract relevant information from data and can be applied to general function-to-function mappings with asymmetric complexities either in physics or other fields. The mechanism of superconductivity has been one of hottest topics for more than one century since the first experimental evidence of superconductivity in mercury was observed by H. K. Onnes in 1911 The success of EPC for superconductivity demonstrates the huge impact from collaboration between fermions (electrons) and bosons (phonons). Since then, scientists keep searching for possible bosonic modes behind superconductivity, including unconventional superconductors such as high-temperature superconducting cuprate Theoretically, it is straightforward to calculate gap functions based on the spectrum of bosonic glue of superconductivity. On the contrary, the bosonic spectrum is material dependent and requires case-dependent ab initio calculations. Since electron and boson contribute to the superconductivity through the overall effective electron-boson spectral function (EBSF) without the need to know much material details, the inference of the EBSF from superconducting properties is possible and can stand for a convincing proof of the mechanism. Our goal is to infer the EBSF from the gap function using machine learning techniques, and this strategy may be extended to other mechanisms including unconventional superconductivity. Since the beginning of this century, machine learning (ML) related techniques have been intensively developed in the fields of the computer vision and natural language processing Starting from few years ago, modern ML gradually becomes a relevant skill for solving different types of problems in physics For superconductivity, efforts are mainly devoted to the prediction of the transition temperature. These include the similarity search using the encoded fingerprints In this work, we realize a machine which can answer the possible EBSF from the input: a gap function. Through the establishment of the relations learned by the machines, we can derive the spectral function relevant to the gap function without performing the ab initio calculations. The performance for simple EBSFs is good by the SL and what is learned by the machine during the training process is investigated. The SL alone, however, is hard to improve the performance of complex, randomlygenerated EBSFs. In order to resolve this issue, we used the AE to evaluate the complexities of both the EBSFs and gap functions. It was found that EBSFs have much higher complexity. Therefore, the complexity of EBSFs is reduced by AE to be compatible to that of the gap function, in which way smoothed EBSFs are generated to contain key information relevant to the input data. By using the AE-smoothed EBSFs as the new labels and the AE-transformed gap functions as the new inputs, the performance is greatly improved, which indicates that the new EBSFs preserve the essential information relevant to the new gap function so that they have one-to-one correspondence between them. This approach thus proposed a process of complexity reduction which can generally extract the key information of the data relevant to our input functions, and can be utilized to improve SL tasks in physics or other fields. The process is demonstrated in Fig. The outline of the rest of this article is given in the following. In Sec. II, we introduce the ME formalism, describing the relations between the EBSFs and the gap functions, the training datasets. In Sec. III, we describe the details and results for the training with simple (Sec. III A) and complex EBSFs (Sec. III B). We discuss the relation between the performance and the compatibility of complexity as well as potential applications of our work and then make a conclusion in Sec. IV. The key feature of the superconductivity relies on the Cooper-pair condensation, initiated by the pair of states (k ↑, -k ↓) occupied coherently. Therefore, the Nambu-Gor'kov formalism utilizing the two-component spinor ψ † k = (c † k↑ c † -k↓ ) was introduced where k is the normal-state energy dispersion and Σ is the self-energy. For the self-energy Σ, the ME theory considers the self-energy Σ comes from both the EPC and the electron-electron Coulomb interaction. Especially, the vertex corrections are argued to be small so that a bare vertex is a good approximation, which means the EPC is truncated at order of ω D /E F , the ratio between the Debye frequency and the Fermi energy. This leads to the self-energy (2) where V C (k -k ) is the screened Coulomb potential, and g k,k ,ν is the screened EPC strength which describes scattering between electron states k and k through a phonon with wave vector q = kk and frequency ω qν . The propagator for phonons is qν ] and the self-energy is in the form of ) where Z(k, iω n ), χ(k, iω n ), φ(k, iω n ) are functions at the Matsubara frequencies to be determined. Here, the phase of the pairing potential φ(k, iω n ) is gauged so as to exclude the σ 2 component. Therefore, the Dyson equation becomes The functions of Z(k, iω n ), χ(k, iω n ) and φ(k, iω n ) can be determined. The functions depend on k, which impedes heavily on the computational task. A standard approximation is applied that the DOS is constant of N F around the Fermi energy E F since E F is much larger than the pairing energy. Hence the energy shift χ is a constant to be omitted. Furthermore, for conventional superconductors the gap function anisotropy is usually weak or smeared out by impurities where the function is positive definite, we finally have the ME equations to solve self-consistently in the following is the interaction kernel function. T is the temperature, and the reduced Planck constant and the Boltzmann constant k B are set to unity for convenience. The electron-electron interaction is renormalized and then considered via the the Morel-Anderson pseudopotential μ * in the frequency below ω c . The μ * value is empirical and in the range of 0.1 ∼ 0.2 for most conventional superconductors We build up a SL machine by using Keras on the Tensorflow backend to take ∆(ω) as an input function to predict the EBSF as the output function. The network structure of the machine contains the input layer (300 neurons), output layer (1000 neurons) and two hidden layers (500 and 800 neurons, respectively), sketched in Fig. In this subsection, we study the performance of the machine when the complexity of the data is low. We prepare the data (totally 1800 data in this dataset) in which every EBSF is constructed by a combination of Gaussian variants. We show some EBSFs in Fig. Given the good performance, we would like to have insights on what the machine has learned from the training dataset. The details are shown in the appendix B. In this part of work, we prepare diverse EBSFs (totally 10000 data in this dataset) by randomly generating the value for each frequency in one EBSF and performing some smoothing (averaging) schemes to slightly eliminate fluctuations. The performance after the training is shown in Fig. An AE, as illustrated in Fig. Latent space (Middle layer) Hidden layer Hidden layer Hidden layer output layer Input layer FIG. (vector) and the corresponding gt-EBSF (vector) as a new vector and then use those combined vectors to train the AE. As the first trial, we set d L = 2 and the result is shown in Fig. The two complexities (or d L 's) for EBSFs and gap functions are so different that many distinct EBSFs may map onto similar gap functions, consistent with the proposed many-to-one mapping. In this case, the machine has difficulties in learning the mapping and possibly end up with outputting the averaged EBSF. It is consistent with what has been observed in Fig. In order to clarify ideas mentioned above, we calculate two gap functions based on the gt-EBSFs and the p-EBSFs. If both the simplified p-EBSF and complex gt-EBSF contain the relevant information, their resulting gap functions should look similar. Our results, as shown in Fig. Our belief is that if one simplified EBSF do contain mostly the key information relevant to the gap functions, the complexity of that simplified EBSF has to be of the same degree as that of the gap functions. Furthermore, the SL machine, trained by the simplified EBSFs and corresponding gap functions, will restore the good performance. In order to systematically control the complexities, here we use an AE to generate new EBSFs as well as the gap functions with desired complexity (or latent dimension) for our SL trainings. The way to generate The performance is good for two reasons. Firstly, the latent dimension of the EBSFs is reduced to two, similar to that of the gap functions. The second and most important reason is that the EBSFs and gap functions are co-transformed so that relevant connection between them are kept by the AE. If these two functions are separately transformed by the AE the performance is lowered. In other words, via an AE, the latent dimension of the EB-SFs is reduced from 32 to 2 and the co-transformation with the gap functions makes the 2-D latent space of the EBSFs equal to the 2-D latent space of the gap functions. We also check that the AE-transformed EBSFs really lead to, by the self-consistent calculations, the new, co-transformed gap functions for any latent dimension. That is, an AE can preserve the connection between the gap functions and EBSFs and transfer this connection to the new dataset no matter what latent dimension is chosen. In the appendix E, we provide evidences showing that the EBSFs predicted by our AE-follow-up SL machine do contain information relevant to the gap functions for any latent dimensions. In the appendix A, we use the connection preserved by the AE to numerically show the many-to-one mapping between EBSFs and gap functions claimed above. Given that all newly generated datasets {v n s} for any latent dimensions n satisfy the ME equations, we have to determine which d L is the appropriate one to construct the SL machine for predictions. The key is to find the latent dimension of the gap functions d Lg . From the inspection of Fig. For the cases using the DOS as input functions, similar calculations and analysis have been performed and the appropriate latent dimension is one, instead of two for the gap functions. It is consistent with our observations as the difference between DOS curves is mainly the positions of the coherence peaks while the difference between gap functions can exist in much more different ways. Given the good performance shown above, we can summarize our process in Fig. The bad performance usually occurs when d Lo > d Li . In this case, the machine has to learn to infer remarkably different output functions (EBSFs in this work) based on similar input functions (gap functions in this work). This is a difficult task and the machine usually ends up with predicting the "coarse grained" functions as mentioned above. However, for the opposite situation, where d Lo < d Li , remarkably different input functions are used to infer similar output functions, which is a relatively easier task. Consider an extreme example where two different input functions (q 1 and q 2 ) correspond to the same output function (r 1 ). Then, the machine only needs to learn to infer r 1 no matter which one of q 1 and q 2 is encountered. For a consistency check, we reverse the roles of input and output functions (that is, here, we use EBSFs to predict gap functions via a SL machine) and the performance of the SL machine is good (not shown), which is consistent with our expectations. In order to have good performance, the latent dimension of the AE has to be chosen appropriately if initially the two latent dimensions of input and output functions are largely different. For the simpler case shown in the first part of this work, two complexities (latent dimensions) are compatible to each other so that the performance is good and we do not need an extra AE. For the complex case shown in the second part of this work, the latent dimension of the output functions (d Lo = 32) is much larger than that of input functions (d Li = 2 for the gap functions and d Li = 1 for the DOS functions). Therefore the best performance occurs when the latent dimension of the AE is chosen to be two (one) if the gap functions (DOS functions) are chosen as the input functions. Usually, it is difficult to have enough dataset directly from experimental inputs for training a SL machine. Therefore, we theoretically generate datasets for training. In order to include all possibilities encountered in the real physical world, data is generated with maximum randomness. However, this process can create extra complexity which is irrelevant to the physical properties of interest leading to bad performance as expected. Our process of complexity reduction serves as a way to extract physically relevant information of the randomly generated functions. In this work, our method is applied to mainly BCS superconductivity but the extension to other types of order parameters of superconductivity, such as d-wave SC or other unconventional ones, should be straightforward as long as similar theoretical formalism connecting the gap functions and bosonic glue is established. Furthermore, this method can be generally applied to any function-tofunction supervised-learning tasks with asymmetric complexities to improve the performance and obtain more understanding on the data. In summary, we predict the EBSF of a superconductor based on the measured gap functions via the supervised learning aided by the autoencoder. When the latent dimensions of input and output functions are compatible, the performance is good. When these two latent dimensions are remarkably different (d Lo > d Li ), we have to reduce the latent dimension of the complex one to be compatible to the simple one so that the good performance restores. This reduction can extract physically relevant information. Therefore, this method paves the ways to improving the performance of general function mappings with asymmetric complexities and to extracting meaningful information in data from physics or other fields. The authors thank Prof. Ting-Kuo Lee for fruitful discussions. This work is supported by Ministry of Science and Technology (Grant No. MOST 109-2112-M-110-010 and MOST 108-2112-M-110-013-MY3 ) and National Sun Yat-sen University. In order to demonstrate the many-to-one mapping, we statistically examine the difference between two EBSFs (say, the original f 1 and the complexity-reduced f 2 ) and that between two corresponding gap functions (say, g 1 and g 2 ). As the first step we randomly generate f 1 and obtain, via ME self-consistent calculations, the gap function g 1 . We then choose an AE-follow-up SL machine with the latent dimension d L = n and feed this machine with g 1 . The output is f 2 . As the next step, we obtain g 2 self-consistently based on f 2 . Note that, both pairs ((f 1 ,g 1 ) and (f 2 ,g 2 )) are shown in the main text to satisfy the ME equations. This completes the generation of one data (f 1 , f 2 , g 1 , g 2 ) and, in the following, we define and evaluate two differences: ∆ f for EBSFs and ∆ g for gap functions using the Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) For each data, the PCC of f 1 and f 2 and that of g 1 and g 2 are calculated as p f and p g , respectively. The PCC will be equal to 1 if the two compared functions are exactly the same. Then two differences are defined as ∆ f = 1 -p f and ∆ g = 1 -p g . We can then calculate the average of ∆ f and ∆ g over the dataset for each latent dimension n. As shown in table I that ∆ f is roughly two orders of magnitude larger than ∆ g , which means remarkably different EBSFs correspond to similar gap functions, a many-to-one mapping. First of all we analyze how the performance is influenced by the neuron number of the layer next to the output layer (NTO layer, see Fig. The generated EBSF must be continuous and positivedefinite. We first create random functions along the one-dimensional ω space by the geometric Brownian motion which is often used as the financial market price simulations In the whole work here, we map the generated EBSF to the frequency range of 0 ∼ 10 meV, and set the temperature T = 1.16K. The dimensionless empirical parameter μ * is fixed to be 0.1 for simplicity since its value does not change the result much. Note that the energy can be used as the common unit and other dimensional quantities are scaled correspondingly. For example, we can still get the same result of the gap function and renormalization if the frequency range is mapped to the range of 0 ∼ 50 meV, while T is chosen to be 5.8 K simultaneously. Some randomly-generated EBSFs will not produce superconductivity at the chosen temperature. We keep only the nonzero ∆ data for training and testing. In Eqs. ( There always exists the solution ∆ = 0 which corresponds to the normal state. In numerical calculation we should be careful of choosing the initial values and the convergent criteria to find the superconducting solutions (∆ = 0) of interest. To solve the coupled equations selfconsistently, we solve them iteratively. However, the simplest and straightforward iteration of a previous output as the next input usually converges poorly. Typically the trivial solution ∆ = 0 might be obtained, especially when the non-trivial solution is small. To perform the numerical iteration properly, we adopt the Broyden's method, which is a quasi-Newton method to find roots of a set of nonlinear equations f (x) = 0 by updating the Jacobian matrix where The inverse of the the Jacobian matrix is updated directly as to minimize the Frobenius norm ||J n -J n-1 || F , as suggested by Broyden until the solution converges. Once the Z and ∆ are solved at the Matsubara frequencies, the analytical continuation of these functions to the real axis is then executed. We adopt the Padé approximation, which requires sufficient and accurate Npoints (here 2M +2 points) data at the imaginary axis 