In this paper we present a successful approach for the generation of partially fluorinated graphene structures. A computationally simple model optimized on a large DFT dataset quickly and precisely predicts experimentally observed structures. From the analysis of the structural diversity of fluorinated graphene in a wide range of synthesis temperatures, the general structural patterns are identified and the conditions for their achievement are determined. In addition, to facilitate further studies of fluorinated graphene, we present a ready-to-use GenCF code that implements the described structure generator. There are three most studied derivatives of chemically functionalized graphene: graphene oxide, hydrogenated graphene and fluorinated graphene For our purposes, we classified the synthesis methods of FG Theoretical approaches to study FG structures are density functional theory (DFT) and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. DFT calculations allow to accurately determine the energy of specific structures, such as various conformations of fully FG In this paper, generating FG structures where the parameters were optimized using a large DFT dataset. We show that adjustable distribution generates the structures corresponding to different synthesis conditions and allows us to analyze the distribution of patterns. DFT calculations were carried out in Jaguar software ver. 10.3 To predict fluorine binding energies we tried to find any hard correlations between obtained geometries and the corresponding energies within a few regression methods (like principal component or support vector regressions). Unfortunately, this approach did not allow us to achieve satisfying results. It was reported that a simple short-range pair potential in Ising-like interaction model exhibits a good prognostic potential for HG where g is the structure vector with elements equal to 0 or 1 or -1, depending on the absence, or upward, or downward orientation of fluorine atoms, respectively. First term is the "pure" C-F binding energy in the absence of any neighbors. The second and third terms are sums over the first and second order neighbors, respectively. Each sum contains two terms. We assume that, the a 1,2 terms are mostly responsible for the geometric distortion of the lattice caused by covalent attachment of fluorine and they are dependent on the relative orientation of the i-th and j-th atoms, while the b 1,2 terms reveal the orientation-independent energy corrections for the neighbors from the first and second surrounding fluorine spheres. A good agreement of E values from Eq. 1 with the above DFT energies (see Fig. Table The obtained results allow us to conclude that in a fluorination process, the growth of chains or island is energetically justified for alternating fluorination due to a low value of b 1 . Ref. where E ± i is the binding energy of fluorine with the i-th site, which is calculated as the difference between the energies of the structure (Eq. 1) with bound fluorine E ± at the center of the elementary structure(see Fig. A series of simulations with various β and fluorination degree was carried out to verify the adequacy of the above scheme. A set of 5 rectangular C 352 structures was simulated for each value of β and fluorination degree (see Fig. While the formation of one-side FG with more than 50% of fluorine is thermodynamically unfavorable N (Fig. The C-C/C-CF ratio shows different behavior in case of one-side and two-side fluorination (Fig. The minimum at β ∼ 20 eV -1 for CF 0.3 and CF 0.4 is associated with a higher branching in relation to β ∼ 30 eV -1 . Unlike the two-side fluorination, with one-side there are no explicit maxima at β ∼ 10 eV -1 , which is associated with an absence of large aggregated clusters. The formation and further transition of small aggregates into short chains are responsible for a slight excess at β ∼ 3 eV -1 . Subsequent β growth leads to an increase in the length of chains and a decrease in their branching. As expected, structural entropy linearizes with the β on a logarithmic scale (Fig. As mentioned above, we cannot state quantitative patterning results in the case of one-side fluorination. Keeping this in mind, we analyze the experimental data on one-side fluorination with plasma (SF 6 ). The functionalization was performed with microwave induced SF 6 plasma, with ions acceleration at 0 (exposure 20 min) and 1 kV (exposure 10 min) In summary, the new method of modeling FG system is presented. Being optimized on a large DFT dataset, it gives a good agreement with the known theoretical and experimental results. We found that varying the synthesis temperature can lead to various structural features: from short chains for low β = 1/k B T (reachable only in plasma synthesis), through bulk or longer chains at β ∼ 10 eV -1 (T∼ 500 • C) for one side and two-side fluorination, correspondingly, to chains elongations and brunching decrease at higher β. Another prediction is the growth of graphene quantum dot's size with the synthesis temperature increase. The accuracy of our model can be estimated by varying the temperature with the same synthesis method. The best region to our prediction examination is compounds with the highest structural variability CF 0.5-0.8 for the two-side FG and CF 0.4-0.5 for the one-side FG. We believe that our work can help in further studies of FG based materials. Source code and ready-to-use build of described structure generator is available on GitHub 