An open question in studying normal grain growth concerns the asymptotic state to which microstructures converge. In particular, the distribution of grain topologies is unknown. We introduce a thermodynamic-like theory to explain these distributions in two-and three-dimensional systems. In particular, a bending-like energy Ei is associated to each grain topology ti, and the probability of observing that particular topology is proportional to 1 s(t i ) e -βE i , where s(ti) is the order of an associated symmetry group and β is a thermodynamic-like constant. We explain the physical origins of this approach, and provide numerical evidence in support. Introduction. Theory, simulation, and experimental work have shown that during normal grain growth, polycrystalline microstructures evolve toward an asymptotic state in which scale-invariant properties become constant Previous studies characterizing the distribution of grain topologies is limited in two important ways. First, little connection has been made between two-and threedimensional systems; a general theory explaining both is desirable. Second, despite careful characterization of grain types that appear and their relative frequencies, an explanation of these observations remains elusive. This letter introduces a novel, thermodynamic-like approach to explain the observed distributions of topological types in two-and three-dimensional grain-growth systems. In particular, we associate a bending-like energy to each grain that depends only on its topology, and show that this energy can help predict the distribution of topologies in these cellular microstructures. Theory. The most basic topological property of a grain is its number of neighbors. In this letter, we use the term neighbors to refer to pairs of grains that share a common edge or face, in two or three dimensions, respectively. In two dimensions, the topology of a grain is fully described by its number of edges, which in most cases is equal to its number of neighbors (in exceptional cases, a pair of neighboring grains can share multiple edges). The arrangement of neighbors in three dimensions, how-ever, is more complicated. Consider, for example, Fig. We say that two grains have the same topological type, or topology, if their neighbors can be paired so that neighbors of one grain are themselves neighbors if corresponding neighbors of the other grain are also neighbors. In two dimensions, each topological type is identified with a natural number. In three dimensions, each type is identified with a graph isomorphism class Thermodynamics. A central goal of statistical thermodynamics is understanding the distribution of microstates of a system when only macrostate features are known. A system of N identical particles confined to a fixed volume in thermal equilibrium with a surrounding fixedtemperature heat bath is a classic example, the canonical ensemble The partition function Z = Z(β) is a normalizing constant which ensures that p is a probability distribution on Ω, the set of all possible microstates. The exponential dependence of probability on energy results from treating the system and its significantly larger surroundings as an isolated system with fixed energy, and in which all possible microstates are equally probable Two dimensions. Although grains in two-dimensional systems are not regular polygons, we consider them so as a first-order approximation. Adjacent edges of a regular n-sided polygon meet at internal angles of α n = π-2π/n. Energetic factors in isotropic grain growth, however, cause edges to meet at angles of θ 2 = 2π/3. We therefore define an energy associated with each vertex of an n-sided face as the square of the difference between α n and θ 2 , in a manner analogous to a conventional elastic energy. The total energy associated with an n-sided grain is the sum of these energies over its n vertices: ( Since each angle of a regular hexagon is α 6 = θ 2 , the energy associated with the n = 6 topology is zero. Although microstate energies largely determine their probabilities, the manner in which microstates are counted must also be considered. In particular, if neighbors of a grain are cyclically permuted, or else their order is reversed, then its topology is unchanged, as pairs of grains are neighbors after this transformation only if they were neighbors before it. This identification leads to a corrective factor of 1/s(t i ), where s(t i ) is the order of the symmetry group of grain topology t i . This factor is analogous to the more familiar 1/N ! factor that arises in systems of N indistinguishable particles, described by Eq. ( In two dimensions, the symmetry group of each regular n-gon is the dihedral group with order 2n, suggesting the following probability distribution of n-sided grains: for some constant β. As mentioned before, we are not aware of any physical interpretation of β, and regard it as a fitting parameter. Figure Three dimensions. Our earlier simulations of threedimensional grain growth suggested that certain topologies appear more frequently than others, even among those with the same number and types of faces Distribution of faces. We first consider grain faces in three dimensions. Whereas edges in isotropic, twodimensional grain growth meet at angles 2π/3, in three dimensions they meet at angles θ 3 = cos -1 (-1/3) ≈ 109.5 • . This suggests defining a bending-like energy associated with an n-sided face in three dimensions: analogous to the energy defined in Eq. ( Figure 3. The product of the observed probability p(ti) and the symmetry group order s(ti) as a function of energies (a) E f and (b) Ev for each observed topology ti, as suggested by Eq. least-squares method finds this equation describes the observed data best when β = 1.29 (χ 2 = 0.009). This prediction fits the data more closely than Eq. ( Distribution of grain topologies. Topologically-defined energies can also be used to estimate the distribution of topological types in three dimensions. We define two such energies for each grain topology t i . The first is a sum of Eq. ( where n j is the number of sides of face j. This energy extends the one defined for polygonal faces to entire grains. The probability of a grain with topology t i can then be estimated by where E(t i ) = E f (t i ), and where s(t i ) is the order of the associated symmetry group; more details about this symmetry group and the algorithm used to calculate its order can be found in Ref. Although E f quantifies the energetic favorability of each grain topology, it depends only on the types of faces of a grain, but not on how those faces are arranged. Such information, however, might yield a more accurate estimate of the distribution of topologies. For example, the two topologies illustrated in Fig. We therefore define a second energy to quantify how curvature is distributed over grain vertices. If three regular n-sided polygons meet at a vertex v, then the Gaussian curvature concentrated at that vertex is , where n j is the number of sides of face j. If we approximate each face as a regular polygon, then K v approximates the actual curvature in purely topological terms. In isotropic grain growth, however, the Gaussian curvature at each vertex is K = 2π -3θ 3 , where θ 3 = cos -1 (-1/3). We then define the energy at each vertex as the square of the difference between these curvatures, and define the total energy E v (t i ) of topology t i as a sum of these energies over its V vertices: Two grains with the same number and types of faces will generally have identical Figure We next consider the relationship between E f , E v , and s(t i )p(t i ) when restricted to grains with fixed numbers of faces. For each fixed number of faces, we use a weighted least-squares method to fit data to a curve of the form s(t i )p(t i ) = 1 Z e -βE(ti) . Figure tahedron, which appears only once in the grain-growth simulation dataset. Finally, we consider sets of grain topologies with identical numbers and types of faces, but in which those faces are arranged differently, thus providing multiple E v values for fixed E f . Figure Conclusions. The most surprising finding of this work is the ability of a topologically-defined "energy" to predict the distribution of grain topologies in steady-state, isotropic grain growth. The similarity between the forms of the energies and distributions in two and three dimensions suggests a common factor governing their behavior. These energies can be understood as measuring the deviation of realistic grains and their geometries from ideal ones in topological terms. The relationship between topologically-defined energy, symmetry, and probability is reminiscent of the classical statistical mechanics approach toward analyzing equilibrium systems. Although grain-growth microstructures are not equilibrium systems, their steady-state properties provide a similar setting for this kind of analysis While the energies suggested here can be thought of as approximating bending energies, other topologicallydefined energies might also be considered. For example, a twisting energy can be defined along grain edges to quantify the strain resulting from differences in face arrangements at alternate ends. Further, while the context of the current study is grain growth in polycrystalline metals, the suggested approach may find application in understanding data collected in studies of polyhedra-shaped cells in other systems, such as bubbles in soap foams Finally, the approach introduced in this letter might be compared with that recently proposed by Lutz et al. 