Coupling of nano-indentation and crystal plasticity finite element (CPFE) simulations is widely used to quantitatively probe the small-scale mechanical behaviour of materials. Earlier studies showed that CPFE can successfully reproduce the load-displacement curves and surface morphology for different crystal orientations. Here, we report the orientation dependence of residual lattice strain patterns and dislocation structures in tungsten. For orientations with one or more Burgers vectors close to parallel to the sample surface, dislocation movement and residual lattice strains are confined to long, narrow channels. CPFE is unable to reproduce this behaviour, and our analysis reveals the responsible underlying mechanisms. occurring across multiple scales is challenging. The reason is that the indentation process involves the evolution of the population of irradiation defects at the nano-scale For instance, nano-indentation behaviour of [001]-oriented ion-irradiated tungsten has been studied with this methodology. 3D micro-Laue X-ray diffraction [111] oriented grains we find long and narrow strain channels that extend over tens of microns. Surprisingly these channels are not predicted by CPFE simulations. The underlying reasons for this are discussed in the light of the mechanisms controlling their formation, morphology and evolution. High-purity polycrystalline tungsten (> 99.97 wt. %) sheet (1 mm thick) purchased from Plansee was cut into 10101 mm 3 samples and fully recrystallised in vacuum (< 10 -5 mbar) at 1500 °C for 24 h. The surface was mechanically ground and then electropolished to achieve a high quality, defect-free finish (see details in Electron channelling contrast imaging (ECCI) was performed on a Zeiss Crossbeam 540 SEM equipped with a backscattered electron (BSE) detector (30 kV, 10 nA). Argus imaging and HR-EBSD around nano-indents was carried out using a Zeiss Merlin SEM with a Bruker eFlash detector (30 kV, 15 nA). The normal EBSD set up, with the sample tilted at 70° to the electron beam, was used for both. The Argus imaging system consistents of three forward-scattered electron detectors receiving signals from different parts of the diffraction pattern The XEBSD code, developed by Britton and Wilkinson Hence the local deviatoric strain tensor and lattice rotation tensor, relative to the reference point, were determined. Fig. In a [001]-oriented single crystal, a pile-up pattern with four-fold symmetry is expected Pile-up streaks in the red grain are ~7 μm long and ~3 μm wide. In the blue grain (Fig. In a [001] tungsten single crystal, the pile-up directions align well with the <111> Burgers vector projections (BVPs) on the sample surface In the blue grain streaks are only observed for two of the BVPs (Fig. Residual lattice strains near indents were probed by HR-EBSD (Fig. . This confirms that the long strain channels are an effect of crystal orientation. For the green grains, the geometric necessary dislocation (GND) density (computed using the approach of The orientation of CPFE-predicted strain fields is also different from the dislocation channel directions observed in experiments. Previous 3D DDD of nano-indentation in FCC metals showed that the morphology of dislocation loops punched out by indentation depends on the crystal orientation and pre-existing dislocation sources In the case of Burgers vector near parallel to the surface, prismatic loops or prismatic half loops, depending on the depth of the dislocation source, can be punched out. These loops thus travel along the Burgers vector direction The CPFE constitutive law considers crystallographic slip on the <111>{110} system. However, the nucleation of dislocations, the morphology of dislocation loops and the transport of dislocations are not included. That is, slip can be activated anywhere, even if there is a lack of sources, provided the resolved shear stress exceeds the critical resolved shear stress of a slip system. Furthermore, the effect of dislocation structure and organisation, such as dislocation pile-up, on the stress field is not evaluated in the CPFE model. However, the stress-induced by piling-up of dislocations (Fig. In summary, the surface deformation, i.e. surface pile-up is dependent on the resolved magnitude of the Burgers vector along the out-of-plane direction. Surface pile-up forms for Burgers vectors inclined to the surface at an angle greater than ~20°, while long streaks (dislocation transport channels) without pile-up form for Burgers vectors near parallel to the sample surface. CPFE simulations can successfully predict the load-displacement curve and surface morphology for different orientations. However, when it comes to lattice strain, CPFE fails to capture the formation of extended dislocation transport channels. This is because CPFE does not consider the nucleation and morphology of dislocations, or indeed their transport and stress contribution during plastic deformation. Multi-scale simulations are needed to capture these effects in a computationally efficient fashion, offering a coarse-grained representation of the detailed behaviour seen in DDD simulations.