We establish that two-dimensional dipolar quantum gases admit a universal description, i.e., their thermodynamic properties are independent of details of the interaction at short distances. The only relevant parameters are the dipole length as well as the scattering length of the combined short-range plus dipolar interaction potential. We derive adiabatic relations that link the change in the thermodynamic potentials with respect to the scattering length and the dipole length to a generalized Tan contact parameter and a new dipolar contact, which involves an integral of a short-distance regularized pair distribution function. These two quantities determine the scale anomaly in the difference between pressure and energy density and also the internal energy in the presence of a harmonic confinement. For a weak transverse confinement, configurations with attractive interactions appear, which lead to a density-wave instability beyond a critical strength of the dipolar interaction. We show that this instability essentially coincides with the onset of a roton minimum in the excitation spectrum and may be understood in terms of a quantum analog of the Hansen-Verlet criterion for freezing of a classical fluid. Interactions in ultracold gases are usually described in terms of the two-body scattering length a as a single parameter, which characterizes the complicated and in detail unknown microscopic interaction. Such a reduced description is possible because at low energies and densities only two-particle s-wave collisions are relevant. Formally, the true interaction is replaced by a zero-range pseudopotential whose strength is adjusted to reproduce a given scattering length The aim of our present work is to develop an extended universal description for neutral atoms or molecules with a permanent magnetic or electric dipole moment. Following the realization of a chromium BEC Due to the long-range nature of the interaction, an extension of the complete set of Tan relations to dipolar gases turns out to be possible only in two dimensions, where the interaction for dipoles aligned perpendicular to their motion is purely repulsive in addition to some unknown shortrange potential. In this case, two-body scattering at low energies is dominated by the s-wave contribution. Moreover, at the many-body level, the interaction decays sufficiently fast to give rise to proper thermodynamics with a finite value of the free energy per particle in the thermodynamic limit, independent of the boundary conditions In this section, we derive universal relations for a Bose gas with dipolar interactions in the limit where scattering is purely two-dimensional in nature. The many-body Hamiltonian of such a system with N particles is Here, V (r) is the complete effective interaction as truncated to motion in the plane. For separations r > R e larger than a short-distance range, the potential is assumed to be of the pure dipolar form given in Eq. ( Throughout the paper, we consider a system of bosons, where only s-wave scattering is relevant at low energies. However, our results on the short-distance correlations and their connections to thermodynamic properties also hold for two-component Fermi gases with only minor modifications by factors of two. In fact, the latter problem is of relevance not only in the context of ultracold atoms but also arises in two-dimensional electron gases (2DEG). As discussed by Spivak and Kivelson , the s-wave contribution dominates and thus electronelectron interactions in a relative triplet state become irrelevant. More generally, however, the scattering phase shifts δ m (k) ∼ k d associated with the long-range dipolar interaction in two dimensions are of the same order for arbitrary finite angular momenta m = 0 Before turning to the full many-body problem, we consider the two-body problem with the pure dipolar potential V d (r). The scattering wave function may be expanded in partial waves as ψ(r) = 1 √ r m e imφ φ m (r), where m ∈ Z is the integer angular momentum and φ the angle in the 2D plane. Introducing r = r/ d as the dimensionless radius and k = k d as the corresponding relative wave vector, the Schrödinger equation for the relative motion reads The low-energy scattering properties are dominated by the s-wave solution. The associated scattering-phase shift δ 0 (k) has a logarithmic dependence on momentum, which is characteristic for short-range interactions in two dimensions where γ E ≈ 0.577 is the Euler constant and α is a positive numerical factor of order one. Note that for a dipolar interaction in two dimensions, the standard effective-range expansion does not hold The numerical factor exp (γ E )/2 in the leading contribution has been chosen such that no corrections of order k 0 are present. While this factor is often absorbed in the definition of a 2 (see, for example, Ref. An example of a potential that gives rise to this universal scattering form is discussed in App. A. At short distances r d , the regular and irregular parts scale as an exponential with (r/ d ) 1/4 exp[∓ 4 d /r], which follows from a WKB approximation A systematic method that connects the short-distance properties of a many-body system and two-body wave functions in vacuum is the operator product expansion (OPE) contains the N -particle wave function Ψ in position space, where we introduce the short-hand X = (r 3 , . . . , r N ) for coordinates that are integrated over. We also use relative and center-of-mass coordinates r and FIG. where φ(r) is defined in Eq. ( where we introduce the contact density C(R) For a pure dipolar interaction a 2 = a d 2 , the pair distribution function is exponentially suppressed for r d . In the actual relevant situation of an interaction which differs from the 1/r 3 -behavior at short distances, however, g(r) diverges exponentially near the origin, which is a consequence of the presence of the irregular solution I 0 in Eq. ( As indicated in Fig. This dependence is a consequence of the nonanalytic behavior S(q → 0) = |q| ξ/ √ 2 + . . . of the static structure factor at small momentum that defines the characteristic length ξ. The large-distance result (10) then follows using the standard connection between the static structure factor and the pair distribution function. A quite general upper bound on the length ξ has been derived by Price Within a single-mode approximation, where the density fluctuation spectrum at long wavelengths is exhausted by a single collective mode, the bound becomes an equality. In this case the length ξ = / √ 2mc s is uniquely determined by the speed of sound c s . In the zero-range limit a 2 , d R e , all information on the interaction is contained in the total scattering length a 2 and the dipolar length d . One may therefore consider the change (A denotes the area of the system) of the grand canonical potential Ω = -P A in response to changes of these two parameters, which defines two extensive quantities X a and X d . They are the generalized forces conjugate to the variables ln a 2 and ln d in Ω(T, A, μ, a 2 , d ). In physical terms, X a and X d describe the work done on the system under changes in the scattering length or the dipole length at fixed temperature T , area A, and chemical potential μ. As shown in App. B, these forces are related to the contact parameter defined in Eq. ( where the partial derivatives of the energy density ε = E/A are taken at fixed dipole length and scattering length, respectively, as well as at fixed entropy S, particle number N , and area A, and where the quantity D is defined in terms of the pair distribution function as follows The first expression ( As will be shown in Eq. ( at short distances, the integral in Eq. ( which is just the interaction energy density. This result can also be obtained directly using the Hellmann-Feynman theorem. As emphasized above, the thermodynamic relations ( which involves the two-body T-matrix at vanishing total momentum evaluated at a finite energy E = μ in the center-of-mass frame. In the presence of long-range dipolar interactions, the effective range expansion of the scattering phase shift in Eq. ( where . The first term is the universal result for the chemical potential of a Bose gas with scattering length a 2 1 with I = 1.0005 a numerical constant, which were determined by Mora and Castin 1, the equation of state only depends on the low-energy scattering length a 2 which follows from the definition of the contacts ( only involves the scattering length and -apart from the logarithmic factor -essentially vanishes with the square of the density. The dipolar contact arises from the contribution ∼ d in Eq. ( It is negative but vanishes faster with density than C. A similar behavior is found in the two-body limit, where a bound state of the combined short-range plus dipolar interaction exists whenever a 2 > a d 2 ) is negative with a numerical prefactor const of order one. In the special case of a pure dipole interaction, where a 2 = a d 2 ∼ d , only the dipolar contact remains. At ultra-low densities, it is determined by the perturbative result The adiabatic relations give rise to two additional exact expressions for the pressure in a uniform situation or the total energy in a harmonic trap. First, we derive the pressure relations for a uniform gas. To this end, we write the grand canonical potential in dimensionless form This relation implies the scaling law Ω(λT, λμ, A/λ, Taking the derivative of this expression with respect to λ and evaluating the result at λ = 1 gives Using we obtain a relation for the pressure: For vanishing dipolar strength d 2 → 0, the expression reduces to the 2D Tan relation As noted above, the remaining contact term ∼ C arises as an anomaly due to the fact that a zero-range interaction in two dimensions is scale invariant only at the classical level. The invariance is broken in the quantum theory where the coupling constant becomes scaledependent is equivalent to the virial theorem for a pure power law interaction ∼ 1/r 3 since, as pointed out in Eq. ( A different version of the virial theorem can be derived for dipolar gases that are confined by a harmonic radial trapping potential V ext (r) = mω 2 r 2 /2 with frequency ω (for simplicity, we assume an isotropic trap, however the final result holds also in the anisotropic case). The associated grand canonical potential can then be written in dimensionless form as A similar scaling analysis as above gives Using T ∂ ∂T +μ ∂ ∂μ -1 Ω = -T S-μN -Ω = -E and that the partial derivative of the grand canonical potential with respect to the trapping frequency is equal to the derivative of the energy (at fixed entropy), we obtain Now, using ω∂E/∂ω = 2 V ext , we obtain the virial theorem Again, the first two terms are the standard virial theorem for 2D quantum gases This result can be compared with a virial theorem by Góral et al. The short-distance factorization of the many-body wave function ( Ψ * (r a , r 2 , . . . , r N )Ψ(r b , r 2 , . . . , r N ), short distances arises from configurations in which both coordinates r a and r b approach any of the other N -1 integration coordinates simultaneously. Using Eq. ( For quantum gases with short-range interactions, the two-body wave function at large momentum is φ(q) = 2π/q 2 . The momentum distribution thus exhibits a power-law C/q 4 tail which in fact holds in any space dimension An analogous crossover is seen in the Fourier transform of the pair distribution function, which determines the static structure factor In an intermediate momentum region √ n q 1/ d , the logarithmic dependence of the pair distribution function gives rise to a power-law momentum tail which is modified by a logarithmic factor. For even larger momenta q 1/ d , this tail will be exponentially suppressed. The domain of validity √ n q 1/ d for the expression The result in Eq. ( In the low-density limit √ n d 1, the contact (24) follows the logarithmic dependence The sum runs over the sites R of a triangular lattice and the factor 1/2 avoids double-counting. For a triangular lattice, which is the configuration with the lowest ground state energy for purely repulsive interactions, the last numerical factor is 4.4462, which agrees with the corresponding constant a 1 = 4.43(1) obtained numerically in Ref. In the context of the fluid-to-crystal transition found numerically in Refs. The results derived in the previous section apply for dipolar gases in the limit R e , l z a 2 , d , where the solution of the two-body problem takes the form (5) appropriate for scattering in two dimensions. In practice, such a strong confinement has not yet been reached. Indeed, typical dipolar lengths are below 100 a B and are thus much smaller than the transverse confinement lengths on the order of l z 0.5 μm. In such a case, the shortdistance behavior is determined by a solution of the full three-dimensional Schrödinger equation in the presence of both a short-range and the dipolar potential: Here, the attractive delta-function term is a dipolar contribution to the short-range interaction which -in contrast to the contribution V sr (r) -is known explicitely in analytical terms. It is specific to the case of magnetic point dipoles and arises from the short distance behavior of the magnetic field whose space integral over a sphere of arbitrary small radius must yield the enclosed dipole moment, ensuring that div B ≡ 0 holds globally As discussed in the introduction, the associated scattering problem even at low energies cannot be reduced to s-wave interactions only and thus is not universal. Nevertheless, a number of exact results can be obtained for the weakly-confined dipolar gas, where the motion along the confined z-direction is restricted to the lowest transverse single-particle eigenstate. This requires the chemical potential to obey the condition μ ω z , which excludes a high-density crystalline phase as discussed in the previous section. We note that the assumption μ ω z even for the tightly confined directions is not obeyed for dipolar gases in cigar-shaped traps realized so far The contribution to the effective two-body interaction V dd (q) that results from projecting the three-dimensional dipolar interaction (41) onto the lowest transverse oscillator level is Here, following the notation in Ref. The total momentum-dependent interaction V tot (q) = g 2 +V dd (q), which arises from the combination of a shortrange part described by an associated scattering length a s via g 2 = ( 2 /m) √ 8πa s /l z associated with small fluctuations δn q around a homogeneous fluid state is positive in the limit q → 0, where χ(q) → κ = ∂n/∂μ. In physical terms, κ > 0 is guaranteed by a positive value of the effective scattering length for head-to-head collisions between aligned dipoles. It is important to note that this is a weaker condition compared to the case without a confining potential, where the effective scattering length a eff s = a sd for head-totail collisions must be positive In the following, we consider the Hansen-Verlet criterion for weakly confined dipolar gases in two dimensions and show that the appearance of a roton minimum essentially coincides with the point where the homogeneous fluid becomes unstable towards a state with a periodic density-wave. This result indicates that the roton instability, where the excitation gap vanishes at some finite momentum q 0 , is preempted by a transition to a phase with a finite density modulation. It is important to note that, in contrast to the transition to an incompressible, commensurate crystal in the tightly-confined limit discussed in the preceding section, the validity of a Hansen-Verlet criterion for transitions into a phase with broken translation invariance in the presence of long-range and partially attractive interactions has not been studied before and is thus not a priori evident. In particular, the criterion does not fix the nature of the spatial order beyond the instability nor does it provide a microscopic description of the underlying first-order quantum phase transition. As noted above, for purely repulsive interactions, the Hansen-Verlet criterion states that the dominant peak in the static structure factor reaches a critical value S(q 0 ) = O(1) of order one at the transition to a phase with an inhomogeneous density, where O(1) 1.7 in the specific case of 1/r 3 interactions in two dimensions. The relevance of this criterion for weakly confined dipolar gases in the limit μ ω z can be tested easily at the level of a Bogoliubov approximation by noting that the resulting static structure factor is completely determined by the effective interaction and the condensate density n 0 (ε q = 2 q 2 /2m is the single particle energy). Based on the expression (42) for the momentum dependent interaction, Fig. Remarkably, this scenario for the transition to a supersolid state is observed experimentally with dipolar gases in a cigar-shaped trap, where the chemical potential is larger than the zero-point energy even along the two tightly-confined directions. The expression A detailed analysis of the superfluid-to-supersolid transition has been achieved in the recent measurements by Hertkorn et al. with the additional assumption that the dispersion E q does not depend on temperature. The thermal factor near the maximum of the structure factor is in the range 50 -100, which corresponds to a critical peak height at zero temperature in the range between 2.6 and 5.2. This is larger than the value 1.7 obtained by applying the Hansen-Verlet criterion in the case of the tightly confined and purely repulsive dipolar gas in two dimensions. Given that a number of assumptions enter into the extrapolation of the experimental data to zero temperature, this is not an unreasonable deviation. In addition, it should be emphasized that the maximum peak height S max (q 0 ) of the zero temperature structure factor in the quantum version of the Hansen-Verlet criterion is not universal. Instead, in general the number depends on dimensionality and the detailed form of the interaction. What the Hansen-Verlet criterion says, however, is that S max (q 0 ) is a constant of order one for any first order quantum phase transition between a fluid phase and one with a periodic modulation in the density. This appears to be the case also for the superfluid-to-supersolid phase transition of dipolar gases in a cigar-shaped trap. Indeed, experimentally, after crossing the transition at the critical value of the short-range scattering length, the dominant peak in the static structure factor is observed to decrease In order to determine to which extent features in the static structure factor provide information about the nature of the instability towards inhomogeneous phases that remain valid beyond the Bogoliubov approximation, we first note that the associated high-momentum tail lim qlz 1 is determined by the effective scattering length a eff s = a sd . The trivial asymptotic limit S(q) = 1 is thus approached from above provided a eff s < 0 is negative. It turns out, however, that the Bogoliubov approximation does not account for the correct asymptotic behavior of the static structure factor at large momentum. In fact, the tail of S(q) for large in-plane momenta q probes dipoles at lateral separations ρ that are much smaller than the vertical displacement in the transverse direction. This can be seen from the definition of the static structure factor in terms of the pair distribution function S(q) = 1 + n 3 dρ e -iq•ρ dz(g(ρ, z) -1). ( In the limit ql z 1, the dominant contribution comes from dipoles with lateral separation |ρ| l z , which is averaged over the direction z of the dipoles. Quite different from the fluid-to-crystal transition discussed in section II.F, which is driven by purely repulsive interactions, the dipoles now may interact attractively. In particular, for distances below l z the transverse confinement is not felt and the scattering problem is of a threedimensional nature with an effective negative scattering length a eff s < 0, which describes the strength of headto-tail collisions. For length scales considerably larger than the dipole length d , the interaction is well described by a pseudopotential description based on the standard Bethe-Peierls boundary condition. As a result, the shortdistance behavior of the pair distribution function is of the form discussed by Tan Performing the Fourier transform in Eq. ( exhibits a high-momentum tail analogous to the one obtained for Bose gases in three-dimensions The Bogoliubov approximation In summary, we have shown that tightly confined dipolar gases admit a universal description that extends those developed by Tan and by Zhang and Leggett in the case of short-range interactions. The description is based on only two experimentally tunable parameters, the two-dimensional scattering length and the dipolar length scale. The associated adiabatic derivatives of the grand canonical potential define a generalized contact parameter and an additional dipolar analog of the contact. These two contact parameters determine thermodynamic relations such as the pressure of a homogenous system as well as the virial theorem in a trapped gas. Explicit results for both contacts have been given for zero temperature in the limit of low densities. In addition, we have discussed the behavior of the momentum distribution n(q) and the static structure factor at large wave vectors. The standard C/q 4 -tail in n(q) for short-range interactions is replaced by a more complicated structure, exhibiting a characteristic minimum around q d 10. The results presented in the first part of this paper apply in the limit of strong transverse confinement, a limit that has not yet been realized experimentally. In the second part, a number of results of a rather general nature have been derived for dipolar gases in a quasitwo-dimensional configuration. In particular, the highmomentum behavior of the static structure factor allows to distinguish the density wave instability in weakly confined dipolar gases from those in dense quantum liquids. Specifically, in the former case one expects a monotonic decay from the dominant peak in the static structure factor towards the asymptotic value of unity. Moreover, it has been shown that the appearance of a roton minimum in the excitation spectrum essentially coincides with the point where dipolar gases become unstable towards a density wave instability according to the empirical Hansen-Verlet criterion for freezing, originally developed for fluid-to-solid transitions with dominantly repulsive short-range interactions. With increasing strength of the dipolar interaction, the roton instability predicted within Bogoliubov theory is thus preempted by a firstorder transition to a state with a non-vanishing density modulation. The observation that the Hansen-Verlet criterion apparently describes a number of generic features which are observed in the superfluid-to-supersolid transition of dipolar gases in a cigar-shaped trap is quite remarkable and deserves further investigation. discussed in the introduction. In our model, the coefficients c 1 and c 2 are, in turn, determined by matching the wave functions at the short-range boundary r = R (defining R = R/ d and ks = k s d ): . (A9) The full expression for the scattering length is thus: As a check, consider the limit R 1 with V 0 fixed, in which the functions K 0 and K 1 are exponentially suppressed and the functions I 0 and I 1 are exponentially divergent, with all other terms in Eq. (A10) finite. Indeed, this is the limit in which the short-range potential is negligible compared to the dipole interaction, and the expression for the scattering length reduces to the scattering length of the pure dipolar potential, a dd = e 2γ E d . In the opposite limit R 1 (again keeping V 0 fixed), where the dipolar potential is negligible, we reproduce the standard result for the scattering length of a potential well, This result is derived from Eq. (A10) by noting that the function I 1 is subleading compared to K 1 and I 0 , which have limits of R/2 and 1, respectively, while K 0 has a logarithmic divergence that changes the prefactor. the parameters of this potential in such a way that the wave function does not contain any nodes, which might be useful for numerical simulations. From Fig. The central assumption as before is the separability which follows from the regular and irregular solution of the two-body scattering problem at low energy. The short-distance behavior of the pair distribution function is still given by the form (8) with a contact C as defined in Eq. ( Considering a change in the grand canonical potential, dΩ = -SdT -P dA -N dμ + X a d(ln a 2 ) + X σ d(ln σ ), (C3) the corresponding adiabatic relations read where we define a generalized power-law contact Furthermore, we note the pressure relation and the virial theorem As before, for a pure power-law interaction, where the scattering length is proportional to the length scale set by the power-law part, the two contact parameters do not appear independently in the thermodynamic relations. Instead, they involve the interaction energy where the low-density contact is given by Eq. 2 n m 2 σ (n 2 p ) (2+σ)/2 a σ with a σ = 4.4462, 2.8915, 2.3595, 2.07043 for σ = 1, 2, 3, 4 in a triangular lattice.