Nitrogen vacancy (NV) centers, optically-active atomic defects in diamond, have attracted tremendous interest for quantum sensing, network, and computing applications due to their excellent quantum coherence and remarkable versatility in a real, ambient environment. One of the critical challenges to develop NV-based quantum operation platforms results from the difficulty to locally address the quantum spin states of individual NV spins in a scalable, energyefficient manner. Here, we report electrical control of the coherent spin rotation rate of a singlespin qubit in NV-magnet based hybrid quantum systems. By utilizing electrically generated spin currents, we are able to achieve efficient tuning of magnetic damping and the amplitude of the dipole fields generated by a micrometer-sized resonant magnet, enabling electrical control of the Rabi oscillation frequency of NV spins. Our results highlight the potential of NV centers in designing functional hybrid solid-state systems for next-generation quantum-information technologies. The demonstrated coupling between the NV centers and the propagating spin waves harbored by a magnetic insulator further points to the possibility to establish macroscale entanglement between distant spin qubits. The past decade witnessed significant progress in new approaches for information processing, such as quantum, 1 neuromorphic, Nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers, In this article, we report energy-efficient, electrical control of single-spin rotation in a hybrid NV-magnet quantum system. The resonant spin waves excited in a proximal magnetic insulator, yttrium iron garnet (YIG), effectively amplify the amplitude of local microwave fields at the NV site, giving rise to orders of magnitude enhancement of the NV spin rotation rate. By utilizing the spin-orbit torque (SOT) generated by an adjacent platinum (Pt) layer, We first discuss the measurement system and device structure as illustrated in Fig. To achieve electrical control of the coherent NV spin rotation rate, we further employed the SOT generated by the Pt layer to vary the amplitude of the oscillating stray field h generated by the resonant YIG strip. Figure The electrically tunable results from the SOT-induced variation of the local microwave magnetic field at the NV site. When an electric current flows through the Pt layer, a spin current Js will be generated by the spin Hall effect. where ∆H0 is the film inhomogeneity contribution to the FMR linewidth, μ is the free-space permeability, ħ is the reduced Planck constant, , , , and correspond to the intrinsic magnetic damping, effective demagnetizing field, saturation magnetization, and thickness of the YIG strip, respectively. characterizes the angle between the in-plane projection of the YIG magnetization and the applied electric current, characterizes the spin transport efficiency at the YIG/Pt interface, So far, we have demonstrated the electrical control of coherent spin rotation of an NV single spin by the quasi-FMR spin wave mode of a proximal ferromagnet. Next, we further extend the measurement platform to a more general scenario, where propagating spin waves with certain wavevectors and group velocities are involved. Figure To illustrate the amplification effect of the propagating spin waves on the NV spin rotation rate, the red curve in Fig. In summary, we have demonstrated electrical control of the coherent spin rotation rate of a single-spin qubit in an NV-magnet quantum system. By applying an electric current in a YIG/Pt nanostructure, we observed a spin-current-induced variation of the Rabi frequency when the NV ESR frequency meets the resonant condition of spin wave modes. Further shrinking the dimension of the magnetic devices to sub-micrometer regime, where the generated spin currents could completely compensate the damping of the ferromagnet and excite the auto-oscillations, Materials and device fabrication. The 20-nm thick Y3Fe5O12 (YIG) films used in this work were deposited by magnetron sputtering on (111)-oriented Gd3Ga5O12 (GGG) substrates. The saturation magnetization is measured to be 1.31 × 10 5 A/m. The details of the growth parameters have been reported in the previous work. NV measurements. NV measurements were performed by a home-built scanning confocal microscope. Green laser pulses used for the NV initiation and readout were generated by an acoustic optical modulator with a double-pass configuration. NV spin state was optically addressed through integrating the measured photoluminescence (PL) generated during the first 600 ns of the green laser readout pulse. NV Rabi oscillation measurements were performed using the sequence shown in Fig. COMSOL Multiphysics simulations. "Electromagnetic Waves, Frequency Domain" module was used to simulate the spatial profile of the microwave magnetic fields generated by an Au CPW on top of a YIG thin film. Electric currents following through the signal and ground lines of the CPW were set to be +I, -I/2, and -I/2, respectively. Equilateral triangular meshes with varying dimensions were used in the simulations. In the area that is in vicinity of the CPW, fine meshes with a length of 0.4 μm was used. We set a growth rate of the mesh size to have large meshes with a length of 40 μm in the area that is far away from the CPW. By solving the Helmholtz Equation, we could obtain the distribution of the magnetic fields in real space. The spin-wave excitation spectra in the momentum space was extracted via Fourier transformation of the magnetic field profile (see supplementary note 5).