We present experimental evidence showing that the effective carrier diffusion length (Ld) and lifetime (τ) depend on the carrier density in MAPbBr3 single crystals. Independent measurements reveal that both Ld and τ decrease with an increase in photo-carrier density. Scanning photocurrent microscopy is used to extract the characteristic photocurrent Iph decaylength parameter, Ld, which is a measure of effective carrier diffusion. The Ld magnitudes for electrons and holes were determined to be ~13.3 μm and ~13.8 μm respectively. A marginal increase in uniform light bias (≤ 5 × 10 15 photons/cm 2 ) increases the modulated photocurrent magnitude and reduces the Ld parameter by a factor of two and three for electrons and holes respectively, indicating that the recombination is not monomolecular. The Ld variations were correlated to the features in photoluminescence lifetime studies. Analysis of lifetime variation shows intensity-dependent monomolecular and bimolecular recombination trends with recombination constants determined to be ~ 9.3 x 10 6 s -1 and ~ 1.4 x 10 -9 cm 3 s -1 respectively. Based on the trends of Ld and lifetime, it is inferred that the sub-band-gap trap recombination influences carrier transport in the low-intensity excitation regime, while bimolecular recombination and transport dominate at high intensity. Hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites (HOIP) have demonstrated unprecedented potential for device applications such as solar cells, photodetectors, LEDs, and lasing[1-5]. Record high efficiencies, reaching 25 % [1,6,7] in HOIP single-junction solar cells can be explained due to properties such as high absorption coefficient, long diffusion lengths, decent mobility, and long-lived carrier lifetimes [8-10]. Long diffusion length (Ldiff) in HOIP has been attributed to processes such as photon recycling, Rashba splitting, high bi-molecular recombination rates, and defect tolerance [11-15]. Ldiff estimates in the range of 100 nm -3 mm, spanning across four orders of magnitude have been reported [8,16,17]. This difference is partly due to different techniques such as transient photoluminescence (TRPL), transient photo-voltage (TPV), transient absorption, impedance spectroscopy and transient microwave conductivity (TRMC) to determine  [8,9,18-20]. Additionally, techniques such as space charge limited current, time of flight, Hall Effect, TRMC, and terahertz conductivity are employed to determine carrier mobility  [8,10,17,19,21]. Determination of diffusion length (Ldiff), a parameter indicative of efficient carrier transport, relies on twin measurements of  and . Long Ldiff are characteristic of good quality films with large grain size. Recombination at the grain-boundaries limits the Ldiff to grain size length-scales [22]. To overcome grain size effects on Ldiff studies, sizable (2-3 mm), Methylammonium Lead Bromide (MAPbBr3) single crystals (MSC) were utilized. Hybrid perovskite single crystals are evolving as suitable solar cell candidates due to low trap density, high Ldiff, and high sub-bandgap absorption, reaching efficiencies of 21 % [21,23,24]. Applications based on their emission and optoelectronic properties are also emerging [25]. In the first part of the paper, we present the direct spatial estimation of effective diffusion length (Ld) measurements on single crystals as a function of light bias intensity using scanning photocurrent microscopy (SPCM). We then report and analyze the emission characteristics using TRPL recombination lifetime techniques. These emission studies enable understanding of the processes and the role of dc light bias on the measured Ld. In this study, large MSCs (~ few mm) were prepared using the technique of inverse temperature crystallization (details in Supplemental Material) Fig. The maxima in Iph(x) corresponds to the electrode-positions at either end. The contact resistance at the electrodes is estimated and verified to be negligible due to charge-selective interfacial layers, with the built-in voltage (Vbi) falling entirely along the inter-electrode length. In the present case of undoped sizable MSC (d ~ 1-2 mm, inset Fig. The generation rate G is given by delta function, G = G0.(x-x0) where x = x0 is the position of illumination. Under conditions of steady-state illumination (dδn/dt = 0), negligible electric field and x  x0, the diffusion current can be expressed as (derivation in Section 11, Supplemental Material): where the effective diffusion length, Ld corresponds to the Iph(x) decay. It must be noted that effective diffusion length, Ld is different from minority carrier diffusion length, Ldiff. Ldiff is the microscopic quantity related to the diffusion coefficient (D) and expressed as (Dτ) 1/2 , where τ is the carrier lifetime. In disordered or amorphous systems, owing to the dispersive nature of transport, Ld and Ldiff can differ appreciably The Iph(x) response in Fig. respectively. This reduction is attributed to the effects of light-soaking The decrease of the Ld at high dc-light bias suggests that the recombination kinetics of the excess carriers is not monomolecular MAPbBr3 is characterized by absorption, largely in the UV-Vis spectral range (Fig. Without loss of generality and for simplicity of modeling and analysis, we identify the 2.15 eV (575 nm) emission as trap mediated radiative emission in the bulk of MSC. This is shown schematically in Fig. where, SRH is the trap mediated non-radiative recombination lifetime and R is the radiative recombination time. The auger recombination component which becomes prominent at high excitation fluence (> 10 17 photons/cm 2 ) is neglected. 1/R can then be expressed as where, δn is the excess carrier density, B the radiative constant, and NA the background doping concentration, RSRH is the non-radiative constant, and NT is the trap density. The radiative recombination rate is given as: where, AR = B.NA. At low fluence, the radiative recombination rate increases linearly with the excitation and quadratically with fluence at a higher intensity. This explains the excitation dependence of the 545 nm peak. The 575 nm peak arises due to recombination from a shallow trap. If δn is smaller than the trap concentration, the emission rate is linearly dependent on the excitation intensityin agreement with the observation in Fig. where, A = B.NA + RSRH. NT. Compilation of intensity-dependent lifetimes for 545 nm and 575 nm emission. For 545 nm emission, the lifetime is constant in the lower intensity (< 10 15 photons/cm 2 ) and reduces at a higher intensity (> The effective PL lifetime corresponding to 545 nm emission, marginally varies up to a fluence of 10 15 photons/cm 2 and at higher fluence, decreases as τR ∝ 1/Bδn. In contrast, for trapemission at 575 nm, observed eff is independent of excitation intensity, implying monomolecular emission. Using Eq. ( Since the E-PLQE  eff / R , for a fluence > 10 15 /cm 2 , R decreases with increasing fluence. The E-PLQE increases with increasing fluence as shown in Fig. We now correlate Ld to the PL-lifetime. In the absence of light bias, the tightly-focused probe beam (405 nm, 5×10 16 photons/cm 2 ) in the SPCM studies generate a high concentration of electron-hole pairs and correspondingly the excess carrier lifetime observed from PL studies (Fig. The light-bias feature elicits the trap-assisted recombination processes Photon recycling in perovskites is an additional factor that contributes to the transport length in perovskite based systems and devices An elegant consistency is observed from the measurements of Iph(x) and PL studies. Ld was observed to decrease as a function of light bias in HOIP single crystals. This observation was correlated with PL lifetime studies which revealed the contribution of trap recombination dynamics in addition to free carrier dynamics. These results provide an insight into the contribution of free carrier and trap emission dynamics to Ld. The sizable Ld in systems where carrier transport is trap mediated points to the defect-tolerant capability of HOIP based device structures. 4. Invariance of Ld with probe beam excitation intensity. We have varied the probe intensity by a factor of ~ 3, since the probe intensity is within the bimolecular regime of excitation, corresponding to which the lifetime variation is expected to be drastic. We also note that, at very low probe beam intensity (< 1 mW/cm 2 ), the Iph magnitude reduces to background current levels, resulting in the absence of the observed Iph(x) features. For x > 0, is the distance between the collection electrode and the point of generation. δno is the generation density at the point excitation. The obtained Iph as a result of diffusion is given as: Since Ldiff is not a constant and has a dependence on δn(x), the Iph(x) can be expressed as: Where Ld is the effective diffusion length and Ld ∝ Ldiff (x) = (kTμτ/e) 1/2 , here τ depends on excess carrier density. 12. Calculation of A and B coefficients. The dependence of A and B on the recombination rate is given in Eq. ( No of carriers generated is given as = αG′ , where G' corresponds to generation rate per pulse. From the integrated generation rate G indicated in Fig. With the τ values given in Fig. We simulated the SPCM experiment with light bias conditions and correlated with PL lifetime values to obtain the Iph(x) profile using the finite element method. We computed at each point the semiconductor characteristics such as: ntot, τ, Ldiff and Iph. For simplicity, we have assumed point illumination of the probe excitation and considered 1-D carrier diffusion. shows the schematic of the sample and illumination profile. The probe generation (405 nm, 30 mW/cm 2 ) is at x=0 in addition to dc-uniform light bias on the MSC sample. The probe point excitation consisted of G (0) = 5 x 10 16 photons/cm 2 . Upon probe photo-excitation, the generation of excess carrier concentration δnprobe is given as: δn probe = αG 0 τ α = 8 x 10 4 cm -1 is the absorption coefficient The excess carrier concentration, ntot, due to both probe carrier diffusion and light bias generation, at each point is: The first term on the RHS refers to probe carrier diffusion with the diffusion length Ldiff = (kTμτ/e) 1/2 , where μ = 115 cm 2 /Vs is the charge carrier mobility Where τ∞ can be attributed to the monomolecular lifetime (~ 125 ns) and τ0 is the lifetime under consideration for a given carrier density. Considering probe illumination at x=0, the excess density is highest at x=0 and then decays further away (shown in black solid line in Fig. Since the lifetime τ0 is small for high carrier density, the fPL value is higher. Fig. shows the plot of fPL as a function of distance away from the point of excitation. In proportional to the carrier density, fPL reduces away from the x=0. The photon recycling (PR) efficiency gPP(x) is the photon density as a result of photon propagation from a previous emissive event. It can be written as: γ PP (x) = γ(x n-1 ). exp ( -x L α ) . f(θ) Where g(xn-1) is the photon density from the previous iterative determination. Lα = 1/α is the photon propagation length. We consider an upper limit of Lα = 10 μm for the case of 545 nm The simulated plot of excess carrier density with and without photon recycling is shown in Fig. 15. Table Light bias (photons/cm 2 ) Ag/PCBM Au/Poly-TPD w/o light bias 13.3 ± 0.6 13.8 ± 0.5 6.12 x 10 11 13.0 ± 0.6 11.9 ± 0.4 4.59 x 10 12 12.1 ± 0.5 9.9 ± 0.3 3.27 x 10 13 9.4 ± 0.3 9.3 ± 0.4 5.41 x 10 14 8.9 ± 0.5 7.0 ± 0.2 4.59 x 10 15 6.9 ± 0.2 6.12 x 10 15 4.6 ± 0.1 The crystals were prepared by inverse temperature crystallization technique as reported earlier by Bakr et.al The crystal device was prepared by drop-casting PC71BM (Lumtec Corp.) and Poly-TPD (Lumtec Corp.) on opposite sides of the bulk single crystal. 3 mg/ml solution of PCBM and Poly-TPD in anhyd. Chlorobenzene (Sigma Aldrich) were drop-cast in a controlled manner with a micro-pipette. After each drop-cast, the layer was left to anneal by placing the coated crystal on hot-plate at 60° C for 30 min. This was followed by coating Ag (~ 150 nm) on the PCBM layer and Au (~ 40 nm) on the Poly-TPD layer by thermal evaporation. The steady state absorption was collected on the MAPbBr3 single crystals using UV-Vis Helios Ultrafast Systems spectrophotometer and integrating sphere. The single crystal was mounted between grooved quartz plates and the spectrum was recorded in reflectance mode. The PL on the single crystals were carried out both in the reflection as well as the transmission geometry. A 405 nm diode laser was used to excite the single crystal. In the reflection geometry, using a lens, the light, after passing through a 450 nm long pass filter was collected into the fiber coupled Mini Spectrometer (Hamamatsu, C10083CA). In the transmission geometry, maintaining the angled incidence of the excitation light, PL was measured with the help of suitable collection optics. PL measurements were carried out with sample placed in the integrating sphere to determine Ext. PLQE. A 405 nm laser with calibrated intensity was used as the illumination source and fiber coupled mini-spectrometer (Hamamatsu, C10083CA) was used to collect the excitation and emission spectrum. Measurements were carried out with the both the reference slide (glass) and the bulk single crystal placed on the glass slide. As the device translates, the short circuit Iph is measured using an amplifier (SRS 830), lockedin to the modulating frequency of the laser driver. Additionally, the light bias is introduced by an LED ring-illumination to have uniform constant illumination. The intensity of the light bias was controlled by varying the current sourced to the LEDs. The intensity of the light bias were verified using a calibrated photodiode. The experiments were carried out using a GPIB-USB interfaced program. To consider the effects of light bias on the probe beam spot size, we model the Gaussian probe beam and check for the change in the spot-size in the presence of light bias. Fig. 