Thermal management has become a promising field in recent years due to the limitation of energy resources and the global warming. An important topic in improving the efficiency of thermal energy utilization is how to control the flows of heat, and thermal rectifiers, such as the thermal transistor, have been proposed as units for modulating the flow of heat. In this work, a reconfigurable non-contact thermal transistor with two-dimensional grating is introduced. The thermal transistor consists of three parts: source, gate, and drain, with the gate working around the phase-transition temperature of vanadium dioxide, a type of phase-transition material. Results show that the unit has a clear transistorlike behavior. The surface phonon/plasmon polaritons supported by the insulating/metallic states that contribute to the radiative thermal transport can be modulated at a nanoscale separation. And the dynamic amplification factor ranges from 15.4 to 30.6 when the stretchable polydimethylsiloxane is subjected to tension or compression. This work sheds light on studies about the controllable small-scale thermal transport due to mechanical deformations. The electric diode and transistor have been widely used in microelectronics, and they are the cornerstone components for almost all the devices in this field. The diode is a rectifier that exhibits a high degree of asymmetry in the current when the applied voltage bias is reversed. The transistor has a function of modulating the current across the source and drain terminals by controlling the current and temperature of the gate. On the other hand, thermal management has become an important and challenging research field due to the limitation of energy resources on the earth and the approaching energy issues like global warming. So, analogous to electronic diode and transistor, thermal diode and transistor have drawn a lot of attention in the recent years The thermal transistor is a device with the idea brought from the metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET) and it has three terminals: source, drain, and gate. It can control the heat flux across the source and drain terminals by a little amount of heat added to or removed from the gate terminal. The thermal transistor has three main functions: thermal switch, thermal modulation, and thermal amplification. Dynamic tuning of the nanoscale radiative thermal trans-arXiv:2007.03889v1 [physics.app-ph] 8 Jul 2020 port is another focus addressed in this work. Gu et al. proposed a new way to modulate the gate temperature by changing the position of the gate, which can be carried out with the piezoelectric motors experimentally. The proposed near-field thermal transistor with three parallel terminals is schematically plotted in Fig. The heat flux between the planar surfaces of the thermal transistor is obtained through the the dyadic Green's function formalism: 17 where When the temperature of VO 2 is lower than its critical temperature (341 K), it is in the anisotropic insulator state. We can use the classical oscillator formula ε ijγ i ω-ω 2 to determine dielectric functions of the ordinary mode ε O and the extraordinary mode ε E . Here, ε ∞ is high-frequency constant, ω i is phonon frequency, γ i is scattering rate, and S i is oscillator strength. As VO 2 is in the completely isotropic metallic state, the Drude model is used Here, ω p is plasma frequency and Γ is collision frequency. The experimental values for calculation are given in the work of Barker et al.. (2) Each term can be obatined as follows: n = (1 - , where ε and ε ⊥ are obtained by ε (x,y), = (1f (x,y) )ε A + f (x,y) ε B and 1/ε (x,y),⊥ = (1f (x,y) )/ε A + f (x,y) /ε B . εy and εy are obtained by interchanging the x and y subscripts. Although the critical temperature of VO 2 is 341 K, the phase change does not happen instantaneously once the temperature reaches 341 K. The equilibrium temperature of the gate T e can be derived from Stefan-Boltzmann's law and the principle of energy conservation, T e = 4 T 4 S + T 4 D /2. It is the temperature when Q G equals to zero. Compared with the previous work, The refractive index n and extinction coefficient κ are the real and imaginary parts of the square root of dielectric function, √ ε = n + iκ. As shown in Fig. The large amplification factor α is definitely an expected goal for a transistor, while a modulable amplification factor is another feature of the proposed device. Figure factor α is observable. Analogous to the electric transistor, which is already a mature device in microelectronics, the thermal transistor is a promising device that can act as a switch, a modulator, or an amplifier. A dynamic-tuning non-contact thermal transistor with grating nanostructure is studied in this work. It is composed of the source, the gate, and the drain terminals. The gate terminal is made of two VO 2 rectangular gratings stacking on two PDMS gratings on both sides of a PDMS substrate. The source and the drain thermal flow can be drastically enhanced due to the small variation of the gate thermal flow. This transistor-like amplification function occurs only in the phase-transition region of VO 2 , which is assumed to be between 341 K and 345 K in this design, while no amplification is observed beyong this temperature region. Besides, by applying a compressive or tensile force on the stretchable gate terminal, the amplification factor can be dynamically tuned. The separations between the source and the gate, the gate and the drain are fixed at 100 nm. The grating height also remains unchanged. As we keep changing the filling ratios in both x and y directions, the amplification factor varies from 15.4 to 30.6. A further study can be carried out in the future, such as changing the fixed temperatures for the source and the drain terminals. The two separation distances can be different to form an asymmetric structure. Alternative phase-transition and host materials and other nanostructures of the gate terminal would also yield different outcomes. This work sheds light on the high-performance thermal transistors and motivates potential applications in dynamic tuning of nanoscale thermal transport due to mechanical deformations. This project was supported by the National Science Foundation through Grant No. 1941743. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.