Electrochemical ammonia synthesis forms a key part of sustainable chemicals synthesis. Single-atom catalysts have emerged as a promising class of electrocatalysts that could be capable of electrochemically reducing nitrogen into ammonia. The analysis of electrochemical reduction of nitrogen is complicated by multiple mechanistic pathways and the competing hydrogen evolution reaction. The identified pathways using thermodynamic analysis based on DFT calculations is strongly dependent on the choice of the exchange correlation functional. In this work, we provide a computational methodological framework using the single-atom systems as an example material class for ammonia synthesis that is robust towards parameter selection. Applying this to Pt 1 /g-C 3 N 4 , Ru 1 /g-C 3 N 4 , and Fe 1 /g-C 3 N 4 , we generate ensembles of limiting potentials, using the ensemble of functionals collected via Bayesian Error Estimation Functionals (BEEF), to robustly predict catalytic activity. We then extend this to study the scaling between NRR reaction intermediates and use it to identify that NNH* as the best descriptor for these relations. In addition, a procedure to investigate selectivity is outlined, and a more robust way to analyze the selectivity-activity trade-off is presented. For this single-atom material class, we find choosing catalysts that lie on the strong binding 1 In the path towards sustainable chemical synthesis, ammonia (NH 3 ) production is an important challenge due to its significant CO 2 emissions of over 300 million metric tonnes. Single-atom catalysts are an exciting new class of materials due to their high metal utilization and tunable catalytic properties. The significant influence of the choice of exchange-correlation functional on the DFT predictions for NRR is recognized, however a methodology for addressing this quantitatively is lacking. In this work, we propose a methodological framework for investigating the NRR catalytic ability of single-atom systems with the inclusion of uncertainty estimation and propagation. We apply this framework using an example class of materials -Pt 1 /g-C 3 N 4 (Pt 1 ), Ru 1 /g-C 3 N 4 (Ru 1 ), and Fe 1 /g-C 3 N 4 (Fe 1 ) to robustly quantify the activity and selectivity accounting for the uncertainty associated with density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Through this, we are able to generate an ensemble of limiting potentials for each of the three systems to provide more realistic predictions in terms of activity. We then study the inherent scaling relationships of the systems towards NRR, and find that from incorporating uncertainty, the NNH* intermediate is the best descriptor of these relations. Finally, we investigate the issue of selectivity, and show that due to the scaling of NNH* with H*, a selectivity-activity trade-off emerges. Based upon this analysis, the design criteria emerges that for this material class is that catalysts which lie on the strong binding leg of the volcano are worth further exploration. In summary, this work aims to simultaneously provide a deeper understanding of these systems while laying out the foundations for future single-atom system investigations for ammonia synthesis. Spin-polarized DFT calculations were conducted using the GPAW package 32 through the Atomic Simulation Environment package. × 4 × 1 Monkhorst-Pack k-mesh were used. The overall reaction for NRR can be summarized as: But, this can occur via many different possible mechanisms which are usually classified as either dissociative or associative. Since pure g-C 3 N 4 is electrochemically inert, The distal mechanism proceeds as described in the following expressions: NNH * 2 + 4(H + + e -) → N * + 3(H + + e -) + NH 3 (2c) In this mechanism, protons and electrons are donated until the outer N is fully saturated and released as NH 3 before the anchoring N begins to be protonated. On the other hand, the alternating mechanism rotates between giving protons and electrons to the outer N and the anchoring N. This is summarized as follows: For both of the mechanisms described above, the bond between the nitrogens are perpendicular to the basal plane. The enzymatic mechanism however is analogous to the alternating mechanism except with the N-N bond parallel to the lattice plane. The competing HER reaction is a 2e -process which can be described as: For all adsorption energy and reaction energy calculations the reference was set to gasphase N 2 and H 2 . The reference electrode was set to the computational hydrogen electrode where 1 2 G H2 G H + + G e -is at equilibrium, and a pH of 0. Adsorption energies for a given NRR intermediate were calculated as follows: To calculate the gibbs adsorption energy at each step of the reaction the following expression was used: For each of these energies their vibrational contributions (zero-point energy and entropy) uses the harmonic approximation at a temperature of 300 K. The catalyst single atom is held fixed for computational convenience, as allowing it to vibrate is observed to have a negligible effect on the zero-point energy and entropy values. To quantify the uncertainty, ensembles of energies are obtained using the BEEF-vdW XC functional which takes the following form: 27 Van der Waals contributions to the energy are accounted for in E nl-c , a vdW-DF2 nonlocal correlation. From this ensemble, confidence values associated with important mechanistic and catalytic properties are calculated. The first confidence value obtained is associated with the confidence that the distal mechanism will proceed on a given surface: where N ens is the number of XC functionals in the BEEF-vdW ensemble, Θ(x) is the Heavi- 2 ) is the reaction energy for NHNH * (NNH 2 * ) using the n-th XC functional. Both the distal and alternating mechanisms begin by forming NNH * . After this step the mechanisms diverge, and there is an uncertainty associated with path selection. The confidence value described in eq.8 addresses this by quantifying the confidence as to whether the distal mechanism would be favourable over the alternating mechanism. Another source of uncertainty in these systems is from the predicted limiting potentials for these systems. For this reaction which contains uphill steps, the limiting potential is U L = -1 e max{∆G 1 , . . . , ∆G 6 } with ∆G i being the free energy change for the i-th step. Propagating the energy ensembles in turn yields an ensemble of U L values. The reaction step which determines this limiting potential is generally referred to as the potential determining step (PDS). Confidence in predicting that the PDS is step i is computed using: where m i pred is a classifier that identifies the most thermodynamically likely PDS for the n-th XC functional and δ k,k is the Kronecker delta function. The final area of uncertainty when considering these systems for NRR is that of selectivity against HER. There is uncertainty over whether the NRR limiting potential is more negative then the HER limiting potential. If the limiting potential of NRR is less negative than HER, then NRR could be activated without also activating HER. The confidence that the limiting potential of NRR will not activate HER as well is described as follows: where U n L,NRR/HER is the limiting potential for NRR/HER corresponding to the free energy landscape generated by the n-th XC functional. Taking this a step further, the selectivity will also be influenced by whether H * or NNH * is more thermodynamically favourable to form on the surface. Thus, a confidence in whether NRR can be activated without activating HER while NNH * is also the more favorable adsorbate can be calculated as: Put differently, c NRR describes the confidence that the system will be able to promote NRR where there is no competition with HER. It is important to distinguish this quantity from the more traditional view of selectivity which is the percentage of the reactants proceeding via NRR instead of HER. 3 Results and discussion We first obtain the single atom systems by relaxing single atoms of Pt, Fe, and Ru onto the clean g-C 3 N 4 surface. It is observed that for Fe adsorption, the cavity was the thermodynamically optimal adsorption position. Based on this, we similarly relax both Pt and Ru within the cavity to obtain their optimal configurations. To solidify the approach of uncertainty quantification with BEEF-vdW, it is important to benchmark the ensemble spread against the spread from selected popular XC functionals. As representative adsorbates, we relax both H* and NNH* onto each of the three systems using BEEF-vdW, PBE, RPBE, The astute reader may notice that for Pt 1 does not have an adsorption energy reported for NNH* using the RPBE XC. This is because for this XC, NNH* was observed to desorb from the surface during relaxation. However, this was the only system observed to demonstrate this behavior. H * /NNH * , is calculated on the i-th system. We justify treating these distributions as normal by calculating their skewness and kurtosis, and verified that all systems have values close to 0 and 3 respectively (Figs. When considering the associative reaction mechanisms (distal, alternating, and enzymatic), all three nucleate from adsorbed N 2 on a clean catalyst surface which is subsequently protonated. However, the distinguishing feature of the enzymatic mechanism is that the N 2 adsorbs horizontally onto the surface, whereas the distal and alternating mechanisms feature vertical adsorption. Thus, we adsorbed N 2 in both a vertical and horizontal configuration onto each of the SA systems. All vertical configurations are found to be thermodynamically favorable with adsorption energies of -0.63 eV on Fe 1 , -0.89 eV on Ru 1 , and -1.33 eV on Pt 1 . Therefore, this configuration is plausible on all three systems. On the other hand, the horizontal orientation of N 2 * resulted in weaker binding in all cases of -0.20 eV, -0.37 eV, and -0.06 eV on Fe 1 , Ru 1 , and Pt 1 respectively. However, protonation of these horizontal geometries leads to relaxation into vertical configurations on all systems. Therefore, we do not consider the enzymatic pathway, and only investigate the distal and alternating mechanisms. Both mechanisms begin with NNH* formation before diverging into the distal and alternating paths which recombine at the final step with two units of ammonia released along the way (Fig. For each adsorption energy of NNH 2 * and NHNH* in the ensemble, the difference is taken to obtain a histogram of dominant pathway predictions (Fig. Shifting focus towards the predicted dominant mechanisms, the PDS determines the limiting potential and thus, to a first approximation, the electrocatalytic activity of a given system. Moreover, the nature of the step can lead to varying strategies when looking for future candidates. For example, if the PDS was NNH* formation, then emphasis should be placed on tweaking the system to increase NNH* binding via methods such as tuning the local coordination environment. With each of the ensemble members yielding their own free energy landscape, a distribution of limiting potentials is extracted for each system (Fig. Put differently, if the right side of Ru 1 's distribution is mirrored on the left, it would increase well into the positive regime. However, if a limit was to exist, a folding would occur causing a skewed distribution shape. Since scaling relations can cause the presence of activity volcanoes with a maximum achievable activity, The presence of scaling relations between intermediate adsorption energies enforces a limit to the maximum achievable activity, and thus we explore scaling among NNH*, NH 2 *, and N*. Previous investigations have reported scaling among these three intermediates, A prior work studied the systematic error present in scaling relations in oxygen reduction via BEEF-vdW. Since N* has been used as a descriptor in other NRR studies, 9,24 its scaling strength with NNH* is evaluated (Fig. As scaling relations form the backbone of activity volcanoes, they highlight the importance of properly identifying a descriptor which is invariant to choice of computational parameters. The fundamental principle behind activity volcanoes is that limiting potentials may be expressed in terms of a single descriptor through the use of scaling relations. This results in a Sabatier-type relationship with a maximum achievable activity allowed by scaling for a system corresponding to a given descriptor. In this case, since we have identified NNH* and NH 2 * as the two intermediates with the most influence on predicted activity, and they demonstrate strong scaling to a high confidence, they are critical in determining the properties of the activity volcano. The limiting potential may be expressed in the form: From the presence of scaling between ∆G NNH * and ∆G NH * 2 +NH3 , this expression can then be simplified to only depend on either ∆G NNH * or ∆G NH * 2 +NH3 . We chose the former due to its stability in phase space. Therefore, for the i-th scaling relation the limiting potential is given by: where m (i) and b (i) are from the i-th member of the scaling ensemble. Stemming from Eq. 13, the path to creating an ensemble of activity volcanoes emerges; propagation of the scaling relations obtained in Fig. where U max L is the maximum observed limiting potential across all activity volcanoes in the ensemble. Near the peak of the volcano the expected limiting potential diverges, highlighting the limitations of the standard activity volcano alone in describing this regime. In corroboration with the skewness trend observed in the limiting potential distributions, Ru 1 , which has the largest skewness, is closest to the peak where Fe 1 with the lowest skewness is furthest from the peak. Therefore, we conclude that the degree of skewness is a consequence of this imposed maximum activity of the activity volcano. In further agreement with the limiting potential distributions, Ru 1 has the highest potential for yielding the best NRR activity as the conditional probability for its descriptor is the most condensed in the region of peak activity. Additionally, the location of the BEEF-vdW optimal values on this volcano agree well with the computed activity volcano. This demonstrates the strength in the observed scaling relation, particularly as both Ru 1 and Fe 1 fall on the stronger binding leg which is described by this relation. Extracting design criteria from this volcano, the maximum activity on the U L volcano of -0.56 V lies at a ∆G NNH * of 0.52 eV. However, on the U EL curve the maximum activity of -0.75 lies at a ∆G NNH * of 0.40 eV. In comparison with Ru 1 's ∆G NNH * of 0.34 eV, it is extremely close to the peak of the U EL volcano. Therefore, in terms of looking for a material that excels at NRR activity, Ru 1 is a good place to start, and tweaking of this system to address selectivity is a promising avenue of exploration. In short, uncertainty estimates propagated through the scaling relations could explain activity behaviour and provide design criteria for within a given materials class. A major obstacle to the development of high performance NRR catalysts is the competition with the HER reaction. To further investigate the relationship between NRR and HER, we also study the scaling of the intermediate adsorption energies with the H* adsorption energy. We draw particular attention to the scaling of ∆G NNH * with ∆G H * as the former was identified to be the best descriptor towards NRR activity. The scaling between these two quantities are plotted in Fig. Alternatively, the scaling between NH 2 * and H* is observed to have widely varying scaling strength depending on the XC with many falling on either side of the spectrum. Moreover, the use of NH 2 * as a descriptor is seen to be very sensitive to computational parameters with a |Σ| of order 10 -1 . Due to the scaling of ∆G NNH * with ∆G H * , we can then write an activity volcano for HER in terms of ∆G NNH * . The limiting potential for HER in general can be expressed as: Substituting in for ∆G H * using the scaling relations allows this to become a function of ∆G NNH * and produce an ensemble of activity volcanoes where the i-th member can be expressed as: And, by applying the same procedure as for the NRR volcano, a conditional probability of p(U HER L | ∆G NNH * ) can also be calculated for this reaction along with an expected limiting potential U HER EL (Fig. Therefore, near the peak we are most confident that the NRR peak lies below the HER peak, meaning that HER is activated and selectivity would be negatively impacted. Moving away from the peak the probability differences become negligible. On the HER volcano the probability differences become more dispersed than at the peak, but still relatively condensed. Along the NRR volcano however, the probability difference became smaller than the resolution of 0.5%. In short, this means that while we have a reasonable degree of confidence as to where the limiting potential is more likely to be associated with HER when moving away from the peak, for NRR it becomes less clear. In terms of selectivity, this then indicates that moving away from the peak is necessary to increase the likelihood that the limiting potential of NRR could be such that HER is suppressed. It also becomes apparent from this volcano that the legs are not parallel. To explore this further, we take the difference of the limiting potentials as a function of ∆G NNH * (Fig. Considering both the expected and limiting potential volcanoes, their intersection occurs at approximately ∆G NNH * ) = -0.5 eV. Therefore, a material at this adsorption strength has the highest chance of suppressing HER for as little activity sacrificed as possible. Thus, a design criteria emerges, that in the pursuit of both high activity and selectivity, exclusively searching for materials that are near the NRR volcano peak is not enough, and instead we should be searching for materials on the strong binding leg as this has the highest chance for improved selectivity. In this work, we present a robust methodological framework to investigate electrocatalysts towards electrochemical ammonia synthesis. We demonstrate that a Bayesian error estimation ensemble approach is capable of describing the uncertainty associated with computational parameter selection in DFT calculations for this context. Applying this framework to NRR on Fe 1 , Ru is able to explain the upper limiting potential limit through the generation of a probabilistic activity volcano. We also apply this methodology to investigate the selectivity of these systems towards NRR, and observe the presence of a selectivity-activity trade-off. This results in a design principle that future efforts should be focused toward exploring materials on the stronger binding left leg of the volcano. Fu- HER overlaid with the optimal BEEF-vdW NRR activity volcano and expected limiting potential curve. Descriptor value that optimizes both selectivity and activity is the intersection of these curves highlighted by the arrow ture studies could explore the single atom design space further using the procedure outlined here. Since the approach presented here requires little extra computational resources, we hope this will become a routine part of electrocatalyst design workflow. The methodological process presented here paves the way towards computational NRR works whose conclusions are robust towards the selection of parameters. We believe this will open the door towards more conservative computational studies that can provide more realistic estimates towards catalytic performance. which is just Eq. 13 from the main manuscript. Notice the i superscripts for the scaling slope and intercept as these values are pulled from the scaling ensemble, and thus N ens different oracle functions emerge. For each ensemble member, the dirac delta function in Eq. S2 will extract two points in descriptor space, one for each leg of the i-th volcano. Normalization for a given descriptor value is then done via: considered in this work. The associative mechanisms can be further subdivided into the distal, alternating, and enzymatic pathways. For all reactions below, * indicates adsorption.