We have investigated the Vanadium-(V) substituted Ni-Zn-Co ferrites where the samples were prepared using solid-state reaction technique. The impact of V 5+ substitution on the structural, magnetic, dielectric and electrical properties of Ni-Zn-Co ferrites has been studied. XRD analysis confirmed the formation of a single-phase cubic spinel structure. The lattice constants have been calculated both theoretically and experimentally along with other structural parameters such as bulk density, X-ray density and porosity. The FESEM images are taken to study the surface morphology. FTIR measurement is also performed which confirms spinel structure formation. The saturation magnetization (Ms), coercive field (Hc) and Bohr magneton (μB) were calculated from the obtained M-H loops. The temperature dependent permeability is studied to obtain the Curie temperature. Frequency and composition dependence of permeability was also analyzed. Dielectric behavior and ac resistivity are also subjected to investigate the frequency dependency. An inverse relationship was observed between the composition dependence of dielectric constant and ac resistivity. The obtained results such as the electrical resistivity, dielectric constants and magnetic properties suggest the appropriateness of the studied ferrites in microwave device applications. Ferrites, influential ceramic materials are composed by combining, firing and blending a huge portion of Fe2O3 (iron (III) oxide) with a small amount of at least one metallic element, for example, manganese, zinc, nickel, barium, cobalt, etc. The important electronic properties make the spinel Ni-Zn-Co ferrites prominent Owing to the mentioned interest many researchers have paid their attention to the Ni-Zn-Co ferrites. Mattei et al. The dependency of the physical properties of ferrites on the distribution of cation over tetrahedral (A) and octahedral (B) sites open the way of changing their properties by introducing different ions into these two sites [37] noted a decline of saturation magnetization due to V substitution in NiFe2-xVxO4 (x ≤ 0.3) nanoparticles system. Magnetic properties of V substituted Li-Zn-Ti ferrites have been investigated by Maisnam et al. Conventional double sintering method was used to prepare V 5+ substituted Ni-Zn-Co ferrite [Ni0.7Zn0.2Co0.1Fe2-xVxO4 (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.12) ] . The following operation are used to prepare the desired samples the details of which can be found elsewhere The sample preparation procedure of Ni0.7Zn0.2Co0.1Fe2-xVxO4(0 ≤ x ≤ 0.12) ferrites. The synthesized samples have been studied by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using Philips X'pert PRO X-ray diffractometer (PW3040) with Cu-Kα radiation (λ=1.5405 Å), Field Effect Scanning Electron Micrographs (FESEM) (JEOL JSM-7600F), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) (PerkinElmer FT-IR Spectrometer). A Wayne Kerr precision impedance analyzer (6500B) [Frequency range: 1kHz-120 MHz, drive voltage of 0.5 V] was also used to study the dielectric and permeability properties. The magnetic properties were obtained by a physical properties measurement system (PPMS), Quantum Design Dyna Cool at ambient conditions. Fig. where, h, k and l are the Miller indices of the crystal planes. The calculated values are given in The lattice constant of studied samples Ni0.7Zn0.2Co0.1Fe2-xVxO4 (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.12) has also been calculated to compare with the experimental one. The lattice constant can be calculated theoretically using the following equation where, R0, rA, rB are the ionic radii of oxygen (1.32 Å) (2) The calculated X-ray density, bulk density and porosity for the studied samples Ni0.7Zn0.2Co0.1Fe2-xVxO4 (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.12) were represented in Table Whereas, for x = 0.12 the increase in density was observed due to the increase of lattice constant. Moreover, the b is found to be lower than the x, because the pores are considered in the calculations of bulk density which are absent in the x-ray density calculations FTIR Spectroscopy is an important technique to study the completion of the solid-state reaction and inspect the presence of deformation in the spinel ferrites due to substitutions of ions In case of ferrites, there are two characteristic peaks in the FTIR spectra. The first peak at low frequency is associated M-O (Metal-Oxide) stretching vibrations at B-sites while the peak at higher frequency side results from M-O stretching vibrations at A-sites Fig. ferrites. The parameters such as saturation magnetization (Ms), coercivity (Hc), magnetic remanence (Mr), etc were obtained from the M-H loops and listed in Table The magnetic properties such as saturation magnetization, permeability etc. are very sensitive to temperature. One of the characteristic parameters, Curie temperature (Tc) can be obtained from the temperature dependent permeability. The permeability remains almost constant up to certain temperature and after increasing slightly by exhibiting a peak, known as Hopkinson's peak, it finally drops sharply to be zero. The temperature at which the permeability becomes zero is known as Curie temperature (Tc), the temperature at which completely disorderliness of atomic moments took place and the ferrimagnetic materials converted to paramagnetic. The temperature dependent initial permeability was measured and shown for different composition in Fig. The mentioned features are also observed for our obtained data and the calculated Curie temperature is shown in Fig. In different circumstances, a significant peak is exhibited by [figure is not shown] at the frequency where sharp decline of is taken place. This phenomenon is termed as ferrimagnetic resonance The relative quality factor (RQF) measures the performance of a material for use in filter. Fig. A very common dielectric behavior of ferrites is that the εʹ and εʹʹ decrease with frequency but exhibit three different responses in three ranges of frequencies: (i) a sharp decrease with low frequency in ԑʹ and ԑʹʹ (ԑʹʹ is not shown), (ii) a slow decrease within mid frequency range in ԑʹ and ԑʹʹ and (iii) finally become almost frequency independent at high frequencies Comparatively slower decrease in ԑʹ and ԑʹʹ is observed in the mid-frequencies region where the orientational polarization is mainly responsible for dielectric constant. The dielectric constant becomes constant at the very high frequency region where the contribution comes from the atomic and electronic polarization The charges produced through electron hopping between Fe 3+ and Fe 2+ are responsible for electrical conduction in ferrites. The motion of these charges are supposed to be hindered at the grain boundaries owing to their activity in the low frequency region and accumulated at the interface causing space charge polarization. Although, the grains are active at the high frequency region but electron hopping cannot follow the frequency of applied external electric that causes a reduction of the charges produced by hopping between Fe 3+ and Fe 2+ Fig. The frequency dependent ac resistivity (ρac) is shown in Fig. Consequently, the decrease of grain size also revealed the reduction of the conductive area. Ni0.7Zn0.2Co0.1Fe2-xVxO4 (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.12) ferrites have been synthesized by conventional ceramic technique. The decrease of lattice constant with V content is observed. A good correlation is observed among lattice constant, density and porosity for different V contents. Average grains size is found to decrease with V contents. The formation of spinel cubic ferrites is confirmed from the obtained values of vibrational frequency υ1 (in the range: 574 to 590 cm -1 ) and υ2 (in the range: 364 to 382 cm -1 ). The soft ferromagnetic nature is observed from hysteresis loops with low values of coercive field. The lowering of Ms (from 71.6 emu/g to 18 -28 emu/g) is due to non-magnetic V substitution. The Curie temperature obtained from temperature dependent permeability is observed to decrease owing to V substitution by means of decreasing the strength of exchange coupling constant. The study of the frequency dependent permeability exhibits a good correlation among the permeability, average grain size and saturation magnetization. The dielectric constant is found to decrease in V-substituted Ni-Zn-Co ferrites where the ac resistivity varies inversely with V contents. It is also expected that the results obtained in this paper will encourage the materials scientist to investigate the effect of V substitution on other ferrites system. V- magnetization (Ms), Magnetic remanence (Mr), Resonance frequency (fr) coercivity (Hc), Magnetic moment (μB), Curie Tem. (Tc), Real permeability (μ') and Relative quality factor (RQF) for Ni0.7Zn0.2Co0.1Fe2-xVxO4 (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.12) ferrites.