While the design of always new metamaterials with exotic static and dynamic properties is attracting deep attention in the last decades, little effort is made to explore their interactions with other materials. This prevents the conception of (meta-)structures that can enhance metamaterials' unorthodox behaviours and that can be employed in real engineering applications. In this paper, we give a first answer to this challenging problem by showing that the relaxed micromorphic model with zero static characteristic length can be usefully applied to describe the refractive properties of simple meta-structures for extended frequency ranges and for any direction of propagation of the incident wave. Thanks to the simplified model's structure, we are able to efficiently explore different configurations and to show that a given meta-structure can drastically change its overall refractive behaviour when varying the elastic properties of specific meta-structural elements. In some cases, changing the stiffness of a homogeneous material which is in contact with a metamaterial's slab, reverses the structure's refractive behaviour by switching it from an acoustic screen (total reflection) into an acoustic absorber (total transmission). The present paper clearly indicates that, while the study and enhancement of the intrinsic metamaterials' properties is certainly of great importance, it is even more challenging to enable the conception of meta-structures that can eventually boost the use of metamaterials in real-case applications. The last decade has seen the birth of a true research outburst on so-called mechanical metamaterials which are able to show exotic mechanical properties both in the static and dynamic regime. Theoretical, experimental and numerical studies have flourished all around the world providing new insights in the domain of material properties manipulation which, only few years ago, was thought far from being prone to possible ground-breaking evolutions. We are today assisting to the conception and subsequent realization of new materials which, simply thanks to their internal architecture, go beyond the materials' mechanical properties that we are used to know and which, for this reason, are called mechanical metamaterials. Already in the late 1980s, it was proven that some foams with special internal architecture can give rise to 'negative Poisson' effects, i.e., they fatten when stretched, contrarily to what happens to the great majority of known materials which experience a reduction in the cross-section when submitted to tensile loads Notwithstanding the massive research efforts deployed to unveil new metamaterials' performances, researchers have just begun to understand the underlying mechanisms, so that "many designs so far have relied on luck and intuition" In order to provide deeper theoretical insight into the mechanisms which allow to tailor metamaterials' mechanical properties, so-called homogenization techniques have been developed which provide rigorous predictions of the macroscopic metamaterials' mechanical behaviour, when knowing the properties of the base materials and their spatial distribution. Homogenization techniques have proven their effectiveness for the description of metamaterials' bulk behaviour in the static and quasi-static regime While homogenization methods are effective to describe bulk metamaterials' behaviours, they are intrinsically unsuitable to deal with metamaterials of finite size, because the 'average operations', on which they are built, make strong use of projection functions (e.g., Bloch-Floquet ones) that are defined in unbounded function spaces As a result of this gap, the response of finite-size metamaterials' structures is today mostly explored via direct Finite Element (FEM) simulations that implement all the details of the involved microstructures (e.g., A first answer to this problem has been given by the introduction of the so-called relaxed micromorphic model without curvature contribution that has recently proven its effectiveness for the description of the mechanical behaviour of a specific finite-size band-gap metamaterial with tetragonal symmetry In this paper we show how the simple fact of assembling a finite-size metamaterial together with blocks of classical-materials can dramatically change the response of the metamaterial itself in such a way that the same structure may act as a complete absorber (total transmission) or a complete screen (total reflection). This switch of the structure's dynamical properties is obtained by keeping the same geometry and the same metamaterial, while changing the homogeneous material in which the metamaterial itself is embedded. These results have been made possible thanks to the use of the relaxed micromorphic model without curvature contribution that, drastically reducing the computational time of the associated numerical simulations, could open the effective exploration of these new meta-structures. We clearly show that, while the interest of studying the intrinsic metamaterial's properties by engineering its microstructure is certainly of great importance, it is even more important to unveil the effects of its interactions with other finite-size metamaterials and classical-materials bricks. It is indeed based on these interactions that it is possible to unfold new meta-structures which can further enhance the properties of the base metamaterials thus opening the way to realistic applications. We recall here the notation that we will use throughout the paper. Let R 3×3 be the set of all real 3 × 3 second order tensors which we denote by capital letters. A simple and a double contraction between tensors of any suitable order is denoted by • and : respectively, while the scalar product of tensors of suitable order is denoted by •, • . 1 The Einstein sum convention is implied throughout this text unless otherwise specified. The standard Euclidean scalar product on R 3×3 is given by X, Y = tr(X • Y T ) and consequently the Frobenius tensor norm is X 2 = X, X . The identity tensor on R 3×3 will be denoted by 1; then, tr(X) = X, 1 . We denote by B L a bounded domain in R 3 , by δB L its regular boundary and by Σ any material surface embedded in B L . The outward unit normal to δB L will be denoted by ν as will the outward unit normal to a surface Σ embedded in B L . Given a field a defined on the surface Σ, we define the jump of a through the surface Σ as: and a + := lim where B - L , B + L are the two subdomains which result from splitting B L by the surface Σ. Classical gradient ∇ and divergence Div operators are used throughout the paper. 2 The subscript , j indicates derivation with respect to the j-th component of the space variable, while the subscript , t denotes derivation with respect to time. 3 Given a time interval [0, t 0 ], the classical macroscopic displacement field is denoted by u(x, t) ∈ R 3 , with x ∈ B L , t ∈ [0, t 0 ]. In the framework of enriched continuum models of the micromorphic type, extra degrees of freedom are added through the introduction of the micro-distortion tensor P denoted by P (x, t) ∈ R 3×3 , with x ∈ B L , t ∈ [0, t 0 ]. 2 Equilibrium equations, constitutive relations, and energy flux The equilibrium equations for the Cauchy continuum are where σ is the Cauchy stress tensor. In the isotropic case, it takes the constitutive form σ = 2μ sym∇u + λ tr (sym∇u) 1, where λ and μ are the Lamé parameters and sym∇u is the strain tensor. When dissipative phenomena can be neglected, the following flux equation must hold: where E is the total energy of the system and H is the energy flux vector, whose explicit expression is given by (see e.g. 1 For example, (A 2 The operators ∇, curl and Div are the classical gradient, curl and divergence operators. In symbols, for a field u of any order, (∇u) i = u ,i , for a vector field v, (curlv) i = ijk v k,j and for a field w of order k > 1, (Div w) 3 Being reserved to the time variable, the index t is treated separately and does not comply with Einstein notation. The equilibrium equations are obtained by looking for stationary points of the following action functional: where J is the kinetic energy density and W is the strain energy density of the considered micromorphic continuum. In particular, the expression of the kinetic energy density takes the form where u is the macroscopic displacement field, P ∈ R 3×3 is the non-symmetric micro-distortion tensor, ρ is the macroscopic apparent density, and J micro , J c , T e , T c are 4th order micro-inertia tensors whose form will be specified in the following subsection. The relaxed micromorphic continuum contains curvature terms connected to CurlP . Here, we use the relaxed micromorphic continuum without curvature contribution. The expression of the strain energy density without curvature contribution ( where C e , C micro , and C c are 4th order tensors whose characteristic will be given in Sec. 2.3. The minimization of the Action functional, eq. ( The flux equation for the relaxed micromorphic continuum is formally the same as eq. ( We now focus on finding solutions in a plane strain framework. This means that we constrain the displacement field u and the micro-distortion P to depend only on the first two components x 1 and x 2 of the space variable x: Given the metamaterials targeted in this paper (see Section 4), we particularise the equilibrium equations to the tetragonal case. This means that the elastic and micro inertia tensors appearing in eq. ( where only the coefficients involved in a plane strain problem are reported (the dots represent components acting on out-of plane variables and are not specified here). In the definition (13) of the micro-inertia tensors appearing in the kinetic energy In the considered 2D case, there are then eight sets of scalar conditions, four on each interface. The finite slab has width h and we assume that the two interfaces are positioned at x 1 = -h/2 and x 1 = h/2, respectively (see Fig. where u - c and u + c are the displacement of the "minus" (x 1 < 0) and "plus"(x 1 > 0) Cauchy half-space, respectively. As for the continuity of generalized traction, we have: where t ± c = σ ± • ν ± are classical Cauchy tractions, t s = ( σ + σ) • ν is the generalized traction in the relaxed micromorphic medium, with ν being the outward unit normal to the surface considered (see In view of the conception of meta-structures for applications in acoustic control, we consider here three tetragonal unit cells which give rise to three different metamaterials at the macroscopic scale. These metamaterials will then be characterised through the relaxed micromorphic model, thus widening the set of tetragonal microstructures that have been characterised so far with this new model (see All the simulations that are reported in this section and in the next one have been carried on with the software Mathematica for what concerns the relaxed micromorphic semi-analytical solutions, and with the software Comsol for the detailed discrete numerical solutions(see In this section we provide the relaxed-micromorphic characterization of the three metamaterials previously introduced (Fig. As for the dynamic parameters, four of them can be computed by considering the limiting case k → 0 (vanishing wavenumbers). In particular, the parameters L 1 , L 2 , L 3 , and L * 1 can be determined by imposing the cut-off of the relaxed micromorphic model to be equal to the corresponding numerical values obtained, e.g., by Bloch-Floquet analysis. Indeed, the cut-offs frequencies of the relaxed micromorphic model are found to be given by . The remaining dynamic parameters L 1 , L 2 ,L 3 , and L * 1 are found to have a strong effect on the dispersion curves when k → ∞ and they are determined by inverse approach to reach the best possible fitting of the Bloch-Floquet dispersion curves As a result of the fitting procedure briefly summarized before, the metamaterial MM1 (see Fig. Following the aforementioned procedure, the metamaterials MM2 and MM3 are characterized through the relaxed micromorphic parameters given in Table 3.62851 × 10 -7 0.0129766 0.028261 In this section we will show how the relaxed micromorphic model can be suitably used to describe the reflective properties of a metamaterial's slab embedded in a homogeneous material (see Fig. Figure We will show in this subsection that the refractive behaviour of the used metamaterial can be drastically modified by simply changing the elastic properties of the outer Cauchy materials. More precisely, the simple fact of changing the properties of the external material can actually "reverse" the metamaterial slab's refractive behaviour (from total reflection to total transmission and vice-versa). This drastic change can be engineered for an extended range of frequencies and angles of incidence. In order to drive the exploration of the more performing structures, we took advantage of the computational performance of the relaxed micromorphic model that allowed us to test different structures in an otherwise unreachable limited time. We show in Fig. • the wavelength of the travelling incident wave; • the thickness of the metamaterials's slab; • the characteristic size of the unit cell. Having fixed the unit cell's dimensions for applications in acoustic control, we do not discuss here the influence of the third characteristic length. As for the influence of the thickness of the metamaterial's slab, we refer to Section 5.2. Here, we limit ourselves to remark that, given the intrinsic simplifications associated to a continuum model, a threshold value t for the wavelength of the incident wave exists, below which the model starts loosing its predictive capabilities. For the meta-structures of Fig. In this subsection, we show to which extent the reflective behaviour of the metamaterial's slab is influenced by the thickness of the slab itself. At the same time, we are able to show that the performances of the relaxed micromorphic model increases when increasing the thickness of the slab. Indeed, by comparison of Fig. To improve the higher-frequency micromorphic description of the structure in this case, a substantial constitutive extension of the relaxed micromorphic model is needed so as to account for higher frequency modes that presumably play an important role in this frequency range. Similar arguments are valid for the slab embedded in the Cauchy material CM2, as shown by Fig. This means that, for this structure, the relaxed micromorphic model presented is sufficient for its correct description in the considered frequency range and that its generalization can be avoided in this case, also for relatively high frequencies. Indeed, in this last case, the fact of increasing the number of unit cells does not significantly improve the description of the slab's refractive behaviour (see Fig. Since the predictive capability of the relaxed micromorphic model here proposed has been assessed in the previous sections, in this subsection, we show the behaviour of the reflection coefficient as a function of the frequency of the incident wave and the angle of incidence for the structure of Fig. We start noticing that for the case of an incident "pressure" wave the structure's refractive behaviour is relatively unaffected by the value of the angle of incidence (see Fig. In particular, when considering fewer unit cells in the metamaterial slab (Fig. In particular, a critical angle exists (see Fig. We analyse the same meta-structure of Fig. First of all, we can identify a "critical angle region" for incident "pressure" waves instead than for "shear" ones. Moreover, we can remark that an almost total transmission occurs for angles smaller than this critical value instead than a total reflection in the previous case. For "shear" waves the behaviour is still different because different zones are identified depending on the value of the incident angle. In particular, two critical angles exist in this case such that total transmission occurs between these two critical values, while total reflection occurs otherwise. In summary, we can see how the fact of simply changing the properties of the "outer" Cauchy material reverses the meta-structure's behaviour in specific frequency and angle-of-incidence ranges, both for "pressure" and "shear" incident waves. In this paper we use the relaxed micromorphic model to characterize three different 2D tetragonal metamaterials that can be used for applications in acoustic control. The reduced structure of the relaxed micromorphic model allows us to efficiently explore different meta-structural configurations in which a metamaterial's slab is embedded in a homogeneous Cauchy material. As a result, we are able to show that the metamaterial's refractive behaviour can be drastically changed by simply acting on the stiffness of the homogeneous material. In this way, the same structure can be adapted so as to act as a total screen or a total absorber in specific frequency and angle-of-incidence ranges. The results presented so far, clearly show that the study of the mechanical behaviour of metamaterials cannot be disjoined by the study of their interactions with other materials, if one wants to enable the realistic conception of new engineering meta-structures. By presenting our results, we also outline that, as any model, also enriched models have limitations that have to be identified "a priori" to avoid their inappropriate use. In particular, we underline that the model's performances may depend on three characteristic lengths that are related to i) the unit cell's size, ii) the metamaterial's slab thickness and iii) the wavelength of the travelling wave. Depending on the relative proportions of these three characteristic lengths the relaxed micromorphic model will be more or less efficient in the description of the meta-structure's behaviour over an extended frequency range. Indeed, while the relaxed micromorphic model will always be predictive of this behaviour in the long wave limit, more or less marked differences may emerge for higher frequencies and lower wavelengths. This calls for the formulation of a new enriched model, including extra degrees of freedom and suitable dynamic internal lengths, so as to extend its efficiency to higher-frequency/smaller-wavelength regions for a wide panel of external excitations. The presence of curvature terms is essential to catch size-effects in the static regime that are not the target of the present paper. Boundary conditions for a finite-size relaxed micromorphic slab embedded between two Cauchy half-spaces Two half-spaces made up of a homogeneous Cauchy material are separated by a micromorphic slab of finite width h. The three materials are in perfect contact with each other: the material on the top of the first interface is a classical linear elastic isotropic Cauchy medium, the material in the middle is an anisotropic relaxed micromorphic medium, while the material on the bottom of the second interface is again a classical isotropic Cauchy medium (see Fig.1). We lowered the propagation speeds cp and cs by directly changing the values of the the stiffness of the outer metamaterial or equivalently by increasing the density as shown in Tables 5-6-7 so as to meet these propagation speeds. This means that different materials CM1, CM2, and CM3 can be found that have the same speeds as in Tables 5-6-7. All these materials would give rise to the meta-structure's behaviours presented in this section.