Previous studies indicate that the properties of graphene oxide (GO) can be significantly improved by enhancing its graphitic domain size through thermal diffusion and clustering of functional groups. Remarkably, this transition takes place below the decomposition temperature of the functional groups and thus allows fine tuning of graphitic domains without compromising with the functionality of GO. By studying the transformation of GO under mild thermal treatment, we directly observe this size enhancement of graphitic domains from originally ≤ 40 nm 2 to > 200 nm 2 through an extensive transmission electron microscopy (TEM) study. Additionally, we confirm the integrity of the functional groups during this process by a comprehensive chemical analysis. A closer look into the process confirms the theoretical predicted relevance for the room temperature stability of GO. We further investigate the influence of enlarged graphitic domains on the hydration behaviour of GO and catalytic performance of single atom catalysts supported by GO. Graphene oxide (GO) is a versatile material with a broad spectrum of possible applications such as water purification, gas separation, energy storage, and energy harvesting Tailoring the graphitic domains of GO without largely changing the amount of oxygen containing functionalities, allows to investigate the influence of graphitic domain size on the properties of GO. It is for example predicted that graphitic domains represent patches along which the water transport is frictionless The integrity of the oxygen functional groups and control over the hydration behaviour now allows to further investigate the properties of GO. In recent years, laminated 2D materials as a catalyst itself or as support for single atom catalysts has emerged as a rapidly growing research field To examine the crystal structure and chemical composition of thermally treated GO, patches of GO covered TEM grids, GO powder, and GO films were annealed at 80 °C for several days in vacuum and air. The annealing temperature of 80 °C was chosen as previous studies indicate that this temperature is optimal for the agglomeration process Annealing in vacuum and air is compared due to the fact that previous studies report different results about the conservation of the oxygen content in mild thermal annealing It is possible to classify TEM images of GO monolayer by high contrast regions as disordered areas containing oxygen functionalities and low contrast regions as ordered areas representing graphitic domains For a representative view of the changes during heat treatment, a statistical approach averaging over 6-12 images per heat treatment day was undertaken. Analysing the development of the number of separate graphitic domains, their size distribution as well as the percentage coverage of graphitic area per image allows to quantify a potential ordering process upon mild thermal heat treatment (see SI -1.3, Fig. The observed enhancement of the size of the graphitic domains could also originate from a removal of adsorbates such as hydrocarbon and physiosorbed oxygen as well as from the decomposition of functional groups by either the mild thermal treatment or electron exposure while recording the TEM images Figure Therefore, solid state nuclear magnetic resonance (SSNMR) measurements over the course of the heat treatment on GO powder were performed. Following previous studies According to the Lerf-Klinowski-model for GO from Hummers' method, epoxy and hydroxyl groups are prominent on the basal plane, while carboxylic acid, ketone and lactol are mostly present on the edges We can conclude that all our analytical techniques, consistently show that the loss of chemically bond oxygen functionalities is marginal compared to the observed large increase in graphitic domain sizes in TEM. Thus, we mainly attribute the enhancement of graphitic domains to the diffusion and agglomeration of functional groups and not to a reduction of GO. As discussed in detail in SI-3, our combined observation of increasing graphitic domain size and decreasing decomposition rate of functional groups with respect to heat treatment time, supports the theoretical prediction that the agglomeration process is beneficial for the room-temperature stability of GO According to our TEM results, the enhancement of graphitic domains takes place faster but is less pronounced in vacuum than in air. As shown with our SSNMR analysis, the increase in sp 2 carbon is less pronounced in vacuum with 3 % compared to 6 % in air, indicating that the decomposition of functional groups is damped in vacuum compared to air. This might contribute to the fact that the observed graphitic domains are larger in air than in vacuum after 14 days of heat treatment. However, it does not explain why the agglomeration in vacuum is slightly faster than in air. Therefore, our observations show, that the diffusion, agglomeration and decomposition process in air and vacuum are different. A detail, that did not get attention in the literature yet and thus need further experimental and theoretical investigations. As mentioned in the introduction, enhanced graphitic domains should facilitate the water transport along stacked GO laminates due to frictionless water flux. Therefore, the hydration behaviour of heat-treated GO was investigated. In order to investigate the hydration behaviour, a study of water permeating GO and its interlayer space was conducted and supported by ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations (Fig. Measured in ambient air, the interlayer space after the heat treatment decreases linearly from 0.75-0.65 nm (Fig. The lateral domain sizes of 1.3 nm and 0 nm cases are indicated. To understand the dual effect of interlayer spacing (degree of swelling) and the enhancement of graphitic domains in GO on water flux, we carried out AIMD simulations of water-GO systems (Fig. Larger graphitic domains might improve the HER and OER activity of GO due to an increase in electrode conductivity To investigate that, we performed electrochemical experiments exploring the HER and OER of GO in alkaline environment. The performance of our catalysts is quantified by assigning an overpotential value η for which the current density j > 10 mA cm -2 . As shown in Fig. Notably, the Fe ions are present within the functionalized area of the GO structure and rather than on the graphitic domain, suggesting a possible coordination with oxygen or defects. For as synthesized Fe-GO, j is dramatically increased for alkaline HER and OER, e.i η is ~204 mV and 320 mV. For OER this is comparable state-of-the art IrO2 (η = 270 mV) The decline in HER and OER activity is similar to the decline of Fe-GO that was annealed after mixing the components. Therefore, the reason for the decline must have another reason. The reduced water transport that was demonstrated by our study of the hydration behaviour of annealed GO might explain the decrease in catalytic activity. Fig. along the GO sheets (black lines). The interlayer space d1 (~1.1 nm) in annealed GO is smaller compared to the interlayer space in original GO d2 (~1.3 nm). Smaller d leads to less physical space for water and consequently reduces the amount of water within the laminar network. As shown by our AMID simulations, the water transport is additionally hindered by damped diffusivity of water. Especially the transport of OH -and H3O + rely on the hydrogen network of the water within GO laminates The first direct observation of enlarged graphitic domains by heat treatment with temperatures under the decomposition temperature of functional groups is presented. This supports various theoretical predictions shows that the decomposition of functional groups is largely supressed in vacuum. This explains the seemingly contradictory results in the literature that reported both the conservation Our investigation of the hydration behaviour of GO with enlarged graphitic domains surprisingly reveals that the water transport is damped with increasing size of graphitic domains. Supported by AMID simulations and interlayer space measurements we can show that the supressed swelling is the dominant factor for the water flux compared with the increased mobility of water molecules along joined graphitic domains. Our initial hypothesis that the enhanced graphitic domains should be beneficial for the catalytic activity of GO can be confirmed for original GO. However, in Fe-GO the decline in mass transport upon suppression of swelling plays a more dominant role for the catalytic activity then the improvement through enlarged graphitic domains. By that, we uncover the so far neglected role of mass transport within the GO laminar structure for catalytic activity. Preparation of monolayer GO-TEM grids: 10 μl of highly diluted and sonicated GO solution was dropped on each TEM grid. By that, a sufficient coverage with mono-and few layer GO was accomplished. Distinguishing between mono-and few layers be analysing the diffraction pattern is straight forward and described in detail below. Between heat treatment and analysis, the samples were stored in a desiccator. GO films: GO films were fabricated using the vacuum filtration method as described in our previous studies Heat treatment in air and vacuum: Both, GO-TEM grids and GO films were annealed in vacuum and air but otherwise same conditions. One batch of samples were annealed in a furnace at 80 °C ± 1 °C and covered with a glass container. Another batch of samples were placed in a vacuum oven at 80 °C ± 1° C (see Fig. Fe-GO for HER and OER: Aqueous GO solution (0.1 mg/ml) and FeCl3 salt was mixed aiming at a Fe/GO of (1/100). The solution was dried in a vacuum oven at 30 °C and 10 mbar to receive fine Fe-GO powder. The powder Fe-GO were placed in an oven at 80 °C for several days as noted in the sample names. Characterization: HRTEM images were obtained with a Gatan OneView IS camera on a JEOL JEM-F200 which was operated at 80 kV to reduce knock-on damage to the GO. Aberration Electrochemical experiments: All electrochemical measurements in this study were carried out with a CHI 760E (CH Instrument, Texas) electrochemical workstation. To prepare electrodes, 5 mg of catalyst powder was dissolved in 0.5 mL deionized water and ethanol solution (1:1, v/v), followed by the addition of 25 μL of Nafion solution (Sigma-Aldrich), and sonicated to form inks, which were then drop-casted on carbon fiber paper to attain a catalyst loading of 0.5 mg cm -2 . The electrodes were then used as working electrodes, while a Pt wire and saturated calomel electrode was used as the counter and reference electrode, respectively. All potentials measured in this study were converted to the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) reference for the purpose of comparison, using the following equation: ERHE (V) = ESCE (V) + 0.245 + 0.059 × pH. Water transport measurements Following the procedure in All AIMD calculations were carried out using the plane-wave DFT code, VASP We employed GO structures that were utilized in ref. Additional Information on TEM study, Supplementary structural and chemical analysis of Knock-on damage caused by the electron beam interaction with the sample leads to displacement and desorption of lightly bound adsorbates such as hydrocarbons and physiosorbed oxygen on the graphitic areas. If those adsorbates were dominantly present, the exposure would lead to an increase in graphitic area over the time the images are taken 1 Some studies surprisingly report a strong reduction of GO under repeated imaging A/B FTIR spectra for heat treated GO films in air/ vacuum. Fig. Both heat treatments result in a smaller interlayer space. However, the treatment in air leads to a more pronounced reduction in interlayer space, resembling in a difference in interlayer space of about 0.1 nm between vacuum and air treated samples after 14 days of heat treatment. Moreover, as shown in Fig. The observed decrease in interlayer spacing that can also be explained by enlarged graphitic areas (see Fig. Upon increasing their distance by agglomeration, larger graphitic areas begin to sag and decrease the average interlayer space. As a side effect, the range of interlayer spaces becomes wider, resulting in an increase in the width of the XRD peak (Fig. Figure In more detail, previous theoretical and experimental studies Our combined experimental and computational results allow to explain the hydration behaviour of GO membranes from a new perspective. Despite a constant C/O ratio, substantial changes in the hydration behaviour are observed. In line with a recent study A Fe-GO film on PVDF was created by vacuum filtration of 20 ml Fe-GO solution. The membrane was immersed into 5 ml of DI water for 7 days. The DI water was then checked for Fe ion concentration. The detected concentration is neglectable and below the detection limit (0.05 mg/l). In other words, less then 0.25 μg of Fe ions left the membrane upon immersion in water for 7 days. By filtration of 20 ml Fe-GO solution, 2 mg of Fe-GO was placed onto the PVDF membrane. Keeping in mind that the Fe-GO solution has ~1 wt% Fe ions inside, the sample contained approx. 20 μg of Fe ions. Consequently > 98.75 % of Fe ions stayed inside the membrane over the course of 7-day immersion in DI-water. Aberration-corrected STEM (Themis, Thermofisher) operated at 60 kV was used to acquire the ADF-STEM images of Fe-GO. The TEM specimens were prepared following the procedure described in the previous session. The imaging was carried out using aberration-corrected annular dark field (ADF) STEM mode where the probe size is approximately 0.14 nm. The dwell time of the scanning beam was kept deliberately low and high spot size was used to reduce the total electron dose on the specimen. This condition allows sufficient spatial resolution for imaging single Fe atom, and the contrast mechanism is sensitive to the high atomic (Z) number element, therefore allowing differentiating the locations of single Fe atoms.