Classical turning surfaces of Kohn-Sham potentials, separating classically-allowed regions (CARs) from classically-forbidden regions (CFRs), provide a useful and rigorous approach to understanding many chemical properties of molecules. Here we calculate such surfaces for several paradigmatic solids. Our study of perfect crystals at equilibrium geometries suggests that CFRs are absent in metals, rare in covalent semiconductors, but common in ionic and molecular crystals. A CFR can appear at a monovacancy in a metal. In all materials, CFRs appear or grow as the internuclear distances are uniformly expanded. Calculations with several approximate density functionals and codes confirm these behaviors. A classical picture of conduction suggests that CARs should be connected in metals, and disconnected in wide-gap insulators. This classical picture is confirmed in the limits of extreme uniform compression of the internuclear distances, where all materials become metals without CFRs, and extreme expansion, where all materials become insulators with disconnected and widely-separated CARs around the atoms. The most basic property of an ordered solid is whether or not it is metallic The standard modern theory of conduction (for ordered solids) is that of Bloch bands, with insulators having filled bands below finite gaps in the spectrum The Kohn-Sham (KS) potential where v s (r) is the KS potential, and ε HO is the energy of the highest occupied orbital (the Fermi energy ε F in a metal). They demonstrated that a classical turning surface could characterize bond types in molecules numerically and visually A turning surface in position space should not be confused with a Fermi surface in wavevector space. The turning surface defined here is the intersection in position-space of the KS potential with the Fermi level. If ε F > v s (r) everywhere, there is no turning surface, whereas the Fermi surface is always well-defined. One could also define a turning surface in terms of the chemical potential μ ≥ ε F Here we present calculations of KS turning surfaces for a variety of simple solids. Our calculations are at the LDA and generalized gradient approximation (GGA) level of exchange-correlation approximations, which usually yield close approximations to more precise KS potentials in molecules (as both KS potential and ε HO are typically too shallow by about the same amount). In Kohn-Sham density functional theory (KS DFT) This work discusses classical turning surface analogs and semiclassical interpretations of them for a variety of simple solids. Section II describes the computational tools used to extract and analyze the KS potential for metals, as presented in Section III, and band insulators presented in Section IV. Special attention is paid to the roles of strain and defects in forming CFRs within solids. Section V discusses how the CFR can be used to predict conduction properties. Section VI discusses the role of CFR connectedness in determining the conductive properties of solids. The Supplemental Materials section contains additional data. To interpret our results correctly, we point out the following crucial points concerning gaps. It has long been known that the KS gap, i.e., the bandgap of the exact KS potential, does not match the true (fundamental charge) gap All ensuing calculations were performed with either the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) For monolayers, a 45 × 45 × 1 k-point grid was used in conjunction with the Blöchl tetrahedron method. All other parameters remain the same from bulk calculations. The c direction was padded with 30 Å of vacuum region to reduce interactions between image monolayers. In density functional plane-wave codes, the densities and potentials are stored on a uniform grid R, the dimensions of which are determined by the size of the unit cell and the plane-wave cutoff energy. Acceptable convergence of the total energy relies on suitable convergence of the potentials and densities on this grid. The values of v s (R) are obtained from this grid. In core regions, the true potential is much deeper than the pseudopotential, so these are classically allowed. Thus the PAW pseudopotential core regions were excluded from the CFR (frozen-core pseudopotentials were used in both VASP and Castep). The self-consistent electronic eigenstates give ε HO (the Fermi energy ε F in a metal), and the regions where ε HO -v s (R) < 0 define the CFR. We assign equal volume to each point relative to the primitive cell, as the real-space mesh is uniform. Suppose there are N prim total real-space mesh points in the cell, and let the volume of the primitive cell be V prim . Then the volume of any point is V prim /N prim . If there are N CFR points at which ε HO -v s (r) < 0, the volume of the CFR is ( The dimensionless, "fractional volume" of the CFR, which will be used in the ensuing figures and fits, is defined as the number of real-space mesh points within the CFR relative to the total number of mesh points in the primitive cell. As the fractional CFR volume v → 0, our method requires ever finer real-and reciprocal-space meshes to resolve v. This need is limited by the resolution determined by the plane-wave cutoff energy. Our data for v 1 will necessarily be more noisy than for larger values of v. Despite this, we show a posteriori that reasonable fits to v(V prim ) may be found. Each code uses differently-generated pseudopotentials with different optimal basis set cutoff energies (and hence pseudopotential grid sizes, etc.), different energy minimization schemes, and different Brillouin zone integration methods. To ensure that our method is not dependent upon the numerical methods of a particular code, we have verified that the Castep and VASP results are consistent. As we see in Table The vacancy defect formation energy can be recast as the energy needed to create a curved surface within a solid The definition of the monovacancy volume given in Carling et al. differs from ours. Their method used the liquid drop model of jellium from Ref. It is natural then to ask how far a metal needs to be stretched before a CFR emerges. In Fig. where V prim is the primitive cell volume, 0 ≤ v < 1 is the fractional CFR volume, Θ is a step function, and the dimensionless c ≡ (c 0 , c 1 , c 2 , c 3 ) are derived from leastsquares fit parameters. Note that 3 m=0 c m = 0, and ∂v/∂V prim > 0 for V prim -V c = 0 + . Fit parameters for PBE and LSDA data, as calculated in VASP, are listed in Table Despite the possibility of noisy data at small CFR fractions, 0 < v 1, no lower cutoff on the VASP data was needed in the fitting process. The Castep data required a cutoff of v c = 0.01 (for which any data with v ≤ v c was taken to have v = 0 instead), and a few elemental solids (Mg, Sr, Ba, Ra) required a higher cutoff, v c = 0.05. The form of Eq. 4 is selected because it makes v tend to zero as V prim tends to V c from above, and to a finite value (c 0 ) as V prim tends to infinity. (A perfect fit over the whole range V prim > V c , not needed here, would require c 0 = 1.) As the PAW core region is classicallyallowed in an all-electron approach, there will always exist a classically-allowed region in this type of calculation. As our method has lower resolution for v 1, we expect our fitted values of V c to be estimates of the "true" values. V c was determined by a root-finding algorithm. When possible, the value of V c was constrained to lie between the largest tabulated value of V prim for which v = 0, and the smallest tabulated value of V prim for which v > 0. When that was not possible, a tolerance of 3% was afforded, which we note in Table Many of the metals presented here exhibit more complex V prim -dependence than the insulators, so we perform a piecewise fit where both functions on the RHS are of the form of Eq. 4. To perform the fit, we chose a value of V 0 to model the point of inflection of the curve, and the fitting procedure detailed above was followed for V prim ≤ V 0 . We then required that v(V prim ) and ∂v(V prim )/∂V prim be continuous at V prim = V 0 , fixing d 0 and d 1 . A least squares fit was then performed to yield d 2 and d 3 . V 0 was modulated to minimize the sum of square residuals, To prevent over-fitting, the lowest value of V 0 for which R 2 < 10 was deemed the optimal fit. Let a be the equilibrium lattice parameter for a given solid as given by Table Note also that the LSDA and PBE curves in Figs. 2 and S4 for Al, Cu, and NaCl cross, whereas those for elemental insulators do not. For the elemental insulators, the difference between the LSDA and PBE curves is always of the same sign. The situation for insulators, as shown in Table However in weakly interacting and van der Waals solids, like graphite and Ne, there are noticeable PBE CFRs. The small (1%) PBE CFR volume in graphite (hexagonal C) at its experimental lattice constants reflects the semimetallic nature of this material. The PBE CFR in graphite lies between monolayers, just as one might expect for few-layer graphene. The CFR volume is nearly 20% of the PBE equilibrium cell volume in graphite because PBE underestimates intermediaterange van der Waals interactions, and thus overestimates the equilibrium spacing. This fraction is reduced to 1% when the experimental cell volume is used instead. The LSDA finds no CFR in graphite, which may be related to the LSDA's underestimation of equilibrium lattice constants. For the prototypical semiconducting layered material MoS 2 , we see the same pattern. The LSDA underestimates the equilibrium c lattice parameter, yielding no CFR. PBE dramatically overestimates the c parameter, yielding a CFR encompassing 22.3% of the primitive cell volume. Note that the LSDA and PBE are similarly accurate for the sandwich-layer thickness z (the distance between neighboring layers of sulfur atoms). Consider instead a monolayer of graphite or MoS 2 . For these sheets, we use the bulk a and z lattice parameters found by relaxing the equilibrium cell volume. We find no CFR within the monolayer region for graphene or monolayer MoS 2 using both the LSDA and PBE. Thus, no in-plane CFR is present in graphene, and no in-sandwich CFR is found in monolayer MoS 2 . Crystalline NaCl, just like its molecular form Referring back to Table . II, we see that a CFR emerges in ds C when the lattice is stretched to 1.21a for PBE (about 1.8 times the equilibrium volume); for ds Si, a CFR is predicted to emerge at 1.06a for PBE (about 1.2 times the equilibrium volume). Thus it appears that PBE predicts the emergence of a CFR in an insulator when the lattice is stretched not much further past its equilibrium point. For both Si and C, the band gap is substantial even when the CFR begins to emerge. The classical radius of the free Ne atom is 0.87 Å, in both PBE In the same vein as for C and Si, we can compress the Ne lattice until the CFR vanishes, as seen in Fig. might expect the bandgap to shrink as the CFR collapses, but the opposite is true. For the smallest lattice constant calculated here (2.85 Å), the band gap is roughly 18.57 eV, compared to a gap of about 11.51 eV As the lattice is compressed, two competing effects determine the bandgap: the bands widen, reducing the gap; and the center of the conduction band is shifted upwards with respect to the center of the valence band, widening the gap. (For an example, see the silicon density of states at equilibrium and at a mild expansion, in Fig. To get an overall sense of how well (or poorly) the classical turning surface yields information on conduction, Fig. Moreover, we can see very clear trends in the strain curves of elemental solids as one goes down a column of the periodic table. In Fig. The alkali and alkali-earth metals show similar, but more complex behavior, as shown in Fig. Naturally, within a column of the periodic table, the critical CFR volume V c increases with atomic number, as shown in the Supplementary Materials. If we define 3. Contrasting the amount of strain needed to induce a CFR for various solids. The grey line is Vprim = Vc, so that solids lying above the grey line have no CFR at equilibrium, and solids below the line have a CFR at equilibrium. For the VASP data (circles for PBE and squares for LSDA), Vprim is the equilibrium cell volume. For the Castep data (diamonds all with PBE), Vprim is the equilibrium cell volume except for the rare gases, for which Vprim takes the experimental value. Metals are shown in blue, and insulators in orange. Note that Sn and Pb were calculated in the cubic diamond structure (α-or grey Sn), which are likely non-metallic phases. In particular, grey Sn has a 0.1 eV gap the volume of a free atom as V at = 4πr 2 TS /3, where r TS is the radius of the atom's classical turning surface from Ref. In the introduction, we described a (semi-) classical model of solids that defined metals and insulators by their turning surface properties. In this model, a metal would have a connected classically-allowed region (CAR), and an insulator would have a disconnected CAR. In Figure In the limit of extreme expansion, the CAR's are always disconnected and well-separated. Electron tunneling is inhibited through energy barriers that are wide or high. The bands will narrow to atomic levels. For a solid built from closed-shell atoms like Ne, the bandgap will tend to a non-zero and typically large value, while for a solid built up from open-subshell atoms like silicon, the bandgap will tend to a zero or small value (depending on whether the Kohn-Sham potential of the free atom is constrained to the symmetry of its external potential). As the lattice is put under extreme expansive strain, we expect all solids to eventually transition to an insulating state, with disconnected and well-separated CAR's. In this limit, the bandgap can become large, small, or zero. If the lattice is compressed well below the equilibrium geometry, we expect any solid to eventually transition to a metallic state, with zero bandgap and a connected CAR. For the solids studied here, our calculations found no CFRs for metals, large CFRs for wide-gap insulators, and the emergence of CFRs when small-gap semiconductors are mildly expanded. Since standard density-gradient expansions are derived for slowly-varying densities without CFRs, the absence of CFRs in metals at equilibrium suggests that generalized gradient approximations (like or beyond PBE) should work especially well for them. A monovacancy in a metal can induce a CFR, and an expansive strain in any material can induce a CFR or increase its volume. Moreover, the emergence of a CFR does not necessarily accompany the opening or closing of The volume of a CFR is a function of the lattice strain. Both metals and band insulators without a CFR at their equilibrium geometry can be stretched to introduce a CFR. Those wider-gap insulators with a CFR at equilibrium can be compressed until the CFR vanishes. Layered materials may have a CFR at equilibrium if a density functional approximation tends to stretch the c lattice parameter, as PBE does. CFRs are also characteristic of perfect ionic and molecular crystals at equilibrium. Our analysis supports the conclusion that rare gas atoms in the crystalline phase are nearly free. Ionic crystals have large CFRs. We showed that graphite and MoS 2 , where intermediate-range van der Waals interactions dominate between monolayers, have CFRs located solely between monolayers, and that their corresponding monolayers have no in-plane CFR. Our work demonstrates that weakly-bound solids tend to have prominent CFRs. Hydrogen-bonded crystals like ice, while not tested here, can be expected to have substantial CFR volume fractions, as suggested by Fig. The connectedness of a CFR seems to play a role in a system's conductivity. It was shown that the CFR in Si near the critical volume V c is disconnected. As the lattice is stretched further, the CFR grows, eventually subsuming much of the primitive cell. The Si bandgap closes very nearly at the same V prim that the CFR connects, indicating a semiclassical insulator-metal transi-tion. A semiclassical picture suggests that a connected CAR and zero bandgap indicate a metallic state, found under extreme compression for any solid. As a corollary, disconnected and well-separated CAR's indicate an insulating state, and are found under strong expansion of the lattice. Interacting quantum mechanical electrons can insulate through the Mott mechanism. We looked for CFRs in zero-gap spin-unpolarized NiO, a paradigm Mott insulator, but did not find one at the equilibrium lattice constant a. A CFR appeared at a lattice constant 1.18a (see Tables Here we include extra figures, fit parameters, and data tables that may prove useful for future work. A figure of the density of states for Si at its PBE equilibrium geometry, and at the critical lattice parameter, is given in Fig. Fig. Last are a series of figures and tables for showing fitted strain curves for select main group elements as calculated with PBE in Castep, and using the fitting procedure in the main text, plotted separately for the Group 1, Group 2, Group 14, and Group 18 elemental solids. We also include numerous tables (Tables FIG. S5. Comparison between VASP and Castep results