Crystallographic image processing (CIP) techniques may be utilized in scanning probe microscopy (SPM) to glean information that has been obscured by signals from multiple probe tips. This may be of particular importance for scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and requires images from a sample that is periodic in two dimensions. The imageforming current for multiple tips in STM is derived in a more straightforward manner than prior approaches. The Fourier spectrum of the current for p4mm Bloch surface wave functions and a pair of delta function tips reveals the tip-separation dependence of various types of image obscurations. In particular our analyses predict that quantum interference should be visible on a macroscopic scale in the form of bands quite distinct from the basket-weave patterns a purely classical model would create at the same periodic double STM tip separations. A surface wave function that models the essential character of highly (0001) oriented pyrolytic graphite (technically known as HOPG) is introduced and used for a similar tip-separation analysis. Using a bonding H 2 tip wave function with significant spatial extent instead of this pair of infinitesimal Dirac delta function tips does not affect these outcomes in any observable way. This is explained by Pierre Curie's well known symmetry principle. Classical simulations of multiple tip effects in STM images may be understood as modeling multiple tip effects in images that were recorded with other types of SPMs). Our analysis clarifies why CIP and crystallographic averaging work well in removing the effects of a blunt SPM tip (that consist of multiple mini-tips) from the recorded 2D periodic images and also outlines the limitations of this image processing techniques for certain spatial separations of STM mini-tips. Scanning probe microscopy (SPM) images are often degraded due to the interference of two (or more) protrusions on the probe tip (i.e. effective mini-tips on a blunt tip), as well as containing sample tilt errors, image bow and drift, and stepping errors that occur while scanning the tip in two dimensions (2D) over the sample surface. Averaging methods have long been used to remove scanning errors. There are also well establish techniques for straightening out keystone-shaped images that result from sample tilt and image drift, Crystallographic image processing originated with the transmission electron crystallography community to aid the extraction of structure factor amplitudes and phase angles from high-resolution phase contrast images of crystalline materials Since one may define 2D image-based crystallography independent of the source of the 2D patterns as being concerned with categorizing, specifying, and quantifying 2D spatially periodic, perfectly long-range ordered patterns This process consists of the application of a Fourier transform to the 2D digitized image (called Fourier analysis), detection of the most likely plane symmetry in reciprocal space, enforcement of this symmetry by averaging of the symmetry related Fourier coefficients to remove all kinds of degradations, and finally inverse-Fourier image reconstruction (called Fourier synthesis into direct space). Consider, for example an STM image, Figure The whole plane symmetry enforcing procedure can be thought of as aligning the periodic motifs of all independent STM images from the multiple mini-tips on top of each other, thus, enhancing the signal to noise ratio significantly when done correctly. The present work shows in detail why CIP works and builds upon prior work We give a streamlined derivation of the tunneling current that the SPM images map. The changes wrought in the tunneling current by having two (or more) tips are then outlined. Next we show that the 2D Fourier transform of the derived current resulting from two tips is comprised of the same Fourier coefficients as a single tip, with the currents from the two tips differing only in a phase term in the momentum Fourier space. (CIP simply removes this phase term as part of the plane symmetry detection and enforcement procedures. There are, however, certain double tip separations for which some of these phases take certain Fourier coefficients to zero, thereby obstructing CIP.) The Fourier transform process is then explicated for a cosine Bloch wave function that gives an idealized approximation of the STM images that a real 2D-periodic sample with a square translational lattice and the comparatively high plane symmetry p4mm would produce, convolved with an idealized Dirac delta function wave function for each of the two tips. (We use the international (Hermann-Mauguin) notations for plane symmetry and 2D point symmetry groups This process is repeated for a newly-derived, somewhat more complicated (0001) oriented graphite atomic surface model. Finally, as a check, Appendix A derives the current produced by a double tip with spatial extent, the bonding state of the H 2 molecule, with both the graphite and p4mm surface models and shows them to be proportional to the Dirac delta function cases. This expected outcome is explained therein by the application of Pierre Curie's well known symmetry principle. Our simulations are done without regards to any particulars of an actual scanning probe microscope. The classical simulations of STM images do not allow for interference between the two tips that constitute some kind of a blunt tip. One may, therefore, generalize the results of the classical simulations to other types of SPM images where there is no interference between the two tips. Since the SPM image is a two-dimensional map of the strength of the tunneling current density, we seek an expression for that quantity. Since the Hamiltonian of the full system is generally too hard to solve, we follow Bardeen has surface eigenenergies and eigenfunctions labeled by quantum numbers σ. Likewise we have V T = V for points inside the tip and barrier regions, and equal to zero in the sample region. The corresponding Hamiltonian H T has tip eigenenergies and eigenfunctions are labeled by quantum numbers τ. The matrix element for an electron initially in the surface state ! " to scatter into the tip state ! " --also the matrix element for an electron initially in the tip state ! " to scatter into the surface state ! " since we will be taking the absolute square --is approximately ). The third equality acknowledges that on the sample side of the surface the quantity H -H S = V -V S is zero, so we can confine the integral to the region of the tip. Bardeen goes T on to make this matrix element more symmetrical with respect to wave functions, and transforms it into an integral over the surface S 0 that encloses the volume Ω T by using Green's first identity As the volume integral form is a more visually intuitive form for many purposes, Tsukada and Shima . which is proportional to Equation (A-3) in Tsukada and Shima an expression of the Dirac-Wentzel-Fermi Golden Rule Finally we introduce another identity in (4a) and take the zero-temperature limit , in which g S represents a sum over conjugate pairs of surface eigenfunctions ψ σ , Likewise for the tip, As a number of authors note, each g can be represented as (π times) the imaginary part of a Green's function Extending this result to encompass two-tips is now straightforward. We follow the derivation of Tsukada, Kobayashi, and Ohnishi If we change variables in the first integral to ρ = ρ 1 + u 1 (u 1 is the relative coordinate to the center of mass R 1 of the half-tip), and likewise for integration region Ω 2 , and then rename ρ m as ! ! in both cases to reduce notational complexity in what follows, then (6a where the first two terms represent sources in which the current follows two independent classical paths, The last two terms represent the interference between two quantum paths for each electron, Equations (6b) through (9a) are equivalent to the final result of Tsukada, Kobayashi, and Ohnishi Mizes, Park, and Harrison To examine the utility of CIP for the double tip case, let , whose first factor is a continuous periodic function in the plane of the surface. It thus has an X-Y variation that can be represented by a 2D Fourier transform whose argument is a discrete set of complex numbers: The product of such wave functions in g S of Equation (7a) is the only part of the current source that depends on the external tip position variable R through R m = R + u m . Then the Fourier transform of g S with respect to R is given by the convolution, { } (7c). Equation (7c) explicitly shows that the currents from the two tips (m = 1, 2) differ only in a phase term in the momentum Fourier space We will see that this phase term does not alter the configuration of frequencies of the Fourier transform we use in CIP, but can affect the magnitudes of the Fourier coefficients (that are related to the square roots of the image intensity) of the discrete points (P,Q). This point may be most clearly demonstrated if we utilize the simplest possible wave functions that will reveal interference. We do so to illustrate the possibilities for reciprocal space symmetry enforcement, not to make predictions for any particular sample or tip. Thus, these wave functions will not be chosen to be eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonians H S or H T . The simplest possible double-tip wave function is a pair of infinitesimal tips, each of whose amplitude is zero everywhere outside of the tip centers of mass points R m = R + u m , which is the point ! ! = 0 (remembering that we renamed each ρ m as ! ! ) . This mathematically convenient, but physically unrealizable approximation of the tip wave functions shows that the two classical current sources are simply translated left or right relative to each other, so a Fourier transform of these two terms of the double tip differ only in a phase in reciprocal space. The two terms that represent the interference between two quantum paths for each electron are somewhat more complicated, partly shifting leftward and partly rightward, but again will differ only in a phase in reciprocal space. The Dirac delta function we have used to approximation the tip wave functions can be represented as the limit of the following Gaussian function as ε→0: If we use a somewhat more realistic approximation of the tip wave functions by, say, utilizing For our surface wave functions we again choose the simplest possible wave functions that will reveal the difference between the classical superposition of two imaging tips and the addition of quantum interference. Chen . We first create current maps from only the superpositions of the two classical current sources. If the tips are separated in the x direction by 2u, Equation (8b) (with this real function ( The Fourier transform of ( . This confirms that classically the conjugate lattice spacing, and hence the underlying symmetry in real space, is independent of the number of tips. A double tip separated by 2u introduces phase terms, Cos[a u], whose only role is to suppress various frequencies at specific tip separations. When u = π/4, for instance, the points at (P,Q) = (±2,0) are suppressed, as are the points at (P,Q) = (±1,±1) when u = π/2. Rather than using reciprocal space Cartesian coordinates (P,Q) of our analytic Fourier transform above, crystallographers generally use lattice vector components {H,K}, that are in general non-orthogonal. Thus, in the present case, the popular CIP program CRISP It is fascinating that an image recorded from two tips can be obscured by the suppression of the various frequencies due to the superposition of two classical images at specific tip separations. One would expect that adding the quantum interference of cross terms (an electron tunneling through both tips at once) from ! 1 (x " u, y,1) (17) would cause additional problems. Let us examine this cross-term, ) / e (18), As before, we could easily Fourier Transform the simplified fourth line of (18) term by term. But given that other functions of interest are less easily reduced to a form having only one argument on which the transform will act, we will instead show the more general approach of individually transforming the two terms in the product on the first line of Eq. ( The Fourier transform of the first term in the product in ( . So the Fourier convolution is of the first line in the product in ( and likewise for the other four terms in parentheses. Thus the Fourier Transform of the full cross term is But in both the classical and quantum cases, u = π/2 entirely suppresses the points at (P,Q) = (±1,±1) (lattice vectors {H,K} = {±1,0} and {0, ±1}) . Furthermore at u = π/2 the classical (P,Q) = (±2,0) terms (lattice vectors {H,K} = ±{1,-1}), line 2 of Equation ( The visual difference between the classical tunneling current Figure Our highly idealized tip wave function, on the other hand, does not lend itself to confident suggestions of this sort. Thus in appendix A we refine this prediction utilizing a more realistic tip wave function, the bonding H 2 molecular wave function. The results, Equation (A23b), are proportional to (have the same spatial dependence as) the quantum interference results of the present section that uses the Dirac delta function double tip. Consider now a somewhat more complicated atomic surface to model, highly (0001) ordered pyrolytic graphite (that is technically known as HOPG), which has three so called α sites in the hexagon that have only recently been observed experimentally by Hembacher et al. Figure We modeled a Bloch wave function to give an idealized approximation of these graphite images. Rather than using their 12 % difference, 248 pN versus 250 pN relative to the 223 pN "hollow space" (at hexagon centers in Figure " ,q (x, y, z) = e #1 2" z 5.59 100 # cos qx (We could, of course have made any number of other choices without changing the essential conclusions of the following work.) As in the prior section, we first simulated "current maps" from only the superpositions of the two independent (classical) current sources. If the tips are separated in the x direction by 2u, Equation (8b) (with the real function ( . The Fourier transform of ( (24). As in the p4mm case of the previous section, the nonzero Fourier frequencies are independent of the number of tips and, hence, so is the underlying symmetry in real space. A double tip separated by 2u in the horizontal direction introduces phase terms whose only role is to suppress various frequencies at specific tip separations. When u = π/2, for instance, the points at (P,Q) = (±1,0) and (P,Q) = (±1,± 3 ) are suppressed. We may choose our lattice vector {H,K} = {1,0} to go from the origin to the upper-right point in the hexagon of Figure lattice vectors {H,K} = ±{2,-1} and {1,±2}, can be observed in the HK tables CRISP generates when the amplitude threshold is reduced to 20% of its default value. Amplitudes of 61 units relative to the 9892 units of the inner ring of frequencies at u = 0 are forced to zero when u = π . The same is true for frequencies at (P,Q) = (±2,0) (or {H,K} = ±{2,-2}) when u = π/4. Such drastic suppression of frequency information along two of three possible nonorthogonal axes almost removes any periodicity in the second dimension. If one knows the "sample" has p3m1 symmetry, CIP can recover a poor but recognizable symmetrized image of graphite, as seen in Figure Next, we include the cross-term to allow for quantum interference. This will give a current proportional to When u = π , the quantum cross-terms also suppress frequencies at Overall the quantum cross terms do not alter the classical images in any discernable way. Finally, we derive in appendix A the current "image" that a fully quantum bonding H 2 tip wave function Since the spacing between atoms in a hexagonal sample differs along the two Cartesian coordinates, for completeness we must examine interference effects in our model due to two tips displaced from each other in the vertical direction (toward the upper side of the hexagon) in addition to the horizontal direction (toward the rightmost vertex of the hexagon) discussed above. As in the prior section, we first simulate "current maps" from only the superpositions of the two independent (classical) current sources. If the tips are separated in the y direction by 2u, Equation (8b) (with the real function ( The Fourier transform of ( ( ) . Again a double tip separated by 2u in the vertical direction introduces phase terms whose only role is to suppress various frequencies at specific tip separations. When When u = ! 2 3 " .9 the frequencies are suppressed at (P,Q) = (±1, ± 3 ) (or {H,K} = {±2,0} and {0,±2}) and (P,Q) = (0,± 3 ) (or {H,K} = ±{1,1}). But the innermost ring of frequencies accounting for 99% of the amplitude override this suppression and produce a clear p3m1 image as in Figure But even with such significant suppression of frequency information, CIP still is able to recover an excellent symmetrized image of graphite, as seen in Figure The Fourier transform of the cross terms is As with the classical terms, when u = ! When u = ! 2 3 " .9 the frequencies are suppressed at (P,Q) = (±1, ± 3 ) (or {H,K} = {±2,0} and {0,±2}) and (P,Q) = (0, ± 3 ) (or {H,K} = ±{1,1}). But, as in the classical case, these are overpowered by the unsuppressed innermost ring of frequencies accounting for 99 % of the amplitude. Likewise the quantum cross terms contain unsuppressed frequencies at (P,Q) = (±1, 0) (or {H,K} = ±{1,-1}), that by far overshadow terms (in square brackets in the second-to-last line) at these same frequencies that are suppressed by ! 3 2 . CIP can serve as a reliable tool for removing multiple-tip effects from SPM images in many cases. The Fourier transform step simply superposes the multiple images onto one amplitude map in Fourier space, with each contribution multiplied by a phase. We have shown that the severe banding that SPM images sometimes contain can arise from the tips approaching separations (relative to the sample's periodicity) for which those trigonometric phase function go to zero. This destroys all information along one axis of the sample surface and in such cases CIP will be unable to recover reliable surface information. Interestingly, we find that a fully quantum model for multiple tips including interference produces a wider range of usable tip separations than a model that includes only classical image overlap. This is found to be true for tip models with and without spatial extent. In addition, we find that quantum interference in double tips does not fall off with distance when the surface is periodic. In other words, banding that occurs at, say, π/2 will also occur at n π/2 for n odd. We note that n sufficiently large to allow for experimental manipulation of tip separation is a possible regime for observing macroscopic quantum interference. Since our simulations were done without regards to any particulars of a STM microscope, the results of the classical simulation may be generalized to other types of SPMs as long as there are no interactions between the two tips. Also the 2D periodic surface features that a SPM images may be much larger than atomic corrugations. The results of the classical simulations can, thus, be generalized to AFM imaging. so that the first Green's function is the one term +sin q x 11 + R 1 ( ) ) ) . We could if we wished take sums over various values of γ and q, but we wish here to demonstrate the general character of the current image maps, not calculate precise amplitudes. The bonding H 2 tip wave function , where , in which we have dropped mention of the energy conservation coefficients for notational convenience, and take the integration region to be inside the region of constant potential. brackets cluster one surface term multiplying each of the two tip terms in order, with the final indices referring to the terms with e ! r ! and e ! r + respectively. The numbered indices refer to the trigonometric function including x 1 , or x 2 or both, and the middle sign is that of the x 2 term of the trigonometric function. Evaluating integrals that have a coordinate dependence with the specific complication of the bonding H 2 wave function are often carried out using hyper-spherical coordinates The problem those techniques solved is to segregate out the various coordinate components of multicenter wave functions and potentials. The simplest case is the overlap integral In the spherically-symmetric case Then One can complete the square in the quadratic form in the exponential and do the r integral, followed by the ρ integrals. For very complex integrals, completing the square in the quadratic forms appears to be an arduous task. Fortunately, the orthogonal transformation that accomplishes this task need not be explicitly found since only its invariant determinant is left after the spatial integration is done. Thus the final form of the where the subscripts stand for observed and symmetrized, w is a relative weight (that is set proportional to A obs ), and the sums are taken over all Fourier coefficient labels H and K, refs. Higher symmetric plane groups (such as p4mm) possess a higher multiplicity of the general position per primitive cell than their type I ("translationsgleiche") subgroups (such as p4, c2mm and p2mm). These subgroups result from their type I supergroup by the removal of certain symmetry elements In addition, we utilize the A forbidden /A allowed ratio for those six plane groups that possess systematic absences Note that systematic absences are due to both glide lines and unit cell centering After these introductory paragraphs on the plane symmetry group determination methodology, we are now ready to assess the double tip images of Figure For u = 0.77 = π/4 -ε, Figure For a tip half-separation of u = 1.1, Figure (The c2mm amplitude residual, for instance, has dropped from four times as large as the p4mm residual in Table As one may glean from Figure & '( ) + S 1+2 $ R,u