We study a Dirac Harper model for moiré bilayer superlattices where layer antisymmetric strain periodically modulates the interlayer coupling between two honeycomb lattices in one spatial dimension. Discrete and continuum formulations of this model are analyzed. For sufficiently long moiré period the we find low energy spectra that host a manifold of weakly dispersive bands arising from a hierarchy of momentum and position dependent mass inversions. We analyze their charge distributions, mode count and valley-coherence using exact symmetries of the lattice model and approximate symmetries of a four-flavor version of the Jackiw-Rebbi one dimensional solution. Lattices with competing periodicities are interesting as discrete systems poised in between primitive crystals and random networks In this Letter we analyze the one dimensional lattice variant of the twisted bilayer problem using graphene as the prototype. The models we construct are one-dimensional in the sense that they have layerantisymmetric strains which produce moiré-scale modulation in only one spatial dimension, retaining latticescale periodicity in the orthogonal coordinate. With a conserved crystal momentum, the problem takes a strictly one dimensional form whose superlattice period is tuned by the lattice strain. This model generalizes the Harper equation We find that this modified Dirac-Harper (DH) model hosts narrow band physics near charge neutrality for sufficiently large moiré periods without fine tuning to a magic angle condition as is required in two dimensions. The near-zero mode structure originates from a reconstruction of the low energy spectrum through a hierarchy of mass inversions necessitated by the matrix structure of the interlayer potential, reminiscent of the multi-flavor variant of the Jackiw Rebbi model One-dimensional bilayer moiré patterns evolving from fully eclipsed (AA) through both staggered (AB, BA) stacking configurations are produced by layer antisymmetric strains (Figure The Harper model for bilayer graphene generalizes Eqn.1 where ψ are four component fields with the conventional ordering of amplitudes on two sublattices and two layers: The high-symmetry configurations admit a represention in terms of Dirac matrices γ 4 = τ x σ 0 , γ 32 = τ x σ x , and where t is the interlayer hopping strength. The matrixvalued Fourier coefficients are defined on this basis of mass matrices, allowing the interlayer coupling to be written ν(x) = ν 4 γ 4 + ν 32 γ 32 + ν 14 γ 14 with amplitudes plotted in Figure Linearizing this problem in the low energy regime gives the continuum variant of the DH model: where ti expresses the expansion of t = t 0 + t(k) in small q i about either Dirac point where t = 0. This expansion is parameterized by a Fermi velocity v F = √ 3ta/2 where a is the microscopic lattice constant. The ( tx , ty ) reduce to v F (γ 15 , γ 25 ) for AC and v F (γ 25 , γ 15 ) for ZZ The electronic spectrum of a one-dimensional moiré superlattice in bilayer graphene has been studied previously within a valley-projected continuum theory The sublattice-diagonal γ 4 mass term commutes with both kinetic terms and displaces the layer-degenerate Dirac cones (Figure In the gaps opened by ν 14 we observe a manifold of weakly dispersive bands near zero energy. Although the ν 4 (SP ) cones overlap this gap significantly in ZZ, they can be shifted in energy by tuning ν 32 . For ZZ, pairs of nearly degenerate modes remain weakly dispersive over half the critical ring width and disperse with opposite velocities at the ring edges. Two sets of these together span the full critical ring, and summing over the two inequivalent valleys we find a total of eight modes with charge densities confined to the AA region (Figure Exact symmetries of the two-valley discrete DH model can be utilized to study valley coherence. Augmenting the ν(x) symmetries to preserve momentum, these are M x , trivially M y T , and their product C 2z T for ZZ and C 2x T , C 2y , and their product C 2z T for AC Low-energy approximate symmetries of the continuum DH model describe single-valley contributions to the mode count. Defining a single-valley 'time-reversal' T K to reverse momenta q about a Dirac point, the operator P K = τ z T K negates the spectrum in a single-valley 'particle-hole' symmetry. In AC, T K leaves the spectrum invariant due to the purely-imaginary kinetic terms, so the spectrum also exhibits chiral symmetry. In ZZ, the purely real kinetic energy terms produce a modified spectrum under T K , breaking chiral symmetry. Since the weakly-dispersing bands are not exactly at zero energy, this chiral symmetry doubles the mode count in AC, and particle-hole symmetry is consistent with the two sets of half ring-width bands found in ZZ. More precisely, the spectra at ±q 25 are related by the operator C 2x , which by commuting with all terms but γ 25 , preserves the energies while reversing q 25 . In AC this manifests in the low bands extending across the full q y width of the ring, and in ZZ it causes a low-energy approximate degeneracy of states at momenta ±q x on the critical ring. Conversely, the sublattice-even γ 15 is reversed via P K which also inverts the spectrum. This causes pairs of states at ±q x in AC and ±q y in ZZ to lie at opposite energies, completing a measure of two full-width bands per valley. The symmetries of the continuum DH model can be associated with an Altland Zirnbauer symmetry classification. From the local Hamiltonian H(x) = ty q y + ν(x), one can classify band manifolds by topological invariants computed at each value of k y . The ZZ Hamiltonian is a real operator which commutes with the complex conjugation operator K and therefore lies in class AI. AC commutes with C 2x K and anticommutes with τ z K, putting it into to class BDI. At fixed momentum k y , these one dimensional Hamiltonians depend on a single positionlike coordinate (x), so the bands of both structures are classified by a Z 2 topological index by ignoring the order 1/L commutator of ∂ ∂x with diagonalization of the RHS. The real part of the eigenvalues of the RHS determine evanescent growing and decaying solutions, and critical points correspond to the nullspace of M (x) = tx q x + ty q y + ν(x) i.e. the local Hamiltonian The one-dimensional moiré structures studied in this Letter support narrow band physics for sufficiently large superlattice periods without requiring fine-tuning to a magic angle condition. An extension of the discrete theory to two dimensions can describe the competition between the lattice and moiré periods with physical consequences that are inaccessible to the continuum theory but are important for any response of the system that is activated by chirality. The drift of the AB/BA peaks as a function of k y is reminiscent of anomalous transport in the Hall effect, although time-reversal symmetry here forbids a charge Hall conductance. Nevertheless, the breaking of M x in the AC structure allows anomalous transport for a neutral transverse dipole current consistent with time reversal symmetry, the active point symmetries and the low energy mode count. This work was supported by the Department of Energy under grant DE-FG02-84ER45118. The kinetic energy of the discrete DH model follows from the tight-binding model using a choice of cells shown in Figure where τ is the layer index, and A, B are the two sublattice sites. A Bloch phase of e iφ where φ ) is acquired at the end of the moiré supercell. It is useful to apply a gauge transformation U = e iφ n N ψ † n ψ n to distribute this phase accumulation evenly across the supercell, resulting in matrix representations (e iky a 2 + e -iky a 2 ) 0 0 (S1) for the Harper kinetic energy These can be written in the basis γ 15 , γ 25 with intracell term t 0 = γ 15 and intercell t(k) = t 15 γ 15 + t 25 γ 25 whose coefficients are tabulated in Table which transforms to the new gauge as from which we can drop the constant phase to write M x = ψ † n ψ N -n . The symmetries of the kinetic term t(k)ψ n+1 + t † ψ n-1 + t 0 ψ n can be written as combinations of M x (which effectively takes t → t † ), sublattice exchange σ x , layer exchange τ x , and complex conjugation K. Since ν(x) is invariant under any pair of M x , σ x , and τ x , we only consider operations with an even multiplicity of these operators. From Equation S1, it is clear that M x σ x K ≡ C 2z T which takes t → (t † ) † is a symmetry for both structures. Additionally, at k x = 0, the AC kinetic terms are invariant under σ x K and M x , which can be augmented to symmetries of ν(x) by combining with τ x to yield σ x τ x K ≡ C 2x T and M x τ x ≡ C 2y . In ZZ at k x = 0, K is trivial so we can split C 2z T into M x σ x ≡ M x and the trivial M y T . The gauge dependence of M x makes it easy to see why in AC C 2y does not commute with the coexisting antiunitary symmetries. If M x contains an x-dependent phase U (x), commuting with K takes U (x) → U * (x). The presence of C 2y guarantees that there exists a valley-mixed eigenbasis, which credits the multiplicity of the degeneracy to valley index. Given that C 2z T is a simultaneous symmetry that preserves valley index, this does not exclude the possibility of a valley polarized basis. Nevertheless, we find a period-three oscillation in the density of certain operators, γ 14 for instance (Figure The interlayer potential is a Fourier series of the form Using Fourier analysis to fix AA, AB, and BA stacking at x = 0, 2π/3L, and 4π/3L respectively, the matrix-valued coefficients evaluate to The Fourier series with these coefficients can be rearranged into To linearize the kinetic energy, we expand the kinetic energy t + t † + t 0 in small momentum q about a Dirac point, i.e. (k x , k y ) = (4π/3, 0) for AC and (0, 4π/3) for ZZ. ) + e ( -ikxa ) + e ( -ikx a ) + e (-iky a ) + e (-iky a LOCAL SPECTRA AND THE Z2 INVARIANT From this linearized model, we can examine the energies under the addition of each term in ν(x). Letting q 15 , q 25 denote the components of q paired with γ 15 , γ 25 , the anticommuting kinetic terms yield the expected Dirac cone Adding a constant ν 4 γ 4 term, which commutes with both components of the kinetic energy, we encounter cones split by energy ±ν 4 With a ν 14 γ 14 term, the spectra along the q 15 and q 25 axes become which in the first case describes hyperbolas opening a gap around zero energy, and in the second case is a cone split by ν 2 4 + ν 2 14 enforcing point gap closures on the q 25 axis. Finally, with ν 32 γ 32 As ν(x) modulates the amplitudes of the mass terms across the moiré, the magnitude of ν 2 4 + ν 2 14 and ν 32 changes as a function of x, moving the q 25 location of the gap closures. Conversely, for every q 25 within the critical ring, there is some combination of mass amplitudes within the moiré where the spectrum admits zero eigenvalues. These gap closures along the spatial dimension occur in the AB/BA regions at q 25 = 0 and move outward to the AA region as q 25 approaches q c , shown in Figure where x = 0 is defined as the AA region. Another natural location for gap closures in the moiré is the pure AA stacking. Choosing q so that q 2 15 + q 2 25 = q 2 c , the local mass configuration of the AA region always supports zero eigenvalues. A topological invariant classifying spectra as a function of k y is calculated over the local spatially varying spectra. Figure where U (x) has as columns the two occupied states below the gap of H(x) = γ 15 q 15 + γ 25 q 25 + ν(x) and x n ranges from 0 to L. The gap closures in local spectra correspond to mass inversions that localize zero modes found in the full moiré spectrum. The critical ring localizes a zero mode on AA stacking as ν 14 changes sign, and the AB/BA-peaked modes localize where the combined mass ν 2 4 + ν 2 14 crosses ν 2 32 + (v F q 25 ) 2 . To write an effective solution for the AA-peaked modes, we begin with the Dirac equation at zero energy i tx ∂ ∂x ψ = -(q y ty + ν(x))ψ x + q 2 y = q 2 c where the gap closes on AA. (f) AC spectrum at qy > qc, index 0. We can transform this equation to center on eigenstates of arbitrary q x by taking ψ → e -iqx ψ. i tx ∂ ∂x e -iqx ψ = -(q y ty + ν(x))e -iqx ψ i tx ∂ ∂x ψ = -(q x tx + q y ty + ν(x))ψ Here M (x) is the spatially varying local Hamiltonian at a fixed q x , q y . Now we multiply both sides by the inverse of i tx to obtain the differential equation Assuming the moiré period is long, an operator varying at the rate of ν(x) approximately commutes with the differential operator, with a neglibile commutator of order 1/L. Therefore we can diagonalize M (x) without significantly altering the left hand side. The real part of the eigenvalues of the right hand side describe evanescent growth and decay in decoupled solutions, so we look for branches crossing zero from positive to negative to describe localized peaks. A zero eigenvalue of M (x) automatically guarantees one of tx M (x) because M (x) annihilates the corresponding spinor, and these account for all the zero eigenvalues of the RHS because tx is invertible. Furthermore, the real part of the RHS eigenvalues are independent of q x ∂ψ ∂x = i v 2 F tx (q x tx + q y ty + ν(x))ψ F (q x + tx (q y ty + ν(x)))ψ because commuting term i v 2 F q x adds a pure imaginary term to the RHS eigenvalues. We can conclude that at fixed k y , a zero eigenvalue of M (x) at any q x guarantees a critical point in the evanescent part of the solution. In the gapped region of AC, this implies critical points in AA as well as the drifting positions ν 2 4 + ν 2 14 -ν 2 32 + (v F q 25 ) 2 = 0. For ZZ, there must be critical points in AA, accompanied by a range at zero near SP due the SP cones crossing the gap. Plots of the spectra (Figure The physical measure of electron states in the weakly dispersing manifolds can be determined by the width of the critical ring 2q c = 2t /( v F ) with v F = √ 3at/2 and the area of the supercell A = √ 3 2 aL. The spacing of states across the critical ring in k space is 2π/L y , so that the number of states across the critical ring is 4L y t /(2π v F ) which includes a factor of two for spin. Dividing by area and letting t /t = 0.1, a = 1.42 × 10 -8 cm, and L = 1800a, we obtain a density of for each type of mode (AA or AB/BA). This is about 1/7 the density required to fill four bands in magic angle twisted bilayer graphene, n = 6.4 × 10 12 cm -2 [S1]. In terms of the strain u, which is about √ 3a/L, the carrier density to fill four bands is For L = 1800, the strain about u = .001. If the strain is increased to the order of u = .01, the corresponding carrier density is 9.7 × 10 12 e/cm 2 . matrices derived from the nearest neighbor tight-binding kinetic energy for the individual graphene layers [15] and ν(x) is a spatially modulated interlayer coupling.