Neuromorphic computing (NC) is gaining wide acceptance as a potential technology to achieve low-power intelligent devices. To realize NC, researchers investigate various types of synthetic neurons and synaptic devices such as memristors and spintronic domain wall (DW) devices. In comparison, DW-based neurons and synapses have potentially higher endurance. However, for realizing low-power devices, DW motion at low energiestypically below pJ/bit-are needed. Here, we demonstrate domain wall motion at current densities as low as 10 6 A/m 2 by tailoring the -W spin Hall material. With our design, we achieve ultra-low pinning fields and current density reduction by a factor of 10 4 . The energy required to move the domain wall by a distance of about 20 m is 0.4 fJ, which translates into energy consumption of 0.4 aJ/bit for a bit-length of 20 nm. With a meander domain wall device configuration, we have established a controlled DW motion for synapse applications and have shown the direction to make ultra-low energy spin-based neuromorphic elements. Artificial intelligence (AI) is now widely being used, ranging from smartphone applications to self-driving cars. To overcome the high power consumption of AI applications, researchers are investigating neuromorphic computing (NC). Since the human brain operates at 20 W and performs intelligent tasks that supercomputers perform by consuming kilo-watts of power, NC (a term for brain-inspired computing) is expected to be energy efficient. For practical implementation of NC, researchers need to invent the electronic analogues of neurons (processing units of the brain) and synapses (memory units of the brain). Ferroelectric, resistive and magnetic materials have been proposed for designing synapse Amongst several devices for neuromorphic computing based on charge and spin, domain wall (DW) devices are one of the least power consuming For experimental realization of low-power neuromorphic computing based on DW devices, it is very important to shortlist a suitable driving force for the DWs. External magnetic field, which has been investigated as a stimulus for driving the DWs along a nanotrack The critical current density for driving the DWs in ferromagnetic (FM) wire can further be reduced using a spin-orbit torque (SOT) from the adjacent heavy metal (HM) layer of high spin-orbit coupling In this article, we have carried out material engineering and device designs to conceive lowpower synapses and neurons and showed energy consumption in the order of aJ/bit. Our spin Hall material enables us to move DW at a current density, as low as 10 6 A/m 2 , which is 10000 times less than the values reported in the literature. We also report device designs that enable us to stop the DWs precisely, a desired feature for achieving non-stochastic synaptic devices. The HP and low-power deposition of W results in a granular structure of W layer. The granularity may be transferred to the ferromagnetic (FM) layer and introduce defects, which cause the stochastic DW motion and higher critical current density cm is generally considered as the baseline for the  phase. Most of the samples with HP-W show  phase, as indicated in the graph. We made film stacks of the type shown in figure This material design was expected to solve the problems of power consumption, Joule heating and TMR. The details of the deposition conditions and sample characterization techniques are presented in methods section. The roughness data and hysteresis loops of the film stack are shown in the supplementary section. All the samples exhibited square hysteresis loops in the out-of-plane (OOP) direction indicating the presence of a perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) at as-deposited state, which is generally attributed to the presence of W in -phase The resistivity of samples LP6 and HP6 was found to be 106 and 132 cm respectively, which suggests that sample HP6 possesses the -phase. The resistivity of the stacks with combined HP-W and LP-W layers (called dual W layer henceforth), showed an increase in the resistivity with the thickness of the HP-W layer and shows a maximum of 166 cm for HP-W (2.5 nm)/LP-W (3.5 nm) (data point is presented in supplementary). The samples with HP-W (6 nm) and HP-W (3 nm)/LP-W (3 nm) (sample HP3LP3) exhibit resistivity more than the baseline value and hence possess the -phase. Samples with stack resistivity very close to 120 cm, LP6 and HP2LP4 as shown in figure shown beneath the respective images) applied and the strength of external magnetic field. For current-driven DW motion experiments, we fabricated micro-wires of dimensions 50 m × 10 m on the above samples The domain wall motion study involves (i) saturating the magnetization in the sample with a positive OOP magnetic field (~ 50 mT), (ii) applying a negative reversal field to nucleate a reverse domain, and (iii) applying current pulses to move the domain walls (in some cases, under an additional external magnetic field). In the case of HP6, the DW could not be nucleated and magnetization (along +z or -z axis) covering the whole microwire was considered as initial state. When the reversal field was increased gradually, a sharp switching of the magnetization covering the whole devices was obtained. Under the influence of a current pulse, the magnetic field required to observe the sharp magnetization switching of magnetization was reduced. However, even for very large current densities of 5×10 In the case of devices of HP3LP3 sample, it was possible to nucleate DW by applying a much smaller negative field (-1.65 mT). Once a DW was nucleated, we applied current pulses along the microwire as shown in figure The domain walls moved by shorter distances and more pulses were required for travelling the total distance of 50 m, at a low current density. Moreover, a small OOP magnetic field was applied during the measurements. The number of pulses required to displace domain walls (by ~50 m) reduced significantly, when OOP magnetic field was increased by 0.1 mT. For the first time, DW motion at such a low current density has been observed, which is significantly new with a high potential for application. Consequently, we carefully studied the role of external magnetic field on the DW motion. Figures of use only at 5 × 10 11 A/m 2 in sample HP6. directions, +z and -z). Interestingly, the DW velocity increases with the current density only for a certain combination of current and magnetic field directions. For the negative current pulses under a negative magnetic field, DW moves even for a low current density of 10 6 A/m 2 and a magnetic field of -1 mT. On the contrary, for positive current pulses and negative OOP magnetic field (figure More importantly, the velocity decreases with the increase in current density in this case. Similarly, for positive current pulses and a positive magnetic field, the DW velocity increases with the current density, for magnetic fields above 1 mT. These results suggest that the negative OOP field assists the negative current and opposes the positive current and so on. In this study, the direction of DW motion due to SOT is consistent with the previous reports where ħ, θ SH , J, e, M s and t refer to the reduced the Planck constant, SHA, current density in HM layer, electronic charge, saturation magnetization and thickness of FM layer, respectively. Moreover, m ̂ and σ ̂ represent the direction of magnetization inside the DW and spin current. Therefore, when a current is flowing through the HM layer, it causes an OOP magnetic field and the direction of this OOP magnetic field depends on the direction of the current. In addition, the externally applied OOP magnetic field either assists or opposes the DW motion depending upon its relative direction with respect to OOP magnetic field due to SOT. In our experiments, we have not applied any in-plane (IP) magnetic field and therefore, the DW motion is completely field-free (except for a negligible Hz). It may be argued that the domain wall motion at 10 6 A/m 2 is achieved due to the presence of an external magnetic field of -1 mT and it may not be practical. Firstly, such a small Hz of few mT can be easily implemented in devices using the stray field from the reference layers in an MTJ design. Moreover, it can also be seen from figure Therefore, this result is unique to the dual W layer design and is useful for designing lowenergy synapse, where small current pulses can move the domain walls by short distances. Being able to drive domain walls at low current densities is a significant result for synapse and neuron applications in low-energy spin-based neuromorphic computing. While there are many advances in terms of high-speed current-driven domain wall motion To achieve stochastic and non-stochastic synapses, we investigated straight microwires and also a new type of meander microwires. In the meander microwires (shown in figure To systematically study the effect of d, we made samples with various d such as 50%, 40% and 15%. Figure The insertion of LP-W spin Hall layer between HP-W spin Hall layer and ferromagnetic layer has resulted in the reduction in the intrinsic pinning in the FM layer, without compromising the spin Hall angle. This, in turn, helped in reducing the current density for driving DWs by an order of 10 4 than the values reported in the literature. The corresponding energy consumption can be reduced to 0.4 aJ/bit, which is significantly lower than all the reported studies. Moreover, we have proposed and demonstrated the design of meander nanowire for realizing the stochastic and non-stochastic DW synapses. The pinning probability can be tuned based on the geometrical design of these pinning centres. These observations provide the avenue for the ultra-energy efficient DW based neuromorphic computing devices. We have used DC/RF Singulus Timaris sputtering tool to deposit the samples, which had the following layer structure: "Si wafer/ W (6 nm)/ Co40Fe40B20 (1 nm)/ MgO (~1 nm)/ Ru (2 nm)". The sample structures are shown in Table Such a low power deposition resulted in a very low deposition rate of 0.03 nm/s. As shown in We used atomic force microscopy (AFM) for estimating the surface roughness of all the films from area scan of 1 m × 1 m. We employed standard four-probe method for measuring the energy consumption in our devices is arising from the dual-W spin Hall layer, which helps to reduce the intrinsic pinning field in addition to providing a reasonable spin Hall efficiency. The results demonstrated in this paper provide a path to achieve ultra-low energy neuromorphic spintronics.