We present electrical resistance measurements of elemental yttrium on bulk and film samples, and both exhibit superconductivity at very high pressures. We show that the pressure dependence of the superconducting transition temperature above 100 GPa is in good agreement with the predicted F ddd phase by Chen et al. [Phys. Rev. lett. 109, 157004 (2012)]. This result together with a new Rietveld refinement made on X-ray data at 123 GPa from Samudrala et al. [J. Phys. Condens. Matter 24, 362201 (2012)] offer strong evidence that the atomic structure of yttrium above 100 GPa is orthorhombic F ddd. Furthermore, our process of evaporating yttrium film directly on a diamond anvil is expected to be a valuable asset for future synthesis of new superhydride superconductors. For almost a century, rare-earth elements have mobilized a considerable amount of effort, experimental and theoretical, for understanding their electronic structure, transport properties, and magnetic properties. By decreasing their atomic number and under compression, most of the rare-earth elements show a common structural-transition sequence: hexagonal close-packed (hcp) → samarium-type (Sm-type) → double hexagonal close-packed (dhcp) → face-centered cubic (fcc) which is driven by an increase of the d -band occupancy resulting from s-d electron transfer We measure resistivity and re-analyse previous X-ray data Yttrium undergoes a series of structural transitions under pressure: hexagonal close-packed (hcp) → samariumtype (Sm-type) → double hexagonal close-packed (dhcp) → distorted face-centered cubic (dfcc) at approximately 13, 25 and 50 GPa, respectively Here, we present resistivity measurements in bulk and film yttrium up to 164 GPa. We show that our results of T c above 100 GPa are in good agreement with the calculation for both oF 16 -F ddd and hP 3 -P 3 1 21 phases High pressure experiments were carried out using three home-designed diamond anvil cells (DAC) made of MP35N superalloy and equipped with 50 μm culet, type Ia and IIas (ultra low fluorescence) diamond anvils. Cells TM8 and TM10 were loaded with a bulk piece of yttrium of ∼ 30 × 20 ×3 μm 3 cut from a lump (Alfa Aesar, 99.9% pure) and a flat yttrium wire (3 μm thickness), respectively (cf. photographs Fig. Electrodes in cell JB1 and TM8 allowed us to measure electrical resistivity in four-point configurations while TM10 was measured using a pseudo-four-point method. Electrical resistance measurements were done with an acresistance bridge SIM921, Stanford Research Systems using 10 to 100 μA excitation. High pressures between anvils were held by composite gaskets consisting of an indented piece of steel (SS 301) insulated in the center with a mixture of cubic boron nitride and epoxy. Ammonia borane (BNH 6 ) was used in all cells as a pressure transmitting medium and also with the aim to serve as a hydrogen donor in future experiments for synthesizing new superhydride superconductors We find metallic behaviour in both bulk and film samples indicative of similar quality. The insets of Fig. Both the film and the bulk samples show superconductivity at low temperatures. Figs In order to closely compare yttrium bulk and film properties, we have extracted the onset, T onset c , the midpoint, T mid-point c , and the point where R(T ) reaches zero T zero-point c as demonstrated in Fig. We observe very good agreement of T c (P ) with previous data in the pressure range up to 100 GPa Above 100 GPa, we observe lower values of T c compared to Deng and Schilling 12 for both our film and bulk samples. Whilst Deng and Schilling 12 observe a broad maximum centred around 150 GPa, we find a slight decrease of T c with pressure in our film samples above 100 GPa with T c approximately 3 K lower than Deng and Schilling 12 at 160 GPa. Our bulk samples exhibit T c approximately 2 K lower than Deng and Schilling 12 at 160 GPa. Whilst pressure gradients are certainly present in our samples (and to a lesser extent in the measurements of Deng and Schilling 12 due to the larger culets used) these pressure gradients cannot easily explain the decrease in T c observed in our film samples above 100 GPa. The pressure gradient in our film samples at 160 GPa is very unlikely to be large enough such that parts of the sample are at 80 GPa where T c , according to Deng and Schilling 12 , matches our value at 160 GPa. In fact, the pressure gradient as measured by diamond Raman across the whole sample including the parts outside the culet is less than 13 GPa. In addition, the superior resolution of the electrical measurements on our film samples gives us high confidence that we are probing the bulk of our sample at the pressure on the culet. We find that the deviation from the normal state is less than 10 -4 above T onset c (cf. grey arrow in Fig. In summary, we observe a slightly lower T c compared to Deng and Schilling 12 . Yet, both our measurements and those of Deng and Schilling 12 show a marked deviation from the linear increase of T c (P ) observed in the dfcc phase between 50 GPa to 100 GPa. In fact, our film samples show a reduction of T c (P ) above 100 GPa in excellent agreement with the values calculated for the predicted F ddd and P 3 1 21 phases 10 . Whilst this agreement might be coincidental, the general trend of T c (P ) observed by us and Deng and Schilling 12 is in rough agreement with the calculation. In order to distinguish between the two candidate phases, we re-analyse previous XRD data by Samudrala et al. We have shown that our experimental values of T c match well the predicted ones for oF 16 -F ddd and hP 3 -P 3 1 21. However, the similar T c predictions for oF 16 -F ddd and hP 3 -P 3 1 21 prevent us from discriminating between the two phases. To do so, we have FIG. Here, we plot the data of Hamlin et al. In summary, we show that both superconducting temperatures in yttrium under megabar pressures and reanalysis of X-ray results provide experimental evidence of the predicted F ddd phase. This result also highlights the reliability of structure search methods and calculations of superconductivity (using evolutionary algorithms in conjunction with density functional theory) and encourage such advanced theoretical work in searching for novel high-pressure phases. Furthermore, the electronic properties of yttrium film is found to be similar to yttrium bulk sample. This opens a new route in the quest for studying new room temperature superconductors, such as such as YH 9 , amongst other superhydrides. Indeed, film evaporation would allow a more accurate control of the sample size and would help to reach the ideal stoichiometry in the synthesis of new superhydride superconductors. This appendix provides additional information on pressure cells as well as further data. 