DW structures in soft magnetic tracks. A in-plane DW can be stabilized in one of two states, transverse domain wall (TDW) or vortex domain wall (VDW) (Figure 1b), depending on the chosen material and structure, especially on thickness (t) and the width (w) of the track. Note that VDWs can have clockwise or counter-clockwise winding (CW, CCW) and up (+z) or down (-z) core polarity, generally degenerate in energy.. In this article, the labels CW-up or CWdown refer to VDW with CW winding and core polarity +z or -z, and similarly for CCW structures. Unless noted, DWs are head-to-head. The phase diagram for the magnetic VDW CCW-up DMI a) b) d) c) VDW CCW-up No DMI TDW DMI y (nm) x (nm) CW-up CCW-up CCW-down CW-down no DMI with DMI The effect of damping-like spin-orbit torque (DL SOT) on magnetic domain walls (DWs) in in-plane magnetised soft tracks is studied analytically and with micromagnetic simulations. We find that DL SOT drives vortex DWs, whereas transverse DWs, the other typical DW structure in soft tracks, propagate only if the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) is present. The SOT drive can add to, and be more efficient than, spin-transfer torque (STT), and so may greatly benefit applications that require in-plane DWs. Our analysis based on the Thiele equation shows that the driving force arises from a cycloidal distortion of the DW structure caused by geometrical confinement or DMI. This distortion is higher, and the SOT more efficient, in narrower, thinner tracks. These results show that the effects of SOT cannot be understood by simply considering the effective field at the center of the structure, an ill-founded but often-used estimation. We also show that the relative magnitude of STT and DL SOT can be determined by comparing the motion of different vortex DW structures in the same track. Introduction. First observed in 1985 We determined the ideal w and t to get the fastest DW propagation by repeating the simulation and calculating the final velocity for various t and w, shown in Figure The DW mobility is lower than in perpendicular systems. For example, a Néel DW in a perpendicularly-magnetized track with the same parameters as Figure where G is the gyrotropic vector, v the velocity, D the dissipation matrix, and F the sum of other forces like SOT (I SOT ) or the repulsion of a VDW core by the track edge (I edge ). These are all functions of a given spin distribution (see suppl. mat.). G only has a z component, J 8 = ±2L 9 # , $ : # M for VDWs (sign given by the core polarization) or J 8 = 0 for TDWs. D and I SOT were calculated from the spin distributions at rest obtained with micromagnetic simulations, with I SOT given by an integral over the track surface: Where e is the elementary charge and Y is x or y. The repulsion of a VDW core by the edge is approximated by a Hooke's spring force In the steady state, the VDW propagates constantly along x with a velocity given by ] 0 = @ SOT * A ) ** under the Thiele forces sketched in Figure = 0 (eq. 2). In contrast, P SOT 0 for a VDW is non-zero near the vortex core (Fig. The Thiele equation can be used to understand the variation of the velocity with track size (Fig. Velocity limitation of VDWs. The Thiele equation can be used to estimate the maximum velocity limit imposed by the VDW expulsion. In the steady state, the final position in y should be less than the edge (w/2): , where the signs +/-correspond to CCW/CW windings. The maximum current density and maximum velocity can be deduced: where a 1 = bN SOT 1 b/! . DMI only changes significantly Ix. Therefore, as in the micromagnetic simulations, we find that CW-down VDWs can be faster than CCW-down, as a larger current density can be applied without expelling the VDW. On the other hand, for up VDWs, it is the CCW-up that is the favorable configuration, as N SOT 0 and N SOT ? have opposite sign and J 8 is negative. For tail-to-tail VDWs, J 8 and N SOT ? are the same as for head-to-head, but N SOT 0 is of opposite sign. Therefore, e.g. a tail-to-tail CW-down VDW is unfavorable. While without DMI there are two optimal configurations, with DMI, one of them will be preferable. As DMI decreases Ix for all DWs, the CCW-up moves the most efficiently. This velocity limitation can be overcome by using current pulses shorter than the expulsion time As the FL SOT is mathematically equivalent to an external field along y, it cannot drive the DW in a steady state motion, but it can distort it and induce transient and reversible motion x (nm) spins along +y, pushing the core of a head-to-head VDW upwards. The larger leftwards motion results from the gyrotropic effect and a larger initial vy. After the transient motion, the steady state velocity is unchanged (≲ 1%). The increase of y deviation reduces, however, the current threshold for VDW expulsion, and so a lower c is preferable (i.e. Pt rather than Ta). For core polarity +z, which move leftwards, the same observations apply (left panel). We study the effects of STT below the Walker threshold assuming, for simplicity, that the non-adiabatic STT is zero (β = 0) in the micromagnetic simulations. Considering Pt as the HM, the current density in CoFeB, ! ST , is estimated to be 10% of that in the Pt 18 Suppl. Mat. . As before, we compare the trajectories under DL SOT and STT (green lines in Fig. STT either enhances or reduces the gyrotropic force in y depending on the relative signs of ] 0 and j. For -z core polarity, ] 0 > 0 and STT increases [ V1WXY , and vice-versa for +z core polarity. The effect of the winding, which determines the sign of N !BC ? , is as before. Therefore, there is an optimal VDW configuration with minimal [ V1WXY (CCWup for our parameters). STT increases the final velocity of up VDWs and slows the down VDWs. Thus, it is possible to choose a configuration of VDW that minimizes the y deviation and maximizes velocity. An interesting consequence is that, by comparing the velocity of different VDW types in the same track (e.g. +z versus -z core polarity), it is possible to evaluate the relative magnitudes of SOT and STT in the material, for which no direct measurement exists. DWs in in-plane magnetized tracks can be driven by SOT with an efficiency that depends on their structure, the size of the track, and the magnitude of DMI. The driving force arises from a cycloidal distortion of the DW structure caused by DMI or, in VDWs, also by geometrical confinement in thinner and narrower tracks. In the absence of DMI, only VDWs in thin and narrow tracks propagate. These findings underline that the effects of SOT may not be assessed simply from the ( )* at the center of the structure. The SOT drives different VDW types in opposite directions, which can be used to estimate the relative magnitude of SOT and STT from the mobilities of different VDWs types. Due to the gyrotropic force, the vortex core in VDW is pushed against the edge, which limits the maximum applicable current density. FL SOT increases the transversal deviation and thus limits further the VDW velocity. Using the parameters of the MgO/CoFeB/Pt system, we estimated that the VDW velocity by SOT may reach 1.2 m/s at 10 GA/m 2 for VDWs with or without DMI. This is three times faster than STT driven velocity, however 65 times smaller than the same system in the perpendicular magnetized configuration. For some inplane DW structures, the effects of STT and SOT add up, resulting in an even higher velocity. These findings indicate that applications that require in-plane DWs, such as the manipulation of magnetic beads with DWs 