Small displacement methods have been successfully used to calculate the lattice dynamical properties of crystals. It involves displacing atoms by a small amount in order to calculate the induced forces on all atoms in a supercell for the computation of force constants. Even though these methods are widely in use, to our knowledge, there is no systematic discussion of optimal displacement directions from the crystal's symmetry point of view nor a rigorous error analysis of such methods. Based on the group theory and point group symmetry of a crystal, we propose displacement directions, with an equivalent concept of the group of k, deduced directly in the Cartesian coordinates rather than the usual fractional coordinates, that maintain the theoretical maximum for the triple product V spanned by the three displacements to avoid possible severe roundoff errors. The proposed displacement directions are generated from a minimal set of irreducible atomic displacements that keep the required independent force calculations to a minimum. We find the error in the calculated force constants explicitly depends on the inverse of V and inaccuracy of the forces. Test systems such as Si, graphene, and orthorhombic Sb2S3 are used to illustrate the method. Our symmetry-adapted atomic displacement method is shown to be very robust in treating low-symmetry cells with a large 'aspect ratio' due to huge differences in lattice parameters, use of a large vacuum height, or a very oblique unit cell due to unconventional choice of primitive lattice vectors. It is expected that our atomic displacement strategy can be used to address higher-order interatomic interactions to achieve good accuracy and efficiency. Lattice dynamical studies In Section II we provide the full details of our displacement method to make judicious atomic displacements for all crystal symmetries. Section III presents an error analysis for the force constants. Results are shown in Section IV. Finally we conclude in Section V. Appendix A illustrates more clearly how V may scale poorly with the lattice parameters or the choice of oblique unit cell for a few selected cases. where the ith column of A is taken from the basic lattice translation vector a i of a crystal. For simplicity we use A to describe a primitive cell but it could be easily extended to deal with a conventional unit cell or even a nonconventional unit cell. A space group operator {R|t} (in the Seitz notation) corresponds to a rotation matrix in the Cartesian coordinates, which is restricted to either p or p for p = 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6. p means a p-fold rotation in the international notation, while p means an improper rotation (i.e., a p-fold rotation followed by an inversion). The 230 space groups are built on top of the 32 crystallographic point groups (see e.g., Refs. In the small displacement method We now review how the force constant matrix Ψ ij between the ith atom in the primitive cell and the jth atom in the supercell may be calculated. This is achieved by sequentially displacing the ith atom in the primitive cell by three displacement vectors λd i k in the Cartesian coordinates, k = 1, 2, 3, where d i k is a unit vector. λ is the magnitude of the displacement which is typically 0.010 ∼ 0.015 Å. For each displacement vector λd i k , we calculate the induced forces on all atoms in the supercell, in particular the induced force F j k on the jth atom, k = 1, 2, 3. If we make F j k to constitute the kth column of a matrix F j where and similarly we let d i k to constitute the kth column of a displacement matrix d i where then the required force constant Φ ij can be calculated from From Eq. 5 we see that the displacement vectors d i k do not need to point along the conventional Cartesian axes but in any directions as long as d i is not singular. A first level of a possible reduction of the number of calculations can be made if an inequivalent atom in the primitive cell, where its position is commonly known as the Wyckoff position, could be mapped under space group operations to its equivalent atoms in the primitive cell, resulting in a 'star of k', which is understood to be a set of atoms. We note that the concept of the star of k is originally defined in the reciprocal space R c is as defined in Eq. 2 and {R|t} maps the ith atom to the i th atom, and the jth atom to the j th atom. R T c is the matrix transpose of R c . With this strategy alone (we call this the 6-displacement method), if there are N 0 inequivalent atoms in a primitive cell, then only 6N 0 calculations are needed. However, it may still be possible to reduce the 6 calculations for each of N 0 inequivalent atoms using the site symmetry on the ith atom. The operation {R|t} also reshuffles the positions of all atoms in the supercell, as well as to rotate the induced forces caused by d i 1 on all atoms in the supercell. This crucial observation implies that without doing an independent (probably expensive) induced force calculation due to d i 2 , we are able to just use the information due to d i 1 to give us all force information for a virtual d i 2 displacement. If there is yet another operation {R|t} that could rotate d i 1 to d i 3 , then again an independent displacement of d i 3 does not need to be carried out. However, in the case when there is no extra operation in a site symmetry that can generate an independent d i 2 or d i 3 , then we have no choice but to carry out necessary separate displacements and find the induced forces to fill up the necessary force field for the Φ ij calculation. In an elegant implementation, the displacement in the Cartesian coordinates d i k can be generated from the directions defined in the fractional coordinates g i k where . g i k may be chosen from a set of S that consists of nonzero vectors of the form (e 1 , e 2 , e 3 ) T , where e n = 0, ±1 for n = 1, 2, 3 for simplicity. By systematically applying the elements of the site symmetry to vectors in S, one may find a minimal set S i that contains between one to three vectors. S i will generate three g i k that form a nonzero determinant for d i . This implementation has a slight drawback that may be illustrated by two similar orthorhombic systems Bi 2 S 3 (1, 1, 0) T . However, these two directions in the fractional coordinates correspond to (a, -b, 0) T and (a, b, 0) T in the Cartesian coordinates which subtend an angle not equal to an ideal angle of 90 • since a = b. The angle between the two displacements in the Cartesian coordinates is actually given by 2 tan -1 b a (see Appendix A for a detailed discussion). Hence if a is much larger than b, the two vectors d i 1 and d i 2 are nearly parallel to each other in the Cartesian coordinates. However the operation is a physical reflection in the xz plane and hence it is possible to force the angle between the two displaced vectors to be exactly 90 • , thereby achieving the largest determinant for d i of 1 for matrix inversion in Eq. 5. In another example, a graphene sheet of a lattice constant a and a vacuum thickness c may use g i 1 = (1, 0, 1) T to generate g i 2 = (0, 1, -1) T and g i 3 = (-1, -1, 1) T with the point group operations. This means only one independent force calculation is to be performed. However, an analysis shows that V = det (c/a) 2 for a large c/a ratio. With To develop a sense of how the inaccuracy of forces and V = det d i may affect the accuracy of force constants, we consider the force constants in the xy plane for the 4c site of the P nma space group. Here We then have If a b, then d i 1 and d i 2 are almost parallel to each other resulting in very similar forces F j 1 and F j 2 . If the force F j 1 due to d i 1 is not determined accurate enough, F j 2 will inherit the same inaccuracy since it is 'copied' from F j 1 through a symmetry operation, then Φ 2 ij will be inaccurate due to a large roundoff error that is amplified by a large geometry factor a 2 b 2 + 1 Now we present a method that will systematically deduce the displacement directions directly in the Cartesian coordinates for a forward difference scheme with the aim of maintaining a largest possible magnitude for the determinant of d i and a minimum number of independent displacements. The displacement method must also maintain the minimal number of independent displacements when a central difference scheme is used for an improved accuracy for Φ ij . For a central difference scheme, we need to displace the atoms in -d i k , k = 1, 2, 3 where d i k have been chosen for a forward difference scheme. We note that two operations are able to map d i k to -d i k : one is the inversion operator, and the other a 2-fold rotation. The task may at first seem arduous for all 32 crystallographic point groups (see Table Usually, the principal axis (the axis with the highest symmetry) is not pointing along the z axis but along a vector n characterized by the polar angle θ and azimuthal angle φ. To ease the discussion of the determination of d i k , we transform all operations R c to R c in the site symmetry according to Here R y (θ) [R z (φ)] is a rotation of angle θ (φ) around the y (z) axis. Under such transformation, the operation with the principal axis R n (η) will be mapped to R z (η) where the rotation axis is now along the z axis. This can be easily seen since R n (η) is transformed to R z (η) via Symmetry is the minimal number of displacements per atom for a central (forward) difference scheme. A. The first case First we consider the triclinic cell where there are two point groups C 1 (1) and C i (1). For C (1) the symmetry is so low that we simply propose to displace the ith atom in x+, y+, and z+, resulting in three independent displacements for a forward difference scheme. In this case, V = det d i attains its largest possible value of unity. For a central difference scheme, we need to displace the atom in x-, y-, and z-, resulting a total of six displacements. For C i (1), an inversion operator exists that could map d i k to -d i k hence we need to do the same number of displacements (i.e., 3) for both the forward and central difference schemes (see the third row of Table For the monoclinic cell there are three point groups to consider. We first consider C 2 (2), we propose to use a first displacement d i 1 = (0, -1, 1) T . Under a 2-fold rotation around the z axis, we generate a second displacement We exhaust all operations in this point group, hence we propose a second independent displacement vector d i 3 = (1, 0, 0) T . This choice makes V to attain its largest possible value of unity. For a central difference scheme, we need to displace the ith atom in -d i 1 independently since there is no operation in the site symmetry that is able to map d i 1 to its negative. However, the 2-fold rotation is able to map d i 3 = (1, 0, 0) T to its negative (-1, 0, 0) T . Hence the total number of displacements is three for the point group C 2 (2) instead of four for a central difference scheme. For the second point group C s (m). There is no operation that can map d i 1 and d i 3 to their negatives. Hence the number of independent displacements is four for a central difference scheme. The third point group to consider is C 2h . Since there is an inversion operator the number of displacements for the forward and central difference schemes are the same, which is two. For the next three point groups for the orthorhombic cells D 2 (222), C 2v (mm2), and D 2h (mmm), we simply need to displace an atom in This direction is obtained by maximizing a test vector (t, u, v) T and its images (t, -u, -v) (under a 2-fold rotation around the x-axis) and (-t, u, -v) (under a 2-fold rotation around the y-axis) thus forming a triple product of V = 4tuv. The magnitude of the displacement vector is constrained according to t 2 + u 2 + v 2 = 1. A standard Lagrange multiplier method gives a possible solution For D 2 and C 2v there is no operation that could map d i 1 to -d i 1 hence we need to do a total of two displacements for a central difference scheme. However, D 2h has an inversion operator that results in the same number (i.e., one) of independent displacement for both the forward and central difference schemes. For the next 24 point groups from C 4 (4) to O h (m3m) covering tetragonal, trigonal, hexagonal, and cubic cells, we note that we have either 3 or 3 or 4 or 4 that is able to generate d . For these point groups, using the Lagrange multiplier method, we find that a single displacement is able to give a maximum V of 4 √ 27 and 1 for C 4 and C 3 , respectively, with a test vector of 3 . In order to prepare d i 1 to be mapped under an existing C 2 operation (which is unfortunately missing in eight point groups C 4 , S 4 , C 4v , C 3 , C 3v , C 6 , C 3h , and C 6v ) to -d i 1 with the C 2 rotation axis pointing along (n x , n y , n z ) direction, we can find the values of t and u by solving the simultaneous equations t 2 + u 2 = 2 3 and n x t + n y u + nz √ 3 = 0. This is equivalent to solving a quadratic equation To see more clearly the nature of solutions to the quadratic equation, without loss of generality we assume the axis of rotation for C 2 is in the yz plane making an angle θ with the z axis where (n x , n y , n z ) = (0, sin θ, cos θ). This gives ). As θ is decreased from π 2 , two solutions will approach one another along the circumference of a circle and coincide with one another when θ becomes a critical angle θ c = sin -1 1 3 = 35.26 • and the solution is (t, u, v) = (0, -2 3 , 1 3 ). When θ < θ c , there is no real solution. Now we perform a detailed error analysis for the displacement method. We shall focus on Φ ij which is the 3 × 3 force constant matrix block between the ith atom and the jth atom based on Eq. 5. Since atom pairs are now understood, we suppress the index i in d i and index j in F j for forces in Eq. 5. We let the exact force F k to differ from the approximate force f k by an error term λ k that measures the intrinsic inaccuracies where The calculated force constant block with d is given by where Φ e is the exact force constant matrix and = [ 1 | 2 | 3 ]. Eq. 10 clearly shows that the error can be attributed by the intrinsic inaccuracy of the force and the inverse of d, which could potentially be large if d is near singular. In the absence of the exact force constant Φ e to calculate errors we rely on where d 0 is chosen to be with the largest possible V . We will study the inaccuracy of the calculated force constant as a function of V in the next section. To confirm the methodology outline above, we carry out density-functional theory (DFT) calculations within the local density approximation, with projector augmented-wave (PAW) pseudopotential as implemented in the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) For an estimate of in Eq. 11 without a full knowledge of the error of the induced forces, we proceed by assuming = 0 J, which is characterized by a single error parameter 0 and an appropriate J matrix. Our aim is to estimate 0 that measures the inaccuracy of the force by fitting the RHS of Eq. 11. We observe that in the limit when V is very small, the three displacement vectors d 1 , d 2 , and d 3 become closer and closer to one another and converge to 1 √ 3 (1, 1, 1) T . To maximize error it is therefore reasonable to assume 1 = ε 0 (1, -1, -1) T , 2 = 0 (-1, 1, -1) T , and 3 = 0 (-1, -1, 1) T . Under such assumption and with Eq 11 we obtain a rather good fit and deduce 0 = 3.7 × 10 -4 eV/ Å2 . This in ) turn gives a reasonable estimate of the force inaccuracy of λ 0 = 5.6 × 10 -6 eV/ Å. Fig. (SG # 191) are shown in Figs. In summary, we have proposed a systematic displacement method that guarantees a theoretical optimal vol- splitting ume V spanned by the displacement vectors to minimize possible severe roundoff errors for lattice dynamical studies. The concepts of the star of k and the group of k that are originally defined in the reciprocal space have been extended to real space to facilitate a practical implemen-tation of the method that is readily applied to all 32 crystallographic point groups and all 230 space groups. The method generates a minimal set of irreducible displacement vectors to keep the number of independent force calculations to a minimum. The error in the calculated force constants is shown to explicitly depend on the inverse of the volume V spanned by the displacement directions and the intrinsic accuracy in the induced forces. This justified the use of the Cartesian coordinates rather than the fractional coordinates to optimize V . Several test systems have been used to illustrate the method. The method is shown to be very effective in dealing cells with a large aspect ratio due to a huge difference in lattice parameters, cells with a large vacuum separation, and cells that are very oblique due to an unconventional choice of a primitive cell. We expect the strategies employed in this paper could be extended to deal with higher order interatomic interactions for efficiency and accuracy. VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENT