Different channels over which electrons scatter between parts of the Fermi surface are the key to various electronic quantum matters, such as superconductivity and density waves. We consider an effective model in higher dimensions where each of the two pockets in the original model maps to (the Landau levels of) two Dirac fermions. We discover an emergent channel when two Dirac fermions from different pairs annihilate, where the presence of a strong density wave is essential. We support our analysis with numerical calculations on model examples in the vicinity of ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic orders. We also discuss interesting consequences on electron interaction channels that beyond-mean-field fluctuations may induce. Introduction-Superconductors are extraordinary electronic quantum matters where the electrical resistance vanishes, and magnetic flux fields are expelled from the materials. Microscopically, the electrons near the Fermi surfaces form Cooper pairs following an electron pairing channel The situation becomes even more complicated when various intertwined orders are established in the phase diagrams in the vicinity of high-temperature superconductivity Here, we analyze the characteristics of electronic quantum matters in both weak and strong density waves in a unified theory. Our theory scheme relies on an effective model in higher dimensions where each of the original model's two pockets maps to (the Landau levels of) two Dirac fermions, where the small parameter is the density wave vector Q or Q -π instead of the density wave strength. While the results in weak density waves are consistent with the perturbative Fermisurface-nesting picture, we discover an emergent channel that engages both pockets simultaneously in strong density waves, where two Dirac fermions from different pairs annihilate as we illustrate in Fig. Model example near ferromagnetic order-Without loss of generality, we consider the following one-dimensional (1D) tight-binding model H 1D = H 0 + H DW : where c x,↑ and c x,↓ are the annihilation operators for spin-up and spin-down electrons, respectively. H 0 is a nearest-neighbor-hopping lattice model explicitly invariant under lattice translations, which are subsequently broken by the density waves in H DW . The system has a fixed electron density is the Fermi vector of the i th pocket (k F i > 0 (k F i < 0) for an electron (hole) pocket) given by the H 0 dispersion, see Figs. Numerical results on the average electron energy of H 1D as a function of Q are summarized in Fig. with momentum transfers 2k F 2 and 2k F 1 , respectively. In strong density waves, on the contrary, the energy minimum clearly shows a single optimal wave vector Q opt = 2k F 1 + 2k F 2 , while the features at the original nesting values 2k F 1 and 2k F 2 are largely suppressed, indicating that the separate scattering channels across their respective nesting vectors are no longer available, and merge into a single, new channel with momentum transfer 2k F 1 + 2k F 2 . The overall low-energy electronic degrees of freedom are reduced. What is the mechanism of this emergent channel with anomalous Q opt and the property of the resulting electronic quantum matter? Theory-The emergent channel occurs at relatively large density wave strengths. Therefore, we take the following theoretical approach for controlled analysis. For incommensurate Q, the physics of Eq. 1 is independent of φ 0 . If we regard φ 0 ≡ k y as the momentum in an extra ŷ dimension and sum over k y , the resulting twodimensional (2D) system with a magnetic field of flux density n Φ = Q/2π is equivalent to those of the original H 1D For the model parameters used in Fig. Thus, we have Q opt = 2k F in weak density waves consistent with the Fermi surface nesting theory and an anomalous Q opt = 4k F in strong density waves. Also, as long as the shift to the h 2D ( k) dispersion, e.g., the 2t sin(k x ) term, is not large enough to shuffle the zeroth and nonzero Landau levels, the condition for optimal filling in Eq. 3 holds, and we have These conclusions are fully consistent with our numerical results. We emphasize the Dirac fermions' crucial role in the emergent channel with anomalous Q opt , which is absent in conventional quadratic dispersions. For instance, we can map to an effective single-band 2D model with electron density n = 2k F /2π 1 and a magnetic field of flux density n Φ = Q/2π. Generally, the most energy-favorable Q opt simply fills the lowest Landau level and nothing else: Therefore, the usual nesting condition Q opt = 2k F holds universally irrespective of weak or strong density waves An interesting special case is when we have a hole pocket and an electron pocket with similar sizes in the initial H 0 , e.g., the electron density corresponds to the purple dotted line in Fig. → 0 and the momentum transfer of the emergent channel vanishes. For our argument in Eq. 3 to be valid through the Q → 0 limit [33], the two remaining Dirac nodes and thus their zeroth Landau levels should be at the same energy Expanding the Hamiltonian in Eq. 2 to linear orders q = k -k 0 around each Dirac node k 0 , we have h 2D ( q) = σ z v x q x + σ x v y q y , where v x and v y are the respective Fermi velocities (linear-k differentials) and their signs determine the chirality of the corresponding Dirac fermion for the Dirac-fermion Landau levels. Notably, (σ z ± iσ x )/2 is the raising and lowering operators among the σ y states, thus there exists a zeroth Landau level fully polarized in either σ y or -σ y depending on the chirality sgn(v x )sgn(v y ) yet irrespective of the details (k 0 , |v x |, and |v y |) of the Dirac fermion. Since the low-energy degrees of freedom and the subsequent emergent density waves are associated with the zeroth Landau level, they are limited to the corresponding σ y = ±1 sectors, labeled as s =→, ←, respectively. As the two Dirac fermions in the center annihilate and corresponding degrees of freedom move to higher energy in strong density waves, the remaining low-energy degrees of freedom and the momentum transfer of 2k F 1 + 2k F 2 imply that the emergent channel should relate to At the mean-field level, such a four-fermion term fully reduces to its fermion-bilinear descendants following Wick's theorem. Beyond the mean-field theory, e.g., in the presence of V Q fluctuations, the four-fermion interaction may achieve independent implications and describe scattering an electron pair into another. Model example near antiferromagnetic order-For density waves with wave vectors too large for a Landau-level point of view, we may separate Q into a large, commensurate component and a small, incommensurate component q 2π. Take the spin density waves near antiferromagnetic order Q = π + q, q/2π O(1) as an example: x,s,s Then, we define a x,s = c x,s for even x and a x,s = c x,-s for odd x, s =↑, ↓, which removes the (-1) x factor in H DW , and H 0 becomes: x,s,s -ta † x+1,s σ x ss a x,s -it a † x+3,s σ 0 ss a x,s + h.c.. Like before, we define φ 0 ≡ k y and map H 0 + H DW to a 2D effective model: with a magnetic field of flux density n Φ = q/2π O(1). This two-band model h 2D has n D = 4 Dirac nodes when λ q is small and n D = 2 Dirac nodes when λ q is large, see Fig. Next, we show an example where the emergent channel conserves momentum. Here, we exploit the k x displacement of the 2D theory's Dirac nodes away from the original 1D pockets in strong density waves: the two Dirac nodes are at k x = ±2π/3 and k y = π/3 for V q = 1 and λ q = ( √ 3 + 1)/2; the term 2t sin 3k x , t = 0.2 does not affect the Dirac nodes, yet gives rise to an asymmetric shift and thus two pockets with opposite carrier types in the 1D dispersion when the electron density n ∼ 1, see Fig. At last, we perform the inverse transformation back to the original c-fermion representation (with k x → k x + π transformation for σ x = -1), which shows two much larger pockets, see Fig. Discussions-Although we mainly focus our discussions on 1D examples for simplicity, we can generalize our methods and arguments straightforwardly to higher dimensions. The mean-field initial setup would make more sense, and the electronic quantum matter dominated by the emergent channels will be more stable. A heuristic case can decouple along orthogonal directions into multiple 1D systems similar to those in Eq. 1 or Eq. 7. Also, our work on two-dimensional density waves from a threedimensional perspective involving topological nodal lines and Weyl semimetals, etc., is in progress. Using the wave vectors as our controlled small parameter, our theoretical perspective via Dirac fermion Landau levels offers simple yet elegant insights towards electronic quantum matter properties in strong density waves and the breakdown of conventional perturbative approaches. The signature of the emergent channel is an anomalous Q opt momentum transfer that differs from the nesting vectors and should be sensitive to electron scattering experiments and change of electron density via either doping or gating. Also, additional electron interaction channels open up in the presence of fluctuating strong density waves, offering intuitive alternatives towards strongly-correlated electron quantum matters such as unconventional superconductivity.