Ultra-wide bandgap semiconductors are ushering in the next generation of high power electronics. The correct crystal orientation can make or break successful epitaxy of such semiconductors. Here it is discovered that single-crystalline layers of α-(AlGa)2O3 alloys spanning bandgaps of 5.4-8.6 eV can be grown by molecular beam epitaxy. The key step is found to be the use of m-plane sapphire crystal. The phase transition of the epitaxial layers from the α-to the narrower bandgap β-phase is catalyzed by the c-plane of the crystal. Because the c-plane is orthogonal to the growth front of the m-plane surface of the crystal, the narrower bandgap pathways are eliminated, revealing a route to much wider bandgap materials with structural purity. The resulting energy bandgaps of the epitaxial layers span a range beyond the reach of all other semiconductor families, heralding the successful epitaxial stabilization of the largest bandgap materials family to date. Since the middle of the last century, semiconductor materials have made a steady climb to the top of the periodic table to wider energy bandgaps. Starting from the early days of Ge, to the Si revolution, and the current wide-bandgap SiC and GaN materials, each new generation of semiconductors have enabled electronic, photonic, and sensing and actuation functions in regimes that were considered impossible before. Next generation electronics and photonics needs much larger bandgaps beyond the established material families. Ultra-wide bandgap (UWBG) semiconductor materials for power and microwave electronics and deep-UV photonics include AlN, BN, diamond, and Ga2O3 This leads to the intriguing question: can single phase and highly crystalline α-Al2O3 of bandgap Eg~8.8 eV, The orientation of the substrate crystal determines the subsequent crystal phases in unique ways in this UWBG material family. Homoepitaxial growth of α-Al2O3 films has been reported on c-, a-, and r-plane substrates using molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) The growth of β-Ga2O3 on c-plane sapphire substrates has been found to have the epitaxial relationship of (2 _ 01) β-Ga2O3 || (0001) sapphire The MBE growth of α-(AlxGa1-x)2O3 material family on m-plane sapphire has not been investigated in detail. However, Sn-doped α-Ga2O3 of bandgap ~5.3 eV on m-plane sapphire grown by mist-CVD exhibits a room-temperature electron mobility of 65 cm 2 /Vs at a high carrier density of n=1.210 18 cm -3 Symmetric XRD 2θ/ω scans of the samples are displayed in a logarithmic intensity scale in Fig. Figure To evaluate the strain in the epitaxial films, asymmetrical reciprocal space maps (RSMs) for 224 _ 0 reflections were taken. Figure Figure The XRD spectra showed the growth of single-phase α-(AlxGa1-x)2O3 films on mplane sapphire substrates. To investigate the atomic details of the crystal structures of the epitaxial layers, high angle annular dark field STEM (HAADF-STEM) images were taken on the cross-sectional α-(AlxGa1-x)2O3 samples for x= 1, 0.37, 0.22, and 0. All the images were viewed along the <0001> zone axis. Figure On the other hand, a clear contrast between the epitaxial film and the substrate is seen for the images of the α-(Al0.37Ga0.67)2O3, α-(Al0.22Ga0.78)2O3 and α-Ga2O3 samples [Figs. Figure Direct optical bandgap energies of the α-(AlxGa1-x)2O3 films were estimated from the relationship of (αhν) 2 versus (hν-Eg). As shown by the red filled circles in Fig. are the bandgap energies of α-Ga2O3 and α-Al2O3, by fitting the plot as depicted by the red dashed line. The value of b is estimated to be 1.1 eV. This experimental value agrees well with the theoretically calculated value of 1.37 eV, and proves the ultra-wide bandgap nature of the epitaxial layers available for bandgap engineering from 5.4 -8.6 eV. In conclusion, we have demonstrated the successful epitaxial stabilization of ultrawide bandgap single phase α-(AlxGa1-x)2O3 films over the entire composition range on mplane sapphire substrates by MBE by avoiding phase transformation by the choice of crystal orientation for epitaxy. Cross-sectional HAADF-STEM images reveal single-phase, single crystalline α-(AlxGa1-x)2O3 epitaxial films are formed, by avoiding the formation of c-plane facets. By varying the alloy composition, bandgap energies from ~5.4 eV up to 8.6 eV with a bowing parameter of 1.1 eV are achieved, making α-(AlxGa1-x)2O3 the largest bandgap epitaxial material family to date. If these layers can be controllably doped, it would pave the way for α-(AlxGa1-x)2O3-based high-power heterostructure electronic and photonic devices at bandgaps far beyond all materials available today. All films reported in this work were grown on double-side polished m-plane (101 _ 0) sapphire substrates in a Veeco Gen930 MBE system equipped with standard effusion cells for elemental Ga and Al, and a radio frequency (RF) plasma source for active oxygen species. The pressure in the growth chamber was ~10 -6 Torr during the growth runs. For the growth of α-(AlxGa1-x)2O3 films (x≥0.37), the input RF power and oxygen flow rate were fixed at 250 W and 0.50 sccm, respectively. The α-Al2O3 and α-(AlxGa1-x)2O3 films (1>x≥0.37) were grown for 2 hours at thermocouple substrate temperatures (Tsub) of 750 and 650 °C, respectively. The α-(AlxGa1-x)2O3 (x=0.22 and 0) samples were grown at Tsub=650 °C using the input RF power of 260 W and the oxygen flow rate of 0.23 sccm. The growth time of α-(Al0.22Ga0.78)2O3 and α-Ga2O3 were 3 hours, and 3 hours 13 minutes, respectively. The Al concentration (x) in the films was varied from 0 to 1 by regulating the beam equivalent pressures (BEPs) of Ga [(0-1.1) ×10 -8 Torr] and Al [(0-1.6) ×10 -8 Torr]. Before each growth, the m-plane sapphire substrates were subjected to an oxygen plasma treatment in the growth chamber for 10 min at Tsub=800 °C. Structural properties and surface morphology of the samples were characterized by XRD measurements, AFM, and STEM. The film thicknesses of the samples (x<1) were determined by XRR measurements, while SIMS was used to obtain the chemical impurity species as well as the thickness of the α-Al2O3 epitaxial layer, since there were no thickness fringes observed from the XRR profile for the α-Al2O3 film due to homoepitaxial growth. The film thicknesses were in the range of 56-84.3 nm. Table Cross-sectional TEM specimens were prepared using a FEI Strata 400 Focused Ion Beam (FIB) with a final milling step of 5 keV to reduce damage. Carbon and platinum protective layers were deposited prior to milling in order to minimize ion-beam damage. The samples were then examined by STEM, using an aberration corrected Titan Themis operating at 300 keV. Data and materials availability: All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. Additional data related to this paper may be requested from the authors 14) On the other hand, m-plane, which is perpendicular to the c-plane, is expected to have less chance to form the c-plane facets and allow the growth of phase-pure α-Ga2O3. 