Two-mode valence electron configuration of carbon atoms lays the foundation of the unique two-mode amorphous state of the monoatomic carbon solid. From the fundamentals of solid-state physics, sp 3 and sp 2 amorphous carbons are two different amorphous species characterized by conceptually different short-range orders, namely, groups of tetrahedrally bonded sp 3 configured atoms and nanoscale size-restricted sp 2 graphene domains framed with heteroatom necklaces. Molecular character of sp 2 amorphics is coherent with the reaction mechanism of the solid amorphicity in due course of the enforced fragmentation. Recent purposeful studies Experiment: multilevel fractal structure, accompanied by pronounced porosity; BSU graphene domains; heteroatom framing necklaces -the nature of their occurrences and functions; Theory: class of amorphous solids -amorphics with a molecular structure; BSU of variable size as a carrier of size-sensitive effects; molecular-crystalline dualism with respect to the spectra of electronic and vibrational states; molecular and solid-state quasiparticle approximations as research methods; Modeling: nanoscale framed graphene molecules (real BSUs) as objects of modeling; the radical nature of BSU; size-kinetic nature of stabilization of BSU molecular radicals; manifestation of the radical nature of BSU; Practical applications based on spin chemistry, carbocatalysis, spin tribology, spin geochemistry, and spin medicine of sp 2 graphenous amorphous carbons. All the issues present the modern content of the current material science of the sp 2 amorphous carbons and many successful results can be found in literature related to each of them to construct the building of this peculiar material. However, there are still some unanswered fundamental questions which prevent from the construction and those are the following: (i) what is amorphous state of the solid carbon from the standpoint of general solid-state concepts; and (ii) what is the place and role of sp 2 amorphous carbons in the total picture of the carbon amorphicity. The current paper is aimed at answering these questions. Amorphous carbons (ACs) are widely common and present a big allotropic class of bodies, both natural and synthetic. Natural amorphics are products of the activity of the Nature's laboratory during geological billion-million-year time. Exhausted geological examinations allowed suggesting a few classification schemes of carbon species (see The family of synthetic amorphous carbons is quite large, covering species different by not only the carbonization rank, but also a mixture of sp 2 and sp 3 components. Analogously to natural species, synthetic amorphics were classified as well Recent comparative studies Continuing the discussion of the general view of the sp 2 carbon amorphicity, we should dwell on one more distinctive feature. Evidently, the molecular nature of BSUs makes it possible to reliably attribute sp 2 ACs to amorphics with a molecular structure. However, in contrast to typical representatives of this class of solids, which are based on molecules of a stable standard structure There might be various reasons for fragmentation, including mechanical impact, chemical reaction, temperature shock, exposure to hard radiation, etc., which can be easily traced by the history of the production of the ACs samples. The fragments ensure the short-range order of the solids and are characterized by large variety with respect to not only different classes of ACs provided by different history and/or technology of their production, but the same class as well. The variety concerns the BSUs size, shape, variation of chemical content, and, which is the most important, the distribution of heteroatoms in the BSU framing area (chemical necklace) at fixed atomic percentage in average. Thus, models presented in Fig. Another distinctive feature of sp 2 ACs lies in the radical nature of their BSU fragments. As shown Structural and analytical studies of sp 2 amorphous carbons were analyzed from the general concepts of the solid-state amorphicity, due to which they can be attributed to molecular amorphics of a new type. The solids are not characterized by structurally and atomically standard molecules but their basic structure units present graphene domains framed with heteroatom necklaces. The domains are resulted from the graphite and/or graphene fragmentation, which itself becomes a distinguished feature of the sp 2 carbon amorphization, which can be called enforced fragmentation of honeycomb canvas. Chemical reactions occurred at the graphene domain edges are suggested to be one of the most important causes of the fragmentation stabilization. Thus originated fragments, becoming the basic structural units (BSUs) of AC, are of particular kind presenting size-restricted graphene domains in the halo of heteroatom necklaces. The weak wdW interaction between the BUSs makes them the main defendants for the numerous properties of the sp 2 amorphous carbon solids.