This study simulated negative-capacitance double gate FinFETs with channel lengths ranging from 25nm to 100nm using TCAD. The results show that negative capacitance significantly reduces subthreshold swing as well as drain induced barrier lowering effects. The improvement is found to be significantly more prominent for short channel devices than long ones, which demonstrates the tremendous advantage of negative capacitance gate stack for scaled MOSFETs. A compact analytical formulation is developed to quantify sub-threshold swing improvement for short channel devices. As the field-effect transistor's (FET) physical channel length scales down, both the switching speed and the drive current are improved at lower power consumption. However, at sub-100nm technology nodes, we face tremendous challenges related to the trade-offs between on-state drive current (Ion) and power consumption due to degraded short channel effects (SCE). In order to simultaneously reduce power consumption and maintain Ion, the negative capacitance FET (NCFET) was proposed We have fabricated the ferrolectric capacitors with 10nm thick HZO. The experimental data obtained from the fabricated devices are used for conducting TCAD simulation of negative capacitance Fin-FET (NC-FinFET) using Preisach model of hysteresis. Fig. Figs. 2(a) and (b) show the simulated structure for DG-NC FinFET along with gate-stack and geometry parameters. The structure and device designs are adopted from The simulation process is performed as follows. The FE capacitance (CFE) is verified to be negative first. This is followed by modulation of the interfacial oxide layer thickness at a fixed FE thickness. Finally, CFE is computed with extrapolation. To account for hysteresis effects in double gate NC-FinFETs, we perform transient TCAD simulation with channel length varying from 25nm to 100nm. Device characteristics of subthreshold swing, on current, and off current are then extracted subsequently. IV. RESULT AND DISCUSSION Fig. In addition to verifying that CFE is negative, we would also like to obtain its exact value. Therefore, a simulation experiment specifically for extracting CFE was designed according to The value of C 789 is influenced by the drain induced barrier lowering (DIBL) effect, which is translated to SS improvement. The focus in The effect of drain-side electric field coupling can be modelled with a DIBL capacitance, Cd, which degrades conventional FET device performance. On the other hand, Cd may improve NC gate-stack capacitance matching (Fig. As Lc scales down, according to Eq. ( SS ?BC?@D = 60mv/dec 71 + According to Eqs. ( This study has successfully demonstrated using TCAD simulation and analytical modeling to achieve the transistor electrostatics improvement via gate voltage amplification from ferroelectric gate stack. Additionally, the sub-threshold swing improvement for short channel FinFETs is found to be more significant than long channel ones, due to improved capacitance matching by the larger drain-side coupling capacitor. Therefore, drain-side coupling capacitance and its role in matching with C ?@ must be taken into account during NC-FinFET device design. 