In this study, the impact of non-inertial effects, caused by rotational motion, on the cylindrical perfect electric cloak is simulated. Also, the interactions between plane waves, Gaussian sine and Gaussian pulse are investigated. It is shown that non-inertial perfect cloak could be detectable with the Sagnac and magneto-electric effects. At a low frequency of gyration, the distortion of wave form pattern is humble and negligible, however when the rotational frequency increases, the pattern distortion becomes huge and wavelets are formed and their intensity grows up. The scattering pattern can be influenced by the direction of rotation, thus, the direction of rotation could be identified with the scattering pattern analysis. Also, a method for measuring rotational velocity can be prepared concerning the electric field phase retardation. The simulation is computed using the FDTD method by transforming the Maxwell's equations from the noninertial framework to the lab framework. One of the interesting topics in the scope of electromagnetism is invisibility. After conceptualizing and introducing the principles of Transforming Optics (TO) Electromagnetic pulse interaction with the perfect cloak is another way to observe the cloaks. In this method, as time is a non-transformed parameter in transformation optics, the cloaking structure can be detectable in the time-domain opposite of frequency-domain All previous works have proposed the cloaking structures in the stationary state, and all of them are motionless (rotation and displacement). Halimeh et al., Opposite the previous surveys that the cloaks were in the inertial state, in this research, for the first time, the non-inertial effects of electromagnetic wave interaction with a perfect rotational cloak is investigated. A 2D cylindrical perfect cloak rotating around its axis with uniform angular velocity is in a non-inertial state without variations in its construction and symmetrical parameters over the time. Electromagnetic wave interaction with the inertial and the non-inertial structures creates different scattering patterns; this can be useful for tracking and measuring speed and distance of invisible objects. Differences between the inertial and non-inertial state of the cloak are caused by rising magneto-electric and Sagnac effect that disturbs cloaking performance by growing up the angular frequency of rotation. In magneto-electric materials, the electric displacement vector (D) depends on the electric and magnetic field strength. Furthermore, magnetic field flux is associated with magnetic field strength and electric field. Regarding magneto-electric coupling, these materials are called the bianisotropic medium. Transformed optic cloaks are sensitive with small disturbance in their parameters Another phenomenon that can be observed in gyrating structures is the Sagnac effect. In fact, due to the difference between the optical path in the direction of rotation and the opposite of it, a phase difference between the two beams is produced; this phase can be investigated for measuring the speed of rotation. The phase difference is related to the size of the circumferential area and its angular frequency. Maxwell's equations in a non-inertial framework can be rewritten as -, , where Here assuming the medium rotates slowly around the z-axis with uniform angular frequency  means that RC  ; R is the outer radius of the rotating medium and C is the speed of light in vacuum. For the 2D cylindrical perfect clock electromagnetic scattering problem, permittivity and permeability are in the tensor form . According to the Berenger's solution for the Perfect Matched Layer (PML) z E splits into two components zx E and zy E . Therefore, Eq.( Equations (4-a), (4-b), (6-a), (6-b) were solved with discretization based on the Yee lattice and leapfrog scheme, using exponential stepping for the rotating 2D cylindrical perfect cloak in free space. Out of cloaking structure the non-diagonal components of permittivity and permeability are zero and diagonal elements are equal to 1. Also 0  out of cloaking structure refres to the inertial framework. In this section, the simulation results of electromagnetic waves interaction with the 2D rotational perfect cloak are presented. As mentioned, the interaction of an electromagnetic pulse with a cloak structure in the time domain can make it visible. In this situation, the direction of the rotation and the angular velocity of the cloak structure can be measured according to the electric or magnetic field phase shift, as well as the Sagnac effect. The simulation's geometry and the 2D cylindrical perfect cloak which is positioned in the center of simulation medium, and gyrating around z axis  is depicted in Fig. is the interior and exterior boundary of the cloak, respectively. Background medium is free space. Since just cloak gyrates and the background is in rest frame then 0  ,   outside the cloak. Thus outside the cloak Eqs. ( The precedence and deletion in the phase of the electric field amplitude on the left and right of the curve are due to the asymmetry in the magneto-electric coupling and Sagnac effect. Since the direction of the cloak velocity at the top and the bottom side are opposite, the continuous plane wave scattering pattern was deformed by increasing Ω, as mentioned before in the Sagnac effect. Phase retardation and warped electric field at x=3 is shown in Fig- For the accurate analysis effect of gyration on scattering pattern, Gaussian and Gaussian sine scattering from the cloak is simulated. Fig- Compared to previous works, in this study, wavelet generation and deformation in electromagnetic pulse are investigated while the cloak is under rotation. In this situation, the deformation of the waveform pattern for higher rotational speeds is clearer than that for the lower ones. For better clarifying, the amplitude of the electric field is plotted logarithmically in Fig- Another information that can be determined with Gaussian pulse interaction with gyrating cloaks is the direction of rotation. Due to the Sagnac and magneto-electric coupling effects, an asymmetry pattern form in electric field scattering pattern. This asymmetry is presented in Fig- In the present paper, we proved that a 2D perfect cylindrical cloak can be detected in the time domain when a continuous plane wave and pulsed wave interacts with the rotating perfect cloak. While the cloak is gyrating, the magneto-electric and Sagnac effects cannot be neglected. The scattering pattern destruction, the strength of pulse bending, and the size of the cylindrical wavelets produced in the rotating cloak permit us to detect the position, speed, and direction of rotation. The achievement of this study compared to previous works is to examine the Sagnac and magento-electric effect in the rotating cloaks. As a result of these effects, the deformation of the electric field pattern and wavelet generation can be applied as a method to measure the speed and direction of rotation.