Two-dimensional (2D) materials unique properties and their promising applications in post-silicon microelectronics have attracted significant attention in the past decade. Recently, ferromagnetic order with out-of-plane easy axis in a monolayer of CrI3 has been observed and reported, with a Curie temperature of 45 Kelvin. Here we study, using density functional theory (DFT) calculations, how hydrogen and oxygen adsorption affects the structural, electronic, and magnetic properties of a CrI3 monolayer. Our results show that while the structure remains almost unchanged by the adsorption of hydrogen, adsorption of oxygen completely distorts it. We have also found that both the adsorption of hydrogen and oxygen atoms significantly influences the electronic and magnetic properties of the monolayer. While hydrogen quenches the magnetic moments of Cr atoms, oxygen introduces an impurity band in the gap. Interestingly, we find a strong enhancement of the Curie temperature by full hydrogenation, while the results are not conclusive for O. This result suggests a simple and effective approach to manipulate the electronic and magnetic properties of 2D magnets for spintronics applications. Since the discovery of graphene in 2004, there is a tremendous interest in experimental and theoretical studies as well as development of two-dimensional (2D) materials Chromium trihalides, CrX 3 (X = Cl, Br, I), are a class of van der Waals bonded, layered semiconductors. These compounds are magnetic and have been known for many decades All this has prompted a number of studies Strain engineering is another effective strategy for tuning and controlling 2D materials as well as CrI 3 . The electronic band gap of CrI 3 along with characteristic ferromagnetism can be controlled by uniaxial and biaxial compressive as well as tensile strains Tuning the electronic and magnetic properties of materials has always been a central topic in condensed matter physics and material science. For instance, in this regard, interactions between adatoms and CrI 3 monolayer are important because the electronic structure of the system can be altered, which could lead to appealing new properties. However, the effect of adsorption of atoms on the magnetism of intrinsic 2D magnets is not yet sufficiently understood. In this work, motivated by previous investigations on other 2D materials, we intend to reveal the effect of H and O adsorption on the structural, electronic, and magnetic properties of CrI 3 monolayer. Our paper is structured in the following manner. Details of computational methodology are described in Sec. 2. We discuss our results in Sec. 3. Finally, conclusions and a summary of our results are given in Sec. 4. We have performed DFT After optimization we get a Cr-I covalent bond length of 2.73 Å with bond angles of 92.88 • , 89.55 • , and 87.12 • . These values are consistent with previous DFT results Hydrogen and O adsorption on CrI 3 monolayer is modeled using single adatom in a 2 × 2 supercell containing 8 Cr and 24 I atoms. For this supercell we re-converged in kgrid and, based on these convergence tests, a 7 × 7 kgrid has been finally used throughout. We have considered adsorption of these atoms at 6 different sites: hollow (H) site at the center of star, hollow (h) site at the center of diamond, bridge (B) site at the midpoint of the Cr-I bond, top ( T I ) site directly above the upper I atom, valley ( V I ) site directly above the lower I atom, and top ( T Cr ) site directly above the Cr atom (Fig. First we have confirmed that the electronic structure of CrI 3 monolayer is in good agreement with prior studies The imbalance between the spin-up and spin-down components is evidence of the magnetic nature of the system. The valence band and conduction band edges are formed by spin-up bands, showing a spinpolarized half-semiconductor character. (The band gap for the spin-down channel is about 1.8 eV.) This is also reflected in the projected density of states (PDOS), as shown in Fig. For the edge-sharing I atoms, their p orbitals split into two p x /p y and p z groups. As we can see in Fig. For all calculated TDOS and PDOS we have rotated the structures as we did for the pure CrI 3 monolayer. We also checked that the results (adsorption energy, magnetic moment, bond length, ...) of the optimized rotated and not-rotated structure are all the same. Again, the only reason for this rotation is to get the appropriate splitting. The TDOS of HCrI 3 and OCrI 3 systems are plotted in Fig. On the other hand, the Mulliken population analysis 46 yields an excess charge of electrons on H and O adatoms (Fig. The DOS projected on different atomic species for the HCrI 3 (2 × 2) system is presented in Fig. The down-spin t 2g d orbitals are now partially filled, but the octahedral splitting is preserved. As we mentioned, the t 2g levels of Cr in an octahedral environment have 3 unpaired electrons, totalling 3μ B per atom. As a result, when Cr binds to H, it shares one of its d-electrons (one of the three unpaired d electrons pairs with the H s orbital electron) and the total magnetization decreases by 1μ B . In brief, due to the reduction of a valence electron per H atom, the overall magnetization is expected to decrease upon H concentration, but probably not completely since it is difficult to imagine a total passivation of Cr atoms by 3 H atoms each. O and I electronic configurations are 2s 2 2p 4 and 5s 2 5p 5 , respectively. Therefore, based on Hund's rule, O and I have 2 and 1 unpaired electrons in their p orbitals, respectively. When the O atom is exposed to the lower I atom in the CrI 3 single-layer, it helps the I atom to break the bonds with the Cr atoms while making new bonds with the displaced I atom and with the Cr atoms by itself. As a result, it shares its two unpaired electrons, and the entire system magnetization remains unchanged. Fig. Having established the electronic changes induced by the adsorbed species, the physical and measurable consequences are now addressed. One of the key measurable quantities that characterizes a ferromagnetic material is its Curie temperature (T C ) at which the ferromagneticparamagnetic transition occurs. A common way to study this transition is by mapping our DFT Hamiltonian to a Heisenberg spin Hamiltonian 47 from which a single atom Hamiltonian can be written as: where S represents the net magnetic moment at the N i site, i and j stand for the nearest N i atoms with exchangecoupling parameter J. Replacing the interaction with other spins by an effective magnetic field H ef f one can obtains: where g is the Landé factor, μ B is the Boltzmann constant, and Based on the Weiss approximation, each S j can be replaced by its average value S j = S By assumption, all magnetic atoms are identical and equivalent, this implies that S i is related to the magnetization of the crystal by M = ngμ B S where n is the number of spins per unit volume. where λ is the Weiss molecular field coefficient. If there are only nearest-neighbor interaction, j J ij = zJ where z is the number of nearest-neighbors. Then If there is an external field H ext , then the total field acting on the ith spin is putting χ C = C/T , where C is Curie constant (C = n(gμ B ) 2 S(S + 1)/3K B ) where T C = λC. By substituting λ and C in this equation Thus, based on the Weiss molecular-field theory (MFT), the T C can be simply estimated using the nearestneighbor exchange-coupling parameter J, being z = 3 the number of nearest-neighbor Cr atoms in the CrI 3 monolayer, S = 3/2, and k B is the Boltzmann constant We have computed exchange coupling constants using jx, a post-processing code for OpenMX , The MFT T C for the H/O functionalized CrI 3 monolayer can be corrected by an appropriate rescaling where X represents H or O, T C (XCrI 3 ) is the rescaled value, T exp C (CrI 3 ) is the experimental one for the clean monolayer (45K), and T M F T C (CrI 3 ) represents the Curie temperature calculated by mean field theory (MFT). Even after this rescaling, the increase in the Curie temperature compared with that of pristine CrI 3 is noticeable. Notice, however, that these calculations contain some approximations in addition to the ones already inherent in MFT. The J coupling constants are assumed to be equal in the MFT approximation, but the computed ones are not constant across the cell, with fluctuations of up to 100%. Furthermore, spin-orbit coupling (SOC) has not been considered and is expected to increase the Curie temperature due to anisotropy contributions. Therefore, we now turn to another method. We map the DFT + SOC results for the fully ferromagnetic and fully antiferromagentic ground state energies to those of an Ising Hamiltonian: We obtain a value of J = 0.95 meV for pristine CrI 3 , which translates into a Curie temperature of 83 K. These numbers compare rather well with those obtained with the jx code and, as expected, are slightly higher. The results for the H and O adatom cases are also presented in Table Finally, we fully functionalize the CrI 3 surface with H and O atoms. Since the favorable site for the H atom was found to be on top of the Cr atom, here all the Cr atoms have H atoms on top. In the case of O, the atoms are placed on V I sites, as this is the most stable configuration. The TDOS of the fully functionalized HCrI 3 and OCrI 3 systems is plotted in Fig. We have investigated, through DFT calculations, the electronic and magnetic structures of the 2D monolayer FM insulator CrI 3 resulting from H and O adsorption. We have found that H adatoms preferentially adsorb on Cr atoms, but hardly influence the original CrI 3 structure although reduce the magnetic moment of the hosting Cr atoms. Oxygen adatoms present a much higher adsorption energy (also on Cr atoms) and greatly distort the atomic structure while introducing an impurity band in the gap. Interestingly, we have predicted that the intrinsic ferromagnetism and corresponding Curie temperature can be largely enhanced by the adsorption of H atoms up to approx. 200 % for full H coverage. Since the main properties of the system remain unchanged, hydrogenation may be a viable route towards room temperature operation devices. Oxygen adsorption, on the other hand, offers the possibility of turning CrI 3 into a half metal.