We study the electronic and topological properties of fully relaxed twisted bilayer (TBG) and double bilayer (TDBG) graphene under perpendicular pressure. An approach has been proposed to obtain the equilibrium in-plane structural deformation and out-of-plane corrugation in moiré superlattices under pressure. We find that the in-plane relaxation becomes much stronger under higher pressure, while the corrugation height in each layer is maintained. The comparison between band structures of relaxed and rigid structures demonstrates that not only the gaps on the electron and hole sides (∆e and ∆ h ) are significantly underestimated without relaxation but also the detailed dispersions of the middle bands of rigid structures are rather different from those of relaxed systems. ∆e and ∆ h in TBG reach maximum values around critical pressures with narrowest middle bands. Topological transitions occur in TDBG under pressure with the middle valence and conduction bands in one valley touching and their Chern numbers transferred to each other. The pressure can also tune the gap at the neutrality point of TDBG, which becomes closed for a pressure range and reopened under higher pressure. The behavior of electronic structure of supertlattices under pressure is sensitive to the twist angle θ with the critical pressures generally increase with θ. Realization of magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) has recently intrigued great interest in exploring their peculiar electronic structure associated with the nearly flat bands around the Fermi level (E F ) Besides TBG, twisted double bilayer graphene (TDBG) with relative rotation between the top and bottom graphene bilayers has been realized recently Here we propose an approach to fully relax TBG and AB-BA TDBG under perpendicular pressure. We find that the in-plane relaxation becomes stronger under higher pressure. The gaps on the electron and hole sides, the dispersions of middles bands of TBG and the neutrality-point gap of TDBG can be effectively modulated by pressure. Pressure induced topological transitions can be observed in TDBG. The outline of this paper is as follows: In Sec. II we study the full relaxation of moiré superlattices in TBG and TDBG under perpendicular pressure. The band structures of systems with and without relaxation are compared in Sec. III. For the fully relaxed structures, we show the gap modulation and evolution of bands in TBG under pressure in Sec. IV and the topological and electronic transitions in TDBG induced by pressure in Sec. V. Section VI presents the summary and conclusions. We consider moiré superlattices in TBG and AB-BA TDBG, where the top layer in TBG has been rotated by θ counterclockwise with the bottom layer fixed and the top BA-stacked bilayer in TDBG is twisted with respect to the bottom AB-stacked bilayer. The mathematical formulation of the moiré superlattice and its reciprocal lattice are detailed in the Appendix. The rigid moiré superlattices undergo spontaneous inplane relaxation due to the energy gain from the larger domains of energetically favorable stacking configurations. Each layer is also corrugated to reach the optimal interlayer distances (h) of the varying stacking configurations across the superlattice. Here we propose a method to fully relax TBG under perpendicular pressure. The TBG with a fixed average interlayer distance (h 0 shown in Fig. Among all configurations of the shifted graphene bi-layer, the AB and BA stacked structures have the lowest energy, and the AA stacking is the most unfavorable. In view of the rotation and inversion symmetry relations of shifted bilayers, the calculated energy of a bilayer with the same h as a function of the shift vector δ can be expressed as V (δ, h) = Ṽ0 (h)+ Ṽ (h) , where the sum is limited to three shortest vectors, ) are basis vectors of the reciprocal lattice of graphene, and components with longer G j are negligible We have adopted the continuum elastic theory to express E tot of a moiré supercell. E tot as the sum of the elastic energy (E el ) in each layer and interlayer interaction energy (E int ) is a functional of the displacement fields u (j) (r) with j = 1 for the bottom layer and j = 2 for the top layer and the interlayer distance field h(r). The elastic energy in a layer with the displacement field u(r) is given by 37 where the integral extends over a moiré supercell. We use λ = 4.23 eV/ Å2 and μ = 9.04 eV/ Å2 for the 2D elastic Lamé factors where δ(r) = r -T -θ r + u (2) (r) -u and where the summation is over nonzero reciprocal lattice vectors G (s) of the supercell and only |G (s) | ≤ 4|b (s) 1 | are used as ũ(n) (r) and h(r) vary smoothly across the supercell. The average h(r) over the supercell is just h 0 . In the following, we have minimized the total energy functional for a fixed h 0 with respect to u (n) (r) and ∆h(r). With the obtained E tot as a function of h 0 , the perpendicular pressure applied to TBG can be evaluated as where Ω (s) is the supercell area and Ω (s) = √ 3a 2 /[8 sin 2 (θ/2)] for the considered moiré superlattices. We have extended the method proposed by Nam and Koshino We find that the layers in TBG under high pressure are still corrugated and the corrugation height in each layer is just slightly decreased compared with the free structure, as shown in Figs. Figure For TDBG, similar analysis as TBG shows that the displacement fields in the two bottom layers are the opposite to those in the two top layers (u(r) and u (r)), and the profile of the interlayer distance between the two bottom layers is the same as that between the two top layers (h (r)), as shown in Fig. Here h 0 and h 0 are the average values of h(r) and h (r), respectively. The TDBG with given h 0 and h 0 is also relaxed by solving Euler-Lagrange equations using the method similar to that for TBG. The perpendicular pressure applied to TDBG can be obtained as Such relations between h 0 , h 0 and P ensure the equilibrium of the system so that the internal pressure applied to each middle layer is equal to the external pressure exerted by the substrates, which is similar to the equilibrium condition for studies of graphene and boron nitride heterostructures under pressure With the relaxed structures of TBG and TDBG under pressure, their band structures can be obtained based on the tight-binding Hamiltonian. We will demonstrate below that relaxation is important to describe the pressure induced gap modulation and topological transitions in TBG and TDBG. To calculate band structures of relaxed TBG and TDBG under pressure, we extend the Hamiltonian of p z orbitals for graphene bilayers proposed in Refs. [39,24] to take into account the effect of the pressure dependent in-plane structural deformation and out-of-plane atomic corrugation. The hopping between intralayer nearest neighbors with their distance d deviated from that of the pristine graphene d 0 = a/ √ 3 is given by V ppπ (d) = -V 0 ppπ e -(d-d0)/λπ with λ π = 0.47 Å. V 0 ppπ = 3.09 eV reproduces the experimental Fermi velocity 40 v F ≈ 1 × 10 6 m/s in the graphene layer. The expression of the interlayer hopping between sites with in-plane projection r and out-of-plane projection h is (7) where V 0 ppσ = 0.453 eV, h 0 = 3.38 Å, λ = 0.58 Å, and λ = 0.27 Å. All interlayer hopping terms with r ≤ 5.0 Å are included in the calculations. We note that these Hamiltonian parameters can reproduce the observed magic angle of free TBG. Since TBG and TDBG with small θ have large moiré supercells, their Hamiltonian can be diagonalized using the planewave-like basis functions. In this approach, the atomic positions of the rigid graphene lattice in each layer are used to label the hopping sites in the Hamiltonian. At a k-point k (s) in the supercell BZ, a low-energy basis function for the sublattice α (α = A, B) in layer n with momentum close to one Dirac point of the layer is defined as where k 0 is the center of one of the supercell BZs containing the Dirac points (K ξ and K ξ with ξ = ±1 the valley index) of the fixed and twisted layers at their corners and r nα is the rigid position of a sublattice-α atom in layer n. k 0 is thus a reciprocal lattice vector of the supercell and the used k 0 can be seen in the schematic reciprocal lattice of a moiré superlattice in Fig. 2 with small integers j 1 and j 2 typically in the range of -4 ∼ 4. The Hamiltonian element between two basis functions is given by where , the summation over r nα is done in a supercell, N 0 is the number of graphene unit cells in one layer of the supercell, and only a small number of large hopping terms r nα |H|r mβ are required for each r nα . Since the Hamiltonian between states from the two different valleys is negligible for large moiré superlattices, each obtained band can be characterized by the valley index ξ, and this is an advantage of diagonalization of the Hamiltonian using the planewavelike basis functions. Figure At the first magic angle of around 1.1 • , the middle bands at E F in free TBG flatten. For θ larger than the magic angle with wider middle bands, the perpendicular pressure narrows down these bands. We find that the pressure can also tune the band gaps on the electron and hole sides, the dispersions of the middle bands as well as the wavefunctions of states in these bands. Such electronic structures with full relaxation considered for different θ and pressure can be based to construct models to describe the observed correlated and superconducting behavior in TBG under pressure The width of the middle valence bands (W V ) reaches local minima at P c1 = 0.92 GPa and P c2 = 1.25 GPa, where W V is smaller than 2 meV, as shown in Fig. Since the electronic properties of TBGs are sensitive to θ, the effect of pressure on tuning their band structures also depends closely on θ. P c1 and P c2 increase rapidly with θ, and only for θ smaller than about 1.54 • W V can reach the minimum under P ≤ 3.2 GPa, as shown in Fig. Free AB-BA TDBGs were found to be valley Hall insulators with a gap (∆ 0 ) opened at the charge neutrality point The topological properties of TDBG are characterized by Chern numbers of the bands in each valley, which are defined as , where F n,k (s) is the Berry curvature of the state at k (s) in the band with index n 42 . Due to the absence of inversion symmetry, states in TDBG can have nonzero Berry curvature. We have calculated F n,k (s) of a relaxed superlattice by 42 where the band state |nk (s) and ∂H k (s) /∂k √ N s R (s) e ik (s) •(R (s) +rν ) |R (s) + r ν with r ν denoting the rigid position of a site in the supercell and R (s) a superlattice vector. The band state |nk (s) expanded as mα,G (s) ψ mα,G (s) |mα, k (s) + k 0 + G (s) can be represented in the basis of |νk (s) The matrix representation of ∂H k (s) /∂k with r μ |H|R (s) + r ν the Hamiltonian between sites at r μ and R (s) + r ν . We first show the evolution of topological and electronic properties with pressure for TDBG with θ = 1.538 • , whose total Chern number of the valence bands is 2 in the ξ = + valley Since the topological transition occurs when the middle valence and conduction bands touch each other, the minimum direct gap (∆ d ) is calculated to identify the transitions. The Chern numbers of the middle valence and conduction bands of the free system in the ξ = + valley are 3 and -1, respectively. Under the critical pressures P c1 = 1.03 GPa and P c2 = 1.51 GPa, the valence and conduction bands touch and their Chern numbers are transferred to each other, as shown in Figs. 5(a), 5(b), 5(f), and 5(g). Then under pressure between P c1 and P c2 , the total Chern number of the valence bands becomes -2. In the ξ = -valley, the Chern number of each band is just the opposite of that in the ξ = + valley. For the rigid superlattice, the valence and conduction bands only touch under a very high pressure, as shown in Fig. Besides topological properties, ∆ 0 and the gaps on the electron and hole sides (∆ e and ∆ h ) are also tuned by the pressure. Under pressure from 0 to P c1 , ∆ 0 decreases to zero. ∆ 0 becomes negative with overlapped valence and conduction bands under pressure slightly larger than P c2 , the system thus becomes metallic in this pressure range. Then ∆ 0 becomes positive under increasing pressure, as shown in Figs. The trend of W V and W C with pressure is shown in Fig. Similar topological transitions as those under increasing pressure also occur in free TDBGs with varying θ from 2.0 • to 1.0 • , as shown in Fig. An approach has been proposed to fully relax TBG and TDBG under perpendicular pressure with both in-plane structural deformation and out-of-plane corrugation considered. The moiré superlattices with fixed average interlayer distances h 0 are first relaxed and the pressure is obtained through the variation of the total energy with h 0 . We find that the in-plane relaxation is greatly enhanced by the high pressure in TBG and in the middle layers of TDBG, while the corrugation height in each layer is just slightly decreased by high pressure. The electronic and topological properties of relaxed superlattices under pressure have been explored by diagonalizing the tight-binding Hamiltonian using the planewave-like basis functions, so that each band can be conveniently characterized by the valley index ξ. The comparison between band structures with and without relaxation demonstrates that relaxation is required to describe the pressure dependent band gaps and detailed band dispersions. Only band widths without relaxation are similar to those of relaxed systems. In TBG, the gaps on the electron and hole sides reach maximum values around the critical pressures P c1 and P c2 with narrowest middle bands and become closed only under a very high pressure. The nearly flat valence and conduction bands become overlapped between P c1 and P c2 , and the wavefunctions of band states under higher pressures than P c2 exhibit rather different spatial distributions from those under smaller pressures. Topological transitions occur in AB-BA TDBGs under pressure with the middle valence and conduction bands in one valley touching and their Chern numbers transferred to each other. The pressure can also tune the gap ∆ 0 at the neutrality point of TDBG, which becomes closed for a pressure range and reopened under higher pressure. The behavior of the electronic structure of supertlattices under pressure is sensitive to the twist angle θ with the critical pressures generally increasing with θ. Our study thus provides a systematic description of electronic and topological properties of fully relaxed TBG and TDBG under pressure, and the proposed approach to relax moiré superlattices under pressure can be applied to various twisted bilayers and multilayers under pressure including heterostructures. In a large moiré superlattice, the local lattice structure around a position r is similar to that of a shifted graphene bilayer, where the shift vector (δ) is defined as the inplane displacement vector from an atom in the bottom layer to the atom in the top layer which sits just above the bottom-layer atom for the AA stacked bilayer with δ = 0. Then we find that the local δ between the twist and fixed layers at r in the superlattice can be taken as δ = (I -T -θ )r. The δ at r = a (s) 1 and a (s) 2 are just a 2 -a 1 and -a 1 , respectively, which is consistent with the AA stacking at the superlattice vectors of TBG. The dependence of Ṽ0 and Ṽ on h can be obtained from the variation of V with h for the AA-and ABstacked bilayers (V AA (h) and V AB (h)) with δ AA = 0 and δ AB = (a 1 + a 2 )/3 as Ṽ0 (h) = [V AA (h) + 2V AB (h)]/3 and Ṽ (h) = 2[V AA (h) -V AB (h)]/9. By ab initio calculations of energies of bilayers, V AA (h) and V AB (h) are fitted as V AA (h) = 0.0322 e -(h-3.2)/0.316 -(1.443/h) 4 +0.0205 and V AB (h) = 0.0259 e -(h-3.2)/0.344 -(1.488/h) 4 + 0.0222 with V and h in units of eV/ Å2 and Å, respectively, where the first terms represent the short-range repulsion and the second terms represent the long-range van der Waals interaction We use ab initio density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the VASP code We have extended the method proposed by Nam and Koshino x u (n) x (q) u (n) y (q) = (-1) n-1 fx (q) fy (q) , (A3) where q takes each G (s) . It can be inferred from this equation that u In view of the real-valued fields and the 120 • -rotation symmetry of the superlattice, ũ(n ), ∆ h(C 3z G (s) ) = ∆ h(G (s) ), and ∆ h(-G (s) ) = ∆ h * (G (s) ). So only Fourier components for one sixth of the considered G (s) are independent in these equations. We have solved Eqs. ( 