We experimentally investigate the dissolution of microscale sessile alcohol droplets in water under the influence of impermeable vertical confinement. The introduction of confinement suppresses the mass transport from the droplet to bulk medium in comparison with the non-confined counterpart. Along with a buoyant plume, flow visualization reveals that the dissolution of a confined droplet is hindered by a newly identified mechanism levitated toroidal vortex. The morphological changes in the flow due to the vortex-induced impediment alters the dissolution rate, resulting in enhancement of droplet lifetime. Further, we have proposed a modification in the key non-dimensional parameters (Rayleigh number Raꞌ (signifying buoyancy) and Sherwood number Shꞌ (signifying mass flux)) and droplet lifetime c   , based on the hypothesis of linearly stratified droplet surroundings (with revised concentration difference C   ), taking into account the geometry of the confinements. We show that experimental results on droplet dissolution under vertical confinement corroborate universal scaling relations 1 4 Sh Ra  and 5 4 c C  -  . We also draw attention to the fact that the revised scaling law incorporating the geometry of confinements proposed in the present work can be extended to other known configurations such as droplet dissolution inside a range of channel dimensions, as encountered in a gamut of applications such as micro-fluidic technology and biomedical engineering. The droplet dissolution process involves the dissolution of lighter single/multiple sessile droplets into a bulk medium by means of mass transfer across the liquid-liquid interface. The mass transfer from the low-density droplet is governed by the interplay of convection and diffusion. The contribution of convection becomes dominant when large droplets with low density dissolve into a dense bulk liquid. An understanding of convection-dominated transport process gives more insights into the fundamental mechanisms that are responsible for the characteristic behaviours of multiphase fluid systems. Further control and tailoring of such processes may lead to a variety of modifications, that can be implemented in several industrial applications such as chemical waste treatment, separation of heavy metals, food processing, distribution of drugs, biomedical diagnostics to name a few From a broader perspective, droplet dissolution can be regarded as a phenomenon analogous to droplet evaporation, which has been extensively investigated by many researchers over the past few decades In this letter, we report how the overall dissolution dynamics is modified by positioning the confinement on top of a single droplet. Confinement was placed vertically over the droplet in such a manner (refer Fig. In the present work, experiments were conducted with a sessile pentanol droplet, which was allowed to dissolve in a bulk aqueous medium (see Fig. Since the droplet exhibits stick-jump characteristics during dissolution It is evident from the figure that compared to the non-confined case; the droplets under confinement dissolve at a slower rate. However, it is rather difficult to distinguish the dissolution rate among the confinement configurations with smaller L/D0, which calls for further investigations. The dissolution of the solute (alcohol) droplet into the surroundings (water) results in a relatively lowdensity alcohol-water mixture compared to the dense bulk medium. This unstable stratified zone aids in the formation of a plume (Fig. During the dissolution of droplets under confinement, both the large-scale (low-velocity) and smallscale (high-velocity) structures/flow patterns are noticed. Large scale structures include a toroidal vortex and central plume originating from the droplet apex, while smallest structures are the eddies near the edge of confinement as well as at the interface of droplet surface (Fig. Figure It was observed that the velocity of the plume originating from the apex of the droplet decreases as the confinement is brought closer to the droplet (Fig. The concentration difference along the plane of the plume can be approximated using linear stratification theory. The plume is lighter and after hitting the obstacle discharges horizontally to a comparatively heavier fluid (Fig. where A m is the measured mass flux rate averaged over the entire surface area (A) (in kg/m 2 s) of the droplet and δ is diffusivity coefficient (m 2 /s) (properties of pentanol are listen in Table Therefore, in the present work, the rate of mass loss () A m from the droplet is evaluated by extracting temporal variation of volume ( Fig. Although in the present study, θ is less than 90o (25o <θ < 35o); the above relation can be used to calculate Sh as no significant differences are observed for diffusion-limited case in the present range of contact angles For a non-confined droplet, 0 C  = , but at the same time, at any finite distance, local concentration will be finite. For any confined case, the concentration at any finite location; say, adjacent to confinement plane (z = L) will be non-zero due to linear stratification (Fig. The amended concentration difference is represented by , thereby taking into account of the difference in alcohol concentration between the droplet surface location (z = 0) and at the edge of confinement (z = L). The alcohol concentration along the plane of the confinement is , where h0 is the droplet height during the start of the dissolution and L is the distance between the substrate and the confinement (see Fig. Similar to Sherwood number (Shꞌ), revised Rayleigh number (ratio of the buoyant force to the damping force) can be expressed as where g is the acceleration due to gravity (m/s 2 ), β indicates solutal expansion coefficient (m 3 /kg) and ν represents the kinematic viscosity (m 2 /s). To incorporate the effect of geometric dependence (confinement), we have modified the concentration difference by invoking the linear stratification assumption (discussed earlier). In eqn. 6, D0 indicates the footprint diameter of the droplet at the inception of dissolution and θ is equilibrium contact angle of pentanol on PDMS substrate (θ ~ 30o). Here, α is a constant and it is equal to 0.95. The value of α falls well within the limit (0.92-1), proposed by Meric et al Figure As it is established from the ongoing discussion that, the dominant mechanism of mass transfer in the present case is via convection, hence it is important to calculate to the time (τcꞌ) taken by the droplet to completely dissolve into the bulk. Although during dissolution, the radius decreases with time, this can be neglected by assuming the process to be quasi-static. The rate of mass loss, where R0 is the equivalent droplet radius at the beginning of the dissolution process and ρ is the density of pentanol. It turns out from Eqn. 8 that for a given volume of droplet undergoing dissolution in a bulk, droplet lifetime has inverse dependence on the concentration gradient, i.e, . Here, the material-dependent prefactor 'a' assumes a constant value of 11 for all the cases. The measured (experimental) values of the droplet lifetime for all the confined cases and the nonconfinement one is compared against the theoretical one (calculated by eqn. 8), showing a good degree of agreement (Fig. 