Exciton many-body interaction bear great implication for application in advanced photonic devices and quantum science and technology such as quantum computing, but the fundamental understanding about exciton many-body interaction is very limited. Here we provide numerous new insights into the fundamentals of exciton Mott transition (EMT), a manifestation of exciton many-body interaction evidenced by the ionization of excitons into a plasma of unbound electrons and holes, i.e. electron-hole plasma (EHP), by taking advantage of the unique properties of twodimensional (2D) semiconductors like monolayer MoS2. We clarify long-standing controversies on the continuousness and criteria of EMT, quantify the charge carrier distribution among the coexisting exciton and EHP phases, establish correlation between the emission features and charge densities of EHP, and elucidate the physical state of EHP charge carriers as nanoscale electronhole complex rather than individually free charges. These results lay down a foundation for furthering the studies of exciton many-body interaction and also for utilizing the interaction in quantum science/technology and the development of advanced optoelectronic devices. The many body interaction of quantum particles or quasi-particles such as electrons, phonons, excitons, and spins is one of the most exciting topical research areas of modern physical science and engineering, as it underlies many major scientific discoveries and technological breakthroughs, such as superconductivity Exciton many-body interaction may be best manifested by the phase transition of excitons. Without losing generality, we focus on MoS2, more specifically, suspended single crystalline monolayer MoS2 flakes. The suspension is to eliminate substrate effects for the simplicity of data interpretation as the presence of substrates can complicate the dynamics of excitons. We previously demonstrated significant changes in the PL of suspended monolayer MoS2 upon the phase transition of excitons. The high-power turnpoint at 20.0 kW/cm 2 features a substantial shrinking of the luminescence area (see the images of 19.9 kW/cm 2 and 21.2 kW/cm 2 in Fig. To further support the correlation of the turnpoint at 8.0 kW/cm 2 to EMT, we examine and exclude out other possible factors being the major reason for the change of PL. These include laser-induced defects, temperature increase, and the increase of trions or biexcitons. First, the photothermal effect of incident laser can give rise to temperature increase at the monolayer, which may induce oxidation of the materials and generate defects if the temperature increase is high enough, and the presence of defects can affect the PL. However, we carefully controlled the measurement condition to minimize defect generation in experiment. The PL measurement was performed in Ar protected environment (see Methods) and the laser power utilized was mild, no more than 0.3 mW at the power density of 8.0 kW/cm 2 (the radius of the focused laser is 1.1m ), which induces a temperature increase of no more than 140°C at the monolayer (Fig. According to our previous studies on suspended monolayer MoS2, The unbound charge carriers of EHP may also screen electron-phonon coupling, EHP and excitons co-exist upon the onset of EMT, and it is important to understand how the photo-generated charge carriers distribute among the two phases. But this information has remained elusive to date due to the difficulty in deterministically distinguishing the signals from different excitonic species in previous studies. To do that, we examine the charge dynamic involved in EMT from intuitive perspective as illustrated in Fig. The first two items represent the linear and nonlinear exciton recombination with X being the linear recombination time and k the EEA rate constant. The third term is exciton diffusion governed by exciton concentration gradient nX and diffusion coefficient D. The fourth term results from exciton funneling under the bandgap gradient induced by the photothermal effect of the incident laser, in which μ is exciton mobility, q is the charge carried by single electrons, andE is the photothermally induced bandgap gradient. α is the absorption efficiency of the monolayer for the incident laser, w is the radius of the incident laser, and I0 is the incident power density. We estimate the steady-state exciton density as a function of incident power with eq. ( using the parameters we measured in experiment ( α = 0.065, 42 k = 0.04 cm 2 /s, 24,43  = 1.0 ns, 24 D = 22.5 cm 2 /s,, and μ depends on local temperature and the size of incident laser as reported previously mi, gi, and Fi represent the effective mass, valley degeneracy, and free energy of excitons (i = X ), free electrons (i = e ), and free holes (i = h ), respectively. h is the Planck's constant, and kB is the Boltzmann constant. T is the local temperature of the monolayer. Most of the parameters in eq (2) are available in references (mX = 0.26 m0, me = 0.47 m0, and mh = 0.60 m0, 45 m0 is the mass of static electrons; gX = ge = gh = 2; the free energy of excitons F X is equal to the exciton binding energy Eb (Eb = 0.42 eV The quantitative estimate for charge carrier density in the co-existing exciton and EHP phases is reasonable, as it is consistent with well-accepted common sense, experimental observation, and theoretical prediction. First, the density of unbound charges carriers in EHP increases by 10 folds from 1.0 10 12 cm -2 at the onset of EMT (~8.0 kW/cm 2 ) to 1.0 10 13 cm -2 at the gas-liquid phase transition (~ 20.0 kW/cm 2 ). This is consistent with the common sense that the critical charge density for the onset of EMT is usually one order of magnitude lower than that for the gas-liquid phase transition. Additionally, the gas-liquid phase transition is predicted to occur when the chemical potentials of EHP and EHL are equal. Theoretical analysis further predicts that the critical charge density of EHP to enable the gas-liquid phase is indeed 1.0 10 13 cm -2 49 , nicely matching the estimated charge density in EHP at 20.0 kW/cm 2 at which we observe the gas-liquid phase transition (see Fig. We can get more insight into the charge carrier distribution among excitons and EHP by further examining the two-stage model from intuitive perspective. The two-stage model is developed on basis of experimental observation that exciton ionization is two orders of magnitude slower than exciton recombination. It considers that a steady state of excitons is formed first, followed by ionization of the excitons to build up unbound charges in EHP until a quasiequilibrium between the excitons and EHP is reached. It also assumes that the steady-state exciton density does not change during the ionization process. The assumption is reasonable given the consistence of the calculation results with common sense, experimental observation, and theoretical prediction as discussed above. Intuitively, we can consider that the loss of excitons due to the ionization may be well compensated by the injection of new excitons via photoexcitation. The correlation of excitons with EHP is similar to the correlation of excitons with trions, the former governed by the thermodynamics of exciton ionization X  e -+ h + and the latter by the thermodynamics of exciton-charge combination X + e (h)  X -(+) . However, unlike EHP, the formation of trions can substantially affect the density of excitons, because the dynamics of trion formation cannot be decoupled from the dynamics of excitons as the exciton-charge combination rate is comparable to the rate of exciton recombination. 50 Our experimental results provide clarification for two long-standing controversies about EMT, whether it is continuous or abrupt and the critical charge density for the onset of EMT. The results in Fig. This indicates that the EMT in monolayer MoS2 is a continuous process. As schematically illustrated in Fig. The continuous nature of EMT generally holds for other semiconductors as reported in many references. Whereas some previous studies did argue that EMT is a first-order, abrupt transition, Our experimental results also clarify the long-standing ambiguity in the criteria for the onset of EMT. EMT has been well recognized to start when the Debye-Hückel screening length Ls is comparable to the Bohr radius a, On basis of the clarification, we develop an approach to find out the proper experimental conditions to enable EMT. We first estimate the critical density of unbound charges for the onset of EMT with np  kBT/e 2 a according to the criteria of Debye-Hückel screening. Since the control of exciton density is more straightforward in experiment, we find out the density of excitons under quasi-equilibrium with the critical density of unbound charges using Saha equation as shown in eq.( Fig. The approach can also be applied to estimating the critical charge densities for the onset of EMT in conventional three-dimensional (3D) semiconductors. Using the Debye-Hückel screening and Saha equation for 3D materials, we can have the critical densities of unbound charges and excitons as np  kBT/2e 2 a 2. ...... ( We performed the evaluation for Si and GaAs with parameters available in references (for Si, a = 4.4 nm,  = 11.4, me = 0.49 mo, mh = 0.19 mo; for GaAs, a = 11.6 nm,  = 12.9, me = 0.067 mo, mh = 0.082 mo; mX = (1/me + 1/mh) -1 ) as well as the ratio of the critical densities of excitons and unbound charges (nX/np, dashed curves) as a function of temperature. The calculations results are reasonable consistent with the critical charge density measured in experiments (black circles in Fig. The unbound charge carriers in EHP are usually believed existing individually without much inter-charge interactions, similar to free charges. However, our experimental results indicate that the charge carriers in EHP exist in format of electron-hole complex in nanometer-scale size instead, which we refer as EHP bubble. This is evidenced by different spatial distributions in the PL intensity and spectral features (peak position and spectral width) of EHP. Without losing generality, we use the result collected at 18.4 kW/cm 2 as an example to illustrate this notion. Figure We find the low energy tails of all the PL spectra, which is mainly contributed by EHP emission, nicely overlap as indicated by the horizonal dashed line. As a comparison, we re-plot all the PL spectra collected from the luminescence center with different incident powers (originally plot in Fig. The different spatial distributions of the PL intensity and spectral features of EHP is counter intuitive, as they point out contradictory spatial distribution of the charge density. The 5fold decrease in intensity suggests a substantial decrease in the charge density with the distance increasing, but the minor change in peak position and spectral width suggests only a mild variation in the charge density over the same distance. This conflict can be conciliated by considering that the charge carriers in EHP exists in format of small clusters (referred as EHP bubble) rather than individual free charges, as illustrated in Fig. Nevertheless it provides useful insight into the physical state of EHP charges. We also expect the size and number of charges in EHP bubbles to vary with incident power, which would need more studies for better understanding. One barrier that prevents the quantitative studies of EMT lies in the lack of quantitative correlation between the PL spectral features and charge density of EHP, although it has been qualitatively understood that the PL spectral features of EHP is associated with charge density. The lack of the correlation makes it difficult to quantitatively evaluate the charge density of EHP, which is critical for the studies of EHP. This is in stark contrast with EHL, whose emission lineshape is well recognized to be the convolution of the occupied electron and hole density of states at the conduction and valence bands, respectively. as illustrated in Fig. The calculation reasonably reproduces the measured peak position and its trend of redshifting with the incident power increasing. The non-trivial deviation at relatively low incident powers is rooted in the intrinsic imperfection of the model, which involves calculation of entropy on basis of statistic thermodynamics that works the best for high charge densities (see S1 for details of the model). The calculated (black) and the measured (red) peak position of EHP emission as a function of incident power. The calculated peak position is equal to the sum of the electronic bandgap (2.31 eV) and EHP's free energy (EeBG + FEHP, the free energy is negative). Inset, schematic illustration for the emission of EHP bubble. The quantitative correlation of the spectral features and charge density of EHP provides a useful way to evaluate the charge density of EHP from PL spectral features. It also provides further insight into the physical state of the charge carriers in EHP. The reasonable fitting of EHP emission with a Lorentzian oscillator indicates that the EHP emits like an electron-hole complex as illustrated in Fig. Given that the charge carriers in EHP emit like electron-hole complex rather than a plasma of completely free charges, we believe that exciton plasma (EP) is a better term to describe the excitonic phase resulting from EMT than electron-hole plasma (EHP). In conclusion, we have elucidated new numerous insights into the fundamentals of EMT by taking advantage of monolayer MoS2. These include clarification for the controversy on the continuous nature and criteria of EMT, quantification for the charge carrier distribution among the co-existing exciton and EHP phase, discovery of the physical state of charge carriers in EHP as nanoscale electron-hole complex (referred as EHP bubbles), and correlation between the emission profile and charge density of EHP. The result lays down a foundation to use EMT in quantum science and to development devices with broad implication in lasers, LEDs, imaging sensors, and optical interconnects. The monolayer was grown on SiO2/Si substrates using a chemical vapor deposition process, PL measurement: PL measurements were performed using a focused 532 nm laser in radius of 1.10m. PL was collected by a long distance 50× objective and imaged through a long-pass filter with laser reflection light filtered out onto the entrance slit of a spectrometer. The spectrometer output was recorded with a PIXIS CCD camera. The PL imaging was recorded by moving the grating to the 0 th order mode. In this collection mode, the spatial PL intensity distribution will be imaged onto the CCD camera at once. The PL spectrum was recorded by moving the grating to the 1 st order diffraction mode. All the PL measurements were done with the samples placed in a chamber flown with Ar gas. Figures S1-S3 S1. Calculation of Fermi energy and free energy of charge carriers