Monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) are two-dimensional (2D) materials with many potential applications. Chemical vapour deposition (CVD) is a promising method to synthesize these materials. However, CVD-grown materials generally have poorer quality than mechanically exfoliated ones and contain more defects due to the difficulties in controlling precursors' distribution and concentration during growth where solid precursors are used. Here, we propose to use thiol as a liquid precursor for CVD growth of high quality and uniform 2D MoS2. Atomic-resolved structure characterizations indicate that the concentration of sulfur vacancies in the MoS2 grown from thiol is the lowest among all reported CVD samples. Low temperature spectroscopic characterization further reveals the ultrahigh optical quality of the grown MoS2. Density functional theory simulations indicate that thiol molecules could interact with sulfur vacancies in MoS2 and repair these defects during the growth of MoS2, resulting in high quality MoS2. This work provides a facile and controllable method for the growth of highquality 2D materials with ultralow sulfur vacancies and high optical quality, which will benefit their optoelectronic applications. methods, chemical vapor deposition (CVD) has been considered as a promising method as it provides a relatively scalable and controllable way for growing TMDCs. Although the syntheses of TMDCs has made great progress, the use of solid-state precursors still has the problem of uncontrollable reaction rate. Unlike graphene growth with a constant supply of gas precursors, for TMDCs, the volatilization rate of solid powder is very sensitive to temperature and pressure, so that the quality of the materials obtained is largely determined by the position of substrates. For example, Wang et al. have studied the relation between the morphology of as-grown MoS2 and the position of the substrate. They found that the evaporation of solid precursors forms a density gradient in the furnace, leading to high dependence of MoS2 morphology on the position of the substrate. Here, we developed a liquid-precursor CVD method (LCVD) and achieved the growth of MoS2 monolayers with ultrahigh quality. By bubbling sulfur-containing thiol (dodecyl mercaptan, C12H25SH) solution into a furnace, the precursor concentration during growth can be precisely controlled and consequently homogeneously-distributed MoS2 are grown on substrates. Systematic microscopic and spectroscopic characterizations confirm the good uniformity and quality of MoS2 monolayers, having the lowest density of sulfur vacancies and highest optical quality among the CVD samples reported previously and very close to the exfoliated MoS2 by using a scotch tape. Theoretical simulations show that thiol molecules can effectively repair the sulfur vacancies in MoS2 during the CVD process, resulting in high quality. These results demonstrate that LCVD is an efficient method to synthesize monolayer MoS2 with ultralow sulfur vacancies and excellent optical properties, which is significantly important for MoS2 fabrication and photonic applications. The growth process is illustrated in Figure Unlike SCVD method which usually shows a position-dependent distribution of MoS2 flakes with abundant defects, constant supply and effective control of precursors will lead to ultrahigh quality MoS2 growth (Figure We then focus on the microstructure of the samples. A low magnified scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) image (Figure Energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) mapping shows the presence of Mo and S elements in the triangular region (Figure To further elucidate the crystalline quality of LCVD MoS2 at atomic scale, aberration corrected high-angle annular dark field scanning TEM (HAADF-STEM) imaging was performed to study the intrinsic defects in the as-grown MoS2 (Figure The SV density of monolayer MoS2 grown by LCVD is the lowest among all reported CVD grown samples, To further investigate the optical quality of our samples, we have performed PL measurements at low temperature, because PL spectra of exciton emission is sensitive to defect density and could be another crucial indicator of material quality. Where E X 0 (0) , S, k B , and 〈ħω〉 are the neutral exciton energy at zero temperature, a dimensionless electron-phonon coupling constant, Bolzmann's constant, and an average phonon energy, respectively. The fitted curve (red dashed line shown in Figure where γ 0 = 42.6 ± 1.3meV is the temperature independent inhomogeneous broadening, c 1 = 19 ± 5μeV/K describes the linear increase due to acoustic Γ phonons, c 2 = 87 ± 18meV is a measure of the strength of exciton-phonon coupling, and 〈ħω〉 = 25.3meV is the averaged energy of the relevant phonon, which is obtained by fitting the A exciton energy shift with Equation (1) for consistency. that the exfoliated MoS2 exhibits a full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 40 meV at 80 K (Figure We have developed a liquid-precursor CVD system and synthesized high quality monolayer MoS2. In this LCVD method, precursor distribution and concentration could be precisely controlled and ultrahigh quality monolayer MoS2 could be achieved. Microscopic and spectroscopic characterizations indicate that the sulfur vacancies in the LCVD MoS2 is the lowest among all CVD samples and is close to those of exfoliated MoS2 flakes. The ultrahigh quality of the the LCVD MoS2 is further proved by low temperature PL measurements, where LCVD samples exhibit a much narrower and sharper PL peak. Theoretical simulations indicate that thiol molecules would chemically absorb onto SV in MoS2 and repair these defects during growth. These results demonstrate that this facile and controllable method can obtain TMDCs with ultralow sulfur vacancies and ultrahigh optical quality, which will facilitate their photonic and optoelectronic applications. Materials and chemicals. Sodium molybdate dehydrate (Na2MoO4•2H2O, 99.5%, Aladdin Industrial Corporation, China), dodecyl mercaptan (C12H25SH, 98%, Aladdin Industrial Corporation, China), molybdenum (VI) oxide powder (MoO3, 99.99%, Alfa Aesar, USA), sulfur powder (S, 99.95%, Sigma-Aldrich, USA), potassium iodide powder (KI, 99%, Alfa Aesar, USA), SiO2/Si substrate (300-nm-thick thermally-grown oxide layer, Hefei Kejing Materials Technology Co., China), acetone, ethanol and isopropyl alcohol (all were Analytical Reagent, Shanghai Macklin Biochemical Co., Ltd., China) were used as received. Bulk MoS2 crystals were used for exfoliation to prepare 2D MoS2 flakes (2D semiconductors, USA). LCVD growth of MoS2. Growth experiments were conducted in a lab-made two-zone CVD furnace equipped with a 1-inch diameter quartz tube (TF55035C-1, Lindberg/Blue M, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Pre-cleaned SiO2/Si substrates were first spun-coated with 0.02 mol/L Na2MoO4 solution and then were placed at the center of the furnace. Dodecyl mercaptan solution was put in a bubbler and connected to the inlet of the system. The furnace was heated to the growth temperature of 850 °C and dodecyl mercaptan was bubbled with 10 sccm Ar into the reactor for one hour. Finally, the reactor was cooled to room temperature in Ar flow. Growth of MoS2 by conventional CVD using solid precursors. Growth experiments were conducted in the same CVD furnace. Sulfur powder (100 mg) was loaded in the first zone upstream, and MoO3 (5-10 mg) with face-down SiO2/Si substrates was placed downstream (8-10 cm) for MoS2 growth. First, the tube was flushed with 350 sccm of Ar for 30 min, then heated to the growth temperature of 750 -780 °C with a ramp rate of 30 °C min -1 and kept for 3-10 min. After growth, the furnace was cooled to room temperature. Ar (50 sccm) was introduced during the whole process. A similar method was used to grow MoS2 with salt, except that 1mg KI powder was mixed with 10 mg MoO3 powder and used as precursors. Materials characterization. The morphology of the samples was examined by an optical microscope (Carl Zeiss Microscopy, Germany). Low magnification and high resolution TEM analyses were carried out in FEI Tecnai F30, USA with an energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy detector at an acceleration voltage of 80 kV. ADF-STEM analyses were carried out using a FEI Titan Themis G2 double aberration corrected TEM. The microscope was operated at an electron acceleration voltage of 60 kV. The convergence angle was about 30 mrad and the collection range of the STEM image was around 53-200 mrad. Reflectance contrast spectra were conducted in a home-built optical measurement system. Raman and PL spectra and mappings were collected using a 532 nm laser excitation with a beam size of ~1 μm (Horiba LabRAB HR Evolution, Japan). The low temperature PL measurements were conducted using a temperature stage (Linkam HFS600E-PB4) connected to a liquid nitrogen dewar bottle. Density functional theory calculations. All calculations were performed using the density functional theory as implemented in Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package. The climbing image nudged elastic band method was used to locate the transition states to determine energy barriers. Supporting Information can be found with this article online. )