Bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) non-fullerene organic solar cells prepared from sequentially deposited donor and acceptor layers (sq-BHJ) have recently been promising to be highly efficient, environmentally friendly, and compatible with large area and roll-to-roll fabrication. However, the related photophysics at donor-acceptor interface and the vertical heterogeneity of donor-acceptor distribution, critical for exciton dissociation and device performance, are largely unexplored. Herein, steady-state and time-resolved optical and electrical techniques are employed to characterize the interfacial trap states. Correlating with the luminescent efficiency of interfacial states and its non-radiative recombination, interfacial trap states are characterized to be about 50% more populated in the sq-BHJ devices than the ascast BHJ (c-BHJ), which probably limits the device voltage output. Cross-sectional energydispersive X-ray spectroscopy and ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy depth profiling directly visualize the donor-acceptor vertical stratification with a precision of 1-2 nm. From the proposed "needle" model, the high exciton dissociation efficiency is rationalized. Our study highlights the promise of sequential deposition to fabricate efficient solar cells, and points towards improving the voltage output and overall device performance via eliminating interfacial trap states. Organic solar cells (OSCs), made from solution-processable carbon-based materials, have the potential to be flexible, light-weight and low-cost. So far, most studies on sq-BHJ systems have focused on device performance rather than a detailed mechanistic study of the underlying photophysics. The reasons and mechanism for the comparable performance need to be understood, and obvious questions remain behind sq-BHJ functionality. For example, to realize high (close to unity) charge generation efficiency in sq-BHJ devices, most excitons must be separated at the donor-acceptor (D-A) interface. Characterizing this process is a prior to understanding efficient device operation. In this work, we focus on interfacial properties in sq-BHJ together with morphological characterizations to study their relationship with the initial exciton dissociation and device performance. Using a range of spectroscopic techniques, we focus on the interfacial states at the D-A interfaces in blends prepared by sequential deposition as well as as-cast one-step methods, and correlate our observations with the device performance. To directly visualize the vertical stratification, we characterize the D-A vertical distribution using cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy-energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (TEM-EDX) and ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS) depth profiling. To understand the effect of D-A distribution on exciton dissociation, a "needle" model is proposed to simulate the structure of sq-BHJ compared with a "cubic" structure for c-BHJ. NFA-based blends. where ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity, ε the blend permittivity, q the elementary charge, N the doping density, A the device active area, V bi the built-in potential, and V the external bias. From the Mott-Schottky plot we obtained a doping density of (7.3 ± 0.6) × 10 16 cm -3 for the sq-BHJ, slightly higher than the value of (6.2 ± 0.5) × 10 16 cm -3 for the c-BHJ, and a built-in potential of 0.87 ± 0.02 V and a blend permittivity of 2.4 ± 0.2 V for both the c-BHJ and the sq-BHJ. To quantify the density and energetics of trap states in both devices, we measured the capacitance as a function of frequency at zero bias in the dark (see Figure where E ω is the demarcation energy, k B the Boltzmann constant, w the depletion width, and ω the modulation frequency. where ω 0 is the attempt-to-escape frequency. Assuming a typical attempt-to-escape frequency of 10 12 s -1 , we find a Gaussian density of trap states centred between 0.5 eV and 0.6 eV of (1.7 ± 0.1) × 10 17 cm -3 for the sq-BHJ, around 50% higher than the value of (1.2 ± 0.1) × 10 17 cm -3 for the c-BHJ (see Figure shows a larger steady-state current between 200 and 400 μs for the sq-BHJ OSC. The higher photocurrent is due to its higher EQE of the sq-BHJ device at the illumination wavelength (460 nm). Trap states have been shown to act as non-radiative recombination centers in Shockley-Read-Hall type recombination, resulting in a lowering of the quasi-Fermi level of the electrons and a limitation in the VOC. From the previous neutron scattering modelling, the morphology of the sq-BHJ is more akin to a homogeneous BHJ than a two-layer PHJ. Unfortunately, we were not able to observe noticeable differences in D:A distribution from bright-field as well as high resolution TEM imaging (Figure The vertical stratification of binary composition greatly influences charge recombination and transport and is of great relevance to device performance. Using the sequential deposition method, the acceptor material is enriched on the top layer. This structure is beneficial for the charge transport in the regular device architecture, but actually not good for the inverted devices. To show this effect, we fabricated inverted devices using c-BHJ and sq-BHJ active layers. Their photovoltaic performance is summarized in Table Excitons are assumed to be uniformly generated in the donor region and those in the acceptor region can be calculated in the same way. (c) Exciton dissociation ratio of the sq-BHJ and c-BHJ structures as a function of L, assuming that excitons with D min < 10 nm are fully dissociated. For the exciton dissociation step, here we propose a simple model for sq-BHJ structure assuming that acceptor phase columns with ignorable volume like a "needle" are grown in the planar donor layer. We note that the needle model is an approximation and the actual morphology might look more similar to a homogenous mixture with a certain gradient ratio along the vertical direction. Both needle and homogeneous-mixing models would be in agreement with STEM-EDX and depth-profile XPS data, because both techniques measure the overage over the beam area (~mm 2 ) which exceeds the scale of phase separation (~10 nm). Same time the needle model we propose is probably a better approximation to describe the following aspects: (i) the likely partial de-mixing of donor and acceptor leading to relatively pure phases; (ii) the typical spatial scale at which excitons diffuse before they dissociate. Inset in Figure Thus, our model provides a simple picture to justify the promise of efficient exciton dissociation in sq-BHJ. We note that this model can be easily modified when knowing the phase separation in more detail. In Materials. PBDB-T was purchased from Ossila (M1002). NCBDT was synthesized using the procedure reported elsewhere. were bought from Sigma Aldrich. OPV device fabrication. The device structure was glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS (poly(3,4ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate)/active layer/PDINO (perylene diimide functionalized with amino N-oxide)/Al. The glass substrate with ITO was cleaned sequentially by deionized water, acetone and isopropyl alcohol under ultrasonication for 10 min each. The subsequent PEDOT:PSS layer was spin-coated at 5000 RPM for 45 s, and then baked at 150 oC for 20 min in ambient atmosphere. For the sq-BHJ film, the donor layer was deposited from 6 mg/ml solution in chloroform at 1900 RPM for 20 s, and the subsequent acceptor layer was cast from DCM solution (~60 uL, 6 mg mL -1 ) at 2500 RPM for 40 s right before spin-coating. PDINO (1 mg mL -1 in CH3OH) was spin-coated on the active layer at 3000 RPM for 40 s. Finally, a 100 nm Al layer was deposited under high vacuum. The effective area of each cell was 4.5 mm 2 . For the inverted devices, the device structure was glass/ITO/ZnO/active layer/MoO3/Ag. The ZnO precursor was prepared from dissolving zinc acetate dehydrate (1.098 g) in 2-methoxyethanol (10 mL) mixed with ethanolamine (301.8 μL) as a stabilizer. The precursor was stirred on a hot plate at 1000 RPM at 60 oC for at least 2 hours. The fully dissolved solution was filtered using 0.2 μm PTFE filters, and then the ZnO layer was spin-coated at 3000 RPM for 60 s before being baked at 80 oC for 10 min and 130 oC for 1 hour in ambient atmosphere, resulting in a ~30 nm-thick film. The active layer was deposited in the same way as the conventional devices and a 10 nm MoO3 as well as a 100 nm silver layer was deposited under high vacuum. Transient photocurrent spectroscopy. A 465 nm light-emitting diode (LED465E, Thorlabs) was used as the light source for transient experiments, connected to an Agilent 33500B wavefunction generator and a purpose-built low-noise power supply. Solar cell transients were recorded by connecting the device to a Tektronix DPO 3032 oscilloscope. For TPC measurements, the device was connected to the 50 Ω input of the oscilloscope via a custom trans-impedance amplifier. A custom-written LabVIEW VI was used for instrument control and data acquisition. Capacitance measurements. Capacitance measurements were performed at a pressure below 3×10 -6 mbar in the dark at 300 K with an AC perturbation of 20 mV. For the fitting, the thickness of the active layer thickness was set to (100 ± 5) nm for the c-BHJ and (90 ± 5) nm for the sq-BHJ devices. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. The structure of samples for XPS measurements was ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer, using the same procedures as for device fabrication. Some films were ready for further measurements, while other films were cut into ~3 mm × 3 mm squares and immersed in water. The floating pieces were then carefully transferred to silicon wafer substrates with and without flipping. The samples (either glass substrates or silicon wafer) were then transferred to an ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) chamber (ESCALAB 250Xi) for XPS measurements, using an XR6 monochromated Al K Alpha X-ray source (hν = 1486.68 eV) with a 400 μm spot size and 200 eV pass energy. Depth-profile ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy. The samples were prepared in the same way as the corresponding c-BHJ and sq-BHJ photovoltaic devices. After preparation, the samples were stored in N2 and afterwards transferred into an ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) chamber of a photoelectron spectroscopy (PES) system (Thermo Scientific ESCALAB 250Xi) for measurements. The samples were exposed to air only for a short time span of approximately 30 seconds during this transfer. All measurements were performed in the dark. UPS measurements were carried out using a double-differentially pumped He discharge lamp (hν = 21.22 eV) with a pass energy of 2 eV and a bias at -5 V. Etching was performed using an Argon cluster (MAGCIS) source with a cluster energy of 4000 eV and a raster size of 2.5×2.5 mm 2 . Otherwise, UPS depth profiling was performed the same way described in Lami et. al. a)