Owing to the experimental discovery of magnetic skyrmions stabilized by the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya and/or dipolar interactions in thin films, there is a recent upsurge of interest in magnetic skyrmions with antiferromagnetic spins in order to overcome the fundamental limitations inherent with skyrmions in ferromagnetic materials. Here, we report on the observation of compact ferrimagnetic skyrmions for the class of amorphous alloys consisting of 4f rare-earth and 3d transition-metal elements with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy, using a DyCo3 film, that are identified by combining x-ray magnetic scattering, scanning transmission x-ray microscopy, and Hall transport technique. These skyrmions, with antiparallel aligned Dy and Co magnetic moments and a characteristic core radius of about 40 nm, are formed during the nucleation and annihilation of the magnetic maze-like domain pattern exhibiting a topological Hall effect contribution. Our findings provide a promising route for fundamental research in the field of ferrimagnetic/antiferromagnetic spintronics towards practical applications. Stabilized by the bulk Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI), skyrmion lattices with swirling magnetic textures have been originally predicted by Bogdanov et al. In practice, however, the relative slow and pinningdominated current-driven dynamic behaviors of the ferromagnetic skyrmions Ferrimagnetic RE-TM alloy films with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy Here, we report on the observation of skyrmions in this class of materials by investigating a ferrimagnetic DyCo 3 (50 nm)/Ta(3 nm) film by means of x-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD), small angle x-ray resonant magnetic scattering (SAXRMS), high-resolution scanning transmission X-ray microscopy (STXM) with circular polarized x-rays, and Hall transport technique. The skyrmion phase is observed for magnetic fields in the transition region to a single domain state, providing an additional topological Hall resistance that is linked to the topology of the skyrmion's magnetization texture To determine the scattering vector Q max of the spectra S(Q) and hence the average domain size D as a function of magnetic field, they were fitted using a split Pearson type VII distribution The D vs field behavior is given in Fig. To reveal the details of the nature of the magnetic domain structures, in particular the eventual formation of ferrimagnetic skyrmions in this system, we performed element-specific STXM in the presence of an external perpendicular magnetic field at 90 K. The results are summarized in Figure In order to quantify the lateral skyrmion profile in great detail, we performed high resolution STXM for CL and CR polarized x-rays (Fig. mation of compact skyrmions with the inner domain reduced to a point-like core where Θ, R, and w defines the polar angle of the magnetization at position r, the skyrmion radius and magnetic wall width, respectively. The magnetic contrast is shown in Fig. A quasi-circular ferrimagnetic skyrmion was selected from Fig. According to Eq. 2, the classification of skyrmions, whether bubble-like or compact with a point-like core, is based on the R/w ratio: for R w, bubble skyrmions exist, while for R/w < ∼ 1 compact skyrmions are formed. As pointed out by Büttner et al., the shape of the skyrmions is determined by the parameter κ = πD i /(4 AK ef f ), with D i , A and K ef f representing the DMI constant, exchange stiffness, and effective anisotropy, respectively To investigate the electrical signature of the ferrimagnetic skyrmions, magnetotransport measurements were performed using a current density of j = 4 × 10 6 Am -2 driven along the x-axis and the magnetic field applied perpendicular to the plane of the film, i.e., H z (Fig. In the absence of topological entities the Hall resistivity ρ xy (H z ) consists of contributions from conventional and anomalous Hall effects with R 0 the conventional Hall coefficient, and R S the cumulative anomalous Hall contribution from skew scattering, side-jump scattering, and the intrinsic (momentum space) Berry curvature mechanisms In order to demonstrate for a topological Hall signal caused by the skyrmions , which is related to the chirality of the local domain structures. Such a addtional signal is clearly observed as shown in Fig. The THE has been successfully used to indicate the presence of ferromagnetic skyrmions in bulk systems and multilayers. Trivial Néel or Bloch walls with chiral number of zero will not cause a THE. In ferrimagnets, however, a contribution to the THE may arise from a canting between the Co and Dy moments within the chiral domain wall region. Future investigations focusing on details of the spin structure of the domain wall will help to clarify if additional contributions to the THE in ferrimagnets exist, as speculated above. In conclusion, we have combined soft x-ray scattering and imaging techniques with transport measurements to investigate the formation of compact ferrimagnetic skyrmions in DyCo 3 thin films with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy. Isolated skyrmions are imaged at 90 K by STXM for narrow perpendicular magnetic field regions. Starting at the magnetic saturation (m z = -1), the skyrmions nucleate at μ 0 H z = -0.11 T continuing to merge when positively sweeping the magnetic field. A second skyrmion regime is reached when applying counter fields (H z >0.25 T) that gradually annihilate the maze-like domain pattern. The detection of a topological Hall effect contribution indicates the existence of isolated skyrmions in broader field regimes at a lower temperature of 50 K. The magnetic microstructure of the skyrmions is found to consist of a small core region of 40 nm and a surprisingly broad outer wall width of 50 nm. The skyrmion profile can be reproduced when considering the intrinsic magnetic material parametes including a DMI constant of about 0.3 mJ/cm 2 , which is consistent with previous studies on DyCo x films. The promising properties of ferrimagnetic skyrmions in DyCo x alloy thin film systems in combination with the possibility to easily tune their magnetic properties by varying their stoichiometry might be a promising route for skyrmions to be used in practical applications in future spintronic devices. In particular, the detrimental skyrmion Hall effect can be minimized when setting the compensation temperature close to room temperature, which will possibly enable the realization of functional skyrmion devices that can be operated under ambient conditions. Future systematic investigations of the skyrmion pocket in the magnetic phase diagram for DyCo x and TM-RE alloys in general will reveal their full potential. The authors acknowledge the financial support for the PM2-VEKMAG beamline by the German Federal Ministry for Education and Research (BMBF 05K10PC2, 05K10WR1, 05K10KE1) and by HZB. A.P.-K. gratefully acknowledges support from the DFG via Sonderforschungsbereich (collaborative research center) SFB 925 (subproject B3) and S. Rudorff is acknowledged for technical support. The samples were prepared by magnetron sputtering (MAGSSY chamber at BESSY) in an argon atmosphere of 1.5 × 10 -3 mbar with a base pressure of 5 × 10 -9 mbar at a deposition temperature of 300 K. Si 3 N 4 membranes with a surface area of 5×5 mm 2 and a thickness of 100 nm were used as substrates for the soft x-ray transmission measurements including SAXRMS and STXM. A 3 nm thick Ta capping layer was grown on the DyCo 3 layer to prevent surface oxidation. SAXRMS experiments have been performed at the VEKMAG end-station at the PM2 beamline, Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin (HZB). The diffracted x-rays are collected on a Peltier-cooled square-shaped CCD detector covering 2.1 • at the working distance of this study. The SAXRMS spectra (Fig. Element-specific STXM measurements were performed at MAXYMUS, beamline UE46 at HZB in the presence of an external magnetic field, H z parallel or antiparallel to the x-ray beam. The difference between the effective spotsize (65 nm) to the ideal resultion of the used optics (32nm) can be explained by the partial coherent illumination and defocussing issues due to thermal drifts of the cryostat. The contrast of STXM image depends on the relative orientation of the sample magnetization and the X-ray polarization vector, being maximum for parallel and minimum for antiparallel alignment.