Previous devices to separate cells by the characteristic force they experience due to dielectrophoresis, which depends on the size and electric properties of the particle, were limited by the flow rates and particle concentrations separation could be achieved at. To unlock the potential of Labon-a-chip technology to create flexible, efficient and multifunction devices at low cost it is necessary to increase the rates at which separations can be performed. Here we present a device capable of high throughput continuous separation of cells from microparticles and demonstrate separation at 7μL/min in a microchannel with a high density of cells and microparticles in the sample of 10 8 -10 9 cells/mL. This device uses the characteristic response of the particles due to dielectrophoresis to provide the initial separation before crucially focusing the particles into completely separate particle streams allowing the operation at high flow rates and particle concentrations. The device is demonstrated with the separation of polystyrene (PS) beads 8 μm, 25μm and human dermal microvascular endothelial cell line (HMEC -1 cells) and human liver cell line (HepG2 cells) suspended in a DEP buffer solution. We show that it is possible to achieve not only high flow rate separation but also high sample purity with, after separation and focusing, one output containing 100% cells. The separation of cells and microparticles has many applications in biological and medical analysis where a fast sample preparation process is necessary. Conventional Fluorescence-Activated Cell Sorters (FACs machines) are capable of very high speed separation of bioparticles however there is increasing interest in developing a technique that can be miniaturised into a Lab-on-a-Chip device. Several techniques have been investigated including optical Device design: Our device design is illustrated in Figures There are three inlets on the microfluidics chip, inlet #1 and inlet #3 are for the DEP buffer solution and for creating a hydrodynamic focusing of the cells and particles before separation. Cells and particles will go to the right side of the microchannel staying a distance from the channel wall to decrease the effects of the wall of the channel Numerical Simulation: The electric field distribution and its gradient were modelled numerically in CFD-ACE+ (CFD Research Corp, Huntsville, AL). We divide the simulations of electric field into two parts: one is the electrode system for separation and another is electrode system for focusing. First of all, the model of electrodes was established and then an AC electric field of 6 Vp-p was applied to the separation electrode system. Figure Cell culture and sample preparation for bio-experiment: The sample was a mixture including HMEC-1 cells (HepG2 cell) and polystyrene beads 8 μm and 25μm in diameter suspended in a DEP buffer solution (55% sucrose [wt/vol],0.3% glucose [wt/vol] and 0.735% RPMI [wt/vol]), 70 μS/cm conductivity with a final high concentration 10 8 to 10 9 cells/mL. Cell culture: HMEC-1 cells, HepG2 (ATCC, HB 8065) were maintained at 37 0 C with 95%/5% air/CO2 in Fscove's modified Dulbecco's medium (DMEM, Gibco-BRL, NY) containing 10% (v/v) heat inactived feta bovine serum (FBS, Biological Industries, Israel) and an antibiotic which was prepared and maintained in M200 medium supplemented with low serum growth supplement (LSGS, both from Cascade Biologics Inc). The cells were then separated and put in a tube and the medium was changed to DEP buffer. Experiment setup: We used three Hamilton Gastight syringes (Hamilton; Reno, NV) for three inlets 1mL: 1mL: 3mL, connected to a syringe pump (WPI SP2301W) to provide the sample and DEP buffer for the chip. A function generator (B3120A, 15 MHz Function/ Arbitrary waveform Generator, Agilent Technologies) was used to generate sinusoidal wave excitation up to 10 MHz, 10Vp-p. The target particles and cells were examined using a microscope (Olympus BX51TRf) on an optical table. The images and movies were recorded using a digital CCD camera controlled by a computer. Dielctrophoresis was coined by H.A.Pohl Where: m  is the permittivity of the suspending medium, r is the radius of cell or particle, are the electric filed gradient of x direction and y direction, CM f is the Clausius -Mossotti factor given by: Where p  , m  are the complex permittivity of particles and medium respectively. The complex permittivity is defined as follows:  is the permittivity,  is the conductivity, 2 1 j  ,  is the angular frequency, Re CM f the real part of Clausius-Mossotti factor is described as follows:  is the Maxwell-Wagner constant. For cells, a single shell model: Where: is the viscosity of medium, Wx and Wy are the wall correction factor in the x and y direction respectively. dx/dt, dy/dt are the instantaneous cell velocities in the x and y direction, respectively. The total force acting cells or particles moving in microchannel can be described as: Where: grav F is gravitational force, bouy F is buoyancy force. At steady state, the DEP force is balanced by the viscous drag: Thus, the velocity of cell or particle follow x direction and y direction as: Re[ ] 6 Re[ ] 6 Experiment: The separation and focusing of cells and particles is based on the physical characteristics of the particles. We set up the experimental parameters as: frequency 100 kHz, 10 V peak-peak and flow rate 2 μL /min. At these values the cells are deflected from left channel to right channel. Cells are separated from the mixed sample of beads 8 μm, beads 25 μm and HMEC-1 cells. At these conditions the cells are deflected rapidly as shown in Figure High throughput separation and focusing: Lab-on-chip devices focus on decreasing the cost and increasing the efficiency of devices. The advantage of our chip is high throughput separation and focusing. We have designed an electrode separation array which is 1.5 mm in length. When we operate with flow rate 2μL/min, cells are deflected rapidly at the beginning of the electrode. When we increase the flow rate to 4 μL/min, 5 μL/min and 7 μL/min (Figure V peak-peak and 100 kHz frequency. The angle of the electrodes also affects their ability to deflect cells The miniaturizing lab on chip We have presented a novel high throughput device for the separation and focusing of cells and microparticles by their characteristic dielectrophoretic forces. The device was demonstrated at a high flow rate 7μL/min in microchannel with a high density of cells and microparticles in the sample 10 8 -10 9 cells/ml. We have demonstrated the successful separation of cells from microparticles achieving a high purity of cells 100 %. This show the potential of this technique for the isolation of samples for the detection of different species of microparticles and cells in a low cost, high efficiency, automated diagnostic device. 