Inverse problems are essential to imaging applications. In this paper, we propose a model-based deep learning network, named FISTA-Net, by combining the merits of interpretability and generality of the model-based Fast Iterative Shrinkage/Thresholding Algorithm (FISTA) and strong regularization and tuning-free advantages of the data-driven neural network. By unfolding the FISTA into a deep network, the architecture of FISTA-Net consists of multiple gradient descent, proximal mapping, and momentum modules in cascade. Different from FISTA, the gradient matrix in FISTA-Net can be updated during iteration and a proximal operator network is developed for nonlinear thresholding which can be learned through end-to-end training. Key parameters of FISTA-Net including the gradient step size, thresholding value and momentum scalar are tuning-free and learned from training data rather than hand-crafted. We further impose positive and monotonous constraints on these parameters to ensure they converge properly. The experimental results, evaluated both visually and quantitatively, show that the FISTA-Net can optimize parameters for different imaging tasks, i.e. Electromagnetic Tomography (EMT) and X-ray Computational Tomography (X-ray CT). It outperforms the state-of-the-art model-based and deep learning methods and exhibits good generalization ability over other competitive learning-based approaches under different noise levels. The goal of an inverse problem in imaging is to estimate an unknown image x from given measurements b which relates to x via a forward operator A y . The forward model of an imaging problem has the form where A y denotes the forward operator; ε is the noise in the measured data. If y is independent with x and the operator A y is linear, it describes the linear inverse problem of imaging systems, e.g. MRI, CT. On the other hand, A y represents a non-linear operator, modelling 'soft-field' imaging systems such as ET and Diffuse Optical Tomography (DOT) The inversion problem of (1) can be generally formulated as an optimization problem that minimizes the cost function: where D denotes data fidelity to ensure consistency between the reconstructed image x and measurements b; R is a regularizer that imposes prior knowledge, e.g. smoothness, sparsity, low-rank, non-local self-similarity; λ > 0 is the regularization coefficient. Frequently, regularizer R is nonsmooth, which cannot be solved straightforward. First-order iterative proximal gradient methods, such as the Iterative Shrinkage/Thresholding Algorithm (ISTA) In addition to these model-based approaches, machine learning, particularly deep learning, has recently become a new frontier of inverse problems in imaging 1) Fully learned approach: This approach utilizes conventional neural networks as 'black-box' by feeding sufficiently large amount of training samples to learn the linear/non-linear mapping from the measured data b to the target image x without explicitly modeling the domain knowledge, i.e. the forward operator A [14]- (1) from a low-dimension data b to a high dimensional image x 2) Image post-processing: This method applies deep learning based image post-processing to suppress noise and remove artifacts. An initial 'coarse' image is first generated by certain analytical inversion, e.g. Filtered Back Projection (FBP) Notable success of this approach has been achieved especially in low-dose CT imaging 3) Model-based deep learning: The forward operator A encapsulates the relevance of the measured data b and the target image x. With the forward operator depicting the underlying physics, conventional model-based algorithms are underpinned by two pillars, i.e. generality and stability. On the other hand, despite the effectiveness of deep learning in capturing critical features of data, its stability is usually unsatisfactory This idea was first proposed in the Learned Iterative Shrinkage-Thresholding Algorithm (LISTA) This paper aims to ground the model-based deep learning approach on the Fast Iterative Shrinkage/Thresholding Algorithm (FISTA) 1) Compared with the state-of-the-art ADMM-based networks, e.g. ADMM-CSNet In the following Sections, we first describe the FISTA-Net starting from the original FISTA framework and then cast it into the deep learning network. Then, we test and evaluate FISTA-Net on two different imaging modalities, i.e. CT and Electromagnetic Tomography (EMT). Iterative Shrinkage/Thresholding Algorithm (ISTA) is a prevailing framework to solve (2) with non-smooth convex regularizers. Each iteration of ISTA involves gradient descent update followed by a shrinkage/soft-threshold step (e.g. proximal operator) where μ = 1/L is an appropriate step size, and L must be an upper bound on the largest eigenvalue of A T A, e.g. L > λ max (A T A) A comprehensive coverage of proximal maps can be found in ISTA is generally recognized as a time-consuming method The main improvement of FISTA is that the iterative shrinkage operator T α is not applied on the previous estimation x (k) , but rather at y (k) which adopts a well-designed linear combination of the previous two estimates x (k) , x (k-1) . FISTA does not require more than one gradient evaluation at each iteration but just an additional estimation that is smartly chosen. Sparse representation, lying on the fact that most natural images could be well described by fewer basis coefficients in certain transform domains, is an important tool in imaging where the operator F(•) could be Fourier Transform (FT), Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) or Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT). Among them, DWT is the most common sparse transform which has been applied in various fields The proposed FISTA-Net to solve ( where r (k) , y (k) , and x (k) are intermediate variables of the final result; W (k) is the gradient operator; T θ (k) denotes the nonlinear proximal operator; ρ (k) represents the scalar for momentum update. FISTA-Net alternates between the minimization of the smooth differentiable part using the gradient information in (8a), and the minimization of the non-differentiable part using a proximal operator represented by a learned network in (8b). The update in (8c) is a two-step linear combination of the previous two iterations. Fig. Gradient descent module r (k) . This layer updates the reconstructed image based on the gradient descent operation of Eq. (8a), which is the closed-form numerical solution of the data consistency subproblem, given y (k) as the output of the previous layer. Explicitly, it aims to find a more accurate estimation that minimizes Ax-b 2 2 . As the data consistency term corresponds to the physical model, it imposes a physics constraint to stabilize the solution. In For Gaussian noises problems (ε is a Gaussian vector in (1)) with R(x) = x 1 , the formulation of (8a) reduces to (6a) by letting W (k) = μA Eq. (8a) satisfies the necessary condition of convergence by letting where W has small coherence with A. The matrix W is precomputed by solving The objective of ( Proximal mapping module x (k) . The proximal operator aims to remove noise and artifacts in the intermediate result r (k) through thresholding in a certain transform domain. In practice, existing sparse transformations need fine-tuning to capture complex image details. FISTA-Net aims to learn a more flexible representation T (•) and threshold θ (k) from training data. In FISTA-Net, T (•) is designed as a combination of four linear convolutional operators (without bias terms) separated by a Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) (see the dashed box in Fig. Mathematically, the sparse transform is invertible, i.e. F • F = I, where I is the identity operator. Inspired by the loss function of sparse autoencoder where L sym is a symmetry loss of inversion; L spa is a sparse constraint. To deal with the changing noise/artifact level at each iteration, previously reported plug-and-play CNN approaches require various pretrained denoiser with different noise levels Momentum module y (k+1) . The original ISTA can be accelerated by introducing a momentum term The total loss function of FISTA-Net is formulated as: where x Ns -x gt 2 2 is the MSE loss of the estimated output of FISTA-Net with respect to the ground truth. We train the network for different tasks with fixed hyperparameters, i.e. λ 1 = 0.01, λ 2 = 0.001 by default. λ 2 is set to a smaller value because the thresholding function has a similar effect. Empirically, we found it is adequate to set these weights such that the magnitude of different loss terms is balanced into similar scales. Although {μ (k) , θ (k) , ρ (k) } Ns k=1 are learnable and no manual parameter tweaking is required in FISTA-Net, we introduce extra constraints to ensure they converge properly. This is based on the observations that ISTA-Net could possibly generate non-positive step size and thresholding values during iteration, which contradicts the definition of these variables. Therefore, a good rule of thumb is to let {μ (k) , θ (k) , ρ (k) } Ns k=1 be positive. In addition, the gradient step μ k should decay smoothly with iterations. Thresholding value θ (k) should also iteratively decrease because the noise variances are suppressed progressively with iterations. The two-step update weight ρ (k) should increase monotonously corresponding to the two-step update weight in the FISTA. Henceforth, we regularize: where the softplus function sp(x) = ln(1 + exp(x)); ρ (k) ∈ (0, 1) is consistent with FISTA; the iteration step k = 1, 2, . . . , N s . One benefit of the softplus function is its simple derivative function. ISTA-based methods can benefit significantly from warmstarting, i.e. initialization near a minimum of the objective function. For ill-conditioned problems, e.g. EMT, we adopt the solution of (2) with Laplacian operator R(x) = Lx 2 2 , (L is the Laplacian matrix) where we set y (1) = x (0) , and λ 0 = 0.001. For well-conditioned problems, e.g. CT, no regularization is needed for initialization and we simply apply iradon transform x 0 = A T b using Python The convolutional network is initialized with Xavier algorithm The unkown parameters of FISTA-Net are Θ = μ (k) , ρ (k) , θ (k) Ns k=1 , F(•), F(•), where N s is the number of iteration steps, given the training data pairs b (i) , x (i) Nt i=1 , N t is size of the training dataset. The iteration step of FISTA-Net is fixed while conducting the end-to-end training. Since the networks are shared throughout and {w 1 , w 2 , w 3 , c 1 , c 2 , c 3 } are decoupled with iteration, we may choose a different number of iterations for reconstruction. In our experiments, all the networks were optimized using Adam algorithm with a mini-batch size of 64 In this section, we verify the proposed FISTA-Net with two representative imaging modalities, i.e. the non-linear Electromagnetic Tomography (EMT) and the linear sparse-view CT. Three prevailing metrics, i.e. the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE), Peak Signal to Noise Ratio (PSNR) and Structural Similarity Index Measure (SSIM) A. Nonlinear Case: EMT 1) EMT Dataset: EMT is a non-intrusive and non-radiative tomography modality that can image the cross-sectional conductivity distribution inside the object without contact 2) Comparison Study: We compare FISTA-Net with four recently reported methods, i.e. Laplacian regularization Table It is however worth mentioning that all methods failed to accurately reconstruct the absolute conductivity of different objects. One reason is that EMT image reconstruction is a nonlinear problem, where A y in (1) is the sensitivity matrix of coils over spatial conductivity in the sensing region; y is deter- mined by the true conductivity x, spatial coordinate, excitation signals, etc. A y (•) is customarily linearized around a constant y 0 , leading to an approximated linear problem (see Fig. 3) Effect of Number of Layers: To evaluate the effect of the number of layers, we tuned the value from 5 to 9. Table 4) Iteration results: Fig. 5) Generalization Ability: We conducted robustness studies for different noise levels (22dB to 40dB) to further evaluate the generalization ability of FISTA-Net. As the experimental data in realistic scenarios contain natural noise components, we added additional normally distributed noise to the measured data in the test set and recorded the PSNR of the reconstructed Ground Truth Lap. Reg. (x 0 ) FISTA-TV 2) Comparison Study: Four state-of-the-art methods were compared against FISTA-Net, including FBP, FISTA-TV, FBP-ConvNet, and ISTA-Net. FBP is implemented with iradon function in Matlab/Python. We set the maximum iteration steps of FISTA-TV as 100 and the regularization parameter to be 0.001. We set the cascaded stage of ISTA-Net as 6. Similarly, the number of layers of our FISTA-Net is configured as 7, following the same procedure described in Section IV-A.3. Table Table V lists the quantitative evaluation results of the 60 view and 120 view CT using different methods. The proposed FISTA-Net achieved the best results in terms of all the metrics, which is consistent with visual observations. In the cases of 60 and 120 views, FISTA-Net gained improvements of 3.340 dB and 4.098dB PSNR over FBPConvNet respectively, which achieved the best quantitative results among the comparative methods. 3) Iteration results: Fig. The presented iterative results in Section IV-A.4 and IV-B.3 provide intermediate images throughout iterations. In this section, we conduct more experimental analysis concerning the convergence performance of FISTA-Net. For comparison, we consider FISTA-TV, ISTA-Net and FISTA-Net using the same initial guess. The regularization parameter of FISTA-TV was hand-tuned to give the best reconstruction. Both ISTA-Net and FISTA-Net adopt 7 layers. Fig. Rigorous theoretical analysis of convergence is not within the scope of this paper, but we refer the readers to the convergence analysis for Learned ISTA in We propose a model-based deep learning network named FISTA-Net to solve the inverse problems in imaging. FISTA-Net has good interpretability inherited from FISTA, and strong learning ability underpinned by CNN to perform noise removal and detail recovery. Through extensive experiments and analysis on two representative imaging modalities, i.e. EMT (nonlinear case) and sparse-view CT (linear case), we demonstrated that: (1) It shows good generalizability due to the decoupling of the data fidelity term and the proximal operator by unfolding FISTA into cascaded stages. (2) FISTA-Net can be readily extended to different inverse problems in imaging, by changing the physical model A.