The recent explosion of machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI) shows great potential in the breakthrough of metal additive manufacturing (AM) process modeling, which is an indispensable step to derive the process-structure-property relationship. However, the success of conventional machine learning tools in data science is primarily attributed to the unprecedented large amount of labeled data-sets (big data), which can be either obtained by experiments or first-principle simulations. Unfortunately, these labeled data-sets are expensive to obtain in AM due to the high expense of the AM experiments and prohibitive computational cost of high-fidelity simulations, hindering the direct applications of big-data based ML tools to metal AM problems. To fully exploit the power of machine learning for metal AM while alleviating the dependence on "big data", we put forth a physics-informed neural network (PINN) framework that fuses both data and first physical principles, including conservation laws of momentum, mass, and energy, into the neural network to inform the learning processes. To the best knowledge of the authors, this is the first application of physics-informed deep learning to three dimensional AM processes modeling. Besides, we propose a hard-type approach for Dirichlet boundary conditions (BCs) based on a Heaviside function, which can not only exactly enforce the BCs but also accelerate the learning process. The PINN framework is applied to two representative metal manufacturing problems, including the 2018 NIST AM-Benchmark test series. We carefully assess the performance of the PINN model by comparing the predictions with available experimental data and high-fidelity simulation results, , using finite element based variational multi-scale formulation. The investigations show that the PINN, owed to the additional physical knowledge, can accurately predict the temperature and melt pool dynamics during metal AM processes with only a moderate amount of labeled data-sets. The foray of PINN to metal AM shows the great potential of physics-informed deep learning for broader applications to advanced manufacturing. All the data-sets and the PINN code will be made open-sourced in https://yan.cee.illinois. It has been widely believed that metal additive manufacturing (AM) can revolutionize mechanical, aerospace, and biomedical industries owing to its superior capability to print metals with complex geometries directly from digital models without the design constraints of traditional manufacturing routes. The market of metal AM has been growing significantly for the past decade. However, compared with the total manufacturing market, the industrial adoption of metal AM has not reached its expected potential due to a lack of reliable process-structure-property relationships. For the past several years, predictive computational models, in conjunction with in-situ and ex-situ measurements and monitoring Among various computational models at different scales and fidelity, thermal-fluid process simulation is not only an essential tool to understand the metal AM physics but also acts as a spearhead to derive the process-structure-property relationship. The metal AM process is intrinsically a multi-scale and multi-physics problem, involving rapid, complex, and coupled mass/flow/heat exchanges between gas, liquid, and solid phases, with large density ratios and complicated interfacial phenomenon. Current numerical simulation tools often employ mathematical models that couple Navier-Stokes equations and a heat transfer equation to capture the evolution of temperature and melt pool dynamics during manufacturing processes. For decades, the manufacturing community has been adopting computational methods that directly solve these mathematical models or their weak forms, based on spatial discretization (e.g., finite difference, finite volume, finite element, and mesh-free methods) and time-stepping. The predictive capacities of these approaches have been significantly enhanced, thanks to the researchers' persistent efforts in numerical method development from the manufacturing and computational mechanics/mathematics communities. For example, Lawrence Livermore National Lab developed a thermal-fluid solver using the Arbitrary-Lagrangian Eulerian technique, which can simulate laser powder bed fusion (LPBF) processes at powder-scale The core of these conventional approaches can be summarized as the process of replacing PDEs with a set of algebra equations that can be handled by digital computers. Despite the continued success and evolution, these methods require sophisticated mathematical treatments for spatiotemporal discretizations, coupling strategies, boundary conditions, and linear solvers to ensure stability, robustness, and efficiency. The application of these approaches to real additive manufacturing problems is prohibitively expensive and intricate. The highfidelity simulations are typically executed in a parallel environment and consume massive high-performance computing (HPC) hours. Also, the performance of these approaches is often problem-dependent, necessitating numerical practitioners to have a deep understanding of not only the manufacturing problems but also the underlying mathematical techniques. Machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI) have the potential to accelerate breakthroughs in thermal-fluid modeling for metal AM processes by harnessing data from sensors, experiments, and high-fidelity simulations. In general, ML focuses on algorithmic modeling of data and making predictions of labels based on observations, with emphasis on making accurate predictions for classification and regression tasks. Modern deep learning approaches have demonstrated tremendous successes in domains ranging from sentiment analysis to chemical predictions to material design However, using deep learning for AM process modeling is still challenging. The primary challenge arises from the lack of large labeled data-sets since either experimental measurements or high-fidelity simulated data of AM processes are expensive to attain, rendering the big data-based ML/AI algorithms infeasible. The good news in scientific problems, however, is that there is highly condensed knowledge and expertise available in fundamental conservation, evolution, or constitutive principles, which are often expressed as a set of partial differential equations (PDEs). One can incorporate this type of knowledge into ML/AI models to enhance their predictive capability in sparse data regions. Nowadays, these approaches are coined as scientific machine learning (SciML) in the computational mathematics/mechanics communities. In particular, a widely used approach in SciML is to train a conventional deep learning (DL) model such as Gaussian process regression (GPR) Although most of the SciML applications are restricted to single physics systems, we envision the general concept can be extended to tackle the multi-physics problems in metal AM. Thus, this paper put forth a SciML framework for metal additive manufacturing processes to predict the temperature field and melt pool fluid dynamics via a physics-informed neural network (PINN). We aim to fully take advantage of the prediction capabilities of deep neural networks while significantly reducing the amount of costly training labeled data. To this end, the physical conservation laws of momentum, mass, and energy are fused into a fully connected neural network by penalizing the loss function with the residuals of the Navier-Stokes equations and enthalpy conservation equation on a set of collocation points. Owed to this additional knowledge, the learning process only requires a small amount of labeled data-set. Besides, to impose the necessary Dirichlet boundary condition (BC), we borrow the idea from the interface-capturing approach widely used in multi-phase fluid mechanics, in which a small portion of the neural network is solely used to enforce the Dirichlet BC by a Heaviside function. This "hard" approach can not only precisely satisfy the Dirichlet BC but also speed up the learning process, compared with the conventional "soft" approach that uses additional constraint in the loss function to enforce the BC. Once the model is trained, the quantities of interest, such as temperature, velocity, pressure, and melt pool dimensions, can be predicted accurately. The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 represents the physics-informed neural network framework, in which the PDEs of physical principles, design of loss function, enforcement of Dirichlet BC, and training procedures are introduced in an articulated way. Section 3 demonstrates the applications of the PINN framework to two representative manufacturing problems. The first application is using the PINN framework to solve a classic solidification problem from the textbook by Dantzig and Rappaz This section presents the governing equations of the thermal-fluid flows in metal AM processes. The theory of the equations builds upon the tacit assumptions that the solid phase is a highly viscous fluid with the same constant density as the liquid phase, and the loss of metal material due to vaporization Here Eq. 1 and Eq. 2 are the Navier-Stokes equations of incompressible flows, where u is the velocity field, p is the pressure field, g is the gravitational acceleration vector, ∇ is the gradient operator, ∆ is the Laplace operator, ρ and μ are the density and dynamic viscosity, respectively. Eq. 3 is the conversation equation of energy, where T is temperature field, c p is the specific heat capacity, L is the latent heat of fusion, κ is the thermal conductivity, Q T is an energy source. To have well-posed systems, Eqs.1-3 are subjected to the following Dirichlet and Neumann boundary conditions where u bc , p bc and T bc are the prescribed velocity, pressure, and temperature on Dirichlet boundaries, respectively. τ and q are the prescribed traction and heat flux on the Neumann boundaries, respectively. ∇ S is a symmetric gradient operator and n is the unit normal vector on the boundary. In the model, the solid and liquid phases are distinguished by a liquid fraction f L , which takes 1 in the liquid phase, 0 in the solid phase, and a linear profile in the mushy zone where T s and T l are the solidus and liquidus temperature, respectively. With the assistance of f L , the material properties in the thermal-fluid model are evaluated by the following interpolation where ψ denotes the specific material property in the model (e.g., density, dynamic viscosity, specific heat capacity, heat conductivity), and ψ L and ψ S are the corresponding property in the liquid and solid phase, respectively. Neural network is a computing architecture that is vaguely inspired by the biological neural networks that constitute animal brains Figure where w l and b l are the weight matrix and bias vector of this layer, respectively. σ l is the activation function that can introduce the non-linearity to the system The goal of the neural network is to learn the following mapping for a given set of manufacturing parameters (e.g,. alloy properties, laser power, and scanning speed): where the input [t, x] are the collocation points (in both space and time) of interest. The output u N N , p N N , T N N are the velocity, pressure, and temperature fields we want to predict. To enable such a mapping, the hidden parameters of the neural network, W and b, need to be identified by optimizing a meticulously designed loss function, which will be given in the next section. Once W , and b are determined, the output prediction can be easily achieved by a feed-forward evaluation, which is very efficient since only a few matrix multiplications are needed in Eq. 11. The loss function, L(W , b), in the PINN for thermal-fluid flows consists of two components: L data (W , b) and L pde (W , b), which represents the constraint of matching existing labeled data and the constraints of satisfying fundamental physical principles. Their definitions are given as follows. Let û, p, and T denote the available labeled data for velocity, pressure, and temperature, respectively. These labeled data can be either obtained by experiments or validated highfidelity simulations. As a mean squared deviation (MSD) of the discrepancy between the prediction and labeled data, the component in the loss function from the data constraint, L data , is defined as where N u , N p , and N T are the number of labeled velocity, pressure, and temperature data points, respectively. Conventional off-the-shelf machine learning tools purely minimize this loss function to identify the hidden parameters. The success of this approach requires a massive amount of data-sets. However, considering the cost of experimental measurements and high-fidelity simulations, these labeled velocity, pressure, and temperature data points are expensive (sometimes impossible) to obtain. This limitation hinders the direct application of big-data based machine learning tools to metal AM process prediction. To alleviate the dependence on big-data, we substitute extra expertise in fundamental physical principles into the loss function. These physical principles, often expressed as a set of PDEs with appropriate initial and boundary conditions, are highly condensed knowledge of fundamental physical mechanisms that can inform the neural network. For that, we first define the following residuals of conversation equations of momentum, mass, and energy (corresponding to Eqs.(1-3)) as To have well-posed systems, appropriate initial and boundary conditions are often necessary. In this paper, the initial boundary conditions are treated as part of the labeled data constraint. For boundary conditions (BCs), many existing PINN frameworks utilize a "soft" approach by designing additional loss components defined on the collocation points of boundaries to constrain the BCs. The downsides of this approach are two-fold: (1) The accuracy of satisfying the BCs is not guaranteed ; (2) The assigned weight of BC loss can affect learning efficiency, and no theory is existed to guide choosing the weight at this point. In this paper, we treat the Dirichlet BC in a "hard" way by using a particular portion of the neural network to purely satisfy the prescribed Dirichlet BC. For that, we first define a Heaviside function as where d(x) is the distance to the Dirichlet boundary. defines a artificial thickness of the boundary. With H (x), the predictions of the neural networks are defined as where u bc , p bc , and T bc are the prescribed velocity, pressure, and temperature. u, p, and T are the solutions that satisfy the PDEs in the interior. Since H (x) smoothly changes from 1 to 0 as d(x) approaches to 0, the prediction will automatically satisfy the prescribed values by definition, without needing additional constraint. Then, the loss term from the PDEs with embedded Dirichlet BCs is defined as. where N r1 denotes the number of collocation points to constrain the PDEs. In the thermal-fluid flow model for metal AM processes, Neumann BCs incorporate surface tension for flow field and laser for thermal field. In this paper, the Neumann BCs are handled by the conventional way, where the following term is added in the loss function where N r2 and N r3 denote the number of collocation points on the fluid and temperature Neumann boundaries, respectively. With above definitions, The hidden parameters W and b are obtained by minimizing the following total loss function, which are a linear combination of data constraint of L data and PDE constraints of L 1 pde and L 2 pde . min λ 1 pde and λ 2 pde are two positive numbers between 0 and 1, which define the weight of the physical law constraints in the loss function. The PINN model is trained by minimizing the loss function defined in Eq. 22. Most of current machine learning frameworks solve the optimization problem by a stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm, which is a stochastic approximation of the gradient descent (GD) optimization The PINN learning process needs the spatial and temporal derivatives of u, p, and T , which can be accurately and efficiently calculated by using automatic differentiation (AD) The solidification process of aluminum in a graphite mold from the textbook Solidification by Dantzig and Rappaz where x * is the location of solid-liquid interface over time, T m , T s , and T l are the temperature distribution in the mold, solid aluminum, and liquid aluminum, respectively. Despite the simplicity, solving this problem provides valuable insights into the solidi-fication behavior and the performance of the machine learning model. The PINN model employs 5 hidden layers and 200 neurons of each layer, which provides better results over others based on our non-exhaustive investigation. The neural network is physically informed with the energy conservation principle defined in Eq. 3 and trained without labeled data-set. The PINN model predicts the temperature distribution from t = 5 s to t = 10 s. Figure In this section, we apply the PINN framework to the Additive Manufacturing Benchmark (AM-Bench) test series conducted by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) A n a l y t i c framework to predict the temperature, melt pool fluid dynamics, melt pool dimensions, and cooling rates during the NIST AM processes, which corresponds to the first challenge in the NIST AM-Bench test series where Q is the laser power, η is the absorptivity, r b is the laser beam radius, V s is the laser scanning speed. η = 0.43 and r b = 50 μm are used in this paper. Table -pn where dσ dT is the Marangoni coefficient, which is only effective in the tangential direction of the temperature gradient. Except for the top surface, no-slip and fixed reference temperature boundary conditions are used for other surfaces. The PINN model employs a fully connected neural network with 5 hidden layers and 250 neurons per layer, which provides a better balance of accuracy and training efficiency over others based on our non-exhaustive investigation. The model is physically informed by the conservation laws of momentum, mass, and energy defined in Eqs. 1-3. A total of 788, 651 collocation points in the x -t slab are used to penalize the PDE residuals (see Eq. 15) in the loss function. Due to the limited point-wise measurements provided by NIST, we use high-fidelity finite element thermal-fluid simulations to generate the labeled data-sets to facilitate the training. The simulated results are treated as "ground truth" after being compared with the NIST experimental measurements. Appendix briefly presents the core formulation of the finite element formulation that has also been validated for other metal manufacturing process modeling We first compare the predicted results of FEM and PINN with available experimental data for case B (195 W, 0.8 m/s). The purpose is two-fold: 1) Ensure the credibility of FEM data as the training data; 2) Validate the PINN model. Figure We then apply the PINN model to all the three cases listed in Table -2 × 10 A critical factor in metal AM is the cooling rate, which profoundly influences dendrite arm spacing, grain structure, micro-segregation, and hot cracking. In this paper, the cooling rate is calculated as where t c = (D s -D 1273.15 )/V s , the cooling time interval determined by dividing the distance between solidus temperature and 1273.15 K by the scanning speed V s . Table This paper presents the first attempt of using the physics-informed neural network (PINN) to predict the temperature and melt pool fluid dynamics in metal AM processes. We applied the PINN model to two representative metal manufacturing problems. The results show that the PINN can accurately predict the quantities of interest by only using a small amount of labeled training data. This paper is also the first few applications of scientific machine learning (SciML), currently confined to single-phase systems, to complex multi-scale and multi-physics problems that involve multi-phase fluid dynamics, heat transfer and phase transition. The two major technical contributions relevant to metal AM of the paper are: • A SciML framework for metal AM processes, which can accurately predict temperature, pressure, and velocity field without relying on big-data. • A "hard" approach for imposing Dirichlet boundary condition, which exactly imposes the prescribed value and speeds up the learning process. Although deep learning models cannot replace conventional numerical tools that will continue to be the principal player, the initial success presented in this paper demonstrates PINN's potential on the modeling and prediction of complicated metal AM processes and paves the way for the broad adoption in advanced manufacturing. We also have to admit that this paper does not comprehensively handle the complexity of metal AM processes. To be precise, the PINN model here does not resolve the ambient gas phase, free-surface deformation of the melt pool, and the evaporation phenomenon, although the effects are not crucial for the applications considered in the paper. In the future, the multi-phase Navier-Stokes will be enhanced with the evaporation model in the momentum equations, which was used in our control volume finite element model J. Yan is partially supported by ASME Robert M. and Mary Haythornthwaite Research Initiation Award and Singapore National Research Foundation (NRF2018-ITS004-0011). The PINN models were trained at the Texas Advanced Computing Center (Tacc) through a startup allocation on Frontera (CTS20014). These supports are greatly acknowledged. The high-fidelity FEM thermal-fluid simulations make use of a residual-based variational multi-scale formulation (VMS) based on our previous work in Figure The FEM simulations of the NIST AM-bench test series make use of a mesh with 4,464,276 tetrahedral elements. A local refinement is designed to capture the moving laser, which is shown in Figure 