The transparent semiconductor In2O3 is a technologically important material. It combines optical transparency in the visible frequency range and sizable electric conductivity. We present a study of thermal conductivity of In2O3 crystals and find that around 20 K, it peaks to a value as high as 5,000 WK -1 m -1 , comparable to the peak thermal conductivity in silicon and exceeded only by a handful of insulators. The amplitude of the peak drastically decreases in the presence of a type of disorder, which does not simply correlate with the density of mobile electrons. Annealing enhances the ceiling of the phonon mean free path. Samples with the highest thermal conductivity are those annealed in the presence of hydrogen. Above 100 K, thermal conductivity becomes sample independent. In this intrinsic regime, dominated by phonon-phonon scattering, the magnitude of thermal diffusivity, D, becomes comparable to many other oxides, and its temperature dependence evolves towards T -1 . The ratio of D to the square of sound velocity yields a scattering time which obeys the expected scaling with the Planckian time. In 2 O 3 is a technologically appealing wide-gap semiconductor (see Ref. Amorphous or granular indium oxide (InO x ) has been the subject of an independent fundamental research activity focusing on a fascinating two-dimensional superconductor In this paper, we present a study of temperature dependence of thermal conductivity in single crystals of In 2 O 3 . We find that the peak thermal conductivity in In 2 O 3 crystal can reach as high as 5000 WK -1 m -1 . In a few other solids, such as diamond Bulk In 2 O 3 single crystals were grown with a crystal growth technique under the name levitation-assisted selfseeding crystal growth method (LASSCGM) as described in detail by Galazka et al. We measured thermal conductivity in a steady-state configuration with one heater and two thermometers. Like in a setup used before We can identify two potential sources of experimental uncertainty. The first is the finite size of the thermal contacts. In this case, the sample length was 5 mm and the typical contact size was 0.1 mm, implying an uncertainty of 2% on the absolute value. The other source of uncertainty is heat loss along the measuring wires. The geometric factor of our measuring wires, given the thickness (25 μm) and their length ( 15 mm), is three orders of magnitude smaller than the geometric factor of our samples. Thermally resistant manganin wires were used to connect thermocouples to the heat bath, and therefore, given manganin thermal conductivity (κ manganin ≈ 1 W/Km at 10K and ≈ 20 W/Km at 300K Figure We measured the temperature dependence of resistivity and Hall constant R H , of all samples. Carrier density was determined using n = 1/R H e (e is the elementary Phonon mean free path in In2O3, extracted from thermal conductivity, specific heat, and the sound velocity. The electric resistivity and the carrier density of these samples are listed in Table charge). This single-band expression is justified by the fact that the minimum of the conduction band is at the center of the Brillouin zone Mobile electrons can also conduct heat. In general, the measured thermal conductivity has two contributions: κ meas = κ ph + κ e . The latter is the electronic contribution to thermal conductivity, which can be estimated using the electric resistivity and the Wiedemann-Franz law: κ e = L 0 T /ρ, where L 0 = 2.45 × 10 -8 V 2 /K 2 is the Sommerfeld value. Even in the most metallic like sample, κ e κ meas . Indeed, for ρ ≈ 2mΩcm, one expects κ e /T =L 0 /ρ ≈ 10 -3 WK -2 m -1 . Even at room temperature, this is a tiny fraction of the measured signal. We can therefore safely conclude that κ meas ≈ κ ph . The effective phonon mean free path ph can be estimated using the kinetic equation κ = 1 3 C ph v s ph . (Note that such an estimation neglects the possible variation of the mean free path among modes and frequencies.) Figure The behavior seen here is to be contrasted with the case of doped semiconductors such as silicon and germanium Our observation implies that the case of In 2 O 3 is more complicated and disorder length scale is not simply the interdopant distance. In the as-grown sample sample 1, the deviation from the intrinsic regime starts below 150 K (see Fig. The two samples with highest κ peak were annealed in the presence of H 2 (see Table A theoretical description of the thermal conductivity can be achieved by calculating the complex phonon spectrum of this solid and solving the Boltzmann-Peierls transport equation Comparison with other solids. Comparison of the thermal conductivity in the best In2O3 sample with diamond count normal collisions between phonons Tantalizingly, in sample 6, where the low-temperature ph is close to the sample thickness and phonons become ballistic, ph (T) peaks at 10 K, a possible signature of phonon hydrodynamics We come back to this intrinsic regime below. Figure Let us now turn our attention to the magnitude of thermal diffusivity in the intrinsic regime. Above 100 K, thermal conductivity in all six samples becomes identical The τ /τP ratio vs the vM /vs ratio in different systems adopted from Ref in magnitude and in temperature dependence. Heat conduction in this temperature range is governed by phononphonon scattering. Our data combined with specific heat reported previously In this intrinsic regime, the asymptotic T -1 temperature dependence of thermal diffusivity represents the temperature dependence of the phonon-phonon scatter-ing cross section. Recently, an empirical lower boundary to D in this regime was noticed Here, s is a dimensionless parameter (representing the ratio of the scattering time τ to τ P ). It was observed A recent theoretical account of the empirical boundary to thermal diffusivity In the Mousatov-Hartnoll plot We can add In 2 O 3 to this plot. It has a melting temperature of T M = 2223 K Interestingly, In 2 O 3 and Al 2 O 3 reside at the opposite ends of the green stripe. This is understandable. Mousatov and Hartnoll In summary, we measured the thermal conductivity of the transparent semiconductor In 2 O 3 and found a peak at 20 K whose amplitude is surpassed only by a few solids. The peak thermal conductivity was found to be extremely sensitive to disorder. In the intrinsic regime, thermal diffusivity respects a boundary found in other insulators.