Electro-optic modulators are utilized ubiquitously ranging from applications in data communication to photonic neural networks. While tremendous progress has been made over the years, efficient phase-shifting modulators are challenged with fundamental tradeoffs, such as voltage-length, index change-losses or energy-bandwidth, and no single solution available checks all boxes. While voltage-driven phase modulators, such as based on lithium niobate, offer low loss and high speed operation, their footprint of 10's of cm-scale is prohibitively large, especially for density-critical applications, for example in photonic neural networks. Ignoring modulators for quantum applications, where insertion loss is critical, here we distinguish between current versus voltage-driven modulators. We focus on the former, since current-based schemes of emerging thin electro-optical materials have shown unity-strong index modulation suitable for heterogeneous integration into foundry waveguides. Here, we provide an in-depth ab-initio analysis of obtainable modulator performance based on heterogeneously integrating lowdimensional materials, i.e. graphene, thin films of indium tin oxide, and transition metal dichalcogenide monolayers into a plurality of optical waveguide designs atop silicon photonics. Using the fundamental modulator tradeoff of energy-bandwidth-product as a design-quality quantifier, we show that a small modal cross section, such as given by plasmonic modes, enables highperformance operation, physically realized by arguments on charge-distribution and low electrical resistance. An in-depth design understanding of phase-modulator performance, beyond doped-junctions in silicon, offers opportunities for micrometercompact yet energy-bandwidth-ratio constrained modulators with timely opportunities to hardware-accelerate applications beyond data communication towards photonic machine intelligence, for instance; where both performance and integration-density are critical. HE ever-increasing growth of bandwidth demands technological breakthroughs of short reach interconnects The work of V. J. Sorger was supported in part by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR) under Grants FA9550-17-1-0071 and FA9550-17-1-0377. (Corresponding author: Volker J. Here, in this work we focus our discussion on the electrooptic modulator, the workhorse-of-the-internet, converting high-speed electrical data into optical domain which underlies a plethora of applications ranging going beyond optical communications In addition, classifying based on physical mechanisms, another differentiation is the way the optical index change is induced, namely either being current-driven modulators versus voltage (field)--driven modulators. In the former, the index can be tuned by injecting (or depleting) charge carriers into (or from) the active region of the materials via capacitive gating Here, we are interested in deriving a fundamental physical framework towards comparing disparate performance metrics and relevant tradeoffs for utilizing these emerging low dimensional materials in electro-optic integrated phase modulation. First, graphene is selected for its unique electrical and optical properties. Next, we choose indium tin oxide (ITO) as this is the most widely used TCO material in industry. Finally, we investigate tungsten di selenide (WSe2) as a representative 2D material from the TMDs which have gained a renewed interest in the community from their bulk 3dimentional counterparts. We investigate these materials for their phase-tuning capability corresponding to current driven schemes in an ab-initio approach, and explore their fundamental charge requirements to deliver a phase shift. We also appoint an array of modal structures comprising of both photonic and plasmonic options to extract relevant parameters for our ab-initio approach for these representative plurality of modes. Finally, we conduct a perturbative performance analysis for disparate active phase shifters relying on aforementioned modal structures to gain practical understanding of device performances and tradeoffs for electrooptic modulators. First, we start off with a generic construction for our phase modulator study where we define relevant geometric waveguide parameters to our ab-initio approach. Then we define phase change cross-sections pertaining to the waveguide geometrical parameters and formulate necessary device metrics for the phase modulator analysis based upon those parameters. A generic scheme exhibiting a waveguide integrated currentdriven phase modulator showcases the modulator length, L and cross-sectional width, wa which is practically the waveguide width (Fig. Adopting the theory by Haus Now, since we are dealing with the two dimensional active region, we may write where is the normalized shape of the mode, is position of active layer so that , where is the active layer width (we assume that in the middle of active layer). Therefore, after performing integration we obtain We choose disparate emerging materials for integrated photonics to investigate phase modulation effects. These emerging low-dimensional materials have gained popularity in recent literature for their heterogenic integration compatibility with, for instance, the Si photonic platform. Here, we take an in-depth look into three modulation mechanism classes among these emerging novel materials including graphene (Pauli blocking and free carriers), indium tin oxide (ITO, free carrier dispersion), and WSe2 (exciton modulation via carriers). Graphene as a phase modulator bears a unique feature -two different mechanisms of index change acting in unison when more carriers get injected. The first mechanism is associated with the reduction of refractive index as the Fermi energy , and thus, the interband absorption edge moves towards higher energies. The second mechanism is reduction of index due to increase of (negative) free carrier response in accordance with the Drude formula. At the same time, the upshift of absorption edge causes decrease of interband absorption, but an increase in the number of free carriers causes the opposite effect. As a result, it is possible to select operating conditions in such a way that index modulation is strong while the absorption modulation is fully cancelled. Such arrangement would be highly desirable as it would facilitate to achieve full zero transmission in Mach-Zehnder modulators, and would reduce nonlinear distortion. To find out what are the conditions for such pure phase modulation, we consider the absorption coefficient due to interband transitions of a single layer graphene in a waveguide, which can be written as (Appendix B) , which is quite high. However, such densities are attainable and have been reported in recent literature The change in the Fermi energy required to obtain a phase shift can be found from For ITO, one can obtain the index change simply via KK relations. The index change is (see appendix C) Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are a novel class of 2D materials that are gaining renewed interest in the community for their unique properties, such as tunable bandgap as a function of strain We can also repeat all the calculations for ITO and find the phase change cross section as We choose different realistic modes for our relevant parameter extraction combining both photonic and plasmonic designs. Our choice of the three different low-dimensional active materials coupled with photonic/plasmonic configurations puts our waveguide consideration array into 6 different modal structures. Every waveguide based modulator modal structure in this study are chosen on the Si on insulator (SOI) platform with SiO2 substrate. All the photonic modal structures are designed with a widely used Si photonic waveguide dimensions of 500 nm × 220 nm, constrained by the epi-Si height of standard foundry processes and diffraction limit of C-band NIR light in Si. The photonic modal structures place the low-dimensional active material over the Si waveguide separated by a thin film of dielectric (oxide) facilitating electrostatic gating schemes (Fig. As expected from our prior work on electro absorption modulators Building upon the analytical material dependent results in sec. III, combined with realistically attainable modal parameters with our chosen modes in sec. IV, in this section we verify these perturbative results to reflect actual device performance (Fig. Similarly, for the ITO case we use, where and . is the collision frequency of the carriers in the ITO, and is the scattering time. We choose a scattering time of 5 fs consistent with our previous experimental results of ITO material's metrology and spectroscopic ellipsometry Finally, the carrier concentration change dependency of the effective index change for WSe2 is taken as Next, we calculate the active device lengths required for phase shifts for all different modal structures based on the maximum (and minimum) attainable effective index change for our carrier concentration conditions (Fig. Additionally, we evaluate the attainable phase shift, with the amount of injected charge using (Fig. fundamental modulation bandwidth potential for these schemes. However, such a low resistance may not be realistic for the photonic modes, where partial and selective doping has to be used in order to keep both the carrier density, and hence, optical loss low Prior to concluding, it would be instructional to compare these three relatively novel phase modulation schemes with the venerable lithium niobate (LiNbO3), which has recently seen a renaissance associated with development of thin film waveguides integrated on silicon The advantage of voltage (or, better said, field-) driven over current driven modulators is easy to discern. Each carrier injected in ITO or graphene only changes the permittivity locally, while each carrier injected into an electrode together with its image on the counter electrode engenders electric field and changes the permittivity through entire active layer thickness. Obviously, in photonic waveguides, one can fill the entire 100's of nanometers thick waveguide with active material making voltage driven modulators more attractive than current driven modulators, if footprint can be ignored for the PIC design. But in plasmonic modulators, the thickness of the optical mode is small, hence the advantages of voltage driven scheme shrinks over current-driven designs , while adding an additional benefit of micrometer compactness beneficial for dense PIC layouts. In conclusion, we have carried out a general analysis of different emerging materials for application in integrated electro-optic modulation. We have shown that performance of electro-optic modulator can be estimated on the basis of just two parameters; one is material related -phase change crosssection, ; and the other is the waveguide effective crosssection, . The ratio of these two cross-sections determines the number of carriers (charge) required to shift phase by 180o. Three materials considered here -graphene, TMD and ITO, all have comparable phase change cross-sections, and it makes ITO competitive for phase modulation, which is strikingly different from electro-absorption based modulators where performance of ITO or any other free carrier modulator is orders of magnitude inferior to graphene and TMD Probably multilayer graphene would be a more ideal medium for compact modulators. The same cannot be said about TMDs since multilayer TMD exhibits strong indirect absorption. Overall one can say that as any emerging materials, monolayers of graphene and TMDs are overrated for electrooptic modulation. They do show excellent performance per each carrier, but the net effect quickly saturates as one runs out of the available densities of states in a monolayer, so it is difficult to achieve 180o phase shift within a short length. On the other hand, ITO is less glamorous in terms of performance per carrier compared to these 2D materials, but one can put more carriers into it facilitating an overall decent effect as demonstrated in When compared with existing electro-optic materials (e.g. LiNbO3, polymers, GaAs, InP) all of which are voltage driven, i.e. with no carrier injection, the three current (or injection) driven materials considered here are highly competitive in the thin plasmonic waveguides but much less so in the photonic waveguides. Of course, besides the fundamental performance parameters discussed here; there are many factors that may influence which material to use. These factors are mostly related to the ease of fabrication and integration on an MOS compatible Si platform and may turn out to be decisive when it comes to moving the modulators out of the lab and into commercial space. Nevertheless, we hope that the simple yet rigorous comparative analysis of fundamental performance characteristics of electro-optic modulators accomplished here, will be useful as a guide to researchers looking for the best fit to any particular application niche. When the active layer has finite thickness one can evaluate integral in (1) as 