Atomically thin binary 2-dimensional (2D) semiconductors exhibit diverse physical properties depending on their composition, structure and thickness. By adding another element in those materials, which will lead to formation of ternary 2D materials, the property and structure would greatly change and significantly expanded applications could be explored. In this work, we report structural and optical properties of atomically thin chromium thiophosphate (CrPS4), a ternary antiferromagnetic semiconductor. Its structural details were revealed by X-ray and electron diffractions. Transmission electron microscopy showed that preferentially-cleaved edges are parallel to diagonal Cr atom rows, which readily identified their crystallographic orientations. Strong in-plane optical anisotropy induced birefringence that also enabled efficient determination of crystallographic orientation using polarized microscopy. The lattice vibrations were probed by Raman spectroscopy for the first time and exhibited significant dependence on thickness of crystals exfoliated down to single layer. Optical absorption determined by reflectance contrast was dominated by d-d type transitions localized at Cr 3+ ions, which was also responsible for the major photoluminescence peak at 1.31 eV. The spectral features in the absorption and emission spectra exhibited noticeable thickness-dependence and hinted a high photochemical activity for single layer CrPS4. The current structural and optical investigation will provide a firm basis for future study and application of this novel magnetic semiconductor. can be increased to near room temperature owing to enhanced ferromagnetic ordering by applying 8% strain. Among various TTMCs, chromium thiophosphate (CrPS4) is a promising antiferromagnetic material with a Neel temperature of 36 K in a bulk form In this work, we synthesized high-quality CrPS4 crystals using chemical vapor transport (CVT) and performed optical studies on mechanically isolated 2D CrPS4 of thickness ranging from single to hundreds of layers. Structural analyses using X-ray diffraction (XRD) revealed its space group C 2 Synthesis and characterizations of single crystals. The crystal structure of CrPS4 has monoclinic symmetry with a= 10.871 Å, b= 7.254 Å, c= 6.140 Å, β= 91.88°, volume= 483.929 Å 3 , space group C 2 The magnetic property measurement system (MPMS), which has a sensitive superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometer, was used to characterize the magnetic property of the synthesized bulk CrPS4 crystal. The temperature-dependent magnetization measurement revealed that the synthesized sample has antiferromagnetism with the Neel temperature of 37.9K (see Figure Figure Viewing the atomic crystal structure in Figure Polarized optical microscopy. Among 2D materials having in-plane structural anisotropy, black phosphorus (BP) is a well-studied representative with a puckered structure. preset on a certain crystallographic orientation (a axis) as shown in Figure As a monoclinic crystal, CrPS4 is optically biaxial and may exhibit birefringence. Linearly polarized light propagating perpendicular to the basal plane can be described by a vector sum of two orthogonal polarizations, characteristic of a and b axes, which will experience different refractive indices. Thus, the in-plane anisotropy in CrPS4 leads to reflected light of elliptical polarization in general. For this reason, reflected light could be observed even though the polarizer and analyzer were aligned perpendicularly to each other. Also, the reflection reached a maximum when the angles between the incident polarization and the principal axes are 45 or 135 degrees, which is expected from a birefringent material. Thickness-dependent lattice vibrations. Lattice vibrations of 2D crystals have revealed interesting behaviors owing to confinement along the stacking axis. From bulk samples (Figure Even a weak coupling essentially increases the restoring force leading to a mode hardening. for the outermost layers than inner ones owing to lack of neighbors for the former. Because surface layers account for a larger fraction in thinner layers, the surface effect can influence lattice vibrations of single and few-layered 2D crystals more significantly. Quantitative understanding, however, requires theoretical investigation on the competition between the mode softening by the surface effect and the hardening by vdW interlayer coupling. It is also to be noted that thicknessdependent dielectric screening of interlayer Coulomb interaction plays a minor role. CrPS4, which has an optical contrast sufficient for identification under an optical microscope, only slightly weaker than that of 2L (Figure Absorption and photoluminescence. The electronic structure of 2D CrPS4 near the Fermi level can be probed by optical absorption and emission. For the former, reflectance measurements were performed instead of transmission due to higher sensitivity. where R and R0 are reflectance of the film and the bare substrate, respectively. These two features are consistent with absorption spectra obtained in a transmission mode from bulk samples cleaved on a transparent adhesive tape (Figure Notably, the optical absorption spectra suggest that the electronic structure of 2D CrPS4 is dependent on thickness but overall close to that of bulk. The salient feature in the PL spectra of CrPS4 (Figure The above absorption and emission spectra revealed that optical transitions of 2D CrPS4 in the visible and near-IR ranges resemble those of its bulk form and are dominated by d-d transitions of Cr 3+ ions under pseudo-octahedral crystal field perturbation. The slight peak energy changes in the absorption spectra can be attributed to the stacking or confinement effects. It is also to be noted that the PL intensity is highly nonlinear and can be very weak for 1L, as summarized in the decreasing PL quantum yield for thinner layers. We attribute this to quenching by defects generated by excitation laser beam. Although the average power density of the excitation beam in the PL measurements was kept below 0.1 mW/μm 2 , the gradual change was inevitable in the subsequent measurements in the Ar atmosphere. Zero Raman and negligible PL signals for 1L but still with finite absorption at the excitation wavelengths suggests that the thinnest CrPS4 is unusually susceptible to photodegradation and other external perturbation. Since the early oxidation study of graphene, We investigated structural and optical properties of single -and few-layer CrPS4 synthesized by CVT method using TEM, AFM, optical microscopy, and Raman/reflectance/PL spectroscopies. Synthesized CrPS4 showed single-crystallinity and its XRD data matched precisely with the theoretical prediction. By analyzing the preferred cleavage angles with TEM and OM, the crystallographic orientation of the exfoliated samples could be easily identified. The polarized microscopy revealed a strong in-plane optical birefringence, which can be also used in determining its lattice orientations. From the Raman measurements with three different laser wavelengths, certain peaks showed variation with thickness evolution, which can be used as an indicator of thickness. Absorption and PL measurements revealed that this material is a semiconductor with an optical band gap of 1.31 ± 0.01 eV, which is attributed to a d-d type transition of Cr 3+ ions. Due to its antiferromagnetic ordering below 36 K and semiconducting behavior, CrPS4 has a high potential in 2D magnetism study and spintronic devices. The TEM and optical analyses in the current will provide an effective and accurate method to determine thickness and crystallographic orientation of 2D CrPS4 in studying its novel material properties and applications. The observed strong structural and optical anisotropy suggests that its electronic and magnetic behaviors are also orientation-dependent and many intriguing properties are to be discovered for this and similar crystal systems. Synthesis process. Single crystalline CrPS4 was synthesized using CVT method. The mixture of powdered elements (99.5 % Cr, 99.99 % P and 99.5 % S with a molar ratio of 1:1:4; Sigma-Aldrich) was vacuum-sealed into a quartz ampoule. This ampoule was placed into a tubular furnace, which has a temperature gradient, and the source side was in the high-temperature zone. The furnace temperature ramped to 700 °C at the rate of 1 °C/min and was kept at 700 °C for a week. After that, the ampoule was slowly cooled down to room temperature and broken to collect the synthesized crystals. Characterizations. The flakes of 40 mg were put in 100 ml of N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) and dispersed using a sonication bath for 4 h. To obtain the powdered CrPS4, the solution was filtered through a porous membrane. The filtered powder was kept in a vacuum oven to remove the solvent. XRD patterns of the powder and single crystal bulk material were obtained by a diffractometer (D8 Advance, Bruker Corporation) using Cu K-alpha radiation (1.5406 nm) at room temperature. Mechanically exfoliated CrPS4 on SiO2/Si substrate was picked up by thin polycarbonate (PC) film and transferred to a TEM grid. Residual PC film was removed by chloroform solvent. The focused ion beam (FIB) technique was employed to fabricate the sample for the cross-sectional view. Also, exfoliated CrPS4 was FIB-milled until it is electron-transparent. Then, the thin lamella was removed from its trench and transferred to a TEM grid. The atomically resolved TEM and STEM image were carried out using an image Cs-corrected Titan at 80 kV and probe Cs-corrected JEM-2100F at 200 kV. Optical spectroscopies. Thin CrPS4 samples (1L ~ 10 nm) for the optical measurements were prepared by mechanical exfoliation of the CVT-grown crystals onto SiO2/Si or amorphous quartz substrates. The home-built setup for the micro-Raman and PL measurements has been described elsewhere. one He-Ne gas laser for 632.8 nm) was focused onto a 1-μm diameter spot on a sample using an objective lens (40x, numerical aperture = 0.60). The back-scattered signal was collected by the same objective and fed into a Czerny-Turner spectrometer (focal length = 300 mm) equipped with a charge-coupled detector (CCD) cooled with liquid nitrogen. The spectral resolution defined by the FWHM of the Rayleigh peak was 3.0 cm -1 and 1.5 meV for the Raman and PL measurements, respectively. For the reflectance measurements, a similar microscope-based spectrometer with a thermoelectically-cooled CCD was used with a broadband collimated light beam from a tungsten halogen/deuterium lamp. To avoid the photodegradation during the Raman and PL measurements, samples were placed in an optical cell filled with high-purity Ar gas (flow rate = 1.0 L/min). Reflectance measurements were carried out in the ambient conditions. 