We report epitaxial growth and surface structure of infinite-layer cuprate Sr1-xNdxCuO2 films on SrTiO3(001) substrates by combining ozone-assisted molecular beam epitaxy and in-situ scanning tunneling microscopy. Careful substrate temperature and flux control has been used to achieve single phase, stoichiometric and c-axis oriented films. The surface of the films is usually characterized by mixed CuO2 surface and grid-like superstructure. The superstructure exhibits a periodicity of 3.47 nm that corresponds to a coincidence lattice between overlayer peroxide SrO2 and underlying CuO2 plane, and gives rise to conductance spectrum that is distinct from the Mott-Hubbard band structure of CuO2. At higher Nd composition x > 0.1, a (2 × 2) surface characteristic of the hole-doped CuO2 emerges, which we ascribe to the intake of apical oxygens in the intervening Sr planes. Infinite-layer (IL) ACuO 2 (A = Ca, Sr, Ba) compounds exhibit the simplest crystal structure among cuprates, in which the major superconducting CuO 2 is alternatively separated by alkaline earth cations along the crystallographic c-axis 1 . Partial substitution of divalent A 2+ ions by trivalent ions such as La 3+ and Nd 3+ leads to electrondoped superconductivity with a record transition temperature T c of 43 K Epitaxial films of IL cuprates can be stabilized and prepared on appropriate substrates by using pulsed laser deposition (PLD) The experiments were performed on a commercial ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) STM apparatus (Unisoku), connected to an ozone-assisted MBE chamber for in-situ film growth. Nb-doped SrTiO 3 (001) substrates were firstly degassed at 600 o C, and subsequently annealed at 1250 o C under UHV for 20 minutes to get the clean surface. Prior to film epitaxy, fluxes of all metal sources (Sr, Nd and Cu) were precisely calibrated in sequence by using a standard crystal microbalance (QCM, Inficon SQM160H). Epitaxial thin films were then prepared by co-deposition of highpurity metal sources from standard Knudsen cells under an ozone flux beam of ∼ 1.1 × 10 -5 Torr. The growth rate is 0.4 unit cell per minute, and the flux ratio between Nd and Cu sources is used to calculate the nominal composition x. Polycrystalline PtIr tips were cleaned by electron-beam heating and calibrated on MBE-grown Ag/Si(111) films. Tunneling spectra were measured using a standard lock-in technique with a small bias modulation of 10 mV at 937 Hz. After in-situ STM measurements at 78 K, the samples were taken out from the UHV chamber for X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements using the monochromatic Cu K α1 radiation with a wavelength of 1.5406 Å. Evidently, the cation stoichiometry of SNCO is quasiself-regulating, resembling, to some extent, the growth of GaAs and metal chalcogenides A larger λ of 16. To identify the two apparently distinct surfaces of IL SNCO films, we acquire atomically-resolved STM images, as illustrated in Fig. In contrast, the grid-like superstructure is characterized by a larger in-plane unit cell of ∼ 5.0 Å (marked by the white square), rotated by 45 o relative to the CuO 2 unit cell in Fig. By acquiring bias-dependent STM images with atomicscale resolution in Figs. Next we explore the dependence of SNCO films on the nominal composition x of Nd. As shown in Fig. 