This paper defines and develops useful concepts related to the several kinds of inductances employed in any comprehensive design-oriented ferrite-based inductor model, which is required to properly design and control high-frequency operated electronic power converters. It is also shown how to extract the necessary parameters from a ferrite material datasheet in order to get inductor models useful for a wide range of core temperatures and magnetic induction levels. F Errite-core based low-frequency-current biased inductors are commonly found, for example, in the LC output filter of voltage source inverters (VSI) or step-down DC/DC converters. Those inductors have to effectively filter a relatively low-amplitude high-frequency current being superimposed on a relatively large-amplitude low-frequency current. It is of paramount importance to design these inductors in a way that a minimum inductance value is always ensured which allows the accurate control and the safe operation of the electronic power converter. In order to efficiently design that specific type of inductor, a method to find the required minimum number of turns N min and the optimum air gap length g opt to obtain a specified inductance at a certain current level is needed. This method has to be based upon an accurate inductor model, for which certain inductances and properties need to be defined and explained. Also, these inductance definitions needs to be parametrized, among other things, according to the specific ferrite material employed in the core. The problem of designing such kind of inductors has been widely treated in literature This paper is organized as follows. In section II, a general magnetic core model is described and its associated permeabilities are introduced. In section III, definitions of several types of inductances are presented. Section IV shows how to obtain the previously defined permeabilities from the ferrite material datasheet. Section V presents some useful properties of the reversible inductance that could be needed to justify the selection criterion of the inductance value as well as N min and g opt . Finally, conclusions are presented in section VI. In this section, we obtain a model for the general magnetic circuit considered in Figure In such a situation, Ampere's law relates the frequency components of current i(t) with their corresponding magnetic field strength H components as follows where dl is the path vector, parallel to H. Separating the frequency components yields where ∆H HF is the amplitude of the field strength excursion due to ∆i HF , the amplitude of the high-frequency current excursion during 1 fHF . The magnetic induction B(t, l) = BLF (l) + B HF (t, l) and its peak-to-peak variation ∆B HF determine the peak induction B(l) = BLF (l)+ ∆BHF (l) . These are related to their corresponding field strength ĤLF (l), H HF (t, l), ∆H HF (l) and Ĥ(l) according to the medium permeability. Having the air gap paramagnetic properties, along L g simply hold where μ 0 is the vacuum permeability. In the magnetic core path L c , those relationships depend on the shape of the ferrite magnetization curve which is shown in Figure because it relates only the low frequency amplitude of the magnetic induction and field strength in the ferrite material when the low frequency i LF takes also its amplitude value îLF . The magnetic induction generated by i LF will not vary much from BLF while t is into the time span defined in (1). Hence during 1 fHF , i HF (t) will produce an approximately closed minor magnetic loop of amplitude (∆B HF , ∆H HF ) starting and ending in the neighbourhood of BLF , as it is shown in Figure ∆H HF (l) = ∆B HF (l) If ∆B HF is made sufficiently small, then μ ∆ and the LF-commutation curve start to be practically independent of ∆B HF . At this point, on the one hand the existing linear relationship between B HF and H HF is captured by the socalled reversible permeability at BLF , μ r ev μ r ev BLF = lim ∆BHF →0 μ ∆ BLF , ∆B HF On the other hand, the LF-commutation curve tends to the regular commutation curve and their respective amplitude permeabilities are related as Now making BLF → 0 due to îLF → 0, the initial permeability μ i is defined as Note that in the core, the relationship between B and H depends not only on the ferrite magnetic characteristics but also on the way in which B evolves with time. In the magnetic circuit of Figure where S c is a core cross-section perpendicular to L c , S g is the remaining surface of S crossing the air gap and dS is the area vector of S. The left side of ( where A c (l) is the area of S c at a certain point l ∈ L c . Around the air gap, the magnetic induction is far more nonuniform in S g than in S c due to the fringing flux. Thus, the mean induction on L g can be quite different from the actual values at the edges of the gap, but being a paramagnetic region, it suffices to propose an effective gap area A ge (l) with l ∈ L g , as if all the induction were there concentrated. Note that A ge (l) is approximately equal to A cg , the core crosssection in contact with the air gap, if its length is much smaller than the linear dimensions characterizing A cg . Given that the winding turns N embrace practically all Φ c , it follows that the linkage flux Ψ is The peak linkage flux Ψ and magnetic induction B(l) in the ferrite core are with R LF ca , R c ∆ and R g are the core LF-amplitude reluctance, core incremental reluctance and the air gap reluctance respectively. Considering the situation where ∆Ψ HF → 0, μ a and μ r ev define the amplitude and reversible inductances at ΨLF , L a and L r ev , as R ca and R c r ev are the core amplitude reluctance and the core reversible reluctance respectively. L a and L r ev usually have dissimilar values at a same ΨLF and vary differently as ΨLF increases from zero to relatively high values. It is then important to find a common situation to relate and relativize their current values with. In a demagnetized material, μ a and μ r ev coincide at the origin which means that L a and L r ev converge to the initial inductance L i being R ci the core initial reluctance. Note that only μ i does not vary with the core cross-sectional area A c (l) along the magnetic path. However, μ i as well as μ a and μ r ev do depend heavily on the core temperature, as is modeled in the next section. The dependence of R ca in (18) and R ci in (21) from core temperature T c and magnetic induction BLF = B, in each specific part of the core, is addressed when the corresponding functions μ a BLF , T c and μ i (T c ) are extracted from the ferrite material datasheet The temperature and induction dependence of R c r ev in (19) is subjected to find μ r ev BLF , T c . In Let us first consider the empirical models that curvefit the upper (u) and lower (l) branches of the dynamic magnetization (B-H) curve of Figure 2 with the positive parameters: coercive field strength H c , coercive permeability μ c and squareness coefficients a u and a l for each branch. Supposing that a l ≈ a u and being B = BLF , μ r ev BLF , T c can be expressed as Apart from μ i , μ r ev depends on T c through B s , H c , a l and μ c and thus (23) has to be numerically fitted for each particular T c . The fitting data is obtained from the 3-D lookup table H(B, T = T c ) based on the corresponding curves from the ferrite material datasheet The starting guess points for the fitting process are extracted from 2-D lookup tables B * s (T ), H * c (T ), a * l (T ) and μ * c (T ). B * s (T ) and H * c (T ) are built to linearly interpolate the two saturation induction and coercive field strength values (B s1 , B s2 , H c1 and H c2 respectively), that are stated at the two corresponding temperatures T 1 , T 2 , in the datasheet of the magnetic material. Lookup tables a * l (T ) and μ * c (T ) are conformed in the following way. Let H 11 (B 11 , T 1 ) and H 12 (B 12 , T 1 ) be the field strength at two different induction levels from the lower branch of the B-H curve at temperature T 1 given by the datasheet. The value B 11 could be from the "linear" region of the curve, while B 12 could be taken from the "knee" between "linear" and "saturation" regions of the curve at temperature T 1 . The estimations of coefficients a l and μ c from (23) at temperature T 1 , a * l1 and μ * c1 respectively, are found numerically solving respectively. Figure It is important to remark that in this situation L r ev is the minimum value of reversible inductance arising along the whole symmetric major loop having ± ĤLF , BLF as tipping points. This is in fact proved by taking into consideration the upper branch of the particular ± ĤLF , BLF major loop which can be described in terms of ( 