A numerical model of 2D finite element in a steady-state level was developed for the electromagnetic field, heat distribution, and thermal stress expansion in an oxide Czochralski crystal growth system. The extended model was employed to compare the impact of different geometries of induction coils and crucibles in the growth process. Analysis of the results emphasizes the potential of the modified geometries in alteration of the electromagnetic field and heat distribution. Consequently, the optimization of crystal/melt interface shape, thermal stress accumulation, and distribution in the growing crystal can be achieved. Finally, the proposed approaches for thermal stress calculations were compared. The outcomes showed a qualitative agreement between two methods of thermoelastic stress analysis in the calculation of stress distribution in BGO crystal. The bismuth germanate (BGO) crystals have been utilized in a wide range of applications from medical equipment (e.g. positron emission tomography) to high energy physics (e.g. low background spectrometry, high-energy calorimetry, and Compton suppression shield detectors). Suitable optical properties, reasonable crystal side smoothness, and preservable cylindrical shape are the factors that could make BGO crystals fit the mentioned applications. Conventional (high gradient) Czochralski technology with its key advantages can fulfill the conditions for growing such BGO crystals. Besides, this method comparably is less expensive and more flexible in terms of crystal size than Bridgman and Low Thermal Gradient Czochralski (LTG-Cz) methods Today, computer simulation is a practical tool to examine the operation of a crystal growth system under different conditions. Modeling of BGO crystal growth using the Czochralski method has a long term history both in the LG-Cz method (for example Here we considered three different coil-crucible configurations and compared the obtained numerical results. Variation of the electromagnetic heat generation, temperature, and fluid velocity fields, crystal/melt interface, and thermal stress pattern in the crystal by modifying the heating system geometry are tracked during different stages of the growth. Afterward, the efficiency of the different coil-crucible configurations in reducing the crystallization front depth, decreasing the maximum values of developed thermal stress in the crystal, avoiding melt undercooling, and incrementing the efficiency of oxide Czochralski growth were addressed. Three regarded configurations are: Case 1. Simple cylindrical both crucible and RF-coil, Case 2. Simple cylindrical crucible with L-shape coil, and Case 3. Crucible with round bottom corner and coil with a curved end (Fig. The induction heating mathematical model was well defined in our previous paper which discussed the influence of crucible and coil geometry on induction heating The fluid flow, continuity condition, and energy equations were assumed to be: (1) axially symmetric system and quasi-steady state, (2) laminar and incompressible Newtonian melt and gas flow while satisfying the Boussinesq approximation, (3) flat melt free surface, and (4) no viscous dissipation in the melt and gas used to calculate temperature and fluid flow field: (a) Melt and gas flow ( ) ( ) Where ρ is the density, V is the vector of fluid velocity, p is the pressure, μ is the dynamic viscosity, β is the thermal expansion coefficient, g is the acceleration of gravity, T is the temperature, z e ˆ is the unit vector along the pulling axes of Z, α is the thermal diffusivity, k is the thermal conductivity, qinduction is the heat source density, κ is the absorption coefficient, and qrad is the radiation heat flux density. The first term inside the integral in Eq. ( The boundary conditions are: a) No-slip boundary condition at the fluid-solid boundaries b) Surface to surface radiation heat transfer at the gas-solid interfaces ( ) c) Surface to surface radiation heat transfer, Marangoni convection and no-slip boundary condition at the gas-melt interface ( ) d) Heat transfer considering the Latent heat generation proportional to the crystal growth rate, and crystal rotation as a boundary condition at the melt-crystal interface ˆmc where the subscripts s, g, m, and c mean solid, gas, melt, and crystal, respectively. e) Gray wall radiation heat transfer at the crystal side surfaces f) Radiative and convective heat transfer at the outer surfaces of the chamber: where Tamb is the ambient temperature. The stress level in the crystals can effectively be determined by the temperature field during the growth process which consequently defines the content of crystal dislocations Analysis of the thermal stress for Cz growth of oxide crystals revealed the significant raise of thermal stress in semiconductor crystals like lithium niobite. It potentially can lead to producing crack during the crystal growth and cooling down process Thermoelastic stress fields inside as-grown crystals were calculated in terms of Von Mises stress. The detailed model explained and reported elsewhere where α T is the thermal expansion coefficient, E is Young's modulus, L is the crystal diameter, and σ is thermal stress. Three different kinds of coil-crucible geometry are considered in the work presented here which are; Case 1. Simple cylindrical both crucible and RF-coil, Case 2. Simple cylindrical crucible with L-shape coil, and The crystal pulling rate was set to 1 mm/H and the crystal rotation rate was fixed at 20 rev/min. Table In this work, a 2D steady-state finite element method using the Newton-Raphson algorithm and direct solver MUMPS (Multifrontal Massively Parallel sparse direct Solver Volumetric heat generation is shown in Fig. In our calculation for case 1 with 15cm crystallization stage, the parasite crystals were recognised at the down part of the melt which are a proof of the importance of selecting proper heating setup. Fig. In all three cases, the Von Mises stress analysis demonstrates that the absolute maximum value of the stress is located near the seed, whereas the second-order stress analysis reveals a local maximum at the seed adjacent and the absolute maximum at the triple point. Between all three cases shown in Fig. The reported tensile strength for BGO crystals has a comparably low value of about 23.2 MPa To the best of the author's knowledge, critical resolved shear stress (CRSS) value of the BGO crystals has not been reported in any wide accessible source. Therefore, reaching a pattern of dislocation density using the calculated Von Mises stress was not possible. In addition, because of the lack of data available to the authors, applying more reliable methods like alexander-haasen sumino analysis was also not part of our research. A finite element simulation was employed to study the effect of coil/crucible configurations in the RF-heating setup of a Cz oxide crystal growth process. Two different approaches were investigated to model thermal stress patterns in the growing crystals. Revolusion of the crystal/melt interface and thermal stress enhancement were examined during different stages of the BGO process. The simulation results show that the changing shape of the electromagnetic heating setup elements can reduce the crystal/melt deflection more than 24% in BGO growth. It can also prevent the formation of parasite crystals at the melted bottom and early reaching of the crystal/melt interface to the crucible bottom. Comparison of first-and second-order thermal stress calculations reveals that both methods indicate a dramatic change of stress distribution in crystal while exhibiting high stress regions at the crystal/melt interface, down part of the crystal rim, and close to the seed. The pattern of thermal stress inside the crystal can differ from radially more homogeneous to heterogeneous by changing the heating setups. There is a remarkable enhancement of maximum thermal stress as the crystal grows in length. In addition, the thermal stress can exceed the tensile strength of BGO crystals when the crystal/melt interface is close to the crucible bottom. In conclusion, the variation in coil/crucible geometry as a passive solution to optimize the heating conditions of semi-transparent oxide crystals with a highly convex melt/crystal interface can effectively reduce the crystallization front deflection. In order to achieve a flat interface, investigating the influence of a magnetic flux concentrator (MFC) along a proper choice of heating setup geometry is highly suggested. Furthermore, reducing the maximum thermal stress accumulation inside the crystal during the growth process and applying an active after-heater, in order to decrease the heat loss from the crystal body by internal radiation, can be very promising. Last but not least, a 3D model of thermal stress and an Alexander Haasen calculation were performed to investigate the generation and propagation of dislocations. These can help better understanding of the dislocation dynamics in BGO crystals which needs more information from the growers and producers.