Metals with fcc structure may exhibit deformation twinning under specific conditions, which is an interesting but somewhat elusive aspect of their deformation behavior. It is well acknowledged that the phenomenon occurs through the activities of twinning partial dislocations. However, the lack of a comprehensive understanding of their fundamental properties obstructs the development of detailed multiscale models of crystal plasticity in the fcc metals. Here we explore the core-structures and lattice friction of twinning partials through atomistically informed numerical modeling. To this end, we choose four fcc crystals with widely differing stacking fault energies. Using the semi-discrete variational Peierls Nabarro model, we compute the core-widths and Peierls stresses of edge and screw twinning dislocations. Apart from the conventional layer-by-layer model of twin nucleation, the recently proposed alternate-shear model has also been examined. In the latter case, a negative stable fault energy has been observed, which is large enough to overcome the Peierls barrier. This study also highlights the significance of incorporating the surface correction, the absence of which leads to an overestimation of the intrinsic lattice resistance of the twinning dislocations. The competition between slip and twinning is a key phenomenon governing the plastic deformation of many metals and alloys with face-centered cubic (fcc) crystal structure. Conventionally, the general consensus has been that the deformation twinning is favored in metals like gold and silver, which have low stacking fault energies (SFEs) On account of the significance of twinning dislocations in the deformation mechanism maps of fcc metals and alloys, it is evident that their behavior and dynamics are of fundamental importance in the twinning process. Computational investigations of crystal plasticity often employ the dislocation mobility laws as key ingredients of multiscale modeling. In particular, a mesoscale method like discrete dislocation dynamics simulation inherently relies on the constitutive relations, which in turn, are extracted from the atomistic calculations Aiming to address the issue discussed above, we present a systematic investigation of the core-structure and lattice resistance of twinning dislocations in fcc metals. This study employs the semi-discrete variational Peierls Nabarro (SVPN) framework to compute the core-widths and Peierls stresses of edge and screw twinning dislocations in four metals with different stacking fault energies. In this regard, the glide of twinning dislocations have been classified into two categories -first, a twinning dislocation gliding over a well-formed twin boundary, thereby causing its migration, and second, the twinning dislocations associated with the nucleation of the initial twin embryos. In the latter category, we examine a newly proposed shear model of twin nucleation, in addition to the conventional layer-by-layer slip model. As the SVPN approach uses the GPFEs as inputs, they have been extracted from atomistic simulations using appropriate interatomic interaction models. We construct virtual crystalline samples of Ag, Au, Cu, and Al with suitable embeddedatom-model (EAM) interatomic potentials The variational Peierls-Nabarro framework offers a rigorous method of calculating the core-structure of a dislocation. It involves expressing the dislocation's energy as a functional of its disregistry field and tuning this field to minimize the energy functional. In particular, we employ the semi-discrete form of this approach Here, E elastic refers to the elastic strain energy of the line defect and is computed as where The local misfit density of the i th nodal point at position x i is given by, ρ ρ ρ i = (u u u i -u u u i-1 )/(x i -x i-1 ), with u u u as the disregistry vector and ρ e/s i as the corresponding edge/screw components. K s = μ/(4π) and K e = K s /(1 -ν) are the pre-logarithmic energy factors for the edge and screw dislocations, respectively, where μ is the effective shear modulus, and ν is the Poisson's ratio. Within the domain of anisotropic elasticity theory, these effective elastic moduli have been computed for the {111} slip plane through the procedure outlined by Fitzgerald et al. where β is the characteristic angle of the dislocation. In Eq. ( In Eq. ( Here, γ(u u u) represents the 2-D misfit potential with u e/s i as the edge/screw components of the disregistry vector. Representing the disregistry vector as the superposition of two inversetangent terms is typically befitting in the case of a full dislocation, which dissociates into two Shockley partials where b = a/ √ 6 is the Burgers vectors and 2ξ is the core-width of the dislocation. Also, u e i = u(x i ) and u s i = 0 for an edge partial, and vice versa for the screw type. In the unified dislocation equation developed by Wang where, B e and B s are calculated as, In the above relationships, d = a/ √ 3, is the interplanar spacing between adjacent {111} planes. θ and φ are the orientation angles associated with the relative pair of neighbor atom vectors and depend on the crystal structure. In the case of fcc crystals with the {111} slip plane, tan θ = 1/ √ 2 and φ = π/6. For phonons propagating in the 110 direction, the effective elastic constant, which is related to the longitudinal wave velocity is obtained as Similarly, the effective moduli c th and c tv correspond to the resolved polarized components of the transverse waves, and are estimated as, The effective shear modulus (μ), Poisson's ratio (ν), and the elastic constants c l , c th , and c tv of all the four metals are computed and presented in Table Finally, the change in enthalpy of the system on account of applied shear stress is given by where τ e and τ s are the shear stresses interacting with the disregistry components, u e (x) and u s (x), respectively. The total energy functional is minimized by initially tuning the core-structure using a global Bayesian optimizer Although the PN model's numerical implementation employs the two-dimensional GPFE, it is easier to visualize its features through its one-dimensional projection. The onedimensional generalized planar fault energies for the disregistry along the 11 2 direction are plotted in Fig. 2 . As the planar fault energies of slip configurations ABC -1, ABC -2, and TG are found to coincide, we shall consider them together for the subsequent computations of dislocation properties. Another noteworthy feature of the GPFE is its qualitative distinction from a typical GSFE profile. Akin to the generalized stacking fault energy, the GPFE shows two energy maxima corresponding to the unstable fault energies. However, unlike the GSFE, which exhibits the characteristic stable stacking fault energy at a disregistry of a 11 2 /6, the GPFE profiles in Fig. As the stress exerted by the fault far exceeds the intrinsic lattice friction and causes the partial to move, minimizing the energy of the system (Eq. 1) leads to failure of convergence even without any external shear stress. Here we devise a simple computational strategy, which allows the calculation of the core-width and the effective Peierls stress on the isolated partial dislocation in an indirect manner. In the absence of an applied load, the stacking fault with negative fault energy applies a fault stress, τ f . This stress pushes the dislocation in the forward direction, while the effective Peierls stress, τ ′ p , acts in the opposite direction (c.f. Fig. Once τ 1 is noted, the external stress is further increased until it attains a critical value τ 2 , at which the partial dislocation moves in the backward direction and the fault region starts shrinking. This situation is easily identified, as the energy optimizer again fails to converge if the applied shear load exceeds τ 2 . Clearly, τ 2 is now acting against both the lattice friction From Eqs. ( Table-III also shows the τ Γ f computed from the fault energy, and a direct comparison with τ f obtained by solving Eqs. ( The original PN model did not inherently account for the lattice discreteness, and the variational approach can, in principle, be implemented within a continuum framework, albeit with severe inaccuracy in the computational results. The semi-discrete variational method was the first rigorous step in introducing the effect of lattice discreteness by replacing the integration over the spatial domain with summation over lattice sites. However, the surface correction (Eqs. We employ atomistically informed Peierls-Nabarro modeling to examine the core-structures and Peierls stresses of twinning partial dislocations in fcc metals. This study includes twinning partials involved in two different mechanisms of twin formation. The semi-discrete variational framework adopted here relies on the generalized fault energy estimated from the atomistic computations. We find that the GPFEs considered here exhibit qualitative dissimilarity as compared to the typical GSFE profile of the {111} plane in fcc metals. The slip associated with the layer-by-layer twinning mechanism merely causes twin-boundary migration without forming a new planar fault, whereas the slip in the alternate-layer mechanism produces a new fault with negative stable fault energy. In the latter case, estimation of the lattice friction proves to be non-trivial, and we demonstrate a new strategy to obtain the effective Peierls stress. Our calculations also underline the importance of incorporating the surface correction and reveal that its omission may lead to severe inaccuracy in estimating the core-width and lattice friction of a twinning partial. Despite the well-known importance of twinning dislocations in dictating the deformation mechanism maps, their fundamental properties have largely remained unexplored. The qualitative difference between the twinning GPFE and the GSFE, particularly in the alternateshear mechanism, suggests that the other dislocation properties depending on the stable and unstable fault energies, also merit close examination. For instance, the modern computational models suggest that akin to the core-structure, the energy barrier and critical stress for the nucleation of twinning dislocation loops should also depend on the generalized planar fault energy under the ECRA and ISIRD grants, respectively. SR thanks the Tata Consultancy Services for providing financial assistance through the TCS scholarship program. * 10/19 * 11.7/7.4 * 4/8 * 7.5/4.8 * 20/34 * 6.3/4.0 * 29/40 * SCREW 3.4/3.0 * 47/70 * 4.3/3.6 * 19/23 * 3.2/2.8 * 53/89 * 3.2/2.3 * 58/107 *