The self-powered sensing system could harness ambient energy to power the sensor without the need for external electrical energy. Recently, the concept of photovoltaic (PV) self-powered gas sensing has aroused wider attentions due to room-temperature operation, low power consumption, small size and potential applications. The PV self-powered gas sensors integrate the photovoltaic effects and the gas sensing function into a single chip, which could truly achieve the goal of zero power consumption for an independent gas sensing device. As an emerging concept, the PV self-powered gas sensing has been achieved by using different strategies, including integrated gas sensor and solar cell, integrated light filter and solar cell, gas-sensitive heterojunction photovoltaics, and gas-sensitive lateral photovoltaics, respectively. The purpose of this review is to summarize recent advances of PV self-powered gas sensing and also remark on the directions for future research in this topic. and the piezoelectric nanogenerator (PENG) The renewed attention to environmental problems has also driven the need for gas sensing devices, which could identify the type and concentration of gaseous chemicals in the ambient air Since the end of last century, it has been established that the gas sensing ability could be activated for many metal oxides under UV light illumination and modulated by light intensity at room temperature instead of thermal activation The purpose of this review is to summarize recent advances of PV self-powered gas sensing and also remark on the directions for future research in this topic. As an emerging concept, the PV self-powered gas sensing has been achieved by using different strategies. In view of different sensing principles, we mainly identify four types of PV self-powered sensing strategies including integrated gas sensor and solar cell The solar cell converts the energy of light directly into the electricity that can be used to power a system. This kind of solar-powered system is very mature and widely used in both large-scale systems such as the satellites Tanuma and Sugiyama Owing to the development of MEMS technology It can be concluded that this approach of integration towards the PV self-powered gas sensing was mostly based on (top) gas sensor/insulator/(bottom) solar cell tandem structures (expressed by Fig. For PV devices, the generating capacity directly depends on the amount of the incident light. By using this property, gas adsorption on certain material will change its optical transmittance, thereupon the solar cell beneath the material (i.e. a light/color filter) receives different light intensity and changes the electric output. This approach is referred to as the integration of gas sensitive light filter and solar cell (expressed by Fig. Kang et al. Similarly, Chen et al. Beyond the chemical method, the transmittance can be modulated by changing the physical structure of the light filter with gas adsorption, based on various filter structures. Jang et al. Seo el al. For this approach, the change in optical transmittance induced by gas adsorption could be based on very different mechanisms, depending on diverse types of light filters. Developing light filters with fast response kinetics, greater degree of the transmittance changes and selective response to specific gases are highly desired for the PV self-powered gas sensing. For that matter, the choice of the solar cell should consider matching the wavelengths of the transmittance change for each filter. In most photovoltaic applications, the generation of voltage and current relies on the structure of semiconductor p-n junctions. Basically, the diffusion of charge carriers to the opposite directions creates a space charge region near the p-n junction, where a built-in electric field is established, by which the photogenerated electron-hole pairs are separated. The heterojunction, a junction formed between two dissimilar semiconductors It is well known that silicon is the most important material in PV industry, and it has also attracted widespread attention as a gas sensing material, e.g., in the form of porous silicon (PSi) Hoffmann et al. in which N D , N A and N i are donor, acceptor and intrinsic doping level; k, T and q are Boltzmann constant, absolute temperature and electron charge, respectively. The interaction of oxidizing (reducing) gases with CdS@n-ZnO caused a decrease (increase) in the donor carriers N D in the ZnO and thus a decrease (increase) in the build-in potential according to Since then, similar structures were developed based on different sensing materials. Jia et al. where q is the electron charge, χ is electron affinity of silicon, W CNT is the work function of CNT membrane and W doping is the additional work function considering gas adsorption as surface doping. Furthermore, the V oc for Schottky junction solar cells can be expressed as where n is the diode ideality factor, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the working temperature, I s is the diode saturation current, and A e and A * are the contact area of the diode and the Richardson constant, respectively. The adsorption of NO 2 caused an increase in the work-function of CNT (W doping ), which led to an increase in B and V oc according to (2) and (3), respectively. From the above cases, it can be inferred that the change of V oc is positively correlated to the change of barrier height in the heterojunction by gas adsorption. Indeed, there are further examples that could prove the point. Liu et al. Apart from silicon, the perovskites family has become one of the most promising materials for the next-generation optoelectronics Then, Chen et al. Very recently, Chen et al. In summary, Table 1) Identifying the materials or parts corresponding to the sensing function and the light-harness function. In the case of CdS@n-ZnO/p-Si structure 2) Selecting the appropriate light source. For silicon or perovskites, solar spectrum or visible light LED is ideal for their matched band gaps and the accessibility of the light source. However, a light source with shorter wavelengths may be chosen for wide band gap materials like most of the metal oxides (when considered as light absorber) 3) Characterizing the typical sensing parameters for the target gas, such as sensitivity or gas response, response and recovery time, detection range, selectivity, stability, etc. Ideally, the variation of sensing parameters in different illumination conditions (e.g., light wavelength and intensity) should be studied. 4) Understanding the mechanism of the light to electricity conversion. This always requires the development of the band diagram of the heterojunction structure. 5) Understanding the mechanism of gas-semiconductor interaction. The gas sensing material should be characterized in advance for accurate modelling. The theory of electronics may provide some perspectives on how gas adsorption affects the electronic structure of the material In some cases of the gas-sensitive heterojunctions, the photovoltaic and gas sensing mechanism can be well-established. Therefore, a further quantitative analysis of the sensing dynamics is highly anticipated, which may provide a validation for the sensing mechanism and a better guidance for the precise and predictable design towards a superior PV self-powered gas sensor. Different from the p-n/Schottky junction solar cell mechanism, anomalous photovoltaic effects (APE) can be observed in certain semiconductor Recently, the lateral photovoltaic effect found application also in the self-powered gas sensing X.-L. Liu et al. proposed a self-powered ammonia gas sensor using the sulfur-hyperdoped silicon The photoelectrons diffused away from the illuminated region in the lateral direction, thereby generating the photocurrent. After NH 3 adsorption, the photocurrent increased probably due to the reduced recombination rate of photoelectrons on silicon surface. Therefore, the sensing ability of this self-powered sensor was stimulated by light and directly based on the photoelectrons. The sensing performance of the sensor based on the hyperdoped silicon can be further improved by flexibly adjusting the operating conditions. For example, Liu et al. Certainly, the anomalous photovoltaics were also observed in numerous other systems, with different mechanisms arising from varied material and structural characteristics. A combination of the anomalous photovoltaic effects with the gas sensing properties of the materials may result in more unfamiliar physical phenomena. As already indicated, very encouraging gas sensing results have been achieved using simple methods and structures, so it can be worthy of further extensive research in this aspect. In addition, Table APPLICATIONS The concept of the PV self-powered gas sensing is heading towards different directions, for each approach has its own characteristics. This trend will continue, as the development of different gas sensors with various materials, types and principles will be always needed. Thus, there is no single answer to the concept of PV self-powered gas sensing. In this section, we are merely providing some prospects based on the insights from relevant literatures. Although we hope interested readers may find them inspiring, it is highly encouraged that they combine their individual research areas, as multidisciplinary studies are essential from concepts to real applications. The prospects and challenges are summarized from four aspects as follow. In this review, different approaches towards PV selfpowered gas sensors commonly use photovoltaic effects to harvest light energy to power the gas sensor. Therefore, the basic functions of a PV self-powered gas sensor are the powering function and the sensing function. However, they are implemented very differently. According to different sensor concepts, the above approaches can be classified into two major categories. In category I, different material or structural components with only single function are integrated, whereas, in category II, materials or structures with multiple functions are directly used. More specifically, the schematic diagrams of the different approaches, towards PV self-powered gas sensing are shown in Fig. Approach A relies on micro-processing technology in order to integrate a miniaturized gas sensor and a solar cell. Both components could perform different functions independently, but when they are combined, the solar cell provided the energy need for gas sensing. As to the device structure, gas sensor/insulator/solar cell tandem structures seem to be the best solution so far. Herein, the insulator ensures both components are connected in series, and the thin film gas sensor ensures that incident light could transmit through the upper layers. The choice of each component is relatively independent, because solar cells with high efficiency and gas sensors with high sensitivity are preferred for better device performance. Therefore, the challenges here are to develop solar cells with higher efficiency and gas sensors with better performance. Approach B integrates a device (solar cell) and a function material (light filter). The light filter alone does not act as an independent device, because it has no transducing function, which is a major different from approach A with the gas sensor. The light filter senses the gas types and concentrations, changes its transmittance, and affects the efficiency of the solar cell beneath it. In order to get higher sensor sensitivity and selective response, the challenge here is to strictly match among the wavelength of the incident light, the change of transmittance spectrum of the light filter, and the absorbance spectrum of the solar cell. Approach C uses rectifying junctions to realize PV effects, and the absorbent gas could alter the barrier heights of the junction between dissimilar materials to change the output signals. At least one material should be both semiconducting and gas sensitive, the latter meaning the electronic structures of the material can be modulated by a certain gas. By purposely choosing the other material, the baseline signal can be changed more flexibly. Since the change in electronic structures induced by gas adsorption occurs only in near surface areas, materials with small sizes and low dimensions are favorable, because the gas sensitivity is significantly affected by size effects. As mentioned before, further quantitative analysis of the sensing dynamics is highly anticipated and challenging. Approach D uses lateral structure with uneven distribution of lights to realize PV effects, and the change of electronic structures of the materials directly reflects on the change in signals. The merit of this approach is that both functions can be realized based on a single material, which is beneficial for simplifying the structure and reducing the size of the device. Nevertheless, the lateral structure may require more length in one of the dimensions, so it is challenging to further reduce the size of the whole device. Materials are the very foundation for fabricating the sensing devices. Nowadays, new materials with novel properties are constantly being discovered. Many nanoscale and low-dimensional semiconductors have been applied to the concept of PV self-powered gas sensing in this review. Developing novel materials with more excellent optical/optoelectronic properties or gas sensing properties is a mainstream direction. Yet, the use of new materials does not always guarantee applicability. Instead, there are plenty of well-characterized photovoltaic and gas sensing materials as mentioned earlier. These have been proven efficient or applicable even long before the concept emerged. Therefore, the choice of applicable materials is vital to begin with. However, studying the single function of sensing performance, optical characteristics and optoelectronic properties of a material is important for the use in gas sensor, light filter and solar cells, respectively. On the other hand, multi-functional materials or structures are more attractive, but they are more complex to study or design. Since the materials aspect is focused for now, it should be noted that most semiconductors are inherently sensitive to certain types of gases or certain wavelengths or light at the same time, which is prerequisite for the use as multifunctional materials. The most typical multifunctional semiconductors in this review are silicon and perovskites. Nevertheless, gas adsorption induced photoresponse change was observed in SnO 2 Rigorously, relying on artificial light sources like LEDs or fluorescent lamps does not truly mean zero power consumption in practical use. However, a steady light source is still required at this stage for stable output of sensing parameters. On the bright side, there are studies on the PV self-powered gas sensors which require only microwatts of light power or exhibit better performance under lower illumination level Regarding the means of energy utilization, multiple functions could be combined into a single chip for high-level integration. As introduced earlier, both gas sensing and photodetection functions were realized on a multifunctional hybrid device by integrating multiple units Bochenkov and Sergeev For a reliable PV self-powered gas sensor, it is important to reduce the dependence of sensing performance on light source. If possible, the sensing parameters should be insensitive to the change of the ambient light for practical purpose. D. Lee et al. Different application needs are the driving force for the development of the concept. From a macro viewpoint, the development of wireless sensor networks (WSNs) leads to the omnipresent internet of things (IoTs) that will tremendously change our way of life. A WSN is a network of nodes that work in a cooperative way to sense and control the environment surrounding them In fact, for other self-powered gas sensing systems used for different applications each energy source may not always available, which may cause serious reliable issues. Using solar or light energy by hybrid cells can be an important supplement for the self-powered energy source, although it can be varied by time, weather and so on. Anyway, the PV self-powered gas sensor will experience a long journey from concepts to real applications. Building a complete sensing system is inevitable for the practical use, which will always require the collaborative study in multidisciplinary fields. In this review, recent advances towards the concept of the photovoltaic self-powered gas sensing are summarized and categorized as integrated gas sensor and solar cell, integrated light filter and solar cell, gas-sensitive heterojunction photovoltaics, and gas-sensitive lateral photovoltaics, respectively. These approaches are based on different materials, structures and mechanisms, and have their own characteristics. The concept has aroused wider attentions in the last decade and will certainly experience further development. Therefore, we put forward some prospects on future directions from materials to applications. Despite some progress in certain areas, it is still a long way from being practical. In our opinion, the PV self-powered gas sensor should be diverse in type, compact in size, high-efficient in energy harvesting and utilization, better performing and reliable in use. We hope practitioners of interests may be inspired after reading and jointly push the concept forwards.