It is known that 3D-ICs suffer from hot spot temperatures that can reach thousands of degrees, if they are not cooled to reasonable operating temperatures. The problem of hot spots is not limited to the high temperatures of the IC; thermal stress can also pose severe problems, even after cooling the chip. This study investigates thermal stress resulting from a 3D-IC hot spot with 20 W power dissipation. The IC is cooled using SiO2 and diamond cooling blocks. The study is performed using three cooling liquids: water, Freon (R22), and Liquid Nitrogen (LN). As expected, the study shows that metal layers on the chip suffer from high thermal stress due to rising the chip temperature to values higher than the room temperature. It is also noticed that the stress becomes more severe, if cooling is done using LN. In fact, the stress exceeded the maximum tensile strength of aluminum, which means failure of the chip. This indicates that cooling 3D-IC may not ensure acceptable operation or reliability. Thermal stress must be investigated at both high and low temperatures to ensure high performance and acceptable reliability. With the increasing density of ICs, two challenges have risen: the first is reaching the physical limit of the device size (reaching the end of Moore's law), and the second is the increase of the power density of the ICs to the point that the performance is adversely affected. To solve the first challenge, a new approach of integration where regular 2D-ICs are stacked on top of each other forming 3D-ICs Although 3D-IC technology resulted in many advantages, it introduced serious problems. One of the problems is the introduction of power noise resulting from the need for huge power supplies and long signal delays To manage power dissipation from 3D ICs, several techniques have been proposed and implemented. Powerful fans, large heat sinks, Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS)-based cooling technology, embedded micro channels In this study, we investigated the thermal stress resulting from the dynamic temperature change of hot spots in liquidcooled 3D ICs. The study was performed using advanced multi-physics numerical analysis program, Comsol TM . II. The relationship between stress and strain is expressed by, where σ is the uniaxial stress, ε is the strain or deformation, and E is Young's modulus Thermal stress can be expressed by the following equation, where α is the thermal expansion coefficient, T0 is initial temperature, TF is final temperature, and ΔT = T F -T 0 in kelvins (K). The temperature, TF varies with respect to time due to subsequent heating and cooling and results in a temperature difference III. In this analysis, the test chip contains a heater to represent the hot spot in the 3D-ICs. The heat generated from a heater is assumed to be equal to the heat generated from the hot spot of the 3D ICs Comsol multiphysics program is used to conduct the thermal analysis. The emissivity values utilized in the simulation are 0.79 for SiO 2 and 0.63 for diamond Our analysis predicted that a 20W hot spot would elevate the chip temperature to 4050 K, if no cooling liquid is admitted, Fig. Thermal stress is investigated for test chip sandwiched between two cooling blocks, as shown in Fig. For SiO 2 cooling block, liquid was pumped at a velocity of 10 mm/s when the 20W heater is powered on, and temperature and thermal stress were calculated during the first 15 seconds. From Fig. Tungsten heater © 2020 IEEE temperature goes down. This difference becomes smaller for R22 than water, leading to a lower stress. Cooling reduced the thermal stress to less than the ultimate tensile stress of tungsten of 980 MPa. Aluminum 6061 is widely used in IC technology as interconnects and ohmic contacts. The ultimate tensile strength of that alloy is 310MPa It appears that inlet velocity of 10 mm/s does not pump enough liquid to cool the IC down. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that if the inlet velocity increased to 100mm/s, both the temperature and thermal stress will decrease. Fig. Stress on aluminum is also investigated, for inlet velocity of 100 mm/s. The results show that the stress on aluminum pads are 241MPa, 107MPa, & 262MPa respectively for water, R22, and LN. Similar to the case of tungsten, R22 cooling provided the lowest stress, because the temperature difference is the lowest. This results signified some issues. The first is that thermal stress exists not only because of higher operating temperatures, but also because of lower operating temperatures than the initial temperature. Therefore, if the intention is to operate at lower temperatures than room temperature, it may be advised to deposit metals at temperatures closer to the operating temperature. Second, the impact of metal elasticity and ultimate tensile stress are critical reliability factors that must be considered when designing 3D-ICs. Since SiO 2 is a poor thermal conductor, it is reasonable to assume that SiO 2 is responsible for the high temperature of the chip. For this reason, diamond, a highly thermal conductive material, is used instead to build the cooling block. Fig. The stress analysis for diamond blocks with 10 mm/s velocity is shown in Fig. When the inlet velocity increased to 100 mm/s, the temperature of the hot spot changed to 318 K for water, 260 K for R22, and 106 K for LN, as shown in Fig. V. The stress analysis for next generation 3D-ICs have been conducted using diamond and SiO 2 cooling blocks. The result shows that, in order to ensure the stability of the IC thermal stress needs special consideration along with the operating temperature. The results also show that overcooling may cause metal breakdown. Therefore, the level of cooling should be considered, and the strength of materials used to build the IC should be evaluated. This study would not be complete without studying the material deformation due to the cooling process. 