Inducing an inversion layer in organic semiconductors is a highly nontrivial, but critical, achievement for producing organic field-effect transistor (OFET) devices, which rely on the generation of inversion, accumulation, and depletion regimes for successful operation. In recent years, a major milestone was reached: an OFET was made to successfully operate in the inversion-mode for the first time Currently, of the few tools available to investigate charge transport and carrier generation at the nanoscale, the most versatile and powerful is the combination of non-contact atomic force microscopy (nc-AFM) and Kelvin probe force spectroscopy (KPFS): the former provides structural information, while the latter allows for measuring charge distribution. KPFS is a measurement of the contact potential difference between the AFM tip and the sample, and so, can be used to detect surface potential changes that occur when a semiconductor is illuminated Nc-AFM can be used to directly measure the force gradient between the tip and sample. In the small oscillation amplitude limit for the familiar metallic tip-metallic sample case, the electrostatic force, F elec , can be related to the measured frequency shift, ∆f , as follows ∆f ∝ ∂F elec ∂z = 1 2 where C ts is the tip-sample capacitance, V DC the applied bias voltage, and V CP D the contact potential difference. Usually, the tip-sample capacitance is assumed to be independent of the applied voltage-and for many doped semiconductor systems studied by nc-AFM, this is a good approximation, even though the capacitance is strictly a function of the applied voltage in these cases There is clear dissonance between the above-stated physical picture and the common analytical as-sumption that the tip-sample capacitance is voltageindependent The first foray in understanding the fundamental physics of doped semiconductors probed by AFM came in 1992 In this study, we thermally deposit 0.2 monolayer of pentacene on an in-situ cleaved KBr crystal, followed by evaporation of 0.4 monolayer of 3,4,9,10perylenetetracarboxylic diimide (PTCDI). In general, pentacene grows in large, flat islands on KBr and stands upright, with the plane and the long axis of the molecule perpendicular to the substrate surface, or with the plane of the molecule perpendicular to slightly tilted and the long axis parallel to the surface We perform KPFS on a pentacene/PTCDI heterostructure (the location is indicated in Figure In fact, the capacitance in a metal-insulatorsemiconductor (MIS) structure -physically represented by a metal AFM tip probing a semiconductor sampleexhibits three distinct regimes: accumulation, depletion and inversion. Consider a n-doped sample interacting with a positively biased tip: the mobile electrons in the sample are attracted to the sample surface, resulting in an accumulation layer of the majority carriers (electrons, in this case). Under negative tip bias, the majority carriers are repelled from the sample surface, leading to a depletion layer. An increasingly negative bias leads to a thicker depletion layer until the minority carrier density at the surface surpasses the initial majority carrier density, as a result of increasing band bending, leading to an inversion layer As such, to better probe the non-parabolic response in Figure We use the model present by Hudlet et al. The spatial variation of the non-parabolic KPFS data is illustrated in figure voltage window of the KPFS data (details in SI). The pentacene island exhibits a strong difference, with some variation within, while the PTCDI islands connected to it (red circles) do not show a significant difference and behave more in line with the KBr substrate. This indicates the doped semiconductor response is limited to the pentacene island. It is well known that the capacitance of an MIS structure operating in the inversion regime exhibits a frequency dependence, whereas the capacitance in the accumulation-mode does not No significant change in frequency shift is observed for KBr for both positive and negative applied square waves, as expected. The pentacene/PTCDI heterostructure, on the other hand, exhibits a decrease in frequency shift with increasing pulse frequency for negative voltages. A de-creased response for higher pulse frequencies is expected for inversion due to the finite life-and generation-time of the minority carriers needed to form the inversion layer. We can deduce that the inversion regime occurs for negative bias, which in turns corresponds to n-doped pentacene. As such, we can assign the three regimes identified in Figure The exact lifetime of the minority carriers cannot be extracted from this measurement, since the exact doping concentration is unknown-this must be a known parameter for a quantitative result to be extracted from the pulsed MOS capacitance measurement presented by Zerbst Furthermore, we must consider the subtle differences between the doped semiconductor measured here, and a MIS structure. For example, in contrast to a MIS field effect transistor (MOSFET), where the minority carriers are injected by the metal contact, no direct electrical connection between the doped semiconductor to the metal electrode exist in our system. The minority carriers needed to form the inversion layer are, in fact, supplied by the larger pentacene/PTCDI island. Only the area directly underneath our AFM tip is depleted of majority carriers. The time response in Figure Theoretically, a non-parabolic response should only be observed over the doped semiconductor; measurements taken over neat PTCDI and KBr should reveal purely parabolic behavior as a function of bias, as indicated by Equation In conclusion, we measure the electrostatic force of an accumulation, depletion and inversion layer in a 2.1 nm thick organic semiconductor. Impurities in the pentacene island, showing up as charging rings in the dissipation channel, act as a dopant for the much larger pentacene island, resulting in a n-doped pentacene island. The inversion layer is generated by sweeping the bias voltage on an AFM tip, which is in close proximity to the island. Only the area directly underneath the AFM tip (approximate radius of 20 nm) is depleted of majority carriers. The measurement qualitatively agrees with numerical simulations. Exact numerical calculations are not possible for our system, since various parameter such as the dopant concentration, intrinsic carrier density, KBr capacitance contribution, etc. are unkown. The formation of the inversion layer was further verified by applying a pulsed voltage and measuring the frequency response. Observing the movement of carriers in organic semiconductor and the formation of inversion layer at this length scale is a crucial step towards studying organic photovoltaics at the nanometer scale. Our study shows that a 2.1 nm thick n-doped pentacene layer can locally be brought to inversion at an approximate 20 nm lateral size. This would enable the production of an organic FET with a channel on the same length scale, which has thus far not been achieved. Further investigation of this system under light illumination is of great interest to advance the understanding of the local nanometer behavior of organic semiconductor during charge generation. Experiments conducted under illumination could potentially help to determine the minority carrier generation-and lifetime of organic semiconductors at the nanometer scale. 