Metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) is one of the main methodologies used for thin film fabrication in the semiconductor industry today and is considered one of the most promising routes to achieve large-scale and high-quality 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs). However, if not taken special measures, MOCVD suffers from some serious drawbacks, such as small domain size and carbon contamination, resulting in poor optical and crystal quality, which may inhibit its implementation for the large-scale fabrication of atomic-thin semiconductors. Here we present a Growth-Etch MOCVD (GE-MOCVD) methodology, in which a small amount of water vapor is introduced during the growth, while the precursors are delivered in pulses. The evolution of the growth as a function of the amount of water vapor, the number and type of cycles and the gas composition is described. We show a significant domain size increase is achieved relative to our conventional process. The improved crystal quality of WS2 (and WSe2) domains was demonstrated by means of Raman spectroscopy, photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy and HRTEM studies. Moreover, time-resolved PL studies show very long exciton lifetimes, comparable to those observed in mechanically exfoliated flakes. Thus, the GE-MOCVD approach presented here may facilitate their integration into a wide range of applications. 2D materials offer many interesting properties to be used in novel and existing technologies. One of the major bottle-necks in their successful integration in real-life applications is the need for reproducible large-scale growth of a high quality material. The pioneering work on the vapor-phase growth of single-and few-layer MoS2 1 led to significant effort by the scientific community to realize methodologies for the large-area growth of 2D materials in general. As a result, extensive research has been carried to study chemical vapor deposition (CVD) growth of single-and few-layer atomic-films in general and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) in particular. Indeed, learning from the vast thin film research in the past few decades, in particular from the chemical vapor deposition of Mo-and W-based thin films, In order to improve the CVD (MOCVD)-derived TMDC crystallinity and thus its electrical and optical properties, we refer to three main approaches. The first method relies on the nucleation density reduction/control to obtain larger domains. This was achieved using halide salts (NaCl, KI, etc.) Furthermore, some of these compounds were found to have detrimental effects on the electrical properties of as grown TMDCs. Here we present a "Growth-Etch-MOCVD" (GE-MOCVD) approach to improve the crystallinity of single-layer WS2 (and WSe2) layers. The original high-density nucleation is suppressed by the pulsed-delivery of the metal and chalcogen precursors in a constant flow of very low amounts of reactive species (H2O) in between the growth-cycles. Thus, carbon contaminants as well as part of the TMDC nuclei are etched and/or re-evaporated, leading to the formation of larger domains with improved crystallinity. We can show a significant increment in the domain size, from few nanometers to more than 15 microns. The growth evolution of atomic-layers is studied as a function of the H2O vapor flow, gas composition and cycle number and type. The crystallinity of the GE-MOCVD grown TMDCs is compared to that produced by the standard MOCVD growth processes using Raman and photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy, as well as high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) studies. Furthermore, transient PL measurements show a long luminescence lifetime, comparable to the emission lifetimes measured from highquality exfoliated flakes, suggesting high optical quality of the WS2 films obtained by the GE-MOCVD approach. This methodology could be implemented in the MOCVD growth of many other 2D materials to improve their crystal quality, as required in nanoelectronics and optoelectronics. Figures In contrast, a pulsed-growth method of GE-MOCVD approach, in which the precursors (W(CO)6 and DTBS) are supplied in cycles, but the water vapor (and carrier gases) is supplied continuously, allows for a successful re-evaporation of the amorphous carbon, thus cleaning the substrate and domains during the precursor-free pulse, before the growth is continued. This approach significantly improved the domain size and crystal quality. The absence of the a-C Raman modes, the low amount of carbon species on the GE-MOCVD grown samples and the increase of the crystalline domain sizes, confirm the GE-approach effectively removes the majority of carbon contamination arising from all the precursors. The effect of the H2O flowrate on the growth is summarized in Figure Here, we aim to explain the growth mechanism and the results described in the previous sections. The introduction of small amounts of H2O during the growth and the pulsed delivery of the growth precursors have two main effects; First, it eliminates or diminishes dramatically, the amount of carbon impurity in the films and on the growth substrate, leading to purer and higher quality WS2 films. Since the presence of amorphous carbon on the substrate may act as a nucleation center, its elimination alone leads to smaller nucleation densities and thus, larger domains. Second, H2O was shown to etch and reevaporate TMDCs, (2) WS2(s) + 3H2O(g) ↔ WO3(s) + 2SO2(g) + 6H2(g) (3) WS2(s) + 6H2O(g) ↔ WO2(s) + 2SO2(g) + 6H2(g) These reactions lead to the re-evaporation of carbon contaminants, (1), and small or defective WS2 domains, ( A schematic model summarizing the growth processes in a standard-and GE-MOCVD is shown in Figure The GE-MOCVD approach can be effectively implemented to reduce the a-C contamination even from the W(CO)6 and to obtain high crystalline and larger single crystalline domains using other chalcogen precursors such as carbon-free H2S. Figure where, b is the slope. Both the X 0 (b = 0.99) and X  (b = 1.06) emissions show linear behaviour, confirming that there is no trap-assisted recombination through mid-gap states. Deconvoluted PL spectra presented in Figures The reduction in PLQE at higher powers might be due to the larger trion formation rate by the generation of free charge carriers and the intrinsically low PLQE of trions. The high optical quality of the single crystalline WS2 domains grown by GE-MOCVD technique is further confirmed by studying the exciton dynamics using time-resolved PL (TRPL). Figure and with the presence of a longer-lived emission component. When compared both nonradiative and radiative lifetimes of transferred GE-MOCVD grown WS2 domains with that of the reported exfoliated samples (Table In summary, a Growth-Etch MOCVD is developed for the synthesis of high optical quality WS2 (and WSe2) atomic layers. The carbon contamination often present when using metal-organic and the organo-sulfide (and selenide) precursors in standard MOCVD is eliminated via a sequential growth and etch process in which the precursors are delivered to the system in pulses and the continuous flow of low amounts of water vapor. As a result, the ultra-high nucleation density usually obtained in standard MOCVD is highly suppressed by the re-evaporation of the carbon contaminants, and small and defective TMDC nucleus. Therefore, this methodology leads to improved crystallinity and lower contamination, as confirmed by TOF-SIMS characterization. By understanding the growth evolution in the developed methodology, high crystalline quality TMDCs were achieved in relative short times, as required for industrial applications. The Raman, steady-state and time-resolved PL spectroscopy studies established the improved crystal and optical quality of the atomic layers grown by the GE-MOCVD. The results obtained here clearly show that these films have very promising optical quality for a CVD (or MOCVD)-derived TMDC, comparable to the ones obtained from mechanical exfoliation of a high quality 3D crystal. Hence, the GE-MOCVD method has the potential to address the more acute deficiencies in MOCVD growth of TMDCs, such as the a-C contamination, low growth rate and poor crystallinity. This procedure could be implemented for the synthesis of many other 2D materials and as a proof of concept, the results on WSe2 showed here. The largescale growth of high-quality atomic-films is a prerequisite for their integration into a wide range of applications. The work presented here therefore, is a significant step forward for this to happen. This material is available free of charge at The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: Schematic of MOCVD setup; Calculation of the precursors and water flowrates; additional Raman, PL, TRPL, TEM, and TOF-SIMS results; and tables corresponding to the comparison of present results with literature. for precursors. In one bubbler, Di-tert-butyl sulfide (DTBS, sigma Aldrich, 97%) was loaded inside a glove box under inert gas and the second bubbler was loaded with W(CO)6 (Strem chemical, 99.9%) in the same glove box. The choice of other source of sulfur was H2S. For this, we used a scrubber system to deal with the residual gas. The background and carrier gas used were argon (99.9999%) and hydrogen (99.999%). The substrates, SiO2 and c-plane sapphire (annealed at 1050 °C for 10hrs) were cleaned using acetone and IPA each for 10 minutes in an ultrasonicator and were dried using a nitrogen gun. Prior to the growth, the furnace was evacuated to a pressure down to 15mTorr for 15 minutes to remove any unwanted moisture/oxygen species. Thereafter, the furnace was ramped to 850 °C at a heating rate of 20 °C/min for 30 minutes under 50 torr with 100sccm of oxygen to remove any possibilities of carbon contamination. Then the oxygen flow was stopped and the system was maintained at the same (850 °C) temperature for another 25 minutes. All the required precursors were then released for the growth. We followed a growth and etch technique in our process cycle as schematically shown in Figures The transfer of WS2 film from the growth substrate to a new desired substrate was carried out by using a previously reported polystyrene (PS) technique. High-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (HRSTEM) images were recorded in a double aberration-corrected Themis Z microscope (Thermo Fisher Scientific Electron Microscopy Solutions, Hilsboro, USA) equipped with a high-brightness FEG at an accelerating voltage of 80kV. High-resolution TEM images were collected on the Themis-Z instrument on a Gatan One View CMOS camera (Gatan Inc., Pleasanton, USA) at negative spherical aberration settings (Cs=-20μm) with higher order axial aberrations corrected up to 30 mrad. Topographic characterization was performed using a Nanosurf Core AFM in tapping mode. The Raman and PL spectroscopy measurements were conducted using a confocal micro-Raman (PL) spectrometer (Horiba, LabRAM HR Evolution). The as-grown samples were excited using an excitation laser of 532 nm and collected the scattered radiation using x100 objective (0.9 NA). The scattered radiation was analyzed and detected using a grating of 1800 gr.mm -1 and, thermoelectrically cooled CCD detector, respectively. The Raman and PL spectral imaging were performed on a software controlled XYZ motorized stage with a step resolution of 100 nm. The laser power, exposure and collection timings were optimized to record the Raman and PL imaging. The incident laser power densities were calculated assuming the beam spot size (diameter) d= (1.22  / NA), where  is the wavelength, and NA is is numerical aperture of the objective. The temperature dependent PL measurements were performed in a cryostage (Linkam) cooled by Liq. N2 under the vacuum environment and by using an objective of x50 (0.5 NA). Prior to the measurements, the samples were heated to 100 c under vacuum for 30 min to remove the any adsorbed humidity and gas molecules. TRPL Spectroscopy measurements were performed using a home-built setup. The spectra were collected from the pristine samples on sapphire and the samples transferred on to quartz substrate. A pulsed laser of wavelength 405 nm (EPL-405nm, 55 ps pulse width) was used to excite the samples mounted on an inverted microscope (Zeiss). An oilimmersion objective lens (63; NA: 1.4) was used to focus the incident laser and collect the PL signals in a confocal configuration and filtered by passing through the 488 nm dichroic mirror and 595 nm long pass filter. Prior to the TRPL, the point of interest was chosen by imaging onto a CCD (Andor, iXon Ultra). PL lifetimes were collected using a single photon avalanche photo diode (SPAD) (ID100, ID Quantique) coupled to a timecorrelated single photon counter (TCSPC) module (HydraHarp 400, PicoQuant). The power dependent TRPL measurements were performed by varying the laser power using a set of ND filters and measuring the power by a powermeter (Nova II, Ophir). Time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy (PHI 2100 TRIFT II) measurements were performed using Ga + ion beam. Surface mass spectra and depth profiles were collected. The depth profiling was performed in a dual-beam mode. A 15KeV Ga + (current of 600pA) ion beam was used as analytical beam, and a 500 eV Cs + (current of 50nA) ion beam was used for sputtering. Analyzed area was 50 x 50 μm 2 , and sputtered area was 400 x 400 μm 2 . The analysis was performed in the vacuum of 5 x 10 -10 Torr, and in negative ions mode.