In the quest for quantum spin liquids, thin films are expected to open the way for the control of intricate magnetic interactions in actual materials by exploiting epitaxial strain and two-dimensionality. However, materials compatible with conventional thin-film growth methods have largely remained undeveloped. As a promising candidate towards the materialization of quantum spin liquids in thin films, we here present a robust ilmenite-type oxide with a honeycomb lattice of edge-sharing IrO6 octahedra artificially stabilized by superlattice formation with an ilmenite-type antiferromagnetic oxide MnTiO3. The stabilized sub-unit-cell-thick Mn-Ir-O layer is isostructural to MnTiO3, having the atomic arrangement corresponding to ilmenite-type MnIrO3 not discovered yet. By spin Hall magnetoresistance measurements, we found that antiferromagnetic ordering in the ilmenite Mn sublattice is suppressed by modified magnetic interactions in the MnO6 planes via the IrO6 planes. These findings lay the foundation for the creation of two-dimensional Kitaev candidate materials, accelerating the discovery of exotic physics and applications specific to quantum spin liquids. Recent progress in the physics of quantum spin liquids has intensified search for new candidate materials The key ingredient of the model is a honeycomb lattice of edge-sharing metal-anion octahedra comprising of Ru 3+ or Ir 4+ ions with a d 5 electron configuration, which produces bond-specific Ising-like interactions, called Kitaev-type interactions, giving rise to strong quantum fluctuations of (pseudo)spins on the honeycomb lattice One of the major challenges in this research field is to incorporate those materials into thin films, especially atomically thin monolayer forms. Thin-film techniques are not only essential for eventual practical applications but also effective for providing additional degrees of freedom for controlling magnetic interactions in actual materials. For example, epitaxial strain at the interface and dimensionality control In this study, starting from ilmenite-type MnTiO3 for which the single-crystalline film growth on Al2O3(0001) has been established The films were grown on Al2O3(0001) substrates by pulsed-laser deposition using a KrF excimer laser (see Methods). Our early attempt to grow ilmenite-type MnIrO3 directly on Al2O3(0001) was not successful, resulting in phase-separated films of Mn3O4 and IrO2 (see Fig. The film thickness of 1.4 nm is roughly equal to typical c-axis parameters of ilmenite-type oxides. In a 0.5-nm-thick Mn-Ir-O (cap)/[4.3-nm-thick MnTiO3/0.5-nm-thick Mn-Ir-O]15/5.7-nm-thick MnTiO3(buffer) film (superlattice cycle number n = 15 in Fig. Sandwiching between stable MnTiO3 layers in the superlattice structure stabilizes the ilmenitetype atomic ordering of Mn-Ir-O ultrathin layers. Our concept to form honeycomb-lattice IrO6 planes was further evidenced by cross-sectional STEM observation (Methods). In a [MnTiO3/Mn-Ir-O]8/MnTiO3(buffer) film (no Mn-Ir-O cap, see Fig. Owing to the Z-contrast nature (Z: atomic number) Judging from these structural analyses, a honeycomb lattice of edge-sharing IrO6 octahedra should partly form a two-dimensional network in the superlattice. While some iridates are known to exhibit metallic conduction Comparing the SMR results, we discuss possible magnetic properties of Mn-Ir-O. In the thick-MnTiO3 monolayer and the trilayer C terminated with 3-u.c.-thick MnTiO3 top layers, nine MnO6 lie beneath the Pt layer. The clearly detected TN (the kink in R) in these thick samples is consistent with the robust antiferromagnetic ordering in the thin-MnTiO3 monolayer that we reported previously Extrinsic contributions like the surface roughness and the size effect (refs. In summary, we have materialized a honeycomb lattice of edge-sharing IrO6 octahedra Thin-film growth. A Mn-Ir-O target was prepared from MnO2 and IrO2 powders by sparkplasma-sintering at 50 MPa and 900 °C. The target composition as measured by EDX was Mn : Ir = 0.90 : 1 (atomic ratio). A MnTiO3 buffer layer was grown at a substrate temperature of 850 °C and an oxygen pressure of 10 mTorr using a Mn-Ti-O target 