Understanding microscopic heat conduction in thin films is important for nano/micro heat transfer and thermal management for advanced electronics. As the thickness of thin films is comparable to or shorter than a phonon wavelength, phonon dispersion relations and transport properties are significantly modulated, which should be taken into account for heat conduction in thin films. Although phonon confinement and depletion effects have been considered, it should be emphasized that surface-localized phonons (surface phonons) arise whose influence on heat conduction may not be negligible due to the high surface-to-volume ratio. However, the role of surface phonons in heat conduction has received little attention thus far. In the present work, we performed anharmonic lattice dynamics calculations to investigate the thickness and temperature dependence of in-plane thermal conductivity of silicon thin films with sub-10-nm thickness in terms of surface phonons. Through systematic analysis of the influences of surface phonons, we found that anharmonic coupling between surface and internal phonons localized in thin films significantly suppresses overall in-plane heat conduction in thin films. We also discovered that specific low-frequency surface phonons significantly contribute to surface-internal phonon scattering and heat conduction suppression. Our findings are beneficial for the thermal management of electronics and phononic devices and may lead to surface phonon engineering for thermal conductivity control. Heat conduction analysis of low-dimensional materials, such as thin films, nanowires, and superlattices, is important for nano/micro heat transfer and thermal management for advanced microelectronics Therefore, phonon transport properties in bulk materials, usually input into the FS model, are not valid for describing heat conduction in sub-10-nm-thick films. Phonon transport in sub-10-nm-thick thin films has been investigated in various studies. For instance, Neogi and Donadio Wang et al. In the sub-10-nm thickness regime, a high surface-to-volume ratio leads to strong coupling of surface structures and heat conduction, which opens a new avenue for heat conduction control using nanoengineered surfaces We considered silicon thin films with 100 , 110 , and 111 surface orientations. A unit cell for each surface orientation is illustrated in Fig. First-principles calculations can be performed to obtain the interatomic force constants (IFCs) required to calculate phonon transport properties Since three-phonon scattering is dominant in thermal resistance, harmonic and thirdorder anharmonic IFCs were considered, and the interaction ranges were set to the secondnearest neighbors. We calculated the in-plane thermal conductivity of free-standing thin films by solving the phonon Boltzmann transport equation under the single-mode relaxation time approximation. In the calculation of the relaxation times for three-phonon scattering, we accounted for both normal and Umklapp processes Figures 2(a), (c), and (e) display the calculated phonon dispersion relations of the 100 surface orientation for three thicknesses. The thinnest film (Fig. As the thickness increases, the wavevector dependence becomes linear, exhibiting a form of three-dimensional vibrational modes inside the film. Another remarkable feature in the dispersion relations is the presence of isolated phonon modes. These isolated phonon modes can be readily observed, even in relatively thick films, corresponding to surface phonons. In the 5.5-nm thin film (Fig. For the 111 surface orientation, the 111 surface-oriented thin film also has surface phonon modes (Figs. However, except for the thinnest films, DOS spectra in the frequency of 2-5 THz slightly change based on the thickness, which is due to the modulation of the dispersion relations. To quantify the modulation of the phonon dispersion relations and DOS, we calculated the Debye temperature of the thin films. Volumetric heat capacity is given by where k B , T , and ω(qs) are the Boltzmann constant, temperature, and energy of the phonon with wavevector q and polarization s, respectively. Using the Debye approximation, the volumetric heat capacity can also be expressed as where N denotes the number of atoms in a primitive unit cell. We obtained the Debye temperature (Θ D ) to match C D v with C v using the Newton-Raphson method. Figure In contrast, Θ D of thin films calculated based on the bulk-adapted method is insensitive to the thickness regardless of the surface orientation, indicating that the presence of a surface is involved in determining the surface-oriented thickness dependence of Θ D . Similar to the surface-to-volume ratio, Θ D for all surface orientations is inversely proportional to the thickness; however, the rate of convergence to Θ bulk D is dependent on the surface orientation. The difference in the convergence rate is primarily determined by the magnitude of harmonic IFC perturbations, more precisely the side peaks characterized by surface phonons. When excluding low-frequency side peaks of the 100 and 111 surface orientations, the calcu-lated Θ D is not affected by the surface orientation and collapses onto the same thickness dependence. Figure For the 111 surface orientation, κ film is clearly different from that of the other surface orientations and is similar to the FS model with the surface specularity of p = 0.95. As previous calculations have demonstrated the failure of the FS model, we also verified the validity of this model. In the FS model, surface specularity is often related to surface roughness To gain more insight into how surface phonons qualitatively affect heat conduction in thin films, we calculated the temperature dependence of κ bulk /κ film (Fig. Our results for the thickness and temperature dependence suggest that surface phonons have an impact on heat conduction in thin films. Here, we evaluate how three-phonon scattering involving surface phonons and other phonons localized in thin films (referred to as internal phonons) influences κ film . Three-phonon scattering processes fall into three groups: (i) scattering with only internal phonons, (ii) scattering with only surface phonons, and (iii) scattering involving internal and surface phonons. Of the three groups, we neglected the (iii) scattering processes (i.e., surface-internal phonon scattering) in the calculations of κ film . To verify our hypothesis, it is necessary to decompose surface and internal phonons. To this end, we applied the atomic participation ratio (APR) where i and N denote the atomic index and number of atoms in a primitive unit cell, respectively. e qs (i) is the eigenvector of the ith atom of phonon mode qs, and M i is the mass of the ith atom. F APR qs (i) is unity when phonon mode qs is completely localized at the ith atom; otherwise, it is 1/ √ N for complete delocalization. Because there are two surfaces at the top and bottom of the thin film, we used F APR qs (i) for the two outermost surface atoms in the decomposition. Here, the outermost surface is defined as the surface in contact with the vacuum layer. The hybridization of the surface and internal vibrations depends on the phonon mode; therefore, the value of F APR qs (i) for decomposing the surface phonons cannot be uniquely determined. Additionally, the surface atomic density and specific surface area depend on the surface orientation and thickness, respectively. Thus, a single threshold value for F APR qs (i) may not be appropriate. Nevertheless, we employed a single threshold value F APR thr and set it to 0.3, which is reasonable for the decomposition of surface phonons (Appendix B). It should be noted that we did not perform decomposition for thin films with thicknesses below 2.2 nm, 1.5 nm, and 2.8 nm for the 100 , 110 , and 111 surface orientations, respectively, because surface and internal phonons are strongly hybridized and cannot be separated. Figure As the decomposition of surface and internal phonons was successful, we neglected surfaceinternal phonon scattering and calculated the thickness-dependent in-plane thermal conductivity of internal phonons (κ inter film ) for three surface orientations at T = 300 K, illustrated in Fig. The temperature dependence (Fig. It is worth identifying which modes are coupled to the S 1 mode for the 100 surface orientation and S 1 and S 2 modes for the 111 surface orientation in the surface-internal phonon scattering. We thus investigated all triplets of the surface-internal phonon scattering and identified that the triplets of two S 1 surface phonons and one internal phonon in the vicinity of 6 THz (i.e., S 1 + S 1 → internal phonon and vice versa) account for 20% of the overall surface-internal phonon scattering below 4 THz for the 100 surface orientation. In contrast, for the 111 surface orientation, triplets of the S 1 + S 1 → internal phonon, S 2 + S 2 → internal phonon, and S 1 + S 2 → internal phonon, and vice versa contribute to 40% of the overall surface-internal phonon scattering below 3 THz. Unlike these two surface orientations, we did not find specific triplets for the 110 surface orientation. As the surface-to-volume ratio decreases, the impact of surface-internal phonon scattering is expected to decrease monotonically. Figure The proportions of surface-surface phonon scattering and surface-internal phonon scattering are inversely proportional to the thickness, independent of surface orientation. By extrapolating the results, surface-surface phonon scattering and surface-internal phonon scattering account for 0.4% and 5.7% of the overall three-phonon scatterings, respectively, at a thickness of approximately 20 nm; thus, the impact of surface phonons should be limited in the sub-10-nm thickness regime and is negligible for heat conduction in thicker films. In the present work, we explicitly considered the atomic structures of thin films and performed anharmonic lattice dynamics calculations to investigate heat conduction in sub-10-nm-thick films. For harmonic properties, we observed that the presence of a surface not only leads to significant modulation of phonon dispersion relations, but also gives rise to surface phonons. The calculated thickness and temperature dependence of the in-plane thermal conductivity of thin films cannot be explained by conventional boundary scattering of phonons at surfaces, suggesting that the mechanism behind the significant suppression of heat conduction is affected by surface phonons. To investigate how surface phonon influence the suppression of heat conduction, we decomposed surface and internal phonons (localized in a thin film) from the perspective of the surface localization of vibrational modes. The results indicate that surface-internal phonon scattering predominantly influences the reduced thermal conductivity. Furthermore, we identified specific surface phonons and triplets in surface-internal phonon scattering that are dominant in the reduction of thermal conductivity. Since surface-internal phonon scattering can be enhanced or reduced by manipulating surface states through chemical functionalization and nanostructured surfaces, our findings can facilitate novel surface-phonon-engineered manipulation of heat conduction in thin films. Frequency (THz) DOS (arb. units) 100 t = 0.55 nm t = 1.1 nm t = 1.6 nm t = 2.2 nm t = 3.3 nm t = 5.5 nm t = 10.9 nm Bulk 0 5 1 0 1 5 Frequency (THz) DOS (arb. units) Scientific Reports 4, 6399 (2014).