Topology ultimately unveils the roots of the perfect quantization observed in complex systems. The 2D quantum Hall effect is the celebrated archetype. Remarkably, topology can manifest itself even in higher-dimensional spaces in which control parameters play the role of extra, synthetic dimensions. However, so far, a very limited number of implementations of higher-dimensional topological systems have been proposed, a notable example being the so-called 4D quantum Hall effect. Here we show that mesoscopic superconducting systems can implement higher-dimensional topology and represent a formidable platform to study a quantum system with a purely nontrivial second Chern number. We demonstrate that the integrated absorption intensity in designed microwave spectroscopy is quantized and the integer is directly related to the second Chern number. Finally, we show that these systems also admit a non-Abelian Berry phase. Hence, they also realize an enlightening paradigm of topological non-Abelian systems in higher dimensions. Topology ultimately explains the origin of phenomena that at first glance appear extremely fragile. The standard example is a gas of electrons confined in a plane under the effect of a strong magnetic field (the so-called 2D quantum Hall effect) More generally, the concept of topology brought a unique understanding of the physics of materials, such as for topological insulators which are insulating in the bulk, yet have conducting surface/edge states The continuous search for new types of topological quantum matter has recently led to the discovery of topologically nontrivial quantum states in conventional multiterminal Josephson junctions Interestingly, topology is not restricted to lowdimensional systems as the canonical example of the 2D quantum Hall effect, but it can also emerge in higherdimensional spaces in which controlling parameters play the role of extra synthetic dimensions. The intriguing case is if a system may be topologically trivial within a restricted (2D) subspace (namely it has a vanishing first Chern number) yet can show nontrivial topology in higher dimensions with nonzero higher-dimensional invariants (e.g., a nonzero second Chern number in 4D space). Indeed, the concept of the 2D quantum Hall effect has been extended to the 4D quantum Hall effect with the quantized nonlinear Hall response determined by the second Chern number Overall, so far, a very limited number of implementations of higher-dimensional topological systems have been theoretically proposed and only a few of them have been experimentally realized. In this work, we show that nanoscale SC systems can implement higher-dimensional topology and represent a formidable platform to study a quantum system with a nontrivial second Chern number. In our proposal, the order is not limited by spatial dimensions since the additional dimensions can be easily implemented by increasing the number of independent SC phases applied at different SC contacts. We propose systems formed by multiterminal SC contacts embedding quantum dots and that are characterized by a nontrivial second Chern number. In the topological regime, for large energy gap and perturbative tunneling coupling between the SC leads, the system possesses one pair of twofold degenerate states with a non-Abelian Berry phase. We show that the nontrivial 4D topology manifests itself in the integrated microwave response of the system by means of nonadiabatic effects First, we discuss a deterministic scheme for the initial preparation of a target state in the ground-state subspace. The scheme is based on the adiabatic sweep from the nondegenerate case to the degenerate case followed by specific adiabatic cyclic paths (non-Abelian Berry rotations) of the SC phases. Since microwave spectroscopy on discrete Andreev bound states is a well established technique by now Our starting point are two quantum dots (left L and right R) with two spin levels whose average energies are L and R , respectively. A local Zeeman field B z is externally applied with opposing direction on each dot. Such a simple double-dot system is coupled to a network composed by different SC contacts which we call hereafter environment. For the sake of simplicity, we assume that all the SC contacts are similar, namely, with the same SC gap ∆ and at the same chemical potential set to zero as a reference. The SC phases associated with the environment provide the synthetic gauge fields composed by four independent parameters λ = (λ 1 , λ 2 , λ 3 , λ 4 ) from which we define topological properties. The independent phases are used to implement a four-dimensional space providing nontrivial topology in terms of higher-dimensional invariants. Indeed, after integrating out the environment, the tunnel coupling of the dots with the SC environment results in an effective phase-dependent Hamiltonian acting solely on the double-dot system which defines the energy spectrum of the lowest discrete states inside the SC gap. Naturally, the final result depends on the structure of the environment and what kind of interaction or structure we synthetize in the double-dot system. The advantage of this general method is the large freedom in constructing a specific effective Hamiltonian of the double-dot system providing all the necessary extra dimensions. As depicted in Fig. where d † ασ (d ασ ) is the creation (annihilation) operator of an electron with spin σ =↑, ↓ on the left (α = L) or the right (α = R) dot, respectively, and h.c. denotes the Hermitian conjugate. As anticipated, the effective Hamiltonian possesses an additional parameterdependent Zeeman term Z(λ) on both dots with re- To engineer this Hamiltonian, we need a parameter-dependent coupling between both dots via the complex hopping K(λ). Finally, we also demand a complex parameter-dependent spin-flip term F (λ) on each dot with reversed sign between the left and the right dot. We show how to engineer these terms using the SC multiterminal environment in Fig. The Hamiltonian in Eq. ( A first example of a topological higher-dimensional system is formed by a multiterminal structure composed by nine standard BCS SC contacts described by four independent phases. Whereas gauge invariance allows us to set one phase to zero (φ 0 = 0) as a reference, we set the other phases to values such that only four SC phases are independent, see Fig. where v 0 is the direct coupling between the dots, and T = π 2 N 2 0 v 2 w 0 is the characteristic energy of the mediated hopping by the superconductors. In addition, N 0 is the normal density of states at the Fermi energy of the superconductors. The dimensionless vector R(λ A ) = [w 1 sin(φ 3 ) + w 2 sin(φ 4 -φ 3 ) + w 3 sin(φ 4 -φ 2 )]/w 0 is associated with the spin-orbit tunnel hopping. A more detailed discussion on the range of parameters and the stability of the topological phase is presented in the Supplemental Material [47]. As a second example, we consider an environment with eight leads, as depicted in Fig. as derived in the Supplemental Material [47] with ̃ T = π 2 N 2 0 ṽ2 w0 and h = πN 0 ṽ2 , whereas ∆ is the gap of the superconductors. The energy of both dots are renormalized by ̃ 0 = 0 -h 2 ̃ T sin(φ 2 )/(∆ 2 -h 2 ). However, this renormalization does not influence our topological findings since the discrete low-energy spectrum of the system is still given by the eigenvalues A more detailed discussion on the range of parameters and the stability of the topological phase is presented in the Supplemental Material [47]. The topological information of the system is encoded in the non-Abelian Berry curvature where A j is the matrix valued non-Abelian Berry connection which has the elements [A j ] αβ = i ψ α |∂ j ψ β calculated from the eigenstates |ψ α of the degenerate energy levels and ∂ j = ∂/∂λ j . The first Chern number takes the usual form of C (1 jk ) = (1/2π) T 2 d 2 λ Tr(F jk ) when integrating the Berry curvature over the 2-torus T 2 spanned by the compact parameters (λ j , λ k ), and the trace is taken with respect to the degenerate basis states. However, it turns out that in our model with a pair of two degenerate levels, the first Chern number always vanishes Remarkably, the system is still topological in the sense of a higher-dimensional invariant. In the fourdimensional space, we consider the second Chern number with the integration over the 4-torus T 4 defined by the compact parameters (λ 1 , λ 2 .λ 3 , λ 4 ). Here, ε jklm is the Levi-Civita symbol in 4D and the sum runs over repeated indices. It is worth to say that, in contrast to the first Chern number which is solely determined by the diagonal components of the Berry curvature, we need the additional information of the off-diagonal elements for the second Chern number. In the following, we will show that the second Chern number does not vanish, C (2) = 0, for some range of the parameters of the system. An advantageous property exists for the symmetric case L = R = 0 . Under this condition, the effective Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Here, 1 1 is a 4 × 4 unit matrix and the Hamiltonian describes a pseudospin Γ in an effective magnetic field Using this representation, the second Chern number can be written as a winding number of the 4D hypersurface traced out by H(λ) about the origin, i.e., counting how often the map n = H/|H| wraps around the unit sphere A cyclic change of the parameters over time defining a periodic path in parameter space is adiabatically slow if the characteristic scale variations of the parameters ∂λ j /∂t (j = 1, . . . , 4) remain much smaller than the energy gap (E + -E -) |∂λ j /∂t| between the first excited state with energy E + and the ground state with energy E -(with being Planck's constant). If the ground state is nondegenerate, the final state acquires a complex geometric phase, known as the Berry phase Consider the closed path C p : t → λ (p) (t) for the time range t ∈ [0, T ] with the periodic condition λ (p) (0) = λ (p) (T ). Defining a specific basis in the ground state subspace |E (α) -(α = 1, 2) and assuming that the initial ground state is -, the final ground state |Ψ f after the evolution becomes the superposition in which the first term is the (scalar) dynamical phase and the coefficients of the linear combination are given by the matrix elements of the unitary rotation as namely the non-Abelian Berry phase describing the rotation. Here, A -is the non-Abelian Berry connection in the degenerate ground-state subspace and P is the path-ordering operator. In general, due to the rotational character, the local and infinitesimal non-Abelian Berry rotations do not commute along the path C p which makes it necessary to use the path-ordering operator P. The preparation of the initial state can be simply achieved in the following way. Initially, one can introduce a small asymmetry L = R in the two dots such that it lifts the degeneracy of the energy levels of the ground state in the symmetric case. This process unequivocally identifies the nondegenerate states |E for L = R . After waiting a sufficiently long time much larger than the time scale set by relaxation processes, one can ensure that state is in the lowest state which we label |E -. Subsequently, the degeneracy is adiabatically restored by tuning L = R , such that the system remains in the |E (1) -state. Then, one can make use of the non-Abelian Berry phase to create arbitrary rotations in the degenerate subspace by simply adiabatically changing the parameters along a closed loop. To give an idea of such implementations, we discuss an example of a state-preparation protocol in detail for the specific case corresponding to the system A, see Fig. -}, these two adiabatic cyclic paths implement qubit rotations, as presented in Fig. Applying a small time-dependent periodic modulation of driving frequency ω to the two parameters λ j and λ k of the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( with the condition of low microwave power A ω. In general, discrete lines appear in the microwave absorption spectrum originating from the transitions from the ground-state subspace to the subspace of excited states. For a weak perturbation, the intensity of these lines is quantified by the transition rates which can be computed using the Fermi's Golden Rule, following standard linear response theory. However, as the ground-state subspace is twofold degenerate, one can prepare different combinations of the initial state before applying microwave radiation, as illustrated in Fig. As discussed above, starting from the asymmetric case L = R one can univocally define the basis state in the ground and excited subspaces which we denote |E (α) ± (α = 1, 2), see Fig. -)/ √ 2 in Fig. In general, applying the microwave signal at two parameters λ j and λ k , as described in Eq. ( + , as shown in Fig. One can measure the delay times from an application of the microwave drives until the system gets excited. By repeating this protocol several times and by analyzing the statistical distribution of these switching events, one can extract the average transition rates which are proportional to the matrix elements of Eq. ( As the matrix elements depend on the relative phase lag δ between the two modulations, one can choose δ = +π/2 and δ = -π/2 to implement circularly polarized microwaves. The difference between these averaged matrix elements is related to the diagonal component of the local non-Abelian Berry curvature for the particular initial state |I μ , i.e., In this way, one has access to the diagonal components of the non-Abelian Berry curvature in the ground-state subspace with basis of the initial states with μ = 1 or μ = 2. The off-diagonal elements of the non-Abelian Berry curvature [F jk ] 12 and [F jk ] 21 in this basis can be obtained using the following properties in which [F jk ] 33 and [F jk ] 44 are given by Eq. ( As a final remark, notice that if just a single parameter λ j is modulated or δ = 0 and δ = π are chosen, the ground state metric tensor g jk can be measured aswell, see Refs. We have presented a first theoretical proposal for a nontrivial second Chern number in SC quantum systems, realizable via a double-dot system and an environmental network structure formed by SC contacts. The need to operate in the odd-parity regime with a large Coulomb interaction on the dots to get rid of Cooper pair injections can be also advantageous, as it possibly restricts dissipation from quasiparticle excitations by restricting parity changes in the system with the inter-and intradot Coulomb interaction. The parameter space is not necessarily restricted to SC phases only, as we have shown in Example B in which a part of the space is analogously created by the magnetization angles of the leads. This yields a great freedom for eventually finding much simpler environmental networks with the presented structure in Eq. ( 