Complex nanophotonic structures hold the potential to deliver exquisitely tailored optical responses for a range of applications. Metal-insulator-metal (MIM) metasurfaces arranged in supercells, for instance, can be tailored by geometry and material choice to exhibit a variety of absorption properties and resonant wavelengths. With this flexibility, however, comes a vast space of design possibilities that classical design paradigms struggle to effectively navigate. To overcome this challenge, here we demonstrate a tandem residual network approach to efficiently generate multiplexed supercells through inverse design. By using a training dataset with several thousand full-wave electromagnetic simulations in a design space of over three trillion possible designs, the deep learning model can accurately generate a wide range of complex supercell designs given a spectral target. Beyond inverse design, the presented approach can also be used to explore the structure-property relationships of broadband absorption and emission in such supercell configurations. Thus, this study demonstrates the feasibility of high-dimensional supercell inverse design with deep neural networks that is applicable to complex nanophotonic structures composed of multiple subunit elements that may exhibit coupling. Nanophotonic materials, including metasurfaces and metamaterials, have greatly expanded our ability to tailor light-matter interaction and deliver new functionalities for information processing and sensing applications A particular category of periodic metasurface structures that has shown promise in supercell configurations is the metal-insulator-metal (MIM) metasurface absorber. Periodic MIM absorbers yield strong resonances that are narrowband in nature, where the wavelength of the resonance peak can be shifted by changing the shape of the resonator [34], [35], [36], [37]. By adopting simple supercell configurations, which contain more than one resonator geometry, multiresonant and broadband absorption behavior has previously been realized [38], [39], [40]. The design and optimization of more complex supercells with hybridized behavior, however, remains an open challenge, but holds the potential of yielding a broader range of spectral responses than previously achieved. Conventional design processes for periodic and complex supercell metasurfaces rely on electromagnetic (EM) simulations that are iteratively optimized by tuning key design parameters until the desired optical properties are obtained. Techniques that have been employed include evolutionary algorithms In response to the need for more efficient design strategies, data-driven approaches based on machine learning, such as deep neural networks (DNNs), have found applications in nanophotonic design While promising, prior studies of DNNs for nanophotonic design have primarily focused on individual scatterers or periodic structures with single-unit cell elements and relatively narrowband operation In this article, we investigate the inverse design of large multiplexed supercell metasurfaces with over 100 subunit elements that can achieve a diverse set of broadband spectral responses. Specifically, we focus on engineering arbitrary bandwidth absorbers operating in the mid-and long-wave infrared regime (4-12 μm) by designing supercell MIM metamaterial absorbers through a deep learning approach. To navigate the large design space that comes with the increased dimensionality of supercells and to address the vanishing gradient problem associated with deep network architectures, we employed a tandem residual network (shown conceptually in Figure Nanophotonic supercell structures such as MIM metasurfaces are capable of producing unique optical responses that extend beyond the sum of their parts. Specifically, in addition to the superposition of individual responses, distinct responses may also arise from the interaction or hybridization between neighboring elements Figure We converted the supercell design parameters into three-dimensional MIM structure models (labeled "3" in Figure Inverse design of supercell metasurfaces with a range of underlying symmetries using a tandem residual network approach. (A) A target absorption spectrum is defined, and the matching design parameters for a multiplexed array of MIM resonators are generated. (B) Data preparation schematic for deep learning. Supercell design parameters (1) representing resonator lengths and positions (2) are converted into 3D models (3). Full-wave electromagnetic simulations are performed on the models (4). Design parameters along with corresponding "ground truth" (5) and predicted ( The performance of a tandem network hinges on the accuracy of the forward-modeling network as well as the breadth and size of the training dataset. Thus, we sought to optimize the architecture of the forward-modeling network and to ensure that the size of our training dataset maximizes the network's implementation efficiency and predictive capabilities. Unlike previous implementations of the tandem architecture, our approach utilizes one-dimensional convolutional neural networks (1-D CNNs) instead of dense networks. 1-D CNNs have been used in various scientific domains Using the same hyperparameters as the forward network, except with an inverted sequence of input and output layers (with 800 and 25 filters, respectively), we designed an inverse-modeling network for the prediction of design parameters (D′) given an input A. However, plain inverse modeling networks are known to encounter the nonuniqueness problem First, we trained a standard tandem dense network by minimizing the loss function between the input absorption spectrum (A) and the spectrum predicted by the forward-modeling network (A′), where A′ is generated by the same D′ predicted by the inverse-modeling network from above. As in Ref. To validate that the tandem network reaches said optimum response, in Figure We utilized the tandem residual network to generate new supercell metasurface designs with a broad range of spectral properties. Figure In the design of the aforementioned multi-resonance and broadband structures, the network not only defined the resonator dimensions required to achieve resonances at the target wavelengths, but also determined their appropriate placements within the lattice in order to reach the target absorption amplitudes. For example, as shown in Figure It is a challenging design task to combine multiple distinct resonant modes in a single metastructure while leveraging, or alternatively minimizing, hybridization between modes and maintaining high absorption per unit area where Amax is the model's estimate of maximum absorption and f is the FWHM in THz. While we show that the structure-property relationships of a design space can be easily represented using a forward-modeling network, we note that the relation in Eqn. 1 (or any relation captured in a similar manner) is not universally applicable, but subject to the same parametric restrictions that were imposed on the training data (i.e., cross widths fixed at 500 nm and cross lengths within the range of 1.4-3 μm). Metasurfaces with dimensions beyond the range restricted by the training data may exhibit a relationship that is different from Eqn. 1. However, the training dataset may simply be updated to incorporate a wider range of geometries to account for such parametric restrictions. As an additional example of discovering application-specific design insights through the neural network, we can calculate the average normal-incidence emissivity of the optimized supercell metasurfaces within defined target bandwidths: Here, II BBBB (TT, vv) = is the spectral radiance of a blackbody at temperature T, where h is Planck's constant, kB is the Boltzmann constant, c is the speed of light, and v is frequency. The lower and upper bounds of the integral (v1 and v2) are derived from the evaluated spectral range (4-12 μm). ε(v) is the metasurface's spectral emittance, which is equal to A(v) by Kirchoff's law. In this case, by querying the neural network in a cyclic manner to solve for emittance (at various temperatures) as a function of the target bandwidth, we can find the relationship between the two parameters (Figure In this article, we demonstrated a machine learning approach to the inverse-design of multiplexed supercell metasurfaces with over 100 subunit elements. The added degrees of freedom offered by a supercell architecture, relative to periodic single-element structures, yields new tailored capabilities including multi-resonant and broadband responses. By forming a cascaded architecture with an inverse-modeling and forward-modeling network, we show that a tandem network effectively overcomes the nonuniqueness problem present in supercell architectures, and can successfully learn a high-dimensional design space of over three trillion possible designs using only 3,600 data instances. Moreover, we present a network architecture based on 1-D convolutional layers and residual building blocks that is capable of generating designs with greater accuracy than a conventional tandem network based on fully connected layers. Through the superposition and coupling of multiple resonant modes in a compact region, the tandem residual network can efficiently design supercell structures with a range of symmetries that yield narrowband, broadband, and multi-resonant responses. The network not only predicts the geometric parameters for an array of resonators (e.g., resonator widths, lengths, radii, etc.), but also their optimum spatial arrangement towards satisfying a specified target. Therefore, the presented approach enables additional degrees of complexity in metasurface design by directly generating structures with a wide range of unique elements while accounting for coupling between these elements. Though we sought to maximize implementation efficiency by minimizing the required training data, we expect that the performance of our tandem network can be improved with more training data and a larger network architecture. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the network itself can be utilized to approximate the structure-property relationships of the investigated class of metasurfaces (within the parameter ranges represented by the training data). By using the forward-modeling network as a full-wave EM simulator, high-speed parameter sweeps can be performed to capture property-specific design trends such as maximum absorption and thermal emittance as a function of bandwidth. Importantly, our results show that DNN-based approaches can efficiently design and characterize large-scale supercell metasurfaces with numerous discrete resonators. We believe our results can expedite the development of supercellclass nanophotonic structures and materials, which may in turn yield new tailored capabilities not achievable through conventional periodic nanostructures. Included in the supplementary material are details regarding hyperparameter optimization and training data size. To train the tandem network for inverse design, we first optimized the architecture of the forward-modeling network through extensive hyperparameter tuning. Furthermore, we trained a fully connected or dense network, "plain" 1-D convolutional neural network (CNN), and 1-D residual network (ResNet) to evaluate the highest-performing architecture type. Figure The primary advantage of the tandem network architecture is its ability to address the nonuniqueness scattering problem (as described in the main text), where drastically different design parameters can meet a similar target response (i.e., a one-to-many problem). To illustrate this problem in the context of our training dataset, Figure The number of supercell design parameters in D (25 total resonators) and the range of values therein (9 different cross lengths) mean there are a total of 3.81 × 10 12 possible supercell designs in the investigated design space. To expedite our deep learning efforts, we sought to minimize the total simulation time and therefore the amount of training data. However, we also had to ensure that the dataset size was large enough to maximize the network's ability to learn supercell designs. In that regard, as shown in Figure Increasing increments of randomly-sampled supercell cross lengths, where D contained values ranging from 1.4-3 μm, were initially generated and used for training. However, after training over 1,500 designs, intermediate tests revealed that the network struggled to predict spectrally selective designs with high absorption (as seen in Figure We observe that both validation losses converge to 2.5 × 10 -3 at 3,600 data instances, demonstrating that the final model resulted in the optimal performance while minimizing the amount of data required for deep learning by sampling less than 1 × 10 -7 % of the total design space. On a distributed high-performance computing cluster with four dedicated compute nodes per simulation, where a node has a minimum of four 64-bit Intel Xeon or AMD Opteron CPU cores and 8 GB memory, each FDTD simulation took approximately 30 minutes to complete. Therefore, our training dataset equates to approximately 75 days of simulation time. 