Synthetic aperture radar (SAR) can measure the phase with antenna and microwave, which cannot be directly extended to visible light imaging due to phase lost. In this letter, we reported an active remote sensing with visible light via reflective Fourier ptychography (FP), termed coherent synthetic aperture imaging (CSAI), achieving high resolution, wide field-of-view (FOV) and phase recovery. A proof-of-concept experiment was reported with laser scanning and a collimator for the infinite object. Both smooth and rough objects are tested, and the spatial resolution increased from 15.6 μm to 3.48 μm with a factor of 4.5. The speckle noise can be suppressed by FP unexpectedly. Meanwhile, the CSAI method may replace the adaptive optics to tackle the aberration induced from atmospheric turbulence and optical system by one-step deconvolution. The spatial resolution in the traditional passive remote sensing is defined by the optical aperture with the formula of 1.22λf/D, where λ denotes the center wavelength, f is the focal length, and D is the diameter of aperture Fourier ptychography (FP) or Fourier ptychographic microscopy (FPM) invented in 2013 is a promising computational imaging technique In this letter, we expanded the FP application to active remote sensing with visible light, termed coherent synthetic aperture imaging (CSAI), to achieve aberration-free, high resolution, and large FOV complex field images with laser scanning scheme and a collimator for an infinite object. We simulated a scenario with two synchronous orbiting satellites in Fig. The performances of the CSAI method are demonstrated with a USAF resolution target in Fig. Then the incoherent image is deconvolved by the PSF as follows where I(kx, ky) is the Fourier transform of incoherent illumination image, and δ is regularization parameters and set to 0.01 in our experiment, superscript * denotes conjugation, OTF denotes optical transfer function, which can be calculated by The result of the deconvolution with the PSF result is shown in Fig. Funding. National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (81427802 and 61975233) and Major Project on High Resolution Earth Observation System (GFZX04014307).