T d -WTe 2 is a topological Weyl semimetal. WTe 2 in the orthorhombic structure is stable at room temperature. Elastic, electronic, bonding, and optoelectronic properties of WTe 2 have been investigated in detail in this work using the density functional theory. Elastic behaviour together with anisotropy indices of WTe 2 have been investigated for the first time. Bonding nature among the constituent atoms and electric field polarization dependent optical constants have also been explored for the first time. WTe 2 is elastically anisotropic; optical anisotropy on the other hand is low. The electronic band structure reveals quasi-linear dispersions along certain direction in the Brillouin zone with semi-metallic features. The Fermi level is located at a pseudogap separating bonding and anti-bonding density of states. The electronic effective mass tensor is predicted to be highly direction dependent. The energy dispersion is significantly weaker in the c-direction. The bonding in WTe 2 is an admixture of covalent and metallic bonds. Optoelectronic properties show strongly reflecting character over a wide band of photon energies. The compound is a strong absorber of ultraviolet radiation. The Debye temperature has been calculated from the elastic constants. We have compared all the calculated physical properties of WTe 2 with those of isostructural MoTe 2 Weyl semimetals. The properties of WTe 2 and MoTe 2 have been compared and contrasted. The calculated parameters of WTe 2 have also been compared with those already available in the literature. Very good agreements have been found. Hermann Electronic and crystallographic properties have long been studied in WTe 2 In our previous study, a comprehensive investigation of elastic and optical properties of orthorhombic MoTe 2 was done using DFT (density functional theory) To the best of our knowledge, the elastic properties of bulk WTe 2 have not been investigated in any detail. Some optical properties of WTe 2 have been studied experimentally The rest of this work is organized as follows: In Section II, we shortly discussed the computational methodology and crystal structure. The results of our computations and their analyses are presented in Section III. Here we explored the structural and elastic properties, Debye temperature, electronic band structure, charge density distribution, bond population analysis and optical properties in different subsections. Finally, in Section IV, we summarized the key features of our investigations and drew some pertinent conclusions. All the calculations presented in this work are performed using the DFT as implemented by the CAmbridge Serial Total Energy Package (CASTEP) At this point, we would like to mention that the surface electronic states carry the main topological features of WSMs and topological insulators. These novel surface electronic structures have their origin in the spin-orbit coupling (SOC). In this study we have not taken SOC into consideration. This is because our focus has been the bulk physical properties of WTe 2 . In a number of prior investigations The structural parameters for MTe 2 (M = Mo or W) obtained from the LDA calculations. The lattice parameters a, b, and c are in Å and the unit cell volume (V) is in Å 3 . The optimized structural parameters are listed in Table Elastic properties of solids relate the mechanical and dynamical behavior under stress and create opportunities for industrial applications. Elastic constants are calculated using the 'stress-strain' method as contained in the CASTEP. Orthorhombic crystals have, by symmetry considerations, nine independent single crystal elastic constants in total and they are all given in Table C44 > 0; C55 > 0; C66 > 0 Our calculated single crystal elastic constants satisfy these inequalities meaning that WTe 2 is stable mechanically. The three diagonal elastic constants C 11 , C 22 , and C 33 measure the capability of the crystal to resist tensile stress along the a, b and c axes, respectively. For WTe 2 , C 33 is very small compared to C 11 and C 22 . This indicates that the crystal is more compressible in the cdirection than the a-and b-directions defining the basal plane, reflecting the layered feature of the compound. Bonding strength in the ab-plane is therefore stronger than that extending in the out-of-plane. The constants C 44 , C 55 , and C 66 determine the resistance of the crystal against shear. Small C 44 indicates that WTe 2 is unable to resist shear deformation in (100) plane. This would constitute the prominent elastic failure mode for WTe 2 . The off-diagonal shear components (C 12 , C 13 , and C 23 ) are due to the resistance to volume conserving orthorhombic distortions. C 23 , which has the lowest value, describes a uniaxial strain along the crystallographic c-direction to a functional stress component along the crystallographic bdirection. For MoTe 2 , C 13 has the lowest value, indicating a fundamental difference in the directional bonding characters between WTe 2 and MoTe 2 . Elastic moduli for polycrystalline aggregates can be calculated from single crystal elastic constants The isotropic bulk modulus (B in GPa) and shear modulus (G in GPa) for polycrystalline MTe 2 (M = Mo or W) obtained from the single crystal elastic constants using Voigt, Reuss and Hill's approximations. The Pugh ratio (B/G), Young's modulus (E in GPa), Poisson's ratio (υ), and the machinability index (μ M ) are calculated from Hill's approximation. Compared to many other metallic binary solids The shear anisotropic factors A 1 , A 2 , A 3 , and A G (in %), A B (in %) and compressibility anisotropy factors A Ba , A Bc for MTe 2 (M = Mo or W). Elastic anisotropy is very common in most of the crystals in nature and the study of it is important, especially for systems with layered structure. The estimated elastic anisotropy factors for both WTe 2 and MoTe 2 are listed in Table Debye temperature (θ D ) is an important lattice dynamical parameter correlated to many thermo-physical properties, such as specific heat, elastic constants, and melting temperature. θ D sets the boson energy cut-off in Cooper pairing for the phonons involved in superconductors. The vibrational excitations arise entirely from acoustic modes at low temperatures. Hence, at low temperatures, specific heat measurements and calculation from the elastic constants give the same value of θ D . In this study, we have estimated θ D from the averaged sound velocity and crystal density (ρ) using the following equation Here h is the Planck's constant, k is the Boltzmann constant, N A is the Avogadro's number, ρ is the density, M is the molecular weight, n is the number of atoms in the molecule, and v m is the mean sound velocity. The longitudinal (v l ) and transverse (v t ) sound velocities of polycrystalline WTe 2 are obtained using the shear (G) and the bulk (B) modulus The density (ρ in g/cm 3 ), longitudinal, transverse, average elastic wave velocity (v l , v t , v m in m/s), and the Debye temperature (θ D in K) from the average elastic wave velocity obtained from polycrystalline elastic modulus. C. Electronic band structure and electronic energy density of states The bulk electronic band structure along some high symmetry directions in the Brillouin zone (BZ) are depicted in Fig. To visualize the bonding nature of the compounds, the charge density distribution in the (100) plane are studied. The charge density maps are illustrated in Fig. To get a better understanding of electron density in various bonds, Mulliken population analysis (MPA) To investigate how the compound under investigation interacts with light, optical properties are studied. Optical parameters can be obtained by considering the photon induced electronic transitions. For the present study, a plasma frequency of 10 eV, 0.05 eV of damping in the Drude term and a Gaussian smearing of 0.5 eV are used. The imaginary part of the complex dielectric function, ε 2 (ω), is obtained from the transitions between occupied and unoccupied electronic energy states, weighted by the corresponding matrix elements. This approach is provided by CASTEP supported formula, expressed as: Here Ω is the volume of the unit cell, ω is the frequency of the incident photon, e is electronic charge, ψ and ψ are the quantum states of electrons in the conduction and valence bands, respectively, with a momentum given by (h/2π)k. Conservation of energy and momentum during the transition is ensured by the delta function. The real and imaginary parts of the dielectric constant describe a causal response and are linked by Kramers-Kronig transform. So this transformation is implemented in CASTEP to obtain the real part, ε 1 (ω) of the dielectric function from the corresponding imaginary part, ε 2 (ω). All the other optical parameters can be calculated from these two parts of the complex dielectric function Figs. The reflectivity spectra shown in Fig. Elastic, electronic, bonding and optical properties of WTe 2 WSM were investigated via first-principles technique. All the computed properties of WTe 2 were compared and contrasted with those of MoTe 2 WSM in the isostructural orthorhombic T d phase. Similar to MoTe 2 , WTe 2 is an elastically anisotropic compound brittle in nature. The polycrystalline elastic moduli of WTe 2 WSM are slightly lower compared to those for MoTe 2 . The calculated unit cell volume of WTe 2 , on the other hand, is larger than the cell volume of MoTe 2 . Both these features imply that bonding strength is relatively low in WTe 2 . Both WTe 2 and MoTe 2 WSMs possess high and comparable values of machinability index which augurs well for possible applications in the industrial sector. The Debye temperature of WTe 2 is significantly lower compared to that of MoTe 2 . Thus the lattice thermal conductivity of WTe 2 is expected to be lower. It also implies that the crystal lattice of WTe 2 is softer in comparison to MoTe 2 . Electronic band structures of both WTe 2 and MoTe 2 WSMs exhibit high level of resemblance with semi-metallic characters and agree very well with previous experimental studies The bonding characters have been explored using the charge density mapping, Mulliken and Hirshfeld bond population analyses. Clear indications of an admixture of covalent and metallic bonding have been found. The directional covalent bonding results in the brittleness of WTe 2 and MoTe 2 WSMs. The refractive indices of both the WSMs are found to be very high in the visible region meaning that WTe 2 and MoTe 2 might be a good candidate for optical displays. The reflectivity spectra suggest that both WTe 2 and MoTe 2 compounds will be good reflecting materials over a wide band of energies encompassing from infrared to ultraviolet regions. The gross features of the recently measured experimental optical conductivity and reflectivity We hope that the results presented in this work will inspire both experimentalists and theorists to study these interesting WSMs in further details in near future.