We have studied the transport properties of LaTiO3/SrTiO3 (LTO/STO) heterostructures. In spite of 2D growth observed in reflection high energy electron diffraction, Transmission Electron Microscopy images revealed that the samples tend to amorphize. Still, we observe that the structures are conducting, and some of them exhibit high conductance and/or superconductivity. We established that conductivity arises mainly on the STO side of the interface, and shows all the signs of the 2-dimensional electron gas usually observed at interfaces between STO and LTO or LaAlO3, including the presence of two electron bands and tunability with a gate voltage. Analysis of magnetoresistance (MR) and superconductivity indicates presence of a spatial fluctuations of the electronic properties in our samples. That can explain the observed quasilinear out-of-plane MR, as well as various features of the in-plane MR and the observed superconductivity. Since the discovery of conductivity 1 at the interface between the two nonmagnetic band insulators LaAlO 3 (LAO) and SrTiO 3 (STO), oxide interfaces have been under intense investigation. The dominant view in the literature on the origin of conductivity at the (001) LAO/STO interface is the so-called polar catastrophe scenario 2,3 , based on the difference between the stacking of neutral layers in STO, but 1-electron-charged layers in LAO. To avoid the discontinuity at the interface, half an electron per unit cell has to transfer from the LAO surface down to interface, leading to a formation of two-dimensional electron liquid (2DEL). Besides that, also La/Sr intermixing Along with LAO/STO, also the interface between the antiferromagnetic Mott insulator LaTiO 3 (LTO) and STO has been under intensive investigation. LTO is polar along (001) crystal direction, so a charge transfer similar to LAO/STO may be expected. At the LTO/STO interface, the polar discontinuity can be resolved by the variable valence of Ti In this paper, we have studied LTO/STO interfaces grown by Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD), and found that in spite of layer-by-layer growth signatures, the LTO layer tends to amorphize. Still, the conductivity in the system is basically due to a 2DEL formed on the STO side of the interface. The 2DEL properties are not much different from those of other STO-based oxide interfaces. In particular, Hall data show two-band behavior with standard values for the carrier concentrations and backgating shows the presence of a Lifshitz point. Less normal is a quasilinear Magnetoresistance (MR), and nonuniform superconductivity. We argue that the possible origin of these phenomena is the non-uniform distribution of oxygen vacancies on the STO surface due to the uncontrolled oxidation process in the LTO layer, which lead to spatial inhomogeneities. This inhomogeneity is clearly seen in the superconducting state, but not easily discernible in the normal state, which is an important part of the message. LAO layers were grown by Pulsed Laser Deposition on a TiO 2 -terminated surface of STO(001) single crystal substrates. The growth temperature was 750 • C. Growth was in an O 2 atmosphere utilizing two nominal pressures: 1 × 10 -4 and 5 × 10 -4 mbar. The thickness of the samples was determined by observing the intensity oscillations using Reflection High Energy Electron Diffraction (RHEED) and fixed at 10 u.c. (see Fig. Most of the measurements were performed in the van der Pauw (VDP) geometry. To determine the sheet resistance, two resistances were measured, one called R H with the current applied over one edge (contacts A,B) and the voltage measured along the opposite edge (contacts C,D), and one called R V using the other pair of edges (current through A,D, voltage over B,C). The sheet resistance R S was then calculated by by solving the VDP equation for R S by the Newton-Raphson method : The magnetoresistance was determined in the same way, by either applying in-plane or out-of-plane fields. Hall data were obtained by injecting the current along one diagonal and measure the voltage across the other one, using an out-of-plane field. The out-of-plane magnetotransport data were (anti-)symmetrized. The in-plane data were not. Instead, the two measured voltages in inplane geometry were used to obtain MR with the current parallel and perpendicular to the current direction. The experimental data obtained at temperatures below 1 K were smoothed to remove noise except for the measurements in magnetic field. The geometry for the measurements of the superconducting transition in the Triton is described in Section IV. An extra sample was prepared for study by scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM), using an oxygen pressure of 5×10 -4 mbar. The conductivity of the LTO layer was checked by using additional gold wires, which were glued by silver paint to the surface of the sample, and resistance was measured by a source meter with an applied current of 1μA in a two-probe geometry. The different samples did shown a variation in conducting properties. Some exhibit higher conductance and/or superconductivity. We did not observe a correlation between high conductance or superconductivity and the oxygen pressure during growth. The transport data reported here is on a sample which shows high conductivity, a decrease of the sheet resistance upon lowering the temperature (Fig. As mentioned above, the conductance in these heterostructures can arise not only from a 2DEL forming at the STO/LTO interface but also in the LTO itself. To distinguish between these two possibilities, after performing the transport measurements presented below, we investigated the conductivity of the LTO layer in the following manner. A Au wire was glued by the silver paint to the LTO surface as is shown schematically in the inset in Fig. Broadly speaking, the magnetotransport properties are similar to previously reported results on oxide heterostructures. In particular the Hall resistance becomes non-linear below 100 K, marking the appearance of twoband behavior, with two types of carriers: of high concentration and low mobility, and vice versa. The Hall data and details of the Hall analysis are given in the Supplement, extracted carrier concentrations and mobilities in Fig. where A, β, γ are fitting parameters. The results of the fit are shown in Fig. The in-plane MR is negligible at high temperatures (Fig. To further study the magnetotransport properties, we applied a back gate voltage V BG to the sample. First we investigate the effect of a gate voltage on R S . The "training" of the sample at 3 K, meaning successive up-down sweeps of the voltage, (Fig. Starting again with the Hall resistance, we find it becomes nonlinear between -25 and 0 V (Supplement Fig. Turning to the MR at 3 K, the out-of-plane MR, shown in Fig 4c (See Supplement Fig. We studied the superconducting properties of the sample in the VDP geometry, using either the 'horizontal' or the 'vertical' sides, and for the whole range of gate voltages V BG . We also measured in a two-probe configuration (current and voltage contacts on the same side). Those data are given in the Supplement, Fig. Anisotropy in STO-based structures has been reported before The normalized resistances at 0 V for the different measurement configurations, including the 2-probe measurements, are plotted in Fig. In region II, R 2 goes to zero and, therefore, R ver V DP goes to zero too. Also, the denominator decreases faster than the numerator in Eq. S6 and consequently, R hor V DP now increases. The opposite trend is observed for R hor 2probe , whereas R ver 2probe changes insignificantly. In region III, R 5 and R 7 reduce to zero, and thereby R hor V DP reduces to zero. In region IV , R 2 = 0, R 5 = 0 and R 7 = 0, as well as the measured resistances R hor V DP and R ver V DP , and therefore R hor 2probe and R ver 2probe become equal: The resistances R 1 and R 6 , occurring as a product in both numerator and denominator, have to remain finite in the measured range, for eq.3 to be determinate. In region V , one of resistances R 3 , R 4 or R 8 is zero because the resistances in the two-probe are zero. In our case, it is R 8 , whereas R 1 , R 3 , R 4 , and R 6 are assumed not to undergo a superconducting transition in the measured range of temperatures to stabilize the fit. The behavior on both sides of the resistance dome around zero gate voltage, for our different measurement configurations, can be understood from this model, assuming the T c 's of all percolation paths on both sides of the dome are suppressed by the gate voltage. For the VDP vertical configuration, because R 2 has the higher T c , the resistance stays zero in the whole range of gate voltages. In the other configurations, since R 5 , R 7 and The proposed model also provides insight into the large critical currents observed in our sample, shown in Supplement Fig. Results of the back gate experiments on our a-LTO/STO samples can be easily separated in three regions: i) negative gate voltages, ii) voltages between -20 V and +75 V, and iii) above +75 V. In the first region, transport is is governed by a one-band regime. Note that we do not observe an insulating state in the negative gate voltage range. This can be a sign of nonuniform conductivity. The behavior under voltage sweeps in the positive quadrant is another. We are apparently not able to fully trap the carriers and induce an insulating state as can occur in (crystalline) LAO/STO and LTO/STO interfaces In the second regime the transport has changed to two band behavior. In this region, the MR exhibits the enhancement of out-of-plane and in-plane MR in agreement with previous works. Anisotropic in-plane MR has been reported in LAO/STO heterostructures The high positive gate voltage range above 75 V is the range where the positive quasilinear MR develops which we believe is another signature of inhomogeneous transport in our films. In fact, such a crossover is observed in various different systems where spatial inhomogeneities can be invoked Earlier, Ref. [38] argued that the large positive MR supports an electronic phase separation scenario. However, there is a significant difference for our films compared to the ones studied in Ref. [38 and 39]. Our system does not (for gate voltages of 0 V and above) exhibit an upturn of sheet resistance at low temperatures. Even more below 30 K, the MR for field-perpendicularcurrent is always negative. The main reason for this is that the results reported in Ref. [38] were on crystalline LAO/STO samples grown at the high pressure of 10 -2 mbar O 2 . Lower pressures leads to a decrease in the maximum magnetization according to results of Ref. 38, thus, making scenario of the phase separation between normal and magnetic region implausible as the main driving mechanism for the observed quasilinear MR. At higher carrier densities (above 75 V), the in-plane MR showed a decrease, indicating an additional contribution which saturates in high fields. A connection between a non-trivial negative in-plane MR and a linear out-of-plane MR was actually observed in work on thin films of the Dirac semimetal Cd 3 As 2 Coming back to the superconductivity, extensive research already indicated the existence of inhomogeneous superconductivity in STO-based oxide heterostructures The final point to discuss is the possible origin of inhomogeneous electronic structure of the interface. This is the more important since it is often assumed that amorphous layers per se need not yield significantly different physics than crystalline layers. Previously, inhomogeneities in the conductance have been shown to arise from ferroelastic domains We have grown and studied heterostructures of LaTiO 3 /SrTiO 3 . In spite of clear two-dimensional growth, our samples were found to be amorphous, which may be due tot the absence of a capping layer. The samples showed the salient characteristics of the electron gas at oxide interfaces, in particular two-band behavior with normal values for the carrier concentrations and mobilities, as well as the existence of a Lifshitz point upon applying a gate voltage. The conductance was found to be high and inhomogeneous, signaled in particular by a large quasilinear MR and a percolative superconducting transition. By measuring in different configurations, both van der Pauw and two-probe, and using a simple model for a non-uniform superconductor To extract carrier concentration and mobility, we used the following equation in the two-band region: where e is the elementary charge, n i and μ i are carrier concentration and mobility of i type carriers correspondingly. For fitting the constraint R S (0) = 1/e(n 1 μ 1 + n 2 μ 2 ) was used. In the one-band region, we used high field Hall resistance value and zero field sheet resistance. The measured resistances can be expressed through a set of resistances of the model in the following way. First, using a Y-∆ network transform, it is possible to simplify the model circuit into two simple ones for the vertical and direction. The circuits obtained in this way are shown in Fig. ) These circuits can be solved by the mesh current method. After some lengthy but straightforward arithmetic calculations, the resistances in the different measurement configurations can be expressed as follow: R hor 2probe = R CD,CD = where V ij = V i -V j , and I ij is the current injected in contact i and taken out from contact j. R i is assumed to follow a simple stepwise function for an inhomogeneous phase transition where R norm i is resistance in normal state, T c i is the critical temperature, which corresponds to the resistance with R norm i /2 and w i determines the broadening of the superconducting transition. The result of the fitting is present in Table a T i and w i are fixed. A. Ohtomo and H. Y. Hwang, Nature 427, 423 (2004). N. Nakagawa, H. Y. Hwang, and D. A. Muller, Nature Materials 5, 204 (2006). R. V. Vovk, G. Y. Khadzhai, I. L. Goulatis, S. N. Kamchatnaya, and A. Chroneos, Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Electronics 28, 10862 (2017).