Though Weyl fermions have recently been observed in several materials with broken inversion symmetry, there are very few examples of such systems with broken time reversal symmetry. Various Co2-based half-metallic ferromagnetic Heusler compounds are lately predicted to host Weyl type excitations in their band structure. These magnetic Heusler compounds with broken time reversal symmetry are expected to show a large momentum space Berry curvature, which introduces several exotic magneto-transport properties. In this report, we present systematic analysis of experimental results on anomalous Hall effect (AHE) in Co2TiX (X=Si and Ge). This study is an attempt to understand the role of Berry curvature on AHE in Co2TiX family of materials. The anomalous Hall resistivity is observed to scale quadratically with the longitudinal resistivity for both the compounds. The detailed analysis indicates that in anomalous Hall conductivity, the intrinsic Karplus-Luttinger Berry phase mechanism dominates over the extrinsic skew scattering and side-jump mechanism. Co 2 -based Heusler compounds have enticed an immense interest in condensed matter physics due to their high Curie temperature and tunability of electronic and magnetic properties Usually, in a ferromagnetic system, the measured Hall resistivity has contributions from both ordinary Hall effect and AHE. The anomalous Hall resistivity component is proportional to the spontaneous magnetization (M ). Although the basic theory of AHE has already been reviewed extensively There are several theoretical and experimental reports on the structural, electronic, and magnetic properties of Co 2 -based Heusler compounds Co 2 TiX (X=Si and Ge) compounds were prepared by arc melting the stoichiometric amounts of high purity of its constituents in a highly purified argon (Ar) atmosphere. In order to avoid any contamination with oxygen, the sample chamber was purged with high purity Ar and evacuated. This procedure was repeated several times. Furthermore, we have heated Ti pieces close to its melting point inside the vacuum chamber before arc melting the compound. To achieve chemical homogeneity, the ingot was remelted five to six times and flipped before each new melting step. The obtained ingot was then sealed in an evacuated quartz tube and annealed for 3 weeks at 950 • C. Phase purity and structural analysis for both the samples were done using the powder x-ray diffraction (XRD) technique with Cu K α radiation in a Rigaku x-ray diffractometer (TTRAX III). The magnetization measurements were performed using a superconducting quantum interference device-vibrating sam- ple magnetometer (SQUID-VSM) (MPMS 3, Quantum Design) in magnetic fields up to 7 T. The sample used for the magnetic measurements is of approximate dimensions 0.3×0.4×4 mm 3 . To minimize the demagnetization effect, the external magnetic field was applied along the longest sample direction. The magnetization data were recorded over the temperature range from 2 to 380 K. To achieve good thermal equilibrium, we have stabilized each temperature for 30 minutes. For each M (H) isotherm, the magnetic field was increased from 0 to 7 T and then reduced to zero. We didn't observe any difference in M (H) between the increasing and decreasing field. The transport measurements were performed in a 9 T physical property measurement system (Quantum Design) using the ac-transport option. For both the resistivity and Hall measurements, the electrical contacts were made in the four-probe configuration using conducting silver paste and gold wires. In order to eliminate any contribution due to the small misalignment of voltage probes, the final Hall resistivity was obtained from the difference between measured Hall resistivity for positive and negative magnetic field. Co 2 TiX compounds crystallize in cubic L2 1 structure (space group: Fm 3m), which consists of four interpenetrating face-centered-cubic lattices along (111) direction. The crystallographic positions of Co atoms are (0, 0, 0) and (1/2, 1/2, 1/2) and those of the Ti and Ge atoms are (1/4, 1/4, 1/4) and (3/4, 3/4, 3/4), respectively. The Rietveld profile refinement of the XRD patterns (Fig. The magnetic field dependence of dc-magnetization at 2 K for Co 2 TiSi and Co 2 TiGe are shown in Figs. where ρ 0 xy is the ordinary Hall resistivity and R 0 and R S are the ordinary and anomalous Hall coefficients, respectively. Carrier concentration (n) can be calculated from R 0 = 1 ne , whereas the sign of R 0 determines the type of the charge carriers. If M saturates, the values ) for Co 2 TiSi and Co 2 TiGe, respectively. At 20 K, | σ A xy | is about 55 Ω -1 cm -1 for Co 2 TiSi and ∼170 Ω -1 cm -1 for Co 2 TiGe. With increasing temperature, | σ A xy | gradually decreases. Ideally, when a nodal-line in the electronic band structure is almost dispersion-less and Fermi level resides in the band gap induced by SOC, i.e., in the resonance condition, the intrinsic contribution to σ A xy resonantly enhances and approaches towards a value e 2 ha As intrinsic AHC, | σ A xy,in |, is approximately proportional to magnetization, the scaling coefficient, should be constant and independent of temperature In summary, we have performed transport and magnetic measurements on Co 2 TiX. These half-metallic Heusler compounds are predicted to host Weyl fermions with broken time reversal symmetry along with the large associated Berry phase of their Fermi surfaces. In Co 2 TiX, the enhanced Berry curvature near the E F is expected to add a large contribution to the intrinsic AHE. We have carried out a detailed analysis of AHE for Co 2 TiSi and Co 2 TiGe compounds in which a scaling relation between ρ A xy and ρ xx has been obtained as ρ A xy ∝ ρ α xx , α ∼ 2. The almost quadratic dependence (α≈2) suggests that AHE is originated from either intrinsic KL or extrinsic side jump mechanism. The experimentally obtained AHC found to be comparable with the theoretically calculated intrinsic AHC in Co 2 TiGe, whereas, it is one order smaller in Co 2 TiSi. However, S H is almost temperature independent for both the materials, which supports intrinsic nature of AHC. The large AHC and AHE make Co 2 TiX promising candidates for future spintronics applications. They also provide a platform for further investigations of exotic properties in other Co 2based Heusler materials. V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS