The growth window of epitaxial Hf 0.5 Zr 0.5 O 2 is established taking into account the main ferroelectric properties that films have to present simultaneously: high remanent polarization, low fatigue and long retention. Defects in the film and imprint field depend on deposition temperature and oxygen pressure, with an impact on fatigue and retention, respectively. Fatigue increases with substrate temperature and pressure, and retention is short if low temperature is used. The growth window of epitaxial stabilization of ferroelectric Hf 0.5 Zr 0.5 O 2 is narrower when all major ferroelectric properties (remanence, endurance and retention) are considered, but deposition temperature and pressure ranges are still sufficiently wide. Ferroelectric HfO 2 films can be deposited using CMOS-compatible conditions, and have a large remanent polarization and retention for more than 10 years, even when the thickness is less than 10 nm. Endurance is critical for memory devices and therefore, improvement of this property in HfO 2 -based ferroelectrics is extremely important. Efforts to achieve this goal have allowed endurance of up to 10 11 cycles to be achieved. HZO films of thickness (t) 9 nm were grown on SrTiO 3 (001) (STO) substrates buffered with an La 2/3 Sr 1/3 MnO 3 (LSMO) electrode of thickness 25 nm. The ferroelectric HZO film and the LSMO electrode were deposited in a single process by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) using a KrF excimer laser. LSMO electrodes were deposited at 700 °C under 0.1 mbar of oxygen. In one series of samples (T s series), HZO films were deposited at an oxygen pressure of 0.1 mbar and a variable substrate temperature T s from 650 to 825 °C. In a second series (P O2 series), the temperature of the substrate was fixed (800 °C) and a variable oxygen pressure P O2 in the range of 0.01 -0.2 mbar was used. Immediately after HZO growth, the samples were cooled under 0.2 mbar of oxygen. The HZO/LSMO bilayers are epitaxial. Detailed structural characterization of the samples and additional experimental details are reported elsewhere. Ferroelectric polarization loops were measured using an AixACCT TFAnalyser2000 platform at 1 kHz by the Dynamic Leakage Current Compensation (DLCC) procedure Figure The effect of P O2 on fatigue is presented in Figures Retention measurements of the T s = 650 C and 825 C films (P O2 = 0.1 mbar) are presented in Figures for negative poling increases to ≈ 40%, while for positive poling it decreases to ≈ 60%. Therefore, the asymmetry is considerably reduced. Films deposited at higher T s show similar retention characteristics. Figures The imprint field (E imp ) and the coercive voltage (V c ) were determined from polarization loops. Its dependence on the deposition temperature and the oxygen pressure are represented in Figures kV/cm at 0.1 mbar. The imprint field in polycrystalline doped-HfO 2 films is generally associated with oxygen vacancies defects. 12,13 E imp is very small in epitaxial films deposited at the lowest oxygen pressure, and its magnitude increases markedly with P O2 . This suggests that there is no simple relationship between oxygen stoichiometry and E imp in our films. The opposite dependence would be expected if E imp is due to oxygen vacancies. The results suggest that there is not great difference in oxygen vacancies in films grown by PLD in the P O2 = 0.01-0.2 mbar range. Indeed, ferroelectric doped-HfO films grown by sputtering have the largest polarization when pure argon atmosphere is used. V (Figure The dielectric constant ε r shows hysteresis loops in all T s series films (Figure The permittivity values are in the range of 28 to 36 (28 -34 at saturation), with a lower permittivity for higher T s . The oxygen pressure P O2 (Figure The film deposited at the lowest pressure, P O2 = 0.01 mbar, does not show significant dependence on the electric field, while the other films in the series show evident hysteresis. All films show negative horizontal shift in agreement with P-E loops (Figure The wide range of the relative dielectric constant shown in Figure Fatigue in ferroelectric oxides is generally associated with oxygen vacancies that are generated by cycling, which are responsible for ferroelectric domain walls pinning, so some domains do not switch and the polarization reduces. Large remanent polarization is achieved in wide ranges of temperature (in the range of around 700 C -825 C) and oxygen pressure (in the range of around 0.05 mbar -0.2 mbar). 6 However, this wide growth window is not optimal considering fatigue and retention. For applications, high remanent polarization, low fatigue and long retention are properties that must be achieved simultaneously. Figure See the supplementary material for electrodes pictures and size measurements; current density versus voltage loops; and ferroelectric polarization loops after a few cycles. J.Lyu, T. Song, I. Fina, and F. Sanchez, Nanoscale 12, 11280 (2020). F. Mehmood, M. Hoffmann, P.D. Lomenzo, C. Richter, M. Materano, T. Mikolajick, and U. Schroeder, Adv. Mater. Interfaces 6, 1901180 (2019).