In this paper, we present a new theoretical model for the dielectrophoresis (DEP) process of the single-walled Carbon nanotubes (SWCNT). We obtain a different frequency interval for the alignment of wide energy gap semiconductor SWCNTs which shows a considerable difference with the prevalent model. For this, we study two specific models namely, the spherical model and the ellipsoid model to estimate the frequency interval. Then, we perform the DEP process and use the obtained frequencies (of spherical and ellipsoid models) for the alignment of the SWCNTs. Our empirical results declare the theoretical prediction, i.e., a crucial step toward the realization of carbon nanotube fieldeffect transistor (CNT-FET) with the DEP process based on the ellipsoid model. A graphene sheet rolled up into a cylinder named SWCNT is either metallic or semiconducting depending on its geometrical structure. An SWCNT is a material with unique properties, like high tensile strength, high electrical/thermal conductivity, high elastic modulus, and ductility. All these properties make CNT-based products to have high scientific importance in addition to a high potential of technical applications such as thermal conduction enhancement, composites, filtration, sensors, and microelectronics. Carbon nanotubes with their unique electronic and mechanical properties have drawn great attention in a broad range of applications especially in Nanoelectronics and sensing applications Dielectrophoresis technique first adopted by Pohl In One of the most important problems in using this technique for aligning CNTs between electrodes is that metallic carbon nanotubes do always exist along with semiconducting CNTs in the solution so adjusting appropriate parameters to absorb only semiconductor CNTs is a great consideration. In this paper, we focus on the frequency of the applied voltage and show that with a suitable theoretical model for this technique we can find the right frequency (one of the important parameters in the process) in this process to absorb and align semiconductor CNTs between electrodes and consequently a p-type CNT-FET behavior of the fabricated device. Here we first derive and demonstrate a prevalent model for DEP, namely a model based on a chain of spherical particles along the CNT axis ( The paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we explain the theoretical work and obtain the frequency interval for the spherical model. In Section 3, we describe the ellipsoid model and estimate the frequency interval related to the model. In Section 4, we employ the obtained frequencies (according to spherical and ellipsoid models) and in order to identify the type (metallic or semiconductor) of aligned SWCNTs, we plot I-V characteristics of fabricated devices. Finally, the conclusions are explained in Section 5. The basic idea in the theory of dielectrophoresis is that a dielectric particle in a nonuniform electric field experiences a net force which depends on the electric field and effective dipole moment of the particle generated because of the external electric field. Dielectrophoresis is a phenomenon in which a force is exerted on a dielectric particle when it is suspended in a non-uniform electric field. The polarization of particles by non-uniform electric field makes it possible to exert DEP force even on non-charged particles. All polarizable particles exhibit Dielectrophoresis phenomena in the presence of an electric field. Electrical properties of particle and medium, shape and size of the particle, the strength of the electric field and frequency of applied field are the main parameters that determine the strength of the exerted force. The dipole consists of equal and opposite charges (+q) and (-q) located a distance vector d apart, and it is located in an electric field E. If the electric field is nonuniform, then, in general, the two charges (+q and -q) will experience different values of the Vector field E and the dipole will experience a net force. The total force on the dipole is where r is the position of the -q particle. The first order approximation (dielectrophoretic approximation) is given by So given the electric field to calculate the force on a dipole we should first calculate the effective moment of the dielectric particle. Here we are trying to model SWCNTs suspended in a medium. Our first model which is prevalent is the spherical particle model of CNTs ( a chain of spherical particles) so we bring the main formula regarding effective dipole moment of a spherical dielectric particle in an external electric field and then go to a new model. The problem of a spherical dielectric particle in an external electric field can (see where ε m is the permittivity of the medium and ε p that of particle and the second term indicates the dipole. Furthermore, we should note that the electrostatic potential φ dipole dipole due to a point dipole of moment ρ eff in a dielectric medium of permittivity ε m is (see By comparing ( consequently for the special case of the homogeneous, dielectric sphere, the expression for the effective dipole moment is Here, K known as the Clausius-Mossotti function When ε p > ε m then K and the effective dipole moment ρ eff is collinear with the electric field vector and when ε p < ε m two vectors are antiparallel. Now we consider the electric field as an AC electric field and assume that sphere and medium have a finite conductivities. The solution is the same as ( The Clausius-Mossotti factor now has become a function of the complex permittivities, containing magnitude and phase information about the effective dipole moment. It considers the complex coordinates as where σ m and σ p indicate respectively the conductivity of medium and the particle. Such ohmic, dispersive behavior is a consequence of the finite time required to build up surface charge σ at the interface. Assuming spatial variation for electric field from equations ( where Ē(t, x) indicates the complex conjugate of E(t, x) and the real and imaginary parts are given by Also, the relevant relaxation time constant in this case is τ = ε p +2ε m σ p +2σ 3 is the reciprocal of the frequency for which R{K} is maximum. The important point about this constant is that whenever relaxation time constant is bigger than the reciprocal of applied frequency, the particle will respond to time-averaged force and torque, i.e., we have τ > 1 ω applied voltage . From The key point is obtaining the below frequency that we desire from the direction of force to align nanotubes between electrodes. Considering SWCNTs solved in deionized water, we use Eq. 15 to calculate the frequency of zero force where So to attract an SWCNT with a given parameters frequency of the applied field should be in the following interval 6.6 MHz < ω < 13.7 MHz (17 An important characteristic of equation ( This means that the frequency of zero force shifts to the right with the increment in the conductivity of particle so to absorb SWCNTs with lower conductivity (wide-bandgap) we should go to lower frequencies and vice versa. Figure We now use a more realistic model namely, prolate ellipsoid, to find the right interval for the frequency of applied voltage. In The problem of the ellipsoid in an electric field can be solved by introducing elliptical coordinates In the case of semiconductors, SWCNT's longitudinal polarizability factor typically is more than ten times higher than transverse polarizability Figure The resulting equation for the induced dipole moment in the direction n is where A n is depolarization factor for the axis n Where a 1 , a 2 , and a 3 are half length along the axes and εp-n is the complex permittivity in the direction n. Comparing equation ( If a 1 = a 2 = a 3 , all three A n s are 1 3 so we get the same result for Clausius-Mossotti factor as before for sphere. If a 1 a 2 = a 3 that we are concerned, A n s can be calculated as follows 1e 2 e 3 ln where e is the eccentricity and is defined as follows For very long needle-shaped ellipsoid we have following approximation for A 1 For A 2 and A 3 we get 1e 2 4e 3 ln In the case of a SWCNT with diameter to length ratio of a 2 a 1 (which is relevant in our case) we have A 1 ∼ 6.6 × 10 -6 and A 2 = A 3 ∼ 1 2 . From equation ( As before we need real and imaginary parts of Clausius-Mossotti factor which in this case from equation ( The point here is that an ellipsoid particle in an electric field always aligns itself with its longest axes along the direction of electric field so in this case, the ruling term is τ 1 . In the case of a long SWCNT with a high aspect ratio, we get the following approximate formula for the experienced force by SWCNT where εpl is the longitudinal complex permittivity. Frequency dependence of the force is present in the R εplεm εm +A 1 ( εplεm ) term. With this approximation we have following range of the applied frequency: where the right hand side indicates Table In order to estimate the frequency, we use the efficient parameters, summarized in Table An important point here is that the transverse conductivity of SWCNT is much lower than its longitudinal conductivity and consequently we assume it to be zero. Figure The point here is that, because of the presence of other forces which result in different motions like electrothermal motion or Brownian motion we should choose the frequency near the lower limit to have higher DEP force and near the stable polarization. In order to identify the type (metallic or semiconductor) of aligned SWCNTs with two different applied frequencies, based on the two models, we plot I-V characteristics of fabricated devices. We know that for metallic SWCNTs we would observe a straight line in the I-V plane and for semiconductor SWCNTs we expect a nonlinear relationship between current and applied voltage. Indeed, for fabricated devices with a dominant number of semiconductor SWC-NTs, with the increment in voltage more and more holes participate in the current generation and we would see an exponential I-V characteristic. The SWCNTs used in our experiment are in the form of aqueous solution and purchased from Nanointegris (http://www.nanointegris.com/) specification for the SWNTs solution are: diameter range from 1.2 nm to 1.7 nm, length range varies between 300 nm and 5 microns, metal catalyst impurity < 1%, amorphous carbon impurity 1-5%, electronic enrichment 98% semiconductor SWCNT. We diluted the solution to 100 ng/ml and used in the DEP process. For the source and drain electrodes, we used two kinds of electrodes one with 2-microns gap and another with a 1-micron gap between electrodes both with 3-microns width at the end tip. The electrodes are shown in Figure We performed the DEP process and in order to align the SWCNTs between the electrodes an applied voltage of 6 V amplitude for 2 microns gap electrodes and 5 V for the 1-micron gap is applied. The duration of the DEP process in all experiments was 20 seconds. Figure An important point to notice is that our model is just for a single SWCNT but experimental results are I-V characteristic of SWCNT bundles so we see a back gate response in I-V curves and very little deviation beginning at high Here, we take the I-V characteristics of the SWCNT-FET into account in terms of linearity. In the case of semiconductor, intrinsic, p-type or n-type, free of external voltage, thermal agitations of electrons in the valance band causes a continues creation of electron-hole pairs i.e. electrons move from valence band to conduction band with a lifetime and result is a a constant concentration of free electrons and holes at a constant temperature. Now using SWCNT as a channel in a CNT-FET, the shape of the current-voltage characteristic is strongly affected by the potential profile across the channel Experimental results show that the right frequency interval in the DEP process for alignment of single-walled carbon nanotubes is the one suggested by the ellipsoid model and in the case of large gap semiconductor SWCNTs shows a great difference; two orders of magnitude; with a spherical model which is prevalent in the articles. Picking the right frequency interval, as the theoretical model suggests, adjusting other parameters of the process such as the geometry of electrodes and changing the metal electrodes we can fully realize a more effective carbon nanotube field-effect transistor based on the DEP process. It is also well depicted that, choosing the right parameters, dielectrophoresis can be applied as a reliable way for carbon nanotube FET fabrication on a large scale.