Amorphous hydrogenated silicon nitride (a-SiN x :H) thin films irradiated with 100 MeV Ni 7+ results in the formation of continuous ion track structures at the lower fluence of 5 × 10 12 ions/cm 2 whereas at higher fluence of 1 × 10 14 ions/cm 2 the track structures fragment into discontinuous ion track like structures . The observation of the discontinuous ion track like structures at the high fluence of 1 × 10 14 ions/cm 2 shows clearly that higher fluence irradiation may not always lead to dissolution of the microstructure formed at lower fluence. The results are understood on the basis of a dynamic electronic energy loss (S e ) in the course of irradiation resulting from the out-diffusion of hydrogen from the films and a continuous increase in density of a-SiN x :H films Amorphous hydrogenated silicon nitride (a-SiN x :H) deposited by PECVD is a precursor material to obtain Si quantum dots (QDs) embedded in a silicon nitride matrix. Conventionally, Si rich films are subjected to various post deposition treatments viz. furnace annealing, flash lamp annealing, irradiation with swift heavy ions etc., to effect the phase separation of the Si and the silicon nitride phase. Among the above post treatments swift heavy ion (SHI) irradiation of a-SiN x :H thin films is of potential interest to achieve the much desired control over the size and spatial distribution of the embedded quantum dots. The localized and transient energy deposition mechanism inherent in SHI irradiation a-SiN x :H thin film was deposited on, p-type Si (100), using PECVD (SAMCO PD-2S) technique which uses rf (13.56 MHz) power to maintain a glow discharge and produce ionised species necessary for thin film growth. Silane (SiH 4 ) (4% in Ar) and ammonia (NH 3 ) were used as precursor gases. During deposition the substrate temperature, chamber pressure and plasma power were maintained at 200 • C, 1.7 mbar and 25 W, respectively. a-SiN x :H thin films having dimension 10×10 mm 2 were irradiated in a direction normal to the film surface with 100 MeV Ni 7+ ions using a 15 UD Pelletron accelerator at the Inter University Accelerator Centre, New Delhi, India. The films were irradiated at room temperature under a chamber pressure less than 10 -7 mbar. The beam was magnetically scanned in order to irradiate the film surface uniformly with fluences of 5 × 10 12 ions/cm 2 and 1 × 10 14 ions/cm 2 . The film compositions were determined using Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS). Cross-Sectional Transmission Electron Microscopy (XTEM) measurements were carried out using a Philips CM-200 microscope, operating at 200 kV, to examine formation of microstructures in the as-deposited and irradiated films. XTEM samples were prepared using the standard procedure involving mechanical polishing and ion milling. The experimental details of photoluminescence (PL) and elastic recoil detection analysis (ERDA) are similar to those provided elsewhere The stoichiometry ratio (N/Si), H content and the compaction of a-SiN x :H thin films before and after irradiation at 5 × 10 12 and 1 × 10 14 ions/cm 2 are listed in Table The composition of the as-deposited film has been determined by RBS. The N/Si ratio of 1.44, indicates a nitrogen rich film under consideration. Further, if we normalise Figure The dissolution of the ion tracks at 1 × 10 14 ions/cm 2 has been evidenced previously for the films 5 R and G . Figure at various fluence values. The red and green data points in figure The SHI induced morphological evolution with fluence of a-SiN x :H is explained with the dynamic nature of the electronic energy loss (S e ). The continuous out-diffusion of hydrogen from the films, and the concomitant densification are responsible for the dynamic S e . The dynamic S e is typical to the case a-SiN x :H and results in the formation of a discontinuous ion track morphology in the overlapping regime of 1 × 10 14 ions/cm 2 . A composition specific model for morphological evolution is proposed. The different response of compositionally different films is attributed to the composition specific constants like thermal and lattice conductivities and electron phonon coupling constant.