One of the most striking manifestations of electronic properties of topological insulators is the dependence of the photocurrent direction on the helicity of circularly polarized optical excitation. The helicity dependent photocurrents, underpinned by spin-momentum locking of surface Dirac electrons, are weak and easily overshadowed by bulk contributions. Here we show that the chiral response can be enhanced by nanostructuring. The tight confinement of electromagnetic fields in the resonant nanostructure enhances the photoexcitation of spinpolarized surface states of topological insulator Bi1.5Sb0.5Te1.8Se1.2, leading to an 11-fold increase of the circular photogalvanic effect and an unprecedented photocurrent dichroism (ρcirc=0.87) at room temperature. The control of spin-transport in topological materials by structural design is a previously unrecognised ability of metamaterials that bridges the gap between nanophotonics and spin-electronics, providing new opportunities for developing polarization sensitive photodetectors. Chirality, or the difference of an object from its mirror image, is a ubiquitous and fascinating phenomenon in nature. It manifests itself at a variety of scales and forms, from galaxies to nanotubes, from organic molecules, to inorganic compounds. Detection of chirality at the molecular or atomic level is key to fundamental sciences (e.g., chemistry, biology, crystallography) and practical applications (e.g., food and pharmaceutical industry), yet very challenging. Detection of chirality relies on the interaction with electromagnetic fields, which is hindered by the large mismatch between the wavelength of light and the size of most molecules and crystalline unit cells, thereby resulting in nearly imperceptible twists of the light field over nanoscale dimensions. In recent years, the chiral response of topological materials, such as topological insulators One of the most striking manifestations of the electronic chirality of topological insulator surface states is the dependence of their photocurrent on light helicity. Spin currents can be transformed into polarized net electrical currents when the system is optically driven out-ofequilibrium Attempts to magnify helicity-dependent photocurrent (HDPC) in topological materials have relied on strategies to increase the inherent surface-to-bulk contribution, such as using Bichalcogenides with low intrinsic doping Designer metamaterials, with structural features comparable to the wavelength of light, provide an independent approach to devise optical properties on demand and enhance light-matter interaction Here we provide a first demonstration of the use of artificial nanostructuring to enhance the chiral photo-galvanic response of topological insulators (BSTS). Thanks to the tight confinement of electromagnetic fields, resonant non-chiral metamaterials effectively enhance the photoexcitation of spin-polarized states, thereby increasing the unbalance between surface-state carriers with opposite spin helicity, and overall resulting in a giant enhancement of the extrinsic chiral photocurrent response of a 3D topological insulator (TI). Surface carriers can be selectively excited in topological insulators by circularly polarized light directed at oblique incidence on the surface of the crystal, and the resulting current flow is determined by the spin-momentum locking of the carriers (Fig. We measured HDPC under nearly uniform illumination (laser beam diameter of ~200 m, much larger than the BSTS device size of ~10 m), with no applied bias (Fig. The coefficients D and L2, are associated to photocurrent contributions from the semiconducting bulk. Specifically, D is related to the polarization independent photo-thermoelectric background current, which sets the overall directional current flow, while L2 to the photon drag effect, which results from linear momentum transfer of the incident photons to the excited carriers. Conversely, the coefficients L1 and C quantify photocurrent contributions from surface carriers. Such currents, driven by linear and circular polarization of the incident light, originate from the linear and circular photogalvanic effects, respectively. The dependence of the photocurrent on helicity is seen in the small asymmetry between the peaks corresponding to photoexcitation by light of opposite handedness ( + and  -in the bottom panel of Fig. The very same BSTS flake, patterned with square ring metamaterial array, behaves dramatically differently. The resonant metamaterial structure induces much larger asymmetry in the population of surface conducting bands, increasing the net spin current (top schematic in Fig. where Iσ+ and -Iσ-are respectively the values of photocurrents under left and right circularly polarized optical excitation, excluding the spin insensitive component D In the following, we report a first attempt to describe the photocurrent behaviour of spintransport metamaterials by electromagnetic modelling. The generated photocurrent is directly proportional to the optical absorption, carrier density, mobility and lifetime of the topological insulator. Thus, under the assumption that the optical absorption of the BSTS metamaterial increases upon nanostructuring, while the remaining transport parameters remain unaltered, carrier anisotropy can be mapped to an anisotropic optical model of the BSTS topological insulator crystal (Fig. Device fabrication: Bi1.5Sb0.5Te1.8Se1.2 single crystals were grown using a modified Bridgeman method. This particular BSTS stoichiometry yields large surface to volume conductivity, so that transport in nanometric thin flakes is surface-dominated Helicity dependent photocurrent measurement: Photocurrent measurements were performed at room temperature, illuminating the devices with continuous wave laser (=532 nm) and with no applied bias. The linearly polarized laser beam was modulated at frequency of 137 Hz by an optical chopper before passing through a λ/4 retarder, and focused to a spot size of ~200 μm diameter at the centre of the electrodes. The experimental setup allowed to continuously vary the polarization of incident light from linear (s-polarized) to circular (RCP and LCP) by rotating the λ/4 wave plate. The incident light polarization was calibrated by a polarimeter. The photocurrent was measured with a lock-in amplifier referenced to the light modulation frequency. In all samples, the photocurrent was found to be linearly dependent on excitation intensity (refer to Supplementary Information, Fig Electromagnetic simulations: 3D electromagnetic simulations were performed using COMSOL Multiphysics, using the experimental relative permittivity of BSTS, r, obtained by ellipsometry. The anisotropic response along the x direction was introduced by assigning non-zero values to the off-diagonal terms of the permittivity tensor, r(yz,zy)=j*r(xx,yy,zz). The incident wave polarization rotation, reproducing the experimental arrangement of polarizer and QWP, was obtained by introducing a  dependence to both, s and p components of the electric field with a /2 phase retardation between the two. The electric field intensity plotted in the graphs was obtained by integrating the |E| 2 within a 3 nm thin slab from the surface.