We provide and analyze a periodic Anderson model for studying magnetism and superconductivity in UTe2, a recently-discovered candidate for a topological spin-triplet superconductor. The 24-band tight-binding model reproduces the band structure obtained from a DFT+U calculation consistent with an angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy. The Coulomb interaction of f -electrons enhances Ising ferromagnetic fluctuation along the a-axis and stabilizes spin-triplet superconductivity of either B3u or Au symmetry. When effects of pressure are taken into account in hopping integrals, the magnetic fluctuation changes to an antiferromagnetic one, and accordingly spin-singlet superconductivity of Ag symmetry is stabilized. Based on the results, we propose pressure-temperature and magnetic field-temperature phase diagrams revealing multiple superconducting phases as well as an antiferromagnetic phase. In particular, a mixed-parity superconducting state with spontaneous inversion symmetry breaking is predicted. A recent discovery of superconductivity in UTe 2 Despite extensive research, the symmetry of superconductivity in UTe 2 still remains unsolved. Time-reversal symmetry breaking has been reported by a scanning tunneling microscopy Recent progress uncovered an impressive feature of this material, namely, multiple superconducting phases under pressure From these observations, UTe 2 is expected to be a superconducting analog of superfluid 3 He A difficulty for theories of heavy fermion systems is a complex electronic structure. For this, first-principles calculations combined with experiments are informative. Density functional theory plus Hubbard U (DFT+U ) In this paper, we provide a minimal tight-binding model for UTe 2 based on the first-principles calculation for an inter-mediate U and investigate magnetic fluctuation and superconductivity. Although we can successfully derive a realistic 72orbital model using the first-principles downfolding method, it is hard to study many-body effects in such a complicated model. Therefore, we here construct a 24-band periodic Anderson model, which appropriately reproduces not only the topology of FSs but also the weight of U 5f , U 6d, and Te 5p electrons obtained from DFT+U calculations. The model predicts a reasonable pressure-temperature (P -T ) phase diagram revealing spin-triplet superconductivity due to ferromagnetic fluctuation with the easy a-axis as well as spin-singlet superconductivity by antiferromagnetic fluctuations. From the result, we propose a mixed even-/odd-parity superconducting phase with spontaneous inversion symmetry breaking under pressure. The DFT+U calculations clarified hole and electron FSs, indicating a rather simple electronic structure near the Fermi level The band structure and FSs are shown in Figs. We apply the random phase approximation for the Coulomb interaction U of f -electrons. Diagonal magnetic susceptibilities, χ a , χ b , and χ c , are calculated from the susceptibility matrix of f -electrons (see Appendix B), and the momentum dependence is shown in Fig. Growth of antiferromagnetic fluctuation originates from the change in orbital characters. Although the FSs show nesting property irrespective of the factor p, the f -electron component is negligible on the nested part of FSs for p = 1.0. Therefore, f -electrons around the X-point enhance the ferromagnetic fluctuation rather than antiferromagnetic one. However, for p = 3.0 the f -electron component is sizable on the nested FSs, and therefore, antiferromagnetic fluctuation develops around a nesting vector q = (π, 0, 0). The q-vector corresponds to antiparallel alignment of the magnetic moment along Uranium chains. As for an intra-unit-cell structure, parallel alignment of magnetic moment between sublattices is favored. This means that, from the view point of augmented cluster multipole Now, we clarify superconducting instability by solving the linearized Eliashberg equation (see Appendix C). In the D 2h point group symmetry, the order parameter of superconductivity is classified as one of the eight irreducible representations. In general, the Eliashberg equation is separable for each representation, and thus we obtain eight eigenvalues for each parameter set. Superconductivity occurs when the maximum eigenvalue is unity. Thus, we can determine what is the most stable superconducting state by comparing the eigenvalues. The p dependence of eigenvalues is shown in Fig. We also evaluate the critical temperature of superconducting instability based on the criterion λ = 1 and show the results in Fig. To clarify the B 3u , A u , and A g states, we here discuss the order parameter of superconductivity. In a standard manner, it is described as ∆(k, iπT ) = μ d μ (k) [σ μ iσ y ] ss , with σ μ the Pauli matrix for spin degree of freedom. Although we omitted indices of sublattices for simplicity, intrasublattice and intersublattice components have similar structures (see Appendix C). Thus, we show the maximum magnitude of intrasublattice components d μ (k) in whole momentum space (Table Transforming to the band basis, we obtain superconducting gap structures illustrated in Fig. Based on the superconducting instability evaluated in Fig. We also propose superconducting phases in the magnetic field H a under pressure [Fig. In this paper, we constructed a 24-band periodic Anderson model as a reasonably realistic and easy-handled model for UTe 2 . The model reveals not only the ferromagnetic fluctuation with the easy a-axis at ambient pressure but also the antiferromagnetic fluctuation under pressures. Accordingly, spin-triplet superconductivity of either B 3u or A u representation is stabilized by the ferromagnetic fluctuation, while spinsinglet superconductivity of A g representation is favored by the antiferromagnetic fluctuation. These results enable us to draw phase diagrams in reason- able agreement with experiments. As a consequence, a mixed even-/odd-parity superconducting state with spontaneous inversion symmetry breaking is predicted. Such a phase was referred to in a review article and k ms , respectively. The single-electron kinetic energy is described by taking into account the hopping integrals up to the third order shown in Fig. (1 + e ikxa + e ikyb + e ikxa+ikyb ), (A10) The tight-binding parameters in Table are multiplied by p with 1 < p < 3.5, while p = 1 at ambient pressure. The sASOC term is written as where σi , τ , and τ (inter) i are the Pauli matrices representing the spin, intra-ladder sublattice, and inter-ladder sublattice degrees of freedom, respectively. We set α 1 = α 2 = 0.1 for simplicity. In Fig. 