Normal incidence 1 keV Ar + ion bombardment leads to amorphization and ultrasmoothing of Ge at room temperature, but at elevated temperatures the Ge surface remains crystalline and is unstable to the formation of self-organized nanoscale patterns of ordered pyramid-shaped pits. The physical phenomenon distinguishing the high temperature patterning from room temperature ultrasmoothing is believed to be a surface instability due to the Ehrlich-Schwoebel barrier for diffusing vacancies and adatoms, which is not present on the amorphous material. This real-time GISAXS study compares smoothing of a pre-patterned Ge sample at room temperature with patterning of an initially flat Ge sample at an elevated temperature. In both experiments, when the nanoscale structures are relatively small in height, the average kinetics can be explained by a linear theory. The linear theory coefficients, indicating surface stability or instability, were extracted for both experiments. A comparison between the two measurements allows estimation of the contribution of the Ehrlich-Schwoebel barrier to the self-organized formation of ordered nanoscale patterns on crystalline Ge surfaces. Elemental semiconductor surfaces bombarded by a broad ion beam at normal incidence are ultrasmoothed In this work, we use real-time experiments with sample temperatures above and below the recrystalliation temperature of Ge to quantitatively measure the ES barrier's contribution to the self-organized pattern formation during 1 keV Ar + bombardment of Ge. The high temperature sample, which was initially flat, was bombarded at a temperature of 300 • C, leading to self-organized pattern formation of ordered pyramid-shaped pits with fourfold symmetry. On the other hand, normal incidence * ludwig@bu.edu ion bombardment of a Ge surface at room temperature smooths it. This hinders X-ray studies by reducing the scattering intensities from the surface. Therefore, to achieve sufficient scattering intensities, the room temperature experiment was conducted by normal-incidence bombardment of a pre-patterned Ge sample. For the experiment, 500 μm thick n-doped (Sb) Ge(001) wafers were cut into 1 × 1 cm 2 pieces and cleaned with acetone, isopropyl alcohol, and methanol. Samples were firmly affixed to a stage by spot welding Ta strips at the two opposite corners. The water-cooled sample stage base supported a heater which in turn was directly beneath a thermocouple and the sample. For the high temperature bombardment experiment, the sample temperature was kept at 300 • C. Additionally, the sample stage was electrically isolated except for a wire leading out to an ampere meter in order to measure ion flux. The sample holder was mounted in a custom UHV chamber with mica X-ray windows and a base pressure of 5 × 10 -6 Torr. For both experiments, samples were bombarded with a broad beam of 1 keV Ar + ions, which was generated by a 3-cm graphite-grid ion source from Veeco Instruments Inc. placed at 0 • ion incidence angle (θ). The ion beam flux was measured to be 1 × 10 15 ions cm -2 s -1 at the operating chamber pressure of 2 × 10 -4 Torr. The final fluences were 1.1 × 10 17 ions cm -2 for the room temperature smoothing and 2.4 × 10 18 ions cm -2 for the high temperature patterning. Real-time X-ray scattering experiments were performed at the Coherent Hard X-ray (CHX) beamline at the National Synchrotron Light Source-II (NSLS-II) of Brookhaven National Laboratory. The photon energy of arXiv:2008.06504v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 14 Aug 2020 The ion source is placed at the polar angle θ = 0 • , which produces amorphization and ultrasmoothing at low sample temperature and self-organized crystalline patterning at high sample temperature. Ge(001) is positioned so that the X-ray incident angle αi is slightly above the critical angle of total external reflection. The scattering intensity is recorded as a function of the exit angles αi and ψ using a 2D detector. 9.65 keV was selected with a flux of approximately 5 × 10 11 photon s -1 and beam dimensions 10 × 10 μm 2 . Experiments used an Eiger-X 4M detector (Dectris) with 75 μm pixel size, which was located 10.3 m from the sample. The incident X-ray angle α i was 0.39 • , which is slightly above the critical angle of total external reflection for Germanium of 0.25 • . The scattered intensity was recorded as a function of the exit angle α f and ψ using the 2D detector, as shown in Fig. Since q x is small, the horizontal component q || (parallel to the surface) can be approximated as simply q y and the vertical component as q z (perpendicular to the surface). In the analysis of this paper, we will primarily be interested in the scattering along the Yoneda wing, which is particularly sensitive to surface structure. Example scattering patterns recorded on the area detector are shown in Fig. A post facto AFM image confirms the formation of ordered faceted patterns on the high temperature sample as seen in Fig. where v 0 is the constant erosion rate of the flat Ge surface, ν∇ 2 h is the curvature dependent sputter rate, j ion is the surface current resulting from the ballistic mass redistribution, and j diff represents the surface current due to diffusion. κ is the isotropic Herring-Mullins (HM) surface diffusion. σ is the non-linear conserved Kadar-Parisi-Zhang coefficient. j diff , which has the ES barrier coefficient and the parameter δ (the angle of the facets are given by θ = ±arctan( 1/δ)), represents the anisotropic current that incorporates both the anisotropy of the ES barrier itself and step edge diffusion. The last term η (x, y, t) is stochastic noise. When slopes are small, such as in the early stages of patterning of an initially-flat sample or in the slightly later stages of smoothing an initially patterned surface, the nonlinear terms of Eq. 2 can be neglected and the equation reduces to a linear form, which is then Fourier transformed where h (q, t) is the Fourier transform of the surface height h (x, y, t), R (q) is the amplification factor or dispersion relation, and η (q, t) is the Fourier transform of a stochastic noise. The amplification factor can be determined experimentally by measuring the q-averaged height-height structure factor evolution where n is the magnitude of the stochastic noise: η (r, t) η (r , t) = n δ(r -r )δ(t -t ). The amplification factor differentiates surface stability or instability; a positive R(q) drives exponential amplification of modes of wavevector q resulting in surface instability, while a negative R(q) damps fluctuations and stabilizes modes of wavevector q. To determine R(q), the q-averaged intensities were first computed by averaging 10 detector pixels in the q || direction (∆q || = ±0.004 nm -1 ) and 70 pixels in the q z direction (∆q z = ±0.028 nm -1 ). The temporal evolution of the scattered intensity from each wavenumber bin was then fitted with a function of the form I(q || , t) = ae 2Rt +b, as in Eq. 4, with a, b and R being independent fit parameters for each q || bin. The time scales over which the linear theory is valid differ from one q || bin to another since structural evolution happens faster at smaller length scales. In Fig. The amplification factor is usually taken to have a form where S y is a coefficient of curvature-dependent surface evolution, incorporating the curvature-dependent sputter erosion (the ν term in Eq. 2), lateral mass redistribution (the ∇j ion term), and, in the case of a crystalline surface, the linear part of the ES term . The coefficient B (the κ term in the case of high temperature patterning according to Eq. 2) is a measure of surface diffusion and/or surface confined viscous flow. Figure In other words, the developing structures had an initial average length scale of 2π/0.07 nm -1 ∼ 90 nm, which is comparable to the length scales in Fig. For the room temperature smoothing experiment, the pre-patterned Ge sample was bombarded beforehand and had well-developed faceted patterns with four-fold symmetry, similar to the final result of the high-temperature experiment as shown in Fig. The results for the two samples are tabulated in Table I. The room temperature curvature-dependent term S RT y = 2.25 ± 0.13 nm 2 s -1 has opposite sign compared to S HT y . This difference in sign is expected due to the instability in the high temperature experiment leading to the formation of patterns versus the surface stability and smoothing in the room temperature experiment. As noted above, the S y coefficient in Eq. 5 includes curvature dependent sputtering ν, lateral mass redistribution, in the high temperature patterning case, it also includes surface instability due to the presence of the ES barrier term. Since the incident ion and most recoil energies are far above thermal energies, we expect that contributions from sputter erosion and lateral mass redistribution are relatively independent of temperature, even through the change in bombarded material from amorphous to crystalline with increasing temperature. However the ES barrier term only exists in the high temperature patterning case. Therefore, subtraction of the curvature-dependent term measured at the room temperature smoothing S RT y from the curvature-dependent term at high temperature patterning S HT y gives the ES contribution to the curvature-dependent term: = S HT y -S RT y = -6.42 ± 0.15 nm 2 s -1 . It is worth noting that the erosive and redistributive contributions to S RT y can be estimated following the general approaches of Bobes et al. Turning to the smoothening term B, high wavenumbers play an important role since it multiplies q 4 || , unlike the case for S y which multiplies q 2 || and can be determined reliably by R(q || ) values at low wavenumbers. The large uncertainty in the experimental value of B RT can therefore be explained by the fact that smoothing causes limited scattering intensities at high wavenumbers. In contrast, B HT has a relatively small uncertainty due to a wider range of accessible wavenumbers. In the room temperature experiment, B RT is believed to be due primarily to ion-induced surface viscous flow In summary, the ES barrier contribution to the curvature-dependent patterning of Ge was determined by subtracting the measured curvature-dependent term for room temperature smoothing from that of high temperature patterning. Compared to the erosive and lateral mass redistribution contributions to the curvaturedependent term, the magnitude of the ES barrier term is considerably larger in magnitude. Within the context of the continuum equation Eq. 2, the ES barrier contribution is primarily responsible for the instability of the crystalline Ge surface. Development of a theoretical formalism linking the measured ES barrier kinetic term to the size of the ES barrier energy in the selforganized ion beam nanopatterning would be a very interesting direction of future research and allow compari-son with the existing ES barrier measurement in Ge(001) homoepitaxy This material is based on work partly supported at BU by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant No. DMR-1709380. X.Z. and R.H. were supported by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science under Grant No. DE-SC0017802. Experiments were performed at the Coherent Hard X-ray