Conventional slippery surfaces show isotropic drop mobility in all directions, but many applications require directional drop motion along a particular path only. In previous studies, researchers used topographic substrates, together with different external stimuli, to demonstrate anisotropic drop motion, which is not very efficient and cost-effective. Herein, we report a novel approach to smartly control drop motion on lubricating fluid coated chemically heterogeneous surfaces composed of alternating hydrophobic and hydrophilic stripes. Upon depositing an aqueous drop on such a surface, the underneath lubricating fluid dewets from the hydrophilic regions but remains intact on the hydrophobic ones, providing sticky and slippery areas for the drop. This results in remarkable anisotropic drop sliding behavior, from uniform motion along parallel to stripes to stick-slip motion along the perpendicular to them. Furthermore, we also demonstrate a phase diagram summarizing different dynamic situations exhibited by drops, sticking, or moving in one or both directions. The directional motion of liquid drops is very useful in numerous practical applications such as water harvesting, fluid transport, lab-on-a-chip devices, drug delivery, to name a few We fabricated chemically heterogeneous surfaces, having alternating hydrophilic and hydrophobic stripes with large wettability contrast, using standard microcontact printing (see Supporting Information, Section 1 Figure Therefore for an LCHet surface, the lubricating fluid from the hydrophilic region underneath an aqueous drop becomes unstable and dewets, as a result, water comes into direct contact with the hydrophilic region of the solid surface. On the hydrophobic region, the lubricating fluid underneath the drop remains intact, hence the part of water drop on top of lubricating oil above hydrophobic region floats. This configuration is shown schematically in the rectangular box in Fig. where ΔE 1 and ΔE 2 are energy differences between the state corresponding to Fig. To control the anisotropic slippery behavior, we prepared various chemically heterogeneous samples with different area fraction of hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions (see Supporting Information, Section 3 Table We investigated that the static wetting behavior of aqueous drops on LCHet surfaces (measured as apparent contact angle in the parallel direction (app(||))), is very different compared to CHet surfaces ( ||) (see Supporting Information, Section 5 Figure Figure to 49 % hydrophobic area fractions. On other samples (with hydrophobic area fraction ≥ 65%), water drops were mobile in one or both directions depending on the hydrophobic area fraction. On samples S5 and S6, with 65% and 80% hydrophobic area fractions respectively, water drops moved only along the parallel direction, and only on the sample S7, having 92% hydrophobic area fraction, water drops moved along both the directions (see supporting information Movie S2-Movie S8). It is interesting to note that despite complete dewetting of the lubricating film underneath a drop, which brings a part of the drop in direct contact with the hydrophilic solid surface, the drop can still move on them. The reason behind the motion is the formation of slippery lubricant microchannels on the hydrophobic regions of LCHet surfaces, which helps in overcoming the pinning due to hydrophilic surface. For a drop motion along the perpendicular direction, the drop has to overcome the pinning barrier at every boundary of hydrophilic-hydrophobic region, which is not the case for the motion along the parallel direction. This is the reason that water drops can move along parallel direction even on smaller hydrophobic area fraction samples, whereas perpendicular motion is seen only for one sample with the highest hydrophobic area fraction. Figure Whereas for the uniform motion along the parallel direction, the TPCL moves freely as suggested by constant apparent contact angles. Based on the apparent contact angles and drop velocities on LCHet surfaces with increasing hydrophobic area fraction, we also prepared a phase diagram for better illustration of anisotropic wetting behavior and drop motion. Figure Using the knowledge of dewetting of a thin liquid film and lubricating fluid based slippery surfaces, we report anisotropic slippery surfaces with controlled drop mobility in the desired direction. We achieved this using chemically heterogeneous surfaces, having hydrophobic and hydrophilic stripes, coated with a suitable lubricating fluid. Upon depositing a water drop on them, the lubricating fluid dewets from the hydrophilic region and moves to the neighboring hydrophobic region to minimize the total energy. This results in the formation of lubricant microchannels, which subsequently demonstrate the anisotropic slippery behavior. Drops always move with uniform velocity in the parallel direction, whereas they demonstrate stick-slip motion in the perpendicular direction. Therefore, the magnitude and direction of drop mobility depend on the area fraction of the hydrophobic region and the wettability contrast between the hydrophilic and hydrophobic regions. We also prepared a phase diagram to summarize the anisotropic drop mobility on such lubricated chemically heterogeneous surfaces. We envision that current findings, including the general principles, anisotropic wetting, and drop mobility will be helpful in the use of the anisotropic slippery surfaces in many practical applications. Materials: Microscopic glass slides (root mean square surface roughness of 8 ( 2) nm) with dimension 2.5" x 2.5" were used as solid substrates. The glass slides were cleaned using deionized water (Milli-Q Millipore), ethanol (Merck), and acetone (Sigma Aldrich). Polydimethylsiloxane 