A set of interacting vortices in 2D in the presence of a substrate with square symmetry and at filling ratio 1 can display a low temperature solid phase where only one of the reciprocal lattice vectors of the substrate is present The behavior of a collection of particles in two dimensions in the presence of a periodic substrate potential has been of interest in the context of various types of systems. These include vortices in superconductors Driven lattice in the presence of a substrate, both random and periodic, have received a lot of attention The existence of a partially pinned solid phase of vortices in the presence of a square substrate potential (that is, substrate potential with square symmetry) was seen in both Monte Carlo (MC) simulations of vortex systems In the simulation In the current work we study the behavior of the driven partially pinned two dimensional vortex lattice. Brownian dynamics The equation of motion for a Brownian particle that is obtained after the fast degrees of freedom have been projected out is a Langevin equation, Here F α is the net force on the particle labeled by α (that is, the effects on the particle in question due to all kinds of interactions other than that with the fluid particles), η is the friction coefficient and f α (t) is the noise term. The condition that at long times the particles should equilibriate to the surrounding fluid temperature gives the form of the noise correlations, If one is just interested in the long time configurational dynamics then the inertial term m dvα dt can be neglected (the overdamped limit) and the equations of motion reduces to In order to integrate these set of equations one can discretize them Here the components of f α G are taken from a Gaussian distribution with zero average value and variance equals 2k B T η δt. This ensures the that noise correlation has the required form as given in Eq.( The force term on the right-hand side of equation ( Here ) is the force on the αth vortex from the other interstitial vortices, with F 0 given by . In this expression φ 0 is the flux quantum, λ ef f is effective penetration depth in the thin film and K 1 is the modified Bessel function of the second kind. We approximate λ ef f = λ 2 h , where λ is the penetration depth and h the film thickness. The sum is over all the other vortices and r αβ is the inter vortex separation. F αs is the force on the αth vortex due to the substrate potential. The substrate potential having square symmetry is generated by the interaction of the interstitial vortices with pinned vortices (that form a square array of lattice spacing, d). The interaction between the interstitial vortex and the pinned vortices is assumed to be of the form , where the sum is over the pinning centers and A is a control parameter The number of interstitial vortices simulated using Brownian Dynamics simulations was N = 400. The averages of various measured quantities were done over 5.0 × 10 5 time steps after letting the system evolve for about 5.0 × 10 4 time steps. The value of δt/η = 0.001d/F a where F a = F 0 K 1 , where K 0 is the modified Bessel function of second kind and K B is the Boltzmann constant. Temperature in the plots below is given in term of T 0 . The force that a pinned vortex exerts on a interstitial vortex at the center of one of the pinning squares that is nearest to it is, ). This would be the appropriate force to compare the depinning forces with. The minimum substrate potential energy barrier that the interstitial vortex has to cross to go from center of one of the pinning square to the neighboring one is )). The temperature equivalent of this energy in units of T 0 is about 0.03. The barriers encountered when the lattice is driven along the direction of vortex displacement from the center in the ground state (ŷ direction in Fig The vortex current, I v , measures the resistance to vortex motion under the action of the drive. The average vortex displacement, D, in the direction of the drive during the simulation is proportional to the average velocity of the vortices. For a given choice of δt η and fixed number of Brownian Dynamics moves one can use D to compare the vortex currents. In all the results presented here, the time for which the lattice is driven is the same and hence D has been used as a measure of the average vortex current. In Fig. Next we look at variation I v as a function of temperature for the case of drive in the easy direction. Keeping the driving force value at F d = 86F b , which is much above the depinning threshold value for easy direction drive, average drift of the vortex lattice was measured for various temperature values. The vortex drift shows a non-monotonic behavior (Fig. To understand what is happening to the vortex lattice itself as it is driven, we studied the structure of the vortex system (expressed in terms of the structure factors at G 1 and G 2 ) in the same temperature range. The structure factors were computed numerically by evaluating S( G i ) = 1 N 2 < m,n e j Gi•( rm-rn) > (i = 1, 2), where N is the number of vortices in the system and r m and r n are the positions of the mth and the nth vortices. The results shown in Fig. This phenomenon looks similar to the peak effect seen in vortex systems with random pinning, where the critical depinning current J c peaks as the vortex lattice melts. To see this effect unambiguously in the current system, one has to keep the driving force close to the threshold value and vary the temperature. Simulations near the depinning force have not been carried out due to the fact that thermal noise is dominant at such low drives and the effects are less discernible for the system size and number of time steps we have used. This is more so when one is close to the transition temperature which is a second order one as seen from the equilibrium simulations. The minimum in vortex current close to the transition temperature should lead to a corresponding increase in the depinning force when one nears the transition temperature. There is now a substantial lateral (in the direction perpendicular to the drive) vibrations in the lattice. But the particles are not yet freely diffusing. (d) Snapshot of the lattice, again for the same driving force but at a higher temperature (T = 1.4) at which the lattice has melted. Note that the vortices are now diffusing laterally and their motion is largely independent other than the average drift under the driving force. One would have expected the vortex current to increase as the temperature is increased with the drive force held constant, since thermal activation would help in crossing the potential barriers that the vortices encounter as they move across the sample As the partially pinned vortex solid is driven in the easy direction, the drive direction ensures that at low temperatures it passes through relatively easy paths, i.e. paths along which the potential produced by the pinning centers has relatively low and flat maxima. This is so because at low temperatures (much below the transition temperature), typical paths taken by the vortices are close to lines that bisect the sides of the pin squares (see vortex trajectories in Fig. where U 0 = AF 0 λ ef f and K 0 is the modified Bessel function of the second kind. U (x, y) is the potential corresponding to the substrate and for finding potential along the edge of the square we have only retained the contribution to the substrate potential from the closest two pinned vortices at (0, 0) and (0, d). The path that goes through the centers of the pin squares is clearly the one with the smallest value of the pinning potential barrier. As the temperature approaches the transition point from below, the spread of the average particle density in the transverse direction (x-direction in Fig. drive (the x direction). As the temperature goes up, the distribution of the x coordinate gets broader. One can estimate the amount of increased barrier height that the vortices encounter due to this spread by finding the width of the distribution as a function of temperature and averaging the peak pinning potential as a function of x over such distributions. The width of the distribution of the x-coordinate of the vortices as a function of temperature, σ x (T ), was determined from the zero drive simulations by finding the room mean square displacement (rms) of the vortices in the x direction: where the sum is over the N vortices, xi is the mean position of the ith vortex and angular brackets represents average over the Brownian dynamics moves in equilibrium. One has to be careful while calculating the width, since the particles sometimes diffuse in the x direction to a nearby pinning square. Computing the rms displacement without due care would lead to an erroneous estimate. The result obtained by keeping track of the individual particle motion and computing the width of vibrations within a pinning square is shown in Fig. The variation of the average barrier height with temperature is shown in Fig. The effective barrier height exhibits a sudden increase just below T c . The sharp rice in the barrier height can be attributed to the increase in σ x with temperature coupled to the fact that U (x, 0) rises sharply as x moves closer to values 0 and x = d. This effective increase in barrier height is a possible explanation for the peak effect like feature seen in our simulations. The average barrier height that the vortex lattice encounters goes up with temperature leading to an increased resistance to flow. In the regime beyond the melting temperature, individual vortex motion are largely uncorrelated. With the rigidity of lattice no more a constraining factor, the individual vortex drift along the driving force direction is aided by the increasing temperature. The arguments based on an increase in the effective barrier height due to increased thermal wandering of the vortices in the transverse direction provide a semi quantitative explanation of the observed temperature dependence of the vortex current. These arguments look definitely plausible for describing the The inset shows the substrate potential value along a side of the pin square (say, along line ab in Fig. behavior for driving force that are slightly higher than the depinning force. For such values of the driving force, vortices that do not move along the lowestenergy paths (i.e.paths passing through the centers of the pin squares) would encounter potential barriers even when the force on them due to the driving force is taken into account. However, for drive strengths much higher than the depinning force (most of our simulations were done in this regime), these arguments need more justification. We believe that our arguments would remain qualitatively valid even for strong drives. This is because the speed of a vortex moving along a path parallel to the y axis would still depend on the variation of the pinning potential along the path, because the force on the vortex has a contribution arising from the pinning potential. So, vortices moving along paths for which the pinning potential has high and steep maxima (such as paths that are substantially displaced from the centers of the pin squares) would be slowed down in comparison to those moving in paths along which the peaks of the pining potential are low (such as paths lying near the centers of of the pin squares). Since the typical transverse displacement of the vortices increases with increasing T , the probability of a vortex taking a path that is substantially displaced from the centers of the squares would increase as the temperature is increased. Since vortices move more slowly along such paths, this may lead to a decrease in the vortex current. Like for the case of easy direction drive, there is a minimum located at the vicinity of the melting transition to the modulated liquid from the partially pinned solid phase (see Fig. In order to check the robustness of the phenomenon seen above for the easy direction drive case, we have also studied how the vortex drift varied as a function of temperature when the lattice is driven along the direction diagonal to the pinning square. Fig. We have carried out Brownian dynamics simulation studies on driven partially pinned solid in two dimensions formed in the presence of a substrate with square symmetry. The lattice undergoes elastic depinning as the drive force is increased at low temperatures. For large drives we observed a dip in vortex velocity as the transition temperature is approached from below, much like the peak effect seen in systems with random disorder. We have attributed this phenomenon to an effective increase in the potential barrier that the vortices encounter close to the transition temperature. This argument is not unrelated to the explanation of the peak effect in terms of a softening of the vortex lattice as the melting transition is approached from below. The increase in the width parameter σ x near T = 0.4 (see Fig. A related system and process has been simulated in the work by Reichhardt et. al. Though the simulations have been carried out for a specific kind of interaction and substrate potential relevant for vortex motion in decorated thin films, the physics should be accessible in other systems too. In colloidal systems, where there is a greater control over the system parameters and better experimental accessibility to the microscopic details, study of these phenomena will be interesting. On the simulation front, it would be interesting to look at the depinning phenomenon itself as a function of temperature. This would require larger systems and extended time averages as the thermal noise can make identification of the depinning of the lattice difficult. From the current study, one can anticipate a non trivial behavior of the threshold depinning force as the temperature is varied. One can also address questions on the nature of the elastic depinning transition vis-á-vis its critical properties and how the nature of depinning varies with filling factors not equal to but close to one. Another aspect that has to be explored further is the nature of the transitions between the moving crystal and fluid phase in the presence of the drive. As seen above, the drive direction can alter appreciably the transition point and the nature of transition. Further study is required to characterize the nature of these transitions. Studies are on to address these questions. The author would like to acknowledge Prof. C. Dasgupta, P. Shatrhunjay and C. Jadeja for useful discussions. This is a pre-print of an article published in Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and Applications. The final authenticated version is available online at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2020.124737