We describe the use of tensor networks to numerically determine wave functions of interacting twodimensional fermionic models in the continuum limit. We use two different tensor network states: one based on the numerical continuum limit of fermionic projected entangled pair states obtained via a tensor network formulation of multi-grid, and another based on the combination of the fermionic projected entangled pair state with layers of isometric coarse-graining transformations. We first benchmark our approach on the two-dimensional free Fermi gas then proceed to study the two-dimensional interacting Fermi gas with an attractive interaction in the unitary limit, using tensor networks on grids with up to 1000 sites. Understanding the collective behavior of quantum manybody systems is a central theme in physics. While it is often discussed using lattice models, there are systems where a continuum description is essential. One such case is found in superfluids, Tensor network states (TNS) are classes of variational states that have become widely used in quantum lattice models. They are complementary to QMC methods as TNS algorithms are typically formulated without incurring a sign problem. In 1D, matrix product states (MPS) now provide almost exact numerical results via the DMRG algorithm. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We first introduce the fermionic continuum Hamiltonian of interest in Sec. II and describe how to discretize it in a manner consistent with open boundary conditions in Sec. III. The two types of fermionic tensor network states are discussed in Sec. IV along with the optimization algorithms used for them. We then present our numerical benchmarks for the free and interacting Fermi gases in Sec. V. We summarize our work in Sec. VI and discuss future research directions. For concreteness, it is useful to define a particular continuum model. In this work we will consider the free and interacting Fermi gases in two dimensions. The Hamiltonian is given by where ψ † σ (r) and ψ σ (r) are fermionic field operators, creating and annihilating a fermion with spin σ at position r, respectively. The fermionic field operators satisfy the anticommutation relation {ψ † σ (r), ψ σ (r )} = δ(r -r )δ σσ . The coupling parameters μ and g denote the chemical potential (which controls the number of particles) and strength of interaction in the system. We assume the system is confined in a L × L square box (0 < r x , r y < L), so that the potential outside the box is V (r) = ∞. When g = 0, we have a free fermion gas confined to the box. Because we define the continuum properties as a numerical limit, we need to first discretize the continuum Hamiltonian H. To do so, we replace the continuum space L × L box by a lattice containing (N + 1) × (N + 1) grid points with lattice spacing = L N . Due to the Dirichlet (open) boundary conditions, the wave function is zero on the boundary of the grid. Thus the non-trivial part of the quantum state is defined on (N -1) × (N -1) grid points (we refer to these as the "active points"). The lattice discretization is shown in Figs. The kinetic energy operator can be represented using a finite difference stencil on the grid. Using 2nd and 4th order finite difference approximations, the Laplacian operator where c, c † are fermionic lattice operators and the symbols ij and ij denote nearest neighbor and third nearest neighbor pairs. Because the wave function is not smooth at the edge of the box, some care must be taken in applying the stencils to ensure that boundary errors of lower order in than implied by the stencil formula do not appear. In the 2nd order approximation, the second-derivative takes the form ∼ -4ψ0+ψ1+ψ-1 2 where the indices on ψ denote the x coordinate. Taking the index -1 to refer to the left boundary, we see that representing the wave function on only the interior N -1 active points, while using the spacing = 1/(N + 1) (rather than the naive spacing of = 1/N ) is consistent with choosing the boundary condition ψ -1 = 0 (and similarly for the right boundary). Using this definition of = 1/(N + 1) we obtain the full 2nd order lattice discretized Hamiltonian as where ḡ is a regularized δ function interaction parameter, whose regularization procedure is described in detail in Secs. V B and A. The same continuum wave function |Ψ can also be represented by a single fPEPS on a coarse lattice connected to layers of isometric tensors (here two layers are shown). We refer to this as fPEPS-tree. For the 4th order approximation, the second-derivative takes the form . Again, taking index -1 to refer to the left boundary, we see that the value of ψ -2 is left unspecified. To maintain the accuracy of the finite difference expression, we should choose ψ -2 to smoothly continue the wavefunction past the boundary. In our case, we choose ψ -2 = -ψ 0 (i.e. the wavefunction is antisymmetric around the boundary). This means that at the boundary, the second-derivative should be replaced by ) and where the colors red, blue and orange correspond to the colored grid points in Fig. To illustrate the importance of the correct representation of the Laplacian for Dirichlet boundary conditions, in Fig. We explore two different fermionic tensor networks to approach the continuum limit ground state |Ψ , depicted in Fig. The second consists of several layers of isometric tensors, with a fPEPS placed at the top, see Fig. We now briefly summarize some of the techniques used to optimize and contract the different types of tensors appearing in the two ansatzes above. The fPEPS tensors are optimized towards a representation of the ground state using imaginary-time evolution, using the "full-update" method to perform bond truncations. To improve efficiency, we exploit Z 2 and U (1) symmetry in all tensors. We adopt the techniques developed in Refs. 41 and 42 to implement U (1) symmetry, choosing relevant symmetric sectors during the optimization. We use a simple-update strategy (based on a direct SVD decomposition) to obtain an initial guess for the symmetry sectors, and those are then further dynamically updated during the full-update optimization by using a similar strategy. Although the fPEPS-fine wave function on the finest lattice is a straightforward representation of the (near)-continuum wave function, direct optimization of such an fPEPS leads to numerical difficulties, such as slow convergence and be-FIG. ing stuck in local minima. This is analogous to what is seen in MPS simulations on very fine lattices The main idea in the multigrid approach is to interleave optimization and interpolation steps for the fPEPS tensors that are determined on lattices with different discretizations. In our version of the multigrid algorithm (i) we first approximate the ground state on the coarsest level by using a N ×N fPEPS ansatz where N ∈ {2, 3}, (ii) we attach a layer of isometric tensors to the N × N fPEPS to create an fPEPS-tree with a single layer of isometries for the 2N ×2N lattice, and we subsequently perform energy optimization of the isometries and fPEPS tensors, (iii) we use a splitting map to map the fPEPStree to a 2N × 2N fPEPS, then we relax the energy again on this finer lattice, (iv) we repeat steps (ii) and (iii) until the de- sired discretization level is reached, yielding the final fPEPSfine wavefunction. A schematic of the multigrid algorithm is depicted in Fig. Two steps need to be further specified, namely (i) initializing the isometric tensors, and (ii) constructing the splitting map. We initialize the isometric tensors by diagonalizing the local Hamiltonian, defined on the 2 × 2 finer lattice, and picking the χ o lowest-energy eigenvectors. This provides an approximate initial guess for the isometric tensors. The key steps in the splitting map are shown in Fig. (3) The parameter controlling the accuracy of this transformation is the bond dimension of the virtual bonds connecting the tensors, denoted χ r ; as χ r → ∞ the transformation becomes exact. The tensors U can in principle be considered to be variational parameters in order to best satisfy the above equation. However, in this paper, we fix the form of U ; some of the diagonal elements are set to 1, and the rest are set to 0, i.e. U ij,m = δ i×D+j,m . This appears sufficient to obtain our desired accuracy (see Sec. V). To solve Eq. 3, we carry out sequential SVD to obtain guesses for four resulting tensors, and then direct optimize the fidelity using alternating least squares (8, 12). to improve the accuracy of the splitting. In Fig. To summarize, the accuracy of calculations with fPEPSfine using the multi-grid algorithm is controlled by four parameters: the initial bond dimension D; the boundary bond dimension χ b controlling the accuracy of the environment contractions; and the accuracy of the splitting map controlled by parameters χ o and χ r , denoting the bond dimension of the isometries and the bond dimension of the resulting fPEPS on the finer lattice. In practice, we can reasonably set parameters χ b ∼ D We first assess the accuracy of the wave functions and algorithms discussed above using the free Fermi gas (g = 0) as a benchmark system. This system is exactly solvable by reduction to single-particle quantities but is a challenging problem for tensor networks in the continuum and thermodynamic limit as the ground-state violates the entanglement area law by logarithmic terms, i.e. ∼ ρ 1 2 A log A, where ρ is the particle density and A is the boundary length. We first compute numerical continuum results using the fPEPS-tree ansatz using the 4th order spinless Hamiltonian discretization. Here we use an fPEPS-tree with two layers of isometries. In Fig. (D, χ o ) = (8, 16). However, the inset shows that going to a finer lattice does not affect the accuracy significantly (the error increases only slightly in the continuum limit). In Fig. o is used to estimate the extrapolated results, as shown in the inset in Fig. We next explore the behaviour of the fPEPS-fine ansatz in the continuum free fermion problem. As the multi-grid optimization involves several steps, we first illustrate the accuracy and errors associated with the individual steps. We start with the accuracy of the splitting map between coarser and finer lattices. This incurs an error which can be measured as , where E b and E f are the energies per lattice site before and after the splitting map, respectively. As χ r increases we expect this error to go to zero, and for a practical method, it is important that a moderate χ r ∼ D is sufficient for good accuracy. In Fig. Using the above multigrid calculation with fPEPS-fine with up to four layers (a fine lattice of 16 × 16 sites) and the 2nd order Hamiltonian discretization, we can estimate the energy of the fPEPS-fine ansatz in the numerical continuum limit. We use a linear extrapolation in 1 D (using a few largest values) to estimate the large-D limit for each lattice spacing. We next present calculations using the fPEPS-fine ansatz for the spin-balanced interacting (g < 0) Fermi gas. We fo- cus on the spin-balanced regime because at this point auxiliary field quantum Monte Carlo has no sign problem, and thus provides a reliable comparison; however, away from this point, sign problems manifest, for which the methods developed here remain suitable. Rather than using the interaction g appearing in the continuum Hamiltonian, the interaction strength is commonly parametrized using the dimensionless coupling parameter η = 1 2 log(2e f /e b ), where e f is the non-interacting Fermi energy and e b is the two-particle binding energy. We will be interested in the simultaneous continuum and thermodynamic limit, which is obtained in the simultaneous limit of infinite particle number and lattice size N e , N → ∞. For each finite lattice size N , an effective interaction ḡ can be specified to be consistent with a given η, which defines the numerical fPEPS-fine lattice Hamiltonian. The procedure to determine ḡ is given in Appendix B, and follows that in Ref. 6. The physics of the system is governed by η and in the limits η 0, η 0, the system is in the Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) and Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) phases, respectively. Recent QMC studies have suggested that the BCS-BEC crossover occurs near η ∼ 1. We present fPEPS-fine results for the ground-state energy (for various N and N e ) in units of the non-interacting Fermi energy E = H Nee f /2 . E = lim Ne,N →∞ E is the desired continuum and thermodynamic limit result. We compare to results from auxiliary field QMC (AFQMC) which is exact up to statistical error (for given N e , N ). The AFQMC data is computed using periodic boundary conditions whereas the fPEPS-fine energies are computed for open boundary conditions, however, in the thermodynamic limit they should approach the same value. In Fig. We further show the extrapolated continuum and thermodynamic limit fPEPS-fine and AFQMC ground-state energies across a range of renormalized coupling parameters, in Fig. We have described the numerical continuum limit of twodimensional tensor network states based on two variants of projected entangled pair states, as well as the numerical algorithms used to work with them. Using continuum grids with up to approximately 1000 sites, our initial calculations show promising results for two fermionic continuum systems in two dimensions: the entanglement law violating free Fermi gas, as well as the interacting unitary Fermi gas of much interest in cold atom experiments. In the latter case, our results compare well to auxiliary field quantum Monte Carlo calculations that are feasible at the spin-balanced point. However, the strength of the continuum tensor network approach is that it is not limited to special points in the phase diagram. This opens up the use of tensor networks to address unresolved questions in spin-polarized Fermi gases, 