Linear polarization analysis of hard x-rays is employed to probe electronic anisotropies in metalcontaining complexes with very high selectivity. We use the pronounced linear dichroism of nuclear resonant x-ray scattering to determine electric field gradients in an iron(II) containing compound as they evolve during a temperature-dependent high-spin/low-spin phase transition. This method constitutes a novel approach to analyze changes in the electronic structure of metal-containing molecules as function of external parameters or stimuli. The polarization selectivity of the technique allows us to monitor defect concentrations of electronic valence states across phase transitions. This opens new avenues to trace electronic changes and their precursors that are connected to structural and electronic dynamics in the class of metal compounds ranging from simple molecular solids to biological molecules. The knowledge of charge distributions and their anisotropies in molecules is crucial for understanding and precise modeling of molecular interactions and optical properties of chemical systems The availability of highly brilliant synchrotron radiation sources has facilitated the transfer of linear and circular dichroism to the regime of hard x-rays Recently, high-purity polarimetry in the x-ray regime has been shown to be a very sensitive technique to detect tiny changes in the polarization state of x-rays caused by the interaction with an anisotropic or chiral, thus optically active medium Here we employ polarization-resolved nuclear forward scattering (PR-NFS) of synchrotron radiation at the 14.4-keV nuclear resonance of 57 Fe to probe atomic charge anisotropies in a metal compound. If the charge anisotropy in the system leads to an electric field gradient (EFG) at the 57 Fe nucleus, nuclear states with a finite electrical quadrupole moment are subject to an electric hyperfine interaction. As a result, the excited nuclear state of 57 Fe splits into two sublevels, shown in Fig. (1) where I is the (2 × 2) unity matrix, v zz is a unit vector along the main axis of the electric field gradient, σ and π are the linear polarization basis vectors (see Fig. The spin state of iron(II) SCO compounds can be switched reversibly from the LS state to the HS state by variation of temperature, pressure or by irradiation with light Although not yet realized, it can be envisioned that the spin dependent charge and/or spin transfer properties of such devices may be tuned by variable concentrations of minority HS defect sites in a matrix of LS centers or vice versa. Therefore, it is of pivotal interest to have a spectral method at hand which is able to probe specifically spin dependent changes in the electronic anisotropy of minority spin species in SCO compounds. As a reference model for PR-NFS at the 14.4 keV nuclear resonance of 57 Fe, the SCO compound [Fe(PM-BiA) 2 (NCS) 2 ] was chosen The experiments were carried out at beamline P01, PETRA III, DESY, Hamburg Orientation dependent NFS and PR-NFS experiments at various temperatures were performed with the sample mounted on a Eulerian Cradle for angular orientation, see Fig. High-purity polarimetry was then performed to determine the direction of the electric field gradients in the sample. A series of PR-NFS spectra taken at T = 220 K are shown in Fig. In addition to the time-dependent NFS and PR-NFS spectra, the time-integrated PR-NFS signal was recorded as a function of the angle χ while the angle φ was kept fix (from now on referred to as χ-PR-NFS-scans). In Fig. At T = 120 K the monoclinic phase of [Fe(PM-BiA) 2 (NCS) 2 ] should be mostly in the LS state. In fact, orientation dependent NFS data obtained at T = 120 K show that the majority of the iron centers are in their LS state which can be inferred from the low value of the quadrupole splitting (∆E Q = 0.63 (±0.02) mm/s, see Supplemental Material In contrast to the high-temperature data in Fig. In fact, at this particular angular position, the χ-PR-NFS scan in Fig. In conclusion, polarization-resolved nuclear forward scattering (PR-NFS) was used here for the first time to investigate charge anisotropies via electric hyperfine in-teractions to gain insights into the ordering of minority phases. With the help of this novel technique it could be shown that during a first order SCO transition from a HS to a LS phase the electric field gradient tensor and thus the charge anisotropy of a HS center is not affected by the increasing amount of LS centers. The HS centers retain their charge anisotropy even when present as a minority phase of a few percent. Such studies are facilitated by the the use of synchrotron radiation (i.e. high photon flux in small, collimated beams) with its enormous brilliance and its intrinsic linear polarization that enables one to very efficiently probe electronic anisotropies in micron-sized single crystals. Single phases of materials can be selectively investigated that would not be accessible in macroscopic polycrystalline or powder samples as typically used in conventional Mössbauer spectroscopy. PR-NFS is applicable to any Mössbauer isotope that exhibits a sizeable nuclear quadrupole moment to determine the electric field gradient at the location of the nucleus. This technique opens new avenues to trace electronic changes that are connected to structural and electronic dynamics in almost all Mössbauer-active metal-containing compounds ranging from biological molecules to solid state systems. Combined with pump-probe techniques our approach opens new perspectives to reveal electronic dynamics of nonequilibrium states in molecular systems that are created, e.g., by impulsive external stimuli like temperature, pressure or electromagnetic and optical pulses: Monitoring the transmission of the polarimeter in a fixed angular setting (φ, χ) could reveal the emergence of electronic order in selected anisotropy directions that are transiently populated during dynamical processes. In general, our method has the potential to sensitively detect ordering phenomena at the onset of phase transitions, transient phenomena, or evolution of nonequilibrium states.