In this work, we perform steady-state continuous wave (cw) photoluminescence (PL) measurements on a MAPbI3 thin film in the temperature range of 10-160 K, using excitation densities spanning over almost seven orders of magnitude, in particular investigating very low densities, rarely used in the published literature. The temperature range used in this study is below or at the edge of the orthorhombic-tetragonal phase transition in MAPbI3. In particular, we show that even in high quality MAPbI3, capable of providing high photovoltaic efficiency, the defect density is high enough to give rise to an energy level band. Furthermore, we show that the intensity ratio between the two PL components related to the two crystalline phases, is a function of temperature and excitation. At high excitation intensities, we show that amplified spontaneous emission is attainable even in cw conditions. Time-resolved PL is also performed to justify some assignments of the PL features. Finally, our systematic approach, typical for the characterization of semiconductors, suggests that it should also be applied to hybrid halide 2 perovskites and that, under suitable conditions, the PL characteristics of MAPbI3 can be reconciled with those of conventional inorganic semiconductors. The employment of hybrid halide perovskites (HHPs) as the active material in solar cells has in the last few years undergone a tremendous development The most common characterization technique of HHPs is photoluminescence (PL) In this work, we study the PL properties of MAPbI3 samples capable of delivering a photovoltaic conversion efficiency above 20%, when incorporated into a device of mesoscopic n-i-p architecture The temperature range of our study is 10-160 K at the edge or below the critical temperature for the O-T phase transition. For higher temperatures, the results are less sensitive to the excitation intensity and the comparison of our findings with the enormous amount of data in the literature recorded at RT is not within the scope of the present work. We paid particular attention to low power densities that are rarely used for probing MAPbI3 and, more generally HHPs, because they allow the observation of low-density electronic states such as those related to crystal defects and impurities or, in the case of MAPbI3, the electronic states due tetragonal inclusions in an orthorhombic lattice Beyond the characterization of our samples, this study will also stimulate the perovskite community to adopt a common way to characterize HHP samples, in order to provide a common and shared methodology, as it has been suggested for perovskite solar cells stability MAPbI3 samples are prepared as detailed in the following. After a deep cleaning sequence, consisting of a triple step of ultra-sonic bath with cleaning liquid dissolved in deionized water, acetone and 2-propanol for 10 min each, simple glass substrates are coated with a MAPbI3 perovskite absorber deposited by solvent engineering methods. Briefly, 717.76 mg mL -1 of PbI2 and 247.56 mg mL -1 of CH3NH3I were dissolved in DMF/DMSO (8:1, v/v) by stirring for 24 h at room temperature to obtain the perovskite based solution. 70 μL of the perovskite solution was spin coated on the glass with a two-step spin-coating process, first at 1000 rpm for 10 s and then at 5000 rpm for 45 s. Just 34 s before the end of the second spin-coating step, 0.7 mL of diethyl ether was dropped onto the substrates. Subsequently, the perovskite layer was treated with a double-step annealing process, performed at 50 °C for 2 min in the dark and then at 100 °C for 10 min. The resulting sample have thickness of about 450/500 nm. Photovoltaic cells based on this type of material show efficiency of 20.12% The sample was held at temperatures in the range 10-160 K in a close-loop He cryostat. The luminescence has been detected with a Peltier-cooled CCD camera after having been dispersed in a 30 cm long monochromator with a 1200 grooves/mm grating. The time-resolved PL measurements were performed at 77 K with a time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) system with a photomultiplier as the detector with an instrumental response function (IRF) of 0.5 ns. The measurements were performed using a pulsed laser source (duration 40 fs) at 520 nm with 1 KHz repetition rate for three different fluences (1.13 μJ/cm 2 , 5.7 μJ/cm 2 and 57 μJ/cm 2 ). Before going into the details of our results, some general considerations based on the cited literature can be made. At room temperature, the MAPbI3 perovskite presents one PL peak due to its tetragonal phase bandgap. Lowering the temperature below ~150 K, a new, higher energy peak emerges, attributed to recombination in the orthorhombic phase. Both peaks continue to be visible in the PL spectra of MAPbI3 also at lower temperatures, well below the structural phase transition (160 K). From now on, for simplicity, we will refer to those peaks as LE (low energy, tetragonal phase) and HE (high energy, orthorhombic phase). Fig. Looking first at the results in Fig. In this Iexc range both LE and HE peaks blueshift as the excitation increases. When Iexc increases further, an inversion of the trend occurs, the LE peak returns to being dominant and both peaks undergo a redshift. We verified that this latter phenomenon is reversible by lowering Iexc back down while observing the PL, in order to be sure that we had not damaged the sample, even at the highest excitation densities used here. In Fig. Increasing Iexc, this peak blueshifts until it reaches the energy typical of the LE peak, (1.55 eV) at 13 W/cm 2 . At intermediate Iexc (see the spectrum at 1.3 W/cm 2 ) we observe two distinct peaks: LE that emerges at 1.55 eV and DE that shifts, eventually merging with LE. The HE peak needs more excitation density to appear and to gain prevalence over the LE peak with respect to the case of the first spot shown in Fig. Finally, it is worth noticing that in the spectra taken at the highest excitation intensities it is possible to identify a low-energy shoulder for both the HE and LE peaks (see black arrows in PL spectra were recorded every 10 K by the controlled heating of the sample from 10 K until the HE peak disappears, between 120-150 K (depending on excitation intensity). The measurements were performed for different incident Iexc: 1.3 W/cm 2 , 13 W/cm 2 , 130 W/cm 2 and 255 W/cm 2 . The results are shown in Fig. At the highest temperatures, for all the power densities, the LE peak is located at ~1.58 eV, as reported in Fig. The low-energy broadening of the LE peak, which has been observed at 10 K at low excitation conditions, is present in the spectra taken at Iexc = 1.3 W/cm 2 (Fig. We would also like to highlight a very peculiar characteristic of these temperature dependent PL spectra: the intensity ratio between the HE and LE peaks is not monotonous as a function of T, especially at low Iexc. To emphasize this aspect, we report colormaps in Fig. From these plots, we can see that the LE peak intensity increases as the temperature is raised up to about 90-130 K, depending on Iexc, and then decreases. This behavior is smoother at high excitation intensities. In contrast, the behavior of the HE peak intensity is quite different as it exhibits a maximum at decreasing temperatures as the excitation power increases. The integrated intensity of the PL reflects the different behavior of the two main spectral components and shows a temperature dependence strongly related to the excitation conditions. In Fig. To investigate further the recombination processes that produce the different emission features and to compare spectra between two different excitation regimes, time resolved PL (TRPL) and spectral PL measurements were performed under pulsed excitation (Fig. In Fig. Analyzing the peculiar aspects of MAPbI3 PL spectra at low temperature, the most evident characteristic is the double peak emission, visible below the transition temperature from tetragonal to orthorhombic phases. This observation is not new and its principal features have been widely studied, but there is still no agreement in the literature about why it is possible to observe the PL features that seem to belong to both tetragonal and orthorhombic phases at temperatures below the tetragonal to orthorhombic phase transition. Some works When illuminated with low Iexc (< 1.3 W/cm 2 ) at T< 70 K (Figs. What we can say from our data is that the blueshift of the DE peak with increasing Iexc is compatible with state filling of defect states distributed on an energy band as well as with a donor-acceptor pair emission Increasing Iexc up to 130 W/cm 2 (Fig. Let us now discuss the dependence of the LE and HE energies upon temperature (Fig. The often observed redshift of the two peaks for decreasing temperature below 80-100 K, which is an uncommon feature in high quality semiconductors but it can be observed in defected materials At the highest Iexc (Fig. High excitation intensities give rise to an intrinsic regime of the material, in which the contribution to the PL of defects and impurity states is negligible. If we look at the temperature dependence of the PL intensity (Fig. The fact that the HE peak intensity appears more affected than that of the LE peak is then attributed to the fact that LE states act as trapping states for e-h pairs excited in the orthogonal domains. However, it is also important to highlight that the latter observations may be affected by a local heating of the sample, induced directly by the excitation source at high Iexc, an aspect that we will discuss later. Of course, we are aware that the further increase of the temperature eventually leads to a red shift. This is also seen in Figs 2(a) and 2(b) where we have reported the RT PL for comparison. As a matter of fact, however, the RT PL is very broad, much broader than at 150 K. This broadening cannot be explained by simple thermal factors, because it is much larger than the difference in kT. Different spectral features contribute to the RT spectra, whose origin is not self-evident and will be not discussed here. All the features observed as a function of temperature and excitation intensity strongly suggest that the LE peak is due to radiative recombination in tetragonal inclusions in the orthorhombic lattice. Indeed, the LE features vary very smoothly with T and Iexc strongly suggesting that there is no change in its nature during the variation of the lattice temperature. Above 130 W/cm 2 , the LE peak starts growing again and returns to be dominant. This is an unexpected result and seems to tell us that more LE domains are induced by higher Iexc. This trend is similar to the evolution in temperature for low power densities and suggests that the intense incident light can locally heat the sample, thermally promoting the tetragonal phase and relative emission. Further features, observed in the temperature dependent measurements, support this hypothesis: we can indeed see that for 130 W/cm 2 and 255 W/cm 2 the HE peak is only observed at the lowest temperatures, in contrast to what we should observe according to the picture described above regarding the interplay between the LE and HE intensities. The observation suggests that the light locally heats the sample and that the real temperature under the laser spot is higher than the surrounding lattice temperature. Panzer et al. In conclusion, we performed a systematic study of the PL emission of MAPbI3 perovskite thin films at low temperatures, using cw excitation intensities varying over about seven orders of magnitude with the use of extremely low excitation intensities, obtaining a coherent set of data, to better understand the complex and elusive emission characteristics of this material. We have demonstrated the significant influence of incident light intensity on the qualitative and quantitative response of the MAPbI3 thin film. In particular, we have shown that at low T (< 100K) and low Iexc (< 1.3 W/cm 2 ) the presence of defect-related emission can be easily observed, also highlighting the relevant differences that can be observed within a single sample due to its inhomogeneities. The power and temperature dependence of the defect band suggests that even in high quality MAPbI3, capable of providing high photovoltaic efficiency, the defect density is high enough to give rise to an energy level band. We have also shown that the intensity ratio between the two components of the doublet usually observed below 160 K, LE and HE, is a complex function of T and Iexc as carrier collection in the low energy regions and its saturation determine that ratio. The same analysis has allowed us to observe that under excitation conditions that favor intrinsic recombination, the behavior of MAPbI3 approaches that of ordinary inorganic semiconductors. Indeed, the peaks redshifts are reduced as well as the non-monotonicity of PL integrated intensity. Finally, our systematic measurements strongly suggest that the LE peak is due to recombination in tetragonal inclusions into the orthorhombic lattice where the recombination that gives rise to the HE emission occurs. At high excitations (Iexc > 13 W/cm 2 ), we have shown that ASE is attainable also in cw conditions, for which a local, non-destructive, heating of the lattice occurs. This result should warn against the use of high Iexc excitation to characterize this material and demonstrates that characterization studies should be performed with cw excitation at low power densities and low temperatures. The last result of our work is that the widely contrasting results shown in the literature can be explained, apart from the intrinsic inhomogeneous nature of MAPbI3 samples, by the fact that temperature and excitation power vary from paper to paper and that the use of pulsed excitation can be misleading. This is in particularly true with regard to the features of the PL doublet usually observed at low temperatures, for which it is unrealistic to draw quantitative conclusions using only one excitation condition.