We study disorder induced topological phase transitions in magnetically doped (Bi, Sb)2Te3 thin films, by using large scale transport simulations of the conductance through a disordered region coupled to reservoirs in the quantum spin Hall regime. Besides the disorder strength, the rich phase diagram also strongly depends on the magnetic exchange field, the Fermi level, and the initial topological state in the undoped and clean limit of the films. In an initially trivial system at non-zero exchange field, varying the disorder strength can induce a sequence of transitions from a normal insulating, to a quantum anomalous Hall, then a spin-Chern insulating, and finally an Anderson insulating state. While for a system with topology initially, a similar sequence, but only starting from the quantum anomalous Hall state, can be induced. Varying the Fermi level we find a similarly rich phase diagram, including transitions from the quantum anomalous Hall to the spin-Chern insulating state via a state that behaves as a mixture of a quantum anomalous Hall and a metallic state, akin to recent experimental reports. Introduction.-The interplay between magnetism and topological states of matter has attracted tremendous research interests in the past decades for its value in both fundamental science and applications. Many interesting and exotic phenomena have been predicted and observed in these types of systems, such as antiferromagnetic (AFM) topological insulators (TIs) One of the first QAH material candidates, which have been well-studied in the past few years, are magnetically doped TI thin films, such as Cr or V-doped (Bi, Sb) 2 Te 3 with a thickness of several quintuple layers (QLs) In this work, by using large scale tight binding transport simulations of disordered 2D systems, we reveal the surprisingly rich phase diagram of magnetically doped TI thin films, which depends on the non-disordered (un-doped) parent state in an intricate fashion. A schematic of our simulations is summarized in Fig. Models and Methods.-We aim at modelling the electronic structures of magnetically doped (Bi, Sb) 2 Te 3 thin films around the Fermi level at the Γ-point by starting from the low-energy k • p effective Hamiltonian with Here, the basis is chosen as ), and t(b) represents the top (bottom) surface states. σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) T is a vector with the entries being the Pauli matrices for real spin (↑ and ↓). v F is the Fermi velocity, M is the exchange field in the z-direction, and g is the effective g-factor. m(k) describes the tunneling between the top and the bottom surface, which goes to zero as the thickness of the film is increased. Since the Hamiltonian shown in Eq. ( In order to quantify the effect of disorder on the magnetic TI, we perform transport calculation as a function of both disorder strength W and the effective exchange field gM . We use a lattice version of the Hamiltonian of Eq. ( Disorder Induced TPT in Magnetic Thin Films.-Figure We now turn to finite disorder and first concentrate on gM = 0. For the 3QL case we find a phase transition driven by disorder from the NI phase to the QSH state akin to the emergence of a TAI We further examine the phase diagrams as a function of disorder strength W and tuning the Fermi energy E F for 3QLs magnetically doped TI thin films (for 4QLs see SM Next, we turn to finite exchange field in panels (c), (d) and (e), (f) with gM = 30 meV and gM = 52 meV, whose intrinsic states without disorder belong to the NI and QAH phases, respectively. For the NI state shown in panels (c) and (d), the time reversal symmetry is broken by the long-range FM order, but the exchange field is not strong enough to drive the thin film to be a Chern insulator, it is a trivial dilute magnetic semiconductor. Increasing the disorder strength, the band gap of the thin film becomes smaller in the weak disorder region. Eventually, it closes at the critical value W c ≈ 290 meV and re-opens again, at which point G assumes the quantized value e 2 /h and δG is zero, indicating the emergence of a QAH state driven by disorder. More interestingly, when we further enhance the disorder potential, the TI thin film will go to the metallic region again and then becomes a spin-Chern insulator (G = 2e 2 /h and δG = 0). The weak disorder part of our observations can again be well understood by the self-consistent Born approximation given as lines (see SM In Fig. Conclusion.-We summarize that in all phase diagrams, non-time-reversal-breaking disorder tends to promote the topological character and once the material achieves a QSH or spin-Chern insulator state, for which both bands show a topological character, by increasing disorder, it cannot be driven into another topological state, but only into an Anderson insulator. This ob-servation is consistent with the negative contribution to the renormalization of the topological mass term found from the solution of the non-self consistent Born approximation (see SM Magnetically Doped Topological Insulator (Bi, Sb) 2 Te 3 Thin Films Takuya Okugawa, 1 Peizhe Tang, 2, 3, * Angel Rubio, 3, 4, 5 and Dante M. Kennes The lattice version of the Hamiltonian of Eq. ( where a is the lattice constant and we take a = 2 nm for all of our calculations. Obviously, Eq. (S.1) reduces to Eq. ( ) where i and j are the sites' x and y coordinates, respectively. Γ 1,2,3,4 are defined as follows: The impurities are modeled as randomly distributed onsite potentials drawn from a uniform distribution between [-W/2, W/2]. The term to be added to H ii jj is explicitly given as: In our work, since non-magnetic impurity are considered, W ij,+↑ = W ij,+↓ and W ij,-↑ = W ij,-↓ are used. Adding the disorder amounts to substituting M → M + W ij in Eq. (S.5) and we employ this Hamiltonian for the central region described in the main text with the number of lattice sites being N x = L x /a and N y = L y /a. For the left and right leads, the clean Hamiltonian of Eq. (S.5) without any disorder is used. First, we calculate the static self-energy Σ u/l defined by (E F -H 0 (H u/l ) denote the disorder average and the upper/lower Block of (S.1) without(with) disorder potential, respectively. Like the Hamiltonian, the selfenergy can be decomposed into blocks Σ u/l = Σ Eq. (S.17) shows that the disorder effects only the mass and not the chemical potential within the nonself-consistent approach. The change in mass δm 0 is found to always be negative for the parameters used in our calculations. This explains the tendency of disorder to promote topologically non-trivial bands in our study of magnetically doped topological insulator (Bi, Sb) 2 Te 3 thin films. In Fig. TPTs. This can be understood by the disorder amounting to a negative contribution to the topological mass term within the Born approximation (which is originally negative for 4QLs case). This can be found by using the solution of the closed form of Born approximations after neglecting the self-consistency. The phase boundary between the QSH and the metallic region is well-described by the self-consistent Born approximation while the one between QSH and the Anderson insulator again cannot be obtained by this approximation. Even though panels (c) and (d) show a result similar at face value, it demonstrates the existence of a spin-Chern insulator at finite exchange field gM . This topological state is not altered by weak disorder and slightly widens in the phase diagram up to around W ≈ 300 meV as disorder is increased. As we discussed in (a), (b), the disorder does not change the already negative topological mass term to be positive, meaning that once a band inversion occurred, its band does not return to be topologically trivial. The boundary of the spin-Chern insulator and the metal can be explained with the self-consistent Born approximation once more, and when the disorder is increased further, as above, an Anderson insulator is found. Finally, in the panels (e) and (f) the non-disordered state corresponds to a QAH insulator around E F = 0 and we find a similar behavior as in the 3QLs case (compare panels (e) and (f) of Fig. Here, we explicitly discuss the influence of choosing different leads on the calculated transport properties shown in the main text, where the lead was chosen in the QSH phase. The main reason why we use the QSH lead is to probe the disorder-induced TPT in the central region most clearly. Using a lead with a trivial bulk gap (such as the clean TI thin film with the thickness of 3QLs), the system is blind to probe the conductance inside the energy window of the band gap, which is the most interesting region to observe the new physics. This is trivial as, since without doping, the Fermi energy E F = 0 is firmly inside of the leads bulk gap and therefore we would not be able to detect the new disorder induced topological phases in the central region. Alternatively, we need to dope the lead to be metallic. Therefore, we also compare the transport properties calculated for QSH lead with those for such a metallic lead. The latter might be connected closer to the current experimental setup routinely realized. In the metallic case, we can probe the transport signal inside the band gap of the TI thin films and the same physics as shown in the case of the QSH lead can be found. However, due to residual hybridization between the lead and central region, the physics shows up even more clearly with the QSH lead, which we preferred to choose. In the following part, we compare the transport properties probed by using these three different kinds of leads: (1) lead of the same nature as the central region but in the clean limit, (2) metallic lead, and (3) QSH lead. Type (1) is defined as using the disorder-free magnetically doped TI thin films which is the same material used for the central region (without disorder, namely W = 0). The mass of the left and right lead region m u/l 0,L/R is set equal to the the central one m u/l 0,C . Such setups have been used in many previous works we always define the sign of the mass term to be negative, namely m The bulk gap value of the QSH leads in the above two cases depends on the magnitudes of |m u 0,C | and |m l 0,C |. So in this case within the lead, the helical edge channel always exist (G = 2e 2 /h), which can connect to edge states and bulk metallic states in the central regions. In Figs. Although with the choice of metallic lead, we can observe the disorder induced TPTs inside the band gap of TI thin films shown in Figs. 