The interplay of time-reversal and n-fold rotation symmetries (n = 2, 4, 6) is known to bring a new class of topological crystalline insulators (TCIs) having n surface Dirac cones due to surface rotation anomaly. We show that the proximity-induced s-wave superconductivity on the surface of these TCIs yields a topological superconducting phase in which two Majorana zero modes are bound to a vortex, and that n-fold rotation symmetry (n = 2, 4, 6) enriches the topological classification of a superconducting vortex from Z2 to Z2 × Z2. Using a model of a three-dimensional high-spin topological insulator with s-wave superconductivity and two-fold rotation symmetry, we show that, with increasing chemical potential, the number of Majorana zero modes at one end of a vortex changes as 2 → 1 → 0 through two topological vortex phase transitions. In addition, we show that additional magnetic-mirror symmetry further enhances the topological classification to Z × Z. Introduction.-Majorana fermions bound to a superconducting vortex 1-9 have received great attention in recent years, since these particles obeying non-Abelian statistics 10-12 were predicted to be experimentally accessible in hybrid systems of three-dimensional (3D) topological insulators (TIs) and conventional s-wave superconductors (SCs) Multiple Majorana vortex modes can emerge when the parent material in proximity to an s-wave superconductor is a 3D topological crystalline insulator with multiple surface Dirac cones protected by crystal symmetry. For instance, an even number of Dirac cones on the surface of 3D topological crystalline insulators (TCIs) such as SnTe In this paper we show that double Majorana fermions bound to a vortex are stable against symmetry-allowed perturbations in superconducting TCIs with C n rotation symmetry (n = 2, 4, 6), and that their topological classification is extended from Z 2 to Z 2 × Z 2 accordingly. We consider a model of s-wave superconducting surface Dirac cones protected by C n symmetry, which is motivated from Ref. 47, and show that double Majorana zero modes are bound to a vortex that preserves C n symmetry (n = 2, 4, 6). Using a lattice model of 3D high-spin TCIs with C 2 symmetry and s-wave Cooper pairing, we then show that the two surface Dirac cones from electrons with total angular momentum J = 1/2 and 3/2 accommodate double Majorana fermions at each end of a vortex line that is parallel to the rotation axis. With increasing chemical potential, the double Majorana fermions disappear successively at two vortex phase transitions that are distinguished by C 2 eigenvalues. Finally, we develop topological classification of Majorana zero modes bound to the ends of a vortex line under crystal symmetry. Our results include a new class of Majorana vortex zero modes classified by Z × Z under C nv symmetry (consisting of C n and a vertical-plane mirror-reflection), in addition to the Z 2 × Z 2 classification under C n symmetry. Interestingly, under two-dimensional (2D) point groups, we find a one-to-one correspondence between topological classification of 3D TCIs and that of Majorana vortex zero modes, which implies that any symmetry-protected surface Dirac cone can accommodate a Majorana vortex zero mode when s-wave pairing is induced on the surface of TCIs. Surface rotation anomaly and Majorana vortex modes.-To see the relation between Majorana vortex modes and C n symmetry-protected Dirac cones due to surface rotation anomaly, we first consider a 2D system of surface Dirac fermions on the surface of a 3D TCI with spin-orbit coupling, time-reversal symmetry (TRS), and C n symmetry for n = 2, 4, or 6. A minimal model Hamiltonian for the surface of a 3D TCI with rotation anomaly is written as with where s i (i = x, y, z) are the Pauli matrices in the spin space, s and s ′ are spin indices (s ∈ {↑, ↓}), σ and σ ′ are orbital indices (σ ∈ {1, 2}), 1 n the n × n identity matrix, v is the velocity (v > 0), and Λ is a cutoff of the order of the inverse lattice spacing. In this minimal model the rotation axis is along the z axis and the double Dirac cones are centered at Γ point (k x , k y ) = (0, 0). The Dirac point can be split into n Dirac points away from the Γ point by adding symmetry-allowed perturbations where K is complex conjugation, σ i (i = x, y, z) are the Pauli matrices in the orbital space, and R n is a representation of O(2), e.g., R 4 : (k x , k y ) → (-k y , k x ). The orbitals are assumed to have opposite parities (e.g., s and p orbitals), as indicated by σ z in Eq. (3). The double Dirac cones belong to different irreducible representations of C n and cannot be continuously deformed into each other while preserving C n symmetry. Thus the Dirac cones cannot be gapped out; for example, a TRS-preserving mass term s z ⊗ σ y is prohibited since {C n , s z ⊗ σ y } = 0. Suppose that an s-wave superconductor is deposited on the rotation-invariant surface of the TCI so that the s-wave Cooper pairs are induced due to the proximity effect. The surface Hamiltonian Ĥsurf is extended to the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian where μ is the chemical potential and ∆ 0 is the induced s-wave superconducting gap, which is assumed to have the same magnitude for the two orbitals for simplicity. BdG describes a C n -symmetric fully-gapped superconductor with the energy spectrum In the presence of a superconducting vortex at the rotation axis (x, y) = (0, 0), the order parameter ∆ takes the form ∆(r)e iθ , where r = x 2 + y 2 and θ = arctan(y/x). Here ∆(r) is a monotonic function of r satisfying ∆(0) = 0 and ∆(∞) = ∆ 0 . We note that the vortex is placed on the rotation axis, and this assumption is naturally satisfied when the superconducting coherence length is much larger than the size of a unit cell. The existence of a vortex breaks TRS, whereas C n symmetry still holds, albeit in a modified form, since a vortex field also rotates as ∆e iθ → ∆e i(θ+ 2π n ) under C n . Thus, the correct form of C n operations in the presence of a vortex 49 is Eq. (3) combined with a gauge transformation by e iπ/n , One can easily verify that Ĥsurf BdG is invariant under the transformation of Eq. ( Note that particle-hole symmetry (PHS) is respected by the BdG Hamiltonian even in the presence of a vortex. The BdG Hamiltonian with a vortex is equivalent to a 2D Dirac Hamiltonian coupled with the s-wave pairing, which is known as the Jackiw-Rossi model 14, where ĉs,σ (x) is the Fourier transformation of ĉk,s,σ . Equations ( To check the stability of the Majorana vortex zero modes, we examine possible perturbations to Majorana fermions. In general the coupling between Majorana fermions can be written as where A ab is a real-skew matrix and γ † a = γa . If such coupling is allowed by symmetry, Majorana zere modes acquire a finite hybridization gap. For the two Majorana zero modes in Eq. ( Symmetry-protected vortex phase transition in a lattice model.-So far we have focused on the surface effective Hamiltonian. This approach is valid for 3D superconducting TCIs where the 3D bulk is insulating. Now we consider a 3D C 2 -invariant lattice model with a vortex line in order to show that double Majorana vortex zero modes can appear at each end of the vortex line, even when the bulk is doped into a metallic state. As the chemical potential increases, a pair of zero modes localized at the opposite ends are expected to have a longer localization length along the vortex line and pair-annihilate at a critical point μ = μ c , which is known as a vortex phase transition To this end, we introduce a model Hamiltonian of highspin fermions in the normal state, where J i are the 4 × 4 spin matrices in the spin-3/2 representation, and τ i the Pauli matrices in the orbital space. In addition to the parameters M , m 0 , and t, we have introduced lattice distortions δ with the coherence length ξ and the vortex line on the rotation axis; see Fig. We numerically diagonalize the 3D BdG Hamiltonian with the vortex line under the periodic boundary condition (PBC) in the z direction and open boundary conditions in the x and y directions, and obtain the energy spectrum of quasiparticles. Figure Topological classification of Majorana vortex end modes.-In the remaining part of this paper, we discuss topological classification of Majorana vortex end modes in superconducting 3D TCIs. The vortex phase transitions are related to the change in the topology of elec-tronic states in a vortex line. The relevant energy scale of these states is the level spacing of vortex bound states, i.e., a mini gap 59 δ ∼ ∆/(k F ξ) ≪ ∆ (k F is the Fermi wave number). The bulk excitations with energy E ∆ are irrelevant in our discussion, and we are allowed to take a finite system size in the directions perpendicular to the vortex line. Since a vortex line breaks TRS, our problem is reduced to classification of quasi-one-dimensional (Q1D) SCs in class D of the Altland-Zirnbauer (AZ) classes Crystal symmetries that can be preserved under the presence of a vortex line and a surface termination are 2D point groups C n or C nv (n = 1, 2, 3, 4, 6), when a vortex line is on the rotation axis or the vertical-mirror plane (see Fig. , where H(k z ) is related to H(k z ) by C n rotation of lattice sites in the xy plane. Furthermore, we can set [C n , P] = 0 with s-wave Cooper pairing. The gauge transformation associated with the U(1) vortex field as discussed above Eq. (5) leads to (C n ) n = 1 N . As a result, the BdG Hamiltonian can be block-diagonalized as where H m is a Hamiltonian in the subsector with C neigenvalue e i2πm/n . Since C n symmetry forbids any mixing of states from different subsectors, we can define an AZ symmetry class for each subsector. When m/n / ∈ {0, 1/2}, the eigenvalues are complex numbers. In this case H m does not have PHS itself and belongs to class A. On the other hand, when m/n ∈ {0, 1/2}, the C n -eigenvalues are real numbers, and PHS remains as a symmetry of H m , meaning that the subsector is in class D. According to the periodic table of topological insulators/superconductors 62,66-68 , Q1D SCs are classified by Z 2 for class D and 0 for class A. Thus, the topological classification under C n symmetry becomes Z 2 ×Z 2 for n = 2, 4, 6 and Z 2 for n = 3, which are consistent with the results from the effective surface theory discussed above. The topological indices (ν + , ν -) ∈ Z 2 × Z 2 are given by where H + (H -) is Hamiltonian in the subsectors with C n -eigenvalues +1 (-1), and U ± is the unitary part of P projected to H ± . TABLE I. Classification of Majorana vortex end modes under 2D point groups. The first, second, and third columns represent 2D point groups, relevant AZ symmetry classes, and 1D topological invariants, respectively. Here, D 2 stands for D × D and so too with the others. Next, we consider the effect of vertical-mirrorreflection (C 1v ) symmetry. Following the arguments in Refs. 40 and 42, we find that the BdG Hamiltonian H(k z ) with a vortex is invariant not by C 1v transformation but by magnetic-mirror transformation M T = T C 1v , which is the combination of C 1v and time-reversal transformation, as For s-wave pairing we can take [M T , P] = 0. Here, M T is antiunitary and M 2 T = 1 N . Thus, M T plays a role of TRS for spinless fermions in the BdG Hamiltonian, and H belongs to class BDI with the 1D topological invariant Z. Finally, we consider C nv symmetry (n = 2, 3, 4, 6) that consists of C n and vertical-mirror reflections, where the rotation axis is in the vertical-mirror planes (see Fig. From Eq. ( where Γ M is a chiral operator, defined by M T P projected onto H ± . The classification of Majorana vortex end modes is summarized in Table where Ψs,σ (x) = (ĉ s,σ (x), ĉ † s,σ (x)) T and the indices s and σ represent the spin and orbital spaces, respectively. We define the C n transformation (n = 2, 4, 6) such that ĉ † s,σ (x) ;sσ e iπ/n (see Eq. ( ;sσ accordingly. From Eqs. (S.6) and (S.8), we obtain (S.9) Therefore, the Majorana operators are transformed, under the C n transformation, as where we have used Eq. (S.9) in the second line. The result leads to the stability of double Majorana vortex zero modes under symmetry-preserving perturbations as discussed in the main text. We consider a model of high-spin fermions: where J i are the 4 × 4 spin matrices in the spin-3/2 basis and τ i the Pauli matrices in the orbital space. M , m 0 , t, δ x , and δ y are material parameters. As discussed in the main manuscript, the double band inversions occur at the Γ point in the parameter regime -3 < M/m 0 < -1, leading to two Dirac cones on a surface. Introducing s-wave pairing with a vortex at (x, y) = 0 into Eq. (S.11) yields two Majorana zero modes at each end of the vortex. We here illustrate those topological states by numerically diagonalizing the normal-state and Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonians. In Fig. We here demonstrate C 4 symmetry-protected Majorana vortex end modes and associated vortex phase transitions. From the analysis of the surface effective Hamiltonian, we see that a simple model having the surface rotation anomaly can be described by a stack of two three-dimensional topological insulators. From this insight, we consider a double topological insulator model: where s i and σ i are the Pauli matrices in the spin and orbital space, respectively. They become a strong topological insulator for -3 < M a /m a < -1 (a = 1, 2) and host two surface Dirac cones on their surface. Suppose that s-wave superconductivity is realized. Then, the BdG Hamiltonian is described as where μ is the chemical potential and 1 n is the n × n identity matrix. To see the vortex phase transitions, we implement a vortex line as ∆ 0 → ∆(x) = ∆ 0 tanh (r/ξ) e iθ , (S.14) where r = x 2 + y 2 , θ = arctan(y/x), and ξ is the coherence length. The vortex line breaks translation symmetry in the xy plane. For a finite lattice site in the x and y directions, Eq. (S.13) can be described as H ij (k z ), where i and j indicate lattice sites in the xy plane. Eq. (S.13) with the U (1) vortex field is invariant under C 4 symmetry: 