The open-source PyNX toolkit Coherent X-ray Imaging techniques have been intensely developed during the last 20 years thanks to the wide availability of synchrotron sources with high brilliance. This covers a wide range of techniques, beginning with phase contrast imaging These techniques all provide high-resolution two or three-dimensional imaging, down to 5 to 15 nanometer resolution depending on the experimental setup. The main experimental requirement is a coherent X-ray beam, which is readily available at synchrotron facilities. These experiments will see the main benefit of the current upgrades of synchrotron rings, which promise two orders of magnitude increase in the available coherent X-ray flux thanks to higher brilliance Data analysis often remains a bottleneck for these experiments, either from the complexity of the algorithms, or simply the computing requirements. A variety of software is readily available for 1 arXiv:2008.11511v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 26 Aug 2020 Ptychography In this article we will present the open-source coherent X-ray imaging modules of the PyNX toolkit. In the previous versions PyNX is written primarily in Python, using the NumPy and SciPy libraries • cdi: Coherent Diffraction Imaging. See section 3. • operator: classes and functions for the operator -based approach, which is described in section 3. • processing unit: functions to automatically select and initialise the processing units, either using OpenCL or CUDA. • ptycho: Ptychography. See section 4. • scattering: legacy GPU-accelerated kinematical scattering calculations, as described in • test: automated test routines and scripts. • utils: array handling and plotting routines. • wavefront: coherent wavefront propagation, mostly for simulation purposes. All calculations for the new coherent imaging modules (cdi, ptycho and wavefront) are executed on the available GPU, either using the pyCUDA or pyOpenCL libraries One important aspect of the code design is that while most (84% lines) of it is written in Python, all the algorithms are executed asynchronously on the GPU, i.e. the commands are sent by the Python process to the GPU for a large number of operations Illustrated in figure Finally, the cdi and ptycho modules also include a runner sub-module, which handles automated data processing using command-line scripts, which will be described in section 5. The CDI technique consists of reconstructing an object from a far-field diffraction pattern alone In order to reconstruct the object from non-redundant diffraction data it is necessary to recover the lost phases of the measured amplitudes. A variety of algorithms are available, all of which rely on alternating between a real-space estimate of the object, where its extent (the so-called 'support' of the object) is evaluated, and diffraction (Fourier) space, where an amplitude constraint can be applied from the measured intensities. A unified view of these algorithms has been presented in where ρ (n) is the object's complex density array at iteration (n), F is the Fourier transform, P m is a magnitude projection operator which replaces the modulus of the calculated scattering by the observed ones, and P S is the support projection operator, which multiplies the object array by 0 outside its support. Since a complete algorithmic chain used to retrieve an object relies on a large number (at least a few hundred) of such mathematical operations, it is convenient to use object-oriented programming to enable writing the sequence of operations exactly as mathematical operations. This is achieved in the following way: All the reconstruction operations (HIO, ER, SupportUpdate) are transparently (no explicit initialisation is required) and asynchronously executed on the GPU. Only when the ShowCDI operator is used, the resulting object and support are fetched from the GPU for display, which automatically waits for all operations queued on the GPU to be finished. 1. a CDI class is defined, including as data the object array (either in real or Fourier space) and the support array (0 outside the support, 1 inside), with a few input/output functions. 2. a family of CDI operators is created, each operator allowing to alter or analyse a CDI object by left-multiplication. These operators also take care of preparing the data and execution kernels in GPU space. For example if cdi is a CDI object, applying an Error Reduction algorithm one simply writes: The main property of operators is that they can be multiplied by another operator to be chained, allowing arbitrarily long operations, or raised to a given integer N to execute the operator N consecutive times. For example: cdi = ER()**20 * HIO()**100 * cdi will apply 100 cycles of Hybrid Input-Output followed by 20 cycles of Error Reduction. This operator-based approach presents several advantages: (i) it is very easy to combine and alter the algorithmic chain which is used for the data analysis, allowing greater flexibility for a wide range of datasets (choices may vary depending on signal/noise quality, hard or soft condensed matter, low or high energy, etc..) and (ii) operators are independent pieces of code which can very easily be expanded or replaced as needed, avoiding the risk of turning the program into a cathedrallike construction which cannot evolve. The only limit to that approach is that the way the arrays (object, observed intensity, masks) are stored in the CDI object must be common to all algorithms. A list of the most important CDI operators is given in appendix 7, and an example reconstruction code is given in figure Figure Examples of speed achieved for various CDI configurations are given in table The most important features of the CDI module are: • main reconstruction algorithms include: Error Reduction • read and write data or reconstructed object using the Coherent X-ray Imaging (CXI) format • functions to simulate data, both for testing and educational purposes. • using the 'free-log-likelihood' figure of merit which provides an unbiased metric for CDI • automated testing functions to check the code (including consistency between OpenCL and CUDA calculations) Ptychography was first developed for electron microscopy The implementation of the ptycho module in PyNX follows the same principle as for the CDI one, with a separation between data and the mathematical operators, with three types of objects: 1. a PtychoData object includes all experimental parameters: observed intensity, probe translation positions, detector distance, X-ray wavelength, bad pixel mask, near or far field flag 2. a Ptycho object includes a PtychoData object, the current object and probe estimates (with optionally several modes 3. a family of Ptychography operators, each one allowing to alter a Ptycho object using the same left-multiplication approach. An operator may alter either object, probe, Ψ arrays, or perform another task (display, export..) Note that in practice the Ψ array is set to a fixed number of N frames, typically a stack between 16 to 128 (it does not need to be a power of two) but larger values can be used, which are simultaneously computed to achieve higher performance through parallelism, while avoiding excessive memory usage. Operators will then loop over the stack of frames to take into account the entire dataset. The operators can be used in exactly the same way as for CDI, e.g. doing 100 cycles of difference map and then maximum likelihood on a Ptycho object p would be written: p = ML(update_obj=True,update_probe=True)**100 * \ DM(update_obj=True,update_probe=True)**100 * p Most of the high-level operators include a number of options which tailor the calculations accordingly, e.g. for the ML operator, the full list with default values is: ML(update_object=True, update_probe=False, update_background=False, floating_intensity=False, reg_fac_obj=0, reg_fac_probe=0, calc_llk=False, show_obj_probe=False, fig_num=-1, update_pos=False, update_pos_mult=1, update_pos_max_shift=2, update_pos_history=False) These options control not only what is optimised but also log-likelihood printing and graphical display. The most important features of the ptycho module are: • main reconstruction algorithms include: Difference Map (DM) • position optimisation (during AP and ML) following the method presented by Odstrčil et al • reporting of log-likelihood based on Poisson, Gaussian and Euclidian noise models PyNX now includes the ability to analyse datasets with multiple GPU and/or multiple computing nodes, using the Message Passing Interface through the mpi4py python module The process follows the different steps: 1. the script (see section 5) loads the scan positions, and distributes them among the different process. This is done by using the k-means algorithm from the scikit-learn python module 2. each process loads the images 3. object and probe are initialised in the master process and each part is distributed among the different process 4. the analysis algorithm is performed independently among the different process, as for a normal ptychography analysis 5. the different parts of the object are stitched together (this can also be done during the algorithm e.g. if the user requests a graphical update of the object). The stitching step has to take into account the different ways the object and probe can differ between independent processes, as only their multiplication can be quantified, unless an image without the object has been included in the dataset. Thus object and probe can have different relative scale factors, a different phase shift, and also a different phase ramp (linearly varying over the 2D array dimensions, in opposite ways for the object and probe). Finally, if the scan positions are updated, the average shifts can differ between the parallel processes. The relative phase ramp of the object and probe is first removed in each process independently using the ZeroPhaseRamp operator, which computes the center of mass of the square norm of the Fourier transform of the probe, and then corrects both probe and object for the phase ramp corresponding to the sub-pixel shift relative to the center of the array in Fourier space. 4,5 The stitching is then done in the following way: 1. the probes are aligned (up to a pixel precision) 2. the scan positions (if they have been updated) are merged and the relative shifts minimised (using the shared positions between neighbouring sets of points) 3. the phase differences between different parts are minimised, by using small areas of the object around the shared scanning positions. 4. the object is finally stitched by a linear combination of the different object parts, weighted by the object illumination for each part. Note that in principle, this asynchronous approach with stitching at the end of the process also allows for a sequential analysis of the different parts of the object, which could only be stitched together after all parts have been processed. This would be useful when an insufficiently large enough GPU cluster is available, and would allow to handle very large datasets, as long as the final object does not exceed available memory. An example result of distributed optimisation is shown in Figure This analysis was performed on the ESRF GPU cluster using from 1 to 6 compute nodes, each with two Nvidia V100 GPUs with 32 GB of memory. The performance of the parallel calculation is shown in Figure Other large-scale tests are reported in Table In addition to the Python programming interface, both CDI and Ptychography datasets can be analysed using command-line scripts, either at the beamline during an experiment, or afterwards. These scripts accept parameters which give access to a range of options, as well as specifying the algorithm in a simple mathematical-like string, which can be easily interpreted using the operator approach. For example, the analysis of a CDI dataset stored in a CXI file, can be simply written: pynx-id01cdi data=pt.cxi support_threshold=0.2 which would perform a simple analysis based on default parameters (600 cycles of HIO followed by 200 cycles of ER, including a support update and printing the log-likelihood every 50 cycles). Alternatively, the exact algorithmic chain can be specified using the algorithm keyword: pynx-id01cdi data=pt.cxi algorithm=ER**200*HIO**600 support_threshold=0.2 liveplot This approach allows the full customisation of the sequence of algorithms used, mixing all standard algorithms (ER, HIO, RAAR,...) along with other algorithms (support update, partial coherence) or parameters (positivity constraint..). More examples of how the algorithm= keyword can be used to customise the actual algorithm chain is given in table As indicated by the name -pynx-id01cdi-this script is tuned for the ESRF id01 beamline These scripts can exploit multiple GPU on one or multiple nodes to either distribute the analysis of multiple scans, or when multiple analysis runs are performed on the same dataset (e.g. to select the best solution based on the free log-likelihood analysis Many other options are available for the command-line scripts, as listed in the online documentation The scripts for ptychography analysis follow the same principles, for example when reading a CXI data file (which includes all observed frames, probe positions, detector distance, mask, wavelength), one can use: pynx-cxipty.py data=data.cxi probe=focus,60e-6x200e-6,0.09 algorithm=analysis,ML**100,DM**200,nbprobe=3,probe=1 saveplot liveplot This will trigger the data analysis, starting from simulating the initial probe as a rectangular aperture of 60(h) × 200(v) μm 2 focused by a lens with a focal length of 9 cm, then optimising the object and the probe (3 modes) with 200 cycles of DM and 100 cycles of ML, followed by an analysis of the resulting probe. The saveplot option allows to save images, including a view of both object and probe as depicted in Fig. Other scripts are available to handle directly data from different beamlines (id01, id13 and id16A at ESRF, NanoMAX at MaxIV, Nanoscopium and Cristal at Soleil), or from different software such as PtyPy To conclude, the PyNX toolkit provides a wide range of modules for the simulation and analysis of coherent imaging data, which transparently exploits accelerated computing on GPUs using either the OpenCL or CUDA language. The programming approach, which mimics mathematical operators, affords a great flexibility in the choice of algorithm chains to be used for data analysis. Command-line scripts are also available to handle CDI and ptychography datasets without any programming knowledge, and new ones can easily be added. PyNX is open-source (CeCILL-B license The list of the main CDI operators is given below. All operations (with the exception of graphical display) are executed transparently on the GPU, and are implemented both for the OpenCL and CUDA languages. Initialise the object support from the intensity auto-correlation Plot the current estimate of the object (amplitude, phase) with the observed and calculated amplitude Update the support based on a threshold relative to the maximum amplitude in the object optionally expanding or shrinking the support afterwards The list of the main Ptychography operators is given below. All operations are executed transparently on the GPU, and are implemented both for the OpenCL and CUDA languages. Some operators actually apply to a stack of N frames (N=16 to 128), whereas others apply to all frames by looping over all stacks of frames. Near field propagation (forward or backward) Psi2ObjProbe Update the object and/or probe from the back-propagated Ψ j Psi2PosShift Update the shift of illumination positions Plot the current estimate of the object (amplitude, phase) and probe The authors acknowledge the help of Manfred Burghammer, Julio Cesar da Silva, Virginie Chamard, Peter Cloetens, Joël Eymery, Tilman Gruenewald, Ross Harder, Stéphane Labat, Kadda Medjoubi, Linus Pithan and Tobias Schülli for useful discussions and/or test datasets. A number of features included in PyNX are inspired from the open-source package PtyPy PropagateNearField() * ApplyAmplitude() * PropagateNearField() Note that GPU kernels are naturally executed asynchronously, but in order to maintain a high performance, it is important to design all algorithms to fetch values from the GPU as scarcely as possible (every 10s or 100s of cycles), so that the GPU process is not slowed down by a synchronisation process, even if it is only to copy a few floating-point values 1 read + 1 write for each of the dimensions of the forward and backward FFT, 1 read and 1 write to apply the amplitude constraints to the complex array in Fourier space, 0.5 read of the intensity array (32-bit float instead of 32-bit complex), and 2.125 read + 2 writes for the RAAR projections operation (the .125 comes from reading the 8-bit support array) the complete analysis code used for the figures of that article is available (along with datasets) from This is also applied for non-distributed ptychography, so that independent optimisations of the same dataset will yield the same phase ramp for the object. Note that this approach can also be used to remove the object phase ramp for far field ptychography: by computing the sum of all calculated diffraction frames and measuring the sub-pixel shift of the center of mass of this intensity, the average phase ramp in the object can be determined. However, as the object can have a varying thickness or composition, this is not an absolute method to derive the correct phase, which can only be obtained if a reference direct beam is used, as shown by Diaz et a http://ftp.esrf.fr/pub/scisoft/PyNX/doc https://cecill.info/