The lattice dynamics of AgPd, Ni55Pd45, Ni95Pt05, and Cu0.715Pd0.285 intermetallic have been investigated using the DFT calculation. The phonon dispersions and phonon densities of states along for two symmetry directions are calculated by Weighted Dynamical Matrix (WDM) and compared with virtual crystal approximation (VCA), supercell approach, and inelastic neutron scattering experimental results. The impact of mass, force-constant fluctuation, and Ag concentration on lattice dynamics of AgPd are discussed, and a comparison between WDM and Supercell approach is performed. The averaged first Nearest Neighbor (1NN) force constants between various pairs of atoms in these intermetallic are obtained from the WDM approach. Based on our results, the WDM approach agrees well with the supercell approach, and neutron scattering experimental data. VCA overestimates in some cases and underestimates, in other cases, the firstprinciples frequencies. The study of alloys has drawn a lot of attention, and exotic properties are produced The disordered lattice is commonly seen in alloy systems, which distorts the chemical environment in the lattice and leads to the change in the physical properties. First-principles calculations for such a disordered system require some approximations. A most common approach is the supercell approximation, which makes disordered configurations in a supercell and apply the periodic boundary conditions. The biggest challenge of such calculations is the very large supercells computational load to mimic the distribution of local chemical environments. The size of Supercell strongly depends on the chemical disorder and tends to be computationally very demanding. The approximation approaches are used to overcome this challenge. The Weighted Dynamical Matrix (WDM) The weighted dynamical matrix approach has advantages over other approximation approaches, which are explained in this work. The most prominent pros are as follows: this approach is straightforward to implement, the generation of a new pseudopotential is not needed for each virtual atom, unlike VCA, and we can calculate any percentage of the alloy without any additional calculation, unlike VCA and Supercell approaches. We compare WDM results to VCA, Supercell, and the experimental reported results for AgPd, Ni55Pd45, Ni95Pt05, and Cu0.715Pd0.285 Alloys. We performed the density functional theory calculations To evaluate the force constants using PHONOPY To find the phonon modes, one needs to construct the dynamical matrix. The dynamical matrix D(q) at the wavevector q is constructed as follows: where m i is the mass of the i th atom. Phonon frequencies ω(q, κ) and mode eigenvectors χ(q, κ) at q, where κ is the band index, are obtained by solving the eigenvalue equation: To calculate the phonon modes for these alloy samples, first, the Hellmann-Feynman forces of the parent structures. The weighted dynamical matrix is constructed as follows: For Ni55Pd45, Ni95Pt05, and Cu0.715Pd0.285, we compare our proposed weighted dynamical matrix (WDM) results with the virtual crystal approximation (VCA) and with inelastic neutron scattering experimental results The results obtained for the phonon dispersion curves and phonon density of states along The results obtained from the phonon dispersion curves along [0,0,] and [0,,] directions by WDM and Supercell approaches calculations are shown in Fig. The first nearest-neighbor force constants, which shown in Table Then, we compare the force constants and conclude that the Ni-Pd force constants (-0.718) should be less than the Ni-Ni (-0.734) ones. That is because Pd is larger than Ni, and the Ni-Pd bonds are larger than the Ni-Ni bonds. We have investigated the lattice dynamics AgPd, Ni55Pd45, Ni95Pt05, and Cu0.715Pd0.285 inter-metallics using first-principles density functional theory. The agreement between WDM, supercell approach, and neutron scattering experiments is good. VCA overestimate and underestimate first-principles frequencies. It is because of the mixing pseudopotential before calculation. This is important from the point of view of the feasibility of using ab initio ordered alloy force constants to study the disordered AgPd and impact of the Ag concentration on the phonon dispersion AgPd. Also, we can see the mass and force-constant fluctuation does not have a significant effect on the phonon dispersion. The results have been analyzed from the nearestneighbor force constant values between various pairs of species. The behavior of force constant versus bond distance follows the expected trend. 