Controlling the stacking of van der Waals (vdW) materials is found to produce exciting new findings, since hetero-or homo-structures have added the diverse possibility of assembly and manipulated functionalities. However, so far, the homostructure with a twisted angle based on the magnetic vdW materials remains unexplored. Here, we achieved a twisted magnetic vdW Fe3GeTe2/Fe3GeTe2 junction with broken crystalline symmetry. A clean and metallic vdW junction is evidenced by the temperature-dependent resistance and the linear I-V curve. Unlike the pristine FGT, a plateau-like magnetoresistance (PMR) is observed in the magnetotransport of our homojunction due to the antiparallel magnetic configurations of the two FGT layers. The PMR ratio is found to be ~0.05% and gets monotonically enhanced as temperature decreases like a metallic giant magnetoresistance (GMR). Such a tiny PMR ratio is at least three orders of magnitude smaller than the tunneling magnetoresistance (TMR) ratio, justifying our clean metallic junction without a spacer. Our findings demonstrate the feasibility of the controllable homostructure and shed light on future spintronics using magnetic vdW materials. After the success of graphene and two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) materials, magnetic vdW materials have been recently attracting enormous attention Metallic ferromagnetic (FM) vdW materials are useful building blocks for new heterostructures due to their compatibilities in spintronic applications In the present work, we achieved a twisted FMM/FMM structure using FGT nanoflake as a model system. Without a spacer between the two FGT nanoflakes, a FGT/FGT structure with a clean interface and a metallic vdW junction was demonstrated. Furthermore, a plateau-like magnetoresistance behavior is found due to the antiparallel magnetic configurations of the two FGT nanoflakes. FGT single crystals were grown by the chemical vapor transport method with iodine as the transport agent. High purity Fe (99.998%), Ge (99.999%), and Te (99.999%) powders were mixed in a stoichiometric ratio 3:1:2. The mixed powder was sealed into an evacuated quartz glass ampoule, which was then placed in a two-zone furnace with a temperature gradient of 750 to 650°C for one week. The nanometers-thick FGT flakes were mechanically exfoliated from the as-synthesized crystals onto the 285 nm-thick SiO2/Si substrates. Starting from the same lattice orientation of the selected nanoflake, we stacked a misoriented structure. Using the dry-transfer method, we took apart half of the FGT nanoflake, then picked it up using a polymer stamp. The picked FGT flake was first rotated by a specific angle and then dropped down on the remaining half of the nanoflake. Finally, the whole entity of the twisted FGT/FGT structure was dry transferred onto the pre-patterned 30/5 nm Au/Ti electrodes on the SiO2/Si substrates. All the fabrication process was performed inside the glove box (Oxygen < 0.6 ppm, H2O < 0.2 ppm) to prevent the surface oxidation of FGT. The transport measurement was conducted using a commercial system (PPMS-9, Quantum Design). In the FGT/FGT structure shown in Fig. The clean interface is essential to achieve a perfect vdW homojunction. The vertical transport property through the junction is suitable for verifying the clean interface because it largely depends on the density of states near the Fermi level and the effective barrier. We were able to prevent an insulating oxidized FGT layer in the junction, by exfoliating FGT nanoflake within the inert gas. Figure Next, we investigated the junction magnetoresistance as a function of a perpendicular magnetic field, with current flowing from Top-FGT to Bottom-FGT. The FGT/FGT structure was expected to behave as a single FGT nanoflake due to the absence of the spacer. On the contrary, the junction magnetoresistance turns out to depend mainly on the relative magnetization direction of the Bottom-FGT and Top-FGT. Here, we observed the resistance plateau with the steep jump and drop as well as the linear magnetoresistance below TC (see Fig. As shown in Fig. In our results, the symmetrical plateau-like magnetoresistance (PMR) was observed at 100 and 50 K (see Fig. The PMR ratio possesses a reasonable value for the metallic vdW FGT/FGT junction. The PMR ratio is defined as [RR AP -RR P ]/RR P , where RAP and RP represent the resistance values of the antiparallel and parallel configuration, respectively. As summarized in Fig. The temperature dependence of the PMR ratio shows a monotonic increase by ~0.025% from 100 to 2 K, as shown in Fig. Here we would like to discuss the specialty of our spin valve homojunction. In principle, two ferromagnetic metals will not work because they will be strongly coupled with no spacer. However, the vdW gap in the twisted FGT/FGT homojunction could decouple two ferromagnetic layers by much weakening the interlayer coupling The vdW junction of the FGT/FGT structure can apply to other possible homojunction. And a similar by-layer effect was also reported in other systems like NbSe2/NbSe2 homostructure In summary, we achieved a FGT/FGT vdW homojunction structure with the twisted interface. The metallic behavior of the junction resistance confirms the clean interface. In such a homojunction of FGT nanoflake, the plateau-like magnetoresistance (PMR) was observed below TC due to the antiparallel magnetization configuration. Unlike the GMR and TMR devices that require the additional separating spacer, the vdW homojunction here stabilizes a resistance plateau without a spacer. Our findings promise the new type of twisted magnetic vdW devices in 2D spintronics. The linearly decreasing behavior is shown as the temperature increases. The inset shows a plot for the temperature-dependent HH C,Top , where the solid red line is a guide to eyes.