We reveal that strong flexoelectric effect of solids can be induced due to the significant charge migration along the strain gradient direction, which represents a new understanding of the origin of flexoelectricity. Beyond the linear response theory, we illustrate such charge migration that is driven by an electric field effect in bent silicon thinfilms. Due to such charge migration, the variation of atomic charge no longer represents a linear response to strain gradient and the resulting giant flexoelectric coefficients being size dependent cannot be treated as a bulk property. The obtained flexoelectric coefficients compare well with the typical experimental values as reported in various ceramics. Our results shed light on elucidating the discrepancy between theory and experiment, and pave a new way to discover excellent flexoelectric performance in conventional materials. Recent experimental and theoretical investigations have substantially advanced our knowledge of flexoelectricity, a phenomenon that depicts the coupling between the electric polarization and the strain gradient in dielectrics Microscopically, flexoelectricity contains both electronic and lattice-mediated Here, based on the generalized Bloch theorem With this, the dipole moment and the flexoelectric coefficient are next calculated. Surprisingly, the flexoelectric coefficient displays a square scaling with the film thickness and approaches the level of 10 -6 C/m at 75 nm thickness, being comparable with the typical experimental values as reported in various ceramics A stress-free (100) silicon film can be depicted by a square lattice with a translation periodicity of T 0 , where the unit cell contains a relatively small number of atoms, N . The precise value of T 0 can be determined by first-principles and density-functional tightbinding (DFTB) where, X n represents atoms inside the primitive repeating cell and X ξ,λ,n represents the atoms inside the replica of the repeating cell indexed by (ξ, λ). The repeating cell contains the same N atoms in the unit cell of the undistorted film. For example, for the (100) silicon film with 10 nm thickness, N = 162. Index n runs over the N atoms inside the cell. The relatively small N allows for systematic QM simulations of the bent structure. We have carried out DFTB calculations on a series of bent (100) silicon films with thickness (h): 10 < h < 200 nm. The exposed surfaces of the films are hydrogenated. The atomic structures are optimized via a conjugate gradient energy minimization to the repeating cell. More computational details are provided in the Supplemental material. We first calculate the variation of the atomic charge in the bent film, where, Q bent refers the electronic charge of the atom located at position x of the bent film and Q stress-free is the same but for the stress-free film. Note that the nuclear charges of individual atoms that remain constant against bending are not considered. The atomic electronic charge, Q, is obtained via a Mulliken charge analysis (see the Supplemental material for details). Fig. We also indicate that the amount of △Q is related to the local strain (ε). In a bent film, the inhomogeneous strain field is simply ε(x) = x/τ = (θ/T 0 )x, with 1/τ = θ/T 0 being the curvature of the neutral surface, Fig. ignoring the atoms on the surface. Here, χ denotes the slope and g = ∂ε/∂x = θ/T 0 is the strain gradient along the film thickness dimension. This revelation is contrary to the prediction of the linear response theory where the charge variation induced by strain gradient distributes homogeneously throughout the deformed solids Bending also has strong influence on the electronic energy spectrum, Fig. where, E ν denotes the energy level of state ν with wavenumber k of the film. The summation runs over all the occupied states. Fig. where, Ω = T 2 0 h denotes the volume of the repeating cell. Because for a given film, T 0 , h, and even χ are all constant, P is proportional to the strain gradient g. As such, the flexoelectric coefficient displays a square dependence on the film thickness, h. However, calculating P directly from the atomic charge, Eq. ( For a bent film, ρ is provided by the generalized Bloch theorem (see the Supplemental material for details). In general, the integral should be over the whole space. However, because the charge transfer is along the film thickness dimension x, the induced P is essentially along x as well. In this way, considering the rotational symmetry of the bent film, Eq. ( The ultrahigh values of μ illustrate the importance of the new mechanism, and the above results reveal several important aspects that distinguish the new mechanism from the linear response theory. (i) The variation of atomic charge △Q is dominated by the level of the local strain of the bent film and thus distributes inhomogeneously along the strain gradient direction. In this way, the induced charge (△Q) can not be treated as a welldefined linear response to strain gradient. Consequently, the obtained flexoelectric coefficients are size dependent, no longer a bulk property of material. (ii)According to the linear response theory, silicon is a system with weak flexoelectricity In summary, using the generalized Bloch theorem coupled with DFTB method and taking silicon films as an example, we reveal a new mechanism that can lead to strong flexoelectric effects in solids. With thorough electronic structure analysis of the bent silicon film, this new mechanism is attributed to a bending-induced electric field effect. This new mechanism cannot be interpreted by the linear response theory where a well-defined linear response of electrons to the strain gradient is needed. Indeed, for silicon, the obtained flexoelectric coefficients are much larger than what is predicted by the linear response theory, but comparable with the typical experimental values as reported in ceramics. This suggests that silicon may be an excellent flexoelectric system, contrary to the conventional wisdom. As such, the new mechanism presents dual importance for the current flexoelectric studies. First, it may be critical to deepening our understanding on the flexoelectricity in solids. Second, due to it, a class of materials with excellent flexoelectric performance are likely to be discovered in conventional semiconductors, e.g., Ge, GaAs, etc.