Single-phase multiferroic materials are usually considered useless because of the weak magnetoelectric effects, low operating temperature, and small electric polarization induced by magnetic orders. As a result, current studies on applications of the magnetoelectric effects are mainly focusing on multiferroic heterostructures and composites. Here we report a room-temperature giant effect in response to external magnetic fields in single-phase multiferroics. A low magnetic field of 1000 Oe applied on the spin-driven multiferroic hexaferrites BaSrCo2Fe11AlO22 and Ba0.9Sr1.1Co2Fe11AlO22 is able to cause a huge change in the linear magnetoelectric coefficient (αE = dE/dH) by several orders, leading to a giant magnetotranstance (GMT) effect at room temperature. The GMT effect is comparable to the well-known giant magnetoresistance (GMR) effect in magnetic multilayers, and thus opens up a door toward practical applications for single-phase multiferroics. In electric circuits, voltage (v), current (i), charge (q), and magnetic flux (φ) are four basic circuit variables. The relationships between them have defined three fundamental circuit elementsthe resistor with resistance R=dv/di, the capacitor with capacitance C=dq/dv, and the inductor with inductance L=dφ/di, as shown in Fig. It is well known that the resistance of a resistor may strongly depend on applied dc magnetic fields, yielding various magnetoresistance (MR) effects. For instance, the resistance of some magnetic multilayers and tunneling junctions are very sensitive to external magnetic fields, resulting in the GMR effect where C is the capacitance, V is the voltage, B is the magnetic induction, S and S′ are the areas of electrodes and magnetic flux, respectively; ε0 (μ0) and εr (μr) are the permittivity (permeability) of vacuum and the material, respectively; A=S/S′ is a geometric factor which is reduced to 1 for the longitudinal configuration; αE=dE/dH is the linear ME voltage coefficient. Apparently, a q-φ relationship is set up only if the ME coefficient αE is non-zero. The calculation of T requires a full assessment of εr, μr, and αE. To study the influence of external magnetic fields on T, one has to measure the magnetic field dependence of εr, μr, and αE separately and do the product calculation subsequently, which is quite complicated and inconvenient. Alternately, since the ME coefficient αE is the characteristic parameter of a transtor, we can focus on its behavior alone, and regard the magnetic field dependence of αE as a kind of MT effect. In fact, αE and its magnetic field dependence can be directly measured by a single experiment, which is very important for potential applications. As we show below, the αE of some single-phase multiferroics strongly depend on the DC bias magnetic field, resulting in a remarkable GMT effect. The magnetoelectric materials investigated in this work are Y-type hexaferrites which are a prototype of spin-driven multiferroics with spiral magnetic structures The magnetic properties were measured by using a Magnetic Properties Measurement System (Quantum Design). The samples were cut into thin plates with the typical size of 3×5×0.2 mm 3 for electrical property measurements. Silver paste was painted on two surfaces of the samples to make electrodes. The dielectric permitivity and ME current were measured in a Cryogen-free Superconducting Magnet System (Oxford Instruments, Teslatron PT) using an LCR meter (Aglient 4980A) and an electrometer (Keithley 6517B), respectively. A poling procedure was performed in order to measure the ME current. First, an electric field E=1 MV/m and a high magnetic field of 50 kOe (perpendicular to the electric field) were applied together on the samples. Then, the magnetic field was swept down to 5 kOe and E was removed. After the samples were short-circuited for 30 min, the ME currents were recorded while sweeping H down to -50 kOe. P was obtained by integrating the ME current with time. The ME coefficient αE was measured by a dynamic method as illustrated in Fig. The MT ratio, defined as MT=[αE(H)-αE(0)]/αE(0) × 100%, is plotted in Figs. In summary, the fourth circuit element "transtor" defined from T=dq/dφ is characterized by the ME coefficient αE=dE/dH which reflects the ability of a material to convert external magnetic field into electric field. It is found that the αE of some magnetoelectric materials is very sensitive to external DC magnetic field, giving rise to a GMT effect at room temperature. This phenomenon not only holds a promise for technological applications but also opens up a fresh field in condensed matter physics. The variation of αE of a material or device in response to external stimuli such as temperature, magnetic and electric fields, pressure, light radiation, etc., may give rise to many new phenomena, and would deserve more research efforts in the future.