A femtosecond laser is a powerful tool for micromachining of silicon. In this work, large-area laser ablation of crystalline silicon is comprehensively studied using a laser source of pulse width 300 fs at two wavelengths of 343 nm and 1030 nm. We develop a unique approach to gain insight into the laser milling process by means of detailed analysis of trenches. Laser scribed trenches and milled areas are characterized using optical profilometry to extract dimensional and roughness parameters with accuracy and repeatability. In a first step, multiple measures of the trench including the average depth, the volume of recast material, the average longitudinal profile roughness, the inner trench width and the volume removal rate are studied. This allows for delineation of ablation regimes and associated characteristics allowing to determine the impact of fluence and repetition rate on laser milling. In a second step, additional factors of debris formation and material redeposition that come into play during laser milling are further elucidated. These results are utilized for processing large-area (up to few mm 2 ) with milling depths up to 200 μm to enable the fabrication of cavities with low surface roughness at high removal rates of up to 6.9 μm 3 μs -1 . Finally, laser processing in combination with XeF2 etching is applied on SOI-CMOS technology in the fabrication of radio-frequency (RF) functions standing on suspended membranes. Performance is considerably improved on different functions like RF switch (23 dB improvement in 2 nd harmonic), inductors (near doubling of Q-factor) and LNA (noise figure improvement of 0.1 dB) demonstrating the applicability of milling to radio-frequency applications. Laser micromachining is a tool which is becoming increasingly relevant for micro/nanostructuring of materials. The use of ultrashort laser processing with pulse width in femtosecond range is advantageous because it can be applied on a wide range of materials like metals, semiconductors, dielectrics, alloys, and ceramics Femtosecond micromachining of silicon has been reported previously in different studies. It has been explored for various applications like microfluidics The technique of laser milling is used in this work to create cavities underneath RF functions implemented in SOI-CMOS technology. The laser beam is raster scanned over the area to be milled. The starting thickness of SOI wafer is usually high (~750 μm) in order to prevent wafer warping during fabrication. As a preliminary step, the wafer is thinned down using processes like grinding and chemical mechanical polishing (CMP). The final thickness of silicon is much smaller and depends on the application requirements. With this in mind, the laser milling process is studied for depths up to 200 μm. The process is adaptable for geometries of side length ranging from ~100 μm to several mm by appropriately defining the laser milling trajectory. The objective of this study is the development of a milling methodology that enables the control of surface quality and roughness while keeping the volume removal rate high. During micromachining of silicon, a commonly identified problem is the appearance of surface corrugations In this work, a systematic approach is employed whereby step-by-step insight is gained towards best parameters for laser milling. In the first step, trenches (grooves) are scribed in silicon by linear displacement of the laser beam. Scribing allows quick estimation of impact of different process parameters on milling without performing two-dimensional surface machining. Section 3 reports different trench measures that are going to be studied and quantified by using optical profilometer measurements. The understanding of these parameters lays the foundation for high quality and high removal rate milling. Section 4 subsequently proposes the study of the surface laser milling to further understand the aspects of changing surface morphology, effect of debris, surface roughness and sidewall quality. The application of laser milling is presented in section 5 where membranes of RF circuits are fabricated. RF characterization of such circuits is performed in order to demonstrate the superior performance of the circuits on SOI membranes. The experiments are performed under ambient conditions using a Diode Pumped Solid State (DPSS) ultrafast fiber laser from Amplitude Systèmes (Tangerine) with a fundamental output at 1030 nm and pulse width (FWHM) of 300 fs. Additional wavelength output of 343 nm is generated using a harmonic box (Amplitude-Systèmes). The 343 nm wavelength is obtained by frequency tripling realized by cascading non-linear crystals, beginning with frequency doubling of the fundamental input beam at 1030 nm and subsequent sum frequency generation of both waves.The maximum power output available at the workpiece is 1.2 W and 13 W for 343 nm and 1030 nm sources, respectively. Power attenuation is achieved by cascading a rotating birefringent half-wave plate with a polarizer which provides a continuous variation of the laser power while decoupling the power attenuation from the laser repetition rate. The pulse repetition rate for maximum efficiency of laser output is 200 kHz and can go up to 2 MHz with reduced efficiency. The laser beam displacement is effected by a galvanometric scanner (Canon) followed by a flat-field telecentric lens (Sill Optics) with a focal length of 100 mm. The maximum galvo speed for milling without path distortions is 20 mm s -1 and 100 mm s -1 for 1030 nm source and 343 nm source respectively Laser micromachining is performed on High-Resistivity (HR) SOI substrate with resistivity > 1 kΩ.cm. This value of resistivity is 2-3 orders of magnitude higher than normal silicon wafer. However, the interpretations in this study is applicable for any type of silicon as it has been shown that substrate resistivity does not affect the ablation threshold for multi-pulse ablation For SOI-CMOS application demonstration, gas phase XeF2 etching is used to selectively remove silicon with respect to silicon dioxide. An etch-protect layer (Ajinomoto GX-T31) is laminated on the back side of the SOI die. This ensures that silicon is removed completely only in the areas where cavities are milled leaving the BOX layer intact. The etching is performed in a Xactix XeF2 etcher. Scribing of trenches is the first stage of our analysis to study the different ablation regimes and to determine the fluence and repetition rate suitable for milling application. The parameters that are varied are the pulse repetition rate (f ), pulse energy (E ) and scan speed (v ). From the chosen parameters, the average power can be given by the expression: To obtain high removal rates, a maximum average power of >1 W up to ~2.5 W is used for removal of trenches. Although higher power is supported in the laser system for the 1030 nm line, it is not utilized because surface roughness and volume removal rate are degraded at high power as it shall be discussed in section 3.2. In order to obtain a given average power, the pulse repetition rate and the pulse energy can be independently chosen. When the pulse energy is varied, correspondingly the peak fluence of the laser pulse changes as given by the expression: Here, w is the beam waist radius, the radial distance measured from beam cross section at focal plane where the intensity reduces to 1/e times the value at the centre. All fluence values reported hereinafter corresponds to the peak fluence. Three cases of trench scribing have been studied as shown in Table In this study, we estimate that lateral distances are affected by a maximum fixed error of 1 μm corresponding to 2 spatial sampling pixels. The power meter accuracy is less than 3%. Based on these figures, the uncertainty in fluence is estimated as < 13%. This section presents the discussion regarding the different experimental observations made in the scribing of trenches utilizing the parameters detailed in section 2.2. Laser micromachining is essentially multi-pulse ablation wherein different ablation regimes can be identified. Each ablation regime is characterized by a certain dominant physical mechanism of ablation and the regimes are separated by a threshold fluence, which changes as a function of the process parameters that are employed. In this section, the average trench depth and recast layer volume are studied to distinguish the ablation regimes. The optical profilometer renders a 3D profile of the trench. A 1D height profile is taken approximately along the central axis of the trench. Average trench depth is determined by summing the different height values comprising the axial trench profile and dividing by the number of points as given by the equation: For the 3 cases, the plots of average trench depth as a function of fluence is shown in Fig. where d , is the average trench depth, φ , the threshold fluence and l , the characteristic ablation depth with the subscript/superscript index 'g' and 's' standing for gentle and strong ablation regimes. The transition fluence between these two regimes is determined by the scan speed when all other laser parameters are fixed. Higher scan speeds allow utilization of higher fluence (consequently a higher average power) in the gentle ablation regime. Thus, higher removal rates can be obtained by using higher scan speeds while still operating in the gentle ablation regime. The ablation regime is important as it determines several aspects like recast layer volume, roughness, trench width narrowing and a detailed discussion of this is presented in sections 3.3 -3.5. From the plots of average depth as a function of fluence, curve fitting is performed to associate data points with the two regimes. The extracted values of characteristic depth and threshold fluence for the 3 cases at different speeds are tabulated in Table In the detailed study of grooves (trenches) in silicon by Crawford et al., it is argued that scribing of trenches may not be equivalent to stationary multi-pulse ablation In this study, the same question had to be addressed: is a linear or two-regime model better to explain ablation data? In order to answer this question, several analyses of the recast layer are performed. It will become clear in next subsection that two ablation regimes are indeed present for all 3 cases. Recast layer is defined as the aggregate of debris/redeposited material in the vicinity of the ablated trench. In the profilometer scan, the points representing the recast layer form a 2D surface extending above the substrate. The recast layer volume is calculated as the volume enclosed by this surface and the reference level of the substrate (zero level). The recast layer volume obtained for the three cases is shown in Fig. A threshold fluence is also extracted using the recast layer volume data. An assumption is made that the recast layer volume (V ) is directly proportional to the ablated volume of the silicon. The threshold fluence for gentle ablation regime has not been reported because the measured volume is close to the lower limit of the profilometer measurement of volume and hence it is difficult to obtain a reliable curve fit. The ablated volume of silicon follows a squared logarithm dependence with respect to the fluence Least squares curve fit has been performed and the threshold fluence in strong ablation regime is depicted as φ in Table In the previous section, ablation regimes have been studied. This section outlines how the ablation regime affects the micromachining in terms of three important parameters: average roughness, trench width and volume removal rate. One of the key aims in this study is to determine the fluence and repetition rate which minimize corrugations. Trench profiles have been presented and corrugations have been studied for different experimental conditions in our previous work in The average roughness measured from the axial trench profile using equation 6 is plotted in Fig. The formation of a periodic structure of holes with a spatial separation well above the laser firing repetition pitch has been reported in the literature. This effect has been observed on silicon where the holes thus formed are called craters or cones The periodic nature of the profile can be easily noticed in the SEM scans depicted for a limited set of processing parameters in Appendix A.4. It is found that the period of the profile is proportional to the scan speed. For the 343 nm source, a Fourier analysis of profiles revealed periods of 6.9, 9.6, and 13.8 μm for speeds of 50, 70 and 100 mm s -1 , respectively. The periodicity is found not to depend on the fluence. However, the amplitude of the dominant period increases with fluence. While average roughness is one measure of roughness that has been presented, Root Mean Squared (RMS) roughness may also be used. Same trends can be observed by plotting the RMS roughness as a function of fluence and is not separately shown here. For the measurement of trench width, the 1D cross-sectional profiles are taken perpendicular to the axis of the trench. The width of the recast layer can vary considerably along the length of the trench. Hence, in order to obtain an average width, 10 cross-sectional profiles are taken at different points along the length of the axis. The average widths calculated from these profiles are plotted in Fig. Only the inner trench widths are shown. When the outer trench widths were plotted, a large scatter is observed and no clear trend can be seen. Hence, these data are not presented here. The 343 nm source features a smaller beam waist of as compared to 1030 nm. The width of cut scales directly with the beam waist as given by the equation: Hence a bigger width of cut can be expected for 1030 nm source. However, it is also determined additionally by the threshold fluence which is smaller for 343 nm source. On comparing the two 200 kHz repetition rate cases, an overall observation indicates higher width of cut is indeed seen for 1030 nm source. However, the scatter of data is not negligible for these data points, which makes it difficult to compare the two cases. Nevertheless, it is seen for both cases that in the gentle ablation regime, the width of trench increases. An additional important observation is made for the two cases. With the onset of strong ablation regime, the trench width starts to decrease. This is most likely due to accumulation of recast material on the sidewalls of the trench as reported in The volume removal rates are compared as a function of average power and the plots for the 3 cases are shown in Fig. Section 3 provided an overview of trench scribing with different parameters and the optimal values have been highlighted. In this section, further analysis is presented for milling over a surface area using the chosen parameters and how process parameters are further refined in order to avoid high surface roughness. Laser milling is performed by raster scanning the laser beam with line to line spacing (pitch) of 10 μm. Square cavities are milled with side length ranging from 100 μm to 1 mm. The parameters of interest are surface morphology, roughness and quality of sidewall. The repetition rate of 30 kHz is chosen to avoid microhole formation. The scan speed is set to 20 mm s -1 and the fluence is varied. The first study is made by a single scan over the milling area. A trench is also scribed using the same parameters to make a comparison between 1D machining and 2D milling. The SEM scans of the surface of the cavities for one scan of laser beam are shown in Fig. The appearance of such self-organized microstructures has been reported for different metals like Cu, Al, Ti etc. The average depth is plotted in Fig. where d is the average depth of cavity, N the number of laser scans and d the average depth obtained from the 1D trench profile using same milling parameters as described in section 3.2. The different parameters computed for 1mm square cavity are summarized in Table It has been shown in this section that choice of fluence is important in milling. Low fluence results in particle debris and surfaces which have high roughness. High fluence reduces particle debris to a great extent. However, with increasing fluence roughness also increases. Hence, it is beneficial to use the lowest possible fluence which does not give rise to particle debris. Also, when all other parameters are kept constant, the roughness increases with number of laser scans due to the build-up of ablation plume and redeposited material. Having discussed the different aspects of milling process, its application to SOI-CMOS technology is elaborated in the next section. The previous sections have dealt with the fabrication of cavities. For application in SOI-CMOS technology, an etch-protect layer is first laminated onto the handler side of the SOI die. Milling is then performed in the area where membranes need to be fabricated. In order to speed up the process, a two-step milling strategy has been used in the applications. In the first step, a cavity with larger area is created at a higher removal rate (fast step). In the second step, the smaller cavity of required dimensions of membrane is created at a slower removal rate (slow step). The bigger cavity allows more space for the diffusion of ablation plume generated during milling of smaller cavity which helps lower surface roughness. The die is then subject to XeF2 etching to complete the removal of remaining few tens of microns of silicon remaining under smaller cavities and suspended membranes are obtained. The membranes of 3 different circuit components are studied: RF switch, RF isolation structures and Low-noise amplifier (LNA). The RF switch is a module in transceiver systems which contain large transistors for switching between transmission and reception of RF signals. RF isolation structures are specially designed structures to quantify RF coupling through the substrate. LNA is present in RF receivers to have a good overall noise performance of the receiver chain. A detailed treatment of these circuits can be found in Two different application demonstrations employing two-steps ablation are shown in Fig. Large-area femtosecond laser milling of silicon has been reported which employs trench analysis. Five measures have been analysed for the trenches: i) average depth ii) recast layer volume (iii) average roughness (iv) trench width and (v) volume removal rate. Optical profilometry has been systematically used to obtain accurate and reliable measurements of all the parameters under study. Using these analyses, fluence and repetition rate conditions have been found suitable for laser milling. Further study on laser milling of cavities have shown additional factors to be taken into consideration. It has been found that presence of debris and material redeposition affects the quality of milling and suitable process parameters have been outlined. Application of large area milling has been demonstrated for RF circuits in SOI-CMOS technology. Suspended membranes of different circuits like RF switch, isolation structures, inductors and LNA have been successfully fabricated. The obtained performance is better than state-of-the-art SOI wafers for RF technology demonstrating the capability of laser processing for microelectronics applications. The profile taken for a 200 kHz repetition rate and 1030 nm source at a scan speed of 50 mm s -1 and fluence of 12.1 J cm -2 is shown in Fig. quantities for milled cavities (single scan) on 1030 nm source at repetition rate of 30 kHz and scan speed of 20 mm s