a) Corresponding author krewer@mpip-mainz.mpg.de Terahertz time-domain conductivity measurements in 2 to 100 nm thick iron films resolve the femtosecond time delay between applied electric fields and resulting currents. This current response time decreases from 29 fs for thickest films to 7 fs for the thinnest films. The macroscopic response time is not strictly proportional to the conductivity. This excludes the existence of a single relaxation time universal for all conduction electrons. We must assume a distribution of microscopic momentum relaxation times. The macroscopic response time depends on average and variation of this distribution; the observed deviation between response time and conductivity scaling corresponds to the scaling of the variation. The variation of microscopic relaxation times depends on film thickness because electrons with different relaxation times are affected differently by the confinement since they have different mean free paths. Conductivity in metals is typically described using a highly simplified model: a gas of identical electrons characterized by a single, universal relaxation time If a universal relaxation time τ u existed, the current response time τ C would be constant and equal to the universal relaxation time τ u of the Drude model. Previous measurements of the current response time in metals were limited to ca. 10 fs accuracy, due to uncertainties in the thickness of the reference substrate The amplitude spectra σ(f) are flat due to the very low relaxation times τ. The flat response time spectra τ C (f) appear to be consistent with the hypothesis of a universal relaxation time τ u , as the hypothesis predicts the response time to be constant and equal to τ u , as a universal relaxation time results in a Drude type dispersion σ ̃= σ DC /(1 -i2πfτ u ). ( The universal relaxation time assumption also predicts that the DC conductivity σ DC is proportional to τ u . We find that the conductivity amplitudes σ are lower for the thinner films, with the difference between 10 to 2.2 nm being much larger than that between 100 and 10 nm. The current response time τ C behaves quite differently. It is also lower for thinner films, but the relative difference in response times between 100 and 10 nm is almost two times that of the conductivity amplitudes, contrary to the assumption of direct proportionality. The 2.2 nm thin film shows higher current response times than direct proportionality would predict from the conductivity amplitudes. To compare the scaling of conductivity amplitude and response time, we extract the spectral average τ̅ C of the current response times for each film. We then compute the DC-limit of the conductivity of a Drude type dispersion from each frequency step by multiplying the conductivity amplitudes σ at each frequency f with √(1 + (2πf τ̅ C ) 2 ). The resulting spectra for the DC parameter are then also averaged. The residual artefacts are the main source of error on both the response time τ̅ C and DCconductivity σ ̅ DC parameters extracted from each spectrum. The residuals are taken into account by multiplying the variance of the weighted averages by the reduced sum of weighted residuals. Further, we use the instances where we have measurements of the same sample in different rounds to estimate the precision. These measurements deviate between 0.1 and 2.7 fs from another, i.e. slightly more than what we estimate from the residuals. We use the larger estimate where we have measurements from different rounds, and we add the average unexplained variance of (0.8 fs) The thickness scaling of the extracted response time and DCconductivity is shown in fig. FIG. None of the existing models for the thickness scaling of conductivity predict the response time Here we sum over all bands b and both spins projections s and integrate over all iso-energy surfaces S(E) in reciprocal space. The conductivity contribution for each point S ⃗ on such an iso-energy surface is given by the group velocity v g and the relaxation time τ, which both may vary between each point S ⃗ , energy E, band b, and spin s. σ ̃(f Basically all parameters S ⃗ , E, b, and s have been expressed as functions of τ, allowing to express the integrand as a single function w(τ). The prefactor W -1 is chosen such that w(τ) is normalised. This allows interpreting w(τ) as a probability distribution density. The distribution of microscopic relaxation times w(τ) gives the probability that a microscopic excitation of unit conductivity per relaxation time will relax in a time τ. W only depends on the electronic structure of the material and not on the relaxation times τ. In the case of a universal relaxation time τ u , the distribution w(τ) reduces to a delta distribution δ(τ -τ u ). Inserting this in eq. ( Here 〈 〉 denotes the average over the distribution of relaxation times w(τ). Equation ( The first moment, the mean relaxation time 〈τ〉, gives us the average magnitude. The second centralised moment is the variance V. The standard deviation √V measures the absolute width of the distribution. To decide how much impact the shape of the distribution has, we need to compare the standard deviation to the mean. This ratio √V/〈τ〉 is the coefficient of variation C. We hence can interpret the deviations of Q = τ̅ C /σ ̅ DC = W(1 + C 2 ) from a constant value in fig. Next, we describe two effects by which surface scattering may alter the variation C of microscopic relaxation times and thereby qualitatively explain the thickness scaling of Q. Firstly, the anticorrelation of bulk and surface scattering may decrease C. Surface scattering predominantly affects electrons with a long expected free path, since those electrons are most likely to reach the surface instead of scattering in bulk. This anticorrelation starts cutting off the long relaxation time "tail" of the distribution of microscopic relaxation times, which decreases the variation. The thinner the film, the larger the role of surface scattering and the larger the reduction of the variation from bulk scattering by the anticorrelated surface scattering. We can interpret the b 1 -term in the empirical polynomial as representing this narrowing of the relaxation time distribution by anticorrelated scattering mechanisms. Secondly, the surface scattering will add positional (z) and directional (v z ) variation between microscopic relaxation times τ(S ⃗ , E, b, s, z, v z ). An electron may scatter very soon from the surface when it is close to the surface and travels towards the surface. An electron that is far away from the surface or travelling parallel to the surface will hardly scatter from it. So the relaxation times due to surface scattering will vary strongly, and the directional variation will increase for increasingly thinner films. This variation will add to the intrinsic variation, increasing the total variation C. We can motivate the b 2 term by this effect. We should mention that contrary to the decrease of Q from 100 to 8 nm, the strong rise of Q for the thinnest films is much less significant due to large uncertainties. Further, competing explanations for this increase exist. Firstly, at thicknesses of a few nm, the roughness of almost 1 nm will cause systematic errors, as described by Namba Cazzaniga et al. 2 ). This translates to variation C ∞ in bulk of 1.7; that means the stardard deviation of the relaxation time distribution is 1.7 times larger than the mean. This variation would certainly be large enough for narrowing of the relaxation time distribution by anticorrelated surface scattering to occur. We illustrate the impact of the variation of microscopic relaxation times on the current response time by using Cazzaniga's value for W to estimate the mean relaxation time 〈τ〉 from the conductivity of the 100 nm film. We estimate 8 fs, while the observed current response time τ̅ C is 29 fs. In summary, we have resolved the phase of the THz conductivity of iron films with enough precision to demonstrate decreasing current response times τ̅ C with decreasing thickness. We further could resolve significant deviations between the scaling of the DCconductivity and the response time. This can happen when no universal relaxation time τ u exists. At this point, we need to distinguish between the observable macroscopic response time τ C , the various microscopic relaxation times τ, and the mean relaxation time 〈τ〉 parameterizing DC-conduction. The conductivity spectrum can be fully described by the distribution w(τ) of microscopic relaxation times. For the low-frequency limit, the observable DCconductivity depends on the mean 〈τ〉, the response time on mean 〈τ〉 and variation C of the distribution of relaxation times. We explain the thickness scaling of the quotient Q = τ C /σ DC by surface scattering changing the shape of the distribution of relaxation times. The relaxation time distribution picture allows predicting the response time τ C for other metallic systems: Mott 7 explained the temperature-independent conduction in Constantan and Manganin alloys by a process that changes the distribution, but not the average relaxation time. Therefore, the response time τ C should increase with temperature in these alloys. estimate the impact of the artefacts in two ways: First by taking into account the reduced sum of residuals to estimate the statistical error on the average. Second we use the differences between the spectral averages of the same samples measured in different series. The statistical error on the measurements lead to errors between 0.2 and 1.2 fs. The differences between measurements of the same sample are between 0 and 2.6 fs, their standard deviation is ca. 1.7 fs. This is somewhat larger than what to expect from the statistical error, even when factoring in the additional error from the substrate thickness correction. Therefore, for the samples with more than one measurement, the measurements are averaged and the differences taken into account to determine the error. The average additional error deduced from comparing measurements of the same sample is 0.8 fs, and this average value is added into the error estimate for the samples with only one measurement. Additionally systematic errors from inaccuracy of the substrate index are factored in, for thick films also any uncertainties on the film thickness. The biggest error contributions are the errors inferred from the residuals and the differences between different rounds of measurements. Only in case of the 3 nm sample, the error from the substrate thickness difference surpasses them. ering process can be assigned a scattering rate 