The success of semiconductor electronics is built on the creation of compact, low-power switching elements that offer routing, logic, and memory functions. The availability of nanoscale optical switches could have a similarly transformative impact on the development of dynamic and programmable metasurfaces, optical neural networks, and quantum information processing. Phase change materials are uniquely suited to enable their creation as they offer high-speed electrical switching between amorphous and crystalline states with notably different optical properties. Their high refractive index has also been harnessed to fashion them into compact optical antennas. Here, we take the next important step by realizing electrically-switchable phase change antennas and metasurfaces that offer strong, reversible, non-volatile, multi-phase switching and spectral tuning of light scattering in the visible and near-infrared spectral ranges. Their successful implementation relies on a careful joint thermal and optical optimization of the antenna elements that comprise an Ag strip that simultaneously serves as a plasmonic resonator and a miniature heating stage. The development of metasurfaces for passive manipulation of optical wavefronts has witnessed tremendous progress over the last decade. In this work we will use germanium antimony telluride (GST), which is one of the most well-established phase change materials based on its use in optical storage media (e.g. compact disk) and non-volatile electronic memories The reversible electrical switching of photonic structures has proven to be more challenging. Electricallycontrolled thermal cycling is well established to switch ultra-compact, 10-nm-scale GST memory cells. We first demonstrate the possibility to electrically tune the scattering properties of phase change antennas. Figure In this work we will mainly focus on the stronger, fundamental resonance. The scattering cross section reduces upon switching from a-GST to c-GST due to the higher materials loss in the crystalline phase at the longer wavelength. The changes in the scattering cross section can be directly observed in dark-field microscopy under white-light illumination. Figure A structural analysis of the antennas before and after switching further confirms our ability to reversibly switch the GST material between crystalline and amorphous phases. Using a focused ion beam (FIB) lift-out technique, we prepared antennas for electron microscopy analysis. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) cross-sectional imaging (see Fig. The Ag strip also performs important electrical and thermal functions. By running current through the beam, it can serve as a miniature hot-plate capable of heating the GST beam that sits on top. Two kinds of current pulses with different temporal profiles are sent through the Ag strips. Set pulses of a 1 μs duration and with a 20 μs trailing time are used to heat the GST above the crystallization temperature (Tx) and then maintain the high temperature long enough to facilitate complete crystallization. From the literature it is established that for our thermal cycle typical crystallization times are around 80 ns. We further analyze the GST switching behavior by monitoring the resistance of the GST nanobeam after sending every reset and set pulse (see Fig. Scattering spectra from the antenna are taken after each current pulse (Fig. An antenna with different volume fractions of amorphous material are also simulated, assuming the top part of the antenna is in the crystalline phase. We find that the spectra continuously morph from the crystalline spectrum to the amorphous spectrum as the volume fraction is increased. The measured spectra after the reset pulses in Fig. We also use a CCD camera to image the antenna in real time as we are sending switching pulses (See Fig. The Ag strip is chosen to be thick enough to prevent any light transmission. Again a thin (6 nm) layer of Al3O2 is used as a spacer and a 50-nm-thick Al3O2 capping layer was deposited to protect the device. In Fig. To verify the simulations, we measure reflection spectra from the metasurface at normal incidence. When the beams are in the crystalline phase the lowest reflectance of 4.3% is achieved at the wavelength of 700 nm, consistent with the simulations. After a reset pulse, the reflected light intensity at this wavelength increases to 14.5%, a more than 3-fold change. The non-zero reflectance for c-GST is attributed to the small variations in the nanobeam dimensions that disturb the delicate, destructive interference condition. The highest modulation in the reflectance of a factor 4.5 is achieved at a wavelength of 755 nm. We also collect the reflected light with a CCD camera after passing through a band-pass filter centered at 690 nm, with a full width half maximum (FWHM) of 10 nm. In Fig. The ratio of the reflectance for the a-GST and c-GST states is shown by the dotted black curve. d. Measured spectra of the reflectance of the metasurface taken after a reset and set pulse. The on/off ratio of the reflectance (reset/set) is also shown as the black curve, with a maximum ratio of 4.5 at the wavelength of 755 nm. The FWHM of the band-pass filter used to obtain Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated a method for realizing electrical, non-volatile, and reversible switching of phase change antennas and metasurfaces devices based on a chalcogenide phase change material. A design was created in which Ag nanostrips can conveniently function as a nano-heater and enable plasmonic antenna functions. We show an optical antenna that offers strong scattering in the visible and near-infrared spectral ranges and significant (30%) electrical modulation of the scattered light intensity. Utilizing destructive interference between two pathways, a metasurface is also demonstrated, with an electrical modulation of the reflectance by more than 4-fold. This work opens the opportunity to create a wide range of dynamic random access metasurfaces capable of programmable and active wavefront manipulation. The optical antennas and metasurface devices are fabricated following many of the same, initial fabrication steps. First, a 120-nm-thick layer of SiO2 is grown by thermally oxidizing a Si substrate. Alignment markers and contact pads are subsequently defined on the substrates by photolithography. We then use electron-beam evaporation to first deposit a 5-nm-thick Ti adhesion layer, followed by a 45-nm-thick Au later and a lift-off in acetone. The next steps to fabricate the optical antennas involve an electron-beam (e-beam) lithography to define the Ag strips, followed by e-beam evaporation of a 4-nm-thick Ti adhesion layer and a 36-nm-thick Ag layer and ultimately a lift-off. We then deposit an Al2O3 layer with a thickness of 6 nm by atomic layer deposition (ALD). Another set of contact pad are defined by photolithography, designed to connect the GST beams. A 5-nm-thick Ti adhesion layer and a 45-nm-thick Au layer are then deposited by e-beam evaporation. For the next layer, we use e-beam lithography to define the pattern, then use DC magnetron sputtering to deposit the GST from a Ge3Sb2Te6 (GST-326) target, to achieve 24-nm-thick GST nanobeams. As the last step, a protective Al2O3 capping layer with a thickness around 20 nm is deposited by ALD (thinner on top of GST at 13 nm). The next steps to fabricate active metasurfaces involve e-beam lithography to define the Ag strips and a deposition of a 6-nm-thick Ti adhesion layer and 54-nm-thick Ag layer. We then deposit a 6-nm-thick Al2O3 layer by ALD. E-beam lithography is used to define the GST patterns, followed by DC magnetron sputtering of GST-326, producing 34-nm-thick GST nanobeam-arrays. An Al2O3 capping layer with a thickness around 50 nm is deposited by ALD. Optical simulations are carried out with FDTD method (FDTD Simulations, Lumerical). Two-dimensional (2D) simulations of the single optical antennas are performed with perfectly matched layer (PML) boundary condition. While a single-wavelength TFSF source is used to study the impact of an inclined illumination at 46°, we sweep the wavelength with a fixed angle of incidence to obtain the spectrum across a broad wavelength range. Monitors are placed around the device, outside of the TFSF source region to calculate the far-field profile of electromagnetic field at each wavelength. We then integrate the field intensity within a solid angle, corresponding to a numerical aperture of 0.6. To further simulate the experimental condition, we measure the collection efficiency of the objective used in experiments (Nikon TU Plan 50×/0.60) at each wavelength. This allows us to correct for the instrument response. 2D simulation of the metasurface are performed using periodic boundary conditions. We also performed 2D thermal simulations a finite-element method (COMSOL Multiphysics). They are implemented for a 10 μm×10 μm region, with the boundary set at room temperature. The thermal model is discussed in more details in Supplementary Note 2. A semiconductor device parameter analyzer is used for electrical characterization, including a pulse generator which sends electrical pulses through Ag strips to induce phase transition and measurement units to monitor the resistance of both Ag and GST strips. Please refer to Supplementary Note 3. We measure the dark-field scattering spectra of the antennas and the bright-field reflection of the metasurfaces with a Nikon C2 confocal microscope. A halogen lamp is used as the illumination source. After being collected by a 50× objective (Nikon TU Plan 50×/0.60), the scattered light from devices is polarized in the TM direction with respect to the devices and is subsequently sent into either of two paths. In the first path, a Nikon DS-Fi1 camera is used to capture images and videos. Alternatively in a second path, a confocal scanner spatially selects the scattered light from the devices and sends it to a Princeton Instruments SpectraPro 2300i spectrometer (150 lines/mm, blazed for λ = 500 nm) and a Pixis Si CCD camera (-70 °C detector temperature) to analyze the spectrum. The antennas are measured under dark-field illumination at a 46° incident angle. The scattered light is collected through a 30-μm-diameter pinhole in the confocal scanner, before analysis by the spectrometer. The measured spectra are normalized to the scattered spectrum of a Lambertian reflector (Labsphere Spectralon 99%) measured under the same condition. The metasurface devices are measured under normal-incidence illumination, with an aperture stop closed to ensure a minimal beam divergence. The measured spectra are normalized to the reflection spectrum of an Ag mirror (Thorlabs PF10-03-P01). While under the microscope for in situ optical measurement, the devices are connected to a semiconductor analyzer by probe tips to perform electrical switching. Transmission electron microscopy was used to analyze the structural phase and physical dimensions of the devices. Details can be found in Supplementary Note 4. Please see the discussion in Supplementary Note 5.