We demonstrate in this work the transferability of self-energy("SE") correction("SEC") of Kohn-Sham("KS") single particle states from smaller to larger systems, when mapped through localized orbitals constructed from the KS states. The approach results in a SE corrected TB framework, within which, the mapping of SEC of TB parameters is found to be transferable from smaller to larger systems of similar morphology, leading to a computationally inexpensive approach for estimation of SEC in large systems with reasonably high accuracy. The scheme has been demonstrated in insulating, semiconducting and magnetic nanoribbons of graphene and hexagonal boron nitride, where SEC tends to strengthen the individual π bonds, leading to transfer of charge from edge to bulk. Additionally in magnetic bipartite systems SEC tends to enhance inter-sublattice spin separation. The proposed scheme thus promises to enable estimation of SEC of band-gaps of large systems without needing to explicitly calculate SEC of KS single particle levels which can be computationally prohibitively expensive. Designing new materials at nanoscale, typically consisting of few tens of atoms, necessitates increase in accuracy of estimation of electronic structure preferably without a commensurate increase in computational cost. Particularly with increasing spatio-temporal resolution of synthesis Mean-field approximation of the Kohn-Sham ("KS") density-functional theory ("DFT") A more general parameter free approach beyond the framework of DFT, is the many-body perturbation theory("MBPT") In this work our approach has been to first incorporate the SEC of KS single particle levels as corrections to TB parameters in a suitable basis and subsequently see if such corrections derived from a smaller reference systems can be reasonably applied to TB parameters derived for larger systems for realistic representation of SEC in such systems without needing to explicitly compute SEC for KS states which can be computationally prohibitively expensive with growing system size. Estimation of QP band-gap within a TB framework has been attempted in recent years The TB basis used in this work are orthonormal Wannier where φ R,j ( r) is the j-th member of the non-orthogonal basis localized in the unit-cell denoted by the lattice vector R which spans over N unit-cells that define the periodicity of the Bloch states. Next we calculate the projection of the non-orthogonal quasi-Bloch states on the orthonormal Bloch states constructed from the cell-periodic KS-single particle states at all allowed k, as: Subsequently the overlaps between the representation of the non-orthogonal quasi-Bloch states within the manifold of of the KS single-particle states, are calculated as: Finally, we use the Löwdin symmetric orthogonalization using which, a set of localized orthonormal Wannier functions are constructed as: Löwdin symmetric orthogonalization thus provides a choice of gauge for linear combination of KS states such that the resultant Wannier functions Φ R ′ ,j ( r) would have minimal deviation from the non-orthogonal orbtials φ R,j ( r) . Hence we here onwards refer these Wannier functions as atomic Wannier orbtials ("AWO"). TB parameters are computed in the AWO basis as: As obvious, the AWOs used here can in principle be substituted by any localized atomic orbitals constructed as linear combination of KS single particle states. To estimate self-energy("SE") correction("SEC") of the KS single particle levels we followed the GW approximation where δ = 0 + and W is the Coulomb interaction screened by a non-local dynamic dielectric screening function computed approximately within the random phase approximation as extension of its static counterpart to finite frequencies following a generalized plasmon pole model With the underlying assumption that correction to the KS single particle states are negligible, the quasiparticle energies are approximated as: where V KS xc is the mean-field exchange-correlation potential derived from the exchange-correlation functionals used in DFT. Estimation of quasi-particle energies within GW approximation is computationally expensive primarily due to the slow convergence of ǫ -1 and G, and therefore of Σ, with respect to unoccupied single particle KS states. Substituting E KS k,n in Eqn.( . SEC of the TB parameters is thus estimated as: There are two main steps in the proposed approach: (1) computation of the ground state electronic structure followed by construction of AWOs as per Eqn.(5) using the KS single particle states transformed as shown in Eqn.(4) followed further by calculation of TB parameters as per Eqn.( Ground state electronic structures are calculated using a plane-wave based implementation of DFT In the following we primarily demonstrate our approach by accounting for SEC of KS band-gap in wider ribbons through correction to their TB band-gap calculated using SEC of TB parameters (∆t) obtained in a narrower ribbon. We chose AGNRs, ZGNRs and hBN-NRs in order to span a wide range of band-gaps and magnetism with only 2p z electrons. We consider H-passivated AGNRs and ZGNRs of varying width wherein AGNRs are specified by a number of the dimer lines and ZGNRs by the number of zigzag chains. AGNRs are categorized in three different families as per the number(n) of dimer lines: n = 3p + 0, n = 3p + 1 and n = 3p + 2, p being an integer. In this work we consider only the 2p z orbitals since they are well known to adequately describe the edge of the valence and conduction bands in GNRs. To maximize the 2p z character of the corresponding AWOs, sufficient participation of the anti-bonding orbitals are required in order to match the weightage of bonding orbitals, which in GNRs are represented increasingly by bands closer to the conduction and valence band edges respectively. Fig. Fig. TB Band-gap with TB parameters in AWO basis derived from KS eigen-states of a given system, would match the KS band-gap of the same system by construction. Similarly, with SEC of TB parameters, referred here onwards as ∆t, the correction to TB bandgap (SEC(TB)), would match the SEC of KS band-gap (SEC(KS)) of a given system, if ∆t is obtained from SEC of KS single particle levels of the same system, as evident in Fig. (1) matching atoms between the reference and the target systems in terms of their neighbourhood not limited to nearest neighbours, and (2) by maximally matching distance between pair of atoms in the reference system to that the target system. In mapping atoms for the criteria (1) the similarity of average nearest-neighbour bond-lengths around atoms can be used as a reasonable criteria. Next we demonstrate the scheme in hBNNR, chosen as an example of wide band gap insulator where the SEC(KS) is substantial. The difference of electronegativities of B and N are reflected in the difference in on-site terms in Fig. We next demonstrate the scheme in ZGNRs as an example of narrow band-gap magnetic materials where Coulomb correlation plays a central role in determining the electronic structure. The difference in on-site energies [Fig. Pertinently, transfer of charge from edge to bulk as seen in Fig. where {t ij } are computed from KS eigen-states of the wider ZGNRs(Z20,Z24), and {∆t ij } from Z16. ∆U is tuned to match SEC(TB) to SEC(KS) in Z20 and Z24. As evident in Fig. In conclusion, we have presented a computationally inexpensive scheme for estimation of self-energy correction(SEC) of band-gap within a tight-binding(TB) framework in the basis of atomic Wannier orbitals (AWO) constructed from KS energy eigen-states. Within the scheme, SEC of TB parameters are first computed for a smaller reference system from SEC of KS single particle levels estimated using the GW approximation of MBPT, and then applied to TB parameters derived for a larger system of similar morphology, in order to estimate SEC of KS band-gap of the larger system, without needing to explicitly compute it. The efficacy of the approach, demonstrated in semiconducting and insulating as well as magnetic and non-magnetic nano-ribbons of graphene and hexagonal boron-nitride, is found to account for about 90% or more of the SE corrected band-gap for 50% to 100% increase in system size as assessed in this work, with nominal increase in computational cost. Notably, the degree of agreement[Fig. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.