We study a lattice-gas model of penetrable particles on a square-lattice substrate with same-site and nearest-neighbor interactions. Penetrability implies that the number of particles occupying a single lattice site is unlimited and the model itself is intended as a simple representation of penetrable particles encountered in realistic soft-matter systems. Our specific focus is on a binary mixture, where particles of the same species repel and those of the opposite species attract each other. As a consequence of penetrability and the unlimited occupation of each site, the system exhibits thermodynamic collapse, which in simulations is manifested by an emergence of extremely dense clusters scattered throughout the system with energy of a cluster E ∝ -n 2 where n is the number of particles in a cluster. After transforming a particle system into a spin system, in the large density limit the Hamiltonian recovers a simple harmonic form, resulting in the discrete Gaussian model used in the past to model the roughening transition of interfaces. For finite densities, due to the presence of a non-harmonic term, the system is approximated using a variational Gaussian model. In a recent article The renewed interest in penetrable particles has been triggered by a growing number of synthesized and naturally occurring nanoparticle whose pair interactions lack the usual hard-core repulsion, resulting in ultrasoft particles that interpenetrate and, in principle, can occupy the same space In a one-component system, thermodynamic collapse becomes possible for systems with pair interactions comprised of a short-range attractive tail and a repulsive soft-core. More recent examples where such systems are studies in connection to thermodynamic collapse include Ref. Thermodynamic collapse in a two-component system is not self-evident, since attractive interactions occur between particles of opposite species, and this implies that a collapsed configuration, or a group of configurations, involves a very specific arrangement of particles whose specific structures has been investigated in Ref. Because one-dimensional models, as a general rule, preclude the possibility of a phase transition Our results are organized as follows. In Sec. II we introduce the model and write down the corresponding grand partition function. In this section we introduce two distinct ways of counting particles, depending on whether particles are considered as distinguishable or indistinguishable. Different ways of counting particles does not arise for a single occupation lattice-gas models and is a consequence of multiple occupation. In Sec. III we transform the original particle system into spin ensemble. In the transformed ensemble spins can take on any integer value as a consequence of particle penetrability. In Sec. IV we analyze thermodynamic collapse in the infinite density limit. This limit is the consequence of penetrability and implies that the average occupation of a site is n → ∞. In this limit the Hamiltonian reduces to a harmonic function and the corresponding partition function transforms into a discrete Gaussian model (DG). A similar model was used to study roughening transition of interfaces. In Sec. V we analyze the system at finite density. Due to a non-harmonic term, the resulting partition function is no longer Gaussian and we analyze the system using a Gaussian variational method. Both approximate and exact models indicate the presence of a metastable region, so that even though the global minimum corresponds to a collapsed state, the system remains in metastable equilibrium. The model consists of two types of particles on a twodimensional square-lattice substrate. As hard-core interactions are not included, there is no restriction on the number of particles that can occupy a single site. If the occupation numbers for a given site are n + i and n - i , where the superscripts "+" and "-" designates different species, then the Hamiltonian of the system is where the first line is for the interaction between particles on the same site, and the second line is for the interaction between particles on neighboring sites (the subscript nn indicates the nearest-neighbor interaction). The dimensionless coupling parameter α for interactions between neighbors is positive in our model. This implies that particles of opposite species attract and those of the same species repel each other. The fact that each lattice site can be occupied by multiple particles at one time results in two types of statistics. If particles are distinguishable as in classical fluids, then the grand canonical partition function is where is the effective chemical potential, and N = L 2 is the number of lattice sites, where L is the size of the system. The factor 1/n i !, also referred to as the Gibbs correction, is a feature of distinguishable particles, and indicates that statistics at a single site follows a poisson rather than an exponential distribution. A more detailed analysis of distinguishability versus indistinguishability is provided in Ref. On the other hand, if particles are regarded as indistinguishable, a situation which in classical systems arises for example in growth models, where particles do not change their location on the lattice substrate but rather are added or removed from it at each Monte Carlo step, in which case the particles of a given site have no labels, then the grand partition function is (5) Based on the above discussion, even if the systems obey the same Hamiltonian, they can be subject to different rules of statistical mechanics which, in turn, can lead to different behaviors. This difference can be particularly relevant in characterizing thermodynamic collapse. As this issue does not arise in a standard lattice-gas model with occupations limited to one, it is important to emphasize it as well as consider it in overall analysis. The system described above can be simplified by transforming it into a spin ensemble with spins corresponding to s i = n + i -n - i . Because a single configuration in the spin-ensemble corresponds to infinitely many configurations in the particle-ensemble, these degeneracies need to be correctly accounted for. The resulting transformed partition functions are for distinguishable and indistinguishable particles, respectively. The terms inside square brackets can be regarded as effective external field. Furthermore, as these terms are even function in s i , the spin symmetry is never broken so that s i = 0 under all conditions. The function I s (x) in Eq. ( Any quantity defined in the original ensemble can be calculated as another quantity in the spin-ensemble. For example, the average number of particles at a single site i, in the original ensemble defined as in the spin-ensemble becomes for distinguishable particles, where the subscript s indicates the average calculated in the spin ensemble, and for indistinguishable particles. For distinguishable particles, the limit ρ i → ∞ is attained if μ → ∞, and for indistinguishable particles if μ → 0 -. In the rest of the paper, we use ρ ≡ ρ i , to indicate the average number of particles on any lattice site and refer to ρ as density. The limit ρ → ∞ is a consequence of the fact that no limit is placed on the occupation number. This is quite different from the standard lattice-gas model where the maximum density is ρ = 1. The spin-ensembles in Eq. ( with the pre-factors and the Hamiltonian is given by where the one-body potentials h(s i ) are Note that in the limit ρ → ∞, h(s i ) → 0 and both Hamiltonians become a simple harmonic function. The difference between distinguishable and indistinguishable particles, therefore, becomes relevant at finite densities. For illustration and to see how these differences might be manifested, in Fig. It might be of interest to place our spin model in the context of other related models. The first difference to be noted is that unlike the standard Ising model, our model permits a spin s i = 0, which can be regarded as an empty site. The class of Ising models that permit empty sites are referred to as site-diluted Ising models with the Hamiltonian H = -J nn p i p j s i s j , where s i = ±1 and p i = 0, 1 are random (correlation free) occupation numbers such that p i = ρ Our model bears the closest analogy to the discrete Gaussian model (DG) In addition to analytical results, we study the transformed spin ensemble using Monte Carlo simulation. The simulated system consists of spins on a square-lattice substrate. A simulation box itself is a square of size L = 128 with periodic boundary conditions. A Monte Carlo move consists of a random selection of a lattice site followed by the trial change of the spin by either 1 or -1 with equal probability. The move is accepted if it lowers the energy, otherwise it is accepted with the probability e -β(Hnew-H old ) . Before calculating average quantities, the system is equilibrated for half a million steps. The average quantities are subsequently computed during another 2 million steps. IV. THE LIMIT ρ → ∞ In the limit ρ → ∞, h(s i ) as defined in Eq. ( whose Boltzmann factor is a Gaussian function and, as the spins are restricted to integers, the resulting system is a discrete Gaussian model (DG). In the past, the DG model has been used to model an interface Although the interpretation and the parametrization of that DG model for interfaces is different from ours (in the interface model spins represent height of an interface and, as the heights of neighboring spins tend to be the same, α < 0), the same general analysis applies to both. The analogy between the interface model and the present binary lattice-gas system of penetrable particles is also interesting. Even though the partition function of the DG model has a Gaussian form, it cannot be solved exactly. However, if we neglect spin discreteness, it may be possible to approximate the DG model with the continuous Gaussian model (CG) which can be solved exactly A systematic way to carry this out is to write the partition function for the DG model where the partition function of the CG model is a contributing term. Any additional term would then represent contributions due to spin discreteness. To see if this can be done, we first reformulate the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where s = (s 1 , . . . , s N ) is the N -dimensional vector, A is a N × N matrix with elements where δ ij is the Kronecker delta function, and ij = 1 if the two spins are the nearest neighbors and zero otherwise. A for an arbitrary dimension d is given in Appendix (B). The corresponding partition function is Note that we ignore the pre-factor B defined in Eq. ( If we rewrite the partition function in Eq. ( and express the Dirac comb function as a Fourier series, we arrive at where the integral term in square brackets is a Gaussian integral with a linear term that can be evaluated exactly using the identity where A -1 is the inverse of the matrix A. The resulting partition function is comprised of two subsystems, where Ξ G is the partition function of the CG model, and Ξ L represents all the contributions due to spin discreetness and is given by The dimensionless temperature of Ξ L is k B T = βK/(4π 2 ). From Eq. ( the missing contributions due to the spin discreteness are contained in the term Ξ L . In this section we verify how accurate this approximation is. To do this, we need to evaluate Ξ G . The determinant in Eq. ( where λ k are the eigenvalues of A. A is a circulant block matrix with circulant blocks where so that in total there are N = L 2 eigenvalues. The determinant of A now becomes To complete the expression, it remains to evaluate the integral (31) When evaluated, it corresponds to a hypergeometric function which can also be expressed as a power series in α, The interval of convergence of the above series is |α| ≤ 1/4. At α = 1/4, I remains finite with a value I ≈ -0.220. For any value outside the radius of convergence, the series diverges, which in the present model implies thermodynamic instability. We designate this value of α as α c . Given the above results, the partition function in Eq. ( It is interesting to consider at this point the partition function of the Ising model that can be expressed as (see appendix C) where α is a function of βJ according to and J is the interaction strength between nearest neighbor sites. In both the DG and the Ising model the value α = 1/4 has physical significance. In the Ising model it indicates a critical point of a continuous phase transition and in the Gaussian model it is the last point before thermodynamic instability. The Ising model, however, is prevented from leaving the convergence region as a result of the parametrization in Eq. ( Going back to the partition function Ξ G , we point out that even if Ξ G is finite at α c other quantities may diverge. The internal energy defined as where s i s j are spin correlations between two nearest neighbors, can be calculated exactly using Eq. ( where K(x) is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind, which contains logarithmic singularity at α c , In Fig. (2) we plot βu. The data points are from the Monte Carlo simulation for the system Ξ ∞ and the dashed line corresponds to the expression in Eq. (37). For βK = 1, the data points follow closely the continuous Gaussian model. For larger βK, the two results diverge, yet despite this the point of thermodynamic instability is the same for both models. In Fig. Another revealing quantity is the distribution of spins at a single site p(s). For the continuous Gaussian model such a distribution is expected to be Gaussian (see Appendix (B) for details), The variance can be obtained by knowing that the total energy per particle for a harmonic system is βu tot = 1/2. The two contributions to the total energy are βu tot = βu + βu ext , where βu ext = ∞ -∞ ds p(s)Ks 2 /2 and βu is given in Eq. (37). This leads to the following result and in the limit α → α c we have In Fig. In the previous section we approximated the Ξ ∞ system by neglecting its spin discreteness, and the comparison with the simulation showed that such approximation is generally correct for βK < 5, and even if not correct at every point, the CG model correctly predicts the point of thermodynamic collapse, suggesting that discreteness has no effect on the thermodynamic collapse. The explanation for this is that close to instability the variance of the distribution p(s) diverges, and for large spin variations the spin discreteness becomes irrelevant. In this section we look more carefully into the neglected contributions of spin discreteness by looking into the behavior of Ξ L . According to Ref. To establish the procedure in a clear manner, we consider first a simpler case of a system in d = 1, for which the matrix A is given in Eq. (B1) and the matrix A -1 is Because the value of α c depends on dimensionality according to α c = 1/(2d), in d = 1 thermodynamic collapse occurs for α c = 1/2. In the limit L → ∞ the summation in Eq. (42) becomes an integral, which evaluates to At α c , A -1 ij diverges, but the divergence can be subtracted and the system can be analyzed in terms of nondivergent interactions. To do this, we introduce an alternating sign matrix, then subtract from each element A -1 ij the divergent term The remaining elements constitute an interaction matrix The Hamiltonian of the system Ξ L can now be written as Clearly, only configurations which suppress the divergence are allowed. Such configurations satisfy s T C = 0, which is the same as where the subscripts "odd" and "even" refer to odd and even numbered lattice sites. Taking this restriction into account, the Hamiltonian can now be written as where the prime implies the restriction in Eq. (48). Although not immediately clear, Ξ L is an even function of α, and flipping the sign of α does not change the partition function. (The sign change modifies Eq. ( which is a Coulomb interaction in 1D. There are two differences between the present system and the more usual Coulomb model, however. First, the valance number of particles on a lattice site is unlimited. Second, the periodic boundary conditions involve only particles in the simulation box and do not include contributions due to images outside the original simulation box. Based on the results of the previous section for d = 1, it is guessed that in d = 2 the interactions between lattice sites are logarithmic at α c , since this is the functional form of Coulomb interactions in this dimension. It is more convenient to represent interactions between spins on a square-lattice, not in terms of the matrix A -1 , but in terms of a pair potential between sites on the (x, y)grid, and such a potential would have the following form dq 2 cos(q 1 n + q 2 m) 1 + 2α cos(q 1 ) + 2α cos(q 2 ) , (51) where n = |x 1 -x 2 | and m = |y 1 -y 2 | indicate a separation between two lattice sites on the discrete Cartesian grid, where x i , y i = 0, 1, . . . . The expression is analogous to that in Eq. ( If we expand the integrand in powers of α and then evaluate each term, we find the following series expansion which constitutes a hypergeometric function. U tot (m, n) diverges at α c = 1/4, and the divergent term is identified as where K(x) is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind. Subtracting the divergence from U tot , the nondivergent pair potential is where an accurate approximation to For n = m = 0 we use U = 0. The approximate functional form in Eq. ( Because the constant terms in U (m, n), together with the divergent term, are irrelevant, the pair interaction can simply be written as The spin configurations are subject to the same restriction as that in Eq. ( with x i and y i indicating discrete locations on a lattice grid. In Fig. where the spin variance is given by s 2 = βK 4π 2 . Fig. The Gaussian distribution in Eq. ( Because the MC simulations on the spin ensemble become impossible for βK > 5, since the only possible spins are s i = 0, the KT transition along the βK parameter in the context of the two-component model could imply a different mechanism of the collapse transition. In this section we consider a more realistic situation where the average occupation number of a lattice site ρ is finite. This also means that the quadratic Hamiltonian H ∞ in Eq. ( The simulations show that the thermodynamic collapse for finite ρ does not occur at α = 1/4, as for the case ρ → ∞, but is shifted to larger values of α. This indicates that the thermodynamic collapse depends on density. This may be somewhat surprising, since one expects the global minimum of a system for α > 1/4 to be a collapsed state. This indicates the presence of a metastable equilibrium. In a two-component system, a collapsed configuration, as it emerges in a simulation, is comprised of numerous clusters, each of which can, in principle, accommodate an infinite number of particles. A sequence of such clusters for a one-dimensional lattice model has been analyzed before If a collapsed configuration consists of a single cluster comprised of all the particles in a system, then the energy of a collapsed state scales like E ∝ -n 2 where n is the number of particles. The competing entropy of noncollapsed configurations, on the other hand, scales like -ST ∝ k B T n ln n. This means that as soon as a configuration with energy that scales like E ∝ -n 2 appears (which for the present model occurs when α > 1/4), the global minimum will always be a collapsed state. The fact that the system does not collapse spontaneously when α > 1/4 suggests that there is a local minimum that produces metastable equilibrium. For a better grasp of the collapse mechanism, we describe a simple situation. We consider a finite system that roughly corresponds to a size of a cluster that emerges in a collapsed state. The system is in contact with a reservoir, so that a number of particles in the system n fluctuates. The particles in the reservoir do not interact with each other, while the energy of the system itself is assumed to be βE = -an 2 so that the system can achieve a collapsed configuration only if a > 0. The grand potential of the system is where n = n + + n -is the total number of particles and n 2 ln n 2 -n 2 is the entropy -T S due to each species. If a > 0, the global minimum of βΩ(n) is for n = ∞. However, there is also a local minimum dβΩ dn = 0 corresponding to and that corresponds to a metastable equilibrium. The local minimum vanishes for a > 1 4e βμ . Since the reservoir density is given by ρ = e βμ , then the thermodynamic collapse can be estimated to depend on the density as a = 1 4ρ . We observe a similar qualitative behavior in our simulations for a lattice-gas model of binary penetrable particles. To use a more rigorous approach to analyze a metastable region, we start with a perturbation approximation. For a finite ρ, the system Hamiltonian is The partition function of this system can be written in terms of the H ∞ ensemble as (62) If we expand the quantity ln Ξ, assuming h to be small, and keep only the first order term, a perturbative expression is Finally, if we use the separation where the subscript G denotes the continuous Gaussian system analyzed earlier. For indistinguishable particles h(s i ) = -μ |s i |, where the average value of |s i | is related to A -1 ii , see Eq. (A8), and the value of A -1 ii is given in Eq. (53) for A -1 ii , we get The internal energy per particle can now be obtained using the definition in Eq. (36). For βμ < 0, the expression in Eq. ( where E(x) is the complete elliptic integral of the second kind. Fig. We next turn to a variational method. We start by postulating a quadratic auxiliary Hamiltonian where Γ is a N × N matrix. To keep things simple, it is assumed that Γ has the same structure as the matrix A, and the only difference is that the coupling constant does not correspond to a physical value α but is used as a variational parameter designated by α . The partition function written in terms of the auxiliary ensemble is Then, using the Gibbs-Bogoliubov-Feynman inequality (GBF) and the quantity ln Ξ becomes As the auxiliary system is Gaussian, the term in angular brackets can be evaluated, leading to Fig. If we take the value of α where the local minimum of the function -ln Ξ ef f disappears, see Fig. Fig. where α 0 corresponds to α at a local minimum just as it is about to disappear. The results show drastic broadening of the metastable region as ρ < 1. This effect is even stronger for smaller βK. For distinguishable particles we see the same type of general behavior and the emergence of the metastable re-gion. However, the application of the variational procedure is more complex as the function h(s) is more difficult to handle. This work investigates thermodynamic collapse in a two-component lattice-gas system of penetrable particles on a square-lattice substrate. Because particles are penetrable, there is no limit on how many particles occupy the same site, and the multiple occupation of a single site gives rise to different statistical mechanics, depending whether particles are regarded as distinguishable or indistinguishable. To facilitate analysis of the system, we transform the relevant partition function into the spin model with spins s i = 0, ±1, ±2, . . . . In the limit ρ → ∞, the system Hamiltonian recovers a simple quardatic form, so that the partition function corresponds to a discrete Gaussian model analyzed in the past in connection to interfaces and the roughening transition. The difference between the Gaussian model used to study interfaces and the Gaussian model of penetrable particles lies in the sign of interactions between spins. Because the Gaussian model at the point of a collapse becomes isomorphic with the lattice Coulomb system, we check for the existence of a KT phase transition along the line of the thermodynamic instability. The presence of the KT transition itself does not affect the collapse transition, it might, however, affect the mechanism. To analyze the system for finite ρ we employ a variational approximation since for this situation the Hamiltonian is no longer harmonic. Both simulations and the approximation indicate the presence of a metastable equilibrium corresponding to a local minimum in the free energy. The extent of the metastable region, furthermore strongly depends on density. The metastable region vanishes at an infinite density, and diverges as density goes to zero. the sake of concreteness, we assume the system size to be L = 4, and in d = 1 the system configuration can be represented with a vector s 1 s 2 s 3 s 4 and the interaction matrix A for the periodic boundary conditions is where the subscript L denotes the matrix size L×L. The matrix is circulant, symmetric, and real valued. Because only three elements are non-zero, the matrix, furthermore, is circulant tridiagonal. In d = 2, the spins of the system with size L = 4 can be represented on a square grid as s 1 s 2 s 3 s 4 s 5 s 6 s 7 s 8 s 9 s 10 s 11 s 12 s 13 s 14 s 15 s 16 and the resulting A matrix for the nearest neighbor interactions is given by 1 α 0 α α 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 α 0 0 0 α 1 α 0 0 α 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 α 0 0 0 α 1 α 0 0 α 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 α 0 α 0 α 1 0 0 0 α 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 α α 0 0 0 1 α 0 α α 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 α 0 0 α 1 α 0 0 α 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 α 0 0 α 1 α 0 0 α 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 α α 0 α 1 0 0 0 α 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 α 0 0 0 1 α 0 α α 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 α 0 0 α 1 α 0 0 α 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 α 0 0 α 1 α 0 0 α 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 α α 0 α 1 0 0 0 α α 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 α 0 0 0 1 α 0 α 0 α 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 α 0 0 α 1 α 0 0 0 α 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 α 0 0 α 1 α 0 0 0 α 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 α α 0 α 1 where the size of the matrix is L 2 × L 2 . If we subdivide the matrix into equally sized square blocks, we find three different sub-matrices. The diagonal blocks are identical to the matrix in Eq. (B1). The blocks adjacent to it are diagonal matrices with the diagonal element α, and the remaining blocks are zero matrices. The matrix A L 2 can more conveniently be represented as a L × L matrix whose elements in turn are L × L matrices, where I L is an identity and 0 L is a zero square matrix. The block representation of the matrix A L 2 is a circulant matrix. The block representation of the matrix A L 3 in d = 3 is . Appendix C: Onsager's exact solution of the Ising model For an antiferromagnetic Ising model with the Hamiltonian the free energy for a square-lattice geometry is given by (recently, a similar expression, in terms of 4 F 3 hypergeometric function, has been obtained in Knowing that the series in the above expression has a convergence interval |α| ≤ 1/4, the phase transition must