GW approximation is one of the most popular parameter-free many-body methods that go beyond the limitations of the standard density functional theory (DFT) to determine the excitation spectra for moderately correlated materials and in particular the semiconductors. It is also the first step in developing the diagrammatic Monte Carlo method into an electronic structure tool, which would offer a numerically exact solution to the solid-state problem. While most electronic structure packages offer support for GW calculations for band-insulating materials, the level of support for metallic systems is somewhat limited. This limitation can be partly attributed to the relatively minor differences often observed between GW and DFT results in treating metallic systems, which is not expected to persist to higher orders in perturbation theory. Describing metals within the GW framework presents a challenge, as it requires accurate resolution of Fermi surface singularities, which, in turn, calls for a dense momentum mesh. Here we implement the GW algorithm within the all-electron Linear Augmented Plane Wave framework, where we pay special attention to the metallic systems, the convergence with respect to momentum mesh, and proper treatment of the deep laying core states, as needed for the future variational diagrammatic Monte Carlo implementation. Our improved algorithm for resolving Fermi surface singularities allows us a stable and accurate analytic continuation of imaginary axis data, which is carried out for GW excitation spectra throughout the Brillouin zone in both the metallic and insulating materials and is compared to numerically more stable contour deformation integration technique. We compute band structures for elemental metallic systems Li, Na, and Mg as well as for various narrow and wide bandgap insulators such as Si, BN, SiC, MgO, LiF, ZnS, and CdS and compare our results with previous GW calculations and available experiments data. Our results are in good agreement with the available literature. Thus our software allows users to compute full bandstructures for metals and insulators using all-electron potential without downfolding to Wannier orbital basis. Perturbative expansion around the free electron limit is one of the most common techniques used in the manybody theory. In ab-initio solid state applications, the expansion is typically carried out in terms of the singleparticle Green's function G, and the screened Coulomb interaction W . When carried out at the first order approximation, and W is computed by the bubble Feynman diagrams, the method is called the GW approximation The accuracy, precision, and scaling of GW calcu-arXiv:2008.07727v3 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 9 Dec 2023 lation, which requires non-local and dynamical selfenergy of electron, has considerably improved over the years Here we describe the implementation of GW approximation within the all-electron LAPW framework, paying special attention to metallic systems for which GW calculations are difficult to converge and band structure throughout the Brillouin zone is painful to compute. This paper is organized as follows. The next section is devoted to the method and presents the setup of perturbation theory in section II A, followed by the description of the method we use to compute the polarization in Sec. II B, and the self-energy in Sec. II C, both are computed in the eigenbasis of the Coulomb repulsion. In Sec. II D we discuss the implementation of the product basis, which allows one to write polarization and the Coulomb interaction in two-dimensional matrix form. In Sec. II E we describe the new algorithm for efficient manipulation of the frequency-dependent quantities G and W . Finally, in Sec. II F 4 we present techniques to plot the quasiparticle spectra, from analytic continuation to contour integration technique, and interpolation of band structure using Wannier interpolation as well as minimizing smoothness of bands across the Brillouin zone. We also study the quality of diagonal approximation and compare it to the matrix form of self-energy, and we check the quality of the Pade analytic continuation and compare it to the contour integration technique. In Sec. III we compare our implementation of G 0 W 0 and GW 0 for insulators with other previously published results, while in Sec. III B we show band structures of several metals within G 0 W 0 approach. Here we concentrate on a diagrammatic point of view of the electronic structure problem, sketching the algorithm in a way in which the extension to higher order diagrams is emphasized, as needed for future Variational Diagrammatic Monte Carlo studies The building blocks in our setup for the perturbation theory are the Green's functions in the Kohn-Sham basis G k,i = 1 iω+μ-ε k,i , and the Coulomb repulsion is written in its eigenbasis. The former depends on the Kohn-Sham eigenvalues ε k,i , while for the latter, we will introduce the so-called product basis The interaction between four Kohn-Sham orbitals, in which ψ k,i , ψ k ′ -q,j ′ are incoming, and ψ * k-q,j , ψ * k ′ ,i ′ are outgoing electrons, takes the form and can be evaluated in the product basis by which can be expressed with the above-defined matrix elements as We can now associate a square-root of the Coulomb repulsion with each pair of the Kohn-Sham orbitals and rewrite this product in the above-defined eigenbasis of the Coulomb repulsion as If we now define the new matrix elements of the form we see that the Coulomb repulsion between the two incoming ψ k,i , ψ k ′ -q,j ′ and the two outgoing ψ * k-q,j , ψ * k ′ ,i ′ Kohn-Sham orbitals can in general be written as the product of two matrices and hence each three-point vertex can be associated with the matrix element M l,ij (k, q), where index l is associated with the bosonic-interaction propagator, and i,j with the two Kohn-Sham bands (See Fig. (" ⌃i,i0 (k, i!) (" 1 )l,l0 (" ⌃i,i0 (k, i!) (" 1 )l,l0 (" ⌃i,i0 (k, i!) (" 1 )l,l0 (" 1 ,i ,j (7) (8) (9) (10) (" P (q, i⌦) (7) (8) (9) (10) (7) (8) (9) (10) ⇣ p ⇣ p q, i⌦, l (8) k q, j q, i⌦, l (8) q, i⌦, l (8) FIG. emphasize that for the perturbative expansion, we only need M and the Kohn-Sham eigenvalues ε k,i to evaluate the expansion. The matrix elements of the Coulomb repulsion are hence absorbed into the definition of M and should no longer appear in the calculation. The advantage of this approach was pointed out in Refs. We want to point out that for the future diagrammatic Monte Carlo calculations, only the matrix M l,ij (k, q) will need to be stored, apart from Kohn-sham eigenvalues ε k,i , to evaluate the Feynman diagram of arbitrary order. However, storing this object in memory will still be a great challenge, as it depends on the dimension of the Coulomb eigenbasis l, the square of the number of bands, and also both the fermionic and bosonic momentum. We envision that this matrix M will need to be stored on a more coarse momentum mesh, and some type of interpolation to a denser mesh of fermionic propagators, which depend on ε k,i and describe the details of the Fermi surface, will need to be implemented. Finally, let us mention that the single-particle counterterm in this expansion is the Kohn-Sham exchangecorrelation potential, which is evaluated in the bandbasis by At the lowest order GW approximation, this potential just needs to be subtracted, and the GW self-energy needs to be added to the Kohn-Sham eigenvalues. At the higher-order expansion, such a counter-term can be, for example, grouped with the occurrence of exchange sub-diagram in each Feynman diagram, as implemented in Ref. The dielectric function in matrix form is , where P is the polarization. At the lowest order W 0 approximation, the polarization is evaluated as the bubble diagram, which can also be evaluated in the eigenbasis of the Coulomb repulsion, in which it takes the form (" 1 )l,l0 (" 1 )l,l0 (" 1 )l,l0 (" 1 )l,l0 (" 1 )l,l0 "k,i "k+q,j i 0 j (13) ,↵ l,l 0 ,ij P (q, i⌦) (" 1 )l,l0 k, i k q, j q, i⌦, l k q, j, i! i⌦ (10) M↵,ij(k, q) W↵ M ,i0j (k, q) k q, j, i! i⌦ (10) FIG. where f is the Fermi function of the form f (x) = [exp(x/T ) + 1] -1 , and indices i, j run over Kohn-Sham bands, N s is 2 or 1 depending on whether the bands contain the spin degeneracy (for example in the presence of the spin-orbit coupling). It is worth emphasizing that the size of ε q,iΩn matrix is smaller than the size of the product basis, because only the eigenvalues of the Coulomb repulsion (v l ), which are finite, contribute to this matrix. Once the matrix ε is calculated, we invert it in this eigenbasis of the Coulomb repulsion, where the matrix is the smallest. In the presence of time reversal symmetry or inversion center, the inner part of the Eq. 8 can be rewritten in a more convenient way for computation, such that the band k, i is occupied and the kq, j is empty, in which case the polarization takes the form ) This form emphasizes that the Polarization has even symmetry with respect to frequency, and is real. However, the matrix elements M l,ij (k, q) are in general complex, therefore the polarization is a complex (Hermitian) quantity on the imaginary axis. We use this form for the tetrahedron method, evaluating tetra d 3 kP q (i, j, k, Ω n ), which is implemented similarly as in Gap2 code 35 , except that we compute all Matsubara frequency points using exactly the same tetrahedron setup, and precompute common parts shared for all Matsubara frequencies, and we group terms which are nearly singular to achieve better cancellation of errors, following ideas from Ref. The dynamic correlation self-energy within GW approximation is the convolution of the single-particle Green's function, and the dynamic part of the screened interaction (" (" (" (" (" ,ij (" q, j ⌦, l q, i⌦, l k q, j q, i⌦, l (8) k, i k q, j q, i⌦, l (8) . eferences k q, j, i! i⌦ (10) M ⇤ ,i 0 j (k, q) W ↵ 11 W ↵ (16) k q, j, i! i⌦ (10) W ↵ (16) FIG. Note that as before, we expressed the self-energy also in terms of the matrix-elements M , written in the eigenbasis of the Coulomb repulsion, which is smaller in dimension than the product basis. The exchange selfenergy is obtained from the above expression by replacing (ε -1 iΩm -1) l,l ′ with δ l,l ′ , and it takes the form The frequency convolution of the dielectric matrix with the single-particle Green's function can be simplified if we take into account that the polarization is even in frequency Ω m (Eq. 9), hence dielectric matrix is also an even function, and therefore i.e., the odd component of the convolution vanishes, and we are left with the sum that falls-off as 1/Ω 4 m , because (ε -1 iΩm -1) falls off as 1/Ω 2 m . Here ξ k = ε kμ. At zero temperature, we can replace the Matsubara sum 1 β iΩm with the integral 1 2π ∞ -∞ dΩ hence the inner-convolution in Eq. 11 can be computed by To carry out this integral, we spline the quantity (ε -1 iΩ -1)(Ω 2 + 1), which has a nice property that saturates at infinity with vanishing first derivative and also has extremum at zero frequency. We use a vanishing first derivative at infinity and a vanishing second derivative at zero, as the boundary condition for the spline. To achieve even better converging integral, we add and subtract a constant such that when Ω = ω n the integrand vanishes. Let us denote (ε -1 iΩ -1) l,l ′ = S ll ′ (iΩ), then the integral Eq. 12 can be written as lim Using the spline for S ll ′ (1 + Ω 2 ), we can afford 10-times or 20-times more frequency points Ω that the dielectric matrix is calculated on. For both meshes, to compute the dielectric matrix and performing the integral in Eq. 14, we use a tangent mesh. This mesh is well-suited for representing Lorentzian function, and is defined by the equation Ω = w tan[x(π -2δ)π/2 + δ], where δ and w are parameters optimized for each represented function, and x is a uniformly spaced mesh in the interval [-1, 1]. Here we want to point out that replacing arctan L ξ k-q,j -iωn in Eq. 14 with ±π/2 is not precise enough when quantities are known on a finite mesh with cutoff L. This is because iω can also assume large values, resulting in a ratio within the arctan function that may not necessarily be very large. While it may be tempting to assume that for sufficiently large values of L, the values of S would saturate, allowing for the extension of the quadrature to infinity (a practice employed in, for instance, the Gap2 code), our investigations have revealed that results exhibit greater numerical stability when extrapolation is avoided. Instead, employing Matsubara points with a cutoff value consistent with that used in calculating ε iΩ yields superior numerical stability. The correlation self-energy Eq. 11 is either computed on the Matsubara axis, or directly on the real axis using the contour deformation technique (See section II F 2 for details). When the self-energy is computed on the imaginary axis, it requires analytic continuation to the real frequency in order to plot band-structure at finite frequency. We managed to implement the tetrahedron method in a stable way so that all Matsubara frequencies iΩ m are computed in exactly the same way up to machine precision, therefore we find that standard Pade approximation The construction of the product basis |χ α ⟩ has been detailed in prior works, for instance, in In the MT part, the Kohn-Sham wave functions are expanded in terms of the solutions of the radial Schrodinger's equation (at certain energy close to the center of the band) u l , its energy derivative ul , and several local orbitals u lo l . Here l is the orbital momentum quantum number. Let's denote all these functions with an index κ, i.e., u κ l . The product of the two Kohn-Sham functions spans the Hilbert space which contains all products of such functions u κ l u κ ′ l ′ . However, we can also order these products in terms of the orbital quantum number L for the products, corresponding to the two-particle orbital momentum L. Further, we know that the triangular identity must be satisfied, so that for a given twoparticle momentum L only those single-particle momenta l, l ′ that satisfy |ll ′ | ≤ L ≤ l + l ′ can contribute. We can thus construct a limited, yet significant number of products for each L, which we denote v n,L , where n runs over all possible products u κ l u κ ′ l ′ , that satisfy triangular inequality. We then compute overlap between these functions O n,n ′ = ⟨v n,L |v n ′ ,L ⟩ and diagonalize it O = U λU † . Note that here each L is treated independently, and in practice, we can neglect L which are larger than some cutoff (when only p orbitals are occupied, L = 6 is very accurate, and L = 10 is converged within a fraction of a percent, hence 2(l + 2) ≤ L ≤ 2(l + 4) is good, where l is maximum momentum for occupied single-particle orbital). The eigenvectors with the eigenvalues larger than some cutoff (for example 10 -4 ) are assumed to be linearly independent, and are used to construct final product basis functions, i.e., where U is defined above as the eigenvector of the overlap (O = U λU † ). Finally, the three dimensional basis functions on the lattice at momentum q are constructed with the help of the spherical harmonics: where M T means the muffin-tin part of the space. In the interstitial space, we use plane waves of reciprocal vectors G, i.e., where V is the volume of the unit cell. Notice that the Bloch's phase e iqr is used in the interstitial, but not in the muffin-tin spheres. As it is convenient to work with the orthonormal basis, we diagonalize the interstitial basis as well. Just as above we compute the overlap where I denotes integral over the interstitial space, and M T a the muffin-tin space of any atom a in the unit cell. We then diagonalize the overlap O = U λU † , and than construct the orthogonalized plane wave basis as Note that here we added U † on the right-hand side, as opposed to Eq. 15, because there is no small eigenvalue in the overlap between plane-waves, and we do not reduce the basis by dropping U † . However, including U † has a useful effect, namely, the resulting orthogonalized plane waves are gauge invariant, in the sense that they are independent of the arbitrary phase (unitary transformation) of eigenvectors, when diagonalizing complex overlap with many degenerate eigenvalues. Finally, we want to emphasize that the resulting piecewise basis, constructed by is orthonormal, because both parts are orthonormal, and are valid only in their respective parts of the 3D space. This basis (denoted by |χ α ⟩) was used in the previous chapter to construct the matrix for the Coulomb repulsion and the dielectric function. We also implemented GW using the minimal frequency basis, obtained by singular-value decomposition of the analytic continuation kernel, the invention of Ref. The slowest part in our implementation is the computation of the dielectric matrix ε, and in particular its rotation from the band-basis to the product basis. If we denote P q (i, j, k, Ω) in Eq. 9 as p ij (k, q, iΩ), we can rewrite Eq. 8 by Here i, j are Kohn-Sham band indices, and l,l ′ are Coulomb eigenbasis indices. We note that the dimension of the Coulomb eigenbasis l is substantially smaller than the square of the number of bands, i.e., i⊗j. As this matrix-matrix multiplication takes most of the computational time and needs to be performed for many Matsubara frequencies, it is desirable to find a more compact representation for p ij (k, q, iΩ), so that Eq. 20 would need to be performed only a few times. The basic idea is to rewrite polarization in the band basis p ij (k, q, iΩ) in terms of a small number of svd-basis functions, similarly as in Ref. where A(x) is the spectral representation of the correlation function on the real axis. The same equation can be written in discretized form as G n = i K n,i A i , where the kernel takes the form: and ∆Ω n and ∆x i is the distance between the points on the imaginary and the real axis and G n = √ ∆Ω n G(iΩ). Note that the kernel for the analytic continuation has to be proportional to K n,i ∝ ∆x i /(iΩ nx i ), but it could be multiplied by an arbitrary separable weight function, which will only modify the metric in which the resulting singular functions are orthonormal. We have chosen a normalization such that the resulting imaginary axis singular-vectors will be automatically normalized using a standard metric U α (iΩ)U α ′ (iΩ)dΩ = δ α,α ′ , as it will be shown below. It is also important to recognize that the two meshes (on the real and the imaginary axes) are not equal. The real frequency mesh only needs to extend up to the selected high-energy cutoff (say L). This also required to be very precise in this interval with many points, as these functions strongly oscillate on the real axis. In contrast, the imaginary axis mesh needs to extend far beyond the scale of L. However as the functions are more smooth, a fewer points are typically needed. The rational for having a larger energy cutoff on the imaginary axis lies in the fact that any feature on the real axis, which is bounded in the interval |x| < L, will taper off slowly on the imaginary axis with a behavior like 1/(L 2 + Ω 2 n ) for bosonic quantities. However, quantities on the imaginary axis are very smooth, and in particular, tails require a small number of points distributed in the logarithmic mesh. It is obvious from Eqs. 21 and 22 that Next, we perform the singular-value decomposition of the Kernel K n,i Eq. 22, and obtain K(Ω n , x i ) = α u α (iΩ n )s α v α (x i ), where s α are the singular values, and u α (iΩ n )/ √ ∆Ω n ≡ U α (iΩ n ) are the desired SVD-basis functions. Now we see that because of the unitarity of the singular eigenvectors u α (iΩ n ), which proves that SVD-basis functions are an orthonormal basis. As it turns out, only a small number of singular values s α are nonzero, because the Kernel for analytic continuation is known to be singular. Consequently this SVD-basis is the minimal orthonormal basis for representing Matsubara quantities. We use a fine tangents mesh on the real frequency axis x i , and a different more coarse tangents mesh combined with logarithmic tails on the Matsubara axis for Ω n , and we can afford here a large number of real-frequency points (thousands) and also several hundred on the imaginary axis. Next we represent the polarization in band basis p ij (k, q, iΩ n ) in terms of these basis functions, i.e. where P α ij (k, q) are coefficients in this SVD-basis. The crucial point is that the number of coefficients α is much smaller than the number of needed Matsubara points. For example, to achieve the precision of polarization p ij (k, q, iΩ n ) up 10 -10 , we typically need 30 coefficients. In this way, using these 30 coefficients on the SVD basis, we can then compute polarization on a much larger number of Matsubara frequencies. First, we compute coefficients for polarization in bandbasis P α ij (k, q) = n ∆Ω n U α (iΩ n )p ij (k, q, iΩ n ) inside the tetrahedron method so that we do not need to store large arrays p ij (k, q, iΩ n ), and we rather store only the coefficients P α ij (k, q). This is a simple matrix-matrix product and can be done very quickly, as there is a small number of basis functions U α . Next, we use these coefficients to get the dielectric matrix on a product basis in two steps: The crucial point is that the product Eq. 24 can be done faster than the product in the original Eq. 20, when the number of coefficients P α is smaller than the number of Matsubara points iΩ n . There is some overhead due to the second step Eq. 25, but this is quite fast, because the product basis l is much smaller in dimension than the square of the number of bands i ⊗ j. Finally, when comparing this SVD-basis implementation versus the convolution with spline interpolation, as explained in Eq.14, we found somewhat mixed results. While both methods work well, the spline interpolation seems to be slightly more robust in the cases we tested. This is because for Pade analytic continuation, we need to compute self-energy to extremely high precision, and consequently, we found that around 30 coefficients P α are necessary. However, W (iΩ n ) seems to be quite a smooth function of Matsubara frequency in all cases we tested, therefore with around 32-64 Matsubara points, we could also achieve extremely accurate spline for the screened interaction W (iΩ n ). Therefore in the test cases presented here, the SVD implementation did not significantly improve over the previously discussed spline interpolation. In cases with more nontrivial frequency dependence of W (iΩ), this SVD implementation will become more useful. To obtain the self-energy on the real axis, we use the Pade analytic continuation method We also implemented the contour deformation integration technique where we left out the matrix elements M for simplicity and took into account that W is even in frequency. This convolution is actually carried out only for the correlation part of the self-energy, hence strictly speaking W q should be understood as W q -V q and Σ k should be understood as Σ c k . However, for simplicity, we keep here a simpler notation of Σ k and W q . When convoluting G 0 and W we notice that one can choose a contour, depicted in Fig. The integral over the remaining semi-circles vanishes, because G 0 and W 0 fall off sufficiently fast, i.e., as 1/ω and 1/ω 2 . The imaginary axis integral (the last term) is essentially the same integral with which we calculate the self-energy on the imaginary axis, and we know that the integrand is smooth and well-behaved, hence the spline integration discussed above gives very accurate results. To compute the self-energy on the real axis Eq. 26 we then just need to add the contour integral, which can be evaluated with the help of the residue theorem. The crucial point here is that the integrand is simple enough that we can analytically find all poles of the integrand inside the contour, and we can evaluate them. As discussed above, the poles of W are all outside of our chosen contour, hence they do not contribute. The G 0 has poles at z = ξ k-q,j -ω and for z > 0 they appear in the first quadrant only. The residue of G 0 in these poles is unity, hence the contour integral is ω<ξ k-q,j <E F W (ξ k-q,jω). On the other hand, when z < 0 and ξ k-q,j < E F , the poles inside the contour appear in the third quadrant, and the integral is -E F <ξ k-q,j <ω W (ξ k-q,jω). The minus sign comes from the opposite orientation of the integral in the third quadrant. Putting all those terms together, we see that the self-energy on the real axis can be calculated in the following way While this integral appears almost as straightforward to implement as the imaginary axis self-energy , the overhead in calculating W q (or dielectric matrix ε) at numerous additional points along the real axis incurs a significant computational overhead. To evaluate the residues in Eq. 28 we use the real frequency mesh with energy spacing of 10 mHa, which requires an additional 74 points on the real axis for a typical 10eV window of band structure plot. In addition, we use 32 points (or 64 points for checking the convergence) of non-uniformly distributed points along the imaginary frequency axis between 0 to 20*i mHa. The comparison of Pade continuation with contour deformation integration is presented in Fig. To obtain the band structure plots, we implemented two complementary techniques: the Wannierization using wannier90 66,67 , as well as interpolation using technique of Refs. Within LAPW method, the overlaps A k ij is readily available for all functions in the muffin-thin sphere, including u l (r)Y lm (r), ul (r)Y lm (r) and local orbitals u LO l (r)Y lm (r). We use singular value decomposition (SVD) to find the linear combination of local orbitals, which have the largest overlap for a certain set of bands that are the target of wannierization. More precisely, we first compute the overlaps where κ is a combined index for u l , ul and u LO l . Notice that in this step we orthogonalize u LO l so that we have orthogonal basis where s i are the singular values. If the number of targeted bands is n, we choose the largest n singular values s i , and create the linear combination of local orbitals with them so that the local component of the needed overlaps are and are guaranteed to be non-vanishing. Of course matrix element A k ij could still vanish at a particular momentum point, but on average it must be large, as we chose the largest n eigenvalues s i in SVD decomposition. The above-defined quantities are finally used as input to the Wannier90 software. This technique is an alternative to the Wannierization technique (see Refs. where S m (k) is the star of the lattice, i.e., and Γ sym are all symmetry operations of the lattice, and R m are the real space lattice vectors. Without loss of generality, we choose m = 0 when R m = 0. Notice that S m (k) has the full symmetry of the crystal and is a scalar of the lattice space group. We should use here a considerably larger number of lattice vectors R m as compared to the number of simulated momentum points in the first Brillouin zone. In this method, we require ε(k) to coincide with the computed values of the quasiparticle dispersion (ε ki ) on the discrete grid being used in the calculation, i.e., k i with i = 1, .., n and at the same time is smooth throughout the Brillouin zone, which is achieved by a constrained minimization of the following functional: where λ i are the Lagrange multipliers. This functional can be rewritten in real space by the help of definition Eq. 33 Here c i are some coefficients that regularize the dispersion, and we typically use nn , and c 3 = 0.25/R 6 nn , where R nn is the nearest-neighbor distance so that the first part of the functional has a particularly simple form Ref. therefore it is best to drop m = 0 term in Eq. 36 and minimize Here N has to be substantially larger that the number of points in the calculation, i.e., at least three to four times larger. The constrained minimization can be performed analytically, and it requires only inversion of a matrix and matrix vector multiplication. For more detailed information of how to solve this minimization problem, the reader is referred to Ref. We implemented the so-called G 0 W 0 and GW 0 methods in both the scalar and the matrix form. In all cases, we compute screened interaction W 0 from Kohn-Sham Green's function G 0 . In G 0 W 0 we convolve W 0 with Kohn-Sham Green's function G 0 = 1/(ω + με 0 k ) using Eq. 14. Here ε 0 k is the Kohn-Sham energy. In GW 0 method, the single-particle Green's function is determined self-consistently and is approximated with the quasiparticle form at every iteration. The scalar (non-matrix) approximation is most commonly used in GW, and its validity has been recently challenged in such a simple system as Si is the sum of exchange and correlation self-energy, and ε 0 k is the diagonal Kohn-Sham energy in the Kohn-Sham band basis. We use the linearized form of the self-energy to determine the poles of Green's function, i.e., we expand with I -Z -1 k = dΣ(ω)/dω| ω=ε k,i is the quasiparticle renormalization amplitude evaluated at the quasiparticle energy ε k,i . This leads to the following eigenvalue problem Since we are looking for the real solutions of this equation, we make all quantities in the above equation Hermitian, i.e., Σ k (ε . Both G 0 W 0 and GW 0 are traditionally solved in the scalar form, namely, the self-energy and exchange correlation potential are approximated by the band-diagonal form, i.e., Σ k,i (ω) = ⟨ψ k,i |Σ k (ω)|ψ k,i ⟩, where ψ i,k are Kohn-Sham eigenvectors, hence Z k are numbers, evaluated for each band Z k,i and the quasiparticle energies of band i are For the case of G 0 W 0 , the self-energy is computed by the Kohn-Sham band energies, ε k,i = ε 0 k,i , hence selfenergy can also be expand around Kohn-Sham energies, to get In the case of GW 0 the self-energy is computed using the self-consistent quasiparticle energies ε k,i ← ω qp i from previous iterations from the Eq. 45, and the iterations are continued until ε k,i = ω qp i up to some precision. Finally, when using the matrix form of the self-energy and the exchange correlation potential, we construct a Hermitian Hamiltonian from Eq. 44 and solve for the eigenvalue λ i , for which the eigenvector is the closest to unity eigenvector with component i close to 1, and zero otherwise. Clearly, we need to construct different Hamiltonian H qp k for each band i, and take only one eigenvalue from the set of eigenvalues of this Hamiltonian. The quasiparticle energy is finally given by ω qp = ε k,i + λ i , as is clear from Eq. 44. For G 0 W 0 we can equate ε k with ε 0 k in the above equation, which avoids the need for self-consistency. In GW 0 we require self-consistency in computing the self-energy, hence the expansion is also done around the current quasiparticle band energy. When comparing the matrix form of the self-energy with the diagonal scalar approximation in Fig. There are several important technical details of the implementation, which are not going to be extensively reviewed here, because they have been nicely explained in other works, for example in Ref. a) The algorithm to compute the matrix elements of the bare Coulomb repulsion has been thoroughly worked out in Ref. b) The inclusion of core states in the calculation is an important advantage of such an all-electron implementation. Here we again follow the implementation of Ref. c) We also implemented the q → 0 limit as in Refs. When summing the terms that are divergent at q → 0 but integrable, we have to add the correction due to a finite number of momentum points in the q mesh. The divergent terms can have either 1/q 2 or 1/q behavior, and would require one to sum q an |q+G| n where n = 1 or n = 2. We first evaluate the sum by dropping the divergent term q = G = 0, and later we add the correction ∆ c , which vanishes for very dense momentum mesh, but gives correction when momentum mesh is sparse. Specifically, The first term in Eq. 49 is evaluated analytically, while the second term is evaluated on the discrete mesh. Here we added a small positive constant α in the exponent, which does not change the nature of the q → 0 divergency, but makes the integral converge fast. If the q mesh is dense, ∆ n c vanishes, while a sparse q mesh has mostly contribution at small q + G and is hence very weakly dependent on α for small α. d) In contrast to insulators, the metallic systems also contain the so-called Drude term as part of the dielectric matrix. This is in addition to other singular terms arising in insulators, which were briefly discussed above. Here we show where Drude's term comes from, and how we treat it. In the eigenbasis of the Coulomb repulsion, we know that the singular eigenvalue in the limit q → 0 is 4π/q 2 , and the exact eigenvector is e iqr / √ V cell . This is because the Coulomb repulsion in the plane wave basis and in the eigenbasis of the Coulomb matrix (expressed in terms of LAPW product functions) are similar matrices, and its non-degenerate singular part is therefore unique. The projection to the Kohn-Sham bands of this singular eigenvector therefore is Next, we want to evaluate the dielectric function in the same q → 0 limit, which follows from Eq. 8 where Inserting this expression into Eq. 51, and expanding for small q, we get the following result Note that we dropped the linear term because its contribution vanishes as it is odd in q. Now we recognize the plasma frequency in terms of which the Drude part of the dielectric constant is Note that we need ε -1 -1 to compute the selfenergy in Eq. 11. While this Drude term gives singular contribution on the real axis, it is however well behaved on the imaginary axis, as it takes the form ε -1 -1 = This Drude term, which appears at q = 0, is of course missed in the discrete sum of Eq. 8, hence we need to add it to the so-called head part of the dielectric matrix, i.e., ε 0,0 → ε 0,0 - (iΩn) 2 , before we invert the dielectric matrix to compute ε -1 . First, we describe our results for insulating systems to benchmark our GW implementation. We have computed GW quasiparticle energies and band gaps for a set of prototypical insulating materials, such as Si, BN, SiC, MgO, ZnS, CdS, LiF, etc. The experimental band-gap ranges in this set of compounds between 1.2 and 14.2 eV. The 8× 8 × 8 k-point grid is considered here. The starting point for GW calculation in insulators is obtained from DFT-GGA simulation using PBE functional. It is worth mentioning here that the gap size does depend on the choice of the DFT exchange-correlation functional. However, the future diagrammatic Monte Carlo method, which sums up all relevant higher-order Feynman diagrams, should not anymore depend on the starting point as the higher-order counter-terms can be properly subtracted The computed bandgap within G 0 W 0 and GW 0 are summarized in Table As is well known, for every band-insulating compound, the bandgap increases in G 0 W 0 as compared to DFT-PBE value. In GW 0 the band gap is further increased compared to G 0 W 0 , especially for wide gap insulators like LiF. We mention in passing that GW 0 calculation is a very cheap post-processing step, once G 0 W 0 calculation is finished. This is because most of the computational time is spent in evaluating the screened interaction W 0 , and once this is available, only the convolution Eq. 14 needs to be repeated several times to determine the selfconsistent quasi-particle energies ε k from Eq. 45. As is clear from Table In Table Next, we add five LO's at the energies tabulated in Ref. Finally, in Fig. Many widely available software packages now support GW corrections to gaps in semiconductors, however, very few support GW calculation in the metallic system, and even fewer allow one to plot the band structure throughout the Brillouin zone. This is due to the numerical difficulty in treating the Fermi surface singularity in metallic systems, which oftentimes leads to less accurate results on the Matsubara axis, and consequently extremely difficult analytic continuation to real frequency. Here we have improved the stability of the tetrahedron method, as implemented in Gap2 code 68 , and improved the convolution between the G and W , so that the standard Pade approximation is stable. In Fig. A somewhat surprising fact is that even though we use tetrahedron analytic integration over momentum points, we still find that a very large number of momentum points are necessary for converged results in metals. While even 4×4×4 grid gives approximate spectra which resemble LDA bands, the convergence with increasing momentum points is slow, and is presented in Fig In Fig. One of the biggest bottlenecks in GW calculations is the computational cost of simulations and the scaling of the software. Although, theoretically GW scales as O(N 4 ), where N is the number of bands, while DFT scales O(N 3 ), practically we find GW method is around two orders of magnitude slower compared to DFT even for the smallest single atom unit cell with only around hundred of bands FIG. 9: (Color online)Comparison of computational cost in PyGW and Gap2 codes: Logarithmic plot for computational cost in G 0 W 0 calculation for MgO using PyGW and Gap2 software in Frontera Supercomputer. In Fig. The efficiency of the GW implementation presented here is highly advantageous for simulating metallic systems. Since the number of momentum points required for such systems is typically between one to two orders of magnitude greater than for band-insulators, the correlation self-energy becomes sensitive to the Fermi surface singularity of the single-particle Green's function. This efficiency improvement will also prove beneficial in future implementations of the diagrammatic Monte Carlo method, which systematically incorporates higher-order vertex corrections into the GW method. This necessitates a highly precise momentum mesh and accurate treatment of core states, aspects achieved only in such all-electron implementations. In conclusion, we describe the implementation of GW approximation within the all-electron Linear Augmented Plane Wave framework, where we pay special attention to the metallic systems, and proper treatment of deep laying core states, as needed for the future variational diagrammatic Monte Carlo implementation. We implement both standard G 0 W 0 approximation, i.e after truncating the series of self-energy to the first order in G and W , as well as GW 0 algorithm, where we self-consistently compute G but truncate the series in W to the first order. Our improved algorithm for resolving Fermi surface singularities and frequency convolution on the Matsubara axis allows us a stable and accurate analytic continuation of imaginary axis data by Pade approximation. This is crosschecked by the contour deformation technique that avoids the need for analytic continuation. We compute band structure and band gaps for a variety of insulators. We demonstrate the accuracy of our implementation by reproducing previous LAPW results for band insulators. We also implemented the matrix analog of G 0 W 0 approx-imation. Here, we demonstrate ed that the conventional diagonal approximation within the Kohn-Sham band basis is an excellent approximation, which is in contrast to the finding of Ref. Surprisingly, we find that GW approximation requires an extremely dense momentum mesh for metals to converge even when tetrahedron integration is used. This is very different than in semilocal DFT approximations in which the potential is computed in real space, and therefore the convergence with momentum points is very rapid. In GW, a 16 × 16 × 16 k-point mesh is required for reasonable convergence in the simple alkali metals such as Li, K, Na, and Mg. To test the implementation, we compute the band structures of these metallic systems and find that the converged bandwidths are slightly smaller than in LDA, for about 2-7%. This agrees very well with the self-consistent quasi-particle GW approach. The bandwidth in the ARPES experiment is smaller, which indicates that vertex corrections are important even in these elemental solids. The recently developed systematic approach, offered by the diagrammatic Monte Carlo method, would be very desirable to determine whether the narrowing of the bandwidth in these moderately correlated systems is purely electronic in origin, or other ef-fects, such as interaction in the final states of ARPES experiment or the surface effects in ARPES measurements need to be considered to reproduce the experimental photoemission. Finally, we also show a substantial three-fold improvement in the speed of GW calculation compared to the previous LAPW code (gap2), on which this implementation is based. ontinuation Approach to Many-Body GW Computation 16, 1742-1756 (2020). URL 9b01235. c nickel in the gw approximation. Phys. s://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ dlmayr, A. Efficient implementation of the gw approximation thod. Phys. Rev. B 81, 125102 (2010). URL https:// 03/PhysRevB.81.125102. ce manipulation by external magnetic field demonstrated for s. Rev. X 6, 041048 (2016). URL https://link.aps. vX.6.041048. ni, T. Spin-wave dispersion of 3d ferromagnets based on alculations. Phys. Rev. B 100, 054419 (2019). URL https: 1103/PhysRevB.100.054419. etiawan, F. Self-energy and spectral function of ce within the B 86, 245126 (2012). URL https://link.aps.org/ 6.245126. ky , A. Efficient implementation of the gw approximation Phys. Rev. B 81, 125102 (2010). URL https:// ysRevB.81.125102. ipulation by external magnetic field demonstrated for X 6, 041048 (2016). URL https://link.aps. 041048. ion of half-metallic ferromagnetism for doped LaMnO3in method. Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 21, 11 ergy of ferromagnetic nickel in the gw approximation. Phys. (1992). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ T. Electronic structure of transition metals fe, ni and cu in the gw the Physical Society of Japan 72, 607-610 (2003). URL https: JPSJ.72.607. https://doi.org/10.1143/JPSJ.72. chindlmayr, A. Efficient implementation of the gw approximation w method. Phys. Rev. B 81, 125102 (2010). URL https:// 0.1103/PhysRevB.81.125102. surface manipulation by external magnetic field demonstrated for . Phys. Rev. X 6, 041048 (2016). URL https://link.aps. ysRevX.6.041048. Kotani, T. Spin-wave dispersion of 3d ferromagnets based on t gw calculations. se, X. Robust Analytic-Continuation Approach to Many-Body GW al of Chemical Theory and Computation 16, 1742-1756 (2020). URL g/10.1021/acs.jctc.9b01235. elf-energy of ferromagnetic nickel in the gw approximation. Phys. 3064 (1992). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ 051. wara, T. Electronic structure of transition metals fe, ni and cu in the gw nal of the Physical Society of Japan 72, 607-610 (2003). URL https: 143/JPSJ.72.607. https://doi.org/10.1143/JPSJ.72. , S. & Schindlmayr, A. Efficient implementation of the gw approximation n flapw method. Phys. Rev. B 81, 125102 (2010). URL https:// oi/10.1103/PhysRevB.81.125102. Fermi surface manipulation by external magnetic field demonstrated for agnet. Phys. Rev. X 6, 041048 (2016). URL https://link.aps. 3/PhysRevX.6.041048. K. & Kotani, T. Spin-wave dispersion of 3d ferromagnets based on sistent gw calculations. Phys. Rev. B 100, 054419 (2019). URL https: /doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.100.054419. T. & Aryasetiawan, F. Self-energy and spectral function of ce within the Phys. Rev. B 86, 245126 (2012). URL https://link.aps.org/ ysRevB.86.245126. . C., Balatsky, A. V., Friedrich, C. & Zhu, J.-X. X. Robust Analytic-Continuation Approach to Many-Body GW f Chemical Theory and Computation 16, 1742-1756 (2020). URL 10.1021/acs.jctc.9b01235. -energy of ferromagnetic nickel in the gw approximation. Phys. 4 (1992). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ 1. a, T. Electronic structure of transition metals fe, ni and cu in the gw of the Physical Society of Japan 72, 607-610 (2003). URL https: 3/JPSJ.72.607. https://doi.org/10.1143/JPSJ.72. & Schindlmayr, A. Efficient implementation of the gw approximation apw method. Phys. Rev. B 81, 125102 (2010). URL https:// /10.1103/PhysRevB.81.125102. i surface manipulation by external magnetic field demonstrated for net. 5] Młyńczak, E. et al. Fermi surface manipulation by external magnetic field demonstrated for a prototypical ferromagnet. Phys. Rev. X 6, 041048 (2016). URL https://link.aps. org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevX.6.041048. 6] Okumura, H., Sato, K. & Kotani, T. Spin-wave dispersion of 3d ferromagnets based on quasiparticle self-consistent gw calculations. Phys. Rev. B 100, 054419 (2019). URL https: //link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.100.054419. 7] Sakuma, R., Miyake, T. & Aryasetiawan, F. Self-energy and spectral function of ce within the GW approximation. Phys. Rev. B 86, 245126 (2012). URL https://link.aps.org/ doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.86.245126.