The expected high performance of graphenebased electronics is often hindered by lack of adequate doping, which causes low carrier density and large sheet resistance. Many reported graphene doping schemes also suffer from instability or incompatibility with existing semiconductor processing. Here we report ultrahigh and stable p-type doping up to ~7×10 13 cm -2 (~2×10 21 cm -3 ) of monolayer graphene grown by chemical vapor deposition. This is achieved by direct polycrystalline MoO3 growth on graphene using a rapid flame synthesis technique. With this approach, the metal-graphene contact resistance for holes is reduced to ~200 Ω⋅μm. We also demonstrate that flamedeposited MoO3 provides over 5× higher doping of graphene, as well as superior thermal and long-term stability, compared to electron-beam deposited MoO3. raphene is a two-dimensional (2D) material with unique physics and intrinsic properties A more promising route to control the doping of graphene and other 2D materials is to introduce charge carriers from the outside, either with a field-effect (electrostatically or with external charge dipoles) or by external dopants (similar to modulation doping in conventional semiconductors) In this letter, we apply MoO3 using a rapid flame vapor deposition technique Monolayer graphene was grown on Cu foil using CVD, and subsequently transferred In previous work Figure Importantly, re-measuring the same device after 8 months [Fig. After process development, we performed six MoO3 flame depositions and two MoO3 evaporation runs. Then we characterized on average twelve TLM structures Figure We attribute the higher doping to two underlying causes. The flame deposition method generates highly crystalline, stoichiometric MoO3, with more terminal O1 sites that create a dipole layer to increase its work function Using Raman spectroscopy, we further monitored the carrier density through the G and G' (also known as 2D) peaks Because the Dirac voltage is outside the measurable VGS range for the capped devices, it is not possible to directly extract the carrier density from the measured ID vs. VGS. Hence, we applied a well-tested model In conclusion, we applied our flame vapor deposition technique to grow thin films of stoichiometric crystalline MoO3 on monolayer CVD graphene. The resulting structures exhibit an ultrahigh and stable p-type charge transfer doping up to ~7×10 13 cm -2 , five times higher than control samples with e-beam evaporated MoO3. Using this approach, the metal (Pd)-graphene contact resistance was also reduced by a factor of 2.5 to ~200 Ω⋅μm. Our fabrication process is CMOS-compatible and can be used to realize competitive performance in graphene electron devices, as well as low-sheet-resistance transparent conductors. Rsh (Ω/sq.) p (cm -2 ) R/R0 (vac.) R/R0 (air)