We report the electronic properties of single crystals of candidate nodal-line semimetal CaAgP. The transport properties of CaAgP are understood within the framework of a hole-doped nodalline semimetal. In contrast, Pd-doped CaAgP shows a drastic increase of magnetoresistance at low magnetic fields and a strong decrease of electrical resistivity at low temperatures probably due to weak antilocalization. Hall conductivity data indicated that the Pd-doped CaAgP has not only hole carriers induced by the Pd doping, but also high-mobility electron carriers in proximity of the Dirac point. Electrical resistivity of Pd-doped CaAgP also showed a superconducting transition with onset temperature of 1.7-1.8 K. measured In recent years, nodal-line semimetals have been intensively studied as a system for realizing topologically nontrivial electronic states. A nodal line is formed by the intersection of linearly dispersive bands in momentum space. One of the first examples was the band contact line in graphite Until now, various nodal-line materials have been experimentally studied. For example, angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) experiments on single crystals of ZrSiS and PbTaSe2 have demonstrated the presence of nodal lines Here, we report the transport properties of single crystals of undoped and Pd-doped CaAgP, which realized intriguing electronic properties caused by the nodal line. CaAgP is a 3p analogue of CaAgAs and crystallizes in the hexagonal ordered-Fe2P type structure The single crystals of undoped and Pd-doped CaAgP were prepared by a flux method using Bi as a flux. Molar rations of 1.1:1:0:1 and 1.1:0.9:0.1:1 for Ca chips (Rare Metallic, 99.5%) and Ag (Kojundo Chemical, 99.9%), Pd (Kojundo Chemical, 99.9%), and black phosphorus (Kojundo Chemical, 99.9999%) powders were used for undoped and Pd-doped cases, respectively, which were put in alumina crucibles with Bi powder (Kojundo Chemical, 99.9%) and sealed in evacuated quartz tubes. The tubes were kept at 673 K for 12 h and 1273 K for 3 h and then slowly cooled to 673 K at a rate of 12 K h -1 , followed by centrifugation. Single crystals of CaAgAs were prepared by the method described in Ref. A. Transport properties resistivity () of single crystals of undoped and Pd-doped CaAgP. The data of CaAgAs are also shown as reference. The undoped CaAgP and CaAgAs samples exhibited similar metallic temperature dependences.  of Pd-doped CaAgP was also metallic, but was different to the undoped samples in that  strongly decreased below 50 K. Similar behavior was also observed for Dirac semimetals such as Cd3As2 and Na3Bi The magnetoresistance of the Pd-doped CaAgP is more extreme than that of the undoped sample. As shown in Fig. The magnetoresistance of the Pd-doped CaAgP differed from that of the undoped sample also in terms of their magnetic-field orientation dependence. As shown in Fig. The strong decrease of the zero-field  below 50 K and the steep increase of magnetoresistance at low magnetic fields in the Pd-doped samples were most likely due to a reduction of back-scattering processes caused by quantum interference effects, i.e., weak antilocalization, and the destruction of it by applying a magnetic field Here we discuss the observed anomalous transport properties of CaAgP in terms of the properties of conducting carriers. As shown in Fig. Unprecedentedly, the Pd-doped samples have electron carriers with extremely high mobility, in addition to hole carriers. As shown in Fig. The xy data at all measured temperatures were well reproduced by the above equation assuming the coexistence of hole and electron carriers in a sample, indicating the presence of hole carriers with nh and h and electron carriers with ne and e. As shown in Fig. In contrast, ne and e at 10 K were 2.3 × 10 16 cm -3 and 2.0 × 10 5 cm 2 V -1 s -1 , respectively, indicating that there were a few electron carriers with extremely high mobility. This e value is very large comparable to that of TaAs (2-5 × 10 5 cm 2 V -1 s -1 ) The above results indicate that Pd doping to CaAgP leads to the emergence of electron carriers exhibiting the characteristics of Dirac electrons as well as hole doping by Pd substitution to the Ag site [Fig. Finally, we report on a superconducting transition observed in the Pd-doped samples. Figure In conclusion, we studied the transport properties of single crystals of a candidate nodal-line semimetal CaAgP. The transport properties of undoped CaAgP are understood within the framework of a hole-doped nodal-line semimetal. In contrast, the Pd-doped samples have not only hole carriers due to the Pd doping, but also electron carriers with extremely high mobility, which are expected to exist in proximity of the Dirac point. The pronounced weak antilocalization effect in the transport properties, such as the drastic increase of magnetoresistance at low magnetic fields and the strong decrease of electrical resistivity at low temperatures, are most likely due to the high-mobility electron carriers. Electrical resistivity of the Pd-doped samples further showed a superconducting transition with onset temperatures of 1.7-1.8 K. These results suggest that CaAgP realizes intriguing electronic properties unique to nodal lines. 