Color centers in 2-dimensional hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) have recently emerged as stable and bright single-photon emitters (SPEs) operating at room temperature. In this study, we combine theory and experiment to show that vacancy-based SPEs selectively form at nano-scale wrinkles in h-BN with its optical dipole preferentially aligned to the wrinkle direction. By using density functional theory calculations, we find that the wrinkle's curvature plays a crucial role in localizing vacancy-based SPE candidates and aligning the defect's symmetry plane to the wrinkle direction. By performing optical measurements on SPEs created in h-BN single-crystal flakes, we experimentally confirm the wrinkle-induced generation of SPEs and their polarization alignment to the wrinkle direction. Our results not only provide a new route to controlling the atomic position and the optical property of the SPEs but also revealed the possible crystallographic origin of the SPEs in h-BN, greatly enhancing their potential for use in solid-state quantum photonics and quantum information processing. Solid-state single-photon emitters (SPEs) are essential elements for the realization of integrated quantum photonic technologies such as quantum communication and quantum network Among several promising candidates, defect-derived SPEs from h-BN have recently attracted a great amount of attention owing to its spectral stability, brightness, and room-temperature functionality Furthermore, the two-dimensional (2D) nature of the host h-BN crystal allows for the SPEs to be integrated in diverse solid-state device structures, enabling to tune the SPEs from h-BN by applying a strain Deterministic control of the SPE position is also a great challenge to overcome toward the practical application of the h-BN SPEs In this study, we show that nano-scale wrinkles in h-BN can be employed to localize SPEs and control their optical property. Furthermore, our combined first-principles theory and optical spectroscopy strongly suggest that the SPEs on the wrinkles are vacancy-derived, significantly enhancing the understanding on the atomic origin of the h-BN SPEs. By using density functional theory, we show that vacancy-based defects gain a significant amount of energy when created on top of a wrinkle due to a larger curvature than in a flat area. We find that the large curvature induces a profound structural relaxation in the defects owing to a dimer reconstruction of their dangling bonds. As an important consequence of the structural relaxation, the symmetry axis of the defects is found to be aligned to the wrinkle direction. Such a characteristic is also evidenced by optical experiments showing an obvious correlation between the polarization orientation of SPEs with the wrinkle direction. Our combined theoretical and experimental study laid down a solid ground for the use of the curvature of h-BN as an effective tool to atomically engineer the SPEs in h-BN at nano-scale. Density functional theory of defects in curved h-BN. We performed density functional theory (DFT) calculations using plane-wave basis functions with an energy cutoff of 85 Ry along with optimized norm-conserving Vanderbilt (ONCV) pseudopotentials To simulate the presence of an isolated point defect in h-BN, we used a supercell method. Each supercell contains 192 atoms and a defect is created in the center of the supercell. The Brillouin zone is sampled with the Γ point only. We tested supercells with different sizes and checked that the supercell size of 192 atoms is enough to separate the central defect and its periodic images. To study the effect of wrinkle's curvature on defects in h-BN, we employed two different h-BN wrinkle structures with two different curvatures: Gaussian-shaped and sine-shaped. We used the two different wrinkle types in order to cross-check the validity of our theoretical results. Namely, the main conclusion should not change depending on the shape of the wrinkle. The wrinkles are induced by applying compressive uniaxial strain to the supercell: 5% and 10% strains were used, which generate wrinkles with curvatures of 0.75 nm -1 and 0.94 nm In our experiment, h-BN bulk crystal purchased from HQ Graphene is exfoliated onto SiO2/Si substrate. The exfoliated h-BN is cleaned by acetone and isopropyl alcohol to remove the residue. Then h-BN flakes are annealed at 800 °C for 2 hours in a chamber filled with Ar gas. After annealing, the sample is cooled down to room temperature and the surface morphology measurement is performed using atomic force microscopy (AFM). The h-BN thickness measured from AFM is about 80 nm (Supplementary Information Figure In photoluminescence (PL) measurement, 532 nm laser is used as an excitation source (P = 200 μW). The linearly polarized laser is focused onto the sample using an objective lens (NA = 0.60) and the collected light by the same objective is reflected by the beam splitter and guided to enter the spectrometer equipped with a chargecoupled device (CCD). In the collection path, a confocal set-up with a 150 μm pinhole is used to block the scattered background light and increase the spatial resolution of the 2D scan. All measurements are performed at 10 K. For the polarization dependent measurement of the excitation laser, we used a half-wave plate (HWP) in the excitation path to rotate the polarization of the laser with respect to the sample orientation. For the emission polarization dependent measurement, the polarization of the laser is fixed, and the emitted light is filtered by an analyzer in the collection path. In order to change the collection polarization while minimizing the influence on the optical path, HWP is included in front of the analyzer and rotated to vary the collection polarization angle. The effect of curved surface of h-BN on the formation of defect centers is first examined experimentally by measuring emitters in exfoliated h-BN flakes with wrinkles. The microscope image of the h-BN flake used in our study is shown in Fig. Then we measured the polarization dependence of the emitted light by varying the excitation laser polarization and collected polarization. Interestingly, for the emitter A on wrinkle 1, the excitation and emission polarizations have the same orientation, which also coincides with the direction of the wrinkle (Fig. On the other hand, for the emitter formed on a flat surface (emitter C), the measured excitation and emission polarizations are significantly misaligned from each other (Fig. To systematically investigate the correlation between the dipole orientation of the emitters and wrinkles, we analyzed dozens of emitters on the same h-BN flake. Among these, 44 emitters are found on wrinkles and 23 emitters are found on flat surfaces, indicating that more emitters are localized on curved area In addition to the polarization dependence measurement, the wrinkle-driven emitters and emitters on flat surface have contrasting spectral distributions. While the emission energies of the wrinkle-induced emitters are mostly centered around 1.88 or 2.16 eV (Fig. To shed light on the apparent correlation between the h-BN SPEs and the wrinkles observed in experiment, we carried out DFT calculations. Figure Fig. To cross-check our conclusion obtained with the sine-shaped wrinkles, we performed the same calculations, but using Gaussian-shaped wrinkles having two different curvatures, 1.02 nm -1 and 1.45 nm -1 at the wrinkle top, and the results are summarized in Fig. In Fig. We find that the curvature-driven energy gain of the vacancy-based defects is maximized when their CS mirror plane is parallel to the wrinkle direction. Fig. We remark that the largest and smallest defect angles possible are 90° and 0°, respectively (see Supplementary Figure We now turn to the analysis of change in the electronic structure of the defects occurring in wrinkles. We find that the microscopic origin of the wrinkle-driven localization and orientation of the vacancy-derived defects is traced to dimerization of atoms in the defects, whose strength is maximized at the top of wrinkles. For the VNNB and VNCB defects in a flat h-BN plane, the two nearest neighboring B atoms of the VN site form a dimer due to the interaction between their dangling bonds (see Supplementary Figure As a consequence of the defect alignment at a wrinkle top discussed above, we find that the optical transition dipole of the VNXB (X=C, N) defects is also aligned to the wrinkle direction. The point group symmetry of the VNXB defects in the middle of a wrinkle is CS, whose mirror plane is perpendicular to the dimer direction of the defects and the h-BN plane. According to the group theory In conclusion, we used a combined theoretical and experimental method to investigate the intimate coupling of wrinkles and single photon emitters in h-BN. We experimentally observed that the number of emitters found on wrinkles far exceed the number of emitters found on flat plane, considering the density of emitters found from the same unit area. In addition, these emitters on wrinkles show a characteristic energy distribution, which is centered around 1.88 eV and 2.16 eV, implying that the emitters formed on wrinkles have a unique origin compared to those found on flat region. Using density functional theory, we demonstrated that the vacancyderived defects can lower their defect formation energy significantly if created in wrinkles owing to the curvature-driven energy gain. On the other hands, substitutional impurities exhibited no energy gain in the proximity of wrinkles. Furthermore, we experimentally observed that the emitters found on wrinkled area show clear dipole orientations for both excitation and emission, which align to the wrinkle directions. Such dependence indicates clear anisotropy in the emitter's crystal structure. Theoretically, we discovered that the most stable atomic arrangement of the vacancy-derived defects considered in this study is one with the defects' CS mirror plane being parallel to the wrinkle direction. Due to the aligned defect's symmetry plane, the defect's optical dipole is also oriented to the wrinkle direction, which is in an excellent agreement with the experimental observation. Based on our numerical results and group theory analysis, the atomic origin of the SPEs formed in wrinkles is considerably narrowed down to vacancy-based axial defects such as VNNB and VNCB. We should mention, however, that it is still not possible to specify the exact atomic structure of the SPEs in h-BN wrinkles solely based on our study. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. Our combined experimental and theoretical work lays a solid foundation to understand and utilize the profound effects imposed by wrinkles on the h-BN SPEs. We found that the dimerization of atoms in vacancy-derived defects plays a key role in constraining the atomic and optical property of the defects in wrinkles. As dangling bonds and their interaction leading to dimerization of atoms are inherent to any vacancy-derived defects in h-BN, the essential physics revealed in this study should apply to other possible vacancy-based SPEs with complex structures 