We report muon spin rotation and magnetic susceptibility experiments on in-plane stress effects on the static spin-stripe order and superconductivity in the cuprate system La2-xBaxCuO4 with x = 0.115. An extremely low uniaxial stress of ∼ 0.1 GPa induces a substantial decrease in the magnetic volume fraction and a dramatic rise in the onset of 3D superconductivity, from ∼ 10 to 32 K; however, the onset of at-least-2D superconductivity is much less sensitive to stress. These results show not only that large-volume-fraction spin-stripe order is anti-correlated with 3D superconducting (SC) coherence, but also that these states are energetically very finely balanced. Moreover, the onset temperatures of 3D superconductivity and spin-stripe order are very similar in the large stress regime. These results strongly suggest a similar pairing mechanism for spin-stripe order, the spatially-modulated 2D and uniform 3D SC orders, imposing an important constraint on theoretical models. Cuprate superconductors are believed to exhibit competing superconducting orders: uniform d-wave vs. pair density wave (PDW) order The conventional BCS theory of superconductivity is based on the Fermi liquid model of electronic states, in which uniformity in real space is assumed and electronic states are characterized entirely by their distribution in reciprocal space. Many discussions of superconducting cuprates have focused only on the nature of the bosonic "glue" responsible for electron pairing Studies of LBCO can provide helpful insight into this unresolved issue, since one of the most astonishing manifestations of competing ordered phases occurs in this system What happens when the stripe order is perturbed? A recent transport study on LBCO x = 0.125 under strong magnetic fields (applied along the c-axis) provided evidence that the putative pairing within the charge stripes is remarkably robust Here we perturb a crystal of LBCO x = 0.115 The diamagnetic response of the LBCO x = 0.115 crystal, measured before mounting in the stress apparatus, is shown in Fig. A photograph of the μSR sample holder, which is used to apply uniaxial-stress to the LBCO-0.115 sample, is shown in Fig. The evolution of the spin-stripe order with compressive stress was characterized by a combination of weak transverse-field (TF) and zero-field (ZF) μSR measurements. In a μSR experiment, positive muons are implanted into the sample, where each muon spin precesses in the local magnetic field. The time dependent polarization P (t) of the ensemble is monitored by detecting the positrons ejected when the muons decay (see Methods section in supplementary for details). μSR is an ideal technique for probing materials such as cuprates, where competing phases may exist together and form microscopic inhomogeneity. Measuring the asymmetry between muons counted in detectors on opposite sides of the sample, and then dividing by the maximum possible signal, one obtains the muon polarization function P TF (t), several examples of which are shown in Fig. In a weak-TF measurement, muons in regions that have no local magnetic order precess in the small applied field. Muons that stop in regions with magnetic order and therefore experience the vector sum of external and internal fields, dephase rapidly. This causes a rapid reduction in the observable P TF (0) (see methods section in Supplementary). Thus, the maximum amplitude of the weak-TF μSR signal is proportional to the non-magnetic fraction, and the magnetic volume fraction V m can be taken to be 1 -P TF (0). At 45 K and zero applied stress, P TF (0) = 1, indicating that there is no magnetic order. At 3 K, P TF (0) is greatly reduced, indicating the development of magnetic order in most of the sample volume. Plots of the temperature dependence of V m for various stresses are presented in Fig. In ZF μSR measurements, the muon spins precess exclusively in the internal local field associated with the static magnetic order, with the collective response averaging over the distribution of muon sites relative to the local modulations of the internal field. As shown in Fig. Our overall results are summarized in Fig. To interpret these results, we first recall that the prevalent electronic structure far away from x = 1/8 is a spatially uniform state, with neither magnetic nor charge order, but with uniform d-wave superconductivity. Close to x = 1/8 a competing phase emerges, with charge and spin stripes pinned along the a-and b-axes Applied stress can reinforce both types of deviations from perfect geometric frustration. Since stress distorts the crystal from its tetragonal symmetry, it disfavors orthogonal stripes and thus is expected to promote the abundance of uniform patches. Patches in adjacent layers whose projections overlap, mediate a non-zero interlayer coupling. However, as long as the patches are sparse, the PDW of the stripes dominates the intralayer physics, and the intralayer order parameter has a vanishing uniformcomponent. Accordingly, the interlayer couplings remain frustrated, very much like in an XY spin glass. These couplings can nevertheless induce an amorphous (glasslike) superconducting 3D order at a finite temperature T c,3D , which in general is lower than T c,2D . As the fraction of uniform patches increases, T c,3D grows. Beyond a critical fraction of such patches, the superconducting phase will develop a uniform (Q = 0) long-range order both within and between the planes. At that point, T c,3D must coincide with T c,2D . Since spatially-uniform d-wave superconducting order in cuprates is empirically known not to show internal static magnetic order, the scenario of a stress enhanced abundance of uniform patches is consistent with our observation of a significant decrease in magnetic volume fraction which correlates with the increase of T c,3D . A mere reorientation of stripes would instead be hard to reconcile with a decrease in V m . Given the drastic change in the superconducting order, it seems likely that the stress reduces the LTT tilting angle A key point here is that the variation in onset temperatures of superconductivity, as stress shifts the balance from 2D to 3D superconducting order, is quite modest. This suggests that the underlying (local) pairing mechanisms are essentially the same in the alternative superconducting states with and without spin-stripe order. What evolves instead is the degree to which fluctuations play a role and the way the bulk coherence is established. Remarkably, the stress required to establish the 3D coherence is very small: σ cr ∼ 0.04 GPa (strain of ∼ 0.05 %), which is much smaller than the stress ∼ 1 GPa (strain of 1 %), which is required to, for instance, induce 3D charge density wave order in ∼ 1/8-doped YBCO Our experiment has important implications for the field of high-temperature superconductivity and, hence, should stimulate the development of an adequate theory. It also leads to new questions, such as: What is the impact of the stress on the crystal structure and charge-stripe order? How do these effects vary with doping? How does the transition between PDW and uniform d-wave SC states happen? Future experiments will be needed to provide answers. In any case, our results provide a new example of the intriguing behavior that can be uncovered by studies with applied uniaxial stress. In conclusion, we use muon spin rotation and magnetic susceptibility measurements to follow the evolution of spin-stripe order and superconductivity in LBCO with x = 0.115 as a function of stress applied within the CuO 2 planes. We observed that an extremely low uniaxial stress of ∼ 0.1 GPa causes a substantial reduction of the magnetic volume fraction and a dramatic rise, from ∼ 10 to 32 K, in the onset of 3D superconductivity, while the onset of 2D superconducting order weakly and continuously shifts to the one of the 3D order. Moreover, the onset temperatures for 3D superconductivity and spin stripe order are quite similar in the large stress regime. These results suggest that the underlying pairing mechanisms are essentially the same in the spatially-modulated 2D and the uniform 3D superconducting states, and that the presence of large-volume-fraction spin-stripe order locally inhibits the development of 3D superconductivity. A polycrystalline sample of La 2-x Ba x CuO 4 with x = 0.115 was prepared by the conventional solid-state reaction method using La 2 O 3 , BaCO 3 , and CuO as precursors. The single-phase character of the samples was checked by powder x-ray diffraction. The single crystal of La 2-x Ba x CuO 4 with x = 0.115 was grown by the traveling-solvent floating-zone Static spin-stripe order in La 2-x Ba x CuO 4 with x = 0.115 was studied by means of zero-field (ZF) and weak transverse-field (weak-TF) μSR experiments. In a μSR experiment an intense beam of 100 % spin-polarized muons is stopped in the sample. The positively charged muons (momentum p μ = 29 MeV/c) thermalize in the sample at interstitial lattice sites, where they act as magnetic microprobes. In a magnetic material the muon spins precess in the local field B μ at the muon site with a Larmor frequency ω μ = 2π ν μ = γ μ B μ [muon gyromagnetic ratio γ μ /(2π) = 135.5 MHz T -1 ]. In a ZF μSR experiment, positive muons implanted into a sample serve as an extremely sensitive local probe to detect small internal magnetic fields and ordered magnetic volume fractions in the bulk of magnetic materials. Thus, μSR is a particularly powerful tool to study inhomogeneous magnetism in materials. The muons μ + implanted into the sample decay after a mean life time of τ μ = 2.2 μs, emitting a fast positron e + , preferentially along their spin direction. Various detectors placed around the sample track the incoming μ + and the outgoing e + . When the muon detector records the arrival of a μ + in the specimen, the electronic clock starts. The clock stops when the decay positron e + is registered in one of the e + detectors, and the measured time interval is stored in a histogramming memory. In this way a positron-count versus time histogram is formed. A muon decay event requires that within a certain time interval after a μ + has stopped in the sample an e + is detected. This time interval extends usually over several muon lifetimes (e.g., 10 μs). In the Dolly instrument the sample is surrounded by four positron detectors (with respect to the beam direction): Forward, Backward, Left, and Right. After several millions of muons stopped in the sample, one at a time, one obtains a histrogram for the positrons e + revealed in the forward (N F ), the backward (N B ), the left (N L ) and the right (N R ) detectors. Ideally, the histrogram counts are described by: Here, the exponential factor accounts for the radioactive muon decay. P (t) is the muon-spin polarization function with the unit vector n α (α = F, B, L, R) along the direction of the positron detector. N 0 is a parameter proportional with the number of the recorded events. N bg is a background contribution due to uncorrelated starts and stops. A 0 is the initial decay asymmetry, depending on different experimental factors, such as the detector solid angle, absorption, and scattering of positrons in the material. Typical values of A 0 are between 0.2 and 0.3. Since the positrons are emitted predominantly in the direction of the muon spin (here precessing with ω μ ), the forward and backward detectors will detect a signal oscillating with the same frequency. In order to remove the exponential decay (which reflects simply the muon's finite lifetime), the so-called reduced asymmetry signal A(t) is calculated: where, N F,L (t) and N B,R (t) are the number of positrons detected in the Forward(Left) and Backward(Right) detectors, respectively. The quantities A(t) and P (t) depend sensitively on the static spatial distribution and the fluctuations of the magnetic environment of the muons. As such, these functions reflect the physics of the investigated system The μSR signals (Figure Here, V m denotes the relative volume of the magnetic fraction, and B int is the maximal value of the internal field distribution (Overhauser distribution). λ T and λ L are the depolarization rates representing the transverse and the longitudinal relaxing components of the magnetic parts of the sample. f and (1 -f ) are the fractions of the oscillating and non-oscillating components of the magnetic μSR signal. J 0 is the zeroth-order Bessel function of the first kind. This is characteristic of an incommensurate spin density wave, as well as of broad internal field distributions with fields ranging from zero to a maximal field and has been regularly observed in cuprates with static spin-stripe order The weak-TF asymmetry spectra, shown in Fig. where t is time after muon implantation, P TF (t) is the time-dependent polarisation, P TF (0) is the initial polarisation (amplitude) of the low frequency oscillating component (related to the paramagnetic volume fraction), λ is an exponential damping rate due to paramagnetic spin fluctuations and/or nuclear dipolar moments, ω is the Larmor precession frequency, which is proportional to the strength of the external transverse magnetic field, and φ is a phase offset. As it is standard for the analysis of weak-TF data from magnetic samples the zero for P TF (t) was allowed to vary for each temperature to deal with the asymmetry baseline shift occuring for magnetically ordered samples. From these refinements, the magnetically ordered volume fraction at each temperature T was determined by V m = 1 -P TF (0)(T ). In the paramagnetic phase at high temperature P TF (0)(T > T so ) = 1. In general, weak-TF signal consists of long-lived oscillations with an applied field and strongly damped oscillations from muons in magnetically ordered regions experiencing a broad field distribution due to the vector sum of applied and internal fields. It is clear from Fig. Here, we briefly discuss about the uniaxial stress device and the sample geometry used during the experiments. We used the piezoelectric-driven uniaxial stress device designed for operation at cryogenic temperatures The uniaxial stress device is mainly comprised of two pairs of piezoelectric actuators: one fixed with the device frame (termed as tension stack) and one with the sample (termed as compression stack). The piezoelectric-driven device is preloaded with a force of ∼ 1000 N using a compression spring. By adjusting the relative voltages in the tension and the compression stacks, we can vary the fraction of the preload applied to the device and hence the sample. The apparatus can only apply compressive forces, whereas, a mechanical gap opens up between the compression stack and the sample holder as soon as the force becomes tensile, constraining the use of our device in tensile stress mode. This is where the sample reaches the zero force position. The displacements and the applied forces were measured using strain gauge bridges (from Tokio Sokki). The instrumental details of our uniaxial stress apparatus are reported in We used a La 1.885 Ba 0.115 CuO 4 sample (referred to as LBCO-0.115 in the following) (7 mm × 4 mm × 0.6 mm) oriented along a crystallographic direction which is off by 30 • from the a axis. The sample was fixed on the sample holder using epoxy (Stycast-2850 FT). Figure The sample was cooled down while keeping the piezoelectric actuators grounded. We applied the compressive stress at 45 K followed by cooling the system down to 2 K. ACS and μSR measurements were carried out upon warming the sample. In order to apply a compressive stress to the sample, a positive voltage was applied in the compression stack (V C ). To avoid possible electrical discharges of He gas at 45 K, we had to limit V C to +100 V. To achieve a higher compressive force, we kept V C = +100 V and applied a negative voltage in the tension stack (V T ). Figure By using the force-sensor calibration described in detail elsewhere Apart from the magnetic ordering temperature and the magnetic fraction, it is instructive to evaluate the stress dependence of the value, as well as the direction of the internal magnetic field, arising from the spin-stripe order. This was done through zero-field (ZF) μSR experiments. The measurements were performed with the initial muon spin polarisation at an angle of 40 • with respect to the c-axis of the crystal, as illustrated in Fig. 