We numerically demonstrate a new type of waveform-selective metasurface that senses the difference in incoming waveforms or pulse widths at the same frequency. Importantly, the proposed structure contains precise rectifier circuits that, compared to ordinary schottky diodes used within old types of structures, rectify induced electric charges at a markedly reduced input power level depending on several design parameters but mostly on the gain of operational amplifiers. As a result, a waveformselective absorbing mechanism related to this turn-on voltage appears even with a limited signal strength that is comparable to realistic wireless signal levels. In addition, the proposed structure exhibits a noticeably wide dynamic range from -30 to 6 dBm, compared to a conventional structure that operated only around 0 dBm. Thus, our study opens up the door to apply the concept of waveform selectivity to a more practical field of wireless communications to control different small signals at the same frequency. In modern society our daily life benefits from various wireless communication devices including smartphones, Bluetooth/WiFi/IoT (Internet of Things) devices, broadcasting antennas for television/radio, radar systems for weather forecasting and GPS (global positioning system) satellites. On one hand, there is strong demand on developing more advanced wireless communication technologies or services to further enhance the quality of our life. On the other hand, this continuous development escalates a potential risk for communication devices to be exposed to other wireless signals unnecessarily, leading to unexpected electromagnetic interference issues A conventional solution to these interference issues is deploying absorbent materials that effectively dissipate the energy of an incoming wave at a designed frequency (or band) and thus suppress the magnitude of the scattering wave to an acceptable level For this reason, we propose a new type of waveform-selective metasurface that is numerically demonstrated to operate at a low power level but still selectively absorbs a particular waveform at the same frequency. This is achieved by replacing conventional diodes with precise rectifier circuits (PRCs) The waveform-selective metasurface demonstrated in this numerical study consisted of metallic patches (1,600 × 1,600 mm 2 ), a dielectric substrate (Rogers3003, 300 mm thickness) and a ground plane (Fig. This structure was numerically tested by using a co-simulation method integrating an electromagnetic simulator with a circuit simulator (ANSYS Electronics Desktop R18.1.0) Practically, commercial schottky diodes have turn-on voltage of a few hundred mV or so. For example, Fig. In this study, V on was decreased by alternatively using the PRC drawn in Fig. where R 1 and R 2 are resistances used in the circuit (see Fig. However, this turn-on voltage is also influenced by resistances as demonstrated in Fig. With extremely large R 0 such as R 0 = 1 MΩ, the turn-on voltage increases again. Although an ideal diode does not permit electric charges to enter from its anode to cathode, a more realistic diode has saturation current, which varies the amount of the current reversely coming into D 1 of Fig. Based on these results, circuit parameters need to be properly designed, otherwise the operating power level of a waveform- selective metasurface would not be improved. In the following part of this study, R 1 , R 2 , R 3 and R 4 are, respectively, set to 10 kΩ, 10 kΩ, 5 kΩ and 50 Ω as default values, while A is basically fixed at 40 dB (Table In addition, the orientations of D 1 and D 2 are changed for the top two PRCs of Fig. To evaluate improvement on the operating power of the proposed structure, we firstly simulated a capacitor-based waveformselective metasurface using conventional commercial schottky diodes as shown in Fig. Secondly, this structure was simulated using the proposed PRCs instead of the conventional diodes. As plotted in Fig. Regarding this point, Fig. The improvement on the operating power level of the proposed structure is more clearly seen in Fig. Moreover, Fig. -30 dBm and -10 dBm, which was limited to only around 0 dBm in the conventional structure (compare the open triangles of Fig. The improvement on the operating power level relates not only to the gain of op-amps and the resistive component of PRCs but also to other factors including frequency, as practically op-amps have frequency-dependent gain and thus more strongly/weakly amplify incoming electric charges depending on frequency. Although our study used PRCs, conventional schottky diodes may be replaced by other rectifier circuits, as long as induced electric charges are properly controlled to enter the internal circuit components. In particular, biased transistors can be alternatively used as amplifier circuit elements instead of op-amps. Many MOSFETs can work at a GHz range including 2.4 GHz (i.e., one of the ISM bands). For a higher frequency such as the millimetre wave band, the op-amps used in our study need to be replaced by more advanced amplifier circuit components (e.g., Microsemi, MMA025AA). In this case, potentially waveform selectivity can be achieved in the millimetrewave band, although possibly more improvement/modification is required for the entire rectifier circuit design. Our waveformselective metasurface was designed to operate around 30 MHz, where many existing commercial op-amps are expected to work (e.g., Texas Instruments provides the op-amps (OPA858) that have a gain larger than 40 dB in this frequency range). Although this study only provided numerical simulations, we emphasize that still the concept of our structure needs to be fully validated by experimental results. However, we also note that measurement results of many circuit-based metasurfaces containing op-amps have been so far reported in the MHz band. For instance, recently studied non-Foster-loaded metasurfaces have been experimentally validated in the MHz band We have proposed a new type of waveform-selective metasurface composed of PRCs instead of conventional schottky diodes. Our simulation results demonstrated that with proper design parameters applied to integrated resistors, PRCs had turn-on voltage that was inversely proportional to the gain of op-amps and lower than that of conventional schottky diodes. By using these PRCs, waveform-selective metasurfaces successfully reduced operating power level to approximately a thousandth, which was still changeable depending on the gain of op-amps used. As a result, waveform-selective absorption was achieved at a power level of -30 dBm, which is the same level as general communication systems, for example, Wi-Fi systems 