The two-dimensional (2D) C3N has emerged as a material with promising applications in high performance device owing to its intrinsic bandgap and tunable electronic properties. Although there are several reports about the bandgap tuning of C3N via stacking or forming nanoribbon, bandgap modulation of bilayer C3N nanoribbons (C3NNRs) with various edge structures is still far from well understood. Here, based on extensive first-principles calculations, we demonstrated the effective bandgap engineering of C3N by cutting it into hydrogen passivated C3NNRs and stacking them into bilayer heterostructures. It was found that armchair (AC) C3NNRs with three types of edge structures are all semiconductors, while only zigzag (ZZ) C3NNRs with edges composed of both C and N atoms (ZZ-CN/CN) are semiconductors. The bandgaps of all semiconducting C3NNRs are larger than that of C3N nanosheet. More interestingly, AC-C3NNRs with CN/CN edges (AC-CN/CN) possess direct bandgap while ZZ-CN/CN have indirect bandgap. Compared with the monolayer C3NNR, the bandgaps of bilayer C3NNRs can be greatly modulated via different stacking orders and edge structures, varying from 0.43 eV for ZZ-CN/CN with AB'-stacking to 0.04 eV for AC-CN/CN with AA-stacking. Particularly, transition from direct to indirect bandgap was observed in the bilayer AC-CN/CN heterostructure with AA'-stacking, and the indirect-to-direct transition was found in the bilayer ZZ-CN/CN with AB-stacking. This work provides insights into the effective bandgap engineering of C3N and offers a new opportunity for its applications in nano-electronics and optoelectronic devices. Two-dimensional (2D) van-der-Waals (vdW) crystals, such as graphene, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), and black phosphorus, have recently emerged as a class of novel materials, with their 2D nature offering unprecedented opportunities for their applications in nanoscale devices Recently, a new 2D hole-free polyaniline (C3N) has been successfully fabricated by polymerization of 2,3-diaminophenazine Engineering the electronic properties of C3N in a well-controlled manner is crucial for its practical applications in nanodevices. Several methods have been widely used to tune the electronic properties of C3N, including the application of strains or external electric fields The first-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations of total energies and electronic structures were carried out by using a planewave basis set and pseudopotentials for describing core and valence electrons The van der Waals (vdW) correction proposed by Grimme (DFT-D2) The unit cell of C3N structure is composed of six carbon (C) and two nitrogen (N) atoms, which is a flat honeycomb sheet akin to graphene. The calculated lattice constant of C3N is 4.861 Å, which agrees well with the experimental result of 4.75 Å where Eribbon is the total energy of the nanoribbon and l represents the length of the ribbons. EC, EN and EH are the energies of single C, N and H atoms in graphene, nitrogen and hydrogen molecules, respectively. nC, nN and nH are the total numbers of C, N and H atoms in C3NNRs, respectively. The effect of magnetism on the formation energy of different edges is also considered. The calculations demonstrated that the ground state of AC-C3NNRs is nonmagnetic. As for ZZ-C3NNRs, only ZZ-CN/CN is nonmagnetic, while both ZZ-CC/CC and ZZ-CC/CN are ferromagnetic. The calculated edge energies with respect to the ribbon width are shown in Fig. For both AC-and ZZ-C3NNRs, it is obvious that CN/CN edge structure has the lowest edge energy, followed by CC/CN edge, and CC/CC edge has the lowest thermodynamic stability. Eedge is also independent of the width of C3NNRs. Moreover, it can be found that ZZ-CC/CC is energetically unfavorable due to its positive value of Eedge. ZZ-CN/CN has much lower value of Eedge than AC-CN/CN at the same width, demonstrating that ZZ-CN/CN is more energetically favorable than AC-CN/CN. The electronic properties of H-passivated C3NNRs are calculated as well. The AC-C3NNRs with three edge configurations are all semiconductors with bandgaps ranging from 0.7 eV to 0.4 eV within the width range of 0.5 nm to 4 nm (see Fig. where Ebilayer and Emonolayer are the energies of bilayer and monolayer nanoribbons, respectively. n is the total number of atoms of the bilayer nanoribbon. To explore the electronic properties of these heterostructures, the bandgaps of bilayer C3NNRs with different stacking orders were calculated. Here, only bilayer C3NNRs with CN/CN edge are considered in our calculations because of the energetical stability of this edge, as shown in Fig. As shown in Table For AB-and AB'-stacking, their orbital overlaps are much less than those of AA-and AA'-stacking, since there are half atoms of lower layer are aligned with the upper layer atoms. This indicates that the possibility of orbital overlap reduces by half at the least. Specifically, there exists 20 CC orbital overlaps in CBM of the AB-stacking, while there are 9 CC and 9 NN orbital overlaps in VBM of AB-stacking. It is clear that the number of orbital overlap is roughly reduced by half compared to the AA-stacking. Therefore, the energy shift of CBM and VBM in AB-stacking is significantly reduced compared with the AA-stacking. As for the AB'-stacking, there exists 10 CC orbital overlaps in CBM, while there are 4 CC and 4 NN orbital overlaps in VBM. Thus, the energy shift of the AB'-stacking is least among all stacking types. In addition to the bandgap change, the band structures of bilayer heterostructures also changes with the stacking order. For example, AA-, AB-and AB'-stacking structures For bilayer ZZ-CN/CN heterostructures with AA-, AA'-, AB-and AB'-stacking, the bandgaps reduced by 0.32eV, 0.26eV, 0.13eV and 0.05eV, respectively. This also makes the bandgaps of the four stacking structures follow the order of AB'-> AB-> AA'-> AA-stacking, which is similar with the case of bilayer AC-CN/CN heterostructures. As shown in Fig. While the bandgap of AB'-stacking is smaller than that of monolayer ZZ-CN/CN (dash red line) but larger than that of C3N nanosheet (blue dash line). Similar to bilayer AC-CN/CN heterostructures, the energy shift of CBM and VBM in bilayer ZZ-CN/CN is also dependent on the number of orbital overlaps. As shown in Fig. and Table In summary, we carried out systematic investigations on the atomistic structures, energetic stabilities and electronic properties of monolayer and bilayer C3NNRs by first-principles calculations. Our computational results indicated that cutting C3N into nanoribbons is an effective way to enlarge its bandgap and the bandgaps of C3NNRs of