Meta-optics based on optically-resonant dielectric nanostructures is a rapidly developing research field with many potential applications. Halide perovskite metasurfaces emerged recently as a novel platform for meta-optics, and they offer unique opportunities for control of light in optoelectronic devices. Here we employ the generalized Kerker conditions to overlap electric and magnetic Mie resonances in each meta-atom of MAPbBr3 perovskite metasurface and demonstrate broadband suppression of reflection down to 4%. We reveal also that metasurface nanostructuring is also beneficial for the enhancement of photoluminescence. Our results may be useful for applications of nanostructured halide perovskites in photovoltaics and semi-transparent multifunctional metadevices where reflection reduction is important for their high efficiency. Recently, meta-optics based on halide perovskites nanostructures In this paper, we propose to employ the Kerker conditions for halide perovskite metasurfaces to achieve broadband suppression of reflection with simultaneous enhancement of photoluminescence properties. We verify our theoretical concept experimentally by nanostructuring MAPbBr 3 perovskite thin films creating a periodical lattice of Mie-resonant perovskite nanoparticles. Optical characterization confirms that the optimized geometric parameters of the metasurface correspond to the reduction of reflectivity from 33% down to 4%, while photoluminescence intensity can be increased by at least 15%. Theoretical approach. As was shown previously, the halide perovskite nanoparticles (e.g. those made of MAPbBr 3 ) of various shapes can support excitation of pronounced Mie resonances in visible and near-infrared ranges The Kerker effect was originally predicted by Kerker et al. To optimize metasurface geometry, at first we used approximation of spherical particles which allows us using of fully analytical Mie theory to describe optical response of perovskite nanoparticles The scattered far field of particle of arbitrary shape E sca is a spherical wave which can be described by following projections in spherical coordinates: with the scattering amplitudes S 1 and S 2 : Here a n (b n ) is scattering coefficient of Mie theory, which defines contribution on electric (magnetic) multipole on n-th order, and τ n and π n are functions which are related with Legendre functions of the first order: To obtain suppression of backward scattering, S 1 and S 2 should be zero when θ = 180 Multipoles coefficients, a.u. Wavelength, nm Wavelength, nm of linear equations, one can express generalized Kerker condition as follows: Simple optimization using experimental data for perovskite dielectric function shows that diameter of the sphere equaled to 170 nm corresponds to satisfying of generalized Kerker coditions in the vicinity of nanoparticle resonance and it is expected to satisfy them approximately in all the visible range (see Figure Numerical simulations. While results for sphere are encouraging, this shape of particle is hardly achievable for manufacturing. Based on used manufacturing methods, bullet-type nanoparticle could be used for experiment (see inset in Fig. To verify this prediction, we simulated numerically the scattering pattern of the bullet-type nanoparticle placed in the homogeneous environment with refractive index equaled to 1.51. It corresponds to case where particle is placed on the glass substrate and covered by the polymer and immersion oil with similar optical density. Figure To prove it, we simulated interaction of metasurface based on bullet-type nanoparticles placed on the top of glass substrate with normally incident linearly polarized light and sweep the geometrical parameters of metasurfaces. While base size of particle stayed the same, height of nanoparticle and period of metasurface can vary. Results of simulations, gathered in Figure However, this parameters of metasurface could correspond to the just optimal filling factor which could be easily satisfied in the metasurfaces based on the particles of other shape. To show that considered broadband anti-reflectance is not an effect of the special nanoparticles shape or suitable filling factor, we compared results of metasurfaces of different shapes but the same filling factor in Figure Experimental results. Basing on the developed design of a broadband antireflective metasurface, we realize it experimentally by employing focused ion beam (FIB) lithography for milling MAPbBr 3 thin film of thickness 170 nm. The details of the film synthesis and deposition are given in Methods. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the fabricated metasurface are shown in Fig. According to the optical images in reflection (Fig. On one hand, the removal considerable part of the film should result in immediate drop of photoluminescence (PL) integral power. On the other hand, according to the simulations, the emission range (λ ≈ 520-560 nm) overlaps with ED, MD, and EQ Mie resonances in the nanoparticles (see Fig. In order to overcome this problem, we propose the defects passivation by perovskite exposition in vapors of isopropyl alcohol (IPA) outside the glove box. In our experiments, the sample with metasurface is placed in a small Petri dish which is put in the bigger Petri dish and heated on the hot plate at 60 • C for 2 minutes. Then, 50 μl of the dissolved solution of MABr in IPA with concentration 20 g mL -1 (V = 0.5 ml) was dripped onto the bottom of the bigger Petri dish close to the small one, after that covered with the preheated lid of the big Petri dish and kept in the mist at 60 • C for 10 minutes. After that, we observe recovery of the PL intensity. Moreover, the metasurface demonstrates even 15% higher PL signal compared to the neighbour smooth area of the film (Fig. According to the previous studies, it is related to the Purcell effect in the resonant perovskite nanoparticles In summary, we have demonstrated that nanostructuring of halide perovskite thin films results in a strong suppression of reflection as well as enhancement of photoluminescent properties. In particular, we have fabricated perovskite metasurfaces with reflection less than 4% and transparency around 90% in a broad spectral range, with photoluminescence signal increased by 15% relative to an unpatterned film of the same thickness. Our design is based on the concept of the generalized Kerker effect realized in individual perovskite nanocuboids forming a periodic lattice. Additional chemical post-processing has allowed for passivating defects in the perovskite film, and, thus, eliminating the harmful effect of PL quenching after the FIB nanostructuring. We believe that our approach can be applied to a broad range of perovskite-based light-emitting structures with the refractive index close to that of MAPbBr 3 . Thus, a combination of novel strategies for geometrical and chemical optimisations of perovskites paves the way for multifunctional perovskite-based optoelectronic devices with high efficiency and high transparency. More specifically, this concept can be applied for improving light-emitting solar cells Materials. Lead(II) bromide (PbBr 2 , 99.998% trace metals basis, Puratronic, Alfa Aesar), methylammonium bromide (MABr, 99.5% DYESOL), dymethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, anhydrous 99.5%) and diethyl ether (anhydrous, Sigma-Aldrich) were used as received without additional purification. Preparation of perovskite precursor solutions. MAPbBr 3 solution. PbBr 2 (293.6 mg) and MABr (89.57 mg) were subsequently dissolved in 1 ml of anhydrous DMSO. All the solutions were prepared in a N 2 -filled glove box operating at 0.1 ppm of both O 2 and H 2 O. Thin films deposition. The glass substrates (18x18 mm 2 ) were subsequently ultrasonicated in acetone and 2propanol for 5 min, respectively, then washed with deionized water, and dried with dry air and finally cleaned with O 3 for 10 min. Perovskite films were spin-coated onto glass substrates by anti-solvent dripping method in the glove box. At first the galss substrate was fixed on the chuck of the sprincoater. Then 100 μl of perovskite ink was dripped into the center of the substrate. The spincoating cycle had following steps: at first step spincoater reached rotational speed of 1000rpm for 5 s at kept that speed for 40 s then it accelerates up to 3000 rpm for 3 s and kept this speed for 40s. At 32th s of the second cycle, 1 ml of diethyl ether was dripped onto the substrate. The films were annealed on the hot plate at 50 • C for 5 min and then at 100 • C for 10 min. Metasurface fabrication Metasurfaces were milled from the thin perovskite film with the use of focused ion Ga + beam. Structures fabrication was carried out with the system of crossed electron and ion beams implemented in Neon 40 (Carl Zeiss). For the milling process 10 pA ion current was used, which provides material etching without re-deposition Optical measurements Measurements of reflection (R) for thin film and metasurfaces was carried out in optical microscope (Carz Zeiss) with an objective ×100 NA = 0.9 focused and collected white light from a halogen lamp. Transmittance was measured on the same setup but with illumination of the samples from bottom by a condenser lens. The signal spectra were collected by a optical fiber with 600 μm core delivering light to a spectrometer (Ocean Optics, QE Pro). Analytical results and numerical simulations. Analytical predictions were made by employing the original Mie calculator implemented in Matlab. Numerical properties of standalone nanoparticles were performed via Comsol Multiphysics. Numerical simulations of metasurface optical properties were performed via CST Microwave studio due to its high performance in tasks of periodical structures simulations.