Materials design based on density functional theory (DFT) calculations is an emergent field of great potential to accelerate the development and employment of novel materials. Magnetic materials play an essential role in green energy applications as they provide efficient ways of harvesting, converting, and utilizing energy. In this review, after a brief introduction to the major functionalities of magnetic materials, we demonstrated the fundamental properties which can be tackled via high-throughput DFT calculations, with a particular focus on the current challenges and feasible solutions. Successful case studies are summarized on several classes of magnetic materials, followed by bird-view perspectives for the future. I. Introduction 2 II. Main applications of magnetic materials 3 A. Main applications 3 III. Criticality and sustainability 4 IV. Main challenges and possible solutions 5 A. New compounds and phase diagram 5 B. Correlated nature of magnetism 7 C. Magnetic ordering and ground states 8 D. Magnetic fluctuations 10 E. Magnetic anisotropy and permanent magnets 12 1. Origin of magnetocrystalline anisotropy 12 2. Permanent magnets: Rare-earth or not? 13 F. Magneto-structural transitions 16 G. Spintronics 18 H. Magnetic topological materials 21 I. Two-dimensional magnetic materials 23 V. Case Studies 26 A. High-throughput workflows 26 B. Heusler compounds 27 C. Permanent magnets 30 D. Magnetocaloric materials 30 E. Topological materials 31 F. 2D magnets 31 Advanced materials play an essential role in the functioning and welfare of the society, particularly magnetic materials as one class of functional materials susceptible to external magnetic, electrical, and mechanical stimuli. Such materials have a vast spectrum of applications thus are indispensable to resolve the current energy issue. For instance, permanent magnets can be applied for energy harvesting (e.g., wind turbine to generate electricity) and energy conversion (e.g., electric vehicles and robotics with mechanical energies from electricity). According to the BCC research report, 1 the global market for soft and permanent magnets reached $32.2 billion in 2016 and will reach $51.7 billion by 2022. Furthermore, to go beyond the quantum limit of conventional electronic devices, spintronics exploiting the spin degree of freedom of electrons provides a promising alternative for energy efficient apparatus, which has attracted intensive attention in the last decades. Nonetheless, there are still a variety of pending fundamental problems and emergent phenomena to be understood. Therefore, there is a strong impetus to develop better understanding of magnetism and magnetic materials, and to design magnetic materials with optimal performance. The conventional way of discovering and employing materials is mostly based on the empirical structureproperty relationships and try-and-error experiments, which are time and resource costly. Early in 2011, the U.S. government has launched the Materials Genome Initiative (MGI), aiming at strategically exploring materials design. Till now, high-throughput (HTP) computations based on DFT have been applied to screening for various functional materials, such as electro-catalyts, In this review, we aim at illustrating the pending problems and discussing possible solutions to facilitate HTP design of magnetic materials, focusing particularly on the intrinsic properties for crystalline compounds which can be evaluated based on DFT calculations. Also, we prefer to draw mind maps with a priority on the conceptual aspects rather than the technical and numerical details, which will be referred to the relevant literature. Correspondingly, the major applications of magnets and the criticality aspects will be briefly summarized in Sect. II. In Sect. III, we will elucidate several fundamental aspects which are essential for proper HTP computations on magnetic materials, with detailed discussions on a few representative classes of magnetic materials. The indepth mathematical/physical justification will not be repeated but referred to necessary publications for curious readers, e.g., the recently published "Handbook of Magnetism and Advanced Magnetic Materials" 14 is a good source for elaborated discussions on the physics of magnetic materials. In Sect. V the successful case studies will be summarized, with future perspectives given in Sect. VI. It is noted that there are a big variety of magnetic materials which are with intriguing physics or promising for applications, as listed in the magnetism roadmap. The main applications of magnetic materials are compiled in Table .I, together with the representative materials. We note that small magnetic nanoparticles (2-100 nm in diameter) can also be used in biology and medicine for imaging, diagnostics, and therapy, Permanent magnets are magnetic materials with significant magnetization (either FM or FiM) which are mostly applied in generating magnetic flux in a gap, with the corresponding figure of merit being the maximum energy product (BH) max . In contrast, soft magnets are magnetic materials with significant M s as well, and they are easy to be magnetized and demagnetized corresponding to high initial and maximal relative permeability μ r = B/(μ 0 H), where B = μ 0 (H+M) denotes the magnetic induction under magnetic field H, and μ 0 is the vacuum magnetic permeability. That is, the corresponding hysteresis loop as shown in Fig. Magnetic materials are a prime example where the supply risk of strategic metals, here most importantly rare-earth (RE) elements, might inhibit the future development. In general, resource criticality and sustainability is understood as a concept to assess potentials and risks in using raw materials for certain technologies, particularly strategic metals and their functionalities in emerging technologies. To be specific, the RE elements such as Sm, Dy, and Tb (the latter two are usually used to improve the coercivity and thermal stability of the Nd-Fe-B systems In this section, the fundamental aspects of designing magnetic materials are discussed, with the pending problems and possible solutions illustrated. There have been of the order of 10 5 inorganic compounds which are experimentally known (e.g. from the ICSD database), which amount to a few percent of all possible combinatorial compositions and crystal structures. where G(target) and G(comp. phases) denote the Gibbs free energy for the target and competing phases, respectively. We note that the Gibbs free energy is a function of temperature T and pressure P, leading to possible metastable phases at finite temperature/pressure. In most cases, only the formation energy with respect to the constituent elements is evaluated, but not the convex hull with respect to the other (either known or unknown) competing phases. It is observed that evaluating the convex hull can reduce the number of predicted stable compounds by one order of magnitude. FIG. A few comments are in order. First of all, DFT calculations are usually performed at 0 K and ambient pressure, thus cannot be directly applied to access the metastability at finite temperature or pressure. The pressure can be easily incorporated into calculations using most DFT codes, whereas the temperature constraint can also be remedied by evaluating the Gibbs free energies as discussed later in Sect. IV D. Nevertheless, given that typical solid phase transitions occur around a few hundreds Kelvin which amounts to tens of meV, it is a challenging task to evaluate the phase transition temperature accurately based on DFT calculations. In this regard, the combination of the DFT and CALPHAD 48 methods provides a good solution where experimental measurements can be easily incorporated, in addition to a straightforward generalization to multicomponent systems. The resulting phase diagram will also provide valuable guidance for the experimental synthesis. Furthermore, the stability of metastable phases can be further enhanced by modifying the experimental processes. For instance, precursors can be used in order to reduce the thermodynamic barrier (Fig. 2. mechanical stability, which describes the stability against distortions with respect to small strain. It can be formulated as where C ij denotes the elastic constant and the strain, and E 0 denotes the ground state energy from DFT with equilibrium lattice parameters. Depending on the crystalline symmetry, Eq. ( 3. dynamical stability, which describes the stability against atomic displacements due to phonons. In the harmonic approximation, where Φ σ,σ R,R is the force constant matrix, D R,σ marks the displacement of atom at R in the Cartesian direction σ. The positive definiteness can be assured by diagonalizing the Fourier transformation of Φ σ,σ R,R , where no negative eigenvalue is allowed. That is, there should be no imaginary phonon mode in the whole Brillouin zone (BZ). On the other hand, if there does exist imaginary phonon modes, particularly at a few specific qpoints, it suggests that the compounds can probably be stabilized in the correspondingly distorted structure. Till now, the stabilities are evaluated assuming specific crystal structures. Such calculations can be easily extended to include more structural prototypes based on the recently compiled libraries of prototypes. For magnetic materials, based on (a) how the magnetic moments are formed and (b) the mechanism coupling the magnetic moments, the corresponding theory has a bifurcation into localized and itinerant pictures. where g J is the Landé g-factor, J denotes the total angular momentum, and μ B is the Bohr magneton. The magnetic susceptibility above the critical ordering temperature (i.e., in the paramagnetic (PM) states) obeys the Curie-Weiss law: 65 where C is a material-specific constant, and θ W denotes the Curie-Weiss temperature where χ shows a singular behavior. The Weiss temperature θ W can have positive and negative values, depending on the resulting ferromagnetic (FM) and antiferromagnetic (AFM) ordering, whereas its absolute value is comparable to the Curie/Néel temperature. The Weiss temperature corresponds to the molecular field as introduced by Weiss, 66 which can be obtained via a mean-field approximation of the general Heisenberg Hamiltonian: where J ij denotes the interatomic exchange interaction. Specifically, S i • S j is approximated to S z i S z j + S z i S z j by neglecting the fluctuations and hence the spin flip term S + i S - j , leading to an effective field proportional to the magnetization corresponding to the exchange field in spin-polarized DFT. However, the real materials in general cannot be classified as either purely localized or itinerant and are mostly at a crossovers between two limits. As shown in Fig. where t ij is the hopping parameter between different sites, n is the number of electrons, and U denotes the on-site Coulomb interaction. As a matter of fact, the Stoner model is a mean field approximation of the Hubbard model in the weakly correlated limit andthe Heisenberg model can be derived in the strongly coupled limit at half-filling. Assuming the local magnetic moments are well defined, the Heisenberg Hamiltonian Eq. (IV B) is valid to describe the low temperature behavior, the interatomic exchange J ij is the key to understand the formation of various long-range ordered states.There are three types of mechanisms, based on the distance between the magnetic moments and how do they talk to each other. 1. direct exchange for atoms close enough so that the wave functions have sufficient overlap. Assuming two atoms each with one unpaired electron, the Coulomb potential is reduced for two electrons localized between the atoms when the atoms are very close to each other, leading to AFM coupling based on the Pauli's exclusion principle. On the other hand, when the distance between two atoms becomes larger, the electrons tend to stay separated from each other by gaining kinetic energy, resulting in FM coupling. Thus, the direct exchange is short ranged, which is dominant for the coupling between the first nearest neighbors. This leads to the Bethe-Slater curve, where the critical ratio between the atomic distance and the spatial extent of the 3d-orbital is about 1.5 which separate the AFM and FM coupling. 3. superexchange for insulating compounds with localized moments, which is driven by kinetic energy gain via the virtual excitations of local spin between magnetic ions through the bridging nonmagnetic elements, such as oxygen in TM oxides. The superexchange can favor both AFM and FM couplings depending on the orbital occupation and the local geometry, which has been formulated as the Goodenough-Kanamori-Anderson rules. Based on the discussions above, the exchange coupling between atomic moments can be either FM or AFM, depending on the active orbitals, distances, and geometries. Such AFM/FM exchange couplings induce various possible magnetic configurations, which give rise to a complication for HTP screening of magnetic materials. That is, the total energy difference for the same compounds with different magnetic states can be significant. This can be roughly estimated by the Curie temperature (T C ), i.e., about 0.1 eV corresponding to the T C (1043 K) of bcc Fe. Thus, magnetic ground state is important not only for the electron structure but also for the thermodynamic stability. However, the number of possible AFM configurations which should be considered to define the magnetic ground state can be big, depending on the crystal structures and the magnetic ions involved. Therefore, identifying the magnetic ground state is the most urgent problem to be solved for predictive HTP screening on magnetic materials. There have been several attempts trying to develop a solution. The most straightforward way is to collect all possible magnetic configurations from the literature for a specific class of materials or consider a number of most probable states, such as done for the half-Heuslers. Furthermore, the interatomic exchange J ij in Eq. (IV B) can be evaluated based on DFT calculations, which can then be used to find out the magnetic ground states via Monte Carlo modelling. There are different methods on evaluating the J ij . The most straightforward one is the energy mapping, where the J ij for each pair of moments are obtained by the difference of total energies for the FM and AFM configurations. where the Heisenberg term in Eq. (IV B) corresponds to the isotropic exchange represents the Dzyaloshinsky-Moriya interaction (DMI). It is noted that DMI is the crucial parameter to form Skyrmions. In short, the essential challenges are (a) how to obtain the magnetic ground states in a HTP manner and (b) how to evaluate the exchange parameters. As we discussed, there are a few possible solutions for the former question. Regarding the latter, as far as we are aware, there has been no reliable implementation where the exchange parameters can be evaluated in an automated way, where either the DFT part of the codes needs careful adaption for materials with diverse crystal structures or only specific components of the exchange parameters can be evaluated. The discussions till now have been focusing on the magnetic properties at zero Kelvin, however, the thermodynamic properties and the magnetic excitations of various magnetic materials are also fundamental problems which should be addressed properly based on the microscopic theory. To this goal, the magnetic fluctuations driven by temperature shall be evaluated, which will destroy the long-range magnetic ordering at T C /T N , resulting in a paramagnetic state with fluctuating moments. The working horse DFT can in principle be generalized to finite temperature, 100 but to the best of our knowl-edge there is no implementation into the DFT codes on the market. Specifically for the magnetic excitations, the ab initio spin dynamics formalism proposed by From the physics point of view, there are two types of excitations, i.e., transversal and longitudinal excitations. For itinerant magnets, the former refers to the collective fluctuations of the magnetization directions which dominates at the low-temperature regime, whereas the latter is about the spin-flip excitations (i.e., Stoner excitations) leading to the reduction of magnetic moments. Correspondingly for the localized moments, the occupation probability of the atomic multiplets varies with respect to temperature, giving rise to the temperature dependent magnitude of local moments, while the interatomic exchange parameters of the RKKY type will cause collective transversal spin waves as well. One of the most essential intrinsic magnetic properties is the magnetic ordering temperature, i.e., T C (T N ) for FM (AFM) materials. The theoretical evaluation of the T C /T N usually starts with the Heisenberg model (Eq. (IV B)) with the J ij parameters obtained from DFT calculations, as detailed in Sect. IV C. As the spin wave precession energy is smaller than the band width and the exchange splitting, it is justified to neglect the precession of magnetization due to the spin waves when evaluating the electronic energies, dubbed as the adiabatic approximation, the critical temperature can be obtained by statistical averaging starting from the Heisenberg model. Both mean-field approximation and ran-dom phase approximation can be applied, where the former fails to describe the low-temperature excitations. To evaluate F magnetic , the disordered local moment (DLM) method 111 provides a valuable solution for both magnetically ordered and disordered (e.g., paramagnetic) states. The DLM method also adopts the adiabatic approximation, and it includes two conceptual steps: 112 (1) the evolution of the local moment orientations and (2) the electronic structure corresponding to each specific configuration. A huge number of orientational configurations are required in order to accurately evaluate the partition function and hence the thermodynamic potential, which can be conveniently realized using the multiple scattering theory formalism based on the Green's functions, namely the KKR method. The DLM method can also be performed using supercells by generating magnetic configurations like special quasi-random structures (SQS), which is invented to model the chemical disorder. Another promising method to address all the issues discussed above is the DFT+DMFT methods. The DMFT method works by mapping the lattice Hubbard model onto the single-site Anderson impurity model, where the crystalline environment acts on the impurity via the hybridization function. Overall, the key challenge to obtain the thermodynamic properties of magnetic materials is the accurate evaluation of the total Gibbs free energy including longitudinal and transversal fluctuations, together with coupling to the lattice degree of freedom. DFT+DMFT is again a decent solution despite known constraints as discussed above, but there is no proper implementation yet ready for HTP calculations. As another essential intrinsic magnetic property, MAE can be mostly attributed to the SOC, 127 which couples the spontaneous magnetization direction to the underlying crystal structure, i.e., breaks the continuous symmetry of magnetization by developing anisotropic energy surfaces. where ∇V marks the derivative of a scalar electrostatic potential, m the mass of electrons, c the speed of light, s (l) the spin (orbital) angular momentum operator. ξ indicates the magnitude of SOC, which is defined for each l-shell of an atom, except that for the s-orbitals where l = 0 leading to zero SOC. The strength of atomic SOC can be estimated by ξ ) for the f -orbitals, respectively. where e m stands for the unit vector along the magnetization direction. the anisotropic spin distribution, with #» r indicating the position unit vector, Q = l 2 -1 3 l 2 indicates the charge quadrupole moment. It is noted that the spin-flip contribution is of higher order with respect to ξ, which is significant for compounds with significant SOC. On the other hand, for the orbital momentum term, it will be reduced to MAE = -1 4 ξe m • δ l ↓ for strong magnets with the majority channel fully occupied, 136 suggesting that the magnetization prefers to be aligned along the direction where the orbital moment is of larger magnitude. Following the perturbation theory, the MAE can be enhanced by engineering the local symmetry of the magnetic ions. It is well understood that the orbital moments are originated from the degeneracy of the atomic orbitals which are coupled by SOC. In general, MAE is a small quantity with a typical magnitude between μeV and meV, as a difference of two numbers which are orders of magnitude larger. In this regard, it is very sensitive to the numerical details such as exchange-correlation functionals, k-point convergence, implementation of SOC, and so on, leading to expensive full relativistic calculations particularly for compounds with more than 10 atoms per unit cell. To get a good estimation, force theorem is widely used (second line of Eq. (IV E 1)), where MAE is approximated as the difference of the sum of DFT energies for occupied states obtained by one-step SOC calculations. From the materials point of view, there are two classes of widely used permanent magnets, namely, the TMbased ferrite and AlNiCo, and the high performance REbased Nd 2 Fe 14 B and SmCo 5 . One crucial factor to distinguish such two classes of materials is whether the RE elements are included, which causes significant MAE due to the competition of enhanced SOC and reduced band width for the 4f -orbitals. Since MAE is originated from SOC, it is an inert atomic property, i.e., its strength cannot be easily tuned by applying external forces which are negligible comparing to the gradient of the electrostatic potential around the nuclei. In addition, the exchange splitting is mostly determined by the Coulomb interaction. For the RE-free magnets, the theoretical upper limit 152 of MAE as high as 3.6 MJ/m 3 . That is, there is a strong hope that RE-free materials can beengineered for high performance permanent magnets. There have also been a number of compounds investigated following this line, focusing on the Mn-, Fe-, and Co-based compounds. However, the interatomic exchange between Mn moments has a strong dependence on the interatomic distance, e.g., the Mn moments tend to couple antiferromagnetically (ferromagnetically) if the distance is about 2.5-2.8 Å(>2.9 Å). 167 and recently Nd 2 Fe 14 B. 168 Such models are ideally predictive, if the parameters are obtained from accurate electronic structure calculations based on DFT. One typical problem of such phenomenological modelling is the ill-description of the temperature dependency of the physical properties, e.g., the magnitude of moments is assumed to be temperature independent. 116 This issue cannot be solved using the standard DFT which is valid at 0 K. For instance, both the longitudinal and transversal fluctuations are missing in conventional DFT calculations. Additionally, for the 4f -3d magnets, the MAE and the inter-sublattice exchange energy are of the same order of magnitude, thus the experimental measurement along the hard axis does not correspond to a simplified (anti-)parallel configuration of 4f and 3d moments. Another challenging problem is how to treat the strongly correlated 4f -electrons. Taking SmCo 5 as an example, there is clear experimental evidence that the ground state multiplet J=5/2 is mixed with the excited multiplets J=7/2 and J=9/2, leading to strong temperature dependence of both spin and orbital moments of Sm. 182 have been performed using primitive analytical impurity solvers. It is noted that SOC is off-diagonal for the Anderson impurities with real spherical harmonics as the basis, leading to possible severe sign problem when the quantum Monte Carlo methods are used as the impurity solver. For such cases, either the hybridization function is diagonalized to obtain an effective basis such as demonstrated for iridates in the 5d 5 J=1/2 states 183,184 , or the variational cluster approach can be applied. One particularly interesting class of compounds which has drawn intensive attention recently is the Ferich metastable materials with the ThMn 12 -type structure. Overall, although the MAE is numerically expensive to evaluate, it is a straightforward task to perform calculations with SOC considered which has been reliably implemented in many DFT codes. The key issue to perform HTP screening of permanent magnets is to properly account for the magnetism such as the spin fluctuations in RE-free and strongly correlated 4f electrons in RE-based materials. In addition, a systematic investigation of the intermetallic structure maps and the tunability of crystal structures via interstitial and substitutional doping will be valuable to design potential compounds. Cautions are deserved particularly when trying to evaluate the MAE for doped cases where the supercells might impose unwanted symmetry on the MAE, and also that the FM ground state should be confirmed before evaluating the MAE. In general, the functionalities of ferroic materials are mostly driven by the interplay of different ferroic orders such as ferroelasticity, ferromagnetism, and ferroelectricity, which are coupled to the external mechanical, magnetic, and electrical stimuli. To search for potential candidates with significant MCE, it is critical to develop mechanistic understanding of the existing cases. For instance, Ni 2 MnGa is the only Heusler compounds with the stoichiometric composition that undergoes a martensitic transition at 200K between the L2 1 austenite and DO 22 martensitic phases (cf. Fig. The magnetocaloric performance of stoichiometric Ni 2 MnGa is not significant, as the martensitic transition occurs between the FM L2 1 and modulated martensitic phase. As shown in Fig. Therefore, designing novel MCE materials entails joint theoretical and experimental endeavour. HTP calculations can be applied to firstly search for compounds with polymorphs linked by group-subgroup relationships, and then to evaluate the Gibbs free energy for the most promising candidates. Nevertheless, for such materials with first-order magneto-structural transitions, hysteresis typically arises as a consequence of nucleation, in caloric materials it occurs primarily due to the domain-wall pinning, which is the net result of long-range elastic strain associated with phase transitions Thus, experimental optimization on the microstructures 239 (Sect. VI A) is unavoidable in order to obtain a practical material ready for technical applications. Till now we have been focusing on the physical properties of the equilibrium states, whereas the nonequilibrium transport properties of magnetic materials leads to many interesting properties, where spintronics is one class of the most interesting phenomena. In contrast to the conventional electronic devices, the spin degree of freedom of electrons has been explored to engineer more energy efficient devices. where γ, α, and M s mark the gyromagnetic ratio, the Gilbert damping parameter, and the saturation magnetization, respectively. e m , B, and T indicate the magnetization unit vector, the effective field, and the total torque, respectively. The torque T is perpendicular to m, which can be generally expressed as 292 where is the unit vector of the torque. Note that the field-like and damping-like terms act on the magnetization like the precession and relaxation terms in the LLG equation (Eq. (IV G)). To induce finite SOT, effective non-equilibrium spin polarization is required, which can be obtained via (a) SHE and (b) Edelstein effect 302 (i.e., inverse spin Galvanic effect(iSGE) 303 ). From symmetry point of view, the occurrence of SOT requires noncentrosymmetric symmetry, thus the heterostructures of NM/FM materials provide a rich playground to investigate SOT, where paramagnetic materials with significant SHE have been the dominant source for inducing spin injection and SOT in FM materials. For instance, SOT has been investigated in Ta|CoFeB, 261 Pt|Co, 257,258 , SrIrO 3 midNiFe, 263 and Bi 2 Se 3 |BaFe 12 O 19 . 304 On the other hand, the Edelstein effect requires Rashba splitting, which can also be applied for spin-charge conversion and hence SOT. For instance, the spin-charge conversion has been demonstrated for 2DEG at the interfaces of LaAlO 3 |SrTiO 3 , 305 Ag|Bi, 306 , and Cu|Bi 2 O 3 |NiFe. 307 Correspondingly, SOT is recently observed in NiFe|CuO x driven by the Rashba splitting at the interfaces. As SOT can be summarized as torque induced by spin current, the Onsager reciprocal effect is spin pumping, i.e., the generation of spin current via induced magneti-zation dynamics. Usually the spin pumping is induced by generating non-equilibrium magnetization dynamics using the ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) and hence creates a pure spin current which can be injected into the adjacent NM layers (i.e., spin sink) without a charge flow under zero bias voltage. For instance, it is demonstrated that spin pumping can be achieved in NiFe|Pt bilayers, 259 with Pt being the spin sink, which can be conveniently detected via the iSHE. In this regard, many materials have been considered as spin sinks, such as heavy metals like Au and Mo 260 and semiconductors as GaAs. An emergent field of great interest is AFM spintronics, which possess several advantages over the FM counterpart. Another emerging field of spintronics is magnonic spintronics 321 realized based on both FM and AFM insulators, as each electron carries an angular momentum of /2 whereas each magnon as the quasiparticle of spin wave excitations carries an angular momentum of . Theoretically, it is predicted that at the interfaces of NM|FMinsulator bilayers, spin gets accumulation which is accompanied by the conversion of spin current to magnon current. Pioneered by the discovery of integer 326,327 and fractional The occurrence of other topological phases such as TI and Dirac fermions in magnetic materials requires extra symmetry. For instance, the Kramers degeneracy is required to define the Z 2 index for nonmagnetic TI. 330 However, the electronic bands in magnetic materials are generally singly degenerate except at the time-reversal invariant momenta (TRIMs), therefore additional symmetry is required in order to restore the Kramers degeneracy. This leads to the prediction of AFM topological insulators, 344 which are protected by an anti-unitary product symmetry S = PΘ, where P can be a point group symmetry 345 or a nonsymmorphic symmetry operator which reverses the magnetization direction of all moments. Furthermore, it is noted that the inversion symmetry I respects the magnetization direction, thus parity as the resulting eigenvalues of I can still be applied to characterize the topological phase if the compound is centrosymmetric. Nevertheless, the generalized Z 4 character should be used, 346 e.g., 4n+2 number of odd parities from the occupied states at TRIMs corresponds to a nontrivial axion insulator. In the same way, for topological semimetallic phases, 339 additional crystalline line symmetry should be present, as will be discussed for particular materials below. Turning now to the first class of materials exhibiting QAHE, which was predicted by Haldane. 385 Such a phenomena can be realized in magnetic topological insulators, 386 with magnetism introduced by doping as observed in Cr 0.15 (Bi 0.1 Sb 0.9 ) 1.85 Te 3 at 30 mK. Particularly, compounds with honeycomb lattices are a promising playground for QAHE, including functionalized graphene, 387,388 Mn 2 C 18 H 12 , 389 etc. We want to point out that QAHE is defined for 2D systems, 385 an interesting question is whether there exists 3D QAHI. By making an analogue to the 3D integer quantum Hall effect, 390 the 3D QAHI can be obtained by stacking 2D QAHI on top of each other, or by stacking Weyl semimetals. The 2D nature of QAHE observed in Cr-doped TIs arises two questions: (1) whether the gap opening in the Dirac surface states required for QAHE can be confirmed experimentally and (2) whether it is possible to engineer axion insulators by forming heterostructures of magnetic-TI/normal-TI/magnetic-TI. For the former, a band gap of 21 meV was observed in Mn-doped Bi 2 Se 3 393 but proved not originated from magnetism. The relevant orbitals responsible for the topological properties for most of the materials discussed so far are p-orbitals of the covalent elements, where the TM-d and RE-f states play an auxiliary role to introduce magnetic ordering. A particularly interesting subject is to investigate the topological features in bands derived from more correlated d/f -orbitals, which has recently been explored extensively in ferromagnetic Kagome metallic compounds in the context of Weyl semimetals. We note that the Kagome lattice with AFM nearest neighbor coupling has been an intensively studied field for the quantum spin liquid. Iridates are another class of materials which are predicted to host different kind of topological phases. Obviously, almost all known topological phases can be achieved in magnetic materials, which offer more degrees of freedom compared to the nonmagnetic cases to tailor the topological properties. Symmetry plays a critical role, e.g., semimetals with nodal line 383373384 and many-fold nodal points, 339 can also be engineered beyond the Dirac nodes and AFM TIs discussed above. Unlike nonmagnetic materials where the possible topological phases depend only on the crystal structure and there are well compiled databases such as ICSD, there is unfortunately no complete database with the magnetic structures collected. Also, it is fair to say that no ideal Weyl semimetals have been discovered till now, e.g., there are other bands around the Fermi energy for all the Weyl semimetal materials listed in Tab. III. Therefore, there is a strong impetus to carry out more systematic studies on screening and designing magnetic materials with nontrivial topological properties. Pioneered by the discovery of graphene, 441 there has been recently a surge of interest on two-dimensional (2D) materials, due to a vast spectrum of functionalities such as mechanical, 442 electrical, 443 optoelectronic, 444 and superconducting 445 properties and thus immense potential in engineering miniaturized devices. However, the 2D materials with intrinsic long-range magnetic ordering have been missing until the recently confirmed systems like CrI 3 , 446 Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 , 447 and Fe 3 GeTe 2 448 in the monolayer limit. This enables the possibility to fabricate vdW heterostructures based on 2D magnets and hence paves the way to engineer novel spintronic devices. Nevertheless, the field of 2D magnetism is still in its infancy, with many pending problems such as the dimensional crossover of magnetic ordering, tunability, and so on. According to the Mermin-Wagner theorem, 449 the long-range ordering is strongly suppressed at finite temperature for systems with short-range interactions of continuous symmetry in reduced dimensions, due to the divergent thermal fluctuations. Nevertheless, as proven analytically by Onsager, 450 the 2D Ising model guarantees an ordered phase, protected by a gap in the spinwave spectra originated from the magnetic anisotropy. The interplay of interlayer exchange and magnetic anisotropy leads to more interesting magnetic properties for CrX 3 (X = Cl, Br, and I). The Cr 3+ ions with octahedral environment in such compounds have the 3d 3 configuration occupying the t 2g orbitals in the majority spin channel. The SOC is supposed to be quenched leading to negligible single-ion MAE. Nevertheless, large MAE can be induced by the strong atomic SOC on the I atoms, i.e., intersite SOC, as elaborated in Ref.456,457 As the atomic SOC strength is proportional to the atomic number, the MAE favors in-plane (out-of-plane) magnetization for CrCl 3 (CrBr 3 and CrI 3 ), respectively. Note that for the bulk phases, the intralayer exchange is FM for all three compounds, while the interlayer exchange is FM for CrBr 3 and CrI 3 , and AFM for CrCl 3 . 458 In this regard, the most surprising observation for the few-layer systems is that CrI 3 bilayers have AFM interlayer coupling 446 with a reduced Néel temperature of 46K in comparison to the bulk value of 61K (Fig. The key to understand the magnetic behavior of such 2D magnets is to construct a reliable spin Hamiltonian based on DFT calculations. Different ways to evaluate the interatomic exchange parameters have been scrutinized in Ref.464 for CrCl 3 and CrI 3 . It is pointed out that the energy mapping method, which has been widely used, leads to only semi-quantitative estimation. Whereas the linear response theory including the ligand states give more reasonable results, ideally carried out in a self-consistently way. Particularly, exchange parameters beyond the nearest neighbors should be considered, as indicated by fitting the inelastic neutron scattering on FePS 3 . 465 Moreover, for the interlayer exchange coupling, DFT calculations predict AFM coupling while the ground state is FM for Cr 2 Si 2 Te 6 , 466 which may be due to the dipole-dipole interaction which is missing in nonrelativistic DFT calculations. 467 Note that the interlayer exchange coupling is very sensitive to the distance, stacking, gating, and probably twisting, 468 which can be used to engineer the spin Hamiltonian which should be evaluated quantitatively to catch the trend. Furthermore, as the most of the 2D magnets have the honeycomb lattice with edge-sharing octahedra like the layered Na 2 IrO 3 and α-RuCl 3 which are both good candidates to realize the quantum spin liquid states, 469 the Kitaev physics becomes relevant, e.g., a comparative investigation on CrI 3 and Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 demonstrated that there does exist significant Kitaev interactions in both compounds. To tailor the 2D magnetism, voltage control of magnetism has many advantages over the mainstream methods for magnetic thin films such as externally magnetic fields and electric currents, because they suffer from poor energy efficiency, slow operating speed, and appalling size compactness. For biased CrI 3 bilayers, external electric fields can be applied to switch between the FM and AFM interlayer coupling. 2D magnets exhibit a wide spectrum of functionalities. For instance, tunnelling magnetoresistance in heterostructures of CrI3 has been observed in several set-ups incorporating CrI 3 multilayers, From the materials perspective, 2D materials have been extensively investigated both experimentally and theoretically. There exist several 2D material databases Like the 3D magnetic materials, 2D magnets displays comparable properties but with a salient advantage that they can form van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures without enforcing lattice matching. A. High-throughput workflows Fig. 1. crystal structure identification. As DFT calculations need only the chemical composition and crystal structure as inputs, HTP calculations mostly start with such information which can be obtained via (1) databases compiling known compounds, (2) substitution based on crystal structure prototypes, and (3) crystal structure prediction using evolutional algorithms. There have been a few databases such as ICSD https://icsd.fiz-karlsruhe.de/index.xhtml and COD http://www.crystallography.net/cod/, with the crystal structures for experimentally synthesized compounds and theoretically predicted crystal structures. Moreover, typical structure prototypes have been identified, 3. characterization of magnetic properties. In Fig. 4. database curation. Ideally, a data infrastructure is needed in order to obtain, store, analyze, and share the DFT calculations. Non-SQL databases (e.g., MongoDB) are mostly used because of their flexibility with the data structure, which can be adjusted for compounds with various complexity and addon properties evaluated in an asynchronized way. Moreover, the data should be findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR), 521 so that they can be shared with the community with approved provenance. Last but not least, with such database constructed, data mining using machine learning techniques can be performed to further accelerate the previous three steps and develop statistical insights on the results, as discussed in Sect. VI B. It is straightforward to set up such HTP workflows, either based on integrated platforms or starting from scratch, as many DFT codes have Python interfaces. Heusler compounds form an intriguing class of intermetallic systems possessing a vast variety of physical properties such as HM, MSME, TI, superconductivity, and thermoelectricity (please refer to Ref. 525 for a comprehensive review). Such versatility is originated from the tunable metallic and insulating nature of the electronic structure due to the flexibility in the chemical composition. As shown in Fig. Focusing on the regular Heusler systems, Interestingly, for both regular and inverse Heusler compounds, tetragonal distortions can take place driven by the band Jahn-Teller effect associated with high DOS at the Fermi energy. 535 HTP calculations reveal that 62% of the 286 Heusler compounds investigated prefer the tetragonal phase, due to the van Hove singularities around the Fermi energy. 536 Such tetragonal Heusler compounds exhibit large MAE, e.g., 5.19 MJ/m 3 for Fe 2 PtGe and 1.09 MJ/m 3 for Fe 2 NiSn, making them interesting candidates as permanent magnets and STT-MRAM materials. To go beyond the p-d covalent bonding between the X and Z atoms which stabilizes the Heusler structures, Wei et al. first explored the d-d hybridization in the Ni-Mn-Ti systems and observed that there exist stable phases with significant MSME, which offers also the possibility to improve the mechanical properties of the resulting Heusler systems in comparison to the main-group-element based conventional cases. The flexibility in the chemical composition for the intermetallic Heusler compounds can be further explored by substituting a fourth element or vacancy in X 2 YZ, leading to quaternary XX YZ and half XYZ Heusler (Fig. Regarding the half Heusler compounds, there have been extensive HTP calculations to screen for nonmagnetic systems as thermoelectric materials, One particularly interesting subject is to screen for Heuslers with transport properties of the topological origin. For instance, motivated by the recent discovered Weyl semimetal Co 2 MnGa, 359 an enlightening work evaluated the topological transport properties (e.g., AHC, ANC, and MOKE which obey the same symmetry rules) of 255 cubic (both regular and inverse) Heusler compounds in a HTP way. 563 By comparing the results for full and inverse Heuslers systems, it is observed that the mirror symmetry present in the full but not the inverse Heusler compounds plays an essential role to induce significant linear response properties. It is noted that only one FM (AFM) configuration is considered for the full (inverse) Heusler compounds, which might not be enough as the electronic structure and the derived physical properties are subjected to the changes in the magnetic configurations. Overall, it is obvious that Heusler compounds are a class of multifunctional magnetic materials, but the cur-rent HTP calculations are still far away from being complete. One additional issue is how to properly treat the chemical and magnetic disorders in such compounds in order to predict the electronic and thermodynamic properties. For instance, the MCE takes place only for Mnrich Ni-Mn-Ti, 543 which has not yet been explained based on DFT calculations. We believe substitutions and chemically disordered systems deserve more systematic treatments in the future HTP studies, particularly for Heusler alloys. As discussed above, the main tasks for HTP screening of permanent magnets are to evaluate the intrinsic magnetic properties for the known and predicted phases, including both RE-free and RE-based systems. A recent work 564 focuses on the RE-free cases, where starting from 10,000 compounds containing Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni available in the ICSD database, step-by-step screening is carried out based on the chemical composition, M s , crystal structure, magnetic ground state, and MAE. Three compounds, namely, Pt 2 FeNi, Pt 2 FeCu, and W 2 FeB 2 are finally recommended. It is noted that the magnetic ground state for the compounds during the screening is determined by the literature survey, which might be labor intensive and definitely cannot work for "unreported" cases. In addition to HTP characterization of the known phases and prediction of novel compounds, tailoring the existing phases on the boundary of being permanent magnets is also promising, which can be done via substitutional and interstitial doping. For instance, theoretical predictions suggest that Ir/Re doping can enhanced the MAE of (Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 B, which is confirmed by experiments. Turning now to the RE-based permanent magnets, due to the challenge to treat the correlated 4f -electrons, approximations are usually made. For instance, in a series of work, the tight-binding linear muffin-tin orbital method in the atom sphere approximation has been applied to screen the 1-5/2-17/2-14-1 type, 568 1-12 type, 569,570 1-11-X type, 173 and the 1-13-X type 571 classes of materials, where the 4f -electrons are considered in the spin-polarized core approximation. One apparent problem is that the magnetization and MAE cannot be obtained consistently based on such a method. The Staunton group has developed a consistent theoretical framework to evaluate both the magnetization and MAE, 572 which is interesting if further HTP calculations can be performed. Additionally, another common problem to access the thermodynamic stability of the REbased compounds with most DFT codes on the market. Nevertheless, the trend with respect to chemical compositions can be obtained, which can be validated with further experiments. Last but not least, the spin moments of the RE elements is usually aligned antiparallel to the magnetic moment of the transition metal atoms, which is usually not properly treated. For such materials, not only the single ion MAE but also inter-sublattice exchange coupling should be included in order to compare with experimental measurements. As discussed in Sect. IV F, MCE is driven by the interplay of various degrees of freedom leading to challenges in performing HTP design of novel MCE materials. For instance, rigorous evaluation of the Gibbs free energies including the lattice, spin, and electronic degrees of freedom is a numerically expensive task, not to mention the complex nature of magnetism and phase transition. Thus, it is of great impetus to establish a computational "proxy" which correlates the MCE performance with quantities easily accessible via DFT calculations. Following the concept that MCE is significant when the magneto-structural phase transitions occur, Bocarsly et al. proposed a proxy in terms of the magnetic deformation Σ M = 1 3 (η 2 1 + η 2 2 + η 3 3 ) 1/2 × 100 and η = 1 2 (P T P -I) where P = A -1 nonmag • A mag with A nonmag and A mag being the lattice constants of the nonmagnetic and mag-netic unit cells. A more systematic and computationally involved workflow is the CaloriCool approach, 237 based on two-step screening. It is suggested that the metallic alloys and intermetallic compounds are more promising candidates than the oxides, which "suffer from intrinsically low isentropic (a.k.a. adiabatic) temperature changes due to large molar lattice specific heat". The first step fast screening is based on the phase diagrams and crystal structures from the literature and known databases, which results in compounds with the same chemical composition but different crystal structures. In the second step, the physical properties including mechanical, electronic, thermodynamic, kinetic properties will be evaluated, c ombining DFT with multi-scale and thermodynamic methods. For instance, the thermodynamic properties can be evaluated following the methods proposed in Ref. 575, which is foreseeably expensive and better done one after another. Also, the success of the approach depends significantly on the database used for the first step screening. Nevertheless, it is proposed based on such design principles that there should be a solution phase Zr 1-x Yb x Mn 6 Sn 6 with significant MCE due to the fact that the pristine ZrMn 6 Sn 6 and YbMn 6 Sn 6 are with AFM and FM ground states with critical temperatures being 580K and 300K, respectively. This is very similar to the morphotropic phase boundary concept for ferroelectric materials, where the piezoelectric response associated with first order ferroelectric phase transition can be greatly enhanced at the critical compositions. 576 As discussed in Sect. IV H, insulators and semimetals of nontrivial nature are an emergent class of materials from both fundamental physics and practical applications points of view. To design such materials, symmetry plays an essential role as explained in detail in Sect. IV H for a few specific compounds. Particularly for magnetic materials, the occurrence of QAHI and Weyl semimetals is not constrained to compounds of specific symmetries, whereas the AFM TIs entail a product symmetry S = PΘ which can give rise to the demanded Kramers degeneracy. It is noted that the symmetry argument applies to the nonmagnetic topological materials as well, where based on topological quantum chemistry 577 and filling constraints 578,579 HTP characterization of nonmagnetic materials have been systematically performed. The HTP screening of 2D magnetic materials has been initiated by examining firstly the bulk materials that are held together by the van der Waals interaction, which can then be possibly obtained by chemical/mechanical exfoliation or deposition. Starting from the inorganic compounds in the ICSD database, 590 two recent publications tried to identify 2D materials by evaluating the packing ratio, which is defined as the ratio of the covalent volume and the total volume of the unit cell. Despite the existing problems with stability for 2D (magnetic) materials, a system workflow to characterize their properties has been demonstrated in a recent work. It is well known that 2D materials offer an intriguing playground for various topological phases particularly for magnetic materials including the QAHE 594 , AFM TI 596 , and semimetals. 417 HTP calculations based on the spin-orbit spillage 585 has been carried out to screen for magnetic and nonmagnetic topological materials in 2D materials, 597 resulting in four insulators with QAHE and seven magnetic semimetals. Such calculations are done on about 1000 compounds in the JARVIS database (https://www.ctcms.nist.gov/∼knc6/JVASP.html), and we suspect that more extensive calculations together with screening on the magnetic ground state can be interesting. Beyond the calculations across various crystal structure prototypes, HTP calculations on materials of the same structural type substituted by different elements provide also promising candidates and insights on the 2D magnetism. 598 For instance, Chittari et al. performed calculations on 54 compounds of the MAX 3 type, where M = V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, A = Si, Ge, Sn, and X = S, Se, Te. It is observed that most of them are magnetic, hosting HMs, narrow gap semiconductors, etc. Importantly, strain is found to be effective to tailor the competition between AFM and FM ordering in such compounds. 599 Similar observations are observed in in-plane ordered MXene (i-MXene), 600 which can be derived from the in-plane ordered MAX compounds with nano-laminated structures. 601 Moreover, our calculations on the 2D materials of the AB 2 (A being TM and B = Cl, Br, I) indicate that FeI 2 is a special case adopting the 2H-type structure while all the neighboring cases have the As discussed in previous sections, HTP calculations based on DFT are capable of evaluating the intrinsic physical properties, which usually set the upper limits for practical performance. To make more realistic pre-dictions and to directly validate with the experiments, multi-scale modelling is required. The first issue is to tackle the thermodynamic properties which can be obtained by evaluating the Gibbs free energy considering the contributions from the electronic, lattice, and spin degrees of freedom. Moreover, the applications of magnetic materials at elevated temperature dictate the numerical calculations of the magnetic properties at finite temperature as well, e.g., MAE at finite temperature. Given the fact that the computational facilities have been significantly improved nowadays, HTP predictions can be straightforwardly made, sometimes too fast in comparison to the more time-consuming experimental validation. In this regard, HTP experiments are valuable. Goll et al. proposed to use reaction sintering as an accelerating approach to develop new magnetic materials, 613 which provides a promising solution to verify the theoretical predictions and to further fabricate the materials. Such a HTP approach has also been implemented to screen over the compositional space, in order to achieve optimal MSME performance. Another emergent field is materials informatics 615 based on advanced analytical machine learning techniques, which can be implemented as the fourth paradigm 616 to map out the process-(micro)structureproperty relationship and thus to accelerate the development of materials including the magnetic ones. As the underlying machine learning is data hungry, it is critical to curate and manage databases. Although there is increasing availability of materials database such as Materials Project, 8 OQMD, 617 and NOMAD, 10 the sheer lack of data is currently a limiting factor. For instance, the existing databases mentioned above compile mostly the chemical compositions and crystal structures, whereas the physical properties particularly the experimentally measured results are missing. In this regard, a recent work trying to collect the experimental T C of FM materials is very interesting, which is achieved based on natural language processing on the collected literature. HTP calculations generate a lot of data which can be further explored using machine learning. This has been performed on various kinds of materials and physical properties, as summarized in a recent review. 625 Such machine learning modelling has also been applied on magnetic materials. For instance, based on the formation energies calculated, machine learning has been used to model not only the thermodynamic stability of the full Heusler, 526,626 half Heusler, 627 and quaternary Heusler 628 compounds, but also the spin polarization of such systems. Importantly, it is suspected that the interplay of machine learning and multi-scale modelling will create even more significant impacts on identifying the processstructure-property relationships. For instance, phase field modelling aided with computational thermodynamics can be applied to simulate the microstructure evolution at the mesoscopic scale for both bulk and interfaces, 630 leading to reliable process-structure mapping. As demonstrated in a recent work, 631 the structureproperty connection for permanent magnets can also be established based on massive micromagnetic simulations. Thus, HTP calculations performed in a quantitative way can be applied to generate a large database where the process-structure-property relationship can be further addressed via machine learning, as there is no unified formalism based on math or physics to define such linkages explicitly. Additionally, machine learning interatomic potentials with chemistry accuracy have been constructed and tested on many materials systems, 632 which are helpful to bridge the DFT and molecular dynamics simulations at larger length scales. We believe an extension of such a scheme to parameterize the Heisenberg Hamiltonian (Eq. (IV B)) with on-top spin-lattice dynamics simulations From the experimental perspective, adaptive design (i.e., active learning) based on surrogate models has been successfully applied to guide the optimization of NiTi shape memory alloys 633 and BaTiO 3 -based piezoelectric materials. 634 Such methods based on Bayesian optimization or Gaussian process work on small sample sizes but with a large space of features, resulting in guidance on experimental prioritization with greatly reduced number of experiments. This method can hopefully be applied to optimizing the performance of the 2-14-1 type magnets, as the phase diagram and underlying magnetic switching mechanism based on nucleation is well understood. Furthermore, the machine learning techniques are valuable to automatize advanced characterization. Small angle neutron scattering is a powerful tool to determine the microstructure of magnetic materials, where machine learning can be applied to accelerate the experiments. In conclusion, despite the magnetism and magnetic materials have been investigated based on quantum mechanics for almost a hundred years (if properly) marked by the discovery of electron spin in 1928, it is fair to say FIG. Among them, we would emphasize a few urgent and important aspects as follows, • integrating the magnetic ground state searching into the available HTP platforms so that automated workflow can be defined. There are several solutions developed recently as discussed in Sect. IV C; • implementation of a feasible DFT+DMFT framework for medium-(if not high-) throughput calculations. Two essential aspects are the interplay of Coulomb interaction, SOC, and hybridization and the treatment of magnetic fluctuations and paramagnetic states. This is also important for 2D magnets with enhanced quantum and thermal fluctuations; • consistent framework to evaluate the transport properties which can be achieved based on accurate tight-binding-like models using Wannier functions; 639 • quantitative multi-scale modelling of the magnetization reversal processes and the thermodynamic properties upon magneto-structural transitions in order to master hysteresis for permanent and magnetocaloric materials; • curation and management of a flexible database of magnetic materials, ready for machine learning. Additionally, a common problem not only applicable for magnetic materials but also generally true for the other classes of materials subjected to propertyoptimization is a consistent way to consider substitution in both the dilute and concentrated limits. There are widely used methods such as virtual crystal approximation, coherent potential approximation, 640 special quasirandom structures, 117 cluster expansion, 641 etc., but we have not yet seen HTP calculations done systematically using such methods to screen for substitutional optimization of magnetic materials. Beyond the bare HTP design, we envision a strong interplay between HTP, machine learning, and multiscale modelling, as sketched in Fig. All in all, HTP calculations based on DFT are valuable to provide effective screening on interesting achievable compounds with promising properties, as demonstrated for magnetic cases in this review. As the HTP methodology has been mostly developed in the last decade, we have still quite a few problems to be solved in order to get calculations done properly for magnetic materials, in order to be predictive. Concomitant with such an evolution of applying DFT to tackle materials properties, i.e., with a transformation from understanding one compound to defining a workflow, more vibrant research on (magnetic) materials are expected, particularly combined with the emergent machine learning and quantitative multi-scale modelling.