In conventional solar cell semiconductor materials (predominantly Si) photons with energy higher than the band gap initially generate hot electrons and holes, which subsequently cool down to the band edge by phonon emission. Due to the latter process, the energy of the charge carriers in excess of the band gap is lost as heat and does not contribute to the conversion of solar to electrical power. If the excess energy is more than the band gap it can in principle be utilized through a process known as carrier multiplication (CM) in which a single absorbed photon generates two (or more) pairs of electrons and holes. Thus, through CM the photon energy above twice the band gap enhances the photocurrent of a solar cell. In this review, we discuss recent progress in CM research in terms of fundamental understanding, emergence of new materials for efficient CM, and CM based solar cell applications. Based on our current understanding, the CM threshold can get close to the minimal value of twice the band gap in materials where a photon induces an asymmetric electronic transition from a deeper valence band or to a higher conduction band. In addition, the material must have a low exciton binding energy and high charge carrier mobility, so that photoexcitation leads directly to the formation of free charges that can readily be extracted at external electrodes of a photovoltaic device. Percolative networks of coupled PbSe quantum dots, Sn/Pb based halide perovskites, and transition metal dichalcogenides such as MoTe 2 fulfill these requirements to a large extent. These findings point towards promising prospects for further development of new materials for highly efficient photovoltaics. A photon with energy hν exceeding the band gap (E g ) of a semiconductor can excite an electron from a valence band to a conduction band and create an electron-hole pair. In this way, a hot electron and hole are produced that usually thermalize quickly to the band-edge with the excess energy (hν -E g ) being lost as heat (Figure Copyright (2014) Macmillan Publishers Limited. CM is also known as impact ionization (II) in bulk semiconductors and multi-exciton generation (MEG) in quantum confined nanomaterials when neutral excitons (Coulombically bound electron-hole pairs) are formed rather than free charge carriers. The key factors characterizing CM are the threshold photon energy from which CM starts and the quantum yield (QY), i.e. the number of electron-hole pairs produced per absorbed photon. The ideal CM scenario is a staircase dependence of the QY on the photon energy where the QY reaches 2 (n) at twice (n-times) the band gap multiple (Figure To effectively exploit CM in solar cells the band gap of the semiconductor should be 0.6-1.0 eV resulting in a maximum efficiency of ~ 44% for an ideal staircase scenario, see Figure During the process of CM, a hot charge carrier with energy exceeding the band gap (either an electron in a conduction band or a hole in a valence band) relaxes by excitation of a valence band electron to the conduction band. CM occurs in competition with phonon emission (carrier cooling). In bulk materials the CM threshold is often as high as about 4 times the band gap. In 2002 Nozik theoretically proposed that CM in quantum confined nanomaterials can be more efficient than in bulk. Interestingly, recent research suggests quantum confinement may not be a necessary requirement for efficient CM, as will be discussed in Section 6. The experimental techniques mostly utilized to investigate CM involve time-resolved pumpprobe laser spectroscopy with detection of transient optical absorption, photoluminescence, or microwave/terahertz conductivity. (1) Here, σ B represents the cross-section of bleach, photoinduced absorption, and/or stimulated emission at the probe energy due to an electron-hole pair. |∆A| is due to QDs containing a single exciton only. Adapted with permission from ref. Copyright (2008) American Chemical Society. For sufficiently high pump photon energy the hot electrons and holes can undergo CM or cooling by phonon emission. Hot charge carriers can lead to another magnitude and shape of the TA spectrum than relaxed charges at the band gap. Transient photoluminescence (PL) measurements have also been utilized to determine the CM threshold and QY. Free mobile charge carriers in assemblies of QDs, nanowires, 2-D, or bulk materials can be probed by time-resolved alternating current (AC) conductivity techniques at microwave or terahertz frequencies. Here e is the elementary charge, N A is the number of absorbed pump photons per unit volume, φ is the QY of charge carriers, and μ e and μ h are the electron and hole mobility, respectively. Therefore, the slope of the linear increase of ∆σ vs. N A gives the CM QY for the corresponding pump photon energy. If we excite below twice the band gap CM is impossible and the observed slope represents φ = 1. For excitation above twice the band gap an increase of the slope of a plot of ∆σ vs. N A gives the CM QY similar to the TA measurements discussed above. With THz measurements, the magnitude of ∆σ can be obtained on a picosecond timescale, which in most cases is sufficiently short to ensure recombination or trapping of charges has not yet occurred. Microwave conductivity measurements have a time resolution of nanoseconds and recombination/trapping of electrons and holes may already have taken place. The latter may be slower at higher pump photon energies and therefore care must be taken that a higher photoconductivity on a nanosecond timescale does indeed reflect CM. For an ideal case scenario, the CM threshold appears at twice the band gap with QY of 2. However, due to restrictions imposed by energy and momentum conservations the CM threshold is often far off from the ideal scenario. For parabolic bands with equal electron and hole effective masses, the threshold becomes 4 times the band gap as shown in Figure Asymmetric photoexcitation as mentioned above is also possible if there is a second conduction (or valence) band with extremum at twice the band gap, as shown in Figure In that case, the excess photon energy is fully transferred to the electron (or hole), which can subsequently relax by CM. Recently, Spoor et al. have shown that for Pb-chalcogenide bulk and QDs the CM threshold can be correlated to the onset of asymmetric optical excitations. 55 These asymmetric excitations involve higher valence and conduction bands, as shown in ) can be found at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnano.8b01530. Further permissions related to the material excerpted should be directed to the ACS. The CM QY is the net result of the decay of a hot charge carrier via consecutive steps of CM and phonon emission. CM results from the coupling of single and multi-exciton states by Coulomb interactions. In the context of quantum chemistry, this is known as configuration interaction (CI) of excited Slater determinants within the Born-Oppenheimer approximation for fixed nuclei. 66,67 A coherent superposition of single and multi-exciton states for fixed nuclei is hypothetical, due to the coupling of electrons with nuclear lattice vibrations (phonons), which makes the Born-Oppenheimer approximation invalid. Electron-phonon coupling results in electron cooling to lower states by phonon emission, as well as decoherence. Numerical calculations of incoherent decay of initially energetic charge carriers, with the rates of the competitive CM and phonon emission processes as parameters, have been successfully used to reproduce CM QYs in PbSe and PbS QDs. Firstly, the pathway in the model of A second approach known as the direct photogeneration model assumes a weak Coulomb coupling between single and biexciton states and was introduced by Klimov et al. The usual symmetric optical excitations in Pb-chalcogenides can be made asymmetric in a heterostructure with a Cd-chalcogenide. This is possible due to the almost equal energy of the conduction band of these two materials, while the valence band of Cd-chalcogenides is lower in energy than for Pb-chalcogenides. Asymmetric excitations have been realized in core/shell QDs and Janus-like NCs, as discussed below. Asymmetric optical excitation has been demonstrated for core/shell PbSe/CdSe QDs and a CM threshold close to twice the band gap (~2.2 E g ) has been realized. ii. Janus heterostructures Kroupa et al. have shown that CdS/PbS Janus hetero-structures have a CM threshold close to twice the band gap (which is determined by the PbS component) and QY higher than core/shell QDs. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. We have discussed the individual Pb-chalcogenide NCs (QDs, NRs, NSs) and heterostructures (core/shell, Janus) in terms of CM threshold and QY. In heterostructures, the CM threshold is reduced to just above twice the band gap and the QY is higher than in NCs consisting of a Pbchalcogenide only. However, for photovoltaic device applications, the NCs must be coupled to allow charge carrier transport and extraction at external electrodes. This can be realized by mutually connecting NCs to form an assembly in which charges can move from one NC to another. Therefore, from a practical point of view characterization of CM in solid films of coupled NCs is essential. In the first instance, Pb-chalcogenide QDs were coupled by introducing short organic ligands on their surface or infilling the space between QDs with metaloxides. In bulk Si, the predominant semiconductor utilized in solar cells, the CM threshold is about 3.5 times the band gap and the QY becomes 140% at 4.5 times the band gap. by Stolle et al. through TA measurements, see Figure of Si in the NIR region (~1200 nm) was monitored at different photoexcitation energies. For excitation energies more than twice the band gap the increase in |∆A| with a biexcitonic Auger decay confirmed the CM process. The CM threshold is lower for Si NRs of aspect ratio 20 (2.2 times the band gap) than it is for Si QDs (2.6 times the band gap) with similar band gap. Importantly, the CM QY was found to be 1.6 at 2.9 times the band gap which is twice that of Si QDs (Figure CM in perovskite materials has been investigated for several compositions such as in organicinorganic halide perovskite formamidinium lead iodide (FAPbI 3 ), all-inorganic cesium lead iodide (CsPbI 3 ) and bulk Sn/Pb halide perovskites. Li et al. studied the CM efficiency in cubic FAPbI 3 perovskite NCs of different sizes and in a bulk sample, which have a varying degree of quantum confinement. Mixed Sn/Pb halide perovskites have a band gap as low as 1.28 eV, which is much more suitable for solar cell applications than the band gap of the perovskites discussed above. It can be concluded from pump-probe spectroscopy, that in several materials CM occurs efficiently with a threshold close to twice the band gap. However, studies showing the system to measure the local photocurrent in PbS QDs (5.4 nm diameter) for different photon energies. We have discussed recent advances of research on CM and findings of new materials exhibiting near-ideal CM. It is of interest that CM with low threshold and appreciable QY has been found to occur in two-dimensional and bulk materials. Conditions to be met for the significant impact of CM in photovoltaics are: (i) asymmetric photoexcitation in which the excess photon energy is transferred predominantly to the electron or the hole so that the CM threshold can be close to twice the band gap, (ii) the exciton binding energy must be sufficiently small to generate free charge carriers, and (iii) charge carrier mobilities need to be high enough for efficient charge carrier transport and collection at electrodes in a device. These conditions have been realized to a large extent in percolative PbSe networks, a bulk Sn/Pb halide perovskite, and MoTe 2 . It appears that quantum confinement is not strictly required for efficient CM. Therefore, future research should also focus on two-dimensional and bulk-like materials.