The rare earth magnetic order in pure and doped Er (1-x) HoxNi2B2C (x = 0, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, 1) single crystal samples was investigated using magnetization and neutron diffraction measurements. Superconducting quaternary borocarbides, RNi2B2C where R = Er, Ho , are both magnetic intermetallic superconductors with the transition temperatures ∼ 10 K. These compounds also develop magnetic order in the vicinity of this temperature. Depending on the rare earth composition the coupling between superconductivity and magnetism creates several phases, ranging from a reentrant superconductor with a mixture of commensurate and incommensurate antiferromagnetism to a total incommensurate antiferromagnetic spin modulation with a weak ferromagnetic state. All of these phases coexist with superconductivity. RKKY magnetic interactions are used to describe the magnetic orders in the pure compounds. However, the doping of Ho on Er (or Er on Ho) sites which have two strong magnetic moments with two different easy directions creates new and complicated magnetic modulations with possible local disorder effects. One fascinating effect is the development of an induced magnetic state resembling the pure and doped R2CuO4, R = Nd and Pr. Rare earth (R) nickel borocarbides RNi 2 B 2 C have managed to stay a current research topic for more than 25 years. The reason for this longtime attraction is related to their magnetic low temperature states which occur in the vicinity of temperatures with superconductivity (SC) In this study we focus on magnetism, superconductivity and the interplay of these states within Er doped Ho (1-x) Er x Ni 2 B 2 C single crystals using magnetic susceptibility and triple-axis neutron diffraction techniques. Single crystals of RNi 2 B 2 C; R = Ho (1-x) Er x with x = 0, 0.25, 0.50 and 0.75 were grown using a slowcooling self-flux technique In order to see the superconducting phase and to determine the transition temperatures as functions of x, we performed a series of DC magnetization measurements, shown in Fig. In panel (c1) and (c2) we see the doping effect of more Er which changes the magnetic behaviour even further away from the reference. The most crowded and thus most interesting scattering plane shown in panel (a1) for the pure system is now empty, without any reflection for x = 0.5. This means that all magnetic moments in the x = 0.5 sample aligned themselves with a modulation along the H-direction, resembling the pure ErNi 2 B 2 C system. So the spin-density wave (SDW) modulation originally belonging to pure ErNi 2 B 2 C becomes more pronounced than the AFM orders seen in pure HoNi 2 B 2 C. This behaviour continues for the x = 0.75 sample and this is shown in panel (d1) and (d2). Different than all other samples, for the x = 0.75 sample there is another IC magnetic development at the (0.32 0 0) position. This peak's intensity increases at low temperatures shown in panel (d2) and the details are given below. Thinking that the origin of this new type of reflection might be a higher order satellite, specifically 3 rd harmonic modulation peak seen in pure ErNi 2 B 2 C, we performed position sensitive diffraction (PSD) measurements in the [H0L] magnetic scattering plane to find all possible magnetic Bragg peaks in this plane. The magnetic modulations studied in temperature scans in the previous figure, are now shown in Fig. The magnetic intensities shown in Fig. where t = T T N is the reduced temperature. A more complicated power law fit including a Gaussian (G(T N ,Γ)) to present a distribution of transition temperatures immersed at the center of the transition temperature at T = T N was also used in the analyses. This is given in Equ. 2 and the result of its fit is shown in the green colored lines in Fig. The critical order parameter analysis results given in Table In this study Er doped Ho 1-x Er x Ni 2 B 2 C single crystal samples with x = 0.25, 0.50 and 0.75 were investigated using MPMS and triple-axis neutron diffraction techniques. Further studies using small angle neutron scattering to investigate the effect of the magnetic order on the Abrikosov lattice would be an interesting new avenue to pursue.