The recent discovery of high-Tc superconductivity (HTS) in Sr-doped NdNiO2 has sparked a renewed interest in investigating nickelates as cuprate counterparts. Parent cuprates [Cu 2+ : d 9 ] are antiferromagnetic charge transfer insulators with the involvement of a single d x 2 -y 2 band around the Fermi level and strong p -d hybridization. In contrast, isoelectronic NdNiO2 [Ni + : d 9 ] is metallic with a d x 2 -y 2 band self-doped by Nd-d states. Using first principles calculations, we study the effect of Sr-doping in the electronic and magnetic properties of infinite-layer nickelates as well as the nature of the holes. We find that hole doping tends to make the material more cuprate-like as it minimizes the self-doping effect, it enhances the p -d hybridization, and it produces low-spin (S=0, non-magnetic) Ni 2+ dopants in analogy with the S=0 Zhang-Rice singlets that appear in cuprates. I. A possible route to address the origin of hightemperature superconductivity (HTS) is to find cuprate analog families, which might help unveil what is relevant for HTS As discussed in the literature, the parent phase of 112 nickelates (at d 9 filling) is quite different from that of cuprates. Experimentally, transport data indicate that RNiO 2 materials are not insulating and there is no experimental evidence for antiferromagnetic order in any RNiO 2 material 3-6 . In addition, electronic-structure calculations of RNiO 2 indicate significant differences from cuprates due to the presence of low-lying R-5d states crossing the Fermi level that effectively self-dope the d x 2 -y 2 band so that the formal electron count for the Ni becomes d 8+δ . Also, because Ni is to the left of Cu in the periodic table, it has an increased charge-transfer energy In cuprates, one starts with a parent phase in which the Cu 2+ ions have one active d x 2 -y 2 orbital hybridized with the p orbitals of the neighboring in-plane oxygens We have performed calculations in both LaNiO 2 (with a= 3.96 Å, c= 3.37 Å), and NdNiO 2 (a= 3.92 Å, c= 3.28 Å), two experimentally available members infinite-layer nickelates, in order to check for chemical pressure effects. Supercells of size 2×2, 3×3 and 4×4 relative to the primitive P4/mmm cell were employed to study the effect of 11% and 25% Sr doping in both LaNiO 2 and NdNiO 2 . They give rise to an average Ni-d filling of 8.75, 8.89 and 8.75, , respectively (with 4 Sr dopants in the unit cell clustered around a particular Ni atom in the latter, which becomes nominally a Ni 2+ ). The corresponding structures are shown in Fig. The missing correlations beyond GGA at Ni sites were taken into account through LDA+U calculations The structure of RNiO 2 materials consists of NiO 2 planes (with 180 • O-Ni-O bond angles) that are separated by a single layer of R ions. The Sr-doped structures experience a small increase in volume with respect to the parent materials ∼ 1-2 % for the levels of doping we are considering, up to 25%. This trend is the expected one as Sr 2+ is larger than La 3+ and Nd 3+ . Also, in the structures containing Sr-doping, there is a slight deviation in bond-lengths and bond-angles after structural relaxation. In particular, there is a distortion of the Ni-O distances in the NiO 2 planes consisting of a modulation of the Ni-O bond length: shorter around the Ni ions closer to a 2+ state, those proximate to the Sr atoms (1.95-1.96 Å) and longer around Ni ions closer to a 1+ state (1.98-1.99 Å), those away from the dopants. Finally, there is significant buckling close to the Sr-substituted atom with Ni-O-Ni bond angles ∼ 175 • . Using spin-polarized calculations, we have performed a full study of the stability of different spin states for different magnetic configurations in the Sr-doped RNiO 2 supercells shown in Fig. the d x 2 -y 2 states dominate around the Fermi level). We note that for either LS and HS d 8+δ cases, an AFM coupling between neighboring Ni atoms is always preferred, mediated by the close to half-filling d x 2 -y 2 band. The energetics for these two different spin states in the different supercells have been analyzed within two different LDA+U schemes: around mean field (AMF) and fully localized limit (FLL). There is a well-known tendency of these different LDA+U flavors to make LS (AMF) or HS (FLL) more stable, respectively Figure Using these AMF-LS results for 2×2 and 3×3 Sr-doped cells, at an effective U= 5 eV we analyze the evolution of the La-d, O-p and Ni-d orbital-resolved densities of states (DOS) upon increasing Sr-doping (see Fig. We now move to the 4 × 4 supercells with an average d Using ab-initio calculations for Sr-doped RNiO 2 (R= La, Nd) systems we have shown that explicit Sr-doping gives rise to important changes in electronic structure and magnetic properties with respect to their undoped counterparts: 1) It reduces the self-doping effect by shifting the R-d bands up in energy away from the Fermi level leading to a more single-band-like picture, with the Ni d x 2 -y 2 band dominating. 2) It gives rise to low-spin Ni 2+ dopants irrespective of the method used, doping level (11% or 25%) or rare-earth cation (both La and Nd yield comparable results). These low-spin dopants make the situation similar to that in cuprates. 3) It drastically reduces the charge-transfer energy (by up to 1 eV for %25 doping) bringing it close to values observed in cuprates. Hence, our calculations show that the appearance of superconductivity in infinite-layer nickelates upon Sr-doping might be accompanied by a more cuprate-like electronic structure and spin-states. Table 