Using density functional based LDA+U method and linear-response theory, we study the magnetic exchange interactions of the superconductor Nd1-xSrxNiO2. Our calculated nearest-neighbor exchange constant J1 = 82 meV is large, weakly affected by doping and is only slightly smaller than that found in the sister compound CaCuO2. We however find that the hole doping significantly enhances the inter-layer exchange coupling as it affects the magnetic moment of the Ni-3d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital. This can be understood in terms of small hybridization of Ni-3d 3z 2 -r 2 within the NiO2 plane which results in a flat band near the Fermi level, and its large overlap along z direction. We also demonstrate that the Nd-5d states appearing at the Fermi level, do not affect the magnetic exchange interactions, and thus may not participate in the superconductivity of this compound. Whereas many previous works emphasize the importance of the Ni-3d x 2 -y 2 and Nd-5d orbitals, we instead analyze the solution of Ni-3d x 2 -y 2 /Ni-3d 3z 2 -r 2 minimal model using Dynamical Mean Field Theory. It reveals an underlying Mott insulating state which, depending on precise values of the intra-atomic Hund's coupling less or larger than 0.83 eV, selects upon doping either S=0 or S=1 two-hole states at low energies leading to very different quasiparticle band structures. We propose that trends upon doping in spin excitational spectrum and quasiparticle density of state can be a way to probe Ni 3d 8 configuration. Since the discovery of high-temperature superconductors (HTSCs) Inspired by HTSCs, the search for possible novel superconducting behavior in nickelates has been attracting significant attention, as their structure and electronic configuration is similar to that of the cuprates Recently, Nd 0.8 Sr 0.2 NiO 2 thin films were synthesized on a SrTiO 3 substrate using soft-chemistry topotactic reduction, and superconductivity with considerably high T c (up to 15K) was observed These breakthroughs have stimulated large-scale theoretical efforts to understand the nature of the superconductivity in rare-earth nickelates. LDA band structures Several works addressed strong correlation effects among Ni 3d electrons The first-principles physics of competing Ni-3d x 2 -y 2 vs. Ni-3d 3z 2 -r 2 , and the connected issue of having the Ni-3d 3z 2 -r 2 states at the Fermi level with hole doping has been first put forward in Ref. No sign of magnetic order has been observed in the original report on superconductivity in NdNiO 2 In this work, based on a density functional LDA+U method and linear-response theory To gain additional insight, we discuss the solutions of such two-band model on the basis of Dynamical Mean Field Theory using the parameters deduced from our band structure calculations. In contrast to the static mean field description, such as LDA+U, where holes occupying Ni-3d 3z 2 -r 2 states promote interorbital triplets, whether S=0 or S=1 state emerges from our DMFT sim- ulation depends on a precise value of the intraatomic Hund's coupling J H in the vicinity of its commonly accepted range of values 0.5-1 eV. This leads to very different quasiparticle band structures. We thus propose that trends upon doping in magnetic exchange interactions and quasiparticle density of states can be a way to probe Ni 3d 8 configuration. Our paper is organized as follows. In Section II we describe our LDA+U and constrained-orbitalhybridization calculations for the exchange interactions. In Section III, we discuss a minimal two-band model that emerges from our study and its solution based on Dynamical Mean Field Theory. Section IV is the conclusion. We perform our density functional based electronic structure calculations within the full potential linearmuffin-tin-orbital (LMTO) method The magnetic exchange interactions J(q) were evaluated assuming a rigid rotation of atomic spins, using a previously developed linear-response approach Similarly to previously reported band structure calculations for LaNiO 2 We now perform the LDA+U calculation to examine magnetic exchange interactions in undoped NdNiO 2 . Our results show that the exchange coupling is large for the nearest-neighbor J 1 within the NiO 2 plane. The sign of this term is AFM, and thus the NiO 2 layer shows a (π,π) spin ordering. There is some debate about the magnitude of the exchange interaction, with estimates ranging from much less than that of cuprates with S=1/2. The estimate of J 1 =25 meV from the Raman scattering experiment of the two-magnon peak There exists a fairly flat band right at the Fermi level along the ZRAZ line, in the band structure of the magnetic ground state configuration of NdNiO 2 , as shown in Fig. To examine the doping dependence we perform a series of hole-doped calculations, varying the number of holes per unit cell from 0.05 to 0.30 by using the virtual crystal approximation. These calculations show that the hole doping within this range does not significantly change the shape of the band structure apart from shifting the Fermi level downward. Regardless of the holedoping concentration, the Ni-t 2g band is almost fully occupied and does not contribute to the magnetic moment. The magnetic moment of the Ni-3d x 2 -y 2 orbital is also unaffected by the hole doping. Instead, the holes preferentially occupy the flat Ni-3d 3z 2 -r 2 band, and, as a result, the magnetic moment of this orbital increases with doping as shown in Table The 5d orbital is spatially very wide, and can have a crucial effect on the magnetic exchange interaction through 4f -5d hybridization, even though it is empty and located above the Fermi level Our calculation shows that both in-plane J 1 and outof-plane J z1 exchange interactions are not sensitive to the position of the Nd-5d band as shown in Table ( 1 2 , 0, 0) (0, 0, 1 2 ) (0, 0, 0) FIG. change interactions are slightly different, the key features discussed above are the same. We illustrate the effect of increasing out-of-plane exchange interactions in doped NdNiO 2 , using an antiferromagnetic Heisenberg model, Eq. ( where J 11 (q)/J 12 (q) are the exchange interactions within the same/different sublattices. (A quantum correction factor Z c ≈ 1.18 which is sometimes used A minimal model for the electronic structure of NdNiO 2 that emerges from the present study should involve Ni-3d x 2 -y 2 and Ni-3d 3z 2 -r 2 orbitals only. Their role has already been emphasized in many recent works The described picture should however be contrasted to the genuine strong correlation effect that prompts to consider an additional hole to be injected into either Ni x 2 -y 2 or 3z 2 -r 2 orbital resulting either in an intraorbital singlet or interorbital triplet. This is different from cuprates, where holes end up in low-lying O 2p band forming Zhang-Rice singlet states Although a number of full-fledge multiorbital LDA+DMFT calculations have been recently carried out to understand the many-body physics of doped NdNiO 2 Our results for the k-resolved spectral functions are summarized in Fig. A different picture emerges from the calculation with J H = 1 eV shown in Fig. Our previous LDA+DMFT calculations Since the Hund's coupling J H of 0.8 to 0.9 eV is well within the range of commonly accepted values, we cannot make a definite conclusion about whether S=0 or S=1 scenario is realized for doped nickelates. However, possible future angle-resolved photoemission (ARPES) experiments may provide important insight since as illustrated by our calculations the quasiparticle band structure is very different between the two cases. Furthermore, while ARPES spectra in the hole-doped HTSCs show waterfall-like behavior In conclusion, using the LDA+U method, we have calculated magnetic exchange interactions for the doped NdNiO 2 novel superconductor. We find that the parent compound is mostly two-dimensional, with large nearest neighbor in-plane, and small out-of-plane exchange interactions. Upon doping, the out-of-plane coupling J z1 was found to increase dramatically, while the in-plane J 1 is almost unchanged. To clarify the origin of these trends, we analyzed the symmetry of the holes induced by doping which were found to be primarily of the 3d 3z 2 -r 2 character promoting the formation of interorbital triplet as Ni 3d 8 ground state configuration. We also investi-gated the role of the Nd-5d states, which contribute substantially to the Fermi surface of NdNiO 2 . Shifting this band upward using a constrained-orbital-hybridization method has little effect on exchange interactions, which leads us to conclude that Nd-5d states have negligible effect on the spin fluctuations and the superconductivity in NdNiO 2 . A minimal two-band model with active Ni-3d x 2 -y 2 and Ni-3d 3z 2 -r 2 orbitals has been further studied with DMFT to reveal an underlying Mott insulating state which upon doping selects either S=0 and S=1 two-hole states depending on the Hund's coupling in the range of its commonly accepted values 0.8 to 0.9 eV. Should S=1 state be valid, we rely on our LDA+U result to predict that upon doping the spin susceptibility gains three dimensionality as it gets enhanced along ΓZ. This can be readily observed in neutron experiments and can be one way to probe the two-hole configuration. We also rely on our DMFT result to predict a formation of a strong quasiparticle peak at the Fermi level detectable by ARPES experiments. A small anisotropy in H c2 was indeed discovered very recently 