Neuromorphic computing has the potential to further the success of software-based artificial neural networks (ANNs) by designing hardware from a different perspective. Current research in neuromorphic hardware targets dramatic improvements to ANN performance by increasing energy efficiency, speed of operation, and even seeks to extend the utility of ANNs by natively adding functionality such as spiking operation. One promising neuromorphic hardware platform is based on superconductive electronics, which has the potential to incorporate all of these advantages at the device level in addition to offering the potential of near lossless communications both within the neuromorphic circuits as well as between disparate superconductive chips. Here we explore one of the fundamental brain-inspired architecture components, the fan-in and fan-out as realized in superconductive circuits based on Josephson junctions. From our calculations and WRSPICE simulations we find that the fan-out should be limited only by junction count and circuit size limitations, and we demonstrate results in simulation at a level of 1-to-10,000, similar to that of the human brain. We find that fan-in has more limitations, but a fan-in level on the order of a few 100-to-1 should be achievable based on current technology. We discuss our findings and the critical parameters that set the limits on fan-in and fan-out in the context of superconductive neuromorphic circuits. In recent years there has been an increase in the study of neuromorphic circuits made from superconducting electronics. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 In superconducting digital circuits, the presence or absence of an SFQ pulse during a clock cycle represents the 1 or 0 of digital logic. As a result a large variety of circuits that manipulate and control SFQ pulses are available including flip-flops, logic gates, shift registers, transmission lines, splitters, mergers and comparators. In this paper we explore the problem of fan-out and fan-in in superconducting neuromorphic circuits. Although there are many similarities to the fan-in and fan-out properties of superconducting digital circuits, there are also important differences, most notably the analog nature of the synapse. We make some basic assumptions about a possible system architecture and show both flux-and currentbased methods of fan-in and fan-out. We use both circuit simulations and calculations to show how these approaches might scale and what factors might limit them in pushing to larger networks. With modest assumptions about fabrication parameters like inductances and critical currents, we show how a fan-out and fan-in of order 100 is possible. Although this falls short of the human brain, it brings the technology in line with silicon neuromorphic computing, without loss of the advantages of low power and high speed. The paper is organized as follows. In Section II we give an overview of the problem, assuming a basic system architecture. In Section III we show two possible ways of fanning out, including splitter trees and a current fan-out. In Section IV we show two methods of fan-in, one with flux and one with current. In Section V we look at the limiting factors for each of these as one scales to larger networks. Finally, in Section VI we conclude and suggest future work. In this section we carefully define the problem of fan-in and fan-out, first in generalized spiking neural networks and then, by assuming a simplified architecture, in a superconducting electronics implementation. Since there is as of yet no agreed-upon architecture for a superconducting neural network, some of our results will change as different architectures are proposed and tested. However, we believe that many of the ideas developed here are general enough that they will translate into future experiments regardless of architecture. Figure One important distinction needs to be made about the signals from neurons and synapses. The signals that flow out of neurons (fan-out), called the spikes or "action potentials" in a biological setting, are essentially digital: they all have about the same amplitude and shape, which are fixed by the ion channel dynamics inside the soma. For this reason, the SFQ pulses of superconducting digital logic are ideal to serve as action potentials. Meanwhile, the signals that flow out of synapses into neurons (fan-in), the socalled "post-synaptic potentials," are analog in nature: although they typically have a similar shape, their amplitude depends on the strength of the synapse and they can be either positive (excitatory) or negative (inhibitory). In our superconducting implementation, we assume a simple two-junction neuron similar to the Josephson junction neuron (JJ neuron) already proposed. In this section we will discuss two potential methods, flux based and current based, for fan-out that can be used in superconducting neuromorphic circuits. Because the fan-out in these circuits is effectively a digital operation, one can start with a fan-out circuit that is a series of nested splitters like those used typically in digital SFQ circuits. Figure is the McCumber parameter, and set the bias current to 70% of the respective Ic values. This method provides a straightforward means of copying the signal flowing out of a JJ neuron to an arbitrarily large number of synapses. In addition to the flux-based fan-out shown in Fig. , where k is the number of stages and J is the single stage fan-out (10 in this example.) Figure While both fan-out circuits were digital and nested to achieve arbitrary levels of fan-out, the fan-in circuit is inherently analog and therefore cannot be nested in the same way. This means that the scaling of these circuits will be under further constraints, the details of which are discussed below. In the simulations presented here, we take a worst-case scenario of trying to drive the summation loop that is the post synaptic JJ neuron above threshold with a single incoming SFQ pulse. For small fan-in sizes this is relatively easy, and we show here that even under these "worst-case" conditions we are able to successfully drive a fan-in of 128-to-1. In order to drive the summation loop above threshold with a single input we had to decrease the critical current of the JJs in the post synaptic JJ neuron. If one wants to extend the network further than a single layer, we then need to reamplify the signal back to the original level so that it can be fanned-out into the next layer of the network. We include this reamplification in our simulated circuits as shown in fig. The traces in Fig. In addition to the flux-based fan-in just described, we also investigated current-based fan-in. Figure For larger networks, the fan-out methods presented in Section III will be limited only by area, junction count, power, and delay. There is no fundamental limit to how many signals can be fanned out with either the splitter method or the current method. The scaling of the junction count with fan-out for each method is given in fig. Depending on the architecture chosen for a superconducting SNN one may want to maintain a constant pulse timing. Figure If space and time delay are permitted, then the binary splitters can be nested much deeper, including to levels similar to the human brain. Figure There is one additional constraint that must be considered as the fan-out is nested to larger circuits, which is the inclusion of repeater junctions (or JTLs), shown in red in Fig. In addition to the flux-based splitter fan-out, one can also nest the current-based fan-out to an arbitrarily large size. The footprint of this type of fan-out will be similar in size to the splitter tree if we are constrained to a vertical line output with uniform time delay wiring. The rough size of a fan-out of 1to-1000 (three layers deep) with this method is 1500 μm in the vertical direction and 250 μm in the horizontal direction. These dimensions were limited by the 1.5 μm pitch in the vertical direction, and by the 0.9 pH/μm maximum inductance in the horizontal direction. Next, we discuss the limits to the two methods of fan-in, current and flux, shown earlier in Section IV. Figure With these simplified circuits we can easily derive the value of the signal current Isig that flows into the output loop in both cases. In the case of the current method, we use the equation for current division. We first calculate the total parallel inductance L|| from the summing node to where the term 1 (L cp + L s ) ⁄ appears (NFI-1) times, once for each of the remaining fan-in paths aside from the one generating the pulse. For now, we have assumed that Lsq is the inductance going to ground for the signal path, ignoring the higher-impedance path through the junctions; we will correct this later. The signal current is then simply I in ( L || ). This leads to: Meanwhile, for the flux method we use the equations of mutual inductance. With a current of Iin flowing through Lcp, the flux coupled to the output loop is MIin, where M = k √ L cp L sq and k is the coupling constant. This then results in a signal current of where Ltot is the total inductance of the large summing loop. Later we will relate Ltot to NFI and Lsq. Looking at Eqs. ( In addition, since the both the input loop (Ic1 -Ls+Lcp) and the output loop (Ic2 -Lsq) each need to generate an SFQ pulse, there is a constraint on their inductance parameter L. Loops capable of generating SFQ pulses need to have a value of L in the range L ≈ 1 -10. In our designs both of these parameters ended up being between 1.5 and 4 and close to each other. (Note that L2 in eq. ( We now apply these three assumptions into the equations for the signal and then compare the expression for the two methods. Looking first at the current, we find: ), where we have assumed that NFI >> 1 and Ic1 >> Ic2 (chosen to maximize the signal -see below), thus ignoring the second term in the denominator. For the case of flux, we make the simple assumption that Ltot in equation ( In our case Lcp = Lsq, so the term in the square root is 1. Note then the similarities between Eqs. (7) and (8). The one major difference is the factor of (Ic1/Ic2) in the flux case. (There is also the factor of k, but this can be of order one.) This allows scaling to a much larger fan-in in the flux case, as one can make this ratio of critical currents (Ic1/Ic2) a factor of 50 or even higher. Thus, the flux method scales to large NFI better than the current method. This is a major result of our paper. Besides the comparison between Eqs. ( The expressions for the signal current derived in Eqs. ( inductors couple a small current back to the input loop (the cross-talk current, which will be discussed below), their impedance is reduced below the value of Lsq. The reduced value L sq ′ is given by: which can be derived from the circuit model of a transformer. Incorporating both of these corrections, we can then rewrite equation (8) as The corrective term is in square brackets. In Fig. Using our numbers for the case where NFI = 16, Lsq = 40 pH and Ic2 = 20 A, we find a crosstalk current of 33.2 A using equation (11), which compares well to our simulated value of 32.6 A. This is actually much larger than the signal current for those parameters (6.4 A). Note that the crosstalk current scales approximately as (1/NFI), so the inability to increase the fan-in keeps the crosstalk large. In the flux case, the crosstalk is given by: where LJ1 is the Josephson inductance of the input junction with Ic1 and we have approximated NFI>>1. Using our numbers for the case where NFI = 128 and Ic2 = 20 A we find a crosstalk current of 1.3 A using equation ( In this paper we have explored the problem of fan-out and fan-in in superconducting neuromorphic circuits. The fan-out is a digital process where the action potential is repeated and copied multiple times. Both flux and current methods give fan-out schemes that accomplish this successfully. Both can be scaled indefinitely to large networks, with a proportional cost in chip area and power dissipation. Since power dissipation scales with the junction count, and each junction dissipating roughly Ic0 energy per SFQ pulse, a rough estimate of the power dissipated for a 1-to-128 flux based fan-out circuit using the Ic values given above is 44 aJ. Pulse timing can be preserved throughout subsequent layers of fanout; if the constraint on timing is lifted, then the cost in area can be reduced. The flux method has a better scaling with junction number, but current fan-out might still be used, depending on the application. Fan-in is an analog process where the weighted synaptic signals are summed and compared to a threshold. Both a current method and flux method were proposed. In scaling to large networks, the flux method appears to be superior to the current method, both in preserving a larger signal current and in keeping the cross-talk to a minimum. For small networks it is possible that the current method could still be used. In our study we have largely ignored the problem of synaptic weighting; that is covered in other work. Looking forward, there are many possible advantages to a future superconducting neuromorphic processor: (i) the ability to use superconducting multi-chip modules (MCMs) 