Lightly doped III-V semiconductor InAs is a dilute metal, which can be pushed beyond its extreme quantum limit upon the application of a modest magnetic field. In this regime, a Mott-Anderson metal-insulator transition, triggered by the magnetic field, leads to a depletion of carrier concentration by more than one order of magnitude. Here, we show that this transition is accompanied by a two-hundred-fold enhancement of the Seebeck coefficient which becomes as large as 11.3mV.K -1 ≈ 130 k B e at T = 8K and B = 29T. We find that the magnitude of this signal depends on sample dimensions and conclude that it is caused by phonon drag, resulting from a large difference between the scattering time of phonons (which are almost ballistic) and electrons (which are almost localized in the insulating state). Our results reveal a path to distinguish between possible sources of large thermoelectric response in other low density systems pushed beyond the quantum limit. The thermoelectrical properties of low carrier density metals are of fundamental and technological interest. Due to their small Fermi temperatures, their diffusive Seebeck effects (S xx ) can be large and, as such, used to develop high performance thermoelectric devices We show in Fig. ) T plotted as a function of the temperature in the sub-Kelvin region. The blue dashed line corresponds to the value Sxx T = 7.3μV.K -2 which is expected in the diffusive regime of a degenerate electron gas with TF = 100K (see tion measurements Let us now discuss the evolution in field of the electrical and thermoelectrical properties of InAs which are shown respectively on Figs. with δ = 0.3-0.4 for InSb and Hg 1-x Cd x Te. The carrier dependence of B QL and B M I for these two systems are shown in Fig. [16] which is well captured by Eq.1 assuming a δ = 0.4 n 1/3 a B >> 0.3 as illustrated in Fig. Above B = 15T, a novel regime is identified where ρ xx varies almost linearly with the magnetic field and concomitant with a saturating n H =10 15 cm -3 and Sxx T =-21μV.K -2 at the lowest temperature. As a function of the temperature, ρ xx first displays an activated behavior followed by a saturation at low temperature (see The residual conductivity and carrier density at low temperature and high magnetic field contrasts with the insulating behavior of lightly doped InSb The field dependence of S xx is qualitatively well captured by the Mott relation Here, Λ < 1 quantifies the momentum exchange rate between phonons and electrons Thus, a large Seebeck response in units of k B e is possible thanks to phonon drag. It requires τ ph τ e and a finite Λ. Herring showed that in intrinsic semiconductors, such as Si and Ge, the large τ ph τe ratio provides a key to understanding the large magnitude of the Seebeck response at cryogenic temperatures Let us discuss how the magnetic field squeezes τ e , leaves τ ph unaffected and thus boosts their ratio. In contrast to the diffusive response, S ph scales with the sample length, the inverse of the mobility and can exceed by far k B e . A crucial test of Eq.3 comes from the size and mobility dependence of S xx . As shown in Fig. The phonon drag picture therefore provides a quantitative agreement of the giant field-induced Seebeck effect in InAs. We note that below T = 8K, S xx peaks in magnetic field while S ph is expected to be the largest at the highest magnetic field (where μ H is the lowest). This implies either a shunt of S ph by the relatively small thermoelectrical response of the surface states or a more elaborate bulk phonon drag picture that would be maximum close to B M I , where the bulk shallow band is partially filled as it has been proposed in FeSb 2 While a purely electronic mechanism has been proposed to give rise to an unbounded thermopower in Dirac/Weyl semimetals in their quantum limit regime 