ith a unique combination of an ultra-high breakdown electric field of ~8 MV/cm Ga2O3 Schottky barrier diodes (SBDs) are highly versatile. They can not only be used as high-speed rectifiers for efficient power regulation Central among all the aforementioned functionalities is the reverse blocking capability of the Schottky barrier, which is critically dependent on the reverse leakage current. In general, the ideal total reverse leakage current (JR,tot) through a Schottky barrier consists of the transport of electrons both above and below the top of the barrier. The former mechanism is thermionic emission (TE), while the latter is barrier tunneling (BT), which comprises thermionic-field emission (TFE) and field emission (FE) Experimentally, most of previous analysis on the reverse leakage current in Ga2O3 SBDs either uses TE model For the calculation of the reverse leakage current, two effects on the shape of the Schottky barrier potential should be considered: image-force lowering (IFL) and doping effects, as illustrated schematically in Fig. The total reverse leakage current is a sum of JTE and JBT: J ",$%$ = J '( + J (* . ( Thermionic emission or tunneling? The universal transition electric field for ideal Schottky reverse leakage current in b-Ga 2O3 The reverse leakage current through a Schottky barrier transitions from a thermionic-emission dominated regime to a barrier-tunneling dominated regime as the surface electric field increases. In this study, we evaluate such transition electric field (ET) in b-Ga2O3 using a numerical reverse leakage model. ET is found to have very weak dependence on the doping concentration and barrier height, thus a near-universal temperature dependence suffices and is given by a simple empirical expression in Ga2O3. With the help of a field-plate design, we observed experimentally in Ga2O3 Schottky barrier diodes a near-ideal bulk reverse leakage characteristics, which matches well with our numerical model and confirms the presence of the transition region. Near the transition electric field, both thermionic emission and barrier tunneling should be considered. The study provides important guidance toward accurate design and modeling of ideal reverse leakage characteristics in b-Ga2O3 Schottky barrier diodes. In the presence of both IFL and doping effects, the potential energy distribution of the Schottky barrier under a surface electric field E is given by where φ ' is the barrier height, Nd is the net donor concentration, and ε : =10 ε > is the dielectric constant of b-Ga2O3 where A * = 4πm * k ' 6 e/h S is the Richardson constant. One the other hand, J '( can be expressed by where E is the electron energy, T(E) is the tunneling probability. Using a Wentzel-Kramers-Brillouin (WKB)-type approximation, T(E) can be written as where p(x) = -iB2m * (E 0 (x) -E) , x1 and x2 are classical turning points where E 0 (x) = E. A single effective mass m * = 0.31 m > is adopted for both the Richardson constant and the tunneling effective mass due to the single-valley and nearisotropic nature of the conduction band Figure With the numerical model established, the transition electric field ET can be calculated by equating JTE with JBT. Figure Knowing the weak dependence on the doping concentration, we calculate ET as a function of temperature without considering the doping effect, as shown in Fig. Due to the negligible dependence on the barrier height and very weak dependence on the doping concentration, we can describe ET in b-Ga2O3 with a near-universal empirical temperature dependence as obtained from a quadratic fitting to the numerical calculation in Fig. E ( = 0.70 ⋅ T 6 + 780 ⋅ T -3.0 × 10 y V/cm, (6) where T is in the unit of K. Equation 6 is valid within the temperature range of 100-800 K and a barrier-height range of 0.5-2.5 eV, with a maximum error of 0.01 MV/cm for ND-NA≤1x10 17 cm -3 , and 0.08 MV/cm for ND-NA≤2x10 18 cm -3 . To verify the existence of the transition region experimentally, we fabricated field-plated SBDs on a (001) Ga2O3 epitaxial wafer grown by halide vapor phase epitaxy (HVPE), as schematically shown in Fig. Temperature-dependent capacitance-voltage (C-V) measurements were performed on co-fabricated SBDs without the field plate. Figure Figure The extracted barrier heights and ideality factors (n) from TED model at each temperature are plotted in Fig. To verify the effect of the field plate in suppressing the edge leakage current, temperature-dependent reverse I-V measurements was performed on both non-field-plated and field-plated SBDs on the same wafer, as shown in Figs. Figure The validity of the fitting depends critically on the fact that the measured bulk reverse leakage current is near ideal. A good check would be comparing the barrier height values extracted from the reverse leakage characteristics with those extracted from other methods. Figure In conclusion, the transition electric field (ET) separating the thermionic-emission and barrier-tunneling dominated reverse leakage regimes is calculated in b-Ga2O3 Schottky barrier diodes, by using a numerical reverse leakage model. ET is shown to have very weak dependence on the doping concentration and the barrier height. A near-universal empirical expression for ET is obtained, which is valid for wide temperature, doping, and barrier-height ranges in b-Ga2O3 SBDs. Experimentally, we confirmed the presence of the transition region in field-plated Ga2O3 SBDs, which show nearideal bulk reverse leakage current well-matched with our numerical model. With the knowledge about the transition electric field, the long-standing confusion about whether thermionic emission model or tunneling model should be used is lifted: if the surface electric field is much lower than ET, thermionic-emission model can be used; conversely, barriertunneling model should be employed. Near ET, it is important to consider both models. These results are highly valuable for the design of functional Ga2O3 Schottky barriers that rely on the precise knowledge about the reverse leakage current. DATA AVAILABILITY: The data that supports the findings of this study are available within the article. E T E T and Good's analytical models 