Energy efficiency is motivating the search for new high-temperature metals. Some new body-centered-cubic random multicomponent ``high entropy alloys (HEAs)'' based on refractory elements (Cr-Mo-Nb-Ta-V-W-Hf-Ti-Zr) possess exceptional strengths at high temperatures but the physical origins of this outstanding behavior are not known. Here we show, using integrated neutron-diffraction (ND), high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), and theory, that the high strength and strength retention of a NbTaVTi alloy and a new high-strength/low-density CrMoNbV alloy are attributable to edge dislocations. This is surprising because plastic-flow in BCC elemental metals and dilute alloys is universally accepted to be controlled by screw dislocations. We use the insight and theory to perform a computationally-guided search over 10 7 BCC HEAs and identify over 10 6 possible ultra-strong high-temperature alloy compositions for future exploration. Achieving the urgent societal goals of reduced emissions and increasing energy efficiency is driving the development of new materials. One path is lightweight materials (Mg, Al, reinforced plastics) (1,2,3) for low-temperature applications, such as transportation, while a second path is high-temperature damage-tolerant materials for increased combustion efficiency (superalloys, TiAl) (4,5). The new ``high entropy alloys (HEAs)'' are single-phase crystalline materials with many components that randomly occupy the atomic sites of the crystal lattice findings are unexpected because screw dislocations are widely understood to control plastic flow in BCC elemental metals and dilute alloys Alloys of nominal compositions of NbTaTiV and CrMoNbV were synthesized, and in-situ neutron-diffraction (ND) measurements were performed (Materials and Methods; S.M. 1, 2; Supp. Fig. The strength of NbTaTiV is comparable to MoNbTaW and MoNbTaWV, which have been novel among BCC HEAs for their exceptional high-T strength retention We now demonstrate that edge dislocations, not screw dislocations, control the plasticity in both NbTaTiV and CrMoNbV. First, TEM analysis on NbTaTiV shows that the dislocations have Burgers vectors of the <111>a/2 type typical of BCC elements and dilute alloys (Supp. Fig. where q is a function only of the dislocation Burgers vector, character, and elastic anisotropy. The CWMP analysis performed on NbTaTiV samples, for <111>a/2 dislocations and deformed to plastic strains of 1.8, 6.8, and 11.8%, reveals q values as shown in Figure as (∆K hkl ) 2 = (0.9/D) 2 + BK hkl 2 C hkl (B a constant) yields the same conclusion (Figure Our experimental demonstrations that plasticity in a BCC alloy can be controlled by edge dislocations is very surprising because it is counter to the nearly-universally-accepted understanding, based on many observations in elemental and dilute BCC alloys over many decades, that screw dislocations completely dominate the plastic flow behavior To further cement that the edge dislocations control the strength, we apply a new theory for the yield strength versus temperature and strain rate for edge dislocations moving through a random BCC alloy where the zero-temperature yield stress σ y0 and zero-stress energy barrier ΔE b0 are computed as Here, μ and ν are the alloy elastic constants, {c i } the solute concentrations, α = 1/12 a line tension parameter, and ε0 = 10 4 s -1 a reference strain rate. The coefficients A σ and A E are computed in the full theory for each alloy composition. There are thus no fitting parameters in the theory, only material properties (elastic constants, misfit volumes, and line tension) and alloy composition. However, the coefficients fall in a narrow range of A σ = 0.040 ± 0.004 and A E = 2.00 ± 0.2 across a wide spectrum of BCC HEAs, indicating that the dominant material properties are the misfit volumes and elastic constants. Applying the theory to NbTaTiV, we first compute the misfit volumes of all solutes using Vegard's Law, which accurately predicts alloy atomic volumes of refractory BCC HEAs studied to date The predicted strength versus temperature for NbTaTiV with no interstitial content at the experimental strain rate of 10 -3 /s is shown in Figure We next apply the theory to the new CrMoNbV alloy. Comparison with experiments is facilitated by the very low interstitial content, as compared to NbTaTiV. Equations 4a,b show that the solute misfit volumes are the critical component for strengthening, and Cr has a small BCC atomic volume of 12.321 Å 3 and so should lead to high strengths. We apply Eqs. 3-4 using (i) Vegard's law, (ii) the additional atomic volumes of Cr=12.321 Å 3 and Mo=15.524 Å 3 , (iii) alloy elastic moduli of μ = 86.24 GPa and ν = 0.3, and (iv) the precise computed coefficients A σ = 0.0344 and A E = 1.93 for CrMoNbV. The predicted yield strength versus temperature for CrMoNbV is shown in Figure With the new understanding of the key role of edge dislocations in the strengthening of BCC HEAs, especially at high temperatures, we can now identify new promising alloy compositions. We note that screw dislocations remain important in some BCC HEAs, but the theoretical mechanisms fail at higher T and accurate theory inputs are difficult to obtain Thus, a computationally-guided search for new high-performance alloys based on edge-dislocation strengthening is a computable mechanistic path for the design and discovery of further new alloys with high strengths, high-temperature strength retention, and low density. To this end, we use Eqs. 3-4, the average coefficients of A σ = 0.040 and A E = 2.00, Vegard's Law, and the rule-ofmixtures for elastic constants, to search across more than 10,000,000 compositions in the 10component Cr-Mo-Nb-Ta-V-W-Hf-Ti-Zr-Al family (S.M. 5). As shown in Figure We also propose two super-high-strength/high-T alloys Mo6WCrZrHf and Mo2.5TaWV2.5CrZrHf with limited W yet predicted strengths of ~ 2.5 GPa at 1,300 K. Future combinations of our design strategy with detailed thermodynamics In order to achieve a BCC solid solution we require the free energy to be lower than competing phases. Two factors enter consideration, enthalpy and entropy. We will compute enthalpies within the Cr-Mo-W-Zr quaternary alloy system utilizing density functional theory (DFT). In addition to the pure elements and random solid solutions, the competing phases are and its associated free energy, F = -k B Tln(Z), in which varying degrees of short-range chemical order are appropriately weighted. The BCC solid solution gains stability relative to competing phases above the temperature T0 at which F vanishes. Vibrational and electronic entropy are neglected, as these are found to be small effects relative to the entropy of chemical substitution when comparing phases of similar structure (i.e. BCC) For equiatomic CrMoWZr we predict phase separation at low temperature into a mixture of BCC-Cr, Cr2Zr.cF24, W2Zr.cF24, and BCC-Mo. The transition to single phase BCC occurs at T0=2300K. The melting temperature is not precisely known; we estimate it as 2300K by averaging the melting temperatures of the six equiatomic binaries. Thus we predict the equiatomic BCC phase to be unstable at all temperatures below melting. Because Laves phase are major competitors to the HEA, we estimated the free energy of the cF24 Laves phase assuming concentration Mo2Zr6 on site 8a and Cr6Mo4W6 on site 16d. This structure lies 82 meV/atom above the convex hull, suggesting that it could be stabilized by entropy of mixing on the sublattices above T0=1300K. Cr and Zr are especially prone to Laves phase formation, so we investigated the effect of moving off-stoichiometry, to CrMo2W2Zr within a 24-atom supercell. Because the composition moves away from the Cr2Zr and W2Zr Laves phases, the distribution of ΔEk values shifts downward by approximately 100 meV/atom, and we predict formation of single phase BCC at T0 = 1600K. At the same time, the melting temperature should rise because the composition is enriched in elements Mo and W whose melting temperatures are high. Thus we obtain a thermally stable non-stoichiometric HEA over a wide temperature range. However, this analysis considers only a subset of potentially competing phases that omits binary and ternary solid solutions, so further investigation will be required to validate this prediction. Our DFT calculations employ the plane-wave code VASP