Silicate glasses system with different chemical formula as (50-x) SiO2 -50 Bi2O3 -xNd2O3 will be prepared by melt quenching method. Using X-ray diffraction, the amorphous nature of these glasses will be identified. The structure changes of these glasses will be studied by FT-IR spectra. The mechanical properties will be associated with the results of FT-IR spectra. Optical characteristic will be measured and investigated at ordinary temperatures (room temperature). Polarizability and basicity of glasses according to the refractive index and optical band gap will be investigated. Judd-Ofelt theory will be applied to analyze the spectra arising from Nd 3+ doped bismuth silicate glasses. The intensity parameters Ω2,4,6 of the present complex and lifetimes of selected levels will be theoretically calculated, as well. Also, the possibility of getting laser transitions between different levels of Nd 3+ doped present glasses will be investigated by calculating the lifetime and branching ratio of the transitions among these levels. Emission and absorption cross sections of the prepared materials will be measured at different spectral regions. Glass is an amorphous substance and has a considerable potential in different fields These glasses have photon energy smaller than other glasses, and higher refractive index. Therefore, the HMO glasses are transparent, promising materials for optoelectronics, fibers, sensors, optical instruments, and offer superior optical, electrical, and radiation shielding materials properties Recently, great efforts have been performed to study the structure and physical properties of Nd 3+ doped different materials. Ramteke et al. Neodymium doped lithium lead alumino borate glasses has been synthesized with the chemical composition 10Li2O-10PbO-(10-x) Al2O3-70B2O3-x Nd2O3. The present material exhibit tow emission lines at 1063 nm and 1350 nm, these lines originated from 4 F3/2 -4 I11/2 and 4 F3/2 -4 I9/2, respectively 1. SBN glasses with the chemical formula (50-x) SiO2 -50 Bi2O3-xNd2O3, will be fabricated by the melting quenching method at 1200 ̊C in ceramic containers for 3 hours and annealed at 450 ̊C for 1 hour. 2. The states of the obtained glasses will be identified by X-ray diffractometer. 3. The structure changes of these glasses will be studied using Bruker's VERTEX 70 FTIR Spectrometers. 4. The mechanical measurements will be determined using a pulse-echo technique (KARLDEUTSCH Echograph model 1085). 5. The optical properties such as refractive index and energy band gap will be studied by spectrophotometer (typeJASCO V-670) in the wavelength range from 200 to 2500 nm. 6. The experiential setup for measuring the emission spectra consists of a diode-pumped CW laser with emission wavelength of 355 nm as a pumping source, laser beam reshaping optics for collimating the laser beam, infinitely corrected objective and a UV-Vis spectrometer. The power of the diode-pumped CW laser is controlled by two means, first through the adjustment of the power of the pumping diode and second through a round variable neutral density filter. The laser beam passes through a 50/50 beam splitter to the sample and a power meter. The pumping laser spot is expanded collimation by a set of plano-concave and plano-convex cylindrical lenses.