The technique of passive daytime radiative cooling (PDRC) is used to cool an object down by simultaneously reflecting sunlight and thermally radiating heat to the cold outer space through the Earth's atmospheric window. However, for practical applications, current PDRC materials are facing unprecedented challenges such as complicated and expensive fabrication approaches and performance degradation arising from surface contamination. Here, we develop a scalable paper-based material with excellent self-cleaning and self-cooling capabilities, through air-spraying ethanolic polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) microparticles suspensions embedded within the micropores of the paper. The formed superhydrophobic PTFE coating not only protects the paper from water wetting and dust contamination for real-life applications but also reinforces its solar reflectance by sunlight backscattering. The paper fibers, when enhanced with PTFE particles, efficiently reflect sunlight and strongly radiate heat through the atmospheric window, resulting in a sub-ambient cooling performance of 5 • C and radiative cooling power of 104 W/m 2 under direct solar irradiance of 834 W/m 2 and 671 W/m 2 , respectively. The self-cleaning surface of the cooling paper extends its lifespan and keep its good cooling performance for outdoor applications. Additionally, dyed papers are experimentally studied for broad engineering applications. They can absorb appropriate visible wavelengths to display specific colors and effectively reflect near-infrared lights to reduce solar heating, which synchronously achieves effective radiative cooling and aesthetic varieties in a cost-effective, scalable, and energy-efficient way. As a result, surface contamination deteriorates the solar reflectance and cooling performance of these structures (Supplementary Fig. To the best of our knowledge, cooling structures with self-cleaning ability have been rarely reported. Furthermore, colored buildings are always desirable for aesthetic purposes The cellulose-based paper that is widely used in our daily life has emerged as a low-cost engineering material for various devices (e.g., electronic device and paper-based lab on a chip) due to its earth-abundance, biodegradability, and remarkable optical and mechanical properties The original paper consists of random-stacked cellulose fibers with porous structures (Supplementary Fig. These factors can affect the optical response of PDRC materials, which is generally undesirable. Fortunately, both solar reflectance and thermal emittance of our cooling paper are angle-independent even a large angle of incident (AOI, θ = 75 • ) (Fig. The 15-minute water immersion test shows the good water-proof properties for outdoor utilization (Supplementary Fig. The compatibility with self-cooling functionality and aesthetics requires that a surface reflects a certain wavelength band in the visible region to display colors, meanwhile maximizes its R solar in near-infrared (NIR) wavelengths (0.7-2.5 μm), where 51% of the solar energy lies to minimize the solar heating, and owns a high IR in the atmospheric window (8 -13 μm) to radiate heat efficiently to the cold outer space. Red-and green-dyed papers can efficiently reflect the NIR sunlight with a high R N IR of 0.89 and 0.87, respectively, to prevent from being heated up by the NIR solar wavelengths (Fig. Similar trends of the cooling performance are observed in the yellow and red mini houses made of dyed cooling papers and corresponding basswood (Fig. We demonstrate a self-cleaning and self-cooling paper made of cellulose fiber-based paper and PTFE particles that can be scalable-fabricated and easily recycled for the PDRC applications. The cooling paper is super "white" in the solar wavelengths, resulting from the backscatter of sunlight by the randomized structure of the cellulose microfibers and PTFE microparticles, while it is infrared "black" in the atmospheric window because of the molecular vibrations of chemical bonds in cellulose and PTFE. The super "white" and "black" features at different wavelengths ensure that the cooling paper has a net radiative cooling loss to the cold outer space. Its performance is better than or on par with other radiative cooling performances as listed in Supplementary Table The 100 lb paper was provided by INTERNATIONAL PAPER. The spray adhesive was from GORILLA. The PTFE film with a thickness of 20 mils was purchased from CS Hyde company. Black dye was from AmeriColor corporation. Red and yellow dyes were from Rite LLC. All reagents were used as received without future purification. Fabrication of the white cooling paper. Three grams of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) microparticles (1.4 μm average size in diameter, Sigma-Aldrich) were added into 30g ethanol (95% denatured, Innovating Science) and homogenized by a high-speed emulsifier at 22,000 rpm for 3 minutes. The resultant suspension was sprayed on to a 12 cm × 13 cm paper by airbrush equipment (nozzle diameter 0.8 mm) at an air pressure of around 70 psi air pressure with a distance of about 10 cm. The mass density of PTFE coating on the paper is around 2 mg/cm 2 . The sprayed paper was dried at 100 • C for 30 minutes. Fabrication of the colored cooling paper. 5g dye (Rite LLC) was dissolved into 10g DI water and was subsequently sprayed onto a 12 cm × 13 cm paper by the same airbrush using the same parameters with the fabrication of the cooling paper. The paper can also be dyed by dipping it into the dye suspension. The sprayed or dip-coated paper was then dried at 60 • C for 30 minutes. Fabrication of Solid cellulose film. Two grams of dried cellulose powders were placed into a dry pellet pressing die with an inner diameter of 13 mm and was pressed at a pressure of 60 MPa for 45s to form a uniform solid film. Recycling process of the cooling paper. The cooling paper was cut into small pieces and was immersed into water for 1 hour. After that, the swelled paper was smashed into paper pulp using the high-speed blender. The paper pulp was thermally-pressed into a paper sheet by the hydraulic press machine under 20 MPa and 200 • C until the paper is dry. The regenerated paper can be reused for fabricating the cooling paper. Morphology characterization. The surface morphologies of samples were examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, S5200, Hitachi Company) under an acceleration voltage of 10 kV. The morphology of the pencil-scratched samples was observed by a Trinocular Metallurgical Microscope (ME300TZA-3M) with a 50X lens. Surface wetting characterization.The water contact angle (CA) of the sample was measured by a contact angle goniometer (DSA-25, Kruss, Germany) with 7 μl DI water droplet at room temperature according to the sessile droplet method. The reported static contact angles were calculated by averaging the measured values from both the left and right sides of the droplet. Six data points were collected at six different positions on the sample surface and were used for calculating the final average values. Paper composition characterization. 1g (± 0.0001g) cooling paper sample was dried at 100 • C for 30 minutes and was weighed to calculate the moisture content. The PTFE content was identified by measuring the mass change of the paper before and after spraying PTFE. 400ml ethanol (95%) was mixed with 100ml HNO 3 for etching other components of the paper to obtain the cellulose. 1g (± 0.0001g) cooling paper sample was mixed with 25g ethanol-HNO 3 solution in a 250ml conical flask with a condenser and was subsequently refluxed for 1 hour at 100 • C. These procedures were repeated 2 to 3 times until the paper fibers were white. The above fibers were washed using the ethanol until the pH of the filtrate is near to 7. Finally, these fibers were dried at 105 • C (± 2 • C) and were weighted for calculating of the cellulose content. FDTD simulation. FDTD simulation was executed using the Lumerical FDTD Solution 2018a. Two-dimensional models were employed and a total-field scattered-field source coupled with two scattering cross-sections of the cellulose fibers and PTFE particles were used to calculate the scattering efficiency. Scattering effects measurement. One layer of paper fibers was peeled off from the original paper using the Tape King packaging tape. 0.2g PTFE particles were uniformly smeared on the adhesive side of the packing tape (CS Hyde company). These cellulose fibers and PTFE particles were placed at the aperture position, which is between the laser pens (red, green, and purple) and the blackboard. The area of scattered laser spots was used to indicating the scattering effect of paper fibers and PTFE particles. Infrared image measurement. Infrared images were taken using FLIT A655C thermal camera with 25 • lens at a resolution of 640 × 480. Cooling power and temperature tracking. The temperature of the cooling paper sample was measured using the K-type thermocouples connected to the National Instruments (NI) PXI-6289 multifunction I/O module. The "ON" and "OFF" of the heater was controlled by the NI PXI-2586 relay module driven by a home-built LabVIEW program using the PID control algorithm to maintain the temperature of the cooling paper tracking the ambient air. Thermal conductivity measurement. The thermal conductivity of one layer paper was characterized by TPS 2500s thinfilm module, while the thermal conductivities of the basswood and concrete were measured by the isotropic standard module of TPS 2500s. Mechanical strength measurement. The mechanical strength of the paper sheet (2 cm × 6 cm × 0.35 mm) and a basswood slab (2 cm × 6 cm × 1.5 mm) were measured by the Mark-10 ESM tensile tester at room temperature.