This work describes the experimental and theoretical study of the nonlinear optical properties of the imidazolium cation based ionic liquids and the corresponding thermooptical parameters. Experimental results of nonlinear optical properties, such as nonlinear refractive index and thermo-optical properties are determined by Z-scan and EZ-scan techniques with a femtosecond laser source. Theoretical simulations of linear and nonlinear optical properties performed by density functional theory (DFT) are discussed, in terms of polarizability, the first and second-order of hyperpolarizability. A correlation between the theoretical and experimental results is presented, where the variation of the signals of each ionic liquid can be compared with their nonlinear optical properties. Ionic liquids (ILs) also named organic molten salts are composed of ions, a large organic cation, and an anion having a delocalized charge. The cation's asymmetry and flexibility lead to weak ion interactions resulting in compounds with a low tendency to crystallize In recent years, ionic liquids have had their main characteristics explored, generating promising science and technologies for academic and industrial applications in areas such as catalysis Among the vast ionic liquids properties that can be studied, optical characterizations are undoubtedly valuable because of the structural and electronic information provided. In the linear optical regime, the optical properties of materials are independent of the light intensity. In contrast, the light field can modify several optical properties in the nonlinear optical regime. The understandings of nonlinear optical (NLO) phenomena are essential to the development of new materials and technology applications, ranging from conversion of wavelength frequencies and optical switches The optical properties of ILs have been widely studied since early 2000. A substance with NLO activity must be polarizable and/or with asymmetric charge distribution and contain a π-conjugated electron moiety, so ILs were recognized as good candidates to be studied in NLO However, to our knowledge, the literature does not describe thermal and electronic effects related to the nonlinear index of refraction of pure ILs exposed to a femtosecond laser source and discuss experimental data associating them to theoretical studies. In order to study these effects, this paper aimed to evaluate the nonlinear optical behavior of four specific ILs, combining theoretical and experimental approach to prospect the prediction of its optical properties. The four ILs characterized and discussed here are the methylimidazole hydrogen sulfate (MImH.HSO 4 ), butylimidazole hydrogen sulfate (BImH.HSO 4 ), 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hydrogen sulfate (BMI.HSO 4 ) and, 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium trifluoromethane sulfonate (BMI.CF 3 SO 3 ). The length and nature of the cation's alkyl chain, as well as the nature of the anion, were modified to verify their influence on the optical properties. Fast and slow response, related to the electronic and thermal effects respectively, was characterized by Z-scan and EZ-scan techniques to those ILs. Theoretical simulation of the Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) analysis of the ILs was also performed and corroborated with the experimental results. The ionic liquids were synthesized using 1-methyl imidazole 99%, (Sigma-Aldrich), 1-chlorobutane 99% (Sigma-Aldrich), ethyl acetate (Sigma-Aldrich) 99.8%, sulfuric acid 98 % (Merck), trifluoromethanesulfonic acid 99% (Sigma-Aldrich), 1butylimidazole 98% (Sigma-Aldrich). The 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hydrogen sulfate (BMI.HSO 4 ) and 1-butyl-3methylimidazolium trifluoromethane sulfonate (BMI.CF 3 SO 3 ) ionic liquids were synthesized by ion exchange reaction from the 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride (BMI.Cl) IL according to the procedures reported in the literature The two protic ILs, the methylimidazole hydrogen sulfate (MImH.HSO 4 ) and butylimidazole hydrogen sulfate (BImH.HSO 4 ), were produced by reacting a 0.2 mol of sulfuric acid with 1-methylimidazole and 1-butylimidazole respectively at room temperature placed under stirring in an ice bath for 24 h. The resulting solution is heated below 90 °C for removing the solvent leading to the production of a white viscous liquid (MImH.HSO 4 , 98% yield) and a brown viscous liquid (BImH.HSO 4 , 93% yield) respectively. The synthesized ILs were characterized by Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) using Attenuated Total Reflectance Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR) with a Bruker Alpha-P in the spectral range 4000-500 cm -1 , and ultraviolet-visible spectrophotometry performed in a Cary 5000 UV-Vis-NIR equipment from Agilent using a 2.0 mm quartz cuvette. Density functional theory (DFT) study was performed to understand the molecular behavior and structural conformation of the ionic liquids. DFT calculations were achieved using the Becke's three-parameter exchange functional in combination with the Lee, Yang and Parr correlation functional (B3LYP) The frontier orbital energies were calculated in a single point run in the same theory level. Molecular electrostatic potential maps (MEPs) of total electronic densities using the partial charges were analyzed with Gabedit software The optical and thermo-optical properties of the ionic liquids were evaluated by Zscan and EZ-scan techniques for the determination of the thermo-optical coefficient, nonlinear absorption and nonlinear refractive index (also called intensity-dependent refractive index). Z-scan is a widely used technique that characterizes the nonlinear refractive index, nonlinear absorption/saturation, and thermo-optical properties by the variation of wavefront curvature In both cases, to a high-repetition laser source, cumulative effects will be generated and must be managed to discern among fast (electronic) and slow (thermal) effects A third experimental setup variation that has no spatial filter was also used. In this case, every change of variation of transmittance will come from the nonlinear absorption/saturation in the sample The EZ-scan configuration was used in the characterization of fast response properties, as a nonlinear refractive index. A measurement without spatial filter, open aperture Z-scan, was performed to measure the nonlinear absorption/saturation of the liquids. The Z-scan configuration was used to evaluate the thermal response since this method allows the Z-scan curve to be fitted by an analytical model based on the thermo-optical properties Fig. shows the following vibration bands: C-H aromatic at 3173 and 3107 cm -1 ; aliphatic C-H 2968 and 2882 cm -1 ; C-N at 1573 cm -1 ; C=C at 1468 cm -1 ; C-F at 1249 cm -1 ; O=S=O at bending vibration of the imidazolium ring, and the band at 750 cm -1 can be assigned to the C-H out-of-plane bending vibration of the imidazolium ring The bands at 1162, 840, and 752 cm -1 can be attributed to the stretching vibration of C-N, the C-H in-plane bending vibration and the C-H out-of-plane bending vibration of the imidazole ring Fig. where E is is the energy of the ionic system, and E + and E-are the energy of the cation and anion, respectively. The interaction energies values obtained for MImH. indicates that the presence of a methyl group in the imidazolium ring increases the interaction between the cation and the anion. This result can be corroborated with the results obtained through the MEPs study (Fig. was located nearest to the imidazolium ring center in comparison with the protic ILs. A correlation between the interaction energies and the HOMO-LUMO energy gap can then be made. The dipole moment () in a molecule infers the molecular charge distribution, and its determination enables the study of intermolecular interactions The second order of hyperpolarizability () is proportional to the effects of the third order of susceptibility, as four-wave mixing and the responses measured by the Z-scan and EZ-scan techniques. We evaluated the linear and nonlinear optical properties of the ILs to several optical responses using the wavelength  = 780 nm. Table The fast responses of molecules measured in the refractive index change techniques are usually generated by effects related to the high orders of susceptibility. The fact these effects are also restricted to the spatial concurring presence of the light fields, corresponding to a local response. Examples of these effects are the nonlinear refractive index and nonlinear absorption. Otherwise, thermal effects, which are slower and promote heat diffusion, are not spatially restricted to the beam region, the reason why it corresponds to a nonlocal effect. The measurements to analyze the fast responses were performed in the EZ-scan configuration. The nonlinear refractive index was evaluated using a model based on literature where T p-v is the peak-valley amplitude of the normalized transmittance variation in the EZ-scan technique, S is the disc blocked factor of the total beam power, k is the wave vector, I 0 is the peak intensity and L eff = (1 -exp (-aL))/a is the sample effective length. A previously presented procedure of attenuation of systematic errors was employed in these measurements by our group These results are present inset of Fig. The real part of the third order of susceptibility, χ (3) , is directly related to the degenerate nonlinear refractive index. This term can be evaluated by the equation where n 0 is the linear refractive index at the same frequency. Considering that the main contribution would correspond to the electronic contribution of the second-order of hyperpolarizability, , can be estimated from the correspondent susceptibility and, therefore, by the nonlinear refractive index through the relation considering the local field factor where N is the molecular number density. In this analysis, the linear refractive index used for the estimative ranges from n 0 = 1.42 to 1.45 for all liquids Table Comparatively, with theoretical results obtained with the DFT theory, these are an order of magnitude smaller. This discrepancy can be associated with a refractive different response, e.g., with the one corresponding to the signal modified by the ILs local structure and the interaction with their vicinities. Based on the value evaluated for the polarization anisotropy, , one should also consider the optical Kerr effect, which arises from the molecular alignment produced by the optical torque on the induced dipoles Experimental nonlinear optical properties values of the ILs obtained: values of the nonlinear refractive index (n 2 ), third order of susceptibility, χ (3) , and the second order of susceptibility, . Sample n 2 (10 -16 cm 2 /W) χ (3) (10 -22 m 2 /V 2 ) χ (3) (10 Even if a short femtosecond pulse with nanojoules of energy enough not to heat the sample during a single propagation, high repetition rates of these pulses generate cumulative effects, which change the wavefront curvature of the propagating beam. The time evolution of transmittance variation in a high-repetition system was modeled by Falconieri where t c is the thermal characteristic time and normalized scanning parameter z̃ = z/z 0 . The thermal lens strength, , represents the intensity of the lens induced by the sample heating, which curves the beam wavefront and generates the variation of transmittance in this regime. The thermo-optical coefficient, the variation of refractive index (n) with the temperature, can be determined by: where P is the laser power in the sample and  is the thermal conductivity, which to ILs can be evaluated applying the model based on equation proposed by Fröba et al. M  where A = 0:113 g cm -3 W m -1 K -1 , and B = 22:65 g 2 cm -3 W m -1 K -1 mol -1 are constants defined in the temperature of 293.15 K, ρ is the density, and M is the molar mass of the liquid. The thermal conductivity values and uncertainties calculated from the respective densities of each IL studied here are displayed in Table These properties were estimated to perform a Z-scan analysis with the ILs. The absorption coefficient (a), the thermal characteristic time (t c ), the thermal lens strength to the laser power equals to 300 mW (), the calculated thermal conductivity () from equation ( Nonlinear optical properties of four ILs, MImH.HSO 4 , BImH.HSO 4 , BMI.HSO 4 , and BMI.CF 3 SO 3 , were determined theoretically and experimentally. These four ILs presented a nonlinear refractive index measured in our experimental conditions. Also, the thermo-optical coefficients were determined to all ILs. The DFT analysis could estimate the nonlinear response of several terms of polarizability, first and second order of hyperpolarizability. The growth of nonlinear values in the DFT analyses of the second order of hyperpolarizability, values are coherent with the growing of nonlinear refractive index measured by the EZ-scan, which can help in a qualitative prediction of ILs before synthesizing and characterize them. One of the ILs did not respect these growing. We believe that, as IL has the biggest difference when compared with the others, the simulations could not reproduce the comparative response. Besides that, no exact agreement was expected, since DFT analysis simulates only a single molecule, not looking at its all vicinity and molecular dynamics responsible for the optical Kerr effect. The technique of polarization-resolved Z-scan measurements will now be introduced to discriminate between electronic and orientational nonlinear effects in these systems. Thermo-optical coefficients were determined to the ILs. Other thermodynamic properties, as thermal characteristic time, thermal lens strength and thermal conductivity, were also evaluated and presented. presents the theoretical values of ,  and, as well the anisotropy of polarizability calculated for the studded ILs. The comparison of the  values obtained for the protic ILs (MImH.HSO 4 and BImH.HSO 4 ) reported in Table