Two-dimensional hole gases in semiconductor quantum wells are promising platforms for spintronics and quantum computation but suffer from the lack of the k-linear term in the Rashba spin-orbit coupling (SOC), which is essential for spin manipulations without magnetism and commonly believed to be a k-cubic term as the lowest order. Here, contrary to conventional wisdom, we uncover a strong and tunable klinear Rashba SOC in two-dimensional hole gases (2DHG) of semiconductor quantum wells by performing atomistic pseudopotential calculations combined with an effective Hamiltonian for a model system of Ge/Si quantum wells. Its maximal strength exceeds 120 meV Å, comparable to the highest values reported in narrow bandgap III-V semiconductor 2D electron gases, which suffers from short spin lifetime due to the presence of nuclear spin. We also illustrate that this emergent k-linear Rashba SOC is a first-order direct Rashba effect, originating from a combination of heavy-holelight-hole mixing and direct dipolar intersubband coupling to the external electric field. These findings confirm Ge-based 2DHG to be an excellent platform towards large-scale quantum computation. Spin-orbit coupling (SOC) entangles the spin and orbital degrees of freedom and has inspired a vast number of predictions, discoveries and innovative concepts, including spin transistors, spin-orbit qubits, spin Hall effect, quantum spin Hall effect, topological insulators, and Majorana fermions However, the Rashba SOC of the ground hole subband in semiconductor QWs, including Ge QWs, is commonly believed to be k-cubic rather than k-linear as the lowest order Because of these compelling differences between k-linear and k-cubic terms, the absence of strong k-linear Rashba SOC excludes holes in QWs from many potential applications. Luo et al. In this article, we study the Rashba SOC-induced spin-splitting in Ge/Si QWs using the atomistic semi-empirical pseudopotential method (SEPM) The k-linear Rashba spin splitting. to the bulk Ge valence band maximum (VBM) being 0.5 eV higher than the bulk Si where τ and σ are the Pauli matrices describing the orbital part and the spin part of eigenstates, respectively, and γ 3 the LK parameter. is also related to the HH-LH mixing. Using quasi-degenerate perturbation theory R (k x σ y -k y σ x ) (see supplemental material for details), where the k-linear Rashba parameter reads The denominator term is the energy separation ∆E 1,2 between HH1 and HH2 induced by SCE (∆ 0 ) and quantum-confined Stark effect (QCSE) (2eU 0 E z ). It is straightforward to learn that α having the same formula [Eq. 2] as that of the direct Rashba SOC in 1D nanowires In the [110]-oriented QWs, besides the interface-induced HH-LH mixing, the breaking of the axial symmetry causes an intrinsic HH-LH mixing at k = 0 and α R (k y ) ≈ γ 3 /γ 2 (the Luttinger parameters for Ge are γ 3 =5.69 and γ 2 =4.24 hence α R (k y ) ≈ 1.34), which explains the atomistic SEPM results shown in Figure Rashba spin splitting fills this void. The effects related to the k-linear Rashba spin splitting where electrons have in 2D systems, become implementable for holes at present. However, the k-linear Rashba effect for holes is not the reprint of electrons. Although their Hamiltonian has the same form, their effective spins differ due to their different orbital angular momentums. One example is the intrinsic spin Hall effect, which converts the unpolarized charge current to chargeless pure spin current (Table Spin dynamics observation make contributions as well. Besides, the Hall effect, where carriers accumulate perpendicular to both the electric field and magnetic field directions, is found to be modified by the kcubic Rashba effect in 2D systems (Table We hereby put forward a few examples of substantial effects above. More importantly, our newly-discovered k-linear Rashba effect has distinct spin properties so that one has to reunderstand the relevant 2D hole spin physics based on the conventional k-cubic Rashba model. Our discovery will force us to review all these substantial effects related to hole spins in 2D systems, further driving forward the development of devices. Furthermore, it remains an open question to detect this k-linear spin splitting term experimentally. Even in the absence of the direct dipolar coupling, Winkler However, this conventional k-linear Rashba SOC effect is small when compared to the kcubic term. Kloeffel In conclusion, we uncover a strong electric-tunable k-linear Rashba SOC of 2DHGs in Ge/Si QWs. We illustrate that this previous unknown k-linear Rashba SOC is a first-order direct Rashba effect, originating from a combination of HH-LH mixing and direct dipolar intersubband coupling. Specifically, in [110]-oriented Ge/Si QWs, the strength of this klinear Rashba SOC can be significantly enhanced by applied electric field to exceed 120 meV Å, comparable to the largest values of 2D electron gases reported in narrow bandgap III-V semiconductors, facilitating the fast manipulation of hole spins. This finding renders 2DHGs in Ge/Si QWs as an excellent platform for quantum computation. We have to stress that these findings are also applicable to 2DHGs in other tetrahedral semiconductors (see supplemental material). Our discovery makes a call to revisit the understanding of 2D hole spin physics, which have been explored with the assumption of k-cubic Rashba SOC. Direct evaluation of the Rashba parameter based on the semi-empirical pseudopotential method. Electronic structures are calculated using our previously developed atomistic, material-dependent semi-pseudopotential method (SEPM). An energy cutoff of 8.2 Ry, which is designed to fit the pseudopotential, is used to select the plane-wave basis, and fast Fourier transformations are used to transform the wave function between a real space grid and a reciprocal space grid. A 16 × 16 × 16 grid in real space is used for each eight-atom cubic (diamond or zinc-blende) cell 