High angular resolution electron backscatter diffraction (HR-EBSD) was coupled with focused ion beam (FIB) slicing to characterize the shape of the plastic zone in terms of geometrically necessary dislocations (GNDs) in W single crystal in 3 dimensions. Cantilevers of similar size with a notch were fabricated by FIB and were deformed inside a scanning electron microscope at different temperatures (21 • C, 100 • C and 200 • C) just above the micro-scale brittle-to-ductile transition (BDT). J-integral testing was performed to analyse crack growth and determine the fracture toughness. At all three temperatures the plastic zone was found to be larger close to the free surface than inside the specimen, similar to macroscale tension tests. However, at higher temperature, the 3D shape of the plastic zone changes from being localized in front of the crack tip to a butterfly-like distribution, shielding more efficiently the crack tip and inhibiting crack propagation. A comparison was made between two identically deformed samples, which were FIB-sliced from two different directions, to evaluate the reliability of the GND density estimation by HR-EBSD. The analysis of the distribution of the Nye tensor components was used to differentiate between the types of GNDs nucleated in the sample. The role of different types of dislocations in the plastic zone is discussed and we confirm earlier findings that the micro-scale BDT of W is mainly controlled by the nucleation of screw dislocations in front of the crack tip. Dislocation accumulation and distribution around crack tips play a great role in fracture mechanics. However until now, the characterization of the plastic zone around crack during fracture tests remains a difficult task. In recent years, a lot of progress has been made in understanding and quantifying fracture mechanics at small scales Local fracture behaviour of specifically oriented specimens of W single crystals was studied by Bohnert et al. where σ y is the macroscopic yield stress and K I is the stress intensity factor, that can be expressed in terms of the stress and the crack length. Numerous works have been published to refine Irwins estimation Another interesting aspect of mechanical testing of micron sized cantilevers is to study the free surface-dislocation interaction. 3-dimensional finite element (FE) framework HR-EBSD can characterize the distribution of GNDs with a sub-100 nm step size, it is however limited by the fact that information is only gathered from the first few tens of nanometers below the surface In the present work, we apply the novel 3D HR-EBSD technique to characterize the 3-dimensional GND distribution in front of the crack tip of notched microcantilevers in body-centered cubic W, deformed at different temperatures and strain rates. Microcantilever beam bending is chosen as form of deformation because many of the formed dislocations during the plastic deformation will accommodate the bending of the crystal and can then be easily characterized by HR-EBSD in terms of GNDs. Our aim is to discuss differences in GND density distributions caused by elevated temperatures and to study the distribution of edge and screw dislocations in order to further elucidate the mechanisms leading to a shift in BDT to lower temperatures in this size regime A high-purity W single crystalline sample with a (100)[001] type crack system were studied, where (100) is the crack plane, and [001] is the direction of crack front propagation. In W, the primary cleavage planes are the {100} type planes In situ microcantilever tests were performed with a nanoindentation platform (Alemnis AG, Switzerland) equipped with a cono-spherical diamond indenter tip with a radius of ca. 1 -2 μm. Room temperature tests were carried out in a Philips XL-30 type scanning electron microscope (SEM), while high temperature measurements were performed in a Zeiss DSM962 SEM. To monitor and adjust the temperature locally, the sample and the tip holder were attached separately to thermal sensors and resistive heaters If not fractured earlier, comparable deformation levels were chosen in each test. The data were normalized for better comparison using the following equation taken from the ASTM standard E399 where f is the geometry factor. Some details of this geometry function can be found in Appendix A along with further equations to describe the small scale fracture mechanical behaviour by means of J-Integrals. By superimposing a sinusoidal displacement with an amplitude of 10 nm to the applied monotonic loading protocol, a contact stiffness measurement was performed during the tests. The procedure is explained in more detail in previous studies From the obtained R-curves critical J-Integrals (J q ) are determined according to different criteria for the onset of stable crack propagation. This is shown in more detail in the Results chapter. Using the following equation, the conditional fracture toughness is calculated as: where E is the Young's modulus, ν is the Poisson's ratio, and q marks the application of a critical force in the fracture toughness calculation. For the 3-dimensional HR-EBSD measurements, a Tescan Lyra3 dual beam SEM equipped with an Edax Digiview EBSD camera was used. The chamber of this SEM is specially designed to allow rotation-free (static) 3D EBSD measurements, reducing any drift originating from stage movements. The samples were placed at a 70 • pre-tilted position, then consecutive FIB slicing and EBSD mapping was performed at a working distance of 9 mm. Slicing was carried out with beam conditions of 30 kV, 450 pA, while the slicing thickness was 90 nm. EBSD mapping was done using 20 kV, 16 nA beam with 100 nm step size on a square grid. The applied 2×2 binning with zero gain level enabled collection of diffraction patterns with 442 px × 442 px resolution. HR-EBSD evaluation was done using CrossCourt v4, a cross-correlation based analysis tool In this article, we utilize both GND estimation through L 1 optimisation and α sq calculation technique on the same dataset in order to study GND density distribution and estimate their total density present in the system. In order to examine the whole volume of the plastic zone, one cantilever (named S3) was lifted out using a nanomanipulator, then re-attached to a copper TEM lamella holder, where FIB slicing and HR-EBSD mapping was performed. A thin Pt layer was deposited on top of the cantilever to reduce FIB damage and protect the integrity of the sample. FIB slicing and EBSD mapping were done on this sample identically to the other measurements in this study, only the FIB slicing direction was perpendicular to the side cutting geometry (see sketches in Fig. Different displacement rates (5 nm/s, 20 nm/s and 50 nm/s) were applied to different samples to investigate the previously observed effect of loading rate and temperature on small-scale fracture behaviour. The goal was to better understand the micromechanical response in these specimens that can be related to the development of the plastic zones. The given displacement rates, which correspond to stress intensity factor rates of approximately 0.06 MPa•m 1/2 s -1 , 0.24 MPa•m 1/2 s -1 and 0.6 MPa•m 1/2 s -1 , respectively, and temperatures were chosen such that the micro-scale BDT occurs in this range. Initially, linear-elastic loading behaviour is observed for all specimens and all investigated temperatures, as shown in Figure , also shown in Table At 21 • C, tests using displacement rates of 50 nm/s and 20 nm/s resulted in cleavage fracture, as shown in Figure EPFM was applied for the determination of fracture toughness from crack resistance curves, which are shown in Figure Unfortunately, it was not possible to deform the samples to a specific strain field or up to a certain GND arrangement. The only way to compare specimens of similar size and shape was to perform tests to similar bending displacements and to analyze respective changes in the evolution of the GND arrangements. In order to try to assess the crack length at different temperatures, a crackextension measurement was conducted on the secondary electron images recorded on the 3D reconstructed samples before each HR-EBSD measurement. Although the images were not high resolution, the evaluation strategy was able to conclude crack lengths on all three samples as a function of distance from the surface (Figure Usually crack extension is investigated on cleaved surfaces, but in this case that was not possible. However, a simple observation could be made on the crack shape. At room temperature the crack seems to be deeper in the middle of the cantilever than closer to the free surface. Also from the sample deformed at 200 • C (S9, which was sliced up beyond its half volume) this tendency seems to be symmetric along the crack tip, as values of the crack length begin to decrease again beyond 2.5 μm distance from the surface. An attempt to carry out similar evaluation on the lift-out sample was also made, but due to FIB milling artefacts a clear image of the notch was not possible to find. Figure Looking at the cross-sectional distribution in front of the crack tip for the cantilever deformed at 21 • C (Fig. However, if different cross-sections are chosen (as presented in Figure The shape evolution presented here corresponds well to recent simulation studies on ductile fracture Although the same displacements were applied during the deformation processes on all cantilevers, a clear difference in crack extension at various temperatures can be observed. From the crack length measurements shown in Figure A sample (S3) with the same dimensions and almost identically deformed at room temperature as the one in Figure Figure The depth of the area with high GND density along the free surface is about 1 μm. One can therefore expect that this is a critical scale for size effect in fracture mechanics, below which the accumulation of dislocations would change around the crack tip. This is confirmed by earlier studies, which shows a change in critical behaviour of both FCC and BCC specimens smaller than 1 μm Magnitudes of ρ GN D estimated on the lift-out sample show lower values than measured in the side cutting case. To understand the reason behind this phenomenon, the in-depth study of the HR-EBSD calculation is necessary. Lattice distortions that are used to calculate stress/strain tensor components (and GND densities) are not measured equally in the two cases. As already mentioned in section 2.3, only the α i3 components can be calculated exactly, while the remaining 6 components are estimated through an optimisation method. α i3 components in the lift-out case correspond to different α ij components in the side cutting case. ρ GN D is calculated from all components of the α ij tensor, but if different slicing direction is applied, 3 different α ij components are calculated while others are only estimated. This is an important feature to keep in mind when ρ GN D estimation is carried out based on HR-EBSD measurements. Therefore, ρ GN D magnitudes should not necessary be the same. Differences in GND density magnitudes or distributions hence originate from detecting different dislocations. This emphasizes the fact that absolute GND density measurement by HR-EBSD need to be taken with care, as it is direction dependent. But comparing different samples with a similar sectioning orientation is still relevant. To better understand what components of the Nye tensor are measured with the two geometries, the Reader is referred to Appenix B. If it was possible to do the cross-correlation calculation itself in 3D (which is currently not available by HR-EBSD, only a synchrotron-based Differential Aperture X-ray Laue Micro-diffraction (DAXM) Usually dislocations in metals do not have pure edge or screw character, but often exhibit a mixture of both. There is however only the possibility to assume pure edge or screw GND components through HR-EBSD and the construction of the Nye tensor. Nevertheless, these components can be individually calculated, giving more insight about local dislocation mechanisms and collective behaviour. The study of the α i3 components were conducted on each cantilever sliced from the side using a section close to the surface (FIB slice No. 4 from the surface) and one map from the middle (FIB slice No. 25 from the surface). α 13 and α 23 components in Figure Based on the GND density analysis, the transition between plain strain (middle of the specimen) to plain stress state at the surface happens in a ∼ 1 μm thick region, as discussed earlier. If sample sizes approach this char-acteristic length the gradient in this transition gets even stronger, that will manifest in size-dependent mechanical effects (the smaller the specimen size, the higher the gradient will be). The amount of α 33 GND component close to the free surface is increasing with temperature compared to the α 13 and α 23 , showing similar trend as in ref. Based on the α i3 components, the Burgers vector directions can be identified (see also in Appendix B ). A sketch in the bottom row of Figure The stress field around a mode I crack tip in an isotropic medium in plane strain or plain stress state is given in Ref. In addition, dislocation slip in BCC materials is more complicated than in FCC materials due to the complex core structure of the dislocations. The difficult motion of the screw dislocations involves temperature activated kink-pair formation and wavy slip, where new kinks can form on different slip planes, e.g. {110}, {112} or {123}) α sq values show similar concentration in their distribution as the total GND density reconstructions in Figure α i3 component analysis was also conducted in the liftout case (S4) for comparison. One section from the cantilever deformed at room temperature was analysed. Note that the coordinate system is oriented differently in the lift-out and side cut case (see in Fig. The 3D shape of the plastic zone in front of crack tips has been successfully characterized by 3D HR-EBSD. As model material and geometry, single crystal W microcantilevers with a notch were deformed at room temperature, 100 • C and 200 • C at various deformation rates. These deformation conditions correspond respectively close to a brittle-ductile regime towards a progressive fully plastic regime at the highest temperature. For the deformation at room temperature, the distribution of GNDs in front of the crack tip shows a clear "dog bone" shape, with more GNDs towards the free surface of the cantilever and less GNDs in the centre of the specimen. This is comparable to what is observed in compact tension specimen at the macro-scale. At higher temperatures, in a more extended plastic regime this "dog bone" plastic zone still appears but its shape evolves with higher temperature, increasing the overall dislocation density at the crack tip, which inhibits crack propagation. This behaviour is supported by earlier studies in macroscopic specimens and simulations. The separate analysis of the α i3 components of the Nye tensor shows for the first time a pronounced trend for more nucleation of pure screw GNDs at high temperature. Screw GNDs are also the one responsible for the inhomogeneous distribution of GNDs between the centre and the free surface of the cantilever. This study reveals the importance of the free surface during micro-mechanical testing and fracture mechanics at small scales. This effect on the mechanism of deformation can only be understood if we are able to characterize in 3 dimensions the distribution of dislocations in deformed materials. Results presented here can be used to compare experiments with simulations. The development of novel computational methods should also focus on how to take into account this free surface effect. The geometry factor f , which is a function of the crack length and the sample height, was calculated by finite element (FE) simulations for the investigated geometry Elastic-plastic fracture mechanics (EPFM) were used to determine the fracture toughness characterized by the onset of stable crack growth, which is denominated as "fracture initiation toughness" in the following. Continuous J-Integrals composed of an elastic and a plastic part (J el and J pl , respectively) were determined for this purpose. The technique, which utilizes a slightly modified approach of the one described in the ASTM standard E1820 where ν is the Poisson's ratio (ν W = 0.28), and E is the Young's modulus (E (2) from the ASTM standard E399 Here, the deviation from the initial linear loading regime by means of the 95 % construction line is used to calculate the critical force F q . For the calculation of the plastic part of the J-Integral J pl , the area underneath the force-displacement curve A pl is determined. The constant η = 2 is set for the bending geometry. From the obtained R-curves critical J-Integrals J q are determined according to different criteria for the onset of stable crack propagation. Using the following equation, the conditional fracture toughness is calculated as: APPENDIX B-Understanding the measured Nye tensor components by HR-EBSD In this article we define the Burgers vector (b) in the RHFS convention (right hand Burgers loop around the dislocation, and the Burgers vector points from the finishing to the starting point of the loop). The second rank tensor α ij was introduced by Nye in 1953 In case of HR-EBSD, as backscattered electrons only originate from the top couple of tens of nanometers of the sample, we can only calculate three components of the Nye tensor from 2D experimental data as where β ij are the components of the deformation gradient tensor Usually dislocations have mixed type and their Burgers and line vectors does not align with the measurement coordinate system. It is important to note that discrete dislocations cannot be detected by HR-EBSD (only lattice rotations), and the same GND can be detected through different α ij components. Therefore, Figure As the bulk sample was oriented towards the three main axes of the unit cell, it is easy to see that different projections of the same GND with a Burgers vector 1/2 < 111 > type can contribute to more than one Nye tensor component. 