The electronic and local structural properties of CuO under pressure have been investigated by means of X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) at Cu K edge and ab-initio calculations, up to 17 GPa. The crystal structure of CuO consists of Cu motifs within CuO 4 square planar units and two elongated apical Cu-O bonds. The CuO 4 square planar units are stable in the studied pressure range, with Cu-O distances that are approximately constant up to 5 GPa, and then decrease slightly up to 17 GPa. In contrast, the elongated Cu-O apical distances decrease continuously with pressure in the studied range. An anomalous increase of the mean square relative displacement (EXAFS Debye Waller,  2 ) of the elongated Cu-O path is observed from 5 GPa up to 13 GPa, when a drastic reduction takes place in  2 . This is interpreted in terms of local dynamic disorder along the apical Cu-O path. At higher pressures (P>13 GPa), the local structure of Cu 2+ changes from a 4-fold square planar to a 4+2 Jahn-Teller distorted octahedral ion. We interpret these results in terms of the tendency of the Cu 2+ ion to form favorable interactions with the apical O atoms. Also, the decrease in Cu-O apical distance caused by compression softens the normal mode associated with the out-of-plane Cu movement. CuO is predicted to have an anomalous rise in permittivity with pressure as well as modest piezoelectricity in the 5-13 GPa pressure range. In addition, the near edge features in our XAS experiment show a discontinuity and a change of tendency at 5 GPa. For P < 5 GPa the evolution of the edge shoulder is ascribed to purely electronic effects which also affect the charge transfer integral. This is linked to a charge migration from the Cu to O, but also to an increase of the energy band gap, which show a change of tendency occurring also at 5 GPa. In particular, we present extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) measurements on CuO at Cu K edge under pressure, in order to get information on the evolution of the local structure around Cu ions. We obtained the evolution of the Cu-O bond distances and the EXAFS Debye Waller factors ( 2 ) of the backscatterer with respect to the absorber atom, which parameterize the effects of structural and vibrational disorder XAS measurements at Cu K edge were undertaken in CuO polycrystalline commercial powders (Aldrich, +99.9% purity) at high pressure up to 17 GPa. The experiment was performed at BM23 beamline at the ESRF (Grenoble, France) The EXAFS spectra, χ(k), were obtained after removing the signal background. The Fourier Transform (FT) curves of the k weighted EXAFS signals were obtained for the k range 1.5 -14.3 Å -1 using a sinus window, with the Athena software of Demeter package XANES spectra were normalized to unity edge jump by using also Athena software from the Demeter package Ab-initio total-energy calculations at zero temperature have been performed within the density functional theory (DFT) Highly converged results were achieved by extending the set of plane waves up to a kinetic energy cutoff of 550 eV. In order to provide a reliable description of the effects of electronic correlation, the calculations were performed using the GGA + U formalism with the Dudarev's approach In the relaxed configurations, the forces on the atoms are less than 0.006 eV/Å and the deviation of the stress tensor from a diagonal hydrostatic form is less than 0.1 GPa. The vibrational properties and the piezoelectric tensor were calculated by using the density functional perturbation theory (DFPT). Lattice-dynamics calculations were performed at the zone center (Γ point) of the BZ with a 3x3x3 supercell. The construction of the dynamical matrix at the Γ point of the BZ involves separate calculations of the forces in which a fixed displacement from the equilibrium configuration of the atoms within the primitive cell is considered. The number of such independent displacements in the analyzed structures is reduced due to the crystal symmetry. Diagonalization of the dynamical matrix provides the frequencies of the normal modes and it was realized by using PHONOPY software O long distance, are fixed to their crystallographic values and the fit is repeated with the rest of the parameters set as free. The resulting Cu-O long distances are slightly higher than the ones obtained by the first analysis and are closer to the ab-initio calculated values. Then, the error bars on the Cu-O long distances obtained below 5 GPa are corrected accordingly, by considering the error introduced also by the second fit value. The lattice parameters were also calculated, and they are in accordance with the ones found in ref. Figure It is worth mentioning that the same evolution of Cu-O short distance is found when the variation of E 0 parameter is left free on the EXAFS fitting, and also for the fit including just the first shell. The evolution with pressure of the longest Cu-O distances are quite different, as they are continuously reduced along the whole pressure range, with compressibility 6.7•10 -3 GPa -1 , that is 18 times higher than the short square planar ones, in agreement with ref. Pressure (GPa) ~5 GPa, the DW barely changes upon compression, (2) from 5 GPa up to 13 GPa there is an anomalous significant increase of the DW factor, unexpected under compression, and (3) above 13 GPa, the DW drops down at a higher value than in region (1) and slightly increases, up to 17 GPa. Moreover, from the EXAFS analysis we get the evolution of Cu-Cu distances and the DW factors, shown in figure EXAFS probes the instantaneous local structure around the absorbing atom (the interaction time of the XAS process is ~10 -14 s). The EXAFS DW factor assigned to the atomic distances contains two contributions: a thermal (or dynamic) one and a structural (or static) one. The first contribution is related to thermal disorder and the second one to local structural distortions, and they cannot be separated According to diffraction experiments, there is no structural transition in CuO in this pressure range Figure In contrast, if a wide distribution of Cu-O long distances is dominant (wide single-minimum blue energy curve in figure Finally, we calculated the piezoelectric tensor using finite differences at three pressures in each of the three regions (0, 7.5 GPa, and 14 GPa). Interestingly, the piezoelectric tensor is essentially zero at zero pressure, with e ijk values in the order of 10 -3 C/m 2 . In contrast, the piezoelectric tensor is non-zero for the longitudinal strains at 7.5 GPa. The electric displacement field induced by a longitudinal strain in the x direction is given by the piezoelectric constants e 111 = 0.16 C/m 2 , e 211 = 0.068 C/m 2 , and e 311 = 0.12 C/m 2 . Interestingly, the displacement field induced by a longitudinal strain in the y direction (e 122 = 0.16 C/m 2 , e 222 = 0.066 C/m 2 , and e 322 = 0.12 C/m 2 ) in the z direction (e 133 = 0.16 C/m 2 , e 233 = 0.074 C/m 2 , and e 333 = 0.12 C/m 2 ) are very similar, and the displacement induced by shear strains is essentially zero. The piezoelectric tensor decreases again at 14 GPa (region (3)), with e 111 = 0.045 C/m 2 , e 211 = 0.067 C/m 2 , and e 311 = 0.026 C/m 2 . As in the previous case, the displacements are equivalent regardless of the direction of the longitudinal strain and essentially zero for shear strain. The Cu K-edge XANES spectra at representative pressures are shown in figure The weak A-peak on Cu K edge XANES in CuO is normally ascribed to quadrupole transitions to empty d states Here we note a very subtle shift of the A prepeak (not shown) towards lower energies on the previously described region (2) (from 5 up to 13 GPa). This can be linked to the rearrangement of the d-states (e g and t 2g ), that become closer under compression, due to the slight shortening of Cu-O short distances in the 8976 8982 8988 8994 9000 9006 square plane and to the evolution towards a 4+2 fold-like coordination. The B shoulder energy mean position changes with compression as can be seen in figure In order to further validate our XAS measurements, theoretical calculations have been performed to obtain the simulated XANES under two different approaches. The first uses the Green formalism on a muffin-tin potential and the second uses a free shape potential by means of the finite difference method The figure Interestingly, the evolution of B structure towards higher energies is well reproduced. The pre-peak A is less intense on the FDM calculation, and it matches better the experimental intensity ratio with the other features. Even though the edge features on Cu K edge XAS of CuO are ascribed both to multiple scattering (MS) and shake-down processes through charge transfer, MS calculations usually give qualitative agreement, as the ligand field and the geometrical structure can also modify the 1s4p transition probabilities. The experimental XANES under pressure shows that the B-shoulder structure is progressively smoothed (figure The B shoulder position depends significantly on the local symmetry in the case of Cu 2+ compounds (i.e. La 2 CuO 4 , Nd 2 CuO 4 However, our EXAFS results (figure The evolution with pressure of the energy band gap is shown in figure Interestingly, the angle  along the Cu-O-Cu chain (marked in figure The local structural and electronic properties of CuO under pressure were investigated by X-ray absorption spectroscopy and ab-initio calculations. The CuO 4 square planar units are found to be stable under compression up to 17 GPa, while the apical Cu-O long distance is continuously decreasing under pressure. The absolute value of the compressibility of Cu-O bonds is slightly smaller than the one found in diffraction measurements, although the relative difference between the shorter and longer Cu-O bonds compressibility is similar The EXAFS Debye Waller factor,  2 , does not change with pressure for Cu-O short bonds, while it shows a continuous increase for Cu-O long bonds (figure The A and B XANES features vary their central energy position with pressure. The edge region on the XANES at Cu K edge reflects dipolar electronic transitions from 1s to 4p empty levels, right above the Fermi level. In particular, the B shoulder originates both from transitions to the 4p apical orbitals and shakedown processes through ligand to metal charge transfer. Its moderate shift is related to variations on the charge transfer energy, as probed by the calculated effective charge transfer from Cu to O ions (figure 6 (c)) and to the increase of the energy band gap. Moreover, the discontinuity of the B structure at 5 GPa, which also reflects the transitions to energy states right above the Fermi level (p states), can be the signature of an electronic transition Summarizing, our XAS study of CuO under pressure revealed a transition to a dynamically distorted Cu-O local structure at 5 GPa, with a Cu 2+ octahedral-like ion (4+2) above 13 GPa. In addition, the description of the evolution of the local structure obtained from EXAFS, together with the ab-initio calculations, allowed us to interpret XANES A and B features and their evolution with pressure. Our results probe the correlation between the local structural, vibrational and electronic properties on CuO under pressure. The authors thank the ESRF for granting beamtime for the proposal HC-3339 and BM23 beamline staff for experimental and excellent technical support. V. M. acknowledges the "Juan de la Cierva" fellowship (FJCI-2016-27921). A.O.R. thanks the Spanish government for a Ramón y Cajal fellowship (RyC-2016-20301) and for financial support (projects PGC2018-097520-A-100 and RED2018-102612-T), and the MALTA Consolider supercomputing centre and Compute Canada for computational resources. Premier Research Institute for Ultrahigh-pressure Sciences (PRIUS) is acknowledged for providing of nanodiamond anvil cells for XAS experiments. We would also like to acknowledge Dra. Gloria Subías and Dr. Javier Ruiz Fuertes for fruitful discussions. XAS, X-ray absorption spectroscopy; EXAFS, extended X-ray absorption fine structure; MF, multiferroicity; DW, Debye-Waller; RT, room temperature; AFM, antiferromagnetic; BZ, Brillouin zone; IR, infra-red; CT, charge transfer. 