Due to their characteristic geometry, TiO 2 nanotubes (TNTs), suitably doped by metalsubstitution to enhance their photocatalytic properties, have a high potential for applications such as clean fuel production. In this context, we present a detailed investigation of the magnetic, electronic, and optical properties of transition-metal doped TNTs, based on hybrid density functional theory. In particular, we focus on the 3d, the 4d, as well as selected 5d transition-metal doped TNTs. Thereby, we are able to explain the enhanced optical activity and photocatalytic sensitivity observed in various experiments. We find, for example, that Cr-and W-doped TNTs can be employed for applications like water splitting and carbon dioxide reduction, and for spintronic devices. The best candidate for water splitting is Fe-doped TNT, in agreement with experimental observations. In addition, our findings provide valuable hints for future experimental studies of the ferromagnetic/spintronic behavior of metal-doped titania nanotubes. Titanium dioxide (TiO 2 , titania) nanostructures have seen exciting applications in a number of areas, including batteries In particular, a titania nanotube (TNT) is an effective nano-photocatalyst that directly splits water Moreover, the highly ordered nanotube geometry and large internal surface area are very useful as a unidirectional electric channel for the photogenerated electrons Most publications in the field have been concerned with mechanisms that decrease the bandgap of TNTs, and shift the absorption edges towards the visible-light range. Doping is a common method for tuning the bandgap of semiconductors. Experimentally, a large number of doped TNTs was prepared, e.g., Refs. With respect to magnetic properties, ferromagnetic behavior has been experimentally observed for V- In view of the relative simplicity of preparing metal-doped TNTs With respect to spintronics application, magnetic sensors and non-volatile magnetic memories are conceivable. As compared to metal-based spintronics, metal-oxide structures are more versatile because of the ability to control the potential variation and spin polarization by external voltages The details of the calculational approach are given in Section II. In Section III, we address the structural and magnetic properties. The main part of this study, the electronic structures of M-TNTs, is presented in Section IV, followed by the optical and photocatalytic properties in Section V. A brief summary is given in Section VI. All the calculations were carried out using plane-wave pseudopotentials in the Vienna ab initio simulation package The exchange-energy functional in the HSE scheme is written as a linear combination of short-range (SR) and long-range (LR) terms. The SR term is a PBE exchange functional (E PBE,SR X (μ)) mixed with a certain percentage of the exact exchange Hartree-Fock (E HF,SR X (μ)) contribution, while the LR term is defined by the PBE exchange functional (E PBE,LR X (μ)). The range-separation (screening) parameter μ is usually and also in this work chosen to be 0.2 Å-1 . Therefore the exchange-correlation energy functional reads: where a is the called exchange mixing coefficient. The standard choice of a in the HSE06 package is 25%, but in order to reproduce the experimental TiO 2 bulk bandgap The dielectric function, ε(ω) = ε 1 (ω) + iε 2 (ω), describes the optical response at the angular frequency ω. First, ε 2 (ω) is calculated on the basis of the standard golden-rule expression, then ε 1 (ω) is found by employing the Kramers-Kronig relation. Finally, the absorption spectrum is determined by TABLE I. Titania nanotube bandgap versus mixing parameter a, as calculated with the HSE functional. The experimental value, 3.2 eV, is reproduced for a = 14%. The low value of the optimal mixing parameter for TNT as compared to bulk TiO 2 (a = 22%) means that the electrons in the nanotube are less localized than those in the bulk system, hence the TNT electrons are easily polarizable, implying good screening TiO 2 anatase nanotubes have been investigated experimentally and theoretically, see, e.g., where E M-TNT and E TNT denote the total energies of metal-doped and pristine TNT, respectively; μ Ti and μ M are the chemical potentials of Ti and the dopant atom, the latter assumed to be given by the energy of the isolated metal atom. TABLE The pristine system (Ti column) is included for easy reference. The last three rows indicate whether the respective system is useful for spintronic, optical, and photocatalytic applications: the means "clear improvement compared to pristine TNT", and the "no improvement", w.r.t. that application. We find the formation energy to be roughly proportional to the number of electrons in the dopant atom, and related to the ionic radius of the larger ions (Sc, Y, La, and Zr). The most stable M-TNT is Ta-TNT because the ionic radius and electronegativity of Ta are very close to the corresponding values of the Ti ion. The formation energies of 4d-TNTs are higher than the corresponding ones in the same group of 3d-and 5d-TNTs, which can be attributed to the large ionic size of 4d dopants as compared to the ionic size of 3d dopants group, and the low electronegativity of 4d dopants as compared to the electronegativity of 5d dopants (Tables II, III, and IV). Regarding the magnetic moment, the difference between the number of outer shell electrons in the metal dopant and the Ti atom determines the magnetic properties of M-TNTs as is apparent, e.g., for Sc-to Fe-TNTs. For the nearly full outer shell Co, the coupling between the outer shell electrons can explain the magnetic moment of Co-TNT: two outer shell electrons are coupling and the third one is unpaired (low spin state), hence the net magnetic moment is 1 μ B to a good approximation. On the other hand, for Co one needs one electron to fill the outer shell, thereby a hole will be created in Co-TNT, and the magnetic moment becomes also 1 μ B . For the full-filled outer shell atoms (Ni, Cu, and Zn), the magnetic moments are 0 for Ni due to the closed (inert) shell, 1 μ B for Cu (the oxidation number is (+3)) and a hole is created, and 2 μ B for Zn (the oxidation number is (+2)) and two holes are created; see Table The density of states (DOS) and projected density of states (PDOS) for pristine TNT are shown in Figs. In order to structure the presentation, we discuss the electronic structures according to the groups in the periodic table. For 3B group dopants (Sc, Y, La), due to their oxidation number of (+3) as compared to (+4) for Ti, the DOS is asymmetric between the two spin For the 4B group dopant considered (Zr), the DOS of Zr-TNT has the same DOS as pristine TNT due to the similarity of the Zr and Ti outer shells, so there is no change in the bandgap. The PDOS shows there is no contribution of Zr states in the bandgap and at the TABLE IV. Ionic radius ( Å) (cf. The last three rows indicate whether the respective system is useful for spintronic, optical, and photocatalytic applications: the means "clear improvement compared to pristine TNT", and the "no improvement", w.r.t. that application. Since the dopants of the 5B group (V, Nb, Ta) have an additional electron compared to Ti, an asymmetric behavior of the two spin components of the DOS arises. The additional states in the bandgap are located at 1.9 eV for V-TNT, and at the edge of the CB for Nb-and Ta-TNTs (Figs. observed that Nb-TNT is an n-type conductor For the next group, 6B (Cr, Mo, W), there are two additional electrons from the dopants which again implies an asymmetry in the spin resolved DOS (Figs. The generated states appear at 2.7 eV for Mo-TNT, and below the CB edge for W-TNT. The gaps of Cr-, Mo-, and W-TNTs are 2.0, 2.4, and 2.4 eV, respectively. The doping with Cr and W improves the optical and photocatalytic activities under visible light irradiation, due to the positions of the states generated within their gaps. For the Cr dopant, the created states are close to the VB and below the CB, therefore the probability of creating a trapping center is small Considering the dopants in the 7B group, Mn and Tc (Figs. Hence Mn and Tc dopings improve the optical properties. The Mn dopant can also enhance the photocatalytic activities due to the location of the created states. This result confirms the experimental observations of the photocatalytic performance for Mn-TNT Regarding the 8B group, first two columns (Fe, Ru, Co, Rh), these atoms have nearly full outer shells. As compared to the previous dopants, the created states are more spread inside the bandgap, and appear near the edges of the VB and the CB as well, which implies a stronger reduction of the bandgap (Figs. 6(e,g) and Figs. We note that ferromagnetic behavior was experimentally observed for Co-TNT We turn now to the closed outer shell atoms, namely the last column in the 8B group ( Reduced bandgaps, compared to pristine TNT, have been observed experimentally for Cuand Ag-TNTs, and for Au doped TiO 2 nanoparticles The last closed outer shell group is 2B (Zn, Cd). The effect of both dopants is the same in the DOS (Figs. 8(g,i)), with a small difference, however, in the location of the created midgap states. Figures V. OPTICAL PROPERTIES AND CLEAN FUEL PRODUCTION The natural fuel type which can be gained depends on the conditions of the chemical reac- In this work we systematically discussed the electronic, magnetic, and optical properties of titania nanotubes doped with 3d, 4d, and selected 5d transition metals, in order to elucidate their potential for various applications. The bandgap and the position of the dopant states determine the enhancement of the photocatalytic sensitivity. In particular, Cr-, Mn-, Fe-, Co-, Nb-, Ru-, Ta-, and W-doped TNTs are expected to be preferential for photocatalytic applications (water splitting and carbon dioxide reduction) as compared to pristine TNT. Fe-doped TNT is the best candidate for water splitting and for the production of hydrogen, methane, and methanol fuels, while the Cr-and W-doped TNTs are best for water splitting and CO 2 reduction, i.e., for the production of clean fuels and, at the same time, for helping to decrease the CO 2 pollution. However, in several cases (14 out of 24) the created midgap states prevent an enhancement of photocatalytic sensitivity. Our results compare favorably with available experimental observations. components, and intermediate states are created at 1.1, 0.9, and 1.3 eV for Sc-, Y-, and La-TNTs, respectively. The dopants introduce a hole in the structure. The intermediate states decrease the bandgap to 2.8 eV. As compared to the pristine case, the VB edge, the Fermi energy, and the CB edges remain unchanged, see Figs. tion. The detailed mechanisms of H 2 O splitting and CO 2 reduction have been reported in several reviews, see, e.g., Ref.