We investigate the effect of small spatiotemporal modulations in subwavelength-dimensioned phononic crystals with large band gaps, on the frequency spectrum for elastic waves polarized in the plane of periodicity. When the radius of cylinders periodically placed inside a matrix of highly-contrasting elastic properties is time-varying, we find that due to the appearance of frequency harmonics throughout the spectrum, the notion of a band gap is destroyed in general, although with the appropriate tuning of parameters, in particular the modulation frequency, it is possible that some band-gap region is retained, making such systems possible candidates for tunable bandpass filters or phononic isolators, accordingly, and for sensor applications. Phononic lattices are necessarily engineered structures made up of composite materials (metamaterials). The tunability of their design can permit novel behaviour not found in conventional materials, such as wide, complete band gaps and nonreciprocal propagation Reciprocal propagation of sound or elastic waves in media The rectification of the mechanical properties of phononic materials has been demonstrated in several experimental or numerical studies, based on phenomena such as electromagnetism Given that phononic materials are a very technologically-promising area of research, our aim in this study is to examine whether time variation of the phononic crystals' already spatially-varying material properties improves or degrades the performance of these systems for various objectives such as acoustic isolators or frequency sensors. We consider a composite composed of two homogeneous structures: a solid cylinder inside a background matrix of a different material, together comprising a square unit cell as shown in Fig. The elastic wave equation in the resulting inhomogeneous elastic medium is derived from the following relations b) Euler's Equation, where the i, j are the components in space, specifically x,y,z, of the various quantities, x i are the spatial coordinates, v i are the components of the velocity, i.e. v i = ∂u i /∂t, for displacements u i , T ij are the components of the stress tensor (defined below). Equations 1 and 2 in conjunction yield after ignoring a term second-order in v since we aim to work in the regime of small displacements. c) Hooke's law, where δ ij is the Kronecker delta function and are the components of the strain tensor u in terms of the displacement vector u and the spatial coordinates x, and λ = ρ (C After an initial disturbance was set in motion at a point inside the cylinder, the system was allowed to evolve. The magnitude of the disturbance is what determines the amplitude of the response and the resulting displacements may be considered to remain within the linear-elastic regime as the problem is completely scalable in this sense. Using the finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method, where the spatial as well as the time domain is discretized, and applying periodic boundary conditions and Bloch's theorem The displacements at the following time step are obtained in terms of their values, as well as those of other parameters, at previous steps, and Fourier-transformed in order to obtain a spectrum of resonant peaks corresponding to the bands in k space We utilized a square grid of 90 by 90 points for the calculations of the band structure for the static model A(t) = 0 and 180 by 180 points or even denser, up to 360 by 360, for more-detailed calculations of the frequency responses of the k = 0 cases with and without time dependence because the denser grid let to less abrupt changes in the material parameters as a function of time, or led to the accessing of smaller amplitudes in A(t). All of the lengths are expressed in terms of the lattice parameter a. Frequency is expressed as a dimensionless quantity ν = νa/c where c is taken as the speed of sound c b in the background material and the units of ν are kHz. The time step in the simulations was taken as ∆t =7.698×10 -4 a/c b . Material ρ (g/cm In Table In this section we apply the formalism and methods outlined in the previous section to two different composite phononic material systems: iron (Fe) cylinders in epoxy, and silicon (Si) cylinders in epoxy. The calculated band structure for waves polarized in the plane of the unit cell, of mixed transverse-longitudinal character, for Fe cylinders in epoxy without time-variation of material properties is shown in Fig. Similarly, for Si cylinders in epoxy without time variation we also find a band structure with large gaps, as shown in Fig. As we time-vary the cylinder radius as outlined in the previous section, for an Fe or a Si cylinder in epoxy, we obtain the spectrum shown in Fig. In Fig. For fixed amplitude modulation and varying frequency modulation of the cylinder radius, we obtain the results in Fig. the main resonance peak compared to the non-time-varying case is unaffected by the value of f . In the case of Fe in epoxy in Fig. x + u 2 y , at steady state once the excitation has long died out. During the steady state, there are of course vibrations but the localization character of each resonance remains unchanged. In Fig. x + u 2 y for a Si cylinder in epoxy for the lowest resonance peak at the frequency 0.1205 in the non-time-varying case (point Y1 in Fig. In Fig. We have examined the effect of periodic strucural modulations in two phononic materials composed of a cylinder inside a matrix of highly-contrasting elastic properties and we have found that in general the large band gaps are destroyed by harmonics generated by the temporal modulation. However, the resonances' time-harmonics induced by structural modulations may be exploited in order to achieve tunable phononic isolation or alternatively, bandpass filtering given that in phononic systems with fairly flat bands, by employing a large-enough modulation frequency, it is feasible that small band gaps could be retained for some regions. The harmonics' periodicity and wide range could also find implementation in a frequency sensor. Modulating the cylinders' radius may be achieved relatively simply: such as by a mechanically-modulated split-ring structure where the two components have a different radius. V. APPENDIX A. Fe cylinder in Epoxy, filling factor of 60% In Fig. As can be seen from the figure, the displacements are on the same scale either for a fixed or for a time-varying cylinder radius. If, instead of a solid cylinder as in the main text, we have a hollow cylinder of Fe in Epoxy with the same outer dimension as the cylinder described in the main text (of 50% filling factor) and inner dimension as shown by the outlines in Fig. x + u 2 y of a point inside the ring in order to visualize the localization of the vibrations. The results are very similar to the corresponding case of a solid cylinder. The displacement profile of point Z1 has the same character as that of point X1 (viz. Fig. Point Z2 has a strong lifting of its degeneracy and only two of the four closely-spaced modes show the same localization as in the solid cylinder case: Z2(2) and Z2(3) which correspond to the two nearly-degenerate modes located at the point Y2 in Fig. 