The icosahedral-like polyhedral fraction (ICO-like fraction) has been studied as a criterion for predicting the glass-forming ability of bulk ternary metallic glasses, Al90Sm8X2 (X = Al (binary), Cu, Ag, Au), using ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations. We found that the ICO-like fraction can be determined with adequate precision to explore correlations with AIMD simulations. We then demonstrated that ICO-like fraction correlates with the critical cooling rate, which is a widely used intrinsic measure of glass forming ability. These results suggest that the ICO-like fraction from AIMD simulations may offer a useful guide for searching and screening for good glass formers. Rapidly quenching metals can lock in a metastable metallic glass (MG) state with many desirable properties, including high elastic modulus, yield strength, specific strength, and good biocompatibility One promising direction to understand better what controls Rc has been the result that local structure capture by Voronoi Polyhedra (VP), and in particular icosahedral (ICO) polyhedra, can correlate with aspects of GFA Our focus on Al-Sm-X alloys is motivated by both the previous success of correlating the GFA with VP from Bokas, et al. In order to examine trends in GFA with VP for the Al-Sm-X alloys we needed to consider two issues. The first is how to accurately calculate the ICO-like fraction. In particular, to allow for efficient prediction of new alloy properties it is ideal if the ICO-like fraction can be obtained from AIMD, rather than from classical MD with potentials, as the former can be implemented accurately on many more systems since it does not require fitting a potential. Thus, the first part of our work was a careful test of the convergence of ICO-like fraction with respect to simulation times and system size from MD for Al-Sm and Al-Sm-Cu. We note that our successful demonstration that AIMD can yield adequately converged results is a critical step in enabling the use of local clusters for GFA screening as it readily enables studies across many systems by avoiding the need for potential development for each one. The second issue we considered was the correlation between GFA and ICO-like fraction. To quantify GFA we use Rc, which is estimated from a simple cooling model and the thickness of ribbons that yield amorphous systems during melt spinning To prepare a model of glassy alloys, we first created a face-centered-cubic (fcc) crystal Al92Sm8 system with 256 atoms. The classical MD simulations were performed using Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) code The equilibrium volume at particular temperature was obtained by constructing pressurevolume (P-V) equation of state AIMD simulations were performed in the framework of the density functional theory using Vienna Ab-Initio Simulation Package (VASP) Convergence tests were performed in Al92Sm8 and Al90Sm8Cu2 by using the classical MD simulations to determine expected errors in the averages calculated using the system size and simulation times accessible to AIMD simulations. In the classical MD simulations, three different system sizes (containing 256, 2048, and 6912 atoms, corresponding to approximately cubic supercells of 1×1×1, 2×2×2, and 3×3×3) were tested. These glassy alloys were first equilibrated using a constant pressure and constant temperature (NPT) ensemble for 100 ps at a given temperature (300 K, 800 K, and 1300 K) while maintaining zero pressure. After that, the equilibrium volume at each temperature was determined so that this volume could be used in subsequent runs in the NVT ensemble. To determine the ICO-like fractions at different temperatures, 100 independent NVT runs were carried out, where independence was assured by starting the runs from different initial velocity distributions. For each NVT run, isothermal holds were done at 300 K, 800 K, and 1300 K for 15 ps each. For each frame in each independent run, the ICO-like fractions were calculated by counting the ICO-like VP for each temperature hold and then dividing by the total number of VP present in the system. The first 5 ps of the isothermal simulation had been treated as the equilibrium run, while the next 10 ps was the production run, at which we calculated the average values of ICO-like fraction. The time step in the classical MD simulations was 1 fs. To enable practical AIMD simulations it is advantageous to use simulation cells of 256 atoms and perform at most about 20 repeated simulation runs. To evaluate possible size effects and confirm that the simulation cell with 256 atoms is large enough, the fractions of ICO-like clusters in Al92Sm8 and Al90Sm8Cu2 systems were calculated via classical MD simulations using three different simulation cell sizes (256, 2048, and 6912 atoms). The values of ICO-like fraction in these systems were plotted as a difference from the ICO-like fraction in the system with 6912 atoms. The raw data can be found in Table To demonstrate that about 20 AIMD simulation runs were adequate for converged results, we calculated how the standard error in the mean (SEM) of ICO-like fraction depends on the number of runs. Here, we mainly focused on the low temperature runs at 300 K for the smallest supercell of Al92Sm8 and Al90Sm8Cu2 with 256 atoms, as shown in Fig. The effect of temperature on the magnitude and SEM of ICO-like fraction of Al92Sm8, Al90Sm8Ag2, Al90Sm8Au2, and Al90Sm8Cu2 was also considered, as shown in Fig. As a next step we examine the possible correlation between the ICO-like fraction and Rc. The magnitude of Rc is predicted based on the approximate relationship between cooling rate R, sample thickness, and thermodynamic properties, R = (T # -T " )K CL % 2 As shown in Fig. The results are summarized in We have also found that the alloying element X affects the composition of the ICO-like clusters. These results are not central to the conclusions shown in this paper and therefore analysis of cluster composition is reported in SI Sec. 4. From Fig. This work showed two results that will aid in the development of simulation accessible features related to VP for predicting GFA. First, we demonstrated that the room temperature ICO-like fraction of a quenched glass can be determined to under 1% precision with system sizes of 256 atoms and averaging over approximately 20 runs of about 3 ps each. These systems sizes, times, and run quantities demonstrate that this feature is accessible to direct AIMD, and therefore can be readily calculated for many systems. Second, we demonstrated that an estimated critical cooling rate, Rc, correlated well with ICO-like fraction across a set of four Al90Sm8X2 (X = Al (binary), Cu, Ag, Au) alloys. This result is consistent with the hypothesis that the true Rc, and therefore GFA, correlates with ICO-like fraction in this family of alloys. These studies provide guidance on methods to determine ICO-like fraction from AIMD and support the further exploration of this feature as a guide for in-silico design of MGs with good GFA. The systems were cooled down from 1300 K to 1100 K, 900 K, 700 K, 500 K, and 300 K with a cooling rate, 5x10 13 K/s, using AIMD simulations. At each particular temperature, the systems with a set of initial-guessed volumes were run for 3 ps with the NVT ensemble. The pressure of each run was obtained, and the equilibrium volume was determined by constructing pressurevolume (P-V) equation of state We have analyzed the chemical composition of the ICO-like clusters with Al at the center and with an X atom at the center, as shown in Table The AIMD simulated ICO-like fractions in these alloys have also been correlated with other potential GFA criteria. These include γ =Tx/(Tg+Tl), ∆Tx=Tx-Tg, and Trg=Tg/Tl, and ω =Tg/Tx-2Tg/(Tg+Tl) (where Tg, Tx, and Tl denote the glass transition temperature, the onset of crystallization temperature and the liquidus temperature, respectively, which were measured from previous experiments Experimentally measured characteristic thermal parameters (in Ref.