The interplay between superconductivity, magnetic field and spin-orbit coupling can lead to the realization of non-trivial topological phases. Recent experiments have found signatures of such phases in magnetic nanoflakes formed by nanostructures coupled to a superconducting substrate. These heterostructures comprise a topologically non-trivial region surrounded by a trivial one due to the finite magnetic exchange field induced by the magnetic nanoflake. The analysis of the topological phase diagram of such a system shows that a similar phase separation occurs by tuning the chemical potential of the nanoflake. In this paper, we study such a possibility in detail, analyzing the spatial extent of the edge modes circulating around the nanoflake and discussing some practical implementations. We also show how the chirality of Majorana edge states can be probed using scanning tunneling spectroscopy with a double tip setup. The quest for the realization of Majorana zero modes (MZMs), driven by the pursuit of both fundamental physics and their potential application to fault-tolerant topological quantum computation However, it has been suggested that non-Abelian braiding is not only restricted to MZMs, but can also be implemented with one-dimensional (1D) chiral Majorana fermions In 2D superconductors with Rashba spin-orbit coupling (SOC), the transition to a non-trivial phase can be induced by an external Zeeman magnetic field In this paper, we instead choose to explore an alternative route. We consider an inhomogeneous system but in a constant magnetic Zeeman energy, which would reside on the C-D line in Fig. The paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II, we first start with a circular geometry for the nanoflake and derive the dispersive chiral Majorana edge states analytically in the continuum limit. We also discuss the spatial extent of the chiral Majorana modes in the tranverse direction. In Sec. III we compare our results obtained in the continuum limit to exact diagonalization of a tight binding model on a lattice. In Sec. IV, we propose and study a setup in order to measure the chirality of the Majorana edge states using two ferromagnetic tips. Finally, we present a summary of our results and give conclusions in Sec. V. We begin by considering a nanoflake with a circular symmetry as depicted in Fig. Thus, the real-space normal state Hamiltonian has the form, where σ i (for i = {0, x, y, z}) are the Pauli matrices acting in spin space. Here, the system is 2D with r ≡ (x, y), and the chemical potential is given by, We may also define the discontinuity δμ = μ 2 -μ 1 at the boundary, see Fig. where Ψ(r) ≡ (ψ ↑ (r), ψ ↓ (r), ψ † ↑ (r), ψ † ↓ (r)) T is the Nambu spinor, with ψ σ (r) being electron field operators which destroy an electron with spin σ at location r. Due to the circular symmetry of the nanoflake (or more precisely, the scalar chemical potential μ(r) = μ(r)), the FIG. BdG Hamiltonian commutes with the zth component of the total angular momentum operator J z = L z + S z . It follows that the Hamiltonian and J z share the same eigenstates. The eigenstates of J z , with the half-integer eigenvalues m J , are given by To focus on states with small total angular momenta, we take a low-energy approximation and neglect the kinetic energy term in the Hamiltonian Here I(z) and K(z) are the Modified Bessel Functions of the first and second kind, respectively. The a, b, and c parameters along with the normalizations are derived within the SM [23], while the radial momenta which control the spatial extent of the bound states wave functions are given by where j = 1, 2 and η = ±. For each of the φ m J bound states localized at r = R 0 , the total radial spatial extent ξ m J of the wave functions are thus determined by The energy spectrum of these bound states vs the m J quantum numbers is presented in Fig. is equal both inside and outside the nanoflake. From our first set of data we obtain ∆ top = 0.070 meV, while for our second set we obtain ∆ top = 0.0296 meV. The existence of only one branch of states in the topological gap signals that they are chiral (here left handed). This in turn supports the hypothesis of a phase separation in space with a chiral Majorana edge state circulating around the nanoflake. We also note that these dispersive states are not perfectly linear, but instead exhibit a slight cubic behavior. Comparing both set of parameters, we see that the larger the discontinuity |δμ| = |μ 1 -μ 2 |, the more localized the edge states are. This behavior is expected; indeed, the in-gap Majorana states are pinned at the domain wall which is controlled by the spatial variation of the chemical potential. We take R0 = 10 nm and α = 0.25 meV•nm. In order to confirm our calculations performed in the continuum limit and to go beyond the circular symmetry assumption for a nanoflake, we have also performed numerical calculations on a lattice based on a tight binding description. Our system can be described by the following tight binding Hamiltonian, The first term corresponds to a free particle on a 2D square lattice, Here t is the hopping integral between nearest neighbor sites where vectors d i ∈ {±x, ±ŷ} stand for the locations of the neighbors of the i-th site, while σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) is the vector with the Pauli matrices being its components. A SC gap can be induced in the layer through the proximity effect-this process is described through the third term by the BCS-like form, The last term in Eq. ( , where the summation is carried out over all adatoms in a given configuration V Here, λ denotes the characteristic length of decay of the impurity potential. The Hamiltonian H can be diagonalized by the unitary transformation, which leads to the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equations Here is the Hamiltonian in the matrix form, with matrix elements standing for the matrix representation of the spin-orbit coupling. More details of this method can be found e.g. in Ref. We report the calculations on a N x × N y = 59 × 59 square lattice with periodic boundary conditions (PBC). Omitting generality, in the calculations presented in this subsection we use a nanoflake with a circular shape and a radius R 0 = 15.1, which covers about 20% of the total area. We present results for a nanoflake characterized by λ = 1 and V 0 /t = -0.06. In subsequent calculations, we take α/t = 0.15, ∆/t = 0.3, and μ/t = 0.4. If not mentioned explicitly in the text, the value of the magnetic Zeeman field h was chosen so that the boundary between the trivial and non-trivial phases remains in the center of the artificial domain wall (typically h/t 0.4). From the solutions of the BdG equations, we first calculate the local density of states (LDOS) where we replace the Dirac function δ(ω) by a Lorentzian, δ(ω) = ζ/[π(ω 2 +ζ 2 )], with a small broadening ζ = 0.003t. Figure The localization of the in-gap states is shown Fig. The total density of states (DOS) of the system per site is given by a summation of the LDOS over the whole 2D space, i.e., ρ(ω) = 1/N i ρ i (ω). Here, we can separate the sum into three different terms a contribution from the sites belonging to nanoflake, a contribution from the domain wall (DW), and a contribution from the bulk states [cf. inset in Fig. As in Ref. The contribution of the bulk (NF) presented in Fig. positive eigenvalue. The value of the magnetic field h for which these dashed lines cross zero energy indicate the phase transition from trivial to non-trivial phase. For effective fields larger than this crossing point, in both cases we observe a topological gap opening around ω/t ±0.1. Contrary to this, the DW PDOS [Fig. A magnetic field, h, leads to a closing of the trivial SC gap and reopening of a new non-trivial topological gap. This occurs at the critical energy h 2 c = μ 2 + ∆ 2 [15-17] (h c /t 0.5 for our choice of parameters). In our system, the value of the chemical potential varies from site to site i.e., μ i = μ + V i . This non-homogeneity can lead to a situation in which the above condition is met only locally Thus, positive (negative) sign of χ i indicates the topologically trivial (non-trivial) phase. Indeed, from the analysis of χ i under an increase of the magnetic field h (see Fig. From the above analysis, it follows that the spatial dependence of the χ i indicator gives a correct information about the emergence of the non-trivial topological domain inside the nanoflake. Using this condition, we construct a topological phase diagram in the two-parameter space defined by the chemical potential μ and the effective magnetic field h shown in Fig. First, we recall that the trivial and non-trivial topological phases are separated by a parabolic boundary h 2 c = μ 2 + ∆ 2 in the homogeneous system. In our system, the nanoflake introduces a non-homogeneity in μ to the system, thus the boundary splits due to the existence of two regions in space where topological phases can emerge. As a consequence, the boundary in the phase diagram evolves into a stripe, whose width is given by max |V i |. Thus, in the limit V 0 → 0 (homogeneous system without any nanoflake), the "stripe" would narrow down into a line h c (μ), as seen in Fig. Second, the region of the stripe separating the phases coincides with the value of the gap δE, calculated as the energy difference between the eigenvalues closest to Fermi level [Fig. When the system has boundaries states provide a contribution to the bond current which can be expressed as the local charge flow and is obtained from the Heisenberg equation The current vector field can be represented as a sum of the spin-dependent currents, I i = iσ I iσ , where I iσ = ∂ t n iσ can be expressed by the BdG eigenvectors In Fig. Due to the breaking of time reversal symmetry, the spin-↑ component dominates and thus resembles the "quasi-helical" situation described in Ref. In order to go beyond the circular limit discussed in previous paragraphs, we locate the substituted atoms at random sites of the lattice as nearest neighbors of an initial atom, located at the center of the surface. This method results in a nanoflake with rugged boundary (cf. Fig. Our experimental proposal is based on the double-tip measurement technique We performed the calculation of the local and non-local differential conductance using the Kwant Here, S αβ ij is the block of the scattering amplitudes of incident particles of type β in tip j to particles of type α in tip i. Then, the differential conductance matrix is given as where I i is the current entering terminal i from the scattering region and V j is the voltage applied to the terminal j, and N e i is the number of electron modes at energy E in terminal i. Finally, the energy transmission is: The nonlocal response is constituted by two processes: (i) a direct electron transfer between the leads and (ii) the crossed Andreev reflection (CAR) of an electron from one tip into a hole in the second tip transfer where ε kσ is the dispersion relation of the free electrons in the tips, while M i is the magnetization of the i th tip. We assume that the tips have opposite magnetization, i.e. M 1 = -M 2 . The tips are separated from the plane of the system by the barrier potential. We assume a system like that shown schematically in Fig. In our system, we can find the local (G 11 and G 22 ) as well as non-local (G 12 and G 21 ) differential conductance (Fig. The non-local conductances G 12 and G 21 (Fig. To explain the above results, we analyzed the propagating modes in the system (Fig. rection [Fig. Summarizing, the non-local conductance is not just a fingerprint of the existence of the chiral mode Recent experimental results have presented the possibility of the emergence of non-trivial topological phases in magnetic nanostructures coupled to superconducting substrates In this paper, we have explored the artificial implementation of topological phase transitions induced by the local modification of the chemical potential. In this respect, we performed analytic calculations valid in the continuum limit in the case of a nanoflake with a circu-FIG. In the last part of our work, we have proposed an experimental method to measure the chiraliy of the edge states, based on a double-tip measurement of the nonlocal differential conductivity. We have found that the non-local transport properties between the two tips allow one to determine the chirality of the edge state. Although challenging, this type of experiment should be accessible with the present technology.