Alloys of hexagonal δ-phase UZr2 have been synthesized and studied by means of heat capacity, magnetic susceptibility, magnetization, electrical resistivity, magnetoresistance, thermoelectric power, thermal conductivity measurements, for the first time, at temperatures from 1.8 to 300 K and in magnetic fields up to 8 T. The weak temperature dependence of the magnetic susceptibility and the small value of both Seebeck (0.75 μV/K at room temperature) and of the Sommerfeld coefficient (13.5 mJ mol -1 K -2 ) point to 5f -electrons in this material having a delocalized nature. The electrical resistivity and magnetoresistance indicate the presence of significant electronic disorder in δ-UZr2, consistent with the disorder in its crystal structure. Density functional theory calculations have been performed and compared to experimental results. Actinide systems show a large variety of exotic behavior coming from 5f -ligand hybridization. Depending on the strength of this process, unusual behavior has been observed in both actinide metals and alloys Recently, there has been a renewed interest in the U-Zr system due to its technological importance as a promising metallic nuclear fuel. The intermediate δ phase is formed on cooling from the high temperature γ phase. Akabori et al. determined the homogeneity range of the δ phase, which is 64.2-78.2 at% Zr at 600 • C and 66.5-80.2 at% Zr at 550 • C In this paper, we focus on the physical properties of δ-UZr 2 , for the first time, measured from 1.8 to 300 K and under magnetic fields up to 8 T. We show that all results obtained strongly point to the presence of delocalized 5felectrons in this material. Furthermore, the transport properties show characteristics typical of disordered metallic systems. We also performed electronic structure calculations and compare the results to experimental measurements. Polycrystalline samples with nominal compositions δ-UZr 2 were synthesized by arc melting stoichiometric amounts of the elements in a Zr-gettered ultra-pure argon atmosphere Hex. Tet. Moscovium 31 K UO2 Cubic online) Summary of the magnetic properties, crystal structures, and magnetic ordering temperatures of UX2 system. Color 45% blue is used to mark ferromagnetic ordering, 55% yellow for AFM order, 65% teal for superconductivity, 65% red for spin fluctuation, and 50% gray for paramagnetism. It is worth noting that in the case of UAu2 a serious controversy about its magnetic properties still remains no other diffraction peaks than expected for AlB 2 of the structure were observed. Magnetization, resistivity, heat capacity, Seebeck effect, and thermal conductivity measurements have been performed using a Quantum Design PPMS DynaCool-9 system equipped with a 9 T superconducting magnet with VSM, ETO, HCP and TTO options. Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations within the Local Density Approximation (LDA) The temperature dependence of the heat capacity C p (T ) of δ-UZr 2 measured from 1.8 to 270 K is shown in Fig. Temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity ρ(T ) of δ-UZr 2 is shown in Fig. Fig. This gives a value of E F = 9.78 eV being similar to those characterizing simple metals The thermal conductivity measured at room temperature is 5 W m -1 K -1 , as shown in Fig. where x = ω/k B T . In the the above equation, ω is the phonon frequency, n v is the number of atoms per unit volume, and is the reduced Planck constant, respectively. By taking into account Θ D = 225 K and n v = 4.4 ×10 28 m -3 appropriate for δ-UZr 2 , the obtained κ min (T ) curve is shown in Fig. In order to gain insight into the electronic structure, we perform baseline calculations using DFT within LDA. Since the electronic correlations are not very strong in δ-UZr 2 (as in-dicated by the relatively low value of Sommerfeld coefficient), this approach should give us an overall picture of the electronic structure in this material. We first note that DFT predicts a magnetic instability, in contradiction with experiments. The presence of magnetism within DFT suggests that local correlations will be relevant, and a detailed exploration of this is beyond our current scope. We restrict ourselves to the non-spin-polarized state, and characterize the electronic structure at this level. DFT results for the 5f -projected electronic band structure and DOS are provided in Figure In summary, we report on the magnetic, transport, and thermal properties of the δ-phase UZr 2 , for the first time, measured from 1.8 to 300 K and under magnetic fields up to 8 T. All the results obtained, especially a Pauli type of magnetic susceptibility, small Seebeck and Sommerfeld coefficient strongly point to the presence of delocalized 5f -electrons in this material. Transport properties, especially the small RRR value, are indicative of electronic disorder in this metallic system, consistent with its disordered crystal structure. We also performed electronic structure calculations and compare the results to experimentally obtained for the total DOS at the Fermi energy. Although the calculations support the presence of the delocalized 5f states in δ-UZr 2 , some discrepancies exists, mainly due to the effects of strong electronic correlations that are not sufficiently captured by the LDA.