Molecular dynamics simulations using an interatomic potential developed by artificial neural network deep machine learning are performed to study the local structural order in Al90Tb10 metallic glass. We show that more than 80% of the Tbcentered clusters in Al90Tb10 glass have short-range order (SRO) with their 17 first coordination shell atoms stacked in a '3661' or '15551' sequence. Medium-range order (MRO) in Bergman-type packing extended out to the second and third coordination shells is also clearly observed. Analysis of the network formed by the '3661' and '15551' clusters show that ~82% of such SRO units share their faces or vertexes, while only ~6% of neighboring SRO pairs are interpenetrating. Such a network topology is consistent with the Bergman-type MRO around the Tb-centers. Moreover, crystal structure searches using genetic algorithm and the neural network interatomic potential reveal several low-energy metastable crystalline structures in the composition range close to Al90Tb10. Some of these crystalline structures have the '3661' SRO while others have the '15551' SRO. While the crystalline structures with the '3661' SRO also exhibit the MRO very similar to that observed in the glass, the ones with the '15551' SRO have very different atomic packing in the second and third shells around the Tb centers from that of the Bergman-type MRO observed in the glassy phase. Rare-earth (RE) elements play an important role in modern materials sciences. While many RE containing compounds exist in oxide forms, there have been considerable interests in developing and understanding RE intermetallic compounds. Especially, aluminum-RE (Al-RE) alloys with high concentration of Al have shown to exhibit large strength-to-weight ratio and are promising for applications in many industrial areas Therefore, information about the short-to medium-range structural orders in these Al-RE alloys upon rapid cooling and their relationship to the local structure motifs in crystalline phases are vital to understanding the competition and phase selection between the glass formation and the crystallization. Recently, we have shown that Al90Sm10 undercooled liquid and glass exhibit strong SRO which are strongly correlated with the building blocks of several novel low-energy metastable crystalline structures in the vicinity of the Al90Sm10 composition While many experimental efforts have also been devoted to investigating the structure of Al90Tb10 alloy In this paper, using an accurate and reliable interatomic potential developed by an artificial neural network (ANN) deep learning method, we perform molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to study the structural order in Al90Tb10 metallic glass at the atomic level. Our MD simulations generated a Al90Tb10 glass sample which yields structure factor S(q) in very good agreement with the data from experimental X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurement. In order to investigate the structural order in the sample, a cluster alignment method We show that more than 80% the first-shell Tb-centered clusters have the '3661' or results from our machine learning potential MD simulations and genetic algorithm crystal structure predictions suggest that there is strong competition between glass formation and crystal nucleation and growth in this system, which would be responsible for its marginal GFA. While MD simulation is a very powerful tool for investigating the structural and chemical orders in condensed systems at the atomic level, the reliability of the predictions from MD heavily relies on the accuracy and transferability of the interatomic potential used in the MD simulation. Ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) can calculate the energies and interatomic forces at very high accuracy, but heavy computational cost of AIMD limits its applications to small number of atoms and short MD simulation time. On the other hand, MD simulations using classical interatomic potentials can handle much larger number of atoms and much longer simulation time, but the accuracy of empirical potentials used in the MD simulations is an issue of great concern. Recently, we have developed an interatomic potential for Al-Tb system using a neural network deep machine learning method The LAMMPS package The potential energies E-3kBT as the function of temperature for the Al90Tb10 samples with different cooling rates obtained from our MD simulation are shown in Fig. Before analyzing the local structure order in the Al90Tb10 glass by cluster alignment analysis, we demonstrate the accuracy of the glass model obtained from our MD simulation by comparing the calculated structure factors S(q) with that from experimental XRD measurement In addition to the total structure factor, the partial structure factors can be easily obtained by MD simulations, which enables us to investigate the contributor of prepeak in S(q). show the partial pair correlation functions (PPCFs) for Al-Al, Al-Tb, and Tb-Tb, respectively. In the Tb-Tb PPCF, the heights of the peaks corresponding to second and third coordination shell is higher than that of the first shell and the difference increases as cooling rate reduced, which implies that the order extended to medium-range in Tbcentered cluster is crucial for understanding of glass Al90Tb10 structure. Our cluster alignment analysis presented below provides more detail insights showing that the atomic structure order in Al90Tb10 glass is dominated by Tb-Tb spatial correlations. We first investigate the SRO in the Al90Tb10 glass sample from our MD simulation at the cooling rate of 10 11 K/s, using the cluster-template alignment method As shown in Fig. The development of local order beyond the first atomic shell to the second and third atomic coordination shells of the clusters is also an important key factor to understand the phase selection in rapid solidification process. In order to demonstrate such MRO up to the second and third atomic coordination shell, the clusters identified as Tbcentered '3661' and '15551' SROs from the analysis shown in Then each set of these super clusters are overlapped respectively by shifting their center atoms to the same origin while keeping the orientations of the clusters same as those have the best SRO alignment with the template. The atomic distributions in these two types of superclusters after such an alignment procedure are shown in Fig. On the other hand, the order of the Tb atoms in the second and third atomic shells are much stronger in both '3661' and '15551' superclusters as can be seen from the middle and right columns in Fig. In order to show the structural order of the superclusters more clearly, a Gaussian smearing scheme To further quantify the degree of Bergman-type MRO in the glass sample, the cluster-template alignment analysis is also performed using the Bergman-type 42atoms '3661' and 48-atoms '15551' superclusters up to the second shell as templates (see the template structures and alignment scores in the Fig. Besides the cluster alignment analysis, an alternative way to investigate MRO in metallic glass is to examine the spatial correlation of the SRO clusters to see how a network is formed by these clusters in the glass. In our analysis, two first-shell '3661' and '15551' SRO clusters are considered as connected if they share at least one atom. There are four different types of connections between two adjacent clusters, i.e., vertex sharing, edge sharing, face sharing and inter-penetrating. Materials also support our conclusion about the relation between the SRO cluster network and the Bergman superclusters in Al90Tb10 glass. From Fig. i.e., the Tb-center atoms in the '3661' and '15551' clusters will extend along the directions of Bergman-type sites. In order to understand how the SRO and MRO observed in the glass phase of Al90Tb10 are related to the structures of possible competing crystalline phases in the same composition region, we performed crystal structure search around the composition of Al90Tb10 by genetic algorithm (GA) using the same neural network interatomic potential employed in our MD simulation of glass. Two low-energy crystalline structures at each composition of Al38Tb4 and Al35Tb4 respectively have been revealed from the GA search and shown in Fig. In summary, the short-range and medium-range structural orders in Al90Tb10 metallic glass have been studied based on the atomistic structures from MD simulations using an interatomic potential developed by neural network deep learning method. The calculated structure factor agrees well with the XRD experimental data, especially for the pre-peak position and intensity. With decreasing cooling rate, the pre-peak is enhanced and the partial structure factors show that the Tb-Tb correlation is responsible for the pre-peak in S(q). Using the cluster alignment method, we identify the '3661' and '15551' motifs are the predominant SRO clusters in the Al90Tb10 glass. The MRO structures up to the second and third coordination shells of Tb-centered cluster are also studied. It is found that the Bergman-type packing in the second shell of '3661' and '15551' clusters. The order is much more pronounced at the Bergman-type positions corresponding to the geometric perfect hex and pentagonal cap in '3661' and '15551' motifs, implying that the geometry of first shell order is important for the MRO development. In the third shell, there is still observable ordering although it is less pronounced than that in the second shell. Cluster alignment using the MRO Bergman-type '3661' and '15551' 