We investigate the Josephson transport properties in a Josephson junction consisting of a conventional s-wave superconductor coupled to a multi-orbital noncentrosymmetric superconductor marked by an orbitally driven inversion asymmetry and isotropic interorbital spin-triplet pairing. Contrary to the canonical single band noncentrosymmetric superconductor, we demonstrate that the local interorbital spin-triplet pairing is tied to the occurrence of sign-changing spin-singlet pair amplitude on different bands with d-wave symmetry. Such multi-band d ± -wave state is a unique superconducting configuration that drives unexpected Josephson effects with 0-π transitions displaying a high degree of electronic control. Remarkably, we find that the phase state of a noncentrosymmetric/s-wave Josephson junction can be toggled between 0 and π in multiple ways through a variation of electron filling, strength of the spin-orbital coupling, amplitude of the inversion asymmetry interaction, and junction transparency. These results highlight an intrinsic orbital and electrical tunability of the Josephson response and provide unique paths to unveil the nature of unconventional multiorbital superconductivity as well as inspire innovative designs of Josephson quantum devices. Breaking of inversion symmetry offers an unique possibility for the design of unconventional superconducting phases 1 in noncentrosymmetric quantum materials In the framework of single band NCS, a lot of attention and intense research efforts have been devoted to determine the relative amplitude of the opposite parity pairing components especially for the perspective of achieving a topological superconducting phase The phenomenology of the Josephson response in suitably designed heterostructure with NCS can be quite rich due to the multi-component superconducting pairing especially when they are comparable in size. While the emergence of π states is typically bound to occur in superconductor/ferromagnet/superconductor junctions Interestingly, even without magnetic effects, when considering a junction between a conventional SSC and a NCS, one can achieve a transition between 0-and π/2type of CPRs in the SSC/NCS junction through an anomalous φ-junction behavior by uniquely tuning the ratio between spin-singlet and spin-triplet component Differently from the case of single band NCSs, it has been recently recognized that in materials with a strong coupling between spin-orbital degrees of freedom the breaking of inversion symmetry can lead to unconventional pairing with exotic topological properties In this paper we demonstrate that isotropic interorbital spin-triplet pairing in NCSs generally leads to an intricate Josephson response within the electronic phase space manifesting 0-π phase transitions when considering a junction that contains a conventional spin-singlet swave SC. This behavior is imprinted in the emergence of a unique sign-changing intraorbital spin-singlet pair amplitude on different bands with d-wave symmetry. Due to the anisotropic and orbital-dependent sign change of the induced intraorbital spin-singlet pair amplitude in the NCS, the Josephson current manifests an intrinsic tendency to undergo a transition from a 0-to a π-phase state. We determine the phase diagram associated with the 0 and π-states in the space spanned by the strength of the atomic spin-orbit coupling (λ SO ) and the orbital Rashba interaction (∆ is ) for various electron filling factor. Due to the subtle orbital dependence of the induced intraorbital spin-singlet pair amplitude, the increase of the electron filling tends to activate more orbital channels and in turn stabilize the π-phase state in a large portion of the [∆ is , λ SO ] parameters space. The temperature dependence of the maximal Josephson current has an anomalous behavior for a junction orientation that is parallel to the nodal direction with a low-temperature rapid upturn that arises due to the presence of flat surface ABSs The structure of the paper is as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the model Hamiltonian and the methodology to determine the Josephson current. Section III is devoted to the analysis of the induced intraorbital spinsinglet pair amplitude in the bulk. Then, we present the behavior of the CPR in Sect. IV in terms of the spinorbital interactions by varying the electron filling and discuss the origin of the sign change in the Josephson current. Section V is devoted to the study of the temperature dependence of the maximum Josephson current. Finally, the discussion and the concluding remarks are presented in Sec. VI. In this section, we introduce the model Hamiltonian and the methodology that has been employed to calculate the Josephson current for the three-orbital NCS/single band s-wave SC junction. In the superconducting state we adopt a Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) description. The left-side SC [Fig. The Hamiltonian for the normal state ĤL (k) describes the electronic states of d-orbitals belonging to the t 2g manifold and is given by with the three terms Ĥ0 (k), ĤSO , and Ĥis (k) where σi=x,y,z,0 are the Pauli matrices and the identity matrix in the spin space. ε(k) corresponds to the intraorbital kinetic energy for each t 2g -orbital, with μ L being the chemical potential of the NCS. ĤSO expresses the canonical atomic spin-orbit coupling and is given by where λ SO is the amplitude of the atomic spin-orbit interaction, lj=x,y,z are the orbital angular momentum operators in the basis (d yz , d zx , d xy ) projected out of the L = 2 space. They are expressed as The third term in ĤL stands for the antisymmetric orbital Rashba interaction and is given by with ∆ is being the strength of the inversion symmetry breaking coupling. In the examined three-orbital NCS, we consider a form of interorbital local pairing that has been extensively studied in Refs. where ψ (α,β) is the spin-singlet/orbital-triplet pair potential and d The spin-triplet/orbital-singlet state for each interorbital isotropic pairing is described by the following d-vectors, . In this study, we consider an interorbital pairing state belonging to the B 1 representation of the C 4v point group [Fig. 1(b)] that is the most favorable energetically among all the allowed interorbital pairings We point out that a different d-vector orientation is associated with the interorbital pairing when mixing the (d xy , d zx ) or (d xy , d yz ) orbitals. On the other hand, for the description of the right-side SC in the junction we consider a canonical single orbital s-wave state, Here, ĤR (k) denotes the Hamiltonian in the normal state for the single orbital model, with μ R being the chemical potential of the single orbital s-wave SC. The pair potential ∆R is given by with the spin-singlet/s-wave pair potential ψ R . In the normal layers between the two SCs, we consider the following single orbital model Hamiltonian, (18) with μ NI being the chemical potential setting the electron density at the normal insulating layer. In our calculation, we set the parameters as t 2 = t 1 = t 4 = t 5 = t, t 3 = 0.10t, ∆ t = -0.50t, μ R = 2.5t, and μ NI = -0.50t. In addition, we fix the critical temperature of the two SCs as T cL /t = 1.0 × 10 -5 and T cR /t = 10T cL . Then, we assume that the gap amplitude of the SCs ∆ L (T ) and ∆ R (T ) has a BCS-like temperature dependence T , where X = L, R denotes the index for the left and rightside SCs within the junction, respectively. In order to compute the Josephson current, we employ the recursive Green's function method with ûNI setting the on-site electron density of the normal layer. Here, tL,NI ( tR,NI ) means the tunnel Hamiltonian between left (right)-side SC and the normal insulating layer, In the (100) direction, these are described by and in the (110 and the non-local Green's functions G 01 (k , iε n , φ) and with the tNI (k ) being the nearest-neighbor hopping term in the normal layer. Concerning the current operator, one can calculate the Josephson current I c (φ) at a given phase difference φ between the left and right side of the junction by evaluating the following expression, Here, Tr ′ means the trace over the electronic degrees of freedom. In this study, we focus on three representative types of spin-resolved Fermi surfaces for the NCS at μ L /t = -0.50 [Fig. We start by analyzing the induced intraorbital spinsinglet pair amplitude for the three representative types of spin-split Fermi surfaces as shown in Figs. In the Josephson junction upon examination, the evenfrequency spin-singlet pairing components in both left and right-side SCs can interfere and contribute to the first harmonic term of the overall Josephson current. For this reason, it is useful to investigate the spin-singlet components of the pair amplitude on the Fermi surfaces in the NCS both in the inner side at a given k in the reciprocal space or along the edge of the junction's interface for the conserved component of the momentum. Hereafter, we indicate as F In particular, we point out that the sign of the pair amplitude on the inner Fermi surface is opposite as compared with that on the outer Fermi surface. Thus, the intraorbital spinsinglet pair amplitude realizes a d ± x 2 -y 2 -wave pairing configuration with a band dependent sign of the pair amplitude that resembles the isotropic s ± -wave proposed in the framework of the iron based SCs Indeed, even if the interorbital spin-triplet pairing symmetry is dominant in the NCS, we expect that the induced intraorbital spin-singlet d ± x 2 -y 2 -wave configuration will play a key role in setting the Josephson current and would naturally lead to a sign frustration in the Josephson current due to the sign effects at the Fermi surface. Moreover, due to the significant orbital dependence and the momentum anisotropy we also expect that 0-π transitions can be sensitive to the junction transparency. In this section, we present the CPR for the interorbital B 1 state NCS/NI/single orbital s-wave SC junction (NCS/NI/SSC). The CPR can be generally expanded in Fourier series in terms of all the harmonics with respect to the applied phase difference φ as follows, Since for the examined junction both SCs have the timereversal symmetry, the cosine term J n equals to zero A change in the junction orientation leads to a dramatic impact on the Josephson response. Indeed, if we select a junction interface with (110) direction the presence of nodal points both in the dominant isotropic interorbital spin-triplet pairing component and in the induced spin-singlet d ± x 2 -y 2 -wave pairing offers the opportunity to explore a highly nontrivial case of unconventional superconductivity. As for the (100) orientation, for the first harmonic term the even-frequency/spin-singlet intraorbital component in the NCS can be coupled to the evenfrequency/spin-singlet pairing in the s-wave SC. However for this case, first harmonic term I 1 vanishes since the B 1 pairing in the NCS is odd under the mirror symmetry along the diagonal direction, while SSC is even. It is the same as the case of the single band d-wave based superconducting junctions Next, we study the first harmonic (I 1 ) contribution to the Josephson current in the (100) direction as a function of the spin-orbit coupling λ SO and orbital Rashba interaction ∆ is in the regime of high transparency since we have seen that only in that case one can observe a 0-π phase transition. Apart from the role of the electron filling of the various bands, it is important to assess whether a variation of the electronic parameters associated with the strength of the spin-orbital entanglement and of the inversion asymmetry breaking can be employed to drive the 0-to π-phase transition. The outcome is remarkable and unveils an intricate interplay between the band occupation (i.e. the orbital character of the Fermi surfaces) and the combination of λ SO and ∆ is . In Fig. we present the resulting phase diagram constructed by evaluating the sign of the first harmonic term I 1 in the Josephson current in each point of the parameters space. We notice that there can be one or two boundaries that separate the 0 (I 1 > 0) from the π-phase (I 1 < 0) region in the parameters space (λ SO , ∆ is ). This implies that a reentrant type of 0-π transition can be also obtained. For instance, by increasing the orbital Rashba coupling at μ L = -0.15 for values of the λ SO lower than about 0.10t, one can achieve a 0-π-0 changeover of the Josephson CPR. Another trend that can be deduced by inspection of the phase diagram is that the increase of the chemical potential μ L moves or generates 0-π phase boundaries. The 0-π boundary (red line in Fig. It is particularly relevant to observe that in the low electron density regime, with only two Fermi surfaces and dominant d xy character, the π-phase can be achieved only for enough large λ SO and ∆ is . Indeed, π-phase at μ L /t = -0.50 appears at large (λ SO , ∆ is ) [Fig. In order to get more insight into the origin of the sign change of the Josephson current in the (100) direction in terms of the variation of the chemical potential μ L in the regime of high transparency t int = 1.0, we check the relation between the first harmonic term of the Josephson current I 1 in the (100) direction and the induced intraorbital spin-singlet pair amplitude at the interface as a function of the conserved momentum k y (Fig. In the case of the three-orbital NCS (left-side SC), the pair amplitude for the (α, β)-orbitals and the single orbital s-wave SC FR , In the Josephson junction upon examination, the spinsinglet pairing components in both left and right-side SCs can interfere and contribute to the first harmonic term I 1 of the overall Josephson current. For this reason, it is useful to focus on the spin-singlet pair components and in particular to have a close inspection of their behavior at the junction's interface by computing the k-resolved amplitude. Here, F (α,β) ↑↓-↓↑ (k y ) refers to the NCS while F ↑↓-↓↑ (k y ) is for the spin-singlet amplitude in the single band s-wave SC. As expected, the spin-singlet pair amplitude in the NCS is non-vanishing due to the combination of atomic spin-orbit coupling λ SO and orbital Rashba interaction ∆ is . Since the intraorbital components are larger than the interorbital ones regarding the B 1 representation, the behavior of the intraorbital terms is more relevant for evaluating their role in setting out the Josephson current. The analysis has been conducted with the aim to μ L /t = -0.50 μ L /t = -0.25 μ L /t = 0.0 : yz-yz even-frequency/spin-singlet : zx-zx even-frequency/spin-singlet : xy-xy even-frequency/spin-singlet ↑↓-↓↑ (α = yz, zx, xy) at (d)μL/t = -0.50, (e)μL/t = -0.25, and (f)μL/t = 0.0. Product of FL with FR where FR(ky) = F ↑↓-↓↑ is the spin-singlet pairing amplitude in the single orbital s-wave SC at (g)μL/t = -0.50, (h)μL/t = -0.25, and (i)μL/t = 0.0, respectively. We note that FL and FR are calculated in the semi-infinite systems. Momentum resolved first harmonic term I1p(ky) of the Josephson current normalized by I1p(ky = 0) for high trasparency (tint = 1.0) in (j)-(l) and low transparency (tint = 0.10) in (m)-(o), respectively. In these panels, we select the chemical potential of the NCS as μL/t = -0.50 for (j)(m), μL/t = -0.25 for (k)(n), and μL/t = 0.0 for (l)(o). Here, we obtain the first harmonic term I1p(ky) by the summation over the Matsubara frequency at iεn = -iπkBT and iπkBT . The other parameters are λSO/t = 0.10, ∆is/t = 0.20, and T = 0.10TcL. identify the driving mechanisms or key physical quantities behind the formation of the π-state in the junction. As we have seen in the previous section, the intraorbital spin-singlet pair amplitude in the bulk has a sign change on the inner and outer Fermi surfaces with d-wave pattern. Then the CPRs which come from the outer and inner Fermi surfaces in the bulk NCS compete each other. This kind of cancellation has been proposed in iron-based s ± SC/canonical SSC Josephson junction With this know-how, we are ready to evaluate a possible link between the behavior of the k-resolved intraorbital spin-singlet pair amplitude with that of the first harmonic term of the Josephson current. In particular, in the tunneling regime the product of the left and right intraorbital spin-singlet component F L F R can be directly compared with the first harmonic Josephson term I 1 . Indeed, for such configuration we have that I 1 ∼ F L F R as one can deduce by comparing the results in Figs. 6(g), 6(h), and 6(i) with those in Figs. 6(m), 6(n), and 6(o). The lack of a π-phase state emerges out of a subtle competition between the positive and negative Josephson channels when inspecting the k-resolved first harmonic term. Here, I 1p (k y ) is obtained by the summation over the Matsubara frequency at iε n = -iπk B T and iπk B T , On the contrary, for high transparency, the behavior of I 1p (k y ) does not correlate with that of the intraorbital spin-singlet pairing amplitude product in Figs. 6(g), 6(h), and 6(i). Since the conductance at the high transparency is larger than that at the low transparency for large momentum as shown in Fig. In this section, we present the temperature dependence of the maximum Josephson current. The behavior of the maximum Josephson current for the temperature T depends on the zero-energy surface ABSs at the interface's junction For these zero-energy surface ABSs, we can expect that the maximum Josephson current increases as the temperature is reduced Likewise, we determine the temperature dependence of maximum Josephson current in the (110) direction as shown in Fig. We study a Josephson junction made of an NCS with local interorbital spin-triplet pairing interfaced with a conventional spin-singlet s-wave SC by considering dif-ferent junction's orientation and exloring the various regimes of electron filling and spin-orbital coupling. We demonstrate that this type of superconducting pairing leads to a sign-changing intraorbital spin-singlet pair amplitude on different bands with d-wave symmetry. Such multi-band d ± -wave state is responsible of unexpected Josephson effects with 0-π transitions displaying a high degree of electronic control. Remarkably, we find that the phase state of a NCS/NI/SSC Josephson junction can be switched between 0 and π in multiple ways through a variation of electron filling, strength of the spin-orbital coupling, amplitude of the inversion asymmetry interaction, junction orientation and transparency. These results highlight an intrinsic orbital and electrical tunability of the Josephson response especially when considering the variation of the orbital Rashba coupling due to an applied electric field. The presented results can find application in quantum materials where the electronic structure is marked by a strong interplay of spin and orbital degrees of freedom. This is commonly encountered in transition metal oxides and in particular at oxide interfaces or surfaces. A paradigmatic example is provided by the twodimensional electron gas forming at the LAO-STO interface Finally, we have proposed the spin-orbitronics functionalities to control the 0-π transitions in Josephson devices. In particular, the remarkable tunability of the Josephson effect by means of electron filling, orbital Rashba interaction and the interface's transparency indicate several ways towards an electrical design of Josephson devices by directly gating the SC or by gating the interface.