Schottky barrier inhomogeneities are expected at the metal/TMDC interface and this can impact device performance. However, it is difficult to account for the distribution of interface inhomogeneity as most techniques average over the spot-area of the analytical tool (e.g. few hundred micron squared for photoelectron-based techniques), or the entire device measured for electrical current-voltage (I-V) measurements. Commonly used models to extract Schottky barrier heights neglect or fail to account for such inhomogeneities, which can lead to the extraction of incorrect Schottky barrier heights and Richardson constants that are orders of magnitude away from theoretically expected values. Here, we show that a gaussian modified thermionic emission model gives the best fit to experimental temperature dependent current-voltage (I-V-T) data of van der Waals Au/p-MoS2 interfaces and allow the deconvolution of the Schottky barrier heights of the defective regions from the pristine region. By the inclusion of a gaussian distributed Schottky barrier height in the macroscopic I-V-T analysis, we demonstrate that interface inhomogeneities due to defects are deconvoluted and well correlated to the impact on the device behavior across a wide temperature range from room temperature of 300 K down to 120 K. We verified the gaussian thermionic model across two different types of p-MoS2 (geological and synthetic), and finally compared the macroscopic Schottky barrier heights with the results of a nanoscopic technique, ballistic hole emission microscopy (BHEM). The results obtained using BHEM were consistent with the pristine Au/p-MoS2 Schottky barrier height extracted from the gaussian modified thermionic emission model over hundreds of nanometers. Our findings show that the inclusion of Schottky barrier inhomogeneities in the analysis of I-V-T data is important to elucidate the impact of defects (e.g. grain boundaries, metallic impurities, etc.) and hence their influence on device behavior. We also find that the Richardson constant, a material specific constant typically treated as merely a fitting constant, is an important parameter to check for the validity of the transport model. Schottky barrier inhomogeneities are present at metal/transition metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) interface due to potential fluctuations and defects in the material and this can impact the device performance The extracted apparent SBH from the simple model does not represent the true band alignment at the metal/semiconductor interface and is counterproductive to the correct understanding of the energetics of the interface. Several other models have been proposed to account for these non-ideal effects in the current-voltage (I-V) behavior of Schottky barrier devices The transport of thermally activated carriers across a typical metal/semiconductor Schottky interface where the semiconductor is lightly doped (~10 15 to 10 17 cm -3 ) is given by the ideal thermionic emission model (Eq. 1) where and q is the electric charge, V the voltage applied across the diode, k the Boltzmann constant, T the absolute temperature, A the area of the diode, A** the effective Richardson constant of the semiconductor and ф the Schottky barrier height (SBH). An important requirement of this model is that the tunneling of carriers across the Schottky barrier is negligible, which is valid when the semiconductor is lightly doped (~10 15 to 10 17 cm -3 ) such that the band banding is gradual and the Schottky barrier width is wide. The accurate extraction of the SBH depends greatly on the successful determination of Is from the forward bias slope of the experimental I-V curves (Eq. 1). However, the thermionic emission model does not fit well to experimental I-V curves at low temperatures, and the modified (non-ideal) thermionic emission models Hence, it is not trivial to identify a correct model to accurately extract the SBH of metal/semiconductor Schottky interfaces, especially if the measurement is done at a specific, or a small range of temperatures, as the effect of temperature can be convoluted into the extracted SBH. In this paper, we investigate the use of four well established methods for extracting Schottky barrier heights as a function of temperature from a weaklyinteracting van der Waals Au contact to a layered MoS2 crystal. The epitaxial growth of Au on MoS2 allows a clean and abrupt interface for this material system The aim of this paper is to review and compare these analysis methods in the context of a clean van der Waals epitaxial contact to a layered material, and show that using the inadequate model in the analysis of temperature dependent I-V data can yield Schottky barrier height values that are misleading by up to an order of magnitude and counterproductive to the understanding of the Schottky interface. Importantly, we show that the effective Richardson constant (A**), typically treated as a fitting constant is an important parameter to cross check the validity of the transport model. As field effect transistors based on 2 dimensional TMDCs such as MoS2 and WS2 have been shown to behave as Schottky barrier transistors The thermionic emission model, Eq. 1, predicts that for V > 3kT/q, a plot of In I against V will be linear with a slope of 1 and its intercept at V = 0 will give Is. From Is, the Schottky barrier height can be extracted. A direct reading of Is from the experimental I-V curve is typically not used as the experimental reverse biased saturation current, as it also contains the image force lowering and other minority carrier effects Using the modified thermionic emission model, diode parameters such as the ideality factor n and barrier height ф can be plotted and were found to be dependent on the temperature. At low temperatures, the thermionic emission model does not fit well to the experimental data and n increases greatly beyond 1, signifying non-ideal transport. While the non-ideal transport has been attributed to additional current contributions from thermally assisted tunneling (thermionic field emission) across the Schottky barrier, generation-recombination current in the depletion region and image force lowering, it is not clear how the empirically modified thermionic emission model can account for these effects. From these modifications, a few versions of the Richardson plot will be analyzed. This is the simplest method and is derived directly from the saturation current term of the thermionic emission model, Eq. 2. When temperature dependent plots can be obtained, a plot of ln(IS/T 2 ) vs. I/T, called a Richardson plot, will be a straight line where the slope and intercept at 1/T = 0 will give ф, and A** respectively. The empirically added ideality factor is not included in Eq. 2, hence this method is the ideal Richardson plot analysis. To account for effects that cause deviations from ideal (n = 1) behavior, such as the image force and surface charges, which they argued to be also present at zero bias, Hackam and Harrop proposed a modified Richardson plot from Eq. 3 to include the ideality factor in the Is term The addition of n to the Is term in Eq. 4 now gives a modified Richardson plot Eq. 5 from which the SBH can be extracted from the gradient of the straight line and A** from the y-intercept. for them due to the presence of a strongly temperature dependent SBH and ideality factor measured Following their modification, the modified Richardson plot now reads: Two different inhomogeneous Schottky barrier models have been proposed independently by Werner and Güttler Tung's model is more rigorous, Werner and Gutter's model is simpler and can be placed into the context of BHEM measured SBHs. Hence in this paper, we focused on the Werner and Güttler model of gaussian SBH where φ app is the apparent Schottky barrier height obtained as a result of the convolution of the gaussian distributed SBH with temperature in the thermionic emission model, Φ is the mean Schottky barrier height and σ is the standard deviation of the gaussian distribution. To obtain the σ of the Gaussian, a plot of φ app against 1/T can be used. The gaussian standard deviations (σ) extracted from Eq. 8 can then be used to correct for the gaussian distributed SBH to obtain the gaussian corrected Richardson plots Eq. 9. Here, a plot of ln ( will give the A** in the intercept and Φ in the gradient. The temperature dependence of the ideality factor and SBH, initially viewed as empirical inconsistencies in many experiments, is now well explained by Werner and Güttler to arise from the inhomogeneous SBH and that capacitance-voltage (C-V) measurements give Φ. In our experiments, we did not perform C-V measurements as capacitance measurement is not typically used in the operation of devices, but the current as a function of applied voltage (I-V) is used and is more common for analysis. Werner and Güttler also showed that for lightly doped (10 15 to 10 17 cm -3 ) semiconductors, thermionic emission dominates carrier transport, even at low temperatures down to 77 K. We demonstrate in our Au/MoS2 sample that by using a gaussian distributed SBH to account for these inhomogeneities, a more reliable value of the SBH can be obtained. We verify the gaussian thermionic emission model systematically using two different types of MoS2 (geological and synthetic crystals, from different suppliers) show that the SBH values obtained are identical within error limits across the two different samples and complementary techniques. We propose that the gaussian thermionic emission model gives a more accurate representation of the real Schottky interface and our results can be used to reconcile the conflicting reports on SBH in the literature and allow I-V-T analysis to yield more in depth understanding of the interface. Figure The p-type geological MoS2 crystal was obtained from Ward's Science The ohmic contacts to the MoS2 crystals were deposited in a high vacuum e-beam evaporator system (AJA International) after cleaving off the top surface using sticky tape to obtain a fresh surface for the evaporation of Ti(5 nm)/Au(80 nm) at a base pressure of 1 × 10 -8 mbar to form ohmic contacts. After deposition of the ohmic contacts, the MoS2 was transferred ex-situ to a thermal evaporator system equipped with an annealing stage (R-DEC) for the Schottky contact deposition. First, the MoS2 crystal was annealed at 350 °C for 2.5 h to improve the quality of the ohmic contacts by removing physisorbed material at the interface or to promote an interface reaction of Ti with the MoS2 surface, and to outgas physisorbed contaminants on the surface of the MoS2 crystal. Next, Au (15 nm) was thermally evaporated onto the clean surface of the MoS2 crystal through a shadow mask at the rate of 0.2 Å/s at approximately 50 °C at a base pressure of 1 × 10 -8 mbar. The larger circular Au devices are 500 μm in diameter and the smaller circular Au devices are 250 μm in diameter, while the rectangular Ti/Au ohmic contacts on each sides of the substrate are 0.7 × 7 mm 2 . Finally, the samples were transferred ex-situ to an UHV Nanoprobe system (Omicron) which is an ultra-high vacuum (base pressure 1 × 10 -10 mbar) four probe STM system equipped with three standard STM probes for contacted I-V measurements, one atomic resolution capable STM probe and a Zeiss Gemini SEM imaging column for accurate positioning of the probes. The devices were measured without further annealing to prevent modification of the as deposited interface. The manifestation of epitaxial Au(111) steps in the overgrowth Au cap layer (Figure Geological MoS2. Fitting Eq. 8 to Figure Similarly for the synthetic MoS2 crystal, Figure We collected a few datasets over a few different locations on the same sample and Figure From Table Standard deviations of the macroscale SBH are one order of magnitude larger than the nanoscale SBH. This can be explained by the non-uniform area of the measurement. I-V-T measurements give a weighted average of the SBH across the whole device area (0.196 mm 2 ) which includes contributions from defects such as step edges, impurities, etc. while the nanoscale SBH has a resolution of a few nanometers which measures largely the pristine SBH at the interface. We did not detect the presence of atomic scale defects in BHEM imaging and spectroscopy, i.e. the scanned areas show a single gaussian distributed SBH over hundreds of nanometers. Point defects such as vacancies are not resolved in BHEM measurements likely due to the pinch off effect The different I-V behaviors of geological and synthetic MoS2 point to the importance of obtaining high quality crystals for device fabrication. Devices fabricated from synthetic MoS2 show more uniform Schottky diode performances than geological MoS2 as the geological crystal contains many impurities that unintentionally dope the crystal. Although some of the best reported devices are made using geological crystals, the high density of contamination in geological crystals results in poor reproducibility and reliability in the electronic properties of 2D devices. It is difficult to differentiate intrinsic material properties from unwanted dopant effects, which can explain the spread of behaviors of devices in the literature. Addou et al. recently studied the surface of geological MoS2 using STM and showed that the surface of the crystal shows huge variation across the same sample due to impurities Our MoS2 crystals are p-type crystals. In recent literature, most MoS2 crystals reported are n-type semiconductors We We used BHEM, which is a more tedious but direct method to measure the zero bias SBH without the need to rely on the validity of temperature dependent models, and to experimentally validate the importance of including a gaussian distributed SBH at the nanoscale in conventional I-V-T analysis. Our results provide the basic framework for extracting the pristine SBH from temperature dependent I-V data and demonstrate that with careful use of the dual parameter (A** + SBH) analysis, we avoid obtaining unphysical numbers that are counter-productive for understanding such interfaces. This implies that the I-V-T analysis can yield important insights on the SB inhomogeneities even though it might be a macroscale measurement. We acknowledge funding from the A*STAR Pharos Grant No. 1527000016. Description of the Werner method to correct for the high series resistance found in the I-V-T curves, comparison of the Prietsch-Ludeke model and the Bell-Kaiser model, impurity scanning tunneling microscope images and strain analysis of our Au/MoS2 using Raman spectroscopy. Figure In the main text, we mentioned that we have also seen defects that were previously reported by Addou et al. in our geological MoS2 samples. 