MAB phases are a new class of layered ternary materials that have already shown a number of outstanding properties. Here, we investigate defect evolution and radiation tolerance of two MAB phases, MoAlB and Fe2AlB2, using a combination of experimental characterization and firstprinciples calculations. We find that Fe2AlB2 is more tolerant to radiation-induced amorphization than MoAlB, both at 150 °C and at 300 °C. The results can be explained by the fact that the Mo Frenkel pair is unstable in MoAlB and as a result, irradiated MoAlB is expected to have a significant concentration of MoAl antisites, which are difficult to anneal even at 300 °C. We find that the tolerance to radiation-induced amorphization of MAB phases is lower than in MAX phases, but it is comparable to that of SiC. However, MAB phases do not show radiation-induced cracking which is observed in MAX phases under the same irradiation conditions. This study suggests that MAB phases might be a promising class of materials for applications that involve radiation. Layered ternary materials In the current study, we consider another class of layered ternary materials labeled as MAB (M = transition metal, A = Al, B = B) phase. Many MAB phases have been predicted theoretically Performance of MAB phases under radiation is compared to that of MAX phases as well as silicon carbide. SiC is known to have good radiation resistance and is already being considered for cladding applications in nuclear reactor applications. The two MAX phases used for comparison are: Ti2AlC (which contains Al, just like the MAB phases considered in this study) and Ti3SiC2 (which so far has shown the highest resistance to radiation-induced amorphization among MAX phases). The materials used in this work were polycrystalline bulk Fe2AlB2, MoAlB, Ti3SiC2 and Ti2AlC, prepared by reactive hot press sintering. The polycrystalline 3C-SiC for this research was purchased from Rohm and Haas Company and it had an average grain size of 5 μm The Fe2AlB2 sample was made from Fe2AlB2 powder (<45 μm particle size) synthesized in a tube furnace (MTI GSL-1800X-S60). The powder was placed in a 12.7 mm inner diameter graphite die, lined with a graphite foil, and pressed at a maximum temperature and pressure of 1200 °C and 50 MPa in a hot-press furnace (MTI OTF-1500X-VHP4 containing a mullite tube) under flowing argon to prevent oxidation. The sample was held at the maximum temperature and pressure for 30 min, using a heating and cooling rate of 10 °C /min. The sample was ground using SiC paper to remove graphite from the surface and resulted in a pellet which was 11 mm tall and 12 mm in diameter. The density of the sample determined by Archimedes principle was >95% of theoretical density. The MoAlB sample was synthesized using MoB powder (<45 μm particle size) and Al powder (>99.7%, <45 μm particle size). The MoB powder was mixed with the Al powder in an atomic ratio of 1:1.3 (MoB:Al). The mixed powder was placed in a 15 mm inner diameter graphite die, lined with graphite foil, and pressed at a maximum temperature and pressure of 1400 °C and 50 MPa in the hot-press furnace (MTI OTF-1500X-VHP4 containing a mullite tube) under flowing argon to prevent oxidation. The sample was held at the maximum temperature for 1 hour, using a heating and cooling rate of 10 °C /min. The sample was ground using SiC paper to remove graphite from the surface and resulted in a pellet which was 95.5% theoretical density, determined by Archimedes principle. The sample was sliced using a diamond blade to produce ~1.5mm thick disks. Polycrystalline bulk Ti2AlC and Ti3SiC2 were synthesized by the reactive hot-press sintering method DFT calculations were performed using the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) Damage introduced during irradiation was analyzed using cross-sectional TEM and HRTEM images shown in Fig. Amorphization of the structure has been further confirmed by the HRTEM shown in Fig. Irradiation of MoAlB at 300 °C also led to complete amorphization of the structure (see Figs. In summary, the most stable interstitials for MoAlB and Fe2AlB2 are all located in the Al layer, as described in Supporting Information 2, which has been observed in MAX phases as well To summarize, some of the criteria proposed for radiation resistance of MAX phases are consistent with results of our experimental studies on MAB phases (i.e., formation energies of the antisite pair and the bond characteristics), some are not (i.e., the ratio of the number of A and MB layers), and in some cases there is no data (i.e., there are no consistent studies of the corresponding binaries). However, more extensive studies on multiple MAB phase systems will be needed to determine whether there exist simple correlations between fundamental defect properties and the radiation resistance across the different MAB phases. There are also some key differences between MAX and MAB phases. For instance, if other MAB phases do not undergo phase transformation driven by antisite defects (consistently with what we found for Fe2AlB2), then perhaps formation energies of antisite defects are not the determining factor in radiation resistance to amorphization of these materials. To rationalize observations from our experiments on the MAB phases and to understand how radiation-induced damage can be annealed, we have analyzed defect energetics in more detail, including defect migration and reaction energies. On the basis of Tables In order to determine whether a defect is able to be annealed (e.g., by reacting with other defects), we assume that it has to move at least 1 nm over a reasonable time period (here assumed to be 100 s). Taking this criterion and the pre-exponential factor to be 10 13 s -1 one can estimate that defects with the energy barrier of 1.17 eV (82 s) can be annealed. We will assume that defects with migration energy or reaction energy barrier higher than 1.33 eV (104 min) will take much longer to anneal -76 times longer than reactions with barriers of 1.17 eV. Note, that there is no reaction whose migration or reaction energy barrier is in the range between 1.17 and 1.33 eV. At the higher temperature (300 °C), the reactions whose migration energy or reaction energy barrier is 1.40 eV can occur within 2.82 s, while the migration or reaction energy barrier of 3.34 eV or higher is still too high for reactions to occur on the time scales of experiments. Note, that there is no reaction whose migration or reaction energy barrier is in the range between 1.40 and 3.34 eV. Using the above criteria, we have analyzed possible reactions between defects summarized in Table First of all, it is known that FPs are introduced as the direct consequence of radiation so how they are recovered affects the tolerance to radiation-induced amorphization. In the two MAB phases studied here, most vacancies and interstitials in the two MAB phases can be removed through FP recombination. VAl and AlI in MoAlB can be removed through reaction #7 in Table (negative reaction energy, VAl migration energy of 1.17 eV and barrierless reaction). Next, BM in both MAB phases can be removed by reaction #4 with the aid of the negative reaction energies, low energy barriers (barrierless for MoAlB and 0.07 eV for Fe2AlB2) and/or the low migration energies of VB (0.68 eV for MoAlB and 0.50 eV for Fe2AlB2). And as mentioned above, BAl can be removed through reaction #3 while providing an intermediate site for the recombination of VB and BI. Before looking into MoAl in MoAlB, we should note that a significant number of antisites MoAl can form due to the unstable MoI as well as from the direct consequence of radiation. However, MoAl cannot be easily removed in MoAlB even at the temperature of 300 °C because of the high migration energy of VMo (5.27 eV), which is still too high for the migration to occur. Recall that we assume that the reactions whose migration or energy barrier is higher than 3.34 eV cannot occur at 300 °C. As discussed earlier, although the existence of MoAl near VMo can reduce the migration energy to 4.84 eV, it is still too high for the migration to occur. Finally, the only reaction which can remove this defect (reaction #5) cannot occur. There are other potential reactions that could anneal MoAl (i.e., BI + MoAl → BAl + MoI, or MoAl + AlMo → AlAl + MoMo). However, the former reaction does not occur due to the formation of an unstable MoI, and the latter, which is the exchange of antisites, is energetically prohibitive. In contrast, FeAl in Fe2AlB2 can be removed through reaction #12 with the aid of the negative reaction energy, low migration energy of AlI (0.25 eV), and the barrierless reaction. Although this process creates FeI, this interstitial can be removed through reaction #8 as discussed earlier. Lastly, MB in both MAB phases can be removed through reaction #14 with the aid of the negative reaction energies, low migration energies of MoAlB (0.46 eV) and Fe2AlB2 (1.17 eV), and low reaction energy barriers (barrierless). This reaction path creates VB with MAl antisites, whose behavior is distinct in the two MAB phases as discussed earlier, i.e., MoAl cannot be removed whereas FeAl can be removed. Therefore, this reaction creates the defect species (MoAl) that cannot be removed in MoAlB, whereas it can contribute to the recovery process in Fe2AlB2. Changing the energy criterion for the higher temperature (300 °C) does not change the defect behaviors of the two MAB phases. We assumed that at 300 °C the reactions with migration energy or reaction energy lower or equal to 1.6 eV can occur within a few minutes, while the migration or reaction energy barrier of 3.34 eV or higher is too high for the reactions to occur. The migration energy of VMo (5.27 eV) in reaction #8 for removing MoAl is still too high in this energy range, whereas all the defects in Fe2AlB2 can be annealed out. In summary, the increased tolerance to radiation-induced amorphization of Fe2AlB2 as compared to MoAlB can be rationalized by the increased production of, and difficulty in annealing out, antisites in MoAlB. In MoAlB, unstable interstitial MoI (and therefore unstable Mo FP) is expected to lead to a larger production of MoAl antisites, which are difficult to anneal out due to the high migration energy of VMo. In addition, there is one defect (MoAl) in MoAlB that is difficult to anneal out even at 300 °C, whereas Fe2AlB2 has no such defects. In Fe2AlB2, all the defects are expected to anneal out in a reasonable period of time at both 150 °C and 300 °C. Since Fe2AlB2 and MoAlB MAB phase materials are both nano-layered ternary borides, which have similar structures to the MAX phase materials, it is instructive to compare radiation resistance of MAB to that of selected MAX phases. We specifically chose Ti3SiC2 and Ti2AlC, since Ti3SiC2 is a MAX phase with an unusually high resistance to radiation-induced amorphization and Ti2AlC contains Al, just like the MAB phases considered here. We are also including comparison to SiC, which is considered to have excellent radiation resistance According to Fig. For the high dose irradiation at 300 °C, the diffraction patterns of all samples also showed clear diffraction spots, indicating the samples were still crystalline after irradiation. A small amorphous band with a width of only ~0.1 μm could be found in SiC (Fig. However, many irradiation-induced cracks can still be observed from the SEM pictures as shown in Fig. Our experiments have shown that radiation resistance to amorphization of Fe2AlB2 is comparable to that of SiC. One should note that the resistance of Ti2AlC and Ti3SiC2 to radiationinduced amorphization is better than that of the two MAB phases, but the MAX phases show cracking whereas the MAB phases do not. In addition, Fe2AlB2 has already been shown to have a high decomposition temperature TEM analysis showed that Fe2AlB2 remains fully crystalline under irradiation of 7.5×10 16 ions•cm -2 at 150 °C and 1.5×10 17 ions•cm -2 at 300 °C, while showing partial amorphization under irradiation of 1.5×10 17 ions•cm -2 at 150 °C. In contrast, MoAlB became amorphous under identical irradiation conditions. On the basis of our first-principle calculations, we were able to rationalize our experimental results. In MoAlB, MoI cannot form in the lattice and instead it is expected to create many MoAl antisites. These antisites cannot be easily removed due to the high migration energy (5.27 eV) of VMo. In contrast, all the defects in Fe2AlB2 are expected to anneal out at both 150 °C and 300 °C. We also performed radiation studies on CVD SiC, MAX phase Ti2AlC, and Ti3SiC2 with the same irradiation conditions as used in the MAB phases. The MAX phases showed that they are tolerant to radiation-induced amorphization under all the irradiation conditions, whereas CVD SiC showed similar trends to Fe2AlB2. Specifically, SiC got amorphized under irradiation of 1.5×10 17 ions•cm -2 at 150 °C and remained crystalline under the other conditions. Our experiments also revealed that the MAX phases showed radiation-induced cracking, which was not found in the MAB phases. Our study points to MAB phases as a promising class of materials for applications in environments that involve radiation and potentially corrosion (as explained in the introduction of this paper). Numerous MAB phases have been predicted theoretically, and further studies are needed to explore the full potential of these materials for applications in harsh environments. Using Eq. S1-4 and the calculated formation energies, the chemical potential map of MoAlB was determined and shown in Fig. those reported in Ti3SiC2 and Ti2AlC. Moreover, for the MAX phase, a-LP decreased, and the c-LP increased after the irradiation, whereas for Fe2AlB2 MAB phase, a-LP increased, b and c-LP decreased after irradiation. The lower overall as well as the lower swelling anisotropy in Fe2AlB2 could be the reason for the lack of radiation-induced cracks in Fe2AlB2. SiC was found to be free of irradiation-induced cracks for all doses at and temperatures considered in this study. Figure 6 GIXRD spectra at an incident angle of 1.0° for Fe 2 AlB 2 unirradiated, irradiated at 7.5 ×10 16 ions•cm -2 at 150 °C (150 °C -low), at 1.5 ×10 17 ions•cm -2 at 150 °C (150 °C -high), and at 1.5 ×10 17 ions•cm -2 at 300 °C (300C-high). Fe2AlB2. "Diff" means a diffusion-limited reaction and the number in parenthesis is the lower of the migration energies of the reactant defects. Negative reaction energy means that the reaction is energetically favorable, and "unstable" means that those reactions cannot occur because they the chemical potential set (μ Mo/Fe , μ Al , μ B ) for the characteristic points (A-I, X and Y) indicated in Fig. of the main text).