An anapole state that breaks inversion and time reversal symmetries with preserving translation symmetry of underlying lattice has aroused great interest as a new quantum state, but only a few candidate materials have been reported. Recently, in a spin-orbit coupled Mott insulator Sr2(Ir1-xRhx)O4, the emergence of a possible hidden order phase with broken inversion symmetry has been suggested at TΩ above the Néel temperature by optical second harmonic generation measurements. Moreover, polarized neutron diffraction measurements revealed the broken time reversal symmetry below TΩ, which was supported by subsequent muon spin relaxation experiments. However, the nature of this mysterious phase remains largely elusive. Here, we investigate the hidden order phase through the combined measurements of the in-plane magnetic anisotropy with exceptionally high-precision magnetic torque and the nematic susceptibility with elastoresistance. A distinct two-fold in-plane magnetic anisotropy along the [110] Ir-O-Ir bond direction sets in below ∼ TΩ, providing thermodynamic evidence for a nematic phase transition with broken C4 rotational symmetry. However, in contrast to even-parity nematic transition reported in other correlated electron systems, the nematic susceptibility exhibits no divergent behavior towards TΩ. These results provide bulk evidence for an odd-parity order parameter with broken rotational symmetry in the hidden order state. We discuss the hidden order in terms of an anapole state, in which polar toroidal moment is induced by two current loops in each IrO6 octahedron of opposite chirality. Contrary to the simplest loop-current pattern previously suggested, the present results are consistent with a pattern in which the intra-unit cell loop-current flows along only one of the diagonal directions in the IrO4 square. The search for novel types of ordered state is one of the most exciting and challenging issues of modern condensed-matter physics. In strongly correlated electron systems, charge, spin, and orbital degrees of freedom generate a rich variety of ordered states. Any of these ordered states can be characterized by their behaviors under space inversion (parity) and time reversal operations. Among systems with broken parity, toroidal states, in which translational symmetry of underlying lattice is preserved, have been widely discussed Recently, the layered perovskite Sr 2 IrO 4 has attracted much interest because it is the first experimental realization of a spin-orbit coupled Mott insulator The magnetic moments are aligned in the basal ab plane and follow the rotation of IrO 6 octahedra forming a canted antiferromagnetism with (+--+) structure along the c axis (AF-I), as illustrated in Fig. Despite the complication of the strong spin-orbit interaction, different active orbitals, and structural distortions, it has been suggested that the low-energy electronic structure of Sr 2 IrO 4 bears certain resemblance to that of the cuprates The effective hole doping is achieved by Rhsubstitution The phase diagram of cuprates features a plethora of the broken symmetries in the pseudogap regime that includes charge-density-wave, stripe and nematic and possible loop current orders Subsequent polarized neutron diffraction measurements in pure and 7% Rh-doped Sr 2 IrO 4 report the development of an unconventional magnetic order that breaks time reversal symmetry above ∼ T N , which is charac-terized by an intra-unit-cell magnetic order Despite the SHG, polarized neutron diffraction, and μSR measurements, however, the nature of the hidden order state remains largely elusive. In fact, because the SHG is a surface probe, it is crucially important to clarify the spatial symmetry breaking by a thermodynamic bulk probe. Moreover, although polarized neutron measurements suggest that the direction of the magnetic moment is perpendicular to the ab plane, the direction of anapole vector is unknown Measurements of the magnetic torque τ = μ 0 V M ×H have a high sensitivity for the detection of magnetic anisotropy, where μ 0 is space permeability, V is the sample volume, and M is the magnetization induced by external magnetic field H. Torque is a thermodynamic quantity that is given by the derivative of the free energy with respect to angular displacement, and can thus shed light on the thermodynamic character of the transition. We performed the torque measurements for a range of directions of H within the tetragonal ab plane of Sr 2 (Ir 1-x Rh x )O 4 to test whether the hidden order breaks the four-fold crystal symmetry. In this configuration, τ is a periodic function of twice the azimuthal angle φ measured from the a axis: where χ ij is the susceptibility tensor defined as M ij = j χ ij H j (i, j = a, b, c). For a tetragonally symmetric system, τ 2φ should be zero because χ aa = χ bb and χ ab = 0. Nonzero values of τ 2φ appear when the tetragonal symmetry is broken by a new electronic or magnetic state; C 4 rotational symmetry breaking is revealed by χ aa = χ bb and/or χ ab = 0. The former and the latter states are illustrated in Figs. The nematic susceptibility is determined by measuring the elastoresistance. The experimental set-up for this measurement is illustrated in Fig. The measurements of two directions along [100] and Top panels of Figs. As shown in the upper middle panels of Figs. 7(a)-(g) distinct two-fold oscillation with B 2g symmetry (∝ cos 2φ) is observed at 270 K for Sr 2 IrO 4 and at 140 K for Sr 2 Ir 0.905 Rh 0.095 O 4 . It should be stressed that these temperatures are obviously higher than T N . Therefore, the data provide the first evidence for a phase transition to an electronic nematic state as a bulk property. As shown in the lower middle and bottom panels of Figs. 7(a)-(h), small but finite two-fold oscillations with B 1g symmetry (∝ sin 2φ) and four-fold oscillations, which has the form τ 4φ = A 4φ sin 4φ, are observed at low temperatures. Figures For pure Sr 2 IrO 4 and x = 0.048, A B2g 2φ (T ) increases with decreasing temperature with no discernible change at T N and shows a saturating behavior at lower temperatures. These results suggest that the nematicity is insensitive to the long range AFM order. In contrast, for 0.095, A B2g 2φ (T ) is strongly suppressed below ∼ T S N and changes the sign below T L N , suggesting that the B 2g nematicity is strongly influenced by the appearance of short-range magnetic structure. With decreasing temperature, the amplitude of four-fold oscillations increases below T N for pure Sr 2 IrO 4 The elastoresistance measurements have been used as a powerful probe of electronic nematic transitions in strongly correlated electron systems, especially in ironbased superconductors The results of elastoresistance measurements along two different strain directions are shown in Figs. Our main experimental findings for pure and Rhsubstituted Sr 2 IrO 4 are threefold: First, the in-plane torque magnetometry provides thermodynamic evidence of the nematic transition that lowers the rotational symmetry of the system from C 4 to C 2 at ∼ T Ω . Second, the growth of B 2g two-fold oscillations indicate a nematic director along the Ir-O-Ir [110] bond direction, in contrast to previous proposals In Fe-based superconductors, including Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 , BaFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 and FeSe 1-x S x , the nematic susceptibility exhibits diverging behavior toward the nematic transition temperature We stress that the absence of divergent nematic susceptibility is consistent with the odd parity order because of the following reasons. In the case of even-parity ferroic nematic order, the elastoresistance measurements can sensitively detect the divergent behavior of nematic susceptibility toward the transition temperature. If the order is of odd parity, on the other hand, the divergence may not be observed from the elastoresistance, because the linear coupling between the strain and the odd-parity order parameter is prohibited. In fact, in the Landau theory, coupling of anapole order and strain is described as where T = (T x , T y ) is a polar vector order parameter for the anapole order in E u representation, ε ij are strain, γ 1 and γ 2 are coupling constants, F lat and F ana are free energy of the lattice strain and anapole order, respectively in the mean field region. Through the coupling term in Landau free energy, nematicity ε xy ∝ T Ω -T is induced below T Ω . These behaviors expected in the mean field region of anapole order are compatible with the results of magnetic torque and elastoresistance measurements. We now discuss the direction of the anapole moment and loop current pattern in the hidden order state. The polar toroidal moment that directs to the a axis and the simplest loop current pattern illustrated in Fig. Among the resemblances of crystallographic, magnetic and electronic structures between Sr 2 IrO 4 and La 2 CuO 4 , the formation of pseudogap with the Fermi arc in electron-doped Sr 2 IrO 4 has drawn a great deal of attention, because the pseudogap is one of the most prominent, and most discussed features of the cuprates. Although the pseudogap is not observed in hole-doped Sr 2 IrO 4 in the present x range It has been reported that the nematic director in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+δ and (Bi,Pb) 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ orients along the Cu-O-Cu bond direction The interpretation of the two-fold oscillations in the AFM ordered states is rather complicated. The rapid suppression of the amplitude of two-fold oscillations with B 2g symmetry below T S N may be due to the segmentation of the domain structure by the short range magnetic order. Further detailed study is required to clarify how the short range magnetic order influences the anapole moment. As shown in Figs. In summary, we measured the in-plane magnetic torque and elastoresistance in a spin-orbit coupled Mott insulator Sr 2 (Ir 1-x Rh x )O 4 . The measurements of inplane anisotropy of the magnetic susceptibility reveal the emergence of the nematic phase with broken rotation symmetry distinctly above the Néel transition. On the other hand, nematic susceptibility exhibits no diverging behavior with approaching the nematic critical point. These results provide bulk evidence for the odd-parity hidden order state suggested by the SHG. The results, along with the report of the polarized neutron diffraction, suggest that the hidden order phase is in an anapole state, which is composed of polar (magnetic) toroidal dipole induced by persistent loop currents. These results may bear resemblance to the pseudogap state of underdoped cuprates, but the nematic director of Sr 2 (Ir 1-x Rh x )O 4 is 45 • rotated from that of monolayer cuprate HgBa 2 CuO 4+δ , implying the difference of the loop current patterns between the two systems. The remarkable common features of the nematicity and distinct differences of the nematic director may be key to understanding the symmetry breaking phenomena in the hidden order state of the iridate and the pseudogap state of the cuprates.