Quantum technology has grown out of quantum information theory and now provides a valuable tool that researchers from numerous fields can add to their toolbox of research methods. To date, various systems have been exploited to promote the application of quantum information processing. The systems that can be used for quantum technology include superconducting circuits, ultra-cold atoms, trapped ions, semiconductor quantum dots, and solid-state spins and emitters. In this review, we will discuss the state of the art on material platforms for spin-based quantum technology, with a focus on the progress in solidstate spins and emitters in several leading host materials, including diamond, silicon carbide, boron nitride, silicon, two-dimensional semiconductors, and other materials. We will highlight how firstprinciples calculations can serve as an exceptionally robust tool for finding the novel defect qubits and single photon emitters in solids, through detailed predictions of the electronic, magnetic and optical properties. NV(-) 2 A2, 2.88 76 , 3 E, 1.43 118 SiV(0) 1.00 119 SiV(-) 2 Eg, 50 120 , 2 Eu, 260 120 GeV(-) 2 Eg, 181 113 , 2 Eu, 1120 113 SnV(-) 2 Eg, 850 114 , 2 Eu, 3000 114 ST1 1.274±0.139 117 NV(0) 0.14 NV(-) 0.04 SiV(0) 0.90±0.10 SiV(-) 0.75-0.79 GeV(-) 0.61 SnV(-) 0.41 ST1 <0.1 4H-SiC VSi-VC(0) 1.094-1.150 124 PL5 divacancy 1.190 125 PL6 divacancy 1.193 125 VSi-NC(-) 0.99-1.06 126-128 VSi(V1) 1.438 129 VSi(V2) 1.352 129 Cr(4+) 1.158, 1.190 130 V(4+) 0.970, 0.929 131 VSi-VC(0) 3 A2, 1.22-1.34 124 PL5 divacancy 1.353 125 PL6 divacancy 1.365 125 VSi-NC(-) 3 A2, 1.282-1.331 128 VSi(V1) 4 A2, 0.004 129 VSi(V2) 4 A2, 0.035 129 Cr(4+) 3 A2, 1-6.46 130 V(4+) 2 E, 529, 43 131 VSi-VC(0) ~0.05 VSi(V1) 0.08 VSi(V2) 0.09 Cr(4+) 0.75 V(4+) 0.25, 0.5 3C-SiC VSi-VC(0) 1.121 132 VSi-NC(-) 0.845 134 1.27 a135 VSi-VC(0) 3 A2, 1.336 132 VSi-NC(-) 3 A2, 1.303 134 VSi-VC(0) ~0.05 6H-SiC VSi-VC(0) 1.094-1.134 136 VSi-NC(-) 0.960-1.000 127 VSi(V1) 1.433 129 VSi(V2) 1.398 129 VSi(V3) 1.366 129 V(4+) 0.948, 0.917, 0.893 131 VSi-VC(0) 3 A2, 1.236-1.347 124 VSi(V1) 4 A2, 0.028 137 VSi(V2) 4 A2, 0.128 137 VSi(V3) 4 A2, 0.028 137 V(4+) 2 E, 524, 25, 16 131 V(4+) <0.5 h-BN nanotube 1.941 138 2.172 and 2.179 139 h-BN ~ 2.0 d , 4.1 e , 5.3 f VB(-) ~1.6 g140 VB(-) 3 A2g, 3.4 140 0.82 75 , 0.59 ~0.030 g WSe2 0.936 142 WS2 VS 1.72 and 1.98 143 0.30 and 0.50 2H-MoS2 1.174 144 c-BN ON-VB ~1.63 145 Bi 3.3 146 Bi-VN 3.57 146 CN 4.09 147 Si impurity 4.94 148 Bi-VN 0.017 Si impurity 0.007 ZnO VZn 2.331 149 CuZn 2.859 150 VZn-ClO 2.365 151 DAP 3.333 152 CuZn 0.0015 DAP 0.996 GaN 0.855 a155 3.33 b , 2.594 c , 1.82 d Cr(4+) 1.193 130 0.71 0.63 c Cr(4+) 0.73 Silicon G-centre CiCs 0.969 157 Er(3+) 0.805 h158 G-centre CiCs 0.30 REI YAG:Pr(3+) 4.122 160 Ce(3+) 2.536 161 YSO: Er(3+) 0.807 162 YVO:Yb(3+) 1.280 163 LaFe3:Pr(3+) 2. Quantum technology is a platform that exploits the basic rules of quantum mechanics to realize certain techniques and functionality more efficiently than classic technologies One may distinguish two types of physical qubits in terms of their role in quantum information processing: local qubits are the units for quantum operations at the quantum nodes whereas the quantum information is delivered by flying qubits between the distant quantum nodes. A natural physical realization of the flying qubits are the photons that can connect the nodes. However, photons are not able to store quantum information at a given site, thus local qubits are typically realized on materials basis with sufficiently long coherence times of the quantum state. In this review, we focus on the physical realization of materials qubits. We note that the quantum nodes may be connected to each other by realizing an interface between the materials qubit and the photon. The materials platforms of local physical qubits are numerous such as atoms in optical lattices A key representative of solid state defect qubits is the nitrogen-vacancy (NV) center in diamond, which is a paramagnetic color center Figure One advantage in the solid-state qubit is its capability of being integrated into the traditional microelectronic structures that have revolutionized our world once already. Diamond has favorable optical properties with room temperature defect qubit but it is difficult to grow diamond at wafer scale and fabricate a semiconductor device from diamond. This was one motivation to seek alternative materials and potential atomic-scale defects that are both robust and easily controlled, similarly to the favorable coherence and readout properties of the diamond NV center. These conditions pose restrictions on the choice of host materials and defect states as explained in detail in Ref. The list of possible applications of defect qubits in Fig. These issues drive the field in searching for new solid-state qubits that operate akin to the NV center in terms of initialization and readout We here review the most fundamental magneto-optical properties of the observed defect qubits and single photon sources with focusing on wide band gap materials that can host room temperature qubits but moderate or small band gap materials are also briefly discussed in Sec. 6.2. We attempt to provide a full coverage of the already identified qubits or single photon sources. We note that other review papers have been appeared related to this topic, and probably numerous review papers have been written parallel to this work or are now being in the preparation phase. We realized that previous review papers either specific to a given material like diamond In the example of diamond NV center, we already listed the key magneto-optical parameters of qubits in the Introduction. These parameters and their sensitivity on external effects (electric and magnetic fields, strain, temperature, etc.) determine their applicability for a given quantum application. The physical concept of these parameters will be discussed in Sec. 2.1, also in the context of ab initio calculations. In a recent review Characterization of point defects in solids is the key task for identification candidates for qubits. Computation of the electronic structure of the point defects is the first inevitable step to this end. Having the electronic structure in hand, the key magneto-optical properties can be calculated which may be called theoretical spectroscopy of point defects in solids. We briefly summarize the typical ab initio methods employed to this end. Born-Oppenheimer approximation is usually applied for the electron-nuclei system of point defects, in which the ions are treated as charged particles with atomic masses, and the electrons move fast in the adiabatic potential created by the ions. The total energy of the electronic states should be calculated as a function of coordinates of ions of the system so that the adiabatic potential energy surface (APES) of the system can be mapped. The global energy minimum of the APES for a given electronic configuration can be found by minimizing the quantum mechanical forces acting on the ions. The quasi-harmonic vibration modes can also be calculated by interpolating a parabola around the global minimum by moving the ions out of the equilibrium positions and solving the Hessian equation. To this end, the total energy of the electronic system should be determined. Two widespread basic methods can be used: (1) quantum chemistry codes with linear combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO) and Gaussian-type orbital (GTO) based molecular clusters; and (2) density functional theory (DFT) supercell methods. Quantum chemistry codes with coupled cluster or configuration interaction (CI) methods can treat highly correlated orbitals, but only small systems can be calculated, which is problematic when the band edges converge slowly to the infinite cluster's values because of the quantum confinement effect, which opens the gap between empty and occupied defect levels. DFT supercell methods are often applied together with a plane waves basis set, as it is a natural basis for periodic boundary conditions (nevertheless, it can also be a GTO basis) which requires pseudopotentials In most of the defect calculations, the charged defects are embedded in the supercell models. By using the correction energy (E corr ) for charged defective supercells, one can calculate the formation energy (E q f [d]) of a given point defect (d) in a charged state q, which provides thermodynamic properties. For a binary compound material (XY), this can be written as (1) where μ i are the chemical potential of ion (i) with n i number in the supercell, and E F is the Fermi-energy with respect to the calculated valence band maximum E V , which is usually aligned to zero energy in the corresponding band diagrams, and then E F varies between zero and the fundamental bandgap (Eg) of the host material. The adiabatic charge transition levels between the q and q+1 charged states can be calculated as which defines the position of the Fermi-level where the defect adiabatically switches between the q and q+1 charge states with respect to E V . The calculated charge transition levels provide the ionization thresholds of the defect qubit as explained in Fig. We note that the given charge and electronic configuration should be calculated as a function of the spin state too, and the lowest energy spin configuration belongs to the ground state spin of the system at a given charge state. This is highly important, for the qubit state is often associated with the high-spin ground state. The spin levels may split due to spin-orbit or dipolar spin-spin interactions at zero magnetic field that previously called ZFS, which can be calculated from first principles (see Ref. The calculation of the key optical quantities, such as the ZPL and DW factors, requires the computation of the optically allowed excited state and the vibration modes. In the Huang-Rhys approximation of the optical transition, it is sufficient to calculate the vibration modes only in the ground state Over the past decades, qubits have been implemented in a wide range of materials, including atoms 105 , superconductors At a low concentration of point defects in a solid, the photo-excitation source can be focused on the target point defect with a simultaneously induced ESR transition by sweeping alternating magnetic fields. If the fluorescence intensity is spin dependent, then the electron spin resonance can be observed by monitoring the fluorescence intensity as a function of the microwave frequency. This technique is called optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) measurement 108 . The spin resonance may be detected at zero magnetic field for non-isotropic defects where the low symmetry crystal field will split the spin levels known as ZFS. Here, we list these most basic key optical (ZPL, DW) and magnetic properties (ZFS in the ground and excited states at the given spin state) for the materials of prominent qubits and single photon emitters that have been experimentally identified to date, including three-dimensional materials such as diamond, SiC polymorphs (4H, 3C, and 6H), ZnO, GaN, cubic BN (c-BN), 2H-MoS2, yttrium aluminum garnet (Y3Al5O12 or YAG), yttrium orthosilicate (Y2SiO5 or YSO), and yttrium orthovanadate (YVO4 or YVO); and two-dimensional materials such as hexagonal BN (h-BN) and transition metal dichalcogenides (WSe2 and WS2). In sections III-IV, we will discuss these materials in detail. Table Diamond has a band gap of about 5.5 eV, thus it can host numerous color centers with emission wavelengths in a wide region from NIR through visible to UV Among the many color centers in diamond, the NV center stands out because of its desirable spin coherence and readout properties The electronic structure of the NV center is shown in Fig. At room temperature, extremely long spin coherence times of up to 1.8 ms are reported for the ground state of the NV center The temperature dependence of the optical transition linewidth and excited states relaxation of a single NV center was associated with strong electron-phonon coupling Recent advances in quantum technology make it possible to create proximate qubits that form a quantum network in solids. Via electron spin-spin interaction, the proximate qubits might interact with each other. It was found that in diamond with extremely high concentrations of NV centers (about 45 ppm), the electron spin coherence time was significantly reduced to about 67 μs 211 , in striking contrast to the 1.8 ms coherence time of the isolated NV centers The most promising area of application of the NV center is the ultrasensitive nanoscale sensors We note that diamond NV center has a great potential to realize room temperature quantum computing, in strike contrast to the present ultralow temperature operation of superconductor based quantum computers. It has been recently shown that single diamond NV center can coherently address 27 Recently, the silicon-vacancy (SiV) defect in diamond, which forms a structure with inversion symmetry, has been of great interest 123 . The inversion symmetry of defects is one strategy to suppress the influence of local electric field noise to signal; i.e., the spectral diffusion. In particular, near transformlimited photons could be generated by the negatively charged SiV(-) centers because of the strong ZPL emission By employing group theory and an advanced ab initio method with a realistic band gap of bulk diamond, Gali and Maze determined the electronic structure of the SiV defect in diamond Jahnke et al. developed a microscopic model of the electron-phonon processes within the ground and excited electronic levels to describe the observed temperature dependent optical line width of the SiV(-) center where χ is the interaction frequency for phonons, ρ is the proportionality constant, and T is temperature. Hence the single phonon mediated transition results in the relaxation of the population between the ground and excited states as well as the dephasing of the states. At low temperature, it leads to a linear dependence. On the other side, at high temperature, the line broadening deviates from the linear relationship with temperature, suggesting the involvement of higher order phonon coupling in the relaxation process. It is worth emphasizing that for NV(-) centers, the inelastic Raman-type scattering process dominates; however, for SiV(-) centers, the inelastic Raman scattering is suppressed and the elastic Raman-type scattering process is dominated. Thus, the two-phonon elastic scattering dominated transition rate is: Therefore, the two-phonon scattering dominates the dephasing of the orbital states at high temperature, which agrees well with the experimental results. Understanding the electronic structure and coherence properties of the SiV(-) center contributed to the development of a coherent population trapping experiment We note a recent breakthrough on creating stable and individual neutral SiV defects 122 in which the zero-phonon line is at 946 nm (see Table The inversion-symmetry based group-IV vacancy color centers XV(-), where X = Si, Ge, Sn, and Pb, in diamond are fast emerging qubits that can be harnessed in quantum communication and sensor applications We note that the sister defects of SiV(0) were studied by first principles calculations Two other color centers in diamond were selected and listed in Table I which were observed as quantum emitters. The NiN4 defect has NIR emission with inversion symmetry, therefore it is an interesting alternative to other color centers in diamond. However, after the early observation of its quantum emission 115 no progress has be reported so far. Further exploration of this color center may be difficult because its controlled formation (clustering of nitrogen atoms around Ni impurity) is a very challenging task. The ST1 color center was also picked up because it has a unique property: the optical emission occurs between the singlet states whereas the qubit state is a metastable S=1 state 117 . The defect exhibits a high room temperature readout contrast at 45%. The electron spin could be coherently coupled to proximate Inspired by the color centers in diamond, deep color centers have been considered in other host crystals As a compound semiconductor, SiC contains intrinsic defects of carbon vacancies (VC), silicon vacancies (VSi), anti-site type defects (SiC and CSi), the carbon antisite-vacancy pair defect (CSi-VC), and divacancy (VSi-VC). The identification of the microscopic configuration of point defects is a key step in the advance of quantum information materials. First-principles calculation combined with magneto-optical spectra were widely employed to study the electronic and spin properties of these defect centers in SiC (e.g., recent ab initio results about native defects in 4H-SiC in Ref. Using optical and microwave techniques similar to those used with diamond qubits, Koehl et al. demonstrated that several point defects in 4H-SiC are optically active and coherently controlled with a range of temperature from 20 K to room temperature 125 . They were mostly identified as divacancy configurations 256 , which they called PL1-4 centers. Neutral divacancies in 4H-SiC have S = 1 ground state spin and ZPL of around 1.1 eV with a DW factor of about 0.03. The coherence times of VSi-VC are 1.2 ms with ODMR readout contrast of 15% in 4H-SiC and 0.9 ms in 3C-SiC 132 . Compared to the NV center in diamond, the divacancy with correlated states in SiC can provide competitive advantages, such as that the emission wavelength in the NIR region would suit biological studies because it can effectively penetrate organic tissue, the ODMR and ZPL signals can be resolved at room temperature, and ZFS is at lower frequencies (~1.3 GHz) than that of the NV center in diamond, which is also preferential for biological systems The divacancy spin levels and coherence times are sensitive to the presence of strain Silicon-vacancy related ODMR centers were well known in hexagonal SiC polytypes and even in a rhombohedral SiC polytype. These centers were labeled as V1 and V2 in 4H-SiC 270,271 and as V1, V2, and V3 in 6H-SiC 272 , where the corresponding emission comes at the near infrared region (see Table Nitrogen-vacancy pair defects (NCVSi) have recently been observed in N-doped 3C, 4H, and 6H-SiC polytype crystals Overall, SiC has obvious advantages in applications of quantum technology. High quality 4-inch 4H-SiC wafer is widely exploited in semiconductor industry with well controlled doping technologies, which is promising to reduce the production cost of the future SiC based quantum devices. Indeed, single divacancy 256 and Si-vacancy spins 300 have been integrated and controlled in SiC diode structures (see Fig. Two-dimensional (2D) materials have been attracting extensive research interest in the last few decades. Recently, room-temperature quantum emitters have been reported in two-dimensional (2D) wide bandgap materials Hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) is one representative 2D material. It is a wide-bandgap (∼6 eV) 2D material with the potential to host color centers that are promising candidates for quantum technology. Many emitters in h-BN are bright with narrow linewidths, are tunable, and have high stability Inspired by the similar phenomenon in NV centers in diamond, it is naturally suggested that the origin of these quantum emitters is the combination of substitutional and vacancy defects. h-BN has a wide variety of possible intrinsic defects, antisite defects, and unintentional impurities (such as H, O, C, and Si) in its lattice structure. Several DFT computational works have attributed these emissions to charge neutral native and substitutional defects with deep bandgap states The intrinsic defects V B and V N in a freestanding h-BN have been observed in a TEM experiment Advanced first-principles calculations in combination with group theory analyses would be a powerful approach to analyze the defects' magneto-optical properties, as shown in Ref. A multireference character of the closed-shell and open-shell ground states of the defect-induced strong electron correlation effect would be another challenge in computational methods to accurately describe the energy levels of point defects 336 . As an example of V N C B defects in h-BN, hybrid functionals such as HSE06 work very well for excitations within the triplet manifold of the defects; however, they underestimate significantly the triplet-state energies by about 1 eV. The estimation of the inaccuracy was based on an h-BN flake cluster model of a few tens of atoms terminated by hydrogen atoms by comparing the DFT results with Hartree-Fock based multireference methods. The estimated DFT error might be overestimated in Ref. It is worth noting that phonons play a critical role in determining the magneto-optical properties of the quantum emitters in h-BN. Strong electron-phonon interaction activates the emission of V N N B defects 337 , which also causes a strong coupling of strain to the ZPL emission. In this particular case, the out-of-plane or membrane phonon modes are coupled strongly to the defect, which moves the atoms out of the plane. Experiments combined with first principles calculations imply that this motion of ions can explain the polarization of the emitted photons from such emitters 327 . The strong electron-phonon coupling, manifested as the Jahn-Teller effect in the excited state, is responsible for the weakly allowed optical transition in VB(-) states in h-BN, and membrane phonons may play a crucial role in the intersystem crossing responsible for the ODMR contrast 179 . The family of two-dimensional materials, including graphene, h-BN, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) (e.g., MoS2, WS2, etc.), and phosphorene, have attracted much attention due to their extraordinary physical, chemical and mechanical properties, as well as their promising applications in nano electronics, thermoelectric devices, wearable electronics, flexible displays and smart health diagnostics Similar to the aforementioned host materials, other wide bandgap materials also host optically active defects that can principally emit single photons. Compared with NV center in diamond, the research of color centers in these wide band gap materials is still in its infancy. Preliminary results show a great advance in these materials, however, further efforts are still required to obtain a comprehensive understanding, such as the correlation between defect orbitals with the pristine orbitals of host material, the effects of strain and phonon coupling on electron coherence. For the completeness of this review article, here we briefly introduce the basic properties, performance and open questions of these wide bandgap semiconductors for application in quantum information technology. Point defects in ZnO were explored for potential application as single-photon sources A room temperature quantum emitter was also observed in cubic ZnS particles of ~100 nm in diameter 366 . The zinc blende ZnS exhibits a room temperature band gap of ~3.6 eV which is somewhat larger than that of ZnO. The fluorescence intensity of the quantum emitter emerges at 600 nm, it has a maximum at around 640 nm, and it decays to zero at around 750 nm upon 532-nm excitation. The ZPL peak is not visible at room temperature. The observed lifetime is at ~2.2 ns. Since the emitter was observed without any treatment it was tentatively associated with an intrinsic defect, the Zn-vacancy. Ab initio predicts for ZPL energy of about 2.4 eV (516 nm) for Zn-vacancy 367 , which is a bit far from the observed shortest wavelength of the emission. Further efforts are needed for identification of this single photon emitter. High quality ZnS material with large band gap has a good potential in hosting visible quantum emitters. Recently, defects in TiO2 thin films and nanopowders exhibited single-photon emission have been found 368 . The excited-state and non-radiative lifetimes were found to be within the range of several nanoseconds and tens of nanoseconds, respectively. The fluorescence occurred in the red emission band. The three types of room temperature quantum emitters show relatively broad luminescence with some peaks between 600 and 700 nm. Low temperature measurements for optical characterization and ab initio calculations may reveal the origin of these single photon emitters in this prospective material with a band gap at ~3.0 eV. Room temperature quantum emitters in gallium nitride (GaN) were reported to exhibit narrowband luminescence In addition to h-BN 2D crystals, the zinc-blende allotropic form of boron nitride, so-called cubic boron nitride (c-BN), has shown important application as a wide-band-gap semiconductor. Recently, Tararan et al. Another possible form of BN is the hexagonal boron nitride nanotubes (h-BNNT). Unlike carbon nanotubes, the polarized B-N bonds create a large band gap of ~6 eV independent from the chirality of the nanotube. The first room temperature quantum emitters were reported in about 5-nm-diameter h-BNNT 138 . Recently, two similar room temperature quantum emitters have been observed in 50-nm diameter h-BNNT 139 . The peaks for the two emitters are found at 571 nm and 569 nm, respectively, presumably attributed to ZPL of the defects. Both emitters have broad features and asymmetric line shapes in the spectra. Similar quantum emitters in the visible wavelength region were reported in 2D h-BN The wurtzite phase of aluminum nitride (w-AlN) has C6v symmetry. It is a wide band gap (6.03-6.12 eV) semiconductor that has many applications 372 . The very large band gap can suppresses coupling between band gap levels and bulk states. Moreover, small spin-orbit splitting of 19 meV was reported 373 , which can enhance qubit-state lifetime. These two unique advantages make AlN an attractive host material for scalable solid-state qubits analogous to diamond and SiC. Furthermore, growth of highquality crystal w-AlN has been reported 374 . The spin states of neutral nitrogen vacancy in AlN has been experimentally detected using electron paramagnetic resonance AlN has large band gap, this meets the criteria for a host material for addressable single photon emitter. However, in AlN, the defect levels induced by anion vacancy are too close to the band edge, results in strong resonance with the bulk band edges. This hinders the application of AlN in scalable quantum technologies. To overcome this issue, Varley et al. proposed that alloying AlN with transitionmetal dopants can push the defect levels deeper into the band gap 376 . For example, Ti and Zr atoms substitute on the Al site can lead to the formation of desired electronic and spin states. Seo et al. proposed an alternative by applying strain 377 . It was found that in the stress-free negatively charged nitrogen vacancy (V N -), the S = 1 state is slightly higher in energy than the S = 0 state, reveals that the two spin states are approximately degenerate in energy. On the other side, these two spin states are associated with two distinct Jahn-Teller distortions configurations. This suggests that these two spin states can be separated in energy by applying strain. Their DFT calculation results demonstrate this expectation, i.e., even at a small compressive strain of -3% along the [1120] direction, the S = 1 state is significantly lower by about 250 meV than the S = 0 state. In addition to the difference between energy of these two spin states, the hyperfine tensors are also sensitive to loading strain. Very recently, Xue et al. have observed numerous room temperature single photon emitters in w-AlN films 378 . At low temperatures, the PL spectra exhibit relatively narrow and strong ZPL peaks with positions varying from the visible (543 nm) till the NIR (~980 nm) region. The full PL spectra thus the corresponding Debye-Waller factors have not reported. They also applied DFT calculations with such functionals that do not well reproduce the band gap or not well tested, and only the vertical excitation energies were determined 378 . Based on these calculations they concluded that some NIR quantum emitters in the AlN film originate from the antisite nitrogen vacancy complexes (NAlVN) and divacancy complexes (VAlVN). Further characterization is required at both the theoretical and experimental fronts in this highly prospective host material. Rare-earth ions (REI) embedded into solid state matrix are prospective building blocks for quantum memory and quantum communication applications Theory here faces with several challenges: highly correlated atomic like orbitals, large spin-orbit interaction and possibly non-negligible electron-phonon interaction for the case of quasi degenerate orbitals. One obvious choice is to apply post Hartree-Fock based methods where the correlation energy between the orbitals can be systematically taken into account by raising the complexity of the approach including relativistic effects (c.f. a review in Ref. Using time-dependent density functional theory embedded-cluster simulations, the electronic and optical properties of two adjacent singlet-coupled F color centers (anion-vacancy) in lithium fluoride (LiF) were investigated Diamond is already proven to be a promising host material for quantum information technology that builds up from carbon atoms. The graphite, including the single sheet of graphite, i.e., graphene, is a zerogap semiconductor, therefore it cannot host color centers. However, some forms of carbon nanotubes with relatively small diameter can introduce small band gap which opens the door for{Citation} hosting NIR emitters. By considering small band gap materials for hosting qubits, silicon crystal is an obvious choice which is an elementary semiconductor. Silicon is the most used semiconductor for integrated circuits which has a band gap at 1.17 eV at cryogenic temperatures. Beside using dopant atoms for realizing qubits, i.e. Kane quantum computer (see below), NIR color centers have been introduced for quantum optics studies (see Table The development of a solid state photon source based on carbon-related nano materials has received a lot of attention One scheme towards a single photon source is the strong exciton-exciton interaction in 1D systems Another strategy for obtaining reliable single-photon emission from carbon nanotubes relies on exciton localization. Deep potential trapping (much greater than kBT) is required for localization at room temperature. However, because the trapping potential in a pristine carbon nanotube is very shallow, single photon emission in a pristine carbon nanotube is limited to cryogenic temperatures. Chemical functionalization of carbon nanotubes provides one way to strengthen the exciton localization and generate localized excitons with well depths of 100 meV or greater, which are higher than kBT at room temperature A completely different approach towards building quantum computers was proposed by Bruce Kane in 1998 399 , which is based on the combination of classical semiconductor technology and electron-nuclear magnetic resonance techniques. As the most successful material applied in semiconductor device technology, silicon (Si) has an indirect bandgap of about 1.17 eV at cryogenic temperatures that reduces to about 1.12 eV at room temperature. The isotopically pure The idea of Kane quantum computer faces at least two challenges: i) efficient readout of single qubits; ii) precise alignment of the donor atoms in Si. By engineering the P donors between two electrodes, i.e. field-effect transistor (FET) configuration, the electrical detection of single P donor electron spins was demonstrated via spin-selective recombination between a deep paramagnetic defect acting as a trap for the P donor electron at the silicon and SiO2 interface. This result was published 402 after 6 years of Kane's publication 399 . The mechanism can be described as a spin-to-charge conversion where the high purity of Si material makes possible to detect single electrons in the FET device. With using pulsed electrical detected magnetic resonance, the Rabi nutation of single P donor electrons (the coherent state) was observed in the Si FET device with using the same mechanism 403 . The disadvantage of this method is that the spin-to-charge conversion probability between the states of the deep defect (presumably a Si dangling bond at the Si/SiO2 interface) and the P donor heavily depends on their locations, and it is extremely complicated to control the formation and location of the deep defect. A breakthrough in the single-shot readout of P donors was achieved in a single electron transistor (SET) architecture with using 1.5 Tesla magnetic field for efficient Zeeman splitting at 40 mK temperature, in order to achieve a spin-selective tunneling of the P donor electron from the SET region towards the electrodes A breakthrough in the precise alignment of P donors was achieved by a combination of scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and hydrogen-resist lithography 409 . Simmons group demonstrated a singleatom transistor in which an individual phosphorus dopant atom was deterministically placed with a spatial accuracy of one lattice site in SET. The SET operated at liquid helium temperatures, and millikelvin electron transport measurements confirmed the presence of discrete quantum levels in the energy spectrum of the P atom 409 . Furthermore, the coherent control of single P donor qubit was demonstrated 410 . This technology has been recently applied to fabricate the two-qubit exchange gate between phosphorus donor electron spin qubits in silicon using independent single-shot spin readout with a readout fidelity of about 94 per cent which operates very fast (about 800 picosecond) 411 . In the two-qubit exchange mechanism the precise alignment of the two P donors was inevitable. This is a crucial step with respect to the previous breakthroughs achieved in the demonstration of various two-qubit gates in Si In addition to phosphorous dopant, arsenic in silicon is another attractive platform for quantum computing, since arsenic dopants have many advantages over phosphorus, include a higher solid solubility in bulk silicon and a lower diffusivity than phosphorus. Moreover, atomic spin-orbit interaction strength of arsenic is twice of that of phosphorus, and triple times of nuclear spin value 416 . The high nuclear spin value present opportunities for simplifications in physical implementations of quantum gate structures. Very recently, using a scanning tunneling microscope tip, Stock et al. reported the successful fabrication of atomic-precision of arsenic in silicon 417 . Obviously, further studies on the quantum properties of the arsenic in silicon are desired. Arsenic has an advantage of the relatively large quadrupole of the nuclear spins that can be harnessed to control the nuclear spin states of the ionized arsenic donors via strain 418 . Obviously, further studies on the qubit properties of the arsenic in silicon are desired. A very interesting donor alternative in Si is bismuth (Bi). Although, Bi has much lower solubility than P in Si but 209 Bi offers a 20-dimensional Hilbert space rather than a 4-dimensional Hilbert space of We note that it was a common belief that the relatively shallow donors and acceptors in Si can be well understood by using the effective mass theory with some fitting parameters for the central cell correction and related empirical tight binding theory Recently, strain was applied to various donors in Si to tune the hyperfine coupling between the corresponding nuclear spin and the donor spin 426 . Although, empirical tight binding theory seemed to mostly reproduce the experimental data but ab initio theory may be needed for accurate prediction, in particular, for the large donor ions. The challenge for ab initio periodic cluster calculations is to accommodate the defect (wavefunction) in a sufficiently large supercell, or to apply the appropriate scaling method to approach the isolated donor limit. The spin-to-photon interface to create flying qubits in Si may be realized by deep donors like chalcogen donors 427 . For the prototypical Another approach is to use deep fluorescent centers in Si to realize quantum emitters. Erbium in Si emits light in the telecom wavelength which is a REI impurity in Si with optical transition between the split 4f orbitals (e.g., Ref. 107 ). A hybrid approach was demonstrated for the readout of the electron spin in which optical excitation is used to change the charge state (conditional on its spin state) of an erbium defect center in a SET, and this change is then detected electrically 430 . Recently, ensembles of G-centers and G-center-related single photon emitters were created in silicon by carbon implantation and annealing Engineering, and Information (Q-AMASE-i), to establish foundries with "mid-scale infrastructure for rapid prototyping and development of quantum materials and devices," according to the program solicitation 444 . Obviously, the above shows that the quantum computer will have a prominent part in the future. Although quantum computers may not supersede traditional computers in tasks for which traditional computers are already proven to be highly efficient, quantum computers could excel in many tasks, such as the design of new materials for health, energy storage and production, high temperature superconductors and new catalysts. We briefly mentioned the challenges in this road in the paper that we perpetuate here. At limited temperature, the excitation of phonon will induce atoms in the solids displacing from their equilibrium positions. As a result, the electron/spin energy level have significant broadening because of the fluctuation of the atoms, leading to finite relaxation time for spin states. For example, significant reduction in spin coherence time was reported in isolated NV center at room temperature with respect to low temperature Beside quantum computation, the development of quantum sensing and quantum communication devices is also a driving force in the field. In quantum sensor applications, the room temperature operation is a must for in vivo biological and medical studies, thus the search for room temperature defect qubits is of high importance in this context. Furthermore, the temperature dependence of materials properties such as high-temperature superconductivity can be only monitored by such quantum sensors that can operate in a broad range of temperatures. The use of light either in the manipulation or readout of the room temperature qubits poses restrictions on the wavelength region for biological studies. Two NIR wavelength regions are defined in the context where the absorption is minimal by typical biological systems (see NIR-I and NIR-II in Fig. We note that the search of point defects for a given ZPL wavelength is an insufficient condition in the optimization of defect qubits. The interaction and coupling between different particles and quasiparticles in solids, including electrons, phonons, photons and spin, are important physical process in nature, and have direct impacts on performance of quantum devices. Considering the complex multiparticles interaction, it is still challenging in computational design of new material platform for quantum technology. Recently, with big data generated by theory and experiments, high-throughput calculation, screening and machine learning methodologies have been adopted to materials genome initiatives and materials informatics It is exciting to note that, due to the enormous potential of quantum computers in the design of new materials and the importance of new material platforms for building scalable quantum computer networks with much better performance, the birth of the usable quantum computer will definitely speed up the development of new material platforms, resulting in "self-accelerating" progress in quantum information technology. The initial step has been recently taken in this direction Finally, we allude here an important point from Ref. All-in-all, the future of color centers qubits looks bright in the joint effort of ab initio simulationstheoretical spectroscopy and qubit control -and experiments.