Transmon qubits are ubiquitous in the pursuit of quantum computing using superconducting circuits. However, they have some drawbacks that still need to be addressed. Most importantly, the scalability of transmons is limited by the large device footprint needed to reduce the participation of the lossy capacitive parts of the circuit. In this work, we investigate and evaluate losses in an alternative device geometry, namely, the merged-element transmon (mergemon). To this end, we replace the large external shunt capacitor of a traditional transmon with the intrinsic capacitance of a Josephson junction and achieve an approximately 100 times reduction in qubit dimensions. We report the implementation of the mergemon using a sputtered Nb-amorphous-Si-Nb trilayer film. In an experiment below 10 mK, the frequency of the readout resonator, capacitively coupled to the mergemon, exhibits a qubit-state dependent shift in the low power regime. The device also demonstrates the single-and multi-photon transitions that represent a weakly anharmonic system in the two-tone spectroscopy. The transition spectra are explained well with master-equation simulations. A participation ratio analysis identifies the dielectric loss of the amorphous-Si tunnel barrier and its interfaces as the dominant source for qubit relaxation. We expect the mergemon to achieve high coherence in relatively small device dimensions when implemented using a low-loss, epitaxially-grown, and lattice-matched trilayer. The invention of the transmon qubit has fueled the rapid development of quantum-information research over the past decade. Multiple landmark breakthroughs have been achieved with this technology. These include the mid-flight detection and reversal of a quantum jump Nevertheless, transmon lifetimes can still suffer from qubit energy relaxation caused by parasitic two-level systems (TLSs) such as defects and dangling bonds that widely exist in superconducting circuits Here, we propose an alternative approach to scaling these circuits that minimizes qubit size while providing an avenue to significantly reduce losses due to interfaces, surfaces, and radiation. This design entails engineering the junction itself to satisfy the transmon requirements for frequency and anharmonicity by merging the external shunt capacitor and the JJ inductance into a single element made of a superconductor-tunnel-barriersuperconductor trilayer; that is, the "mergemon." This design has several advantages over the traditional transmon. First, the mergemon allows a reduction of approximately 100 times in the device footprint For this proof-of-principle demonstration, we present the design, fabrication and measurement of the firstgeneration mergemon using a sputtered Nb-a-Si-Nb trilayer. The microchip layout adopts a conventional coplanar-waveguide design The fabrication process begins by sputtering a Nb/a-Si/Nb trilayer onto a high-resistivity intrinsic Si wafer substrate that has been cleaned with hydrofluoric acid The microchip circuit described in Fig. To facilitate the detection of the qubit state, a halfwavelength readout resonator is capacitively coupled the mergemon. The qubit-resonator coupling strength, g/2π ≈ 50 MHz, is much smaller than the detuning, ∆/2π = |f r -f q |, where f r (f q ) is the resonator (mergemon) frequency. With this configuration, the qubitresonator system is well described by the circuit quantum electrodynamics in the dispersive regime. The dispersive coupling between the qubit and the readout resonator induces a qubit-state-dependent shift of χσ z in the resonator frequency, where χ is the dispersive shift Next, the mergemon qubit frequency is examined in a two-tone spectroscopy. Similarly to the conventional transmons, the mergemon is a weakly anharmonic oscillator. The two-lowest energy states of the mergemon can be approximated as a qubit because of its finite anharmonicity. Therefore, to characterize the qubit system, one needs to choose a sufficiently small pump-tone power to induce the mergemon qubit transition while avoiding excitation to the higher energy states. shows an illustrative diagram of the five-lowest energy levels of a mergemon. In this work, the anharmonicity α is defined as where E 01 (E 12 ) is the energy of the transition |0 → |1 (|1 → |2 ). To characterize the anharmonicity, the transitions to higher excited states are probed via the multiphoton processes described in Fig. The mergemon shows an anharmonicity of 170 MHz in the spectrum measurement, similar to that of a conventional transmon. Evidently, the measured mergemon frequency f q (4.475 GHz) and anharmonicity (170 MHz) significantly deviate from their designed values (5 GHz and 260 MHz). The scanning electron micrograph presented in Fig. To provide further evidence that the device is indeed in the transmon regime, the experimental result presented in Fig. where ω j represents the eigenenergies of the isolated mergemon, ω r = 2πf r is the angular bare resonator frequency, â † (â) is the photon creation(annihilation) operator of the readout resonator, and g ij is the coupling matrix element between the transitions of the mergemon and the resonator. To find the dispersive shift in the resonator frequency induced by the mergemon, one needs to perform a canonical transformation on Ĥ, omit second-order or higher-order terms, only consider coupling terms between nearest neighboring energy levels and apply a rotatingwaveform approximation where χ j,j+1 = g 2 j,j+1 /(ω j,j+1 -ω r ) is the dispersive shift induced by a transition between neighboring levels. The feedline |S 21 | response, as shown in Fig. We note the isolated mergemon Hamiltonian takes the form where k is the number of excess Cooper pairs on the island, k g is the offset charge and φ is the Josephson phase g ij /g 01 |i j| cos (2πf pump t), Since the spectrum linewidth is dominated by the qubit energy-relaxation process as discussed later, we set the TABLE I. Parameters for a-Si mergemon TLS-loss analysis: material, relative permittivity ( ), layer thickness (d), simulated participation ratio (pn), TLS loss tangent (tan δ) from the literature, tan δ reference and T1 for each mergemon region. To take into account the interface defects between the electrode metal and the barrier, we assume tan δTB-M is 10 times tan δTB. Similarly, considering the exposure of the tunnel-barrier-vacuum interface to harsh clean-room processes, tan δTB-V is set to be 1000 times tan δTB. The vacuum region is lossless and, therefore, is omitted in this analysis. dephasing rate in the ME simulation to zero. To achieve good agreement between the simulated and measured spectra, a qubit lifetime of 55 ns is used in the ME simulation. We leave out the f probe in the simulation because it is detuned far from the mergemon frequency. Besides, we also carefully choose a small VNA output power to ensure its amplitude is negligibly small compared with f pump . We estimate the probing tone reached at the mergemon chip is at least 2 orders of magnitude smaller than the pumping tone. Furthermore, our choice of low power for f probe and the input-line attenuation ensures the average number of photons in the readout cavity is around the single-photon level. Hence, the power-broadening effect due to the cavity photon shot noise should be negligible compared with the intrinsic line width of the mergemon. D. Two-level-system loss analysis Finally, we discuss the possible cause of the short qubit lifetime and strategies to increase it. The operation of a transmon qubit requires a small driving power close to a single-photon excitation. Hence, most of the parasitic TLSs in the superconducting circuit are unsaturated. These provide channels for energy relaxation, thereby limiting T 1 of the qubit where v n is the volume of the nth region, n is the relative permittivity of the nth region, E is the electric field strength and U is the electric field energy. Because of the difference in material and surface treatment, each region possesses a distinct TLS loss characterized by the loss tangent tan δ n We calculate the PR of each region using the electric field profile simulated in a finite-element field solver. First, we build the 2D model, shown in Fig. finite-element field solver, where we take advantage of the rotational symmetry of the model to obtain the threedimensional field solution. This approach allows moreefficient use of our computational resource. Then the integration of the electric field energy density, as shown in Fig. To evaluate the contribution of individual materials and interfaces to the mergemon energy relaxation, T 1 of each region is derived with Eq. 8. As shown in Table I, the a-Si mergemon lifetime is limited by the dielectric loss of the tunnel barrier and its interfaces. The PR model predicts the qubit lifetime can be increased to 33.2 μs by the replacement of the amorphous barrier and the associated interfaces (tunnel-barrier-vacuum and tunnel-barrier-metal) with high-quality crystalline material. Furthermore, our simulation reveals that further increase in the crystalline mergemon lifetime is possible through the modification of the device geometry along with the necessary material developments to realize these changes. By increasing the tunnel barrier thickness and radius, one can reduce the participation ratio of the lossy metal-vacuum interfaces at the edge of the tunnel barrier. Figure . 5 shows the lifetime of a mergemon with a crystalline tunnel barrier can be prolonged beyond 100 μs with this approach. The footprint of the optimized mergemon is still approximately 20 times smaller than that of the conventional transmon Our results highlight the need for further studies in epitaxial trilayer material that would enable such an optimized mergemon design. The thick tunnel barrier suggests that low-band-gap semiconducting materials such as crystalline germanium could be a promising candidate for this application In conclusion, we present a strategy to improve transmon scalability. By merging the shunt capacitor and the JJ into a single device made of a sputtered Nb/a-Si/Nb trilayer, we achieve a 2-orders-of-magnitude reduction in the transmon footprint. The energy-level transitions measured by a two-tone spectroscopy confirm the mergemon is indeed a weakly anharmonic system. The two-tone spectra obtained with various pumping powers are described well with a master-equation simulation. An in-depth TLS-loss analysis identifies the lossy amorphous silicon tunnel barrier and its interfaces as the major limiting factor for the qubit relaxation time. We acknowledge that the large size of the readout resonator and the on-chip signal routing are still roadblocks for high-density qubit integration. However, these can be addressed by use of a lumped-element component 