Intrinsic and extrinsic ion migration is a very large threat to the operational stability of perovskite solar cells and is difficult to completely eliminate due to the low activation energy of ion migration and the existence of internal electric field. We propose a heterojunction route to help suppress ion migration, thus improving the operational stability of the cell from the perspective of eliminating the electric field response in the perovskite absorber. A heavily doped p-type (p + ) thin layer semiconductor is introduced between the electron transporting layer (ETL) and perovskite absorber. The heterojunction charge depletion and electric field are limited to the ETL and p + layers, while the perovskite absorber and hole transporting layer remain neutral. The p + layer has a variety of candidate materials and is tolerant of defect density and carrier mobility, which makes this heterojunction route highly feasible and promising for use in practical applications. Owing to the outstanding semiconductor properties of organic-inorganic hybrid metal halides, perovskite solar cells have emerged as promising candidates for low-cost photovoltaic applications. After understanding the formation/decomposition mechanism of the perovskite material, It was once reported that ion migration-induced cell performance degradation is reversible under day/night cycling. As such, in practical applications, we should not pin all our hope of sustaining the electricity production ability of the cells on the performance recovery phenomenon. Therefore, suppressing the intrinsic and extrinsic ion migration in the cell is highly necessary for improving cell stability. Ion migration mainly depends on the activation energy, available migration channels and internal electric field in the cell. Scheme 1 presents a logic diagram to exhibit the mechanism of the ion migration-related operational stability issue of the cell, which has been briefly discussed in the above section. Regarding the ion hopping and migration process, the electric field is the driving force, and the temperature and light illumination influence the dynamic parameters. The electric field is directly dependent on the external voltage and heterojunction properties. The external voltage is an important variable in a practical cell. In the dark (night), no external voltage is applied to the cell, while in the day (light), the external voltage at the cell can reach 1.0 eV in the maximum power point (MPP) tracking mode. When the sunlight intensity changes during the day, the external voltage will fluctuate accordingly. The change in electric field during the day/night can reach 10 4 V cm -1 , which is large enough to drive ion migration and redistribution. Ion migration is in fact a common phenomenon in photovoltaic devices, such as Cu(In, Ga)Se 2 and CdTe solar cells, Compared to the carrier density, ion migration/accumulation is a more significant variable in the cell, as exhibited by the bias voltage-dependent charge density in Figure When light illumination is applied, ion migration will continue to a higher N I of ~4.0×10 17 cm -3 . Under a high voltage of 1.0 V (close to the MPP), the N I is ~1.5×10 17 cm -3 . This result is much lower than that in the short-circuit condition, and thus, would release the accumulated ions at the interface with a value of ~2×10 17 cm -3 (i.e., 4×10 11 cm -2 ). This large ion redistribution will affect the stability of both the perovskite lattice framework and the interfacial structure and thus can cause significant cell performance degradation. At a higher voltage, such as in the open-circuit condition, an increase in ion redistribution (~4.0×10 17 cm -3 ) together with an increased carrier density can induce more severe cell performance degradation, as observed in the experiment. Ion migration is driven by the electric field or the electric field change in the perovskite absorber. In the cell, a heterojunction electric field is formed because of the different Fermi energy levels between the perovskite absorber, ETL and HTL, and the change in electric field is caused by the external voltage. Figure In a single heterojunction, the electric field response is determined by the built-in electric potential distribution in the cell. The electric potential in the light absorber side can be written as the following (take the ETL-perovskite (p-type) as an example): where In the cell, the averaged electric field and its change are proportional to V D pero and ΔV D pero , respectively. Equations ( ) of the HTL/perovskite interface will also influence the electric field response. According to equations ( VBOs were calculated and are presented in Figure where <F> is the averaged electric field strength, |F (x)| is the field strength at a certain position x, and L is the thickness of the perovskite absorber. The electric field change (ΔF) in the cell when it is switched from dark (0 V) to light (0.9 V) has also been averaged as The standard cell exhibits a PCE of 22.2%, and <ΔF> reaches up to 1.7×10 4 V cm -1 . For the ETL/perovskite, when the CBO is increased to a positive value of 0.1 eV, a high PCE of 22.9% can be obtained. However, this PCE improvement is realized by strengthening the electric field. In addition, no obvious reduction in <ΔF> can be observed. For the HTL/perovskite, a high PCE of 23.4% can be obtained at a negative VBO of -0.1 eV. Similar to the ETL, adjusting the band-edge position of the HTL cannot reduce <ΔF> and, thus, is hardly able to help improve cell stability. The influence of the doping properties of each layer in the cell is further investigated over a wide concentration, as presented in Figure ) is decreased to 10 5 cm -3 , <ΔF> can be reduced to <1.0×10 4 V cm -1 but results in a low PCE of ~10%. This decrease in PCE is due to the weakening of the heterojunction potential and the charge transporting ability of the CTLs. The electric field in the ETL or HTL can be easily converted to a negative value by external voltages, which will greatly reduce their charge extraction and collection ability. As such, to sustain desirable charge output at high voltages, the cell needs to have a high heterojunction potential. For the perovskite absorber, both n-type and p-type doping properties were considered. Figure At this N A pero , the perovskite exhibits a wide neutral region of more than 450 nm, in which ion migration can be suppressed. In this neutral region, the carriers transport through a diffusion mechanism, and the long carrier diffusion length of the perovskite ensures efficient charge transport/extraction and thus a high PCE of 22.4%. This result means that an electric field in the bulk perovskite is not necessary for obtaining a high PCE. Nonetheless, the perovskite still exhibits a high electric field of >10 5 V cm -1 at both the ETL/perovskite and HTL/perovskite interfaces, and the change in electric field at the ETL/perovskite interface can reach 10 5 V cm -1 (Figure Moreover, the high p-type doping of the perovskite is usually realized by a high concentration of self-doping point defects, such as cation vacancies and anion/cation substitutions. This high concentration of point defects may provide more ion migration channels. In addition, the existence of deep defects or lattice distortion can also be induced by the high concentration of self-doping point defects, thereby influencing the PCE. In summary, although a high N A pero can help theoretically eliminate the bulk electric field and ion migration, it may not be an acceptable method in practice. Although adjusting the heterojunction properties of a standard structured cell can hardly improve the operational stability of the cell while sustaining a high PCE, the above studies still provide several valuable results regarding the electric field and cell performance. First, a large heterojunction depletion electric potential is necessary for obtaining a high PCE. Second, an electric field in the bulk light absorber is not always necessary for obtaining a high PCE as long as the light absorber has a long carrier diffusion length. Third, the electric field response in the bulk light absorber can be eliminated by limiting the charge depletion of the heterojunction at the interfacial region. These results guide us to design a new heterojunction device structure, as shown in Figure As such, the ion distribution in the perovskite absorber can be stabilized. The HTL/perovskite junction can also be modified by this route. Here, we mainly focus on the ETL/perovskite interface because we have found that the electric field response mainly exists at this interface. The electric field profile of this four-layer-structured heterojunction cell and its response to an external bias voltage and light illumination are quantified by device simulation, and an example (Table It can be clearly seen that an electric field mainly exists in the ETL and p + layer with a field strength reaching 10 5 V cm -1 . For the intrinsic perovskite, a weak negative electric field (~ -10 3 V cm -1 ) exists in the cell in the dark, and the field exhibits a negligible response to the external bias voltage (<1.0 V). When light illumination is applied, the bulk electric field is reversed to ~+10 2 V cm -1 . In addition, a large negative electric field of 10 4 V cm -1 appears at the HTL/perovskite interface and even extends into the HTL, which may induce intrinsic or extrinsic ion migration. This behavior arises because the photoinduced carriers (~10 14 cm -3 ) have changed the charge distribution in the intrinsic perovskite absorber. Comparatively, when the perovskite is doped, the light illumination has little influence on the electric field. Regardless of whether the cell is in the dark or under illumination, only a weak positive electric field of 10 2 V cm -1 exists in the perovskite absorber and remains unchanged across the entire studied voltage range (0-1.2 V). More importantly, the electric field at the HTL/perovskite interface and in the HTL has been completely eliminated, thereby helping suppress the extrinsic ion drift from the HTL into the perovskite. Thus, our proposed heterojunction device should be able to help significantly relieve the ion migration-related stability issue of the cell. To evaluate the possibility of constructing this heterojunction device in practice, we further search for a material to use as the critical p + layer. We systematically regulate the band-edge position (reflected by the CBO) and bandgap (E g ) of the p + semiconductor and calculate their influence on the PCE and <ΔF> of the cell, as presented in Figure -0.2~0.2 eV and E g : 1.1~1.5 eV), as shown in Figure More importantly, we can find an overlapping region between the high PCE and low <ΔF>. For example, the white dashed lines in Figure The influence of defect density (from 10 14 cm -3 to 10 17 cm -3 ) and carrier mobility (from 0.1 to 10 cm 2 V -1 s -1 ) of the p + layer on the PCE and <ΔF> has also been considered, as shown in Figure The cell can always sustain a high PCE of >21% as long as the p + layer has a moderate carrier mobility (for example ≥ 1 cm 2 V -1 s -1 ). This demand can be easily satisfied by Sb 2 Se 3 , CZTSSe and CuIn 5 S 8 . In this work, we proposed a four-layer-structured perovskite heterojunction (ETL/p + /perovskite/HTL) route for eliminating the electric field response in the perovskite absorber, which is expected to suppress the intrinsic or extrinsic ion migration, thus enhancing the operational stability of the perovskite solar cell. Compared to a conventional perovskite cell, a thin p + layer has been introduced in this new heterojunction device structure. The junction charge depletion and built-in electric field mainly exist in the ETL and p + layer, while the perovskite absorber and HTL are maintained as neutral. The external bias voltage and light illumination that the cell has to work under will no longer induce ion migration in the perovskite absorber. Although the photogenerated carriers in the neutral perovskite absorber transport mainly through the diffusion mechanism, owing to the long carrier diffusion length and suppressed interfacial charge recombination, the cell can still obtain an impressively high PCE. Therefore, this new heterojunction device structure has overcome the contradiction between reducing the internal electric field and sustaining a high PCE in a conventional perovskite cell. Through a material search, we further identify that the critical p+ layer has a variety of candidate materials and is highly tolerant of defect density and carrier mobility. Therefore, this heterojunction device is feasible for use in practical applications, thus providing a promising route for improving the operational stability of perovskite solar cells.