Compact and efficient optical antennas are fundamental components for many applications, including highdensity fiber-chip coupling and optical phased arrays. Here we present the design of grating-based micro-antennas with perfectly vertical emission in the 300-nm silicon-on-insulator platform. We leverage a methodology combining adjoint optimization and machine learning dimensionality reduction to efficiently map the multiparameter design space of the antennas, analyse a large number of relevant performance metrics, carry out the required multi-objective optimization, and discover high performance designs. Using a one-step apodized grating we achieve a vertical upward diffraction efficiency of almost 92% with a 3.6 μm-long antenna. When coupled with an ultra-high numerical aperture fiber, the antenna exhibits a coupling efficiency of more than 81% (-0.9 dB) and a 1-dB bandwidth of almost 158 nm. The reflection generated by the perfectly vertical antenna is smaller than -20 dB on a 200-nm bandwidth centered at λ = 1550 nm. L IGHT coupling between integrated photonic devices and the off-chip environment has always posed challenging research problems, especially for high-index-contrast platforms such as Silicon-On-Insulator (SOI). Antennas based on surface gratings have been widely used to interface integrated circuits with optical fibers (Fig. Manuscript received XXXXXX; revised XXXXXXX from the second-order diffraction In this paper, we present the design of compact, highly efficient, and ultra-broadband micro-antennas based on surface gratings. These antennas have a perfectly vertical emission, i.e. the beam centre axis is aligned along the direction normal to the chip surface, while maintaining low reflections over a large spectral range. An approach we recently proposed The paper is organized as follow. Section II summarizes the design methodology and investigates the performances that can be achieved with micro-antennas based on periodic grating structures. The analysis of one-step apodized gratings is presented in Sec. III where several performance metrics and achievable trade-offs are discussed. Based on this analysis, Sec. IV reports on the multi-objective optimization of the apodized design. The impact of stochastic fabrication variability is discussed in Sec. V, including an estimation of the expected device fabrication yield. Conclusions are drawn in Sec. VI. Finally, Appendix A includes additional details on the Fig. The antenna structure considered in this work is based on a surface grating as schematically shown in Fig. i.e., the lengths of each segment within a grating period. The design space is explored using the machine learning design technique described in where V 1 and V 2 are the two principal components and C is a constant vector. Instead of five lengths, we can hence represent a good antenna design (i.e., an antenna with high coupling efficiency) by using only the two parameters α k and β k . Since all good designs lie on the 2D α-β sub-space, the rest of the design space can be excluded from further investigation. The α-β sub-space can be rapidly and exhaustively mapped by parameter sweeps computing not only the coupling efficiency but also any other required performance, allowing a comprehensive analysis of the device behavior. Further details on the design methodology are reported in Appendix A. Antenna simulations are performed using the commercial 2D-FDTD solver from Lumerical. The light is launched into the antenna by the fundamental TE mode of the input waveguide at the left of Fig. where ρ u is the fraction of the injected optical power diffracted upwards and φ is the overlap integral between the diffracted field and the Gaussian function. We consider here three different periodic grating designs with N = 3, N = 4, and N = 5 periods, respectively, to find the minimum acceptable antenna length that does not compromise diffraction efficiency. In the three cases, we sweep α and β to map coupling efficiency and reliably identify the global optimum (see Appendix A for details). The results for λ = 1550 nm are shown in Fig. with ρ u and ρ d the fraction of the injected optical power diffracted upwards and downwards, respectively. For N = 3, I for all the three cases. It is interesting to notice how minimum feature size grows from 43 nm to 54 nm when N is increased from 3 to 5. These small features are not surprising giving the compactness of the designs and can be achieved by advanced 193 nm immersion deep ultraviolet lithography For the five-period design (N = 5) the 1-dB bandwidth is about 133 nm. For this antenna, the simulated reflection (i.e., the fraction of power coupled to the counter-propagating fundamental TE mode of the input waveguide) as a function of α and β is reported in Fig. In a periodic grating, the overlap integral φ in Eq. 2 poses a theoretical limit of approximately 0.8 to the maximum achievable fiber coupling efficiency, due to the mismatch between the exponentially decaying intensity profile generated by the grating and the Gaussian-like shape of the fundamental mode of an optical fiber Based on the results shown in the previous section for the antennas based on periodic gratings, we design a grating structure where one period with a first set of structural parameters (one-step apodization) is followed by four identical periods (periodic section) with a second set of parameters. This structure is schematically shown in Fig. The design methodology is identical to the one described in Sec. II with the difference that now the sub-space of good designs discovered through PCA grows from 2D to 3D, that is: where V 1 , V 2 , and V 3 are the three principal components and C is a constant vector. The principal components are V 1 = [0.139, -0.313, 0.025, 0.607, -0.705, 0.022, -0.001, 0.129, -0.020, -0.001] μm, V 2 = [-0.125, 0.890, 0.221, 0.348, -0.106, 0.075 , -0.007 , 0.015, -0.066, 0.032] μm, and V 3 = [-0.181, -0.300, 0.790, 0.258, 0.325, -0.014, -0.035, -0.146, -0.170, 0.174] μm. Instead of 10 segment lengths, parameters α, β, and γ are used to represent one-step apodized devices. A number of performance metrics are calculated as a function of these three parameters, providing a wealth of information to support design selection. Figure Dealing with multi-objective optimization commonly requires designing for the optimizer an objective function that includes and properly weighs all the desired performance metrics. Often this complex process is based on trial and error and requires the designer's experience to find the correct balance between all the terms and guide the optimizer to the proper solution. The possibility to map the design space, as described in Sec. III, makes multi-objective optimization much easier, essentially reducing it to a post-processing look-up exercise. From this point of view, it is of particular interest to investigate the relation between fiber coupling efficiency and 1-dB bandwidth, obtaining a form of Pareto frontier for an optimization problem involving these two quantities. This analysis can be easily done here by exploiting the data described above (only designs with minimum feature size above 40 nm are considered). Figure The availability of this thorough analysis allows the designer to easily select the best antenna design based on multiple objectives. In this case, we want an antenna with the highest possible fiber coupling efficiency, also ensuring a maximum reflection R in the 1450 nm -1650 nm wavelength range below -20 dB, a 1-dB bandwidth BW larger than 150 nm, and minimum feature size above 40 nm. This corresponds to the optimization problem: maximize ( Solving Eq. 5 directly as a global optimization problem would pose significant challenges due to multiple constraints (or alternatively a complex objective function with multiple terms to be properly weighed) and the difficulty in navigating the 10D design space. Moreover, some of the constraints such as limits on bandwidth and reflection became clear only after the analysis presented in Figs. The structural parameters ] of the design selected based on the requirements described in Eq. 5 (design A) are reported in Table 3 ). The performance of these two designs are compared in Table The analysis of the impact of fabrication uncertainty on the antenna performance is a fundamental aspect of the design. Here we consider four different sources of common geometrical variability: Width deviations for the shallow and deeply etched sections, etch depth deviation, and a misalignment between the two etch steps. All these quantities are considered as normally-distributed independent random variables with zero mean and standard deviation of 5 nm for the width and etch variations and 10 nm for the misalignment. The stochastic analysis is performed very efficiently using a polynomial chaos model As a synthetic measure of the sensitivity of the fiber coupling efficiency to fabrication variability we compute the device fabrication yield Y as the probability for a given design to have η ≥ 0.75. The yield is reported in Fig. In this paper we have exploited a methodology based on adjoint optimization and machine learning dimensionality reduction for the multi-objective design optimization of a grating-based micro-antenna in a 300-nm SOI platform. The compact antenna is only 3.6 μm long, has a perfectly vertical diffraction efficiency of almost 92%, and directionality of 98%. When coupled with an optical fiber with mode field diameter of 3.2 μm vertically placed on top of the antenna, a coupling efficiency of more than 81% is achieved with a wide 1-dB bandwidth of almost 158 nm. Reflection is smaller than -20 dB over the entire 1450 nm -1650 nm wavelength range. These good performances make the antenna ideal for applications requiring dense arrays of both fiber and free-space coupling interfaces. For the periodic grating, in the initial sparse set of good designs we only select optimized solutions with coupling efficiency η ≥ 0.6 (17 designs), η ≥ 0.7 (19 designs), and η ≥ 0.72 (39 designs), for N = 3, N = 4, and N = 5, respectively. The maximum coupling efficiency among these designs is 0.612 (N = 3), 0.695 (N = 4), and 0.73 (N = 5), always smaller than the maximum efficiency found by subspace mapping. The size of all these design sets is largely sufficient to guarantee the proper convergence of PCA Beside providing several advantages in the design, the use of dimensionality reduction makes it easier also in the case of multi-parameter devices to investigate how different parameters contribute to the device performance. To this purpose, the periodic grating design with N = 5 periods presented in Sec. II is considered here. For the five geometrical parameters [L 1 , •, L 5 ], Fig. computed using the initial sparse set of 39 good designs (see Appendix A). In Eq. 6, cov denotes the covariance and σ is the standard deviation. The correlation coefficient measures the linear dependence between two parameters. As can be seen, the correlation matrix has a clear block structure. Parameter L 1 is strongly correlated with parameter L 3 (ρ 1,3 = 0.98) and strongly anti-correlated with parameter L 2 (ρ 1,2 = -0.98) while correlation with the other two parameters is negligible. Likewise, parameters L 4 and L 5 are quite strongly anticorrelated (ρ 4,5 = -0.7). The application of PCA allows to highlight and take advantage of these correlations. The two principal components for this case (N = 5) are: For V 1 , the third component is at least three times larger than all of the other ones, meaning that V 1 is largely aligned along the L 3 direction in the 5D design space. Because of the strong correlation between L 1 , L 2 , and L 3 we can conclude that V 1 mostly represents the first three design parameters (which defines the silicon pillar and the two fully etched gaps, see Fig. ). This behaviour is even stronger for V 2 where the fourth and fifth components are almost identical and about ten times larger than the other ones. We can hence assume V 2 mostly represents L 4 , and L 5 (the L-shaped structure). Because the goal of PCA is to represent a set of correlated parameters with a minimum number of independent parameters, the existence of two blocks of correlated parameters makes two principal components sufficient to represent the original 5D design space (or at least the portion of this space where good designs reside). This first result can be used to analyse the behaviour of coupling efficiency (Fig. η fiber coupling efficiency; ρu upward diffraction efficiency; Γ directionality; R maximum reflection in the 1450 nm -1650 nm wavelength range; BW 1-dB bandwidth; Y device yield.