We employ a combination of machine learning and first-principles calculations to predict magnetic properties of rare-earth lean magnets. For this purpose, based on training set constructed out of experimental data, the machine is trained to make predictions on magnetic transition temperature (Tc), largeness of saturation magnetization (μ0Ms), and nature of the magnetocrystalline anisotropy (Ku). Subsequently, the quantitative values of μ0Ms and Ku of the yet-to-be synthesized compounds, screened by machine learning, are calculated by firstprinciples density functional theory. The applicability of the proposed technique of combined machine learning and first-principles calculations is demonstrated on 2-17-X magnets, Ce2Fe17-xCoxCN. Further to this study, we explore stability of the proposed compounds by calculating vacancy formation energy of small atom interstitials (N/C). Our study indicates a number of compounds in the proposed family, offers the possibility to become solution of cheap, and efficient permanent magnet. Permanent magnets are a part of almost all the most important technologies, starting from acoustic transducers, motors and generators, magnetic field and imaging systems to more recent technologies like computer hard disk drives, medical equipment, magneto-mechanics etc. While SmCo 5 and NdFe 14 B provide reasonably good solutions, keeping in mind the resource criticality of RE elements like Nd and Sm, a significant amount of effort has been put forward in search of new permanent magnets without critical RE elements or with less content of those. The idea is to optimize the price-to-performance ratio. Starting from the simplest binary RE-TM structure of CaCu 5 , by replacing n out of m RE (R) sites with a pair of TM (M) sites, R m-n M 5m+2n structures are obtained. This can give rise to several possible binary structures of different chemical compositions, listed in order of RE-leanness; RM 13 (7.1%), RM 12 (7.7%), R 2 M 17 (10.5%), R 2 M 14 (12.5 %), RM 5 (16.7%), R 6 M 23 (20.7 %), R 2 M 7 (22.2 %), RM 3 (25 %), RM 2 (33 %) etc. Judging by the rare-earth content, 1:13, 1:12, 2:17, 2:14 compounds may form examples of rareearth lean materials. It is desirable to modify the known binary compounds containing low cost RE's belonging to these families to achieve best possible intrinsic magnetic properties, namely (i) high spontaneous or saturation magnetization (μ 0 M s ), at least around 1T, (ii) a Curie temperature (T c ) high enough for the contemplated devise use, 600 K or above, and (iii) a mechanism for creating sufficiently high easy-axis coercivity (K u ). The synthesis and optimization of properties of real materials in experiment is both time-consuming and costly, being mostly based on trial and error. Computational approach in this connection is of natural interest to screen compounds, before they can be suggested and tested in laboratory. Typical computational approaches in this regard are based on density functional theory (DFT) calculations. A detailed calculation estimating all required magnetic properties, i.e M s , T c , K u from first-principles is expensive and also not devoid of shortcomings. For example, estimation of T c relies on parametrization of DFT or supplemented U corrected theory of DFT+U total energies to construct spin Hamiltonian and solution of spin Hamiltonian by mean field or Monte Carlo method. While this approach would work for localized insulators, its application to metallic systems with itinerant magnetism is questionable, as it fails even for elemental metals like Fe, Co and Ni. We demonstrate applicability of our proposed approach on Ce and Fe based 2:17 RE-TM intermetallics, Ce 2 Fe 17-x Co x compounds (x = 1, . . ., 7). Our choice is based on following criteria, (a) the compounds contain rare earth Ce which is the cheapest one among the RE family having market price of ∼ 5 USD/Kg. Aiming to search new candidates for permanent magnets we use supervised machine learning (ML) algorithm which helps us to screen compounds with high T c (T c 600 K), high M s (μ 0 M s > 1 Tesla), and easy axis anisotropy (K u > 0) among the huge number of possible candidates of unexplored RE-TM intermetallics. The first step of any ML algorithm is to construct a dataset. We construct three datasets of existing RE-TM compounds for T c , M s and K u separately using the following sources: ICSD,[22] the handbook of magnetic materials, The dataset of M s is relatively smaller than T c , containing only 195 entries. The majority of the compounds in this dataset belong to 2:17 composition similar to the database of T c . The relatively smaller dimension of M s dataset is primarily due to fact that experimental reports available for M s are much less than T c . Secondly M s has been mostly reported at room temperature, in some cases at low temperature. To maintain uniformity of the dataset we consider M s reported at room temperature, resulting in a lesser number of compounds in the M s dataset. Reports with quoted values of anisotropy constant are even more rare. Our exhaustive search resulted in only 73 data points. This pushes the dataset size to the limit of ML algorithms, for which predictive capability becomes questionable due to large bias masking the small variance. After constructing the dataset, we carry out preprocessing of the data, as outlined in Ref. The next and the most crucial step is to construct a set of simple attributes, which are capable of describing the instances (in this case RE-TM compounds) and then deploy ML algorithm to map them to a target (in this case T c , M s and K u ). The attributes considered in this study are summarized in Table . I, which can be divided into three broad categories, namely, stoichiometric attributes, element properties and electronic configuration attributes. The stoichiometric attributes may contain the information of both elemental and compositional properties as suggested by Ward et al. In the third step, we train different popular machine learning algorithms with the constructed dataset for prediction. We use ML algorithm in three different problems; (a) to predict the compounds with T c more than 600 K, (b) compounds with μ 0 M s > 1 Tesla, and (c) compounds with easy-axis anisotropy. Regression is used in the former case, whereas latter two cases are treated as classification problems. We use five different ML algorithms for regression in case of T c namely Ridge Regression (RR), The final step is to employ the trained algorithm on yetto-be synthesized RE-TM compounds, and thus to explore new compositions with targeted properties. We choose Ce 2 Fe 17-x Co x C y N z (y,z = 0/1; x = 0 . . . 8) as the exploration set for application of the trained ML algorithm. This results in a set of 36 compounds among which 8 compositions (Ce 2 Fe 17-x Co x CN, x = 1, . . ., 8) have neither been synthesized experimentally nor studied theoretically, to the best of our knowledge. We apply our trained ML algorithms on all of these 36 compounds and the results are summarized in Fig. 2. The top panel of Fig. Switching to the M s part, the middle panel of Fig. The predictions from classification model on K u is shown in bottom panel of Fig. We find while the anisotropy of Fe 17-x Co x compounds without interstitial C/N (x = 2, . . . 7) atoms are predicted to be easy-plane, their carbonated/nitrogenated/carbo-nitrogenated counterparts show easy-axis anisotropy. For pure Fe compounds, apart from carbo-nitrogenated compound, all are predicted to be easy-plane, while for Fe 16 Co compounds carbonated as well as carbo-nitrogenated compounds are predicted to be easy-axis. This in turn, highlights the effectiveness of Co substitution on making K u positive. We note the prediction confidence of the carbo-nitrogenated compounds are around 0.75. On basis of the above ML analysis, we pick up seven yet-tobe synthesized compounds, Ce 2 Fe 17-x Co x CN, x = 1, . . ., 7. This choice is guided by the compounds satisfying T c > 600 K from regression model, and μ 0 M s > 1 Tesla with easy-axis anisotropy from classification models, and being Fe-rich. In following, we describe their crystal structure, and present results of DFT calculated electronic structure, anisotropy properties, and stability properties. The Ce 2 Fe 17 compounds crystallize in the rhombohedral Th 2 Zn 17 -type structure (space group R 3m), derived from the CaCu 5 -type structure with a pair (dumbbell) of Fe atoms for each third rare earth atom in the basal plane and the substituted layers stacked in the sequence ABCABC . . .. As shown in Fig. Although the R 3m symmetry is lowered upon Co substitution and the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) in the anisotropy calculation, for the ease of identification, we will still use the the notations 9d, 18f , 18h and 6c. Our total energy calculations show that Co preferentially occupy sites in the sequence 9d > 18h > 6c > 18f . Out of available 17 TM sites we have considered Co substitution up to 7 sites, which result in Fe-rich phases of compositions Ce 2 Fe 17-x Co x CN with x = 1, 2, . . ., 7. Following the site preference we consider Co atoms in 9d and 18h sites. We expect the lattice parameters not to change much upon Co substitution, as Fe and Co, being neighboring elements in periodic table, has similar atomic radii. Nevertheless, to check the influence of Co substitution on lattice structure, we optimize the lattice constant and the volume for all x values. Following our expectation, the results show only a marginal decrease in lattice parameter and volume (with a maximum deviation of 1%) upon increasing Co content, in line with the findings by Odkhuu et al. In the following we present the DFT results for the magnetic moments and density of states (DOS), as given in GGA+U +SOC calculations. The details of the DFT calculations are presented in the Appendix. Importance of application of supplemented Hubbard U on RE sites within LDA or GGA+U formalism is considered as one of the possible means to deal with localized f orbitals of RE ions, and have shown to provide reasonable description. Fig. Having an understanding of the basic electronic structure, in terms of magnetic moments and density of states, we next focus on calculation of magneto-crystalline anisotropy constant, K u , which is a crucial quantity responsible for coercivity in a permanent magnet. MAE defines the energy required for turning the orientation of the magnetic moment under applied field, expressed as E(θ) ≈ K 1 sin 2 θ + K 2 sin 4 θ + K 3 sin 4 θcos4φ, where K 1 , K 2 , and K 3 are the magnetic anisotropy constants, θ is the polar angle between the magnetization vector and the easy axis (c-axis), and φ is the azimuthal angle between the magnetization component projected onto the ab plane and the a-axis. In most cases, the higher order term K 3 is relatively small compared with K 1 and K 2 . For θ = π/2, one may thus write It's positive and negative values indicate the easy axis and easy plane anisotropy, respectively. To satisfy the criteria of a good permanent magnet, it should have easy axis anisotropy with value larger than 1 MJ/m 3 . Most of the easy-axis K u values are found to be larger than 1 MJ/m 3 , except Fe 14 Co 3 and Fe 13 Co 4 for which it is found to be 0.74 and 0.91 MJ/m 3 , respectively. Few of the concentrations exhibit easy-axis K u values larger than 2 MJ/m 3 , e.g. Maximal energy product and Anisotropy Field While, the estimates of K u and μ 0 M s are useful information to access the effectiveness of the suggested materials as permanent magnets, technologically interesting figures of merit of hard magnetic materials, are the maximal energy product (BH) max and anisotropy field H a . These can be estimated from the knowledge of μ 0 M s and K u as follows, The factor 0.9 in the expression for (BH) max implies the common assumption that ideally out 10% of a processed bulk hard magnet consists of non-magnetic phases. Unlike the other RE-TM magnets like 1:12 compounds, one of the advantage of 2:17 compounds is their stability. Both stable form of Ce 2 Fe 17 and its Co substituted form have been reported in literature. , where N k indicate number of different atoms (Ce, Fe, Co, N and C) in the cell, and ǫ k denote energy/atom of bulk Ce in FCC structure, α-Fe, Co in HCP structure, in molecular nitrogen and C in graphite structure, gives values -0.61 to -0.59 eV/atom for the studied Ce 2 Fe 17-x Co x CN compounds. A major challenge with interstitial compounds, though, is the nitrogen diffusion. where E N (C)vac and E pristine denote the optimized total energies of compound containing N and/or C vacancy, and vacancy free compound. The internal positions for defect free pristine structure and structures containing nitrogen and/or carbon vacancies are performed keeping the lattice parameters fixed. E N (C) is the energy per N or C atom, which is obtained from calculation of N 2 molecule or graphite. The obtained results for Ce 2 Fe 17-x Co x CN compounds in minimum energy configuration of Co is shown in Table The vacancy formation energies, listed in Table Designing alternative solutions for permanent magnets, satisfying the criteria of low-cost, while keeping the magnetic properties comparable to those of permanent magnets in use, is of utmost importance for cost-effective technology. Towards this goal, we use a combined route of machine learning, based on experimental data, and the first-principles calculations.While machine learning has been applied for problem of rare-earth magnets, While a large volume of experimental data is available with numerical value of T c , the corresponding dataset with numerical values of M s and K u is small. On the other hand, there exists sizable dataset with information of K u being positive (easy axis) or negative (easy plane), and μ 0 M s being larger or smaller than 1 Tesla. We thus employ regression model of machine learning training to make predictions on numerical values of T c , and classification model to make predictions on sign of K u , and μ 0 M S being larger or smaller than 1 Tesla. We apply the trained machine learning to 2:17 rare-earth transition metal compounds with carbon and nitrogen in interstitials. We choose the compounds to contain abundant rare-earth Ce, and to be Fe-rich to make them cost-effective. Although nitrogenated version of this series has been investigated, Our computational exercise based on exhaustive search of experimental database, should motivate future experimental processes in making high-performance 2:17 interstitial magnets, with cheapest RE element Ce, the most abundant 3d metal, Fe and cheap non-metal interstitial dopings like C and N. The estimated price-to-performance based on calculated energy product, and available market price The authors acknowledge the support of DST Nanomission for the computational facility used in this study. DFT calculations for electronic structure, magnetocrystalline anisotropy are performed using the all-electron densityfunctional-theory code in full potential linear augmented plane wave (FP-LAPW) basis, as implemented in WIEN2K code. For FP-LAPW calculations, APW + lo is used as the basis set, and the spherical harmonics are expanded upto l = 10 and the charge density and potentials are represented upto l = 6. The sphere radii are set at 2.5, 1.9, 2.34, 1.56 and 1.51 bohr for Ce, Fe, Co, N, and C. For good convergence, a RK max value (the product of the smallest sphere radius and the largest plane-wave expansion wave vector) of 7.0 is used. We set the cutoff between core and valence states at -8.0 Ry. The k-space integrations are performed with 112 k-points in irreducible Brillouin zone (BZ), following the report of use of 80 k-points in irreducible BZ in case of SmCo 5 to provide good estimate of MAE. The structural optimization in plane wave basis is carried out starting with experimental structure of Sm 2 Fe 17 CN, All the calculations are performed by considering a collinear spin arrangement. The MAE is obtained by calculating the GGA+U +SOC total energies of the system, in FP-LAPW basis as K u = E a -E c , where E a and E c are the energies for the magnetization oriented along the crystallographic a and c directions, respectively. For accurate estimates of vacancy formation energy, we also use FP-LAPW basis. While constructing the database, we avoid inclusion of noisy data. We do bootstrapping to normalize the data which is followed by removal of outliers with the help of violin plot. A data is removed if it lies outside of Q1-1.5×IQR or Q3+1.5×IQR, where IQR is the interquartile range and Q1, Q2 and Q3 are lower, median and upper quartile respectively. In the next step we identify correlated attributes using Pearson's correlation coefficient which can be defined as, Here n is the sample size, x i and y i are sample points and x and ȳ are the sample means. The heatmap obtained by using the above mentioned correlation is shown in Fig. 1. Electronegativity difference between RE and TM (∆ǫ) and CW average of atomic no. of TM (< Z T M >) 2. CW TM percentage (T M %) and CW average of atomic no. of TM (< Z T M >). 3. CW TM percentage (T M %) and Electronegativity difference between RE and TM (∆ǫ). 4. Total number of f electrons (f n ) and Atomic no. of RE (Z RE ). 5. LE percentage (LE%) and CW average of atomic no. of TM (< Z T M >). 6. LE percentage (LE%) and Electronegativity difference between RE and TM (∆ǫ). We thus discard ∆ǫ, LE%, Z RE and < Z T M > from the list of attributes. The performance of a model can be quantified in terms of coefficient of determination which can be expressed as follows: for predictions f (x i ) and a set of actual values y i with mean μ. If the algorithm performs perfectly, R 2 score is 1. Fig. RR algorithm circumvents issues in ordinary linear regression like over-fitting or failure in finding unique solution due to multicollinearity. It develops on least square error by adding an extra penalty/regularization term to the loss function of ordinary linear regression. KRR builds on the ridge regression technique by using kernel trick Apart from these we use two other algorithms, ANN and RF. The model performance scores are satisfactory for both of them. A simple ANN architecture called perceptron implements a processing element or artificial neuron called Threshold Logic Unit (TLU) which can have one or more input(s) and one output. Each input is related to a weight. The TLU calculates the weighted sum of its inputs, applies a step function (generally Heaviside or sign function) to it and outputs the result. A perceptron Random forest is an ensemble method which consists of multiple decision trees. Each tree is built on a portion of entire training data with a subset of total number of attributes. Tree algorithm is based on 'top to bottom' approach, starting from a root node, it consists of many intermediate nodes and ends at leaf nodes. At each node of a tree a particular attribute classifies the data and helps to grow the tree. The prediction is based on accumulating the results from all such trees, taking ensemble average in case of regression or considering votes from majority trees in case of classification. Such an algorithm can capture the complex and nonlinear interaction between different attributes and can built a robust and sophisticated model. Our random forest consists of 100 trees built by bootstrapped Similar to M s , we use random forest algorithm for K u , to classify positive K u from negative K u compounds. The best model by performing 10-fold cross validation, in this case, is built up with 80.62% accuracy Like M s , in this case F1 score for positive K u is 83% and for negative is K u 77.5% suggesting slight preference of classification towards positive K u which is also captured in the plot of confusion matrix as shown in Fig. 