The robust spin and momentum valley locking of electrons in two-dimensional semiconductors makes the valley degree of freedom of great utility for functional optoelectronic devices. Owing to the difference in optical selection rules for the different valleys, these valley electrons can be addressed optically. The electrons and excitons in these materials exhibit valley Hall effect, where the carriers from specific valleys are directed to different directions under electrical or thermal bias. Here we report optical valley Hall effect where the light emission from the valley polarized excitons in monolayer WS2 propagates in different directions owing to the preferential coupling of excitonic emission to the high momentum states of the hyperbolic metamaterial. The experimentally observed effects are corroborated with theoretical modeling of excitonic emission in the near field of hyperbolic media. The demonstration of optical valley Hall effect using a bulk artificial photonic media without the need for nanostructuring opens the possibility of realizing valley based excitonic circuits operating at room temperature. In the monolayer limit, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) such as WS2, WSe2, MoSe2, and MoS2 are direct-bandgap semiconductor materials with broken inversion symmetry Here we report the use of hyperbolic media to realize optical valley Hall effect where the 2D TMD does not have to be placed inside cavities or on any nanostructured medium. Instead the near field coupling of the valley polarized excitonic emission to high-k states of the hyperbolic media facilities the optical valley Hall effect resulting in directional propagation of the emission. This optical valley Hall effect in hyperbolic media arises due to the nature of light propagation inside such medium and has previously been used to demonstrate optical spin Hall effect in the microwave To study the problem of chiral emission through HMM, we assume a two-dimensional electric dipole source located on the upper surface of a multilayer structure. The electric field density in the lower half-space can be calculated by the simplified expression E x ∝ (α + βk x /|k z |). Here, kx and kz are the x and z components of the wavevectors and  = ± are constants that define the electric dipole polarization. Note that the expression for electric field includes the contribution of the propagating [√k x 2 + k y 2 < k 0 ] and evanescent [√k x 2 + k y 2 > k 0 ] modes as shown by us previously If α > 0 and β > 0, the spectral amplitude with kx < -k0 add up destructively, whereas for kx > k0 constructive interference occurs. Therefore, the near-field interference effect lies at the heart of the selective directional excitation of guided modes illuminated by an elliptically polarized dipole. When an elliptically polarized dipole illuminates a multilayered structure, the inversion symmetry is broken, and the high-k modes can be excited. The high-k evanescent modes carry transverse spin angular momentum The large values of model index for the SPPs (called long and short range plasmon polaritons) in HMM medium results in higher field confinement in comparison SPPs in single metallic film As a result, the SPP modes in layered medium show much reduced line widths than the surface modes of a thin film as shown in Fig. For the experimental verification of optical valley Hall effect, we fabricated a 140nm thick seven period HMM structure on 120m thick glass slide through sequential depositions of Ag and Al2O3 thin films each of 10 nm thickness with 1 nm thick Ge wetting layer for each Ag layer using electron beam evaporation. A TMD monolayer of WS2 was exfoliated to PDMS stamp and transferred to the HMM surface following our earlier reported process A plasmonic thin film is also known for directional coupling of SPP wave for the incident chiral electromagnetic wave summary, we demonstrate efficient routing of valley exciton emission using hyperbolic media by exploiting the high-k states and the higher Q factor SPP modes in them. This effect relies on the photonic spin Hall effect in HMMs. The experimental demonstration is found to be in very good agreement with theoretical calculations. Through Fourier space imaging we are able to establish the valley dependent routing of emission from monolayer WS2 placed in the near field of the HMM. While nanostructured photonic systems can be used to realize similar effects, the use of a bulk substrate to realize such valley polarized routing presents a simple and broadband approach for practical realization of valley dependent optoelectronics. Finite element method simulations were performed by using COMSOL Multiphysics RF module. The HMM is designed with effective medium parameters of ε x = ε y = -6.246 + i1.081 and ε x = 7.76 + i0.2624 for Ag/Al2O3 multilayers volume fraction of 50%. The multilayered HMM is also designed with Ag/Al2O3 multilayers in the XY plane with periods extending in the zdirection. Simulations model the quantum emitter as a circular electric dipole oriented in the XZ plane perpendicular to the metal-dielectric layers of the HMM with an emission spectrum at 620 nm. The dielectric constant for the Ag is obtained from the previous report of Palik et al, Seven periods HMM substrate and one period control sample with Ag and Al2O3 multilayers were grown by a Kurt Lesker PVD 75 electron beam evaporation system on top of precleaned 120 μm thick glass substrates with surface roughness<1 nm. The pressure inside the vacuum chamber was kept to ∼2× 10 -6 torr throughout the process. 1-2 nm Ge seed layer was grown prior to each Ag layer to ensure good uniform distribution of Ag thin layer on Al2O3 layer. The top surface of HMM was terminated with Al2O3 layer to avoid top Ag layer oxidation as well as the WS2 monolayer exciton emission quenching. A monolayer of WS2 TMD material (HQ Graphene) was exfoliated onto a thick PDMS stamp and transferred to the HMM surface by home build transfer stage. The WS2 monolayer on the HMM surface was excited from the top with a 0.25 NA, 10X microscope objective with excitation wavelength of 620 nm from Toptica Photonics ® laser source with repetition rate of 80 MHz and pulse width of 1ps. The polarization of the laser was set to circular polarization by using the combination of a linear polarizer and quarter wave plate. The near field PL below the HMM surface was collected by using Olympus PLN 100X Oil Immersion Objective with 1.4 NA. The whole back focal plane of the microscope objective was imaged onto the Princeton Instruments CCD camera operating at -70 0 C. For the helicity resolved measurements, the PL signal was resolved into helicity angles by using the combination of another quarter wave plate and a linear polarizer.