Observation of resonance modes is the most straightforward way of studying mechanical oscillations because these modes have maximum response to stimuli. However, a deeper understanding of mechanical motion could be obtained by also looking at modal responses at frequencies in between resonances. In this paper, we present visualisation of the modal response shapes for a mechanical drum driven off-resonance. Furthermore, we describe these transitions through superposition of resonance modes. resonance modes. We find that the spatial distribution of the oscillating component of the driving force affects the modal weight or participation. Moreover, we are able to infer the asymmetry of the drum by studying the dependence of the resonance modes shapes on the frequency of the driving force. Our results highlight that dynamic responses of any mechanical system are mixtures of their resonance modes with various modal weights, further giving credence to the universality of this phenomenon. Mechanical vibrations of a structure, regardless of its geometry and type of material, can be fundamentally described by a combination of its natural resonance modes, called eigenmodes, and a form of the driving force 1 . A resonance mode is defined as a pattern of motion in which the system or its part moves in a periodic oscillation with a maximal amplitude at a characteristic frequency. The spatial distribution of motion is determined by the inertial and elastic properties of the oscillating body, its shape, and the boundary conditions imposed on it. If either the material properties or the boundary conditions of the structure change, the resonance modes change accordingly Modal analysis has been an important engineering tool for the past several decades In determining, improving, and optimizing dynamic characteristics of structures and components, it has found various applications in civil and nuclear engineering, aviation, auto-motive and space industries, acoustic instruments production and biomechanical studies. As modal analysis is used in the numerical analysis of finite element methods, the presence of damping and nonlinearity requires experimental techniques to complement the computer model. Experimental modal testing involves both the application of a driving force and detection of vibration responses at various locations of the structures In this paper, we explore the effect of the driving force on the off-resonance motion. We investigate the response shapes, for driving frequencies both at resonance and off resonance, of the two-dimensional mechanical plate drums made from niobium diselenide (NbSe 2 ) flakes using a Fabry-Perot laser interferometer a . By observing the off-resonance response shapes, we see transitions from one resonance mode to another. Using the frequency modal analysis, we determine how the resonance modes of the system participate in vibrations, with some being more prominent than the others, as the driving frequency changes. A consequence of this is the demonstration of how the resonant modes depend on the oscillating component of the driving force spatial distribution. Also through this analysis, we infer the inherent asymmetry of the system from the resonant modes distribution with respect to the driving frequency. a The choice of NbSe 2 as the drumhead, while might be arbitrary for this work, could be beneficial for future low temperature studies as it's one of the 2D materials that are superconducting NbSe 2 mechanical drums are fabricated through the transfer of exfoliated flakes onto a silicon chip with pre-patterned gold electrodes and AR-P (AllResist Positive) resist. The latter acts as a spacer for the drum (details of the fabrication are described in the Methods section and Supplementary Information). Figure A scanning mirror is used to move the laser spot across the drumhead thereby making it possible to spatially resolve the recorded driven response. Through this method one can see how the response shapes look and also visually differentiate and ascertain the driven resonant modes, especially the higher ones. The driving of the mechanical drums is done using the electromotive scheme by supplying a voltage from a function generator with an oscillating component (V ac ) with a frequency close to the mechanical resonance frequency of the drum, and a dc component (V dc ). The dc component of the applied voltage allows amplification of the ac component, which improves the signal-to-noise ratio without the need of strong drive that might result in the non-linear regime of the resonator The details of conversion of V (x, y, ω d ) into Z(x, y, ω d ) are discussed in a separate article In order to visualise the response shapes, a system response to the drive at various frequencies is first measured for both devices at certain spots of their respective drumheads. From the knowledge of the theoretical mode shapes of a circular plate The a and b in the notation are used to designate the modal pairs with the same number of nodes but different orientation. First, we investigate the response of device A. In Fig. However, the corresponding modal pairs of the f 1 and f 2 were difficult to find. A possible explanation could be their non-favourability given the intrinsic asymmetry of the system. Now that we have mapped the response shapes at the resonances of the drum, we proceed to map the response shapes at frequencies between these resonances. Figures where e mn (ω d ) is the frequency-dependent weights of the corresponding resonance mode, Z mn . Note that both Z(x, y, ω d ) and Z mn (x, y) are normalised so that A |Z(x, y)| 2 dxdy = 1 for the drum area A. Given Z(x, y, ω d ) and Z mn (x, y), e mn (ω d ) is determined by the following integral: The circle and square symbols from Fig. To confirm this trend, we used finite element method (FEM) simulations. Figures 3f-j present the corresponding mechanical displacement Z(x, y, ω d ) obtained from FEM simulations using COMSOL neglecting damping parameters. The dotted lines in Fig. We see that in the absence of damping, participation at the resonance frequencies is equal to 100%, which is not always the case in the experiment. From here we can see the transition of the modal weight dominance from (2,1) mode to (0,2). The FEM results show that at 44 MHz, the contributions are 45% and 55% for the (2,1), and (0,2) modes, respectively. In contrast, at 48 MHz, the response shape is overwhelmingly dominated by the (0,2) mode, while (2,1) mode contributes 0.07% only. We have done the same analysis for the elliptical drum. Figures In the observations presented above, we are only able to infer the trend of e mn (ω d ). To better understand the frequency dependence of e mn (ω d ), we start with the general equation of motion for a forced clamped plate where z dc+ac (x, y, t) is the out-of-plane displacement, whose Fourier transform is Z(x, y, ω d ), ρ is the mass density of the plate material, h is the plate thickness, and D is the flexural rigidity. The right-hand side of equation 3 is the total driving force per unit area V dc V ac , F ac can be further simplified by assuming z dc+ac to be roughly equal to z dc (see Supplementary Information Note 2 for the derivation details). The results of these simplifications will give the following equation of motion The right-hand side of equation 4 is now the AC component of the driving force per unit area, F ac (x, y, t). The next step is to approximate the shape of z dc . For a clamped circular or elliptical plate under a uniform load, the shape of the deformation can be described by the Bessel function for the (0,1) mode with the following form where a and b are the motional semi-major and semi-minor axes for the elliptical drum. In the case of the circular drum, a = b = R, which is the motional radius of the circular drum. The parameter B here is the static deformation prefactor that reflects the sharpness of the distribution. Finally, using equations 1 and 5, e mn (ω d ) takes the following form (see (2,1) mode. In other words, the dominance of the (0,2) mode can be observed in a broader frequency range compared to the (2,1) mode. From the point of view of drum geometry, we compared the modal equilibrium points of the drums with each other. We see that the equilibrium is closer to the (2,1) mode in the circular drum than the elliptical drum. This means that the additional eccentricity present in the elliptical drum allows the (2,1) mode to widen its dominance in frequency b . In fact, the presence of the (2,1) mode implies that there is an inherent asymmetry in the system. A perfect circular drum would only show axisymmetric modes. This type of analysis can be relevant to coupling of NMRs to other systems In summary, we observed intermodal transitions of NbSe 2 mechanical plate drums through spatial mapping at off-resonance frequencies. We, then, described the off-resonance motion as a superposition of the resonance modes. Through this modal analysis, we were able to see how participation of resonance modes changes as the driving frequency changes. Furthermore, by looking at the modal weight formula, we were able to describe how the modal shapes are revealed through the application of the driving force and deduce how this driving force is distributed across the oscillator. In fact, all mechanical vibrations of objects are mixtures of their resonance modes across the driving frequency spectrum with varying b The details of the effect of eccentricity on the modal equilibrium position is shown in Supplementary Information c FEM simulations of a beam geometry with global driving force distribution is shown in Supplementary Information weights of participation. This fundamental and universal understanding of the relationship between the resonance modes and the driving force will greatly benefit all future NMRs studies, which will inevitably involve coupling of the flexural motion to various degrees of freedom of different nature and energy. Sample Fabrication. 40 nm Au and 20 nm Cr electrodes were lithographically patterned on 7 mm x 7 mm x 0.65 mm p-doped Si chips with a thermally grown 543 nm thick SiO 2 layer. The chip is then cleaned through ultrasonication for 10 minutes in acetone, 2 minutes in IPA, and 1 minute in DI water. The drums' spacer is then created by spin coating the chip with the AR-P (CSAR-62) electron beam resist. After baking at 180 o C for one minute, the resist is patterned with the drum hole and contact window patterns. After development, the resist is baked again at 180 o C for 9 minutes to make it rigid. The spacer thickness is measured to be 295±10 nm using a commercial stylus profilometer. Bulk NbSe 2 purchased from HQ Graphene are exfoliated and transferred onto the patterned drum and contact windows using a deterministic dry PDMS stamp transfer process P. Verboven, "Frequency-domain system identification for modal analysis," (2002).