The article presents the result of an extended in silico experiment on computational vibrational spectroscopy of graphene molecules performed using the virtual vibrational spectrometer UHF VVS, previously proposed in the first part of the study The idea of a virtual spectrometer turned out to be very attractive and productive for putting things in order in the field of computational spectroscopy. Any device is usually designed to carry out a large number of measurements. Certainly, these measurements are performed under conditions limited by the technical characteristics of the device. Whatever these characteristics are, there will always be reasons for their inconsistency with some specific requirement of real experiment. This circumstance is largely compensated by a comparative analysis of the data obtained from the device, which greatly increases their reliability. The technical characteristics of a virtual spectrometer are determined by the computational softwares, on which it is based. In the case of vibrational spectroscopy, the programs must allow solving the dynamical problem of an object using the methods of quantum theory. Thus, in the first realized virtual multi-frequency spectrometer (VMS) Graphene molecules (GMs) present a particular class of compounds related to nanosize graphene sheets, both bare and framed by a necklace of heteroatoms in due course of the polyderivatization of different kinds. Molecules of all the types are radicals Figure The IR and Raman UHF VVS spectra of the basic GM I of the current study is presented in Fig. cm -1 where the spectrum of the GM is closer to that of C70. The absence of fullerene tangential modes at ~550 cm -1 in the graphene spectrum is evidently connected with the flat molecule structure in contrast to either sphere-or ovaloid-like shapes of fullerenes. As discussed earlier Hydrogen is the favorite participant of carbonaceous compounds and GMs are not exception. Graphene is friendly with hydrogen, which, both in natural and industrial conditions, is one of the first elements to partially inhibit the activity of initially bare GMs. A detailed discussion of the graphene hydrogenation, both virtual and experimental, can be found in Ref. 9 and 21. The hydrogen role for natural molecules is largely discussed by the example of natural amorphous carbons Virtual spectra of the molecules of the first set, produced with the UHF VVS, are shown in Fig. Substitution of hydrogen atoms with methyl units (molecule VI) leads to a full reconstruction of both IR and Raman spectra of the molecule. As seen in Fig. As for changes in the Raman spectra of C=C vibrations of molecules I, IV, and V presented in Fig. A set of the UHF VVS produced IR and Raman spectra of molecules VII-IX (see Fig. Diverse experimental studies, recently performed for a selected set of sp 2 amorphous carbons (ACs) Since C-H and O-H stretchings dominate in the spectra of hydrogenated natural amorphics, thus suppressing the intensity in the middle frequency region and complicating spectra analysis, below high-freq and mid-freq regions will be considered separately. Within each of the part, the spectra will be renormalized with respect to the maximum intensity value. A general picture of the vibrational spectra of the models in the high-freq region is presented in Fig. Molecule XII -ShC. The necklace atomic content constitutes 13 at % and the spectrum has an obvious necklace character. Carbonyl units provide two intense bands at 2000 cm-1, apparently distinguishing their location on the zigzag and armchair edge atoms. The simultaneous presence of hydrogen and oxygen in the molecule necklace results in a its bizarre spectrum in the 700-1800 cm - 1 region, mixing C-H bendings and stretchings with those stimulated by C=O bonds. Similar discussions can be proposed for Molecules XI -AnthX and X-Anthc. Finally, Fig. The results presented in this article show that in silico spectroscopy can become an effective method for studying the vibrational spectra of large molecules and, particularly, radicals. The first application of the UHF VVS spectrometer to graphene molecules made it possible to establish hitherto unknown features of the formation of their vibrational spectra. A deep analysis of these features has yet to be done, but it is already obvious that we are expecting the discovery of new sides of the special electronic structure of graphene. The obtained data open the way to a new wide area of research in this area, of new unexpected discoveries. 1 