At the nano-scale, surface phenomena such as attractive VdW forces strongly dominate; explosions may well be thought impossible. We confirm nano explosions that are important for a fractal (hierarchical, scale invariant) pore structure, greatly increasing pore access. Analyzing only microscope images, image analysis and statistical error reduction algorithms alone provide conclusive evidence of explosively expelled material. The results reconfirm that computer image recognition and statistical analysis are a widely applicable and inexpensive technique for determining parameters which are otherwise unavailable, such as the densities of single nano shapes. The explosion mechanism explains optimum calcination temperatures for cobalt-hydroxide and why slow heating optimizes porosity. Slow heating increases the accessible surface area by 60% with this supercapacitor material. Already in the micrometer range, VdW forces such as surface tension dominate over inertia; small aquatic animals must constantly propel themselves or else immediately come to a stop as if in thick honey rather than water. At nano sizes , it is questionable whether true explosions of material by itself (excluding high impact projectiles, strong laser beams and suchlike) occur at all. Even with very weakly bound alkali clusters on helium droplets, suggested explosively ejected regions upon internal reactions Washing away of un-reacted chemicals hinders comparing with calculated yields from reactant concentrations, and moisture as well as tiny amounts per sample renders weightings inaccurate. As was first shown by proving the low density of carbon in Ag nanoparticle doped carbon spheres: Soft templates The optimum accessible pore area in Co(OH)2 calcinations is obtained at 300C. We will discuss how the explosion mechanism implies that heating slower than the usual 10 to 20 C per minute will increase the force of the explosions. This improves pore access in several ways. Measurements confirm a 60% higher accessible surface area with this important material. Co3O4 is one of the most intriguing magnetic p-type semiconductors and widely applied in lithium-ion batteries, Computer image recognition assisted shape analysis (Fig. If cobalt-hydroxide is thermally dehydrated, the denser Co3O4 should first form in the surface because heat and oxygen enter from the outside according to 12 6Co(OH)2 + O2 → 2Co3O4 + 6H2O. This produces six water vapor molecules in exchange for every O2 molecule, and additionally inside a shrinking, increasingly denser material. Gaseous water is trapped and then explodes through the dense surface layer. If this hypothesis (H1) is correct, material will be lost from the explosion craters. Moreover, the porosity should depend on the speed of the heating, which we predict as follows (H2): The surface that has already turned into the denser oxide has a certain thickness, labeled "", at the time when water starts to be trapped and explode through this layer (Fig. Heating faster will increase the pressure below a still thinner surface layer rapidly. Therefore, (fast) is smaller (Fig. Rupturing will eventually occur, because temperature T increases far beyond the dehydration onset at 180C. The explosion crater diameters are now comparable to (slow). Slow heating therefore leads to better access to both, the interior (1) and to the surfaces between stacked shapes (2). Explosions lead generally to scale invariant structures. The surface density of small pores is therefore similar, but they distribute now in a rougher and thus larger surface, so the number of accessible small pores is increased (3). These are three ways in which better access to pores is expected. Meso-pores (2 to 50 nm diameter) are important for catalysis and supercapacity, but only if they can be accessed. The precursors are β-Co(OH)2 plates from a hydrothermal synthesis described elsewhere, Whenever possible, such as in case of the face area ( ) , the value A is first calculated for every shape, before averaging to A . We call this "delayed averaging". Calculating instead from the averages a and / ab, the result "A(<a>)" is only 88% of the true A , yet again an error over 20%. The appropriate assumption for random growth processes is a log-normal (LN) size distribution. Therefore, true averages can also be calculated from systematic underestimations such as A(<a>) by applying 41 a , is here s = 0.16. A is therefore 98% of A , and there is generally always only a 1 to 3% mismatch between the result from the LN-correction and the delayed averaging. The large standard 'errors,' such as in our result 32 (35 14) 10 nm A = , do not imply that the applied methods are imprecise. On the contrary, they report the actual, physical distribution widths. The distribution of the height h is also broad. Therefore, the volume Ah suffers a similar systematic error. The volume cannot be calculated separately for every shape, because the heights h are not extracted from the same shapes as a and b are. We remove the error in h by LN-correction. Chemical dehydration starts at about 180°C. The loss of weight is therefore always 13.6%, corresponding to 3Co(OH)2 → Co3O4, regardless the heating rate, as long as the final temperature is above 250C and one starts with dry material. Staying at 300C guaranties that any improvement due to a different heating rate  = dT/dt will improve the material over previous reports, but one should note that a proper 'walk-in optimization' onto a global maximum would likely result in yet better products, perhaps at 280°C. The slow heating hypothesis H2 is easily confirmed by Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) measurements (unpublished). 20 °C/min lead to the reported maximum Calcination at 200 to 250 C shrinks a to (117 ± 30) nm. These values (average and width) are for example based on 109 individual shapes from five different SEM images. Height h shrinks to (25 ± 5) nm. The shrinkage is 1.1 for both, a and h. The mass density of non-porous Co3O4 is  = 6.11 g/cm . Note that the stacking of plates leads to pores in between plates. Barrett-Joyner-Halenda (BJH) measurements therefore lead to average pore diameters that are far too large (for example 8 nm, although heights h are only ~ 19 nm). Calcination at 300 to 350 C shrinks a and h to 111 and 19 nm. The shrinkage of h is 1.4, higher than the 1.2 for a. This is consistent with a missing surface layer of about 2 nm, but it is still not conclusive evidence. Height shrinks more than other directions if pores migrate, because a randomly migrating pore is likely to reach one of the two faces of the nano plate, while the edges are on average ten times further away than the faces. Assuming the density of solid Co3O4 again, the amount of Co would be 3.9*10 -17 mol. This equals the initial amount, but the shapes are very porous. In other words, the initial amount was obtained although the pore volume was not yet subtracted. This is clear evidence for missing material. Yet differently put: Under the assumption that no material was lost, the density would be 5.7 g/cm 3 , much larger than the 4.1 g/cm 3 above. Seen this way, one has two conclusions simultaneously: There is material lost now (H1) and the plates after treatment at 200 to 250 C are internally at least as porous as they are after 300 to 350 C. Nevertheless, it is well known that BET and electrochemical measurements show 300 C to be superior. This confirms that the explosions mainly bring about access to the pore network and that this access is most important for the desired properties. Two predictions from a hypothesized explosive pore formation mechanism were confirmed by conclusive evidence for the lost material (H1) and for the predicted dependence of the accessible specific surface area on the temperature ramping rate (H2). The known optimum pore structure at 300C has therefore been fully understood, because it is now known why it is worse also at temperatures that are lower than the optimum. It was proved quantitatively that the explosions provide a more accessible pore network, not more pores. The temperature ramping rate dependence can be exploited to provide a material with a far superior specific surface area (60% above previous reports according to initial, not yet optimized measurements). Computer facilitated image analysis was crucial. The shapes are truncated triangles, not regular hexagons. The method exploits information contained in the size distributions' shapes and widths, reducing errors from above 20% down to only 2%. The general method obtained yet again otherwise not attainable quantities such as the weight of single nano shapes and thus the number of shapes, here 4.5*10 11 per mg.