In the "ballistic" regime, the transport across a normal metal (N)/superconductor (S) pointcontact is dominated by a quantum process called Andreev reflection. Andreev reflection causes an enhancement of the conductance below the superconducting energy gap, and the ratio of the zero-bias and the high-bias conductance cannot be greater than 2 when the superconductor is conventional in nature. In this regime, the features associated with Andreev reflection also provide energy and momentum-resolved spectroscopic information about the superconducting phase. Here we theoretically consider various types of non-ballistic N/S point contacts within a network resistor model and show that even when the superconductor under investigation is simple conventional in nature, depending on the shape, size and anatomy of the point contacts, a wide variety of spectral features may appear in the conductance spectra. Such features may misleadingly mimic theoretically expected signatures of exotic physical phenomena like Klein tunneling in topological superconductors, Andreev bound states in unconventional superconductors, multiband superconductivity and Majorana zero modes. Point contact spectroscopy Andreev reflection causes such non-linearity because as soon as V = ∆/e, the conductance of the point contact gets enhanced due to Andreev reflection. However, one important aspect which is often ignored in such studies is that the intrinsic I -V characteristics of superconductors are also non-linear. The effect of this non-linearity in a point contact spectroscopy experiment involving a superconducting point contact can be avoided only if the transport is allowed to take place in a transport regime where the bulk resistivities of the materials forming the point contact do not contribute to the overall point contact resistance. Fortunately, nano-positioning technology has empowered experimentalists to tune the size of the point contacts such that the effective contact diameter (a) can be made smaller than the elastic mean free path of the materials forming the point contact and make transport happen in the so-called "ballistic regime" where the contact resistance is given by Sharvin's The ballistic transport characteristics across a superconducting point contact are well understood within the one-dimensional model developed by Blonder-Tinkham and Klapwijk (BTK) BTK modelled the interface potential barrier as a one-dimensional delta function V 0 δ(x). To characterize the strength of the potential barrier at the interface between the metal and the superconductor, BTK defined a dimensionless parameter Z = V 0 v F , where v F is the Fermi velocity. Z = 0 means the barrier is transparent and in this extreme case, for eV < ∆, the electrons undergo Andreev reflection with a probability = 1. However, when Z is non-zero, in addition to Andreev reflection the electrons can also undergo normal electrons and consequently, the Andreev reflection probability becomes less than 1. Assuming the electron and hole wave functions to be plane waves and solving the Bogoliubov-DeGennes equations, the Andreev reflection (A(E)) and the normal reflection (B(E)) probabilities were calculated by BTK. Then the current through the point contact could be calculated as where, N (0) is the density of states at the Fermi level. This is then used to calculate the dV /dI vs. V spectra. Such theoretically generated spectra are then used to fit the experimental spectra to extract the value of the superconducting energy gap (∆). The Andreev reflection spectra calculated using BTK theory for different values of Z are shown in the supplemental materials. For Z = 0, at very low temperatures, it is found that the spectrum is flat for V ≤ ∆/e. With increasing Z, two peaks at V = ±∆/e develop. This double peak structure in superconducting point contacts is a hallmark signature of Andreev reflection. When Z is large, the peaks become very sharp and mimic the coherence peaks of the superconducting tunnelling spectra. Thus, local tunnelling spectroscopy can be thought of as a special case of point contact Andreev reflection spectroscopy. The discussion above is valid only when the point contacts are strictly in the ballistic regime of transport and R M has no role to play where, Γ(l/a) is a numerical factor close to unity, a is the contact diameter and 2h/e 2 is the fundamental quantum of resistance, ρ(T ) is the temperature dependent normal state resistivity of the superconducting material. Since the first term (R S ) is proportional to 1/a 2 and the second term (R M ) goes as 1/a, for smaller a, the first term dominates over the second term. This is when pure Andreev reflection is seen. When a is larger, the contribution of the second term (R M ) cannot be ignored. In order to investigate such non-ballistic transport 2(a,b,e,f) respectively. The parameters used to generate the spectra can be found in supplemental material (Table characteristics, we first need to look at the anatomy of a point contact. When a sharp metallic tip approaches a superconducting sample, first it forms a tunneling barrier. On further approaching, microscopic cracks (micro-constrictions) develop at the contact region due to which the tunneling barrier develops "shorts" and electronic transport in the socalled metallic regime can happen through these micro-constrictions (see Figure divided into them as if they are some resistors connected in a parallel configuration (inset of Figure R M 1 and R M 4 represent two purely thermal contacts which connect the constrictions 1, 2 and 3. We have generated the I -V characteristics , where total current I = i I i . α takes values 1,2,3,4,5. The index i represents i-th micro-constriction (i = 1,2,3) in the intermediate regime and I cα is the critical current of the corresponding R M α . This formula is used to calculate I i vs. V for all values of I i > I ci . The calculated I -V thus obtained has been folded in order to obtain the characteristics for the current flowing in the opposite direction as well. The I -V characteristics corresponding to R S have been obtained using the BTK theory for different constrictions keeping the gap (∆) same for all the constrictions (as it is the same superconductor for all). Then, we calculated the total dV /dI vs. V curves adding the dV /dI characteristics corresponding to different R M and R S for the three arms of the network circuit (characterized by I 1 , I 2 and I 3 ). After that, we found dI/dV for the arms. The dI/dV corresponding to the three arms were added to compute the final dI/dV vs. V graphs presented in the paper. Now, we have simply varied the R M and the R S corresponding to the micro-constrictions to generate a series of spectra and found that for certain combination of these parameters special spectral features may appear in conventional N/S point contacts that may closely resemble some exotic effects. We discuss our findings below. All the I -V characteristics corresponding to respective R M and R S that we have considered are shown in the inset of the figure panels. The details of the parameters used for generating the I -V characteristics and the dI/dV spectra are provided in the supplemental material. In Figure All the spectra that we discussed above displayed only one pair of conductance dips. By changing the proportion in which the critical current driven I -V characteristics of different micro-constrictions mix with each other, we have found a number of spectra where multiple conductance dips were also observed. In Figure Such multiple dips In this case, the I -V characteristics are expected to be non-linear due to critical current as well as due to Andreev reflection. In Figure superconducting proximity effect Finally, we also explored other possible ways in which the point contact Andreev reflection spectra can deviate from a canonical shape and found a number of spectra with unique features which might falsely indicate the emergence of novel fundamental excitations/modes in a solid. A collection of such spectra along with the assumed I -V characteristics corresponding to R M and R S are shown in Figure In some extreme cases, the ZBCP can be very sharp and erroneously hint to the possibility of exotic pairing in the superconductor being investigated In conclusion, in order to understand the origin of special spectral features that ubiquitously appear in point contact Andreev reflection spectroscopy, we have theoretically modelled a superconducting point-contact as an ensemble of a number of micro-constrictions through which electronic transport takes place. We have considered the shape and size of the micro-constrictions to be different and consequently giving rise to different shape of the I -V characteristics. We have then mixed such I -V characteristics in different proportions and found wide variety of spectra appear closely resembling the features expected for certain complex physical phenomena. We have also allowed some of the micro-constrictions to be in the ballistic regime and found that depending on the way Maxwell's (R M ) and Sharvin's (R S ) resistance mix with each other, spectral features mimicking even more complex processes may appear. Our model calculations can be used to analyze such non-ballistic spectra and such analysis can help extract spectroscopic information selectively from the ballistic micro-constrictions in the "intermediate" regime point contacts. Therefore, the exotic features appearing in Andreev reflection spectroscopy can be attributed to exotic physics only after carefully ruling out the contribution of the non-ballistic characteristics discussed here. In figure The quantity that is plotted is differential conductance (dI/dV ) with V . For this, a dc current, mixed with a sine wave (of very small amplitude compared to the magnitude of the FIG. axis will need to be multiplied by the total point contact resistance in order to make it V . Now, these peaks in dV /dI will appear as dips in dI/dV . When the R S component (and any other component depending on the nature of the electrodes forming the point contact) is also added, the dV /dI below V = I c (R M + R S ) will be non-zero. This is how the critical current enters the picture! For multiple constrictions with different critical currents, the resultant spectra may show multiple conductance dips (and the other features as discussed in the manuscript). To note, in the point contacts away from the ballistic regime, the horizontal (V ) axis cannot be strictly taken as the energy axis as the dissipative processes are allowed in such regimes of transport. 