The contribution of bulk and surface to the electrical resistance along crystallographic b-and caxes as a function of crystal thickness gives evidence for a temperature independent surface states in an antiferromagnetic narrow-gap semiconductor CrSb2. ARPES shows a clear electron-like pocket at Γ-Z direction which is absent in the bulk band structure. First-principles calculations also confirm the existence of metallic surface states inside the bulk gap. Whereas combined experimental probes point to enhanced surface conduction similar to topological insulators, surface states are trivial since CrSb2 exhibits no band inversion. Topological states on surfaces of topological insulators (TIs) are of high interest in quantum information and spintronics alike FeSb 2 and CrSb 2 crystallize in identical marcasite crystal structure and both are FeSi-like narrow gap semiconductors with dominant 3d character of the electronic states near the valence-and conduction-band edges Single crystals of CrSb 2 were grown as described previously Figure First we discuss high-temperature behavior. To eliminate uncertainty in the geometric factor arising from varying contact geometry, we plot the resistance ratio R b /R b (300K) and R c /R c (120K) for crystals with current path along b-and c-axis respectively, i.e. the R(T ) normalized to the resistance values at 300 K and 120 K respectively [Fig. A simple parallel conductance model, with total conductance described by G = G S + G B , is used to extract the contribution from bulk and surface. Here, G S = 1/R S is the surface contribution, which is assumed to be independent on T . The G B = 1/R B is the bulk contribution-assumed to be thermally activated due to a bulk energy gap ∆. Therefore, where r S ≡ R S /R(T 0 ) and r B ≡ R B /R(T 0 ) are the dimensionless, normalized surface and bulk resistance ra-tios (T 0 = 300 K and 120 K for b-and c-axis, respectively) Fitting results to this model using r s , r B and ∆ as free parameters are shown as solid lines in Fig. ARPES measurements [Fig. Hall effect offers further insight into the surface contribution to electronic transport. We used three crystals with different thickness: S1 (450 μm), S2 (345 μm) and S3 (156 μm). Hall resistivity ρ xy at 20 K [Fig. All experimental observations above indicate the increase in contribution from the surface states as the thickness decreases. The surface electron concentration in ARPES measurement is 1.59×10 17 m -2 . This corresponds to effective 3D Hall coefficients of -1.76 × 10 -4 m 3 /C (S1), -1.35 × 10 -4 m 3 /C (S2) and -6.13 × 10 -5 m 3 /C (S3), much larger than the observed value. Hence, both bulk and surface electronic states account for the R H in S2 and S3 whereas thick S1 crystal shows single-band behavior since the signal from surface electrons is dwarfed by bulk electronic states. The two band electronic transport model In order to analyze the individual conductivity of the surface and bulk states we consider conductivity tensor σ = ρ -1 , where σ is the sum of surface and bulk contributions and t is the crystal thickness where e is the electron charge and n and μ are carrier density and mobility, respectively. We use the subscript s and b to denote the surface and bulk contributions. According to the Matthiessen's rule Two crystals were polished to four different samples labeled as R ij where i = 1, 2 represents crystal number and j = 1, 2 represents different thickness. Larger j means thinner sample. The low temperature conductivity of these samples are shown in Fig. Figure In summary, we have presented the first evidence that CrSb 2 hosts surface conducting states. The thicknessdependent resistivity and the transition from one-band to two-band Hall effect come from the increased contribution from the surface state as the sample size decreases. The crossover in the conductivity of the bulk and surface states explains the plateau and low temperature behavior in resistivity. The surface states are also observed in ARPES measurement, in good agreement with electronic transport. First principle calculations indicate that surface states in the bulk energy gap are topologically trivial. 