We create and isolate single-photon emitters with a high brightness approaching 10 5 counts per second in commercial silicon-on-insulator (SOI) wafers. The emission occurs in the infrared spectral range with a spectrally narrow zero phonon line in the telecom O-band and shows a high photostability even after days of continuous operation. The origin of the emitters is attributed to one of the carbon-related color centers in silicon, the so-called G center, allowing purification with the 12 C and 28 Si isotopes. Furthermore, we envision a concept of a highly-coherent scalable quantum photonic platform, where single-photon sources, waveguides and detectors are integrated on a SOI chip. Our results provide a route towards the implementation of quantum processors, repeaters and sensors compatible with the present-day silicon technology. Single-photon sources are key building blocks for photonic quantum information processing and optical quantum computing In photonics, silicon and its mature technology have been demonstrated to be instrumental for applications in integrated optics, sensing and long-range telecommunications In this work, we demonstrate that silicon can host single-photon emitters in the telecom O-band of fiberoptic communication, allowing monolithic integration with photonic circuits. Based on the spectral properties, we attribute the origin of these emitters to the wellknown carbon-related defect in silicon, the so-called G center. We discuss a scalable architecture where these single-photon emitters are incorporated into basic blocks of quantum photonic circuits, serving as an interface between flying and stationary qubits. Our experiments are performed on a commercial SOI wafer purchased from IceMOS. It consists of a 12 μmthick Si device layer separated by a 1 μm-thick buried oxide layer from the substrate, as schematically shown in Fig. A superconducting nanowire single-photon detector (SNSPD) from Single Quantum is used for the spectrally integrated PL measurements. The SNSPD has a detection efficiency of > 90% and < 60% at the wavelengths of 1.3 μm and 1.6 μm, respectively. The dark count rate is below 100 counts per second (cps) and the timing jitter is less than 50 ps. Using two linear nanopositioners anchored to the sample holder, two-dimensional (XY) lateral PL mappings over 6 mm with a positioning accuracy of 200 nm are obtained. To perform in-depth (Z) PL scans, the microscope objective is mounted into the third linear nanopositioner. The PL is collected by the same objective and then coupled to a single-mode fiber fed to the SNSPD after imaging through a 75 μm confocal pinhole. Two long-pass filters (830 nm and 1250 nm) are used to completely suppress the contribution of the reflected laser light and the Si bandgap emission from the PL signal. The G center can be represented as a carbon-silicon molecule occupying a single lattice site To determine the number of emitters in these spots, we perform the Hanbury Brown and Twiss interferometry experiment. This is a frequently used method to verify single-photon emission A standard evaluation method for the single photon nature of a quantum emitter is the second order intensity correlation function g (2) (τ ) = I(t)I(t + τ ) / I(t) 2 , where I(t) is the photon count rate at time t. This function represents the measure for a photon detection at time t + τ if a previous photon is recorded at time t. The correlation function is derived from a time-delayed coincidence histogram, which is recorded as described above. The background signal from the surface centers has a strong influence on the measured second-order correlation function g (2) meas (τ ). Therefore, we apply a standard correction procedure g (2) (τ ) = [g (1) Here, N corresponds to the number of single-photon emitters. The results for g (2) (τ ) obtained from the spot A are presented in Fig. The power dependence for the count rate at the spots C and B (background) is presented in Fig. From a fit to Eq. ( To determine the creation efficiency of the G centers using C implantation, we first count individual spots in Fig. To analyze the spectral properties of single G centers created by C implantation, the PL spectra are measured by using a Shamrock Kymera 193i spectrograph equipped with an iDus InGaAs front-illuminated photodiode array (PDA) detector. The PL spectrum of the G center consists of a phonon sideband (PSB) superimposed by the zero-phonon line (ZPL) and phonon-related peaks As the background correction factor for the engineered G centers ρ 0.75 differs from the ideal case ρ = 1, it is necessary to improve it for future quantum photonic applications. Its origin is not clear and could be the tail of the Si bandgap emission or the emission from surface/interface defects. A possible way to suppress the background signal is to use another excitation wavelength with higher excitation efficiency than that used in our experiments, for instance 590 nm or 420 nm The G centers are activated when a Si wafer containing C impurities (incorporated either during growth or by implantation) is annealed and subsequently irradiated with high-energy protons The saturation power for the spot D in the pristine SOI is found to be P 0 = 2.2 mW. This corresponds to a power density of 300 kW cm -2 , which is by a factor of 4 higher than for the irradiated sample of Fig. The PL spectrum from the spot D at Z = 12 μm is presented in Fig. The low count rate and the absence of the ZPL compared to the implanted samples is because the SOI fabrication process is not optimized for the creation of G centers with high optical quality The thick solid line in Fig. Photostability is an important characteristic of a single-photon emitter. The PL time trace from one of the spots with a single G center at P = 4 mW is shown in Fig. A single G defect coupled to a ring resonator mode can serve as an ideal basic module for scalable quantumoptical processors and networks due to several reasons. (i) The path of a single photon is unambiguously linked to the spin state of a single defect (iii) The wavelengths of the resonator modes and the G center ZPL can be tuned independently, as schematically presented in Fig. We have demonstrated for the first time that commercial SOI wafers can host telecom single-photon emitters based on one of the carbon-related point defects in silicon. They have been shown to possess a spectrally stable zero-phonon line in the O-band and exhibit a long-term photostability over days of continuous excitation. Using C implantation, these telecom single-photon emitters are engineered in a controllable way within tens nm below the surface of the device layer in a SOI wafer. Inspired by these findings, we have envisioned a feasible concept for the realization of an integrated photonic platform with single-photon emitters, which is compatible with the current silicon technology. The implementation of this platform could enable scalable quantum processors and networks.