Cerium oxide nanoparticles have been shown to mimic oxidoreductase enzymes by catalyzing the decomposition of organic substrates and reactive oxygen species. This mimicry can be found in superoxide radicals and hydrogen peroxides, harmful molecules produced in oxidative stress associated diseases. Despite the fact that nanoparticle functionalization is mandatory in the context of nanomedicine, the influence of polymer coatings on their enzyme-like catalytic activity is poorly understood. In this work, six polymer coated cerium oxide nanoparticles are prepared by association of 7.8 nm cerium oxide cores with two poly(sodium acrylate) and four poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) grafted copolymers with different terminal or anchoring end groups, such as phosphonic acids. The superoxide dismutase-, catalase-, peroxidase-and oxidase-like catalytic activities of the coated nanoparticles were systematically studied. It is shown that the polymer coatings do not affect the superoxide dismutase-like, impair the catalase-like and oxidase-like and surprisingly improves peroxidase-like catalytic activities of cerium oxide nanoparticles. It is also demonstrated that the particles coated with the PEG-grafted copolymers perform better than the poly(acrylic acid) coated ones as oxidoreductase-like enzymes, a result that confirms the benefit of having phosphonic acids as anchoring groups at the particle surface. Cerium oxide nanoparticles (CNPs) are non-stoichiometric CeO2 nanocrystals with a cubic fluorite-like structure made of divalent oxygen anions O 2-, tetravalent Ce 4+ and surface clusters of trivalent Ce 3+ neighboring oxygen vacancies. ), nitric oxide (NO) and peroxynitrite (ONOO $ ). In this work, we use 7.8 nm cerium oxide nanoparticles coated with poly (acrylic acid) or poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) copolymers as enzyme-mimicking heterogeneous catalysts for the decomposition of reactive oxygen species. These polymers were considered because they were found to prevent the adsorption of proteins and confer to metal oxide nanoparticles remarkable colloidal stability in biological media. CeO2 nanoparticles were synthesized by thermo-hydrolysis of Ce(NO3)4. TEM micrographs of CeO2@PAA2,5K, CeO2@MPEG2,5K-MPh, and CeO2@MPEG2K-MPEGa1,2K-MPh show individual particles separated from each other (Supplementary Information Figure The catalase-like catalytic activity of polymer coated CNPs was investigated by spectrofluorimetry using the Amplex-Red reagent assay. A mixture of horseradish peroxidase (HRP) and Amplex-Red was added to each well, this latter being transformed into the fluorescent resorufin due to the reaction with the remaining H2O2. The CAT-like activity is here defined as the percentage of decomposed H2O2 at the end of the assay. Figure Increasing the nanoparticle molar concentration leads to an increase in H2O2 disproportionation for the seven samples considered. For all, A FG+ ([CNP]) follows a sigmoidal-shape dependence when plotted in a semi-logarithmic scale fitted using a Langmuir adsorption function of the form: 32 where [CNP] L FG+ is the only adjustable parameter. [CNP] L FG+ characterizes the CAT-like catalytic activity of a given particle in the conditions used. It also represents the concentration at which A FG+ reaches half of the saturation value. To compare the effects of the coating on the CAT-like activity, we introduce two quantities, the turnover frequency ν +O and the relative performance P PQ2 . The turnover frequency is defined as and denotes the number of hydrogen peroxide molecules decomposed per second and per nanoparticle, whereas the relative performance represents the ratio of the turnover frequency of a given particle with respect to that of the bare nanocrystals. Data show that bare CNPs are the most efficient CAT-like catalyst among the studied particles, with a value of [CNP] L FG+ of 12 nM and a ν +O of 0.231 s -1 . For the PEGylated CNPs, similar sigmoidal behaviors are observed, leading to [CNP] L FG+ = 29 nM, ν +O = 0.096 s -1 and P PQ2 = 41%. Previous work has shown that the CAT-like catalytic activity of cerium oxide nanoparticles is correlated to the surface concentration of Ce 3+ but also to the amount of hydrogen peroxide adsorbed at the interface. The SOD-like catalytic activity of CNPs was investigated by a colorimetric assay using UV-Vis spectroscopy. where [CNP] L _O` is the only adjustable parameter. For the 7 samples, we found [CNP] L _O` = 20.9 nM, suggesting that the SOD-like catalytic activity does not depend on the coating or on the molecular structure of the tethered chains. In terms of relative performance, all coated particles have a P PQ2 of the order of 1. It is interesting to note that while catalase activity is affected by the polymers, the SOD activity has been relatively unperturbed by the coatings. Possible reasons for these observations are the following: i) the diffusion and adsorption of superoxide on the particle surface is unaffected by the coatings; ii) as the SOD activity is largely dependent on the Ce 3+ concentration, these coatings do not bond tightly to Ce 3+ surface, therefore superoxide radicals can compete for Ce 3+ surface more actively; iii) the Ce 3+ sites are unaffected by surface coatings and the ratio of Ce 3+ /Ce 4+ do not change significantly; iv) the coatings anchor on the surface of cerium oxide nanoparticles through metal centers while the superoxide may adsorb on the oxygen defect sites and participate in the redox reaction. One or all of these reasons together contribute to this unique SOD activity of CNPs. Figure Auto-regeneration is a unique property of CNPs by which the particles can switch between the two oxidation states, Ce 3+ and Ce 4+ and regenerate catalytic surface activity. To study the effect of polymer coating on the auto-regeneration, 0.2 M H2O2 was added to 1 g L -1 bare and coated CNPs (Figure The peroxidase-like catalytic activity of bare and coated CNPs was investigated by using the particles as heterogeneous nanocatalysts in the oxidation of the 3,3',5,5'-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) by hydrogen peroxide. The concentration of the oxidized TMB can be determined by absorbance spectroscopy in the near-UV and visible ranges. In a first step, we investigated peroxidase-like activity in acetate buffer at pH 4.0. as a function of the coating (Figure (3) In the previous equations, [CNP] L is the molar concentration of nanoparticles, V -fg the maximum rate of product formation, K -the Michaelis-Menten constant or the amount of TMB required for the rate of product formation to be V -fg /2. In Eq. 4, K FG+ denotes the amount of products formed per unit of time on a single nanoparticle, or the maximum frequency of product formation. The continuous lines in Figure • from H2O2 or from other ROS species. To check the hydroxyl radicals produced during the reaction, the fluorescence intensity of conversion of terephthalic acid to 2-hydroxyterephthalic acid (2HTA) was monitored (Supplementary Information S7). Terephthalic acid is a non-fluorescent molecule which converts to 2HTA in the presence of OH • s. In this article, we report on cerium oxide nanoparticles structural and antioxidant properties, and on the synthesis of functional polymers used as coating. The polymers examined have a dual functionality, one for protection against protein adsorption and one for targeting with terminal amine groups allowing additional covalent binding. As a comparison, we also examine coatings made form poly(acrylic acid) of different molecular weights, these polymers imparting negative surface charges to the cerium oxide particles. For the two types of polymer coats, we show that the particles remain dispersed and not aggregated (except for PAA5K which exhibits the presence of dimers and trimers), with a core of 7.8 nm and a corona of 3 -10 nm thick. Keeping the CNP core identical and changing the nature of the coat, we are able to specifically highlight the impact of polymers on the oxidoreductase catalytic activities of cerium oxide nanoparticles. The main result that emerges from this work is that functionalization with polymers can tune the enzyme mimetic activities of cerium oxide nanoparticles. In our experiments, it is found that polymers do not affect the superoxide dismutase-like, slightly impair the catalase-like and oxidase-like and surprisingly improves peroxidase-like catalytic activities of the particles. It is also evidenced that CNPs coated with the PEG-grafted copolymers perform better than the poly(acrylic acid) coated ones as oxidoreductase-like enzymes. The data suggest that the impact of polymers on the catalase and SOD activities is most likely due to the ability of polymers to interact with metal centers and modify their oxidation state, or even the ability of ROS to diffuse and access the active sites. On the other hand, the peroxidase activity of CNPs is likely to stem from the synergistic action between the polymers and the particles. As the selectivity of nanozymes is a critical issue in biomedical applications, these surface functionalization strategies present an opportunity to suppress or enhance their enzymatic activity, while providing excellent stability and dispersion in biofluids. The summary of the knowledge obtained by this study is that biocompatible polymers can be pursued as surface modifiers of cerium oxide nanoparticles that can tune its enzymatic activities. Cerium oxide nanoparticles (CNP) with a nominal diameter of 7.8 nm were kindly provided by Solvay (Centre de Recherche d'Aubervilliers, Aubervilliers, France). The poly (poly(ethylene glycol) methacrylate-co-dimethyl-(methacryoyloxy)methyl phosphonic acid) polymers, bearing phosphonic acids and PEG chains were synthesized by Specific Polymers® (Castries, France) and are abbreviated as MPEG2K-MPh, MPEG5K-MPh, MPEG2K-MPEGa1K-MPh and MPEG2K-MPEGa2K-MPh. The poly(acrylic acid) coated nanoparticles (CeO2@PAA2K and CeO2@PAA5K) were prepared according to the precipitation-redispersion protocol. The scattered intensity and the hydrodynamic diameter D * were obtained from the NanoZS Zetasizer spectrometer (Malvern Instruments) with detection angle at 173°. The second-order autocorrelation function was analysed using the cumulant and CONTIN algorithms to determine the average diffusion coefficient D F of the scatterers. D * was calculated according to the Stokes-Einstein relation D * = k p T/3πηD F where k p is the Boltzmann constant, T the temperature and η the solvent viscosity. The hydrodynamic diameters provided here are the second coefficients in the cumulant analysis, noted Z GtQ in the Malvern software. Measurements were performed in triplicate at 25 °C after an equilibration time of 120 s. Laser Doppler velocimetry using the phase analysis light scattering mode and detection at an angle of 16° was used to carry out the electrokinetic measurements of electrophoretic mobility and zeta potential with the Zetasizer Nano ZS equipment (Malvern Instruments, UK). Zeta potential was measured after a 120 s equilibration at 25 °C. A UV-visible spectrometer (SmartSpecPlus from BioRad) was used to measure the absorbance of polymer coated cerium oxide nanoparticles aqueous dispersions. Absorbance data were used to determine the nanoparticle concentration for each batch by means of Beer-Lambert law. Micrographs were taken with a Tecnai 12 TEM operating at 80 kV equipped with a 1K×1K Keen View camera. CNP dispersions were deposited on ultrathin carbon type-A 400 mesh copper grids (Ted Pella, Inc.). Micrographs were analyzed using ImageJ software for 200 particles. The surface S of each particle was measured manually, and the diameter D was calculated from the expression: D = v4S/π. The Ferret analysis performed by the same plugin also provides the maximum and minimum diameters D -fg and D -w4 , from which the diameter was again estimated: D = 1/2(D -fg + D -w4 ). For the cerium oxide nanoparticles investigated here, the two determinations give the same size distribution (Fig. where D is the median diameter and β(s) is related to the size dispersity s through the relationship β(s) = vln (1 + s # ). s is defined as the ratio between the standard deviation and the average diameter. The catalytic activity of cerium oxide nanoparticles in the dismutation of superoxide radical anion was assessed by a colorimetric assay using UV-Vis spectroscopy (Kit #19160-1KTF). The self-regeneration ability of CNPs (1 g L -1 ) was investigated by addition of 0.2 M H2O2. Bare and polymer coated particles (1 g L -1 ) were incubated with 0.2 M H2O2 which oxidized cerium oxide from Ce 3+ oxidation state to Ce 4+ oxidation state. Oxidation converts colorless solution into yellow color solution which indicates more Ce 4+ on the lattice particle surface. SOD-mimetic activity was followed before and after addition of H2O2 by using UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Biotek, Synergy HT spectrophotometer) by the method elucidated by Korsvik et al. The catalytic activity of CNPs in the disproportionation of H2O2 was assessed by spectrofluorimetry using the Amplex-Red reagent assay (Cat # A22180). The steady-state kinetics of TMB oxidation catalyzed by nanozymes was carried out in a Hitachi UV2010 spectrophotometer by following the absorption of the oxidation product at 652 nm. The experiments were done in acetate buffer 0.1 M pH 4.0 at 25°C, the temperature being controlled by a Peltier. The effect of concentration in the nanozyme peroxidase-like activity was evaluated by varying the nanoparticle molar concentration [CNP] from 1 to 20 nM, maintaining those of TMB and of hydrogen peroxide at 0.8 mM and 2 M, respectively. For the peroxidase-like catalytic activity, kinetic curves were obtained in triplicate using [CNP] = 10 nM, [TMB] = 0 -0.8 mM and [H2O2] = 0 -2 M. For the oxidase-like catalytic activity, the data were obtained in triplicate by fixing the CNP at 250 nM, with the same conditions as above for [TMB] and [H2O2]. The kinetic parameters V -fg and K ‹ which are the maximum rate of product formation and the Michaelis-Menten constant were determined after fitting the time dependences with the Michaelis-Menten equation (Eqs. 3 and 4). Hydroxyl radical ( OH) generation was investigated by using terephthalic acid as a probe. A stock solution of 15 mM of terephthalic acid was prepared by adding 124.5 mg in 50 mL of deionized water consisting of 37 mM NaOH. To perform the reaction 5 mM of terephthalic acid was mixed with 10 nM CNPs and 50 mM H2O2, in a total volume of 3 mL. The reaction mixture was incubated for 30 minutes in dark at room temperature. After that the solution was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 5 minutes to remove the background. The fluorescence intensity of conversion of terephthalic acid to 2-Hydroxyterephthalic acid (2HTA) was measured at 315 nm excitation wavelength and emission spectra was followed from 350 to 550 nm using Cary Eclipse fluorescence spectrophotometer (Agilent). 1% ethanol was added to the solution to study the scavenging impact of ethanol on hydroxyl radical generation in the reaction. To quantify the hydroxyl radicals produced in the reaction the fluorescence intensity was compared with the fluorescence of standard 2-Hydroxyterephthalic acid. Various concentrations of 2HTA (2.5 μM, 5 μM, 7.5 μM, 10 μM and 12.5 μM) were prepared in 0.1 X PBS. The standard curve from 2HTA fluorescence was plotted and from that the concentation of hydroxyl radicals generated by cerium oxide nanoparticles in presence and absence of ethanol was calculated and represented. Cerium oxide nanoparticles have demonstrated antioxidant properties, resulting in intensive research into nanomedicine applications. In this study, polymeric coatings using poly (ethylene glycol) and phosphonic groups are found to significantly to improve colloidal stability of nanoparticles in biofluids and also to reduce, preserve or increase the enzyme-like catalytic activities of the cerium oxide.