The properties which characterize the stationary Hall effect in a Hall bar are derived from the Langevin equations describing the Brownian motion of an ensemble of interacting moving charges in a constant externally applied electromagnetic field. It is demonstrated that a non-uniform current density a) superimposes on the injected one, b) is confined in a boundary layer located near the edges over the Debye-Fermi length scale c) results from the coupling between diffusion and conduction and d) arises because of charge accumulation at the edges. The theory can easily be transposed to describe the Hall effect in metals, semi-conductors and plasmas and agrees with standard and previously published results. The physical mechanisms underlying the classical Hall effect 1 are well-known and are described in reference textbooks. For an ideal Hall bar -i.e. a long, thin, and narrow conducting layer contacted to an electric generator with symmetric lateral edges (see Fig. However, the nature of the boundary conditions at the edges is problematic since the accumulation of electric charges is not due to an external constraint (like e.g. for a capacitor or in a simple Ohmic conductor 2 ). Rather, this charge accumulation is produced by the system itself in reaction to the presence of a static magnetic field (which corresponding force produces no work), in agreement with the Le Chatelier-Braun principle. The purpose of this work is to provide a stochastic description of the (time-independent) stationary Hall effect by formulating the problem in the general context of the modern theory of Brownian motion We start by considering the Langevin equations of motion for the position r and momentum p describing Brownian motion of a point charge q having a mass m in an electromagnetic field, viz. Here, B is the externally applied magnetic field (supposed uniform here since we neglect the magnetic properties), -∇Φ is the electric part of the electromagnetic field describing both the externally applied field and chargecharge interactions, ζ is a phenomenological damping coefficient, and λ(t) is a Gaussian white noise force having the properties (see Refs. [ 5,6] for details) arXiv:2008.09212v1 [cond-mat.stat-mech] 20 Aug 2020 where the overbar denotes a statistical average over the distribution of realizations of the white noise Since in this work we are concerned with the steady-state situation, it is sufficient to consider the overdamped limit of Eq. ( Since B is constant in direction and magnitude, we assume that this vector is applied along the Z axis of the laboratory frame OXY Z. Next, we introduce the angular frequency where B is the magnetic field modulus, and the mobility tensor where is the bare Ohmic mobility of charge carriers, and is the Hall mobility. On using Eq.( where κ(t) is a white noise velocity defined in terms of the white noise force λ(t) by the statistical properties of which can easily be deduced from Eqs.( where D e is an effective diffusion coefficient given by with and D is the usual diffusion coefficient of the Smoluchowski-Kramers theory ? being linked to the Ohmic mobility by Einstein's relation. Owing to all what preceeds, one may derive the Fokker-Planck equation for the density of carriers n(r, t) corresponding to Eq.(11) using the methodology described in Risken's book where β -1 = kT and where we have introduced the dimensionless tensors and We note that Eq.( and the total current j(r, t) is the vector sum of Eqs.( We now assume that θ 2 H << 1. In this situation R ≈ 1 and the tensor (20) may be replaced by unity, while the tensor (19) remains unchanged. In this approximation, the Fokker-Planck equation (18) becomes ∂n ∂t (r, t) = D∇ • (∇n(r, t) + qβn(r, t)∇Φ(r, t)) where e Z is a unit vector along the Z axis. After this lengthy derivation we are ready to characterize the stationary state of interest. Indeed, for the stationary state Eq.(24) reduces to which solution is where n 0 is the intrinsic charge carriers density, as can be checked by insertion. We note in passing that because of Eq.( so that n(r) as given by Eq. ( is sufficient for describing the steady state density of charge carriers. In order to make further progress, it is necessary to specify Φ(r). Here, we consider that this quantity is made of two terms. The first one arises from the voltage imposed by the experimentalist to the device. This voltage creates a uniform electric field (scalar potential gradient) E 0 = -∇V 0 (r) inside the material. The second term V int (r) arises from the charge-charge interaction and can be written on fairly general grounds as follows : where V is the volume of the sample, U int describes the interactions between pairs of relevant entities in the sample and g is the pair distribution function where δn(r) << n 0 describes a small departure of the charge density from uniformity. Since r denotes the position of a point inside V, altogether Eq.(29) becomes Now, using where ε is the absolute static electric permittivity of the material, we have where δ(r -r ) is the three-dimensional Dirac delta function. By combining Eqs. (31) and (33), we finally have the mean-field Poisson equation for V int , namely In the following, we shall retain only terms linear in δn(r). By combining Eqs.( where the Debye screening length λ D is given by The Debye screening equation ( Next, we can combine Eqs. ( which is important in what follows. We consider now a Hall bar with length a, width b and thickness c (cf. Figure This equation is integrated once to yield where K is an integration constant to be specified later. Since the electric voltage is applied by the experimentalist in the X direction, we have where e X and e Y are unit vectors along the X and Y axes respectively. The conduction and diffusion current densities Eqs. ( Thus, using Eqs.( Notice that in spite of the fact that j is non-uniform, still ∇ • j = 0 and the solution of this last equation is nor j = 0, nor j = const! This demonstrates the non-trivial character of the current density distribution in a Hall device, where it is the device itself which generates its own boundary conditions along the y axis. In order to determine K, we use the global constraints imposed by the current injection from the generator, namely, the total electric current is zero in the Y direction. This implies that we neglect significant leakage currents (e.g. due to the voltmeter, or due to a lateral circuit). Therefore, the flux of the total current density through a section containing E 0 vanishes. We have According to Eq.((44)) the current density j Y is a constant so that the dot product under the integral is zero. Therefore, and we have which is the negative of the projection of the Hall electric field. Denoting the Hall field by E H , we deduce the well-known result where in the last equality Eq.( since we have assumed during our derivation that θ 2 H << 1. We note that the second term is proportional to D H = η H kT which has the units of a diffusion coefficient. This term appears because of coupling between conduction and diffusion. Note that for usual laboratory magnetic fields (B 1T), the second term in the right-hand side of Eq.( The above theory may be easily connected with the irreversible Thermodynamics of Creff et al. This last equation becomes finally if μ is written as follows : which is the starting point of the non-equilibrium Thermodynamics approach used by Creff et al. We now apply this last equation to the Hall bar in the mean field approximation. By integrating Eq.( where an unsignificant integration constant has been ignored. Because, in the mean field approximation, we have Eq.(30), Eq.(52) becomes after trivial algebra μ(x, y) = -E 0 x -E H y (54) since V 0 (r) = V 0 (x) = -E 0 x. This definitely proves that the stationary state in the Hall bar leads to a linear variation of the electrochemical potential μ with y (Creff et al. use μ = μ -V 0 instead in their work). In order to quantitatively illustrate our calculation, we consider a situation where charges are accumulated at the edges in a symmetric manner. In this situation, we have where δn a = δn(b/2) is the charge accumulated at the y = b/2 boundary. The symmetry of the two edges imposes δn(0) = 0 and the mean number of charge carriers (corresponding to the electroneutrality) is n 0 . This gives for j X (y) the expression We are interested only in the nonuniform part of the current, viz. J S X (y) = j X (y) -J 0 (57) where J 0 = qn 0 ηE 0 is the usual Ohmic current. in agreement with the predictions of Creff et al. At last, our treatment can be extended to the determination of the steady-state spin Hall effect with finite spin-flip length. In particular, it will be interesting to compare the results obtained from an adaptation of the present method with those obtained by us recently In conclusion, we have proposed a theoretical treatment for handling the steady-state Hall effect by formulating the problem in terms of Brownian motion in a field of force. We have illustrated our method by determining the properties of the stationary Hall effect in a Hall bar, and revealed a nontrivial nonuniform contribution to the current density which results from the coupling between conduction and diffusion. For realistic values of b and λ D , this current density is confined in a boundary layer of thickness λ D near the boundaries parallel to the direction of the Ohmic current density. This model noticeably strengthens previous results 4 obtained from a description in terms of non-equilibrium Thermodynamics.