Hot-spots are considered among the unavoidable consequences of the high integration density of 3D-ICs. Eliminating hotspots requires employing efficient cooling techniques. Using embedded channels, liquid cooling systems can be designed to deliver the right amount of coolant to each spot of the chip. In this study, numerical analysis is used to investigate the cooling of a 20 W hotspot using embedded channels employing three coolants: water, Freon (R22), and liquid nitrogen (LN). The investigation of thermal management and stress show that, although LN provides the lowest operating temperature (164 K), it causes the highest stress (355 MPa) at 100 mm/s inlet velocity. The study also shows that, coolant delivery using parallel channels results in a wide variation of local temperatures and stress. This stress variation may form "high-stress spots," which may cause circuit failure, performance degradation, or yield reduction. Therefore, cooling systems and chip fabrication should be designed to ensure the elimination of high-stress hotspots. Increasing the packing density requires the reduction of the device size. Published reports show that device size has reached its physical limit and Moore's law is almost reaching its end. Although several technologies, such as quantum computing or single electron transistor, have been proposed to meet the increasing demand for high integration density, the 3D-IC technology is believed to be the most practical one. 3D-ICs are built by stacking several 2D-ICs on top of each other and connecting them using metal interconnects through vias In this study, thermal stress analysis is conducted for a chip with 20 W hot-spot that is liquid-cooled through parallel embedded channels. The study was conducted using Comsol, a multi-physics numerical analysis program. Water, Freon R22, and Liquid Nitrogen (LN) are used as coolants. II. The heat transfer in any system can be a result of a combination of one or more of the following mechanisms: conduction, convection, and radiation. Heat conduction through a material with length l and cross-section A can be expressed by the following equation. Here, Q is the transferred heat, t is the time, k is the thermal conductivity (W.m -1 K -1 ) and ΔT is the temperature gradient, or the temperature difference between the two ends of the object in Kelvin (K). Q/t is the power in watts. Convection is the heat flow carried by the motion of fluid or gas. Heat convection can be expressed by the following equation. In this equation, h is the convective heat transfer coefficient (J.m -2 K -1 ), A is the object's cross sectional area which carries the fluid, and ΔT is the temperature difference between fluid temperature, T F , and heated surface temperature, T . Radiation is a method of heat transfer, where the exchange of heat takes place through heat emission to the ambience. Radiation can be described by the following equation, Here, P is the power, ε is the emissivity factor, σ denotes Stefan-Boltzmann constant (=5.67 X 10 -8 W.m -2 .K -4 ), A is the surface area of the radiating body and T is the temperature of the radiating body The relationship between stress and strain is bound by the following equation, In this equation, σ is the uniaxial stress, ε is the strain or deformation, and E is Young's modulus, measures the stiffness of a solid material Heat may cause thermal stress. Thermal stress can be expressed by the following equation, where α is the thermal expansion coefficient, T0 is the initial and TF is the final temperature of the object, and ΔT = (T F -T 0 ) in kelvins (K). The object temperature, TF varies with respect to time due to heat transfer, resulting in temperature difference III. For this study, a 20 W hotspot is represented by a 20 W tungsten heater The thermal analysis was done using the physical material parameters provided by the Comsol material library unless it is otherwise stated. The emissivity value used in the simulation for Si is 0.93 First, we set the inlet velocity into the embedded channels, shown in Fig. One observation from the figure is that there is no overshooting, as the case of For water cooling, the highest temperature difference of the Cu is 122 ̊C (415 K-293 K). For R22 cooling, that difference is 74 ̊C, and for LN the difference is -80 ̊C. Therefore, the von Mises stress on Cu is 337 MPa for water, 200MPa for R22, and 211MPa for LN, see Fig. For electroplated copper, with Poisson's ratio of 0.35 and thickness less than 0.885μm, the yield strength reaches 300MPa For tungsten heater the stress is tensile when coolant is H 2 O or R22. For water cooling, the highest stress is found to range from 200 MPa at the sides to about 320 MPa at the middle. For cooling using R22, the stress ranges from about 100 MPa to 220 MPa. For LN, the stress is compressive ranging from about 80 MPa to 156 MPa. In all cases, the stress on tungsten is much less than the yield strength of 750 MPa and the ultimate tensile strength of 980 MPa The stress observed on the Aluminum pads are tensile for water and R22 reaching 318 MPa and 206 MPa, respectively. For LN, the stress is compressive reaching 148 MPa. Aluminum 6061 has a tensile yield strength of 267 MPa and maximum tensile strength of 310 MPa The inlet velocity was increased to 100 mm/s. The temperature and von Mises stress are mapped in Figs. It is quite normal for a processor to have an idle temperature around 318K to 323K (25 ̊C to 30 ̊C) and full load temperature (50 ̊C to 60 ̊C) The study investigates the temperature and stress on the different metal wires and when a 20 W hotspot is cooled using embedded channels. The study considered three different coolants, water, R22, and LN with admission velocities of 10 mm/s and 100 mm/s. The study revealed important facts. First, water may not be able to bring temperature to an acceptable level to avoid Cu and Al deformation, especially at lower fluid velocity of 10 mm/s. Second, bulk copper cannot withstand the stress using any coolant, due to the low yield strength of 33.3 MPa. Third, if electroplated Cu is used, the yield strength increases to 300 MPa, and the metal can withstand the stress resulting from cooling using R22 and LN at 10mm/s velocity. Fourth, if the velocity increases to 100 mm/s, metal can withstand stress when water and R22 is used, but LN cooling causes unacceptable stress. In other word, R22 is the most suitable coolant for cooling 20 W hotspot. Since Al 6061 has a yield of 267 MPa, what is said about electroplated Cu can be said about Al alloy. For tungsten, with a yield strength of a minimum 750 MPa, no deformation will take-place under any of the cooling mechanisms. The study also shows that admitting the fluid from one side results in a large temperature and stress gradient that can reach 140 ̊C and 100 MPa, respectively. This creates local hot-spots and high-stress spots. These spots may not damage the IC, but it may make the performance unacceptable. The study shows the need for redesigning the embedded channel system in order to optimize the cooling process and eliminate both hotspots and high-stress spots. 