The recently proposed rSCAN functional [J. Chem. Phys. 150, 161101 (2019)] is a regularized form of the SCAN functional [Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 036402 (2015)] that improves SCAN's numerical performance at the expense of breaking constraints known from the exact exchange-correlation functional. We construct a new meta-generalized gradient approximation by restoring exact constraint adherence to rSCAN. The resulting functional maintains rSCAN's numerical performance while restoring the transferable accuracy of SCAN. Introduction There is a fundamental trade-off at the heart of all large scale chemical and material computational studies between prediction accuracy and computational efficiency. The level of theory used must simultaneously make accurate and efficient material property predictions. For many projects, Kohn-Sham density functional theory (KS-DFT) presents an appealing compromise, delivering useful accuracy and favorable algorithmic complexity. The Materials Project database presents a case study of finding such a balance Meta-GGAs are commonly designed around constraints known for the exact XC functional while minimizing the number of free parameters that must be fit. Functionals derived in this way are termed "nonempirical," and we refer the reader to the supplemental material of Ref. 7 for precise definitions of all the exact constraints known for meta-GGAs. Alternatively, the functional can be built from a more flexible form that allows some exact constraints to be broken, so that free parameters can be tuned for accuracy to reference data sets. Functionals taking the latter route, termed "empirical" functionals, tend to be less reliable for systems outside their fitting sets, making a non-empirical functional desirable for large scale applications. The strongly constrained and appropriately normed (SCAN) functional Despite these successes, SCAN's utility for large scale projects is limited by its sensitivity to the density of the numerical integration grid used during calculation. This poor numerical performance in many codes mandates the use of dense integration grids which reduces SCAN's computational efficiency In recent work, Bartók and Yates propose a regularized SCAN termed "rSCAN" that aims to control SCAN's numerical challenges while changing as little as possible from the parent functional The need for a computationally-efficient revision of SCAN is made plain in Fig. Summary of Changes The SCAN functional is constructed using a dimensionless kinetic energy variable, where, is the positive kinetic energy density, φ i (r) are the Kohn-Sham orbitals, Θ(μ -ε i ) is the orbital occupation, τ W = |∇n| 2 /(8n) is the von Weizsäcker kinetic energy density, and τ unif = 3(3π 2 ) 2/3 n 5/3 /10 is the kinetic energy density of a uniform electron gas, μ is the chemical potential, and ε i are the orbital energies. SCAN uses α to tune functional performance for the local chemical environment The design of rSCAN prioritizes numerical efficiency over satisfaction of exact constraints, and instead uses a regularized α , where τ r = 10 -4 and α r = 10 -3 are regularization constants. While the choice of a constant τ r eliminates numerical instability as α → 0, α does not retain the correct uniform and non-uniform scaling properties of α, nor the correct uniform density limit. For a uniform electron gas, α → 1, which SCAN uses to recover the LSDA exactly. In rSCAN, α → 1/(1 + τ r /τ unif ) which varies with the density, losing the correct uniform electron gas description. It has been shown that recovery of the uniform gas limit is critical for an accurate description of solids, atoms and molecules For a slowly-varying electron gas, the exchange and correlation energies have well-known expansions in powers of the gradient of the density. Let s = |∇n|/(2k F n), a dimensionless density-gradient on the scale of the Fermi wavevector k F = (3π 2 n) 1/3 , and q = ∇ 2 n/(4k 2 F n) a dimensionless density-Laplacian. The gradient expansion for the exchange energy per particle ε x (r) is /2 is a spin-scaling function of the spinpolarization ζ = (n ↑ -n ↓ )/n. Then the density-gradient expansion of the correlation energy per particle ε c (r) is where β(r s ) is a weakly-varying function of the Wigner-Seitz radius r s = (4πn/3) -1/3 , with a maximum β(0) ≈ 0.066725. The kinetic energy density τ has an analogous but unwieldy density-gradient expansion It is clear then that rSCAN makes wide-ranging sacrifices in exact constraint adherence in order to make a numerically-efficient meta-GGA. Here, we will show definitively that such sacrifices are needless and derive revisions to the rSCAN functional to restore exact constraint adherence without harming numerical efficiency. We apply these revisions to build a regularized-restored SCAN functional, r 2 SCAN, which recovers the most important exact constraints of SCAN. Table The correct uniform-and non-uniform-scaling properties of α, as well as the correct uniform density limit of E xc , are recovered in r 2 SCAN by regularizing α as where η = 10 -3 is a simple regularization parameter. Note that because τ ≥ τ W , ᾱ has the same range as α, 0 ≤ ᾱ < ∞. This is distinct from the dimensionless kinetic energy variable suggested by Ref. which ranges between 0 ≤ β < 1, and has less rapidlyvarying derivatives than α. As this work seeks revisions to SCAN, we will not consider β or related iso-orbital indicators here and adopt ᾱ as the iso-orbital indicator used throughout r 2 SCAN. SCAN uses the iso-orbital indicator variable α to drive interpolation functions f x/c (α) for exchange and correlation. The rSCAN functional replaces the original SCAN interpolation functions with a polynomial function of α when α < 2.5 that smooths out the plateau-like behavior of the original near α = 1. The r 2 SCAN functional adopts the rSCAN interpolation function but uses ᾱ as the indicator variable. Both the SCAN and rSCAN interpolation functions are shown in Figure The SCAN interpolation function was designed to have vanishing derivatives at α = 1, but the rSCAN replacements go linearly through zero at this point. As a result of these non-vanishing derivatives, the interpolation function makes spurious contributions to the slowly-varying density-gradient expansions that break the corresponding exact constraints. The r 2 SCAN functional recovers the gradient expansions through O[(∇n) 2 ] while using the rSCAN polynomial interpolation by directly canceling spurious terms in the slowly-varying energy densities. For exchange we recover the gradient expansion by replacing the x(p, α ) function of SCAN and rSCAN with, Here, the constants C η = 20/27 + 5η/3, depending on the regularization parameter η = 10 -3 , and 2. SCAN (blue, solid) and rSCAN (red, dashed) interpolation functions plotted for a generic stand-in iso-orbital indicator "Y" (α for SCAN, α for rSCAN, ᾱ for r 2 SCAN). The functions mix Y = 0 (single orbital) and Y = 1 (uniform density limit for α and α ) energy densities. The derivatives of the SCAN interpolation functions vanish to all orders in Y at Y → 1, allowing SCAN to recover the appropriate densitygradient expansions exactly in the slowly-varying limit. The rSCAN interpolation functions are used with Y = ᾱ in r 2 SCAN and their smooth, non-vanishing first derivatives at Y = 1 necessitate changes from SCAN to r 2 SCAN in the Y = 1 energy densities. C 2x ≈ -0.162742 eliminate erroneous contributions from df x (ᾱ )/dᾱ at ᾱ → 1, and d p2 = 0.316 is a damping parameter determined as the maximal value (therefore least damped) required to recover SCAN's error for the rare gas atom and jellium surface appropriate norms described in Ref. From Eq. 4, we see that a meta-GGA recovering GE4X must either explicitly include the Laplacian of the density as an ingredient, or recover q-dependent terms via integration by parts on τ . The latter method, used in SCAN, is theoretically sound but likely introduces further numerical instabilities due to an increased sensitivity to α. Furthermore, the gradient expansion for the correlation energy is known only to second order, and the relevance of GE4X (beyond GE2X terms) to real systems has not been established. To ensure that our functional is numerically stable we only consider GE2X here and defer further discussion of GE4X and its difficulties to a further publication in the near future. The gradient expansion for correlation is only known to second order, and we recover it by replacing the g(At 2 ) function which appears in the slowly-varying correlation energy density of rSCAN and SCAN with, Here ∆y is the new term introduced in r 2 SCAN that eliminates erroneous contributions from df c (ᾱ )/dᾱ at ᾱ → 1. Replacing α with ᾱ and g(At 2 ) with Eqs. 9 and 10 in rSCAN correlation defines r 2 SCAN correlation and approximately recovers GE2C. In Eq. 10, ∆f c2 ≈ -0.711402 and γ = (1 -ln 2)/π 2 ≈ 0.031091 are constants; all other quantities are functions defined in the Supplemental Materials. The correlation gradient expansion of r 2 SCAN becomes exact whenever |∇ζ| = 0, and approximately recovers GE2C for all other values of ∇ζ. Thus r 2 SCAN recovers GE2C exactly for spinunpolarized systems, where the correlation energy is likely most negative, and for fully spin-polarized systems, where the correlation energy is likely least negative. Between these limits, the r 2 SCAN correlation gradient expansion is a reasonable approximation to the true gradi-ent expansion. Enhancement Factors and Derivatives These modifications should not degrade the good numerical performance of rSCAN. Their effect can be seen in Figure and summarize the non-multiplicative component as the derivative of the energy density with respect to τ . Both are shown in Figure While the overall inter-shell features of the F xc are similar between the two functionals, SCAN shows plateaus where α = 1, while r 2 SCAN is smooth throughout. This behavior is echoed as sharp oscillations in both the multiplicative potential component and non-multiplicative τ derivative for SCAN, which contrasts with the smooth equivalents for r 2 SCAN. We suggest that r 2 SCAN may make generation of meta-GGA pseudopotentials feasible. Note that on the scale of Figure Atomization Energies Reference 25 shows that atomization energies are particularly problematic for rSCAN, with its error being roughly twice that of SCAN's. As such, we take the G3 set of 226 atomization energies We restate that the improved numerical efficiency of r 2 SCAN is immediately apparent from Figure Further Testing The transferablility of the new functionals was further tested for 76 reaction barrier heights We have presented r 2 SCAN as a functional combining SCAN's transferable accuracy from exact constraint satisfaction with rSCAN's numerical efficiency. r 2 SCAN satisfies the most important exact constraints of SCAN. In our future work, we will assess the importance of the GE4X terms beyond GE2X (recovered by SCAN, but not by r 2 SCAN) as an exact constraint. We draw this conclusion from the competitive accuracy shown for the diverse test sets of Table II and the rapid grid convergence of Figure S1: Computational Methods and grid convergence in VASP, S2: r Section S1 provides essential input parameters needed to reproduce the calculations reported in the main text. Section S2 provides the equations of r 2 SCAN, with numeric parameters given. Section S4 tabulates reference atomic energies for the nitrogen and neon atoms. Section S5 tabulates all resultant data for the test sets in the main text. All data referenced in the main text is made available here. Machine-readable data will be made available at reasonable request. Tables Within Turbomole • Gaussian basis set 6-311++G(3df,3pd), excepting the S22 set, which used aug-cc-pVTZ. The G3 set of atomisation energies Within VASP • ISMEAR function (controlling partial occupancy near the Fermi level) set to -5 (tetrahedron method with Blöchl corrections), except for Sr, where it was set to 1 (Methfessel-Paxton scheme) • ENCUT set to 650 eV for plane wave cutoff energy (except for Na, where it was set to 1000 eV) • Γ-centered grid in k-space, with KSPACING set to 0.1 Å-1 • ADDGRID set to true (optional finer grid to calculate augmentation charge density) • PREC set to "Accurate". The LC20 set of cubic lattice constants VASP does not use basis sets for real-space integration; the fineness of the real-space mesh and the reciprocalspace mesh are controlled by the KSPACING parameter. Smaller values of KSPACING increase the fineness of both meshes, generally improving the quality of numeric integration, and allowing for more k-states to be included in the Hamiltonian. We have selected a value of 0.1 Å-1 much smaller than the recommended default, 0.5 Å-1 . We have also performed a convergence test of the mean absolute error (MAE) for AE6 test set [66] of six atomization energies (a subset of G3) with respect to the real-space grid in VASP. The size of the real-space grid in VASP is controlled by the precision (PREC, set to "accurate" here) and the energy cutoff (ENCUT). One may also specify the number of grid points per axis using the NGX, NGY, and NGZ tags. For this test, the "fine" grid settings NGXF, etc. were left to be automatically determined by the combination of PREC, ENCUT, and the grid points per axis. A default grid was selected by leaving ENCUT as the default from the pseudopotentials, and the grid points per axis unspecified. As is common for molecular and atomic calculations in VASP, only the Γ point was used to sample k space. In Table The ultimate choice of regularization for the unphysical region ᾱ < 0, as shown in Eqs. S7 and S26, is consistent with the current implementation of SCAN in VASP. The current SCAN subroutines in VASP simply extend SCAN's interpolating functions, f x (α) and f c (α), to α < 0; our implementation does the same. We do not ascribe a physical interpretation to these regions, nor to the numeric regularization chosen. They are necessary computational artifices. An exchange functional for a density with arbitrary spin polarization, n ↑ and n ↓ , can be constructed from a spin-unpolarized functional via the spin-scaling relation Thus we present equations only for spin-unpolarized exchange energy functionals. Any constants not defined here nor in the main text are unchanged from rSCAN. The values of the new constants appearing in the previous equations are η = 0.001 and d p2 = 0.361. Some constants appearing here are unchanged from either SCAN or rSCAN. Note that for the rSCAN interpolating polynomial we take the convention of indexing the coefficient by the power of α it multiplies, thus the vector c x begins S4 at c 0 . These are: c x = (1, -0.667, -0.4445555, -0.663086601049, 1.451297044490, -0.887998041597, 0.234528941479, -0.023185843322) (S14) (S31) (S39) The values of the new constants appearing in the previous equations are the same as for exchange, η = 0.001 and d p2 = 0.361. Some constants appearing here are unchanged from either SCAN or rSCAN. Note that for the rSCAN interpolating polynomial we take the convention of indexing the coefficient by the power of α it multiplies, thus the vector c c begins at c 0 . These are: c c = (1, -0.64, -0.4352, -1.535685604549, 3.061560252175, -1.915710236206, 0.516884468372, -0.051848879792) (S42) The effect of the η regularization parameter on the r 2 SCAN exchange and correlation functionals is illustrated in Figures , as a function of the η regularization parameter in r 2 SCAN for exchange (top), correlation (middle), and exchange-correlation (lower) calculated from fixed Hartree-Fock Slater orbitals The exchange-correlation potential plots of Figure We provide the total and exchange-correlation energies for the nitrogen and neon atoms from the common cc-pVTZ basis set 