The discovery of superconductivity in a d 9-δ nickelate has inspired disparate theoretical perspectives regarding the essential physics of this class of materials. A key issue is the magnitude of the magnetic superexchange, which relates to whether cuprate-like high-temperature nickelate superconductivity could be realized. We address this question using Ni L-edge and O K-edge spectroscopy of the reduced d 9-1/3 trilayer nickelates R4Ni3O8 (where R=La,Pr) and associated theoretical modeling. A magnon energy scale of ∼ 80 meV resulting from a nearest-neighbor magnetic exchange of J = 69(4) meV is observed, proving that d 9-δ nickelates can host a large superexchange. This value, along with that of the Ni-O hybridization estimated from our O K-edge data, implies that trilayer nickelates represent an intermediate case between the infinite-layer nickelates and the cuprates. Layered nickelates thus provide a route to testing the relevance of superexchange to nickelate superconductivity. Ever since the discovery of superconductivity in the cuprates In this Letter, we combine Resonant Inelastic X-ray Scattering (RIXS) with first principles calculations and theoretical modeling to characterize the magnetic exchange in trilayer R 4 Ni 3 O 8 that fall in the overdoped regime of cuprates in terms of electron count. We find a near-neighbor exchange of J = 69(4) meV, in good accord with our first principles calculations. This demonstrates that these reduced nickelates indeed have a strong superexchange (within a factor of two of the cuprates). By comparing the O K-edge pre-peak intensity to that of cuprates and infinite-layer nickelates, we argue that these trilayer materials are intermediate between cuprates and infinite-layer nickelates. Based on this, we suggest that electron-doping R 4 Ni 3 O 8 materials provides a compelling route to testing the relevance of superexchange for nickelate superconductivity. R 4 Ni 3 O 8 (R =La, Pr) single crystals were prepared by synthesizing their parent Ruddlesden-Popper phases and reducing them in H 2 /Ar gas as described previously We used XAS to confirm the expected electronic properties of the La 4 Ni 3 O 8 samples. The Ni L-edge spectrum from 846-878 eV is shown in Fig. We then performed RIXS to study the low-energy degrees of freedom. High energy-resolution RIXS measurements were performed at I21 at the Diamond Light Source with a resolution of 45 meV and at NSLS-II with a resolution of 30 meV. All RIXS data shown were taken at a temperature of 20 K using a fixed horizontal scattering angle of 2θ = 154 • and x-ray polarization within the horizontal scattering plane (π polarization). Different momenta were accessed by rotating the sample about the vertical axis, such that the projection of the scattering vector varies. (H, 0) and (H, H) scattering planes were accessed by rotating the sample about its azimuthal angle. Figure In order to analyze the magnetic dispersion, we fit the low-energy RIXS spectra with the sum of a zero-energy Gaussian fixed to the experimental energy resolution in order to account for the elastic line and a damped harmonic oscillator to capture the magnetic excitation [41]. To model the magnetic interactions, we expect a leading contribution from the nearest-neighbor in-plane Ni-O-Ni superexchange, J. We further know that La 4 Ni 3 O 8 , like some other nickelates and cuprates, has a striped ground state with both spin and charge character, with an inplane wavevector of Q = (1/3, 1/3) where k in is the incident wavevector and M n,Q (r i ) is magnetization vector at site i (i.e., the eigenvector of the n th spin-wave mode at Q). This vector is in-plane since the ground-state moments are along c Our rather large value of J = 69(4) meV is the principal result of this Letter. This magnetic exchange is 2.5 times larger than that of the 1/3 doped nickelate La 2-x Sr x NiO 4 which also has a diagonal stripe state (with S = 1 d 8 magnetic rows and S = 1/2 d 7 domain walls), though the two have comparable J 1 Given the 180 degree Ni-O-Ni bonds in the d 9 nickelates, superexchange is the most likely mechanism for generating their exchange interactions, as in the cuprates. In the charge-transfer limit, the strength of this interaction scales as t 4 pd /∆ 3 where t pd is the hopping between the transition metal x 2 -y 2 and oxygen pσ orbitals, and ∆ ≡ E d -E p is the energy difference between them. Large pd hopping and a small ∆ implies a large ligand-hole character for the doped holes, as this is controlled by the ratio t pd /∆. We therefore fit the O K pre-peak intensity to compare to the literature for La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 In conclusion, we report the presence of a large superexchange J = 69(4) meV in La 4 Ni 3 O 8 -the first direct measurement of superexchange in a d 9-δ nickelate. This superexchange value is within a factor of two of values found in the cuprates, and this, coupled with a substantial O K pre-peak, establishes the charge-transfer nature of this d 9-δ nickelate with substantial d-p mixing. By comparing the O K-edge XAS spectra of La 4 Ni 3 O 8 to that of the cuprates and the infinite-layer nickelate, we establish that trilayer nickelates represent a case that is intermediate between them. This result is interesting in view of the widespread belief that increasing magnetic superexchange might promote higher-T c superconductivity Work The difference between La 4 Ni 3 O 8 and Pr 4 Ni 3 O 8 has been studied in prior x-ray absorption and density functional theory (DFT)-based work In this Section, we compute the dispersion relation and RIXS intensity for the magnons in a diagonal stripe state. To reproduce the stripe order shown in Fig. We proceed to calculate the magnon dispersion for the diagonal stripe state by generalizing the torque equation formalism of Carlson et al. where r, r label the positions of the spins in different magnetic unit cells and the indices i, j label the spins within each magnetic unit cell (i, j = 1, ..., 6) as shown in Fig. and we set S z r,i = ±S with the sign given by the orientation of the spin in the ground state. To start, we identify the couplings J ij rr that connect the spins at different lattice positions, with the origin taken to be the location of spin 1. We distinguish two groups of spins, (S 1 , S 3 , S 5 ) and (S 2 , S 4 , S 6 ), with each group having equivalent in-plane locations due to the c-axis translational symmetry. Their couplings are • S 1 (r = 0) couples to S 2 twice with J (r = a 1 , r = a 2 ) and twice with J 1 (r = -2a 1 , r = -2a 2 ). The same applies for S 3 (S 5 ) coupled to S 4 (S 6 ). • S 2 (r = a 1 ) couples to S 1 twice with J (r = 0, r = a 1a 2 ) and twice with J 1 (r = 3a 1 , r = a 1 + 2a 2 ). The same applies for S 4 (S 6 ) coupled to S 3 (S 1 ). For the couplings along [0,0,1], we have: • S 1 (S 2 ) couples to S 3 (S 4 ) with J z . • S 5 (S 6 ) couples to S 3 (S 4 ) with J z . • S 3 (S 4 ) couples with J z to S 1 (S 2 ) and to S 5 (S 6 ). With this information, we can write the torque equations for each of the six spins in the magnetic unit cell, for example: Substituting Eq. 4, we can rewrite this expression as and simplifying where we have defined The final torque equations for the six spins are This results in a 12 × 12 secular matrix (6 spins, 2 components, x, y, per spin) Diagonalizing this matrix yields the squared eigenvalues and each of which are two-fold degenerate because of the tetragonal symmetry of the ground state. As iω = λ, these eigenvalues correspond to the magnon branches and To justify these labels, and give some sense of these energies, we consider the Γ point. Substituting Q = 0 in Eq. 8 gives C = 2J + 2J 1 and D = J z , which shows that our labels were chosen in order of increasing energy: where the approximation applies for J z J. The magnon dispersion for the parameters determined by the fit to the RIXS data, J=69 meV, J 1 =17 meV (with J z =13.6 meV), can be seen in Fig. As explained in the main text and Ref. with i summed over the six spins in the magnetic unit cell and As the analytic expressions for the eigenvectors are complicated, we chose to determine them by diagonalizing the secular matrix Eq. 10 numerically for each Q using SciPy is degenerate with with n, Q being implicit. It is important to enforce this symmetry when calculating the RIXS intensity. For the fit shown in the text, we took into account the scattering geometry of the RIXS measurements, with and with θ the Bragg angle and λ E the photon wavelength. Here, In particular, as the in-plane component of Q is swept, the Q z component changes accordingly. We performed DFT calculations for La 4 Ni 3 O 8 with the all-electron full potential code WIEN2k The exchange couplings (J, J 1 and J z ) were obtained from total energy calculations for different Ni spin configurations (labeled C1-C4 in Fig. • C1 -AFM J, AFM J 1 , AFM J z • C2 -AFM J, AFM J 1 , FM J z • C3 -FM J, FM J 1 , FM J z • C4 -FM J, AFM J 1 , FM J z The energies per trilayer are (with each bond counted once) where E 0 is the non-magnetic energy. Solving this set of linear equations gives whose values are listed in the main text. Our X-ray absorption spectrum (XAS) measurements aim to compare the intensity of the O K-edge pre-peak feature as a guide to the 3d-2p orbital hybridization in nickelates and cuprates. We analyze our data on La 4 Ni 3 O 8 against literature data for La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 from Ref. lower integrated spectral weight, the broadening perhaps due to a spatially varying doping. The relative integrated weight per doped hole is 1.00(2):1.74(5):1.05 FIG. arXiv:2008.08209v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 16 Jan 2021