Extraordinarily transmitting arrays are promising candidates for quasi-optical (QO) components due to their high frequency selectivity and beam scanning capabilities owing to the leaky-wave mechanism involved. We show here how by breaking certain unit cell and lattice symmetries, one can achieve a rich family of transmission resonances associated with the leaky-wave dispersion along the surface of the array. By combining two dimensional and one dimensional periodic Method of Moments (MoM) calculations with QO Terahertz (THz) timedomain measurements, we provide physical insight, numerical and experimental demonstration of the different mechanisms involved in the resonances associated with the extraordinary transmission peaks and how these evolve with the number of slots. Thanks to the THz instrument used, we are also able to explore the time-dependent emission of the different frequency components involved. This characteristic held the key for the explanation of the, at that point, unexplained mystery. The relation between the high transmissivity and the periodicity became apparent when the transmission spectrum was mapped for different planes of incidence Experiments similar to those published in The development of extraordinary transmission was subsequent to similar periodic structures, widely-used by the microwave community, known as Frequency Selective Surfaces (FSS) EOT arrays, with their narrow linewidth and strong suppression out of band, have been shown to be excellent candidates for quasi-optical (QO) components such as filters and wave plates Let us consider the array shown in Fig. where G M (x, y) is a dyadic Green's function, relating the in-plane components of the electric field on the surface of the slots and the surface current density on the metallic screen, and J as is the surface current density on the perfectly conducting plane in the absence of the slots (dictated by E i ). It is well-known that for the case of a doubly-infinitely periodic array, the integral equation can be reduced to a single unit cell defining a periodic dyadic Green's function, G per M which groups the contributions from all the arrays through an infinite summation, in which the fields on the array are considered Floquet-periodic as imposed by the impinging wave where the integral is limited to the single unit cell δ 00 by defining a two-dimensionally periodic Green's function given by where k x0 and k y0 are the phasing wavevectors defined as in Both equations ( Once the system of equations has been inverted, the total electric field on the surface of the array can be directly calculated together with its Fourier transform, which can be used to calculate the far-field and the scattering parameters As discussed in the introduction, the presence of EOT phenomenon is linked to the existence of surface waves supported by the array. Mathematically this link is clear, as the existence of surface waves can be studied by looking for the zeroes of the determinant of the matrix of the system of linear equations resulting from the application of the MoM, |∆ per |, which is a function of the geometrical parameters, the frequency and the phasing imposed between adjacent unit cells. This means that when the excitation is close in frequency, phasing and polarization to that of the surface wave, resonant behaviour is found. When the position of these zeroes is tracked for a range of frequencies and phasings, one can build the dispersion diagram of the surface modes Using the analysis techniques and the concepts presented here, we have studied the transmission through a two dimensional periodic array of slots for three different periodicity configurations, i.e. a > b, a = b and a < b, as shown in Fig. In Fig. When the periodicity along the y direction is smaller than that along the x, the degeneracy of the EOT peak is broken, and we would expect to find two peaks in the transmission spectrum in Fig. In Fig. The fact that the position of the two resonant peaks can be dictated by the periodicities chosen along the x and y direction allows for a large freedom in the design of quasioptical filters. The electrical size of the aperture can be then used to engineer the width of the resonances, as done in standard single-resonance EOT filters As one can see, the EOT through tilted slot arrays opens a wide variety of situations through the coupling of the impinging radiation into a wider variety of Floquet modes, and therefore of EOT resonances. As it was shown in In order to verify the theoretical results and physical insight provided in the previous section, we performed a series of experiments at THz frequencies using QO experimentation techniques as discussed in the Appendix. The samples under test were laser micromachined (further details about the fabrication can also be found in the Appendix) subwavelength hole arrays on 10μm-thick aluminium foils. The geometrical dimensions of the fabricated samples were inspected with a microscope; the in-plane lattice periods were a = 540 ± 5 μm and b = 600 ± 5 μm, and the slot dimensions were l = 226 ± 5 μm, w = 176 ± 5 μm. The transmission spectrum at normal incidence with the electric field polarization perpendicular to the long side of the slots, l, increases with the number of rows N y (Fig. ) (j = 0, . . . , N y -1), where η 0j represents the surface of the j-th slot within the unit strip and G per 1D (x, y) is the 1-D periodic dyadic Green's function given in terms of the free space Green's function To introduce the illumination effects, a 1-D Gaussian beam profile is used as the impinging wave for the calculation of J as (x, y), as in The existence of two transmission channels involved in the EOT (i.e. direct transmission and leaky-wave-mediated transmission) becomes evident in the time-frequency analysis of the scattering phenomenon, which allows for the time-dependent analysis of the radiated waves We have also studied the complete angular dependence of the system by varying both angle of incidence and polarization, as these allow to control the matching of the impinging wave to the two leaky waves responsible for the two different EOT resonances of the tilted slot array. peaks. Additionally, one can see the excitation of higher order spatial harmonics, such as the (-1,0) and (0,-1), whose associated resonant frequencies increase with the angle of incidence. Although for the sake of brevity we only show here the position of the peaks, we have found that the relative transmissivity of the two EOT peaks can be controlled by choosing the wave to be either TE or TM, therefore promoting the excitation of one of the two leaky waves while suppressing the other. In particular, by using TE oblique incidence the lower frequency resonance is favored, while the TM oblique incidence enhances the higher EOT resonance. This effect can be explained by the increasing wavevector matching between the impinging and the leaky wave, which can ultimately lead to huge resonant amplitudes as theoretically shown for bound surface waves supported by semi-infinite arrays We have found experimentally, however, that the excitation of the two leaky waves can also be controlled by playing with the field configuration of the scattered fields on the slot. In Fig. In this paper we have provided an extensive study of the EOT phenomenon through periodic and finite arrays of tilted slots, which allow for a very distinguishable simultaneous coupling to two different EOT resonances, in contrast to the highly symmetric arrays traditionally studied in the literature. We have shown that the two resonances can be linked to the existence of two different leaky waves, propagating along perpendicularly to each other, as demonstrated by the calculation of their dispersion diagrams and also by showing their matching (or absence of matching) to the scattered fields under certain symmetries. By performing experiments at terahertz frequencies we have both demonstrated the validity of our theory, but have also shown the role that finite effects play in the quality factor of the theoretically highly selective EOT resonance. Thanks to the time-domain spectroscopy, we are able to show the consequences that the dispersion characteristics of the leaky-waves involved have in the time response associated with each frequency component of the scattered fields, namely its slow resonance build-up. By exploring the angular dependence under two differently polarized illuminations, we have shown the off-axis dispersion of the leaky waves which is dominated by the linear lightline harmonic dispersion and Fabrication. The laser fabrication trials were performed on a state-of-art laser micromachining system that integrates a femtosecond (fs) laser source (Amplitude Systems Satsuma model) with a maximum average power of 5W, central emission wavelength of 1030 nm, pulse duration of 310 fs and maximum pulse repetition rate of 500 KHz. A stack of five mechanical axes (three linear and two rotary stages) were used to move the samples with very high accuracy and precision, i.e. the positioning resolutions of the linear and rotary stages as stated by the manufacturer were 0.25 μm and 45 μrad, respectively Measurements. The samples were characterized with the all fibre-coupled THz time-domain spectrometer TERA K15 from Menlo Systems in a QO configuration without purging. A couple of TPX planoconvex lenses (effective focal length ≈54 mm) were used to work with a collimated beam whose frequency-dependent beam-waist at the sample position was estimated to be 4.1 mm and 4.0 mm along the E-and H-plane at 0.5 THz, respectively. For the angle-resolved measurements of Fig. 