Granular aluminum is a promising material for high kinetic inductance devices such as qubit circuits. It has the advantage over atomically disordered materials such as NbN x , to maintain a high kinetic inductance concomitantly with a high quality factor. We show that high quality nano-scale granular aluminum films having a sharp superconducting transition with normal state resistivity values of the order of 1 × 10 5 μΩ cm and kinetic inductance values of the order of 10 nH/ can be obtained, surpassing state of the art values. We argue that this is a result of the different nature of the metal-to-insulator transition, being electronic correlations driven (Mott type) in the former and disorder driven (Anderson type) in the latter. In recent years superconducting (SC) qubit circuits (QC) have evolved considerably. The first type, the so-called Cooper pair box When the mean free path l of a metal is reduced by disorder to be smaller than the BCS coherence length ξ 0 , the superfluid density n s can be decreased substantially. For a given value of the current, pair velocity is much increased and the kinetic energy of the Cooper pairs becomes the dominant factor of the self-inductance of a stripe. In a stripe of length L, width w and thickness t the kinetic energy of the superfluid with density n s and velocity v s is stored as inductive energy a) Electronic mail: avivmoshe@mail.tau.ac.il since J s = I s /wt = n s (2e)v s and the penetration depth definition is λ 2 = 2m μ0ns(2e) 2 we obtain for the inductance where L k/ is the kinetic inductance divided by the number of squares L/w. Deep in the dirty limit, defined as l ξ 0 , λ 2 λ 2 L ξ 0 /l, where λ L is the London penetration depth where ρ n = m/ne 2 τ is the normal state resistivity. In the BCS weak coupling 2∆ = 3.53k B T c 7 one can calculate L k/ from the values of the sheet resistance R = ρ n /t and the critical temperature. A high inductance can be reached by increasing the value of the sheet resistance. This can be achieved by decreasing the film thickness (for example Nb Another material that has been considered recently for application in QC is granular aluminum (grAl) We show in Fig. A further critical point concerns the level of losses, as seen for instance in resonators. In Fig. We propose that the origin of the different behaviors of atomically disordered and granular superconductors lies in the different nature of their metal to insulator transition. When disorder is on the atomic scale the transition is of the Anderson type. This is the case in NbN x films where disorder is created by introducing vacancies through a reduction of the nitrogen concentration The nature of the metal-to-insulator transition is quite different in a granular metal consisting of nano-size metal crystallites weakly coupled together. When the coupling is weak enough, the Coulomb charging energy of the grains turns the granular system into an insulator If, in addition the grain size distribution is narrow as is the case here, a Mott transition can be preserved. Indeed, disorder appears to play in that case only a minor role since superconductivity persists up to k F l values smaller than unity! 20 . Additional experimental evidence for a Mott transition in nanoscale grAl has been previously presented and discussed In Fig. to Mattis-Bardeen (MB) theory The internal quality factor can be approximated by the expression Q i σ 2 /σ 1 which holds for thin film (t λ) and a kinetic induction fraction α = L k /L g of order unity On the basis of these compared optical conductivity data we expect higher losses in devices based on NbN x , and other atomically disordered superconductors, than in devices using nano-scale grAl. This is borne out by the respective quality factor values of resonators made of these two types of materials, see Table Regarding the possibility of other Mott granular SC, we suggest granular materials having a level spacing of the order of 100 K. The advantage of grAl is that this criterion is established naturally during the sample evaporation, without any need for expensive techniques. Al-Ge films deposited at low temperature are also a possibility In summary, we suggest that the nature of the M/I transition is crucial for achieving both high kinetic inductance and high quality factor devices. Atomically disordered SC are less suitable for this purpose, as evident from the low quality factors which we believe result from massive presence of sub-gap states seen from optical conductivity data. In contrast, nanoscale superconductors, such as grAl, are more suitable for this purpose. Their higher quality factor at large kinetic inductance values results we believe from the absence of intrinsic sub-gap states. We have interpreted this difference as being due to the different nature of the metal-to-insulator transition in these two systems, being of the Anderson type in NbN x and of the Mott type in nano-scale grAl. We suggest therefore that high inductance devices based on superconducting granular films, consisting of grains of only a few nano-meters with a narrow size distribution so as to reduce disorder effects, should be further considered for implementation in quantum circuits. We acknowledge fruitful discussions with Ioan Pop, Florence Levy-Bertrand, Marc Scheffler, Nimrod Bachar and Christoph Strunk, held at the Superconducting Kinetic Inductances 2019 workshop in Bad Honnef, hosted by the Wilhelm and Else Heraeus-Foundation. . Internal quality factors Qi at low circulating photon numbers, approaching single photon regime. Asterisk marks L k/ as estimated by Eq. 3 with the assumption of a BCS weak coupling ratio. Note that all grAl data shown in this table was taken for samples deposited onto substrates held at room temperature.