In this work, dot-sized upconversion nanocrystals (UCN-dots) with diameter c.a. 3.4±0.15 nm have been synthesized. These UCN-dots exhibit visible emission (at  = 497, 527 and 545 nm) under the excitation with 980 nm CW-NIR laser. Further, these UCN-dots exhibit high energy upconversion emission (UV region,  = 206 to 231 nm) with Ti-Sapphire Femtosecond laser of 140-femtoseconds duration at 80 MHz repetition rate at different excitation, which has never been reported. This is interesting to report that the generation of high energy UV-Vis emission and their shifting from  = 206 to 231 nm for the UCN-dots by tuning the excitation wavelength ranging from  = 950 nm to 980 nm Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins irradiated from Ti: sapphire Femtosecond laser observed. We have demonstrated the generation of high energy upconversions with change in energy band gaps as well as number of absorbed photons per photon emitted under the Femtosecond-laser excitation power. Additionally, we report the photo luminescence of UCN-dots in visible range with 450 nm excitation wavelength exhibiting blue and red emission (visible to visible). The generation of high energy up-conversion in UV-Vis region could be useful for designing optoelectronic and biomedical devices for therapeutic application. Upconversion phenomenon is a two photon-(one from sensitizer ion and other one from activator ion) process followed by Energy Transfer (ET) which contributes higher photon energy in ultraviolet (UV) and visible range under the excitation with Infrared (IR) or near infrared (NIR) radiation. The transmutation of IR/NIR photons to UV/visible-photons in upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs) make them unique for applications in electronics and biomedical. Though there are a few lanthanide ions manifested upconversion but substantially Yb 3+ , Er 3+ , Tm 3+ trivalent lanthanide ions have been used to synthesize upconversion nanocrystals due to their efficient upconversionemission. The particle size and morphology of UCN-dots were characterized through transmission electron microscopy and high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) (model FEI TecnaiG2-TWIN 200 KV), elemental analysis was performed using Energy Dispersive X-ray analysis (EDXA), X-Ray diffraction pattern (XRD with CoKα-radiation) was used to determine the crystal structure. Raman Spectroscopy (WiTec, alpha 300) was used to find out the solid state lattice vibration and to find out the defects, Fluorescence Spectrophotometer (HITACHI, F-4600) provided with an external near infrared (NIR) laser source 980nm to measure the upconversion fluorescence (UCF) spectra in visible region. Ti Sapphire tunable oscillator laser with Femtosecond pulses were used to study the upconversion in UV and Visible region. The arrangement of Femtosecond experimental set-up has been shown in Figure UCN-dots were synthesized as discussed in the experimental section and characterized them through the suitable methods. Figure Distance between two adjacent fringes has been calculated to be 3.1 Å and is matching well with the results reported for larger sized UCN nanoparticles. Crystal structure of solid powder UCN-dots has been confirmed through XRD study Figure Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins Weak Raman bands with phonon frequency below 1000 cm -1 confirm for the presence of vibration modes () of -NaYF 4 or β-NaYF 4 crystals. Further, the weak bands appeared at 687-703 cm -1 and 260-279 cm -1 along with the broad band appeared in between 750-1750 cm -1 confirmed for the FCC structure of α-NaYF 4 :Yb 3+ ;Er 3+ (phonon vibrations in between 1384-1416 cm -1 and 932-1041 cm -1 with moderate intensity). The possible reasons for the appearance of higher frequency bands in Raman spectra in UCN-dot particles are: (i) the dimensions of particles are very small due to which a higher number of capping agents are being absorbed on the surface, as a result high energy C-H or C-C vibrations can be Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins caused of getting higher frequency Raman bands, (ii) presence of functional groups (O=C-O -and OH -) of oleic acid attached on the surface of the particles and (iii) finally, a higher percentage of capping agents and their functional groups on the UCN-dots can act as surface active agents which can initiate a compressive stress leading to closely packed surface atoms, and as a result of vibration, Raman bands appeared at extended band position. and (d) 2500 cm -1 to 3300 cm -1 , exhibiting the presence of major capping agents in cubic phases Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins The obtained major bands are centred at 407 nm, 430 nm, 462 nm, 520 nm, 548 nm, 570 nm, 607 nm, 640 nm following two direct energy transfers from Yb 3+ ion to Er 3+ ion (Figure From Figure nm (E g =2.26 eV), 570nm (E g =2.18 eV) correspond to the 4s 3/2→ 4I 15/2 transition and these Please do not adjust margins three are responsible for the green emission. Whereas red emission band appeared at 607 nm (E g = 2.04 eV) and 640 nm (E g = 1.94 eV) which is configured for the 4F 9/2 →4I 15/2 transition (Figure Upconversion mechanism (CW-980 nm laser). Up-converted materials qualify the inclusion of two or more photons resulting in the emission of higher energy photons through several energy transfers (radiative and non-radiative) either between two ions (activator ion and sensitizer ion) or within the energy states of an activator ion itself in the visible-spectrum range which has been shown in Figure The energy transfer mechanism has been shown in Figure Nearly 50% absorbed NIR photons are upconverted from the UCN-dots resulting in visible emission spectrum. As the synthesized particles are of dot-sized particles (size~ 3.5 nm), therefore, number of non-radiative relaxations increase by the solvent molecules and an overall quantum yield (Q.Y.) decreases. The energy level diagrams of UCN-dots and their up-conversion mechanisms following CW-980 nm laser diode excitation is shown in Figure Please do not adjust margins The GRR value of the present UCN-dots appeared to be very high relative to the UCN nanoparticles with larger size. A Ti Sapphire tuneable oscillator laser with pulse duration ~140 femtoseconds at a repetition rate of 80 MHz (coherent chameleon ultra-II made) was used as a pumping source for sample excitation. Luminescence signal was recorded using non-gated Spectrometer (Ocean Optics, MAYA 2000). The schematic of experimental setup is shown in Figure The generation of emission bands in the UV region in interaction with femtosecond pulses is due to the non-linear effects introduced by the transient second order non-linearity by femtosecond pulses. Further it is noticed that the luminescent bands at UV-Vis region shows shifting of band with respect to the incident pump wavelengths, which is further clearly confirmed in support of the process of high energy upconversion for UCN-dots and this phenomenon is reported here for the first time. Please do not adjust margins In UV region (1st series of the observed emissive bands) (Figure Thus, the main interesting attraction is the emission at the UV region once the UCN-dot excited under the Fs-laser and their remarkable red shifting once they are excited from950 nm to 980 nm Fs-laser irradiation (Figure To measure the Fs-laser power dependent luminescence and the number of absorbed photons taken part in the process, the following power law equation has been used Where I UC is the luminescence intensity, which is proportional to the 'n th ' of excitation power 'n' is the number of absorbed photons per photon emitted under the Fs-laser excitation power and this has been calculated from the slopes of . Similar power law concept has been used to calculate the NIR laser power dependent luminescence using NIR elsewhere. Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins excitation. Energy transfer 1: 2F 7/2 (Yb 3+ ) + 4F 7/2 (Er 3+ )→ 2F 5/ 2 (Yb 3+ )+ 4I 11/2 (Er 3+ ) ( Energy transfer 2: 2F 7/2 (Yb 3+ ) + 4G 11/2 (Er 3+ )→2F 5/ 2 (Yb 3+ ) +4F 9/2 (Er 3+ ) Please do not adjust margins Further, the number of absorbed photons for red emission and for UV-light emission n(R) and n(UV) have also been calculated and found to be 5.46 and 0.40., respectively (Figure Highest value of "n" for UV (5.46) satisfies the highest number of transferred excited photons compared to the other emissions. Please do not adjust margins The relative energy transfers for UCN-Dots in UV-Visible region occurred due to the high power Fs laser and their significant relevance along with their excitation path ways can be explained in the subsequent section. By Fs-laser excitation sources (980, 970, 960 and 950 nm), initially the Yb 3+ sensitizes and excites to 2F 5/2 level and transfers energy to Er 3+ in order to excite them to different energy levels e.g., 4I considering the match of energy separation. Importantly, this work revealed that the UCN-dots could be a potential candidate for emitting highly efficient ultraviolet radiation which could be useful as UV-emitting nanophosphors and can be used in several bio-applications. Particle size distribution, zeta potential values, EDAX, Plots of intensity [a.u.] vs excitation wavelength [nm] for UV, G1,G2 and R; Table g = 1.87 eV) and can be assigned to a transition 4F 9/2 →4I 15/2 . A feeble Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins NIR emission between available free of charge via the internet at http://pubs.acs.org