Many practical applications require the analysis of electromagnetic scattering properties of local structures using different sources of illumination. The Optical Theorem (OT) is a useful result in scattering theory, relating the extinction of a structure to the scattering amplitude in the forward direction. The most common derivation of the OT is given for plane waves but advances in optical engineering now allow laser beam shaping, which might require an extended theorem where the impinging source is a structured field. In this work, we derive an expression for the optical theorem based on classical electromagnetic theory, for probe sources given in terms of propagation invariant beams. We obtain a general expression for the differential scattering cross section using the integral scattering amplitude approximation in the far field. We also analyze the scattering problem of a zero order Bessel beam by a dielectric sphere, under the Rayleigh approximation by varying the angle of incidence. This work is focused on a fundamental relation in scattering theory, the so-called optical cross-section theorem or simply the Optical Theorem (OT), which describes the rate at which energy is distributed from a probing incident wave field by a scattering object, due to re-radiation and absorption by the scatterer T φ + k 2 T φ = 0 in Cartesian, circular cylindrical, parabolic cylindrical, and elliptical cylindrical coordinates, where k T is the transversal wave vector; the solutions of this equation are the well known plane, Bessel Let us consider a scatterer particle of arbitrary form and size, volume V , and a complex permittivity where ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity. The medium surrounding the scatterer particle is lossless and its permittivity ε is real. We assume also that the scatterer particle and the surrounding medium are non magnetic, so that they have magnetic permeability μ = 1, see Figure If the Poynting vector of the scattered field is given by the following expression then the time-average scattered power is [4] where sup is the surface around the volume V of the scatterer particle and S ∞ is the surface at infinity. Assuming nothing else that the correctness of the Maxwell equations, it is possible to show that [4] with Bajer and Horak and that where E y H denote the total fields; i.e., E = E i + E s and H = H i + H s . Substituting these last expressions in (5), using the divergence theorem and expanding the divergence of the cross product obtained, we arrive to the following expression for the total power absorbed and scattered, If we substitute the Maxwell equations, in ( where, for simplicity, we have avoided writing the r-dependence of the permittivity inside the particle. Equation ( where we have defined the current density which can be thought as the producer of the scattered field. We introduce now the Hertz potential where the Green function for the Hemholtz equation is which represents the scattered field. If we substitute ( In terms of the Hertz potential the scattered electric and magnetic fields can be written as where ô = r R is the unit vector directed to the observation point. As shown in Figure It is straightforward to show that Thus, the scattered field, Equation The previous equation can be written as where we have defined the scattering amplitude and where the unit vector î is the direction of the impinging electric field; physically, equations ( We make now ô = î and we get the forward scattering amplitude We write the propagation invariant incident beam in its plane-wave representation where êi is the polarization of the incident field, k is the wave vector that can be related to the cone angle defined for invariant beams thus, using the representation As π -π A(φ)dφ is a constant, equating integrals ( which is the well known optical theorem Using the definition of the extinction transversal section as σ ext = σ a + σ s , where σ a is the absorbed transversal section, and σ s is the scattering transversal section where | S i | is the averaged incident Poynting vector. In this section, the scattering of an incident propagation invariant beam by a dielectric sphere with constant relative permittivity ε r and radius a is presented As the impinging field is an invariant beam, we substitute its plane wave representation, given by Eq. ( where k is the wave vector and a is the sphere radius. Using where ρ = x 2 + y 2 is the transverse radius, m is an integer, k T = k sin β is the transversal wave vector, and β is the value of the half-cone angle It is important to remark that in where we have used the standard scattering geometry By integrating the equation ( while the absorbed transversal section σ a has to be obtained from the Poynting vector where A t is the transversal area. This equation can be conveniently written as where x = ka is a scattering parameter factor related to the wavelength and the sphere radius Here we look at the analytical scattering solution for a dielectric sphere in the Rayleigh regime ka << 1, where the transversal vector wave is k T = 2π λ sin θ sin β We have obtained a general optical theorem for any propagation invariant beam, where the plane wave case is a particular case. To demonstrate the link between our generalized formulation and prior results in this area, we have shown that the presented ordinary form of the optical theorem renders the particular case for free space derived in previous works. Using the amplitude scattering function in the far field approximation we have obtained a general representation for the Rayleigh scattering regime that can be applied to any invariant beam. We have studied the scattering of a Bessel beam, assuming that the incident wave is linearly polarized and considering a zero Bessel beam as a function of the incident impinging angle β. Our method can be extended to other propagation invariant beam members, both to calculate the scattering amplitude function and to evaluate the forward-scattering approach. This method can be applied to arbitrary probing fields as any invariant beam can be written as a plane wave superposition.