Quantum many body phases, in competition or coexistence has always been a fascinating area of research in condensed matter physics. One of the most widely investigated scenario of phase competition is that between superconductivity and magnetism, which in spite of several decades of research continues to bring up new surprises till date. While superconductivity and magnetism are naively considered to be antagonists, there are several circumstances where these many body phases can be found to be cooperating, coexisting and even promoting each other. The results of such cooperative behavior are found to show up as exotic quantum phases. In this chapter we discuss about such an exotic superconducting phase, which comes to life when a particular class of superconducting material viz. "Pauli limited superconductors" are subjected to an imbalance between the population of the fermionic species undergoing pairing. The consequence of such an imbalance is the emergence of a non-trivial spatially modulated superconducting phase, popularly known as the Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) phase. Characterized by a finite momentum pairing between the fermionic species the FFLO phase hosts a non zero magnetization, leading to an unconventional coexistent phase of superconductivity and magnetism. Starting with an introduction to the Pauli limited superconducting systems, in this article we will review the solid state and ultra cold atomic gas setups which hosts the FFLO superconducting phase, along with the relevant experimental diagnostics and their reported observations. This would be followed up by the theoretical attempts made to understand the physics of these novel superconducting systems, and the progress made therein. Finally, a non perturbative numerical technique would be discussed, which is suitable to capture the behavior of such many body systems, and edges over the existing ones in several aspects. Being a vibrant area of strong correlation physics, the Pauli limited superconductors hold several exciting promises for future investigations. We will touch 0 upon them towards the end of the chapter. Superconductivity is one of the most fascinating phenomena of quantum many body systems. Right from its discovery in mercury (Hg) by Kamerlingh Onnes in 1911 The BCS theory was originally devised to capture the physics of "conventional" superconductors, with low transition temperature such as, lead, mercury etc., and it was shown that in these materials the lattice phonons served as the attractive "glue" to pair up the fermions Inspite of the change in the mechanism of superconductivity, some of the aspects however remained unaltered between the conven-tional and unconventional superconductors. For example the superconductivity was still dictated by the pairing between the fermions having equal and opposite momenta, i. e. the net momentum of the Cooper pair was zero. Keeping it consistent with the existing literature, we would refer to such superconducting pairing as the "zeromomentum" superconductivity, so as to distinguish them from the "finite-momentum" superconductivity, which would be introduced in the later sections of this chapter. It is obvious that once this pairing between the fermions is broken by some perturbation, superconductivity is destroyed. One of the most prominent superconducting pair breaking perturbation is the magnetic field. It is now well established that an orbital magnetic field when applied to a type-II superconductor leads to the formation of superconducting vortices beyond a lower critical field, H≥H orb c1 In general, the upper critical magnetic field of a superconductor is determined based on both the orbital and Pauli paramagnetic pair breaking effects. The relative importance of these effects is determined in terms of the Maki parameter α, defined as which is the ratio of the two upper critical magnetic fields at zero temperature (T=0). Here, F is the Fermi energy. For most of the superconductors α < 1, and thus the system loses superconductivity via the overlap of superconducting vortices much before the applied magnetic field reaches H P c2 . There are however situations when α > 1 and thus H P c2 < H orb c2 , viz, (i) the Fermi energy is strongly suppressed, (ii) the superconducting system is two dimensional and is subjected to an in-plane magnetic field, such that the orbital effects can be neglected, and (iii) the system is charge neutral. The class of superconductors with α > 1 and which loses its superconductivity by Pauli paramagnetic pair breaking effect are known as the Pauli limited superconductors. Prominent examples include heavy fermion superconductor CeCoIn 5 A Pauli limited superconductor in the absence of any orbital effect is known to demonstrate non trivial behavior in the in-plane mag- netic field-temperature (H -T ) phase diagram The symmetry breaking arising due to the finite momentum Q gives rise to spatial modulations in the superconducting order parameter. There had been several proposals regarding the form of this spatially modulated order parameter with the first one suggested by Fulde and Ferrell being Here, the superconducting amplitude is homogeneous but the phase undergoes periodic modulations in the real space. In a similar spirit Larkin and Ovchinnikov suggested that a linear combination of two plane wave solutions corresponding to degenerate superconducting states as Though the FFLO phase continues to be the most sought after superconducting phase in systems with Fermi surface mismatch, there are other candidate phases which can be stabilized in these systems, viz. Breached Pair (BP) The renewed interest on imbalanced superconducting systems is attributed to two key experimental breakthroughs viz. (i) the advent of ultracold atomic gases and (ii) improvisation of experiments on solid state materials. Before going into the details of the experimental observations we highlight the candidate systems amenable to the realization of imbalanced superconductivity and superfluidity. In general, the term superconductivity is used in the context of solid state systems containing charged electrons, while for the charge neutral ultracold atomic gases, superfluidity is the correct choice of nomenclature to describe the state with long range macroscopic phase coherence. In the remaining sections of this chapter we will follow this protocol to refer to the solid state and neutral cold atomic gases. We mentioned in the earlier sections that in order to realize FFLO phase the superconducting material should have large Maki parameter (α >1). This requirement is stringent and is achievable only under specific conditions. • In a three dimensional superconductor if H orb c2 is significantly larger than H P c2 then it would lead to a large Maki parameter. In heavy fermion superconductors such as CeCoIn 5 the large mass of the electrons give rise to low electron velocity and thus a high H orb c2 . The resulting high Maki parameter α ∼ 5 makes it a suitable candidate to realize FFLO superconductivity. • In layered two-dimensional materials the orbital effects are strongly suppressed when the magnetic field is applied, which makes a large Maki parameter plausible in such systems. A candidate material is quasi two-dimensional organic superconductor κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu(NCS) 2 , with Maki parameter of α ∼ 8. • If the system is a neutral Fermi gas, i. e. comprising of neutral atoms then the applied magnetic field can couple only to the spin degrees of freedom. This makes the ultracold atomic gases a promising candidate to realize FFLO phase. In these systems the superfluid pairing takes place between the fermions present in two hyperfine energy states of the neutral atoms or it can take place between the fermions in the energy states of the atoms belonging to two different atomic species or to two different isotopes of the same atomic species. We now discuss the experimental observations made on these candidate systems, which suggests that these systems host exotic phases such as, FFLO and BP, in presence of applied magnetic field or population imbalance of fermionic species. One of the earliest experiments which suggested the possibility of FFLO phase in CeCoIn 5 (T c ∼2.3K) were the specific heat measurements reported by Bianchi et al. Based on the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements carried out on single crystal of CeCoIn 5 , Koutroulakis et al. By carrying out high magnetic field neutron scattering experiments on CeCoIn 5 Gerber et al. In two-dimensional layered organic superconductor κ-BEDT (T c ∼ 9.5K), the FFLO phase was inferred from specific heat measurements in presence of applied in-plane magnetic field In addition, the presence of FFLO superconducting phase has been recently proposed in iron superconductors such as KFe 2 As 2 , LiFeAs etc. Over the past decade ultracold Fermi gases have proved to be the testbed of research on imbalanced superfluid systems, owing to the flexibility of tuning the interaction parameters (via Feshbach resonance), optical lattice and trap geometries, that these systems provide. Unlike the solid state superconducting systems where a magnetic field is applied, population imbalance in ultracold atomic gases is created by loading unequal populations of fermionic species in the optical lattice. Alternatively, equal populations of different atomic species with unequal effective masses can be loaded in the optical lattice to create mass imbalanced Fermi gases. Clear evidence of superfluid pair correlations have been found in case of both balanced The concept of unitarity is intimately related to the s-wave scattering length which can be controlled via the Feshbach resonance. In three-dimensional (3D) continuum Fermi gas the scattering length a 3D → ∞ as g → g c . Here, g c is finite in 3D and defines the interaction strength at which the first two-body bound state formation takes place in vacuum. The dimensionless coupling 1/k F a 3D = 0 (where, k F is the Fermi momentum) at g c and also corresponds to the regime of maximum T c of the 3D Fermi gas. For two-dimensional (2D) Fermi gases unitarity corresponds to the coupling strength at which ln(k F a 2D ) → 0 (a 2D is s-wave scattering length in 2D), which once again corresponds to the interaction for maximum T c . For a lattice the notion of k F is not very meaningful particularly if one is away from the regime of small filling. In the context of lattice fermion models, the crossover regime or unitarity corresponds to the interaction strength at which T c is maximum, where neither the fermionic nor bosonic description of the system holds true completely Shin et al. A quantum phase transition was detected in the unitary imbal-anced Fermi gas of 6 Li at a critical polarization (magnetization) of ∼ 36% by Shin et al. On the other hand the transition at high temperatures and weak polarization was found to be of second order. These two orders of phase transition are connected at a tricritical point. While they carried out the experiment in presence of trapping potential, using tomographic reconstruction of local Fermi temperatures and spin polarization they determined the phase diagram of the homogeneous system free from any inhomogeneity arising due to the trapping potential. The resulting phase diagram comprised of a superfluid phase in the regime of weak polarization characterized by spatial coexistence of superfluid order and non zero polarization at finite temperatures, akin to the BP phase. This regime undergoes second order thermal phase transition to a normal phase. The large polarization regime is a phase separated (unstable) regime which undergoes a first order thermal phase transition. At still larger polarizations the system is in the normal phase. Note that signatures of FFLO phase was not detected in this experiment, however Shin et al. did not rule out the possibility of such a phase at large polarizations Experimental investigations of mass imbalanced Fermi-Fermi mixtures are relatively fewer. A mass imbalanced Fermi-Fermi mixture is achievable for example in a 6 Li-40 K mixture. While superfluidity in such a system is yet to be attained in experiments, the Fermi degenerate regime The experimental observations across different classes of solid state materials and ultracold atomic gases lead to a flurry of activities in the theoretical front. The theoretical studies can broadly be classified in two categories as, (i) the lattice fermion models and (ii) the continuum models. In this chapter we will mainly focus on (i). For a detail discussion on continuum models with imbalance the readers are referred to We consider the Hamiltonian of a two component Fermi gas comprising of up (↑) and down (↓) fermion species, with an attractive interaction between them. For the sake of simplicity we do not take into account any external potential acting on the fermions. The Hamiltonian corresponding to such a system reads as, where, σ =↑, ↓ correspond to the two fermion species. V ↑↓ (r, r ) is the interaction between the species, with r and r being the position coordinates, corresponding to a two dimensional system. The kinetic energy contribution to the Hamiltonian is given as, and μ σ is the species dependent chemical potential. Note that the effective mass (m σ ) in the kinetic energy contribution is dependent on the species. For a system with only imbalance in fermionic populations m ↑ = m ↓ = m since the mass of the fermions of both the species are the same. On the other hand, for a system comprising of two different isotopes of the same atom or of two different atomic species, m ↑ = m ↓ . Such systems can be realized in ultracold atomic gases and are called "mass imbalanced" Fermi-Fermi mixtures. For the present discussion we consider equal effective masses for both the species and set m ↑ = m ↓ = m. We simplify the model by approximating the interaction to be a contact interaction as, This approximation is particularly good for ultracold atomic gases in which the interaction is short ranged We consider an underlying lattice potential and for that expand the continuum Fermi operators in terms of Wannier functions where, ĉ † σ,n,i creates a σ particle in the lattice site i in the energy band n, and w * n (rr i ) are the Wannier functions. The Wannier functions can be approximated by harmonic oscillator states in the tight-binding limit. At low temperatures and weak interactions only the lowest energy band n = 0 would be occupied by the fermions, we can thus omit the band index henceforth. Using the above expansion the continuum Hamiltonian is re-written as, Ĥ = - Here, ij corresponds to the summation over nearest neighbors of a lattice and t σ,ij is the hopping amplitude between the nearest neighbors; σ is the onsite energy and U is the on-site interaction, and are expressed as Equation ( Here, U < 0 corresponding to the attractive interaction between the fermions. Equation ( The standard BCS theory describes the transition from a normal Fermi gas to a zero momentum uniform superconducting state, and the pairing field is considered to be a constant, ∆ i = ∆. In order to capture the inhomogeneous superconducting state such as FFLO or BP, one needs to retain the spatial dependence of the pairing field. Note that the pairing field defined so far is on-site and does not take into account any directional dependence. In the language of superconducting pairing state symmetry, such an on-site pairing correspond to a s-wave superconducting state. For the sake of simplicity we will discuss the theoretical formalism in detail for a s-wave superconducting state and will outline the modifications of this formalism for a non s-wave pairing state, at the end of this section. The BCS approximation in addition to the pairing field introduces Hartree field corresponding to the fermionic number densities, which is defined as, n σ = ĉ † σ ĉσ . Including the Hartree field in the formalism renormalizes the chemical potential as, Here, μσ is the renormalized chemical potential and the densities are considered to be uniform. In terms of the average pairing and the Hartree fields the mean field Hamiltonian describing a s-wave superconducting pairing of the fermions in a two component Fermi gas, reads as, In the Hamiltonian given by Equation ( Note that the approximation of uniform density should be used carefully. The approximation breaks down in case of superconductors with spatial inhomogeneities, such as those arising in a FFLO of BP phase or in disordered superconductors. In such cases the correct tool of choice is Bogoliubov-de-Gennes (BdG) formalism which takes into account the spatial inhomogeneities of the pairing field amplitude (|∆ i |) as well as of the number densities The FFLO phase comprises of spatially modulated superconducting state coexistent with non zero magnetization. The corresponding Cooper pair centre of mass momentum Q is determined by minimizing the energy of the system. While the FF state corresponds to a superconducting state with modulation in the pairing field phase (∆(r) = ∆e iQ.r ), the LO (∆(r) = ∆ cos(Q.r)) state on the other hand contains modulation in the pairing field amplitude. There is now a consensus that at the ground state of two component population imbalanced Fermi gas the LO phase is energetically favorable as compared to the FF phase, both in case of lattice as well as continuum systems In this section we consider the simpler FF ansatz to discuss the mean field theory of the spatially modulated superconducting phase. The theory can however be easily generalized to describe the LO superconducting phase. Using the ansatz for the FF state (∆ i = ∆ i e iQ.r = ∆ i e i(Qxx+Qyy) ) the superconducting Hamiltonian for the population imbalanced two component Fermi gas in two-dimensions is given as, Here, Q x and Q y correspond to the components of the Cooper pair centre of mass momentum Q, in two dimensions. In order to determine the superconducting gap and number equations this Hamiltonian needs to be diagonalized. Since the Hamiltonian is not diagonal in the electronic basis we carry out a basis transformation using Bogoliubov-Valatin transformations defined as Here, n is a complete set of states, u n and v n are the eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian Ĥ, which satisfies the condition u i2 n +v i2 n = 1 Thus, we have, where, n corresponds to the eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian Ĥ. Using the above expressions one can determine the coefficients u i n and v i n by solving the matrix eigenvalue equation. For this we define the matrices A and Ψ, such that, and The resulting eigenvalue equation is then given as, In order to solve the eigenvalue equations, one first needs to determine the superconducting pairing field (∆ i ) as well as the chemical potentials μ ↑ and μ ↓ . For this the set of coupled equations corresponding to ∆ i and fermionic number densities n iσ is to be solved self consistently. In terms of the BdG eigenfunctions and eigenvalues the self consistent mean field equations are given as, where, f ( n ) and f ( -n ) are the Fermi functions corresponding to the positive and negative eigenvalues, respectively. Starting from an initial guess these equations are iterated to obtain self consistent values of the pairing field and the number densities. For a lattice of dimension L × L the dimension of the matrix is 2N × 2N , where, N = L 2 . The net chemical potential of a population imbalanced Fermi gas is defined as, μ = . The difference between the chemical potentials act as a Zeeman field defined as, . In terms of μ and h we can thus write the spin resolved chemical potentials as, μ ↑ = μ + h and μ ↓ = μh. While working in grand canonical ensemble we work at a fixed chemical potential μ and tune the Zeeman field h such that, the system undergoes phase transition between an uniform superconducting phase and inhomogeneous FFLO or BP phases, at a fixed interaction U . By examining the real space self consistent mean field solutions of the pairing field and fermionic number densities one can analyze the underlying state. A non zero ∆ i corresponds to a superconducting state, while a state with ∆ i = 0 is non superconducting. In the same spirit, m i = (n i↑n i↓ ) = 0 corresponds to a state with finite magnetization. Before analyzing the self consistent solution it is however essential to determine whether the particular solution is stable, in other words whether it corresponds to the minimum energy state for the given choice of parameters. We thus next calculate the free energy of the system and for that we go back to Equation where, |Ψ G correspond to the ground state. The free energy of the system reads as, The global minima of this free energy functional gives the stable ground state of the system. Based on the pairing field amplitude and average magnetization ( m i ) the ground state of two component imbalanced Fermi gas can be broadly classified as, (i) uniform (BCS) superconducting phase ). Note that even though both BCS and BP phases are characterized by Q = 0 pairing state, the BP phase comprises of gapless excitations unlike the BCS superconducting state So far we have taken into account only the inhomogeneity in the amplitude of the pairing field (BdG formalism). The complex superconducting pairing field defined as, ∆ i = |∆ i |e iθi however comprises of amplitude and phase, both of which in principle can fluctuate and become inhomogeneous. The fluctuations in the pairing field amplitude and phase becomes progressively important with increasing temperature where thermal fluctuations can serve as pair breaking agent. In order to understand the importance of fluctuations on the superconductivity of a system let us take a detour to briefly summarise the BCS-BEC crossover in Fermi gases Figure According to the BCS mean-field theory, superconductivity of a system vanishes due to the suppression of the superconducting pairing field amplitude. This obeys the thermal scale T BCS ∼ e the corresponding superconducting pairing field amplitude varies as ∆ ∼ T BCS . Thus, T BCS increases linearly with increasing ∆ and in turn with U which governs the magnitude of ∆ The regime of intermediate coupling is the most complex part of this phase diagram and none of the perturbative schemes are suitable to capture its behavior. In this regime marked as the "non Fermi liquid" in Figure The two thermal scales are thus defined as the T c , at which the superconducting state loses its long range macroscopic phase coherence and T pg , at which short range pair correlations are lost. The pseudogap regime with short range pair correlations but no long range order, is characterized by spatial fragmentation of the state into isolated islands akin to uncorrelated Josephson junctions. The finite temperature behavior of the BCS-BEC crossover shows that in the regime of intermediate (and strong) coupling it is the thermally induced phase fluctuations which leads to the loss of long range phase coherence and of the global superconductivity, unlike the weak coupling regime where superconductivity is destroyed via the suppression of pairing field amplitude. One thus needs to take into account the effect of phase fluctuations in order to correctly capture the behavior of superconductors or superfluids with interactions away from the weak coupling regime, at finite temperatures. Having established the importance of fluctuations in superconducting systems we now once again take a look at the candidate systems where FFLO or BP phases are reported. The key candidates as discussed earlier are, three dimensional heavy fermion superconductor CeCoIn 5 , two-dimensional layered organic superconductor κ-BEDT, both with large Maki parameter of α > 1 and neutral ultracold atomic gases. Apart from the large Maki parameter there is another property which serves as a common link between these apparently very distinct systems. An important characteristic of any superconductor is the ratio between the superconducting gap at zero temperature and T c . The BCS estimate of the same is 2∆ 0 /k B T c ∼ 3.5 The experimental observations thus bring forth a common link between the various Pauli limited superconducting systems, viz. all these systems belong to the regime of intermediate coupling. While at one hand this sets up the stage for complex physical properties to play out, on the other hand it calls for a non perturbative approach to address these systems. It is thus imperative to take into account the effect of fluctuations while addressing the finite temperature behavior of the imbalanced Fermi superconductors and superfluids. Consequently, a mean field approach to the problem will not suffice. We discussed above that apart from the semi analytic and Tmatrix approaches We begin by rewriting the two-dimensional attractive Hubbard model with population imbalance, introduced in Equation ( where, t ij = -t only for the nearest neighbor hopping and is zero otherwise; σ iz is the Pauli matrix. The hopping amplitude t is set to unity and is chosen to be the reference energy scale for the problem. μ is the net chemical potential and the Zeeman field h is applied along the ẑ direction; |U | > 0. The Hubbard partition function is a functional integral over the Grassman fields ψ iσ (τ ) and ψiσ (τ ), where, β is the inverse temperature, μ σ takes into account the field h. Our strategy is to decompose the interaction in terms of the bosonic auxiliary s-wave pairing field ∆ i (τ ) = |∆ i (τ )|e iθi(τ ) , using Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation The ψ integral is now quadratic, but an additional integration over the field ∆ i (τ ) has been introduced. The weight factor for the ∆ configurations can be determined by integrating out the ψ, ψ and using these weighted configurations, one goes back and compute the fermionic properties. Formally, where, G is the electronic Green's function in the {∆} background. The weight factor for an arbitrary space-time configuration ∆ i (τ ) involves computation of the fermionic determinant in that background. If we write the auxiliary field ∆ i (τ ) in terms of its Matsubara modes as, ∆ i (Ω n ) then the different options are readily recognized, • Quantum Monte Carlo retains the full "i, Ω n " dependence of ∆ computing ln Det[G -1 {∆}] iteratively for importance sampling. The approach is valid at all T, but does not readily yield real frequency spectra. • Mean field theory (MFT) is time independent, neglects the phase fluctuations completely but can handle spatial inhomogeneity in amplitude of the pairing field. Thus, ∆ i (iΩ n ) →| ∆ i |. When the mean field order parameter vanishes at high temperature the theory trivializes. • Dynamical mean field theory (DMFT) retains the full dynamics but keeps ∆ at effectively one site, i.e, ∆ i (Ω n ) → ∆(Ω n ). This is exact when dimensionality D → ∞. • Static path approximation (SPA) (1) T = 0: Since classical fluctuations die off at T = 0, SPA reduces to standard Bogoliubov-de-Gennes (BdG) MFT. ( Evidently, all the numerical approaches have different set of merits and caveats, and consequently different regimes of applicability. We now discuss the numerical implementation of the SPA technique in some detail where, the last term is the stiffness cost associated with the now "classical" auxiliary field. In the standard mean field approach the superconducting pairing field ∆ i is assumed to be a real number, but here we retain the degrees of freedom associated with the pairing field phase and amplitude. The background field ∆ i obeys the Boltzmann distribution, which is connected to the free energy of the system. For large and random ∆ i the trace is taken numerically. We generate the random background of {∆ i } by using Monte Carlo, diagonalizing H ef f for each attempted update of ∆ i . The relevant fermionic correlators are computed on the optimized configurations at different temperatures. Evidently, the technique is numerically expensive and involves large computation cost in diagonalizing the matrix to compute the free energy for each attempted update of the auxiliary field. For an N × N matrix the computation cost scales as ∼ O(N 3 ) per update and ∼ O(N 4 ) per lattice sweep. This imposes constraint on the lattice size that can be accessed within reasonable computation time. In order to access larger system sizes a cluster based update scheme could be utilized wherein instead of diagonalizing for the entire lattice at each attempted update, a smaller cluster of size N c = L c ×L c surrounding the update site is diagonalized We have now set up a theoretical framework to investigate the behavior of spatially inhomogeneous superconducting and superfluid phases. Different numerical tools to access these systems both at the level of ground state as well as at finite temperature through mean field and non perturbative techniques are discussed. In order to understand the theoretical formalism we considered that the interaction between the fermion species is onsite and the resulting pairing state symmetry is s-wave. This is a valid approximation as far as ultracold atomic gas set ups are concerned and most of the experiments carried out on imbalanced Fermi systems in ultracold atomic gases are for s-wave superfluids. Furthermore, here a single channel decomposition of the interaction term was carried out. In principle, along with the pairing channel the interaction can be decomposed in density and spin channels as well. This however would add to the computation cost and more importantly would not lead to any qualitative difference in the behavior of the present system. The behavior of the imbalanced Fermi superfluid (or superconductor) is analyzed based on different thermodynamic and quasiparticle indicators, some of which are, • Pairing field structure factor:-S ∆ (q) = 1 N 2 i,j ∆ i ∆ * j e iq.(ri-rj ) • Spin resolved single particle density of states (DOS):-N ↑ (ω) = • Spectral functions and lineshapes:- • Low energy spectral weight distribution:-A(k, 0). Here, Note that the static path approximation approach, as mentioned above does not take into account the quantum fluctuations at the ground state. While in continuum this could be a poor approximation, on a lattice it is reasonable. The low energy fluctuations in a FFLO like state arises from, (i) the phase symmetry of the U (1) order parameter, (ii) the translational symmetry breaking and (iii) rotational symmetry breaking. As a result, in continuum a long range order can not survive even at T=0 in two dimensions. The mean field theory, which predicts such order is therefore invalid. On a lattice, the spatial symmetry is already broken and thus the translational and rotational modes are gapped out. The only low energy excitations thus left are the XY type, in presence of which the two-dimensional system can have long range order at T=0 and undergoes Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thousless (BKT) transition at the finite temperatures. The issue of fluctuations thus reduces to how well the U (1) phase fluctuations and the corresponding T c are captured by this approach. The superconducting pairing state symmetry in solid state materials depend on the material parameters and the coupling constants involved. As discussed earlier, the all the known Pauli limited superconductors belong to the regime of intermediate coupling. This in turn naturally categorises them to be superconductors with short coherence length, whose pairing state symmetry can no longer be swave. Indeed the pairing state symmetry of CeCoIn 5 and κ-BEDT are established to be d-wave The Hubbard Hamiltonian can be suitably modified to take into account the nearest neighbor interaction which gives rise to d-wave pairing state symmetry as, where, the attractive interaction |U | > 0 is now between the nearest neighbors, on a square lattice. After carrying out the Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation to decompose the four-fermion interaction, the corresponding partition function reads as, The bosonic auxiliary field ∆ ij encodes the direction dependence of the d-wave superconducting order parameter. Apart from the superconducting pairing state symmetry there is another aspect which needs to be taken into account while constructing a model Hamiltonian for the solid state Pauli limited superconductors, viz the lattice structure. The heavy fermion CeCoIn 5 comprises of a three dimensional cubic lattice structure We conclude this section by stating that a realistic theoretical model of solid state Pauli limited superconductors would be significantly complicated owing to the various interaction parameters and complex band structure that needs to be taken into account. However, a relatively simplistic model which takes into account the dominant coupling scales and energy bands is amenable. Such a theoretical framework should be able to capture the experimental observations on these materials with qualitative and in some cases with quantitative accuracy. It should however be kept in mind that solving even a minimal quantum many body Hamiltonian is a demanding and computationally extensive task. Consequently, there still remains several open areas to be explored in the playground of Pauli limited superconductors as well as of Fermi superfluids in ultracold atomic gas setups. This section discusses some of the studies carried out on lattice fermion models to understand population imbalanced Fermi gases, Pauli limited superconductors and mass imbalanced Fermi-Fermi mixtures. Most of the T=0 investigations are carried out within the framework of mean field theory and there is a large volume of literature discussing the same. We do not attempt to be comprehensive and would discuss only some of the important results and the inferences drawn based on them. Regarding the beyond mean field attempts, broadly the observations made by three different numerical approaches are covered in this section, viz. (i) dynamical mean field theory (DMFT) The thermal transitions pertaining to two-dimensional systems, discussed in this section are Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transitions corresponding to algebraic decay of quasi long range or-der in two dimensions Within the framework of lattice mean field theory the two-component Fermi mixture with population imbalance in an optical lattice was studied by Koponen et al. Using an elaborate variational mean field scheme based on BdG method with Hartree corrections, Loh and Trivedi An extensive numerical study of the ground state was carried out by Chiesa and Zhang as well as by Rosenberg et al on a twodimensional square lattice, using Hartree-Fock-Bogoliubov-de-Gennes (HFBDG) theory The behavior of the LO state across dimensional crossover between one to three dimensions was investigated using DMFT by Törmä and co-authors In their DQMC study of imbalanced s-wave superfluid Wolak et al. Gukelberger et al. A comprehensive analysis of this system in grand canonical ensemble (fixed chemical potential) was carried out using SPA, close to the half filling and at an intermediate interaction The work showed that in the regime of weak magnetic field the system loses uniform superfluid order to PPFL via a second order thermal transition, while for the strong magnetic field LO phase, the thermal transition is of first order. Moreover, a first order thermal transition regime was identified near the quantum critical point between the uniform superfluid and FFLO phases. In this regime, the uniform (Q=0) superfluid phase undergoes first order thermal transition to the PPFL phase. Over the entire regime of magnetic field (magnetization) signatures of superfluid pairing were observed at the high temperatures as short range pairing correlations, which survives upto temperatures T ∼ 1.5T c and gives rise to the pseudogap phase. Akin to the T c the pseudogap scale is strongly suppressed by the magnetic field. Based on the real space maps the low magnetic field high temperature phase was identified to be a BP phase with spatial coexistence of zero momentum superfluid correlations and non zero magnetization, as shown in Figure At the ground state the LO phase was characterized by uniaxial stripes with the exact pairing momentum being dictated by the magnitude of the Zeeman field for a fixed interaction and chemical potential. The thermal disordering of the LO phase is demonstrated via the real space maps in Figure 6 Distribution of spin and momentum resolved fermionic occupation number which maps out the Fermi surface shows that in the LO phase the Fermi surface is two-fold symmetric, rather than the fourfold symmetry of the uniform superconducting state. Signatures of LO phase was observed upto T ∼ 2T c , at still higher temperatures the signatures of pairing correlations are lost and the distribution was found to be akin to the PPFL phase, as shown in Figure The quasiparticle properties such as single particle DOS, spectral functions and distribution of low energy spectral weight carried intriguing imprints of the underlying modulated superfluid phase Studies carried out on the FFLO phase of non s-wave superconductors are relatively fewer, inspite of all the solid state Pauli limited superconductors being d-wave. Vorontsov et al. used self consistent theory to study the effect of in-plane Zeeman field on a twodimensional superconducting system with d x 2 -y 2 pairing state symmetry Within the framework of Ginzburg-Landau theory Beaird et al. studied Pauli limited superconductors with d-wave pairing state symmetry The effect of non magnetic impurities on Pauli limited d-wave superconductor was studied by Vorontsov et al. using quasiclassical Eilenberger equations in which the effect of impurities was included via self consistent T-matrix approximation Using the BCS weak coupling model Yang and Sondhi made certain intriguing predictions about d-wave superconductor subjected to an in-plane Zeeman field Using the BdG mean field theory on a two-dimensional lattice model Zhou and Ting mapped out the thermal phase diagram of Pauli limited d-wave superconductor as a function of in-plane Zeeman field The static path approximation (SPA) technique was used at a fixed chemical potential and intermediate interactions to address the behavior of two-dimensional population imbalanced d-wave superconductor, in detail Based on the real space signatures shown in Figure In ultracold atomic gases pairing between equal populations of two atomic species with unequal atomic masses (Fermi-Fermi mixture) can give rise to mass imbalanced Fermi superfluid. Experimentally a mass imbalanced Fermi-Fermi mixture can be achieved in 6 Li-40 K mixtures. The theoretical studies are primarily restricted to continuum models, using both mean field and beyond mean field techniques Works on lattice fermion models of mass imbalanced Fermi-Fermi mixtures are very limited. Wang et al. Using density matrix renormalization group (DMRG) and quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) techniques Dalmonte et al. The only beyond mean field study of mass imbalanced Fermi-Fermi mixture in two-dimensions, at and above the ground state was carried out using the SPA At a fixed imbalance of population, the phase diagram comprises of LO, BP and unstable (phase separated) regimes in the imbalancetemperature plane and a larger imbalance in mass reduces the regime of stability of these phases. The thermal phase diagram in the imbalance-temperature (η -T )-plane presented in Figure Owing to the mismatch in mass and thus of the hopping amplitudes the two species are subjected different "scaled" temperatures. Consequently, while in the pseudogap regime PG-I both the fermion species are pseudogapped, in the pseudogap regime PG-II it is only the lighter species which is pseudogapped while the heavier species is a polarized Fermi liquid. At η = 1 corresponding to zero imbalance in mass, both the pseudogap scales collapses to one. The phase diagram shows that, while akin to the population imbalanced system the T c is strongly suppressed by imbalance in mass, the short range pair correlations survive over a large temperature regime of T ∼ 2T c The work further discussed the BCS-BEC crossover picture for mass imbalanced Fermi-Fermi mixture at a fixed population imbal-ance and established the presence of two pseudogap regimes across the crossover. The BCS-BEC crossover revealed a crucial observation. It showed that a critical interaction strength (U c ) is required to realize superfluid order in mass imbalanced Fermi-Fermi mixture in presence of a population imbalance. This observation is in striking contrast with those of two component balanced Fermi gases where superfluid phase is realized for any arbitrary strength of attractive interaction. Figure A similar study was carried using SPA by Karmakar Over the past few years there has been immense progress both in the experimental and theoretical front to understand the spin-orbit coupled ultracold atomic gases. Since the ultracold atomic gases are one of the prospective systems to realize exotic superfluid phases such as, FFLO and BP, there has been obvious interest to investigate the effect of spin-orbit coupling on imbalanced Fermi gases. In this section we will summarize some of the major developments in this area and the observations therein. We will also touch upon some of the open problems in this area towards the end of this section. For further details on spin orbit coupled Fermi gases the readers are encouraged to consult the excellent reviews by Galitski and Spielman Spin orbit coupling has remained a subject of interest since the early days of quantum mechanics and can be understood as follows. If an electron is allowed to move in an electric field and we move the electron's rest frame, this will lead to the generation of a magnetic field by the associated Lorentz transformation. This magnetic field will couple itself to the electron spin leading to spin-orbit coupling. The exact form of the spin-orbit coupling depends upon the direction of the electric field and the electron velocity; one of the commonly used form of the spin-orbit coupling is the Rashba spin-orbit coupling (RSOC), given as, where, α is the strength of the spin-orbit coupling interaction, σx and σy are the Pauli matrices. In the absence of inversion symmetry the Rashba spin-orbit coupling takes the form of Dresselhaus spinorbit coupling and is given as, In real space the Rashba spin-orbit coupling is given as, where, σ is the vector of Pauli matrices and α ij = αẑ × r ij is the spin-orbit vector on each bond of a two-dimensional square lattice. t ij,α correspond to the strength of the spin-orbit coupling. In ultracold atomic gas experiments spin-orbit coupling is generated using synthetic electric field Theoretically, the effect of spin-orbit coupling on the FFLO superfluid state has largely been investigated using mean field theory. This has been carried out either by determining the ground state energy using the FF ansatz in presence of spin-orbit coupling Based on BdG mean field theory in two-dimensions, Xu et al. showed that in a continuum system in presence of spin-orbit coupling the FF state is energetically favoured over the LO state, particularly at strong spin-orbit couplings Beyond mean field corrections were incorporated for the continuum model of three dimensional spin-orbit coupled Fermi gas by Liu Within the framework of lattice fermion models, Iskin investigated the spin-orbit coupled Fermi gas in presence of an optical trap in two dimensions, using BdG mean field theory The topological aspect of spin-orbit coupled Fermi gases was investigated by Tewari et al. In their studies carried out on two dimensional continuum system Zhang et al. Mean field theory has been pushed to investigate the finite temperature behavior of spin-orbit coupled imbalanced Fermi gases, as well In a recent work, Wang et al. investigated the spin-orbit coupled Fermi gas within the framework of continuum model in two and three dimensions As is evident from the above discussions, the theoretical works on spin-orbit coupled imbalanced Fermi gases are largely the ones based on mean field theory. This leaves a void in our understanding as far as the effects of fluctuations are concerned. For example, the exact thermal scales of the spin-orbit coupled imbalanced Fermi gas in an optical lattice is so far unknown. The presence of lattice breaks the translational symmetry and can potentially stabilize phases which are unstable in continuum. It is worth investigating whether a modulated superfluid phase can be stabilized in a lattice with spin orbit coupling in presence of pair fluctuations. Moreover, spin-orbit coupling allows for the possibility of realizing triplet superfluid pairing. Most of the works we discussed here do not take this possibility into account. Even if a triplet pairing state does not lead to a long range order at the ground state, it is certainly pos-sible that triplet pair correlations are present at high temperatures. In the same spirit, with the energy of the FF and LO phases being comparable, even though the ground state hosts FF superfluid phase in presence of spin-orbit coupling, competing LO correlations can be present at finite temperatures. Signatures of the presence of such competing correlations would be borne out in the quasiparticle properties of the system. Investigations of such effects require one to include fluctuations beyond the mean field theory, and are certainly worth pursuing. The last few years have witnessed a great deal of activity in the theoretical as well as experimental front to unveil the mysteries of the exotic superconducting phases like FFLO and BP. Though the possibility of superconducting phases with finite centre of mass momentum of the Cooper pairs was predicted decades ago, it was the advent of ultracold atomic gases, and significant advancement of material science experiments, that has paved the way to access and understand such novel quantum many body phases. Amongst the solid state materials, so far three candidate materials have stood out as possible hosts of FFLO phase viz., heavy fermion superconductor CeCoIn 5 , organic superconductor κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu(NCS) 2 and iron superconductor KFe 2 As 2 . With the continuous development that is going on in material science, the hope is that other materials would join the class of Pauli limited superconductors in not so distant future. The ultracold atomic gas systems with the unprecedented control of the tuning parameters, that it provides, have taken the centre stage to engineer and analyze exotic quantum phases, such as FFLO. While a clear spatial signature of the modulated superfluid phase is yet to be realized in these systems, coexistence of superfluid pair correlations and unpaired fermions are indeed observed, suggesting a possible BP phase. The theoretical attempts are not far behind either, and the prob-lem of imbalanced Fermi systems have been addressed by mean field as well as non mean field approaches. We now have a broad understanding of not just the ground state but also of how the effects of fluctuations play out and dictate the thermal scales associated with these systems. The world of quantum many body physics is however a fast evolving one and newer experimental breakthroughs are not infrequent. For example, experimental realization of spin-orbit coupling in fermionic and bosonic systems in ultracold atomic gas setups have been reported recently. In the theoretical front however, we have not moved beyond the realms of mean field theory so far, except occasionally. It is obvious that even for the population balanced scenario, these spin-orbit coupled bosonic and fermionic systems are theoretically not well understood at this moment and a concerted effort is required to achieve the same. In the same spirit, the effect of disorder adds another interesting dimension to these systems. While disorder is largely expected to be detrimental for the FFLO phase, it can possibly aid in to stabilize the BP phase, at the ground state of a s-wave superfluid. This chapter has covered some of the important theoretical and experimental advances and observations pertaining to imbalanced Fermi systems, and is no way comprehensive. The subject is not yet well understood and promises a plethora of avenues and areas which needs to be explored inquisitively.