Two-dimensional (2D) bismuth oxyselenide (Bi2O2Se) with high electron mobility is advantageous in future high-performance and flexible electronic and optoelectronic devices. However, transfer of thin Bi2O2Se flakes is rather challenging, restricting measurements of its mechanical properties and application exploration in flexible devices. Here, we develop a reliable and effective polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)-mediated method that allows transferring thin Bi2O2Se flakes from grown substrates onto target substrates like micro-electro-mechanical system substrates. The high fidelity of the transferred thin flakes stems from the high adhesive energy and flexibility of PDMS film. For the first time, the mechanical properties of 2D Bi2O2Se are experimentally acquired with nanoindentation method. We found that few-layer Bi2O2Se exhibits a large intrinsic stiffness of 18-23 GPa among 2D semiconductors, and a Young's modulus of 88.7±14.4 GPa which is consistent with the theoretical values. Furthermore, few-layer Bi2O2Se can withstand a high radial strain of more than 3%, demonstrating excellent flexibility. The development of the reliable transfer method and documentation of mechanical properties of 2D Bi2O2Se jointly fill the gap between theoretical prediction and experimental verification of mechanical properties of this emerging material, and will promote flexible electronics and optoelectronics based on 2D Bi2O2Se. Two-dimensional (2D) materials have drawn significant attention for flexible electronic and optoelectronic devices. Revealing the mechanical properties of 2D materials is the first prerequisite for their applications in flexible and stretchable electronics. In this work, we develop a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)-mediated transfer method to successfully transfer thin Bi2O2Se flakes onto target substrates. In this PMDS-mediate transfer method, we use PDMS to directly peel off thin Bi2O2Se flakes from mica substrate and transfer them onto micro-electro-mechanical system (MEMS) SiO2/Si substrates with periodic arrays of holes. The suspended few-layer Bi2O2Se flakes with high fidelity and variable thicknesses, including thin ones down to 3.2 nm (5 layers, 5L), are obtained by such PMDS-mediated transfer method, because PDMS as a laminate with high adhesive force and flexibility makes the Bi2O2Se flakes adhere tightly to detach from mica to fulfill the transfer. AFM nanoindentation measurements show that the stiffness of few-layer Bi2O2Se flakes is in the range of 18-23 GPa, which compares favorably among semiconducting 2D materials. Meanwhile, Young's modulus of Bi2O2Se is measured to be 88.7±14.4 GPa, in accordance with the theoretical values and is found to be layer-independent. We further reveal that the thin Bi2O2Se flakes maintain good flexibility and elasticity within a high radial strain up to 3%. Our work discloses the first experimental results about mechanical properties of emerging 2D Bi2O2Se and paves a way to explore its applications in flexible electronics and mechanical property related devices. Few-layer and single-crystalline Bi2O2Se flakes on mica substrate were synthesized with vapor-solid (VS) deposition following our previous work (please see Experimental Section for details). However, the PMMA-assisted method is unable to transfer thin Bi2O2Se flakes, which remained on mica. Because rigid PMMA with low adhesive force According to the measurement results by AFM contact mode, which has been used to evaluate the adhesion of polymers, After transfer onto the MEMS SiO2/Si substrate via the PDMS-mediated method, all Bi2O2Se flakes keep the original rectangular shape and the structural integrity, as shown with the scanning electron microscope (SEM) image in Figure The crystal structure of the transferred Bi2O2Se samples was further investigated by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) characterization. The high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) image in Figure We use AFM nanoindentation to measure the intrinsic mechanical properties of 2D materials. As the hole is circular, the strain applied on the flake via the tip is reasonably isotropic at the hole center. Notably, the radius of the tip (rt, ~ 7 nm) is much less than that of the hole (r, ~ 1 μm) with a ratio of rt/r = 0.007 << 1. Therefore, the isotropy in strain and the negligible ratio permit the use of following F-δ equation to fit force curves, where σ 2D 0 denotes the pre-strain of the suspended flake, E 2D is 2D elastic modulus, q is a constant and expressed by q = (1.049 -0.15ν -0.16ν 2 ) -1 , and ν represents the Poisson's ratio of Bi2O2Se with a theoretical value of 0.35. dominates at the range of large loads, as elucidated by the force curve of 6L Bi2O2Se in logarithmic scale coordinates (inset of Figure it shows the same trend with E 2D versus layer number that increases from 60 to 550 N m -1 in the same range (Figure Based on the calculated σ 2D max and E2D, two fundamental parameters that describe mechanical properties of the materials, i.e., stiffness (σ) and Young's modulus (EYoung), can be determined by, Where δ is the critical indentation before breaking. As shown in Figure We have developed a reliable and effective PDMS-mediated method to transfer thin Bi2O2Se flakes from mica onto MEMS substrates with good fidelity. Taking advantage of the flexible PDMS with high adhesive force, the transferred Bi2O2Se, including thin ones down to 5L, maintain the initially rectangular shape, homogeneous morphology, and high-quality structures. Furthermore, the mechanical properties of 2D Bi2O2Se have been comprehensively studied and we disclose that the fewlayer Bi2O2Se shows a high stiffness of 18-23 GPa and a layer-independent Young's modulus of 88.7 ± 14.4 GPa. We also show the increase of fracture radial strain with the decrease of layer numbers of Bi2O2Se, as well as the high flexibility of a 6L flake that withstands a deformation of more than 3%. The PDMS-mediated transfer method and experimental measurements of the mechanical properties of 2D Bi2O2Se pave a solid foundation for the applications of this emerging material in flexible devices. Growth and Transfer of Few-Layer Bi2O2Se: Few-layer Bi2O2Se samples were grown by the method of VS deposition. Finally, the Bi2O2Se vapor from the high-temperature zone at 700 °C was carried by the pure Ar (99.99%) with the flow rate of 200 sccm to deposit on the mica substrates for 6 min, to obtain 2D Bi2O2Se flakes with various thickness. For the PMMA-assisted transfer method, a PMMA layer was spin-coated on the as-grown Bi2O2Se on the mica with the speed of 2,000 rpm for 1 min followed by the heat treatment at 150  C for 1 min. To assist PMMA layer, commercially available PDMS with the thickness of 200 μm (KYN-200, Hangzhou Bald Advanced Materials Co., Ltd., China) was attached to the surface of PMMA/Bi2O2Se, the adhesion between which was improved by heating at 80  C for 1 min. Then the sample (PDMS/PMMA/Bi2O2Se/mica) was put into distilled water in a petri dish to peeled off PDMS/PMMA/Bi2O2Se from mica and transfer onto a micro-electro-mechanical system (MEMS) SiO2/Si substrate with hole arrays. The diameter and depth of the holes were 2 μm and 300 nm respectively, which were confirmed by SEM and AFM (Figure Before transferring Bi2O2Se flakes by the PDMS-mediated method, the as-grown Bi2O2Se samples on mica were soaked into HF solution with an ultralow concentration of 0.01% for 5-10s to weaken the interaction between the thin flakes and mica, then cleaned in distilled water immediately. The extremely low concentration of HF solution and immediate cleaning would not deteriorate the structure of Bi2O2Se flakes, as approved by the characterization results in this manuscript. For the PDMSmediated method, a piece of flexible PDMS with appropriate thickness of 200 um (KYN-200, Hangzhou Bald Advanced Materials Co., Ltd., China) was attached and pressed to make the adhesion stronger between Bi2O2Se flakes and PDMS. Afterwards, PDMS layer along with Bi2O2Se flakes were peeled off from mica with the help of a water droplet of 5 μL, followed by transferring PDMS/Bi2O2Se onto MEMS SiO2/Si substrate. Finally, the transferred samples were heated gradually to 180 °C to improve the adhesion between Bi2O2Se flakes and the target substrate, while bare PDMS layer was easily removed to obtain suspended Bi2O2Se flakes with various thickness. The high adhesion and flexibility of PDMS play the most important role to successfully transfer the Bi2O2Se flakes with various thichness, including the thin ones with the thickness of 3.2 nm (5 layers), onto the MEMS SiO2/Si substrate. On the one hand, AFM contact mode was used to study that the adhesive force of PDMS is more than two times as high as that of PMMA (Figure Materials Characterization: The morphology of samples was characterized by optical microscopy (Imager A2m, Carl Zeiss, Germany) and SEM (5kV, SU8010, Hitachi, Japan). AFM (Cypher ES, Oxford Instruments, USA) was used to further characterize the morphology and measure the thickness of all samples with the tapping mode, which avoids damages during the scanning processes. Raman spectrometer (HR800, Horiba JY, Japan) was applied to collect the Raman spectra and mapping patterns. The spot diameter of the excited laser with the wavelength of 633 nm is ~ 1 μm, and the step size of Raman mappings is 1 μm. TEM characterization (Tecnai F30, FEI, USA) was performed to obtain TEM images and SAED patterns at the operating voltage of 300 kV. XPS analyses (ESCALAB 250Xi, Thermo Fisher, USA) were performed to confirm the chemical composition of Bi2O2Se flakes. Flakes by Nanoindentation: After the collection of AFM images of Bi2O2Se flakes by the tapping mode, contact mode was applied for subsequent application of force for nanoindentation measurements. The spring constant of an AFM cantilever (AC55TS, Oxford Instruments, USA) was calibrated using the thermal noisy method before each measurement. The extension and retraction speed of the AFM tip was 500 nm s -1 . Measurement of Adhesive Force of PDMS and PMMA: AFM can be used to evaluate the adhensive force of polymers. Subsequently, a force of 100 nN was loaded on and unloaded from the samples by an AFM tip with the speed of 500 nN s -1 to collect the approach and extraction force curves, respectively. Accordingly, the adhensive forces between the polymers and the AFM tip were obtained (Figure 