2G high temperature superconducting (HTS) wires, YBCO coated conductors, perform a better carrying current capability, which is potentially applied in the manufacture of HTS magnets. This paper presents the experimental results of the pumping current for YBCO coils using a pulse-type magnetic flux pump in the conduction-cooling system and liquid nitrogen bath (LN2) cryogenic environment. Optimization of the flux pump used in the conduction-cooling system is that a constantan heater was added to keep the temperature of the pumping bridge at a certain value. Excitation effects of the YBCO coil at different temperatures were investigated in the conduction-cooling system. A fast-increasing of pumping current in the YBCO coil occurs when the temperature of the YBCO sheet (i.e., pumping bridge) is in the range of 50 K to 80 K. The relationships between saturated pumping current and input voltage, working frequency, numbers of magnetic poles were also studied. Using the seven-pole configuration, the saturated current can reach 155 A when the frequency is 20 Hz and the voltage is 6 V. The excitation characteristics of the flux pump in the LN2 cooling system show the possibility of the pulse-type magnetic flux pump for the practical application of HTS magnets. IGH temperature superconductor (HTS) magnet has been widely applied in magnet systems such as nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) Magnetic flux pump, which is subject to Faraday's law of electromagnetic induction, provides a variable magnetic flux and then injects direct current (DC) into the superconducting loop (corresponding author: Chi Ma) Zhiming Bai and Xinhui Cui are with the College of Science, Northeastern University, Shenyang 110819, China. Compared with the first generation HTS wires, such as Bi-2223, the second generation HTS wires own higher operating temperature, critical current, and better on-field performance, which is more attractive for applications. YBCO coated conductor tapes with significantly improved mechanical properties show a superior behavior over bulk superconductors Many types of flux pumps for the YBCO coil were proposed in recent decades The pulse-type magnetic flux pump is composed of four main parts: iron yoke, copper solenoids, pumping bridge, and the Ushaped frame. Eight copper solenoids wound on seven pairs of iron core to enhance the field strength that can be changed by the input voltage. The iron core is made from laminated silicon steel sheets to reduce eddy current loss. There is an air gap of 3 mm between the upper poles and the lower poles. The pumping bridge made by the YBCO coated-conductor is in the middle of the air gap. The U-shaped frame is used to support and cool the pumping bridge. More details of the pulse-type magnetic flux pump have been discussed in the former paper We prepared two sets of YBCO single-layer coil with the same specification, coil 1 and coil 2. They are all made of 4 mm×0.2 mm YBCO coated conductor. The critical current of the YBCO tape before winding is 220 A at 77 K (determined at 1 μV/cm, self-field). Each coil contains 5 turns. The diameter of two coils are both 110 mm and their self-inductance are 2 μH. The soldering technique used in this experiment is similar to that in Ref. An expression for the dynamic resistance (Rdyn) have proposed as follow Where 2a is the width of the superconductor sheet, l is the length of the superconductor sheet, f is the frequency of the applied time-varying magnetic field, Ic0 is the critical current of the tape, Ba is the amplitude of the applied field, and B0 is a factor describing the field-critical current relationship. The net flux injected into the superconducting loop in one working cycle is proportional to the dynamic resistance First, we use the conduction-cooling system to excite the YBCO coil 1. In preceding experiments of flux pump using a Bi-2223 and MgB2 sheet where II 0 is the saturated current, τ is the decay constant and ττ = LL RR ⁄ , L is the inductance of the YBCO coil, R is the joint resistance. We use equation ( As shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. The fast-increasing part appeared when the temperature of the pumping bridge is in the range of 50 K to 80 K. This is close to the temperature range of liquid nitrogen. When considering practical applications, another set of flux pump working in the LN2 bath was prepared to observe the effect of current pumping and discussed in later sections. The magnetic field strength affects the magnetic flux pumped in each pumping cycle, and it depends on the input voltage of the flux pump. In this part of work, we have designed two sets of cooling systems: a conduction-cooling system and a LN2 bath system. Coil 2 was used to do experiments in those two cases to explore the excitation effects of the input voltage. In the conduction-cooling system, we use the constantan heater to keep the temperature of the YBCO coil near 75 K so that it could be taken as a comparison test with the LN2 system. The working frequency is set as 20 Hz. Fig. Fig. The magnetic poles are made of copper solenoids wound on laminated silicon steel sheets. In the process of generating a moving magnetic field by the flux pump, the increase of working frequency may cause more loss in iron cores. The core loss (∆PP) includes two parts: hysteresis loss (∆PP h ) and eddy current loss (∆PP ee ). It can be expressed as: (3) where ffis the frequency, A and B are constants determined by the material factors of the core. ∆PP h and ∆PP ee are both related to frequency. The relationship between the core loss and frequency shows a parabolic growth. We have taken some measures to reduce the core loss, such as using the soft magnetic material silicon steel with a narrow hysteresis loop as the iron core to reduce the hysteresis loss and stacking the silicon steel sheet to reduce the eddy current loss. However, when the frequency is high, the core loss cannot be ignored. The core loss generates heat, which causes a temperature rise, leading to local demagnetization in magnetic poles. The effective magnetic flux pumped in each pumping cycle decreases and, consequently, the maximum saturated pumping current in the YBCO coil decrease. Other possible reasons will be verified and analyzed in future experiments. The YBCO coils are prepared and excited by the pulse-type magnetic flux pump in the conduction-cooling and LN2 system. A constantan heater is added to the U-shaped frame of the flux pump to change the temperature of the pumping bridge. The excitation effects of the flux pump at different temperatures have been investigated in the conduction-cooling system. This HTS flux pump device applies the dynamic resistance mechanism, which uses a time-varying magnetic to trigger flux flow into the superconducting closed loop. When the temperature of the YBCO sheet is in the range of 50 K to 80 K, the pumping current in the YBCO coil shows a fast-increasing trend. The characteristic of pumping current at different input voltage and frequency has been investigated. The YBCO coil could obtain a saturated current of 155 A when the input voltage of the flux pump is 6 V and the pumping frequency is 20 Hz with seven magnetic poles. For the six-pole configuration, the pumping current has the 152 A maximum value at 30 Hz. The experiment results in the LN2 system show the pulse-type magnetic flux pump is workable for the practical applications of HTS magnets.