Icephobic surfaces inspired by superhydrophobic surfaces offer a passive solution to the problem of icing. However, modeling icephobicity is challenging because some material features that aid superhydrophobicity can adversely affect the icephobic performance. This study presents a new approach based on artificial neural networks to model icephobicity. Artificial neural network models were developed to predict the icephobic performance of concrete. The models were trained on experimental data to predict the surface ice adhesion strength and the coefficient of restitution (COR) of water droplet bouncing off the surface under freezing conditions. The material and coating compositions, and environmental condition were used as the models' input variables. A multilayer perceptron was trained to predict COR with a root mean squared error of 0.08, and a 90% confidence interval of [0.042, 0.151]. The model had a coefficient of determination of 0.92 after deployment. Since ice adhesion strength varied over a wide range of values for the samples, a mixture density network was model was developed to learn the underlying relationship in the multimodal data. Coefficient of determination for the model was 0.96. The relative importance of the input variables in icephobic performance were calculated using permutation importance. The developed models will be beneficial to optimize icephobicity of concrete. Ice formation on surfaces can lead to undesirable consequences such as slippery roads and walkways, downed power and communication lines, and transportation delays. Icephobic surfaces have been developed to combat the problem of icing Dry concrete is porous, hydrophilic, and prone to ice accretion. Water absorbed by the concrete undergoes freeze-thaw cycle in winter weather, and forms cracks in the concrete. Also, anti-icing or deicing agents which have environmental impacts In this paper, we develop neural network models to predict two metrics of icephobicity of concrete-the ability to repel incoming water droplets, and the ice adhesion strength-based on material composition and environmental condition. Water droplets impinging with kinetic energy, for example, raindrops falling on a surface can either stick to the surface, bounce off, or break up into smaller droplets. In cold conditions the droplets that stick to the surface can freeze and result in ice accretion. An icephobic surface should ideally be able to repel such incoming droplets before they have a chance to accumulate on the surface and freeze. Also, the adhesion strength of ice to the surface should be low so that any ice can be easily removed by wind or vibrations. The experimental data characterizing these two aspects from our previous studies Two feed-forward artificial neural network models were developed and trained to predict icephobic performance of concrete surfaces. The first model predicts the effectiveness of concrete surfaces at repelling incoming water droplets measured in terms of the coefficient of restitution (COR) of droplet rebound. The second network predicts the ice adhesion strength (kPa) on concrete surfaces. Concrete samples with various mortar and coating compositions were prepared as described in Two aspects of icephobicity of concrete were studied. First, the ability of concrete to repel incoming water droplets were studied as described in The droplet bouncing tests generated a dataset (DS1) of 85 samples, with seven features and one target. The features are the material composition parameters and the Weber number of incoming water droplets. The target is the mean COR of the rebounding water droplets. The ice adhesion tests generated a dataset (DS2) of 30 samples, with six features. The target is the mean ice adhesion strength (kPa) on concrete surface. Datasets were scaled so that any variable with a large order of magnitude does not overwhelm the network weights during model training. Additionally, scaling improves the model performance. A holdout set of 20% and a validation set of 20% were randomly extracted from DS1 before feature scaling. The remaining features from DS1 were scaled. Twenty percent of data was separated from DS2 as validation set before scaling. The datasets were scaled using the Yeo-Johnson power transformer The topology of the artificial neural network (ANN) for predicting COR is shown in Figure1a. The network has seven input neurons, two hidden layers with 12 neurons each, and one output neuron. Activation functions are used to introduce nonlinearity in the model. The Rectified Linear unit (ReLU) f(x) = max(0,x) is used as the activation function for the hidden layer. ReLU offers several computational advantages over other activation functions The holdout (test) set was used to estimate the model performance after deployment. DS2 consists of a range of experimental data using both hydrophobic and regular concrete. Because of the wide range of ice adhesion values, the target in DS2 exhibits a bimodal distribution (Figure where m is the number of mixture components, α i is the mixing coefficient, and N denotes a normal distribution with mean μ i and variance σ 2 i . The feed-forward network can be used to estimate the mixture parameters. Figure where q is the total number of patters in the training set Figure Relative importance of the predictors in the models were determined using permutation importance After training and validating ANN 500 times using bootstrap method, its generalization performance was obtained. The mean number of epochs for the network was obtained as 179 (Figure The relative importance of the features in the two models are as shown in Figure The models developed in this study are used to predict two aspects of icephobicity-the ability to repel incoming water droplets, and the ice adhesion strength-of concrete. The first aspect is characterized by the COR of water droplets impacting the surface. Surfaces with high contact angle can repel incoming water droplets. However, in some cases the droplets can get pinned to hydrophobic/superhydrophobic surfaces. The effectiveness of the surfaces in repelling incoming water droplets depends also on the surface micro/nanotopography The training for ANN was performed with 51 datapoints. In training phase, the weights and biases are repeatedly updated by backpropagation. During training the model can pick up the noise in the data instead of learning the underlying relationship between the features and target. To avoid this, a validation set is used to monitor the error metric. If during training, the validation error increases while the train error stays the same or continues to decrease, then the model is overfitting. To prevent overfitting, the error metrics were monitored for the 179 epochs. Early stopping can also be used to prevent overfitting. Data leakage from validation and test sets to training set can result in overly optimistic predictive models. Data leakage was minimized by separating the train, test, and validation data before scaling. The holdout test set of size 17 was used to check if the final model predictions were overly optimistic. R 2 of 0.92 for the test set compared to 0.94 for the entire dataset implies that the model was able to learn the underlying relationship in the data over the entire range of COR. Note that the error produced in the model can be reduced by changing the hyperparameters, but at the cost of overfitting due to limited number of samples. Permutation importance (Figure The second aspect of icephobicity modeled is the ice adhesion strength on concrete surface. The adhesion strength depends not only on the water-repellency but also the surface micro/nanotopography. As discussed previously, material and coating parameters need to be considered as features for the model. Since the experimental dataset consisted of 30 samples, it was split for train and validation. A holdout set was not available for this model. The validation set and early stopping strategy were used to prevent overfitting of the model. In early stopping the training is stopped when the model stops improving on the validation set. Data leakage was minimized by scaling the train data separately. MDN was trained on a bimodal dataset, and thus predicts ice adhesion strength of both icephobic and regular concrete. Icephobic concrete exhibits lower ice adhesion strength compared to regular concrete. From Figure Silica fume content was the most significant variable as estimated using permutation importance for the MDN model. Note that silica fume provides a smaller scale roughness compared to the sand particles. PMHS content in the coating was the next significant variable because of its functionality. PMHS provides high water contact angle, thus minimizing the area of contact between water and the surface. The roughness provided by silica fume further enhances the contact angle by creating pockets of trapped air at the interface. The air pockets and low contact area result in weak adhesion of ice to the surface. The models presented in the paper predict the metrics for icephobic performance of engineered surfaces. These models can be extended for other targets such as material properties by using additional predictors in the training and validation phases. MDN is ideal for modeling materials where multimodal data can be expected, such as hydrophilic/hydrophobic/superhydrophobic materials. Two artificial neural network models were developed to predict the icephobic performance of concrete. The first model predicts the ability of concrete to repel incoming water droplets at -5 • C using COR of water droplet rebound as the metric. The first model has RMSE of 0.08, with a 90% confidence interval of [0.042, 0.151]. R 2 for holdout data was 0.92, demonstrating the model's robust predictive performance over the entire range of dataset. The model was able to capture the effect of material and coating compositions, and environmental conditions on the collision dynamics of water droplets with the concrete surface. The second model is a mixture density network to predict the adhesion strength of ice on concrete at 0 • C. Early stopping was used to prevent model overfitting. The model captured the effect of material and coating compositions to predict the icephobicity of both icephobic and regular concrete samples. R 2 for the entire dataset was 0.96. Variables associated with coating composition were found to be relatively more important than the ones associated with concrete composition in both models. The versatility of MDN makes it suitable for material modeling where multimodal data can be expected. • PMHS (% wt.) • Silica fume (% wt.)