Few-layer InSe draws tremendous research interests owing to the superior electronic and optical properties. It exhibits high carrier mobility up to more than 1000 cm 2 /Vs at room temperature. The strongly layer-tunable band gap spans a large spectral range from near-infrared to the visible. In this perspective, we systematically review the optical properties of few-layer InSe. Firstly, the intrinsic optical and electronic properties are introduced. Compared to other two-dimensional (2D) materials, the light-matter interaction of few-layer InSe is unusual. The band gap transition is inactive or extremely weak for in-plane polarized light, and the emission light is mainly polarized along the out-of-plane direction. Secondly, we will present several schemes to tune the optical properties of few-layer InSe such as external strain, surface chemical doping and van der Waals (vdW) interfacing. Thirdly, we survey the applications of few-layer InSe in photodetection and heterostructures. Overall, few-layer InSe exhibits great potential not only in fundamental research, but also in electronic and optoelectronic applications. The isolation of graphene by mechanical exfoliation The linear dispersion and massless Dirac fermions yield unique electronic and optical properties of graphene InSe emerges as a competitive 2D semiconductor in recent years. In 2013, Mudd et al. exfoliated the bulk crystal of InSe into thin layers and revealed the largely layer-tunable band gap of few-layer InSe In this perspective, we systematically review the studies on the optical properties of few-layer InSe, mostly from the perspective of experiments. There are four sections following this introduction. We start with the intrinsic optical and electronic properties of few-layer InSe. The layer-dependent band structures, light absorption and emission, Raman scattering and the electron transport properties will be introduced in section II. Then we survey several methods to tune the optical properties of fewlayer InSe such as external strain, surface chemical doping and vdW interfacing in section III. Furthermore, the applications of few-layer InSe in optoelectronics will be discussed in section IV. Finally, we present an outlook on the future study of the optical properties in section V. The band structures of 2D materials can exhibit strong layer dependence due to the quantum confinement in the out-of-plane direction. For instance, there exists an indirect-to-direct bandgap transition for the TMDCs with thickness decreasing from bilayer to monolayer The PL intensity of few-layer InSe decreases by more than an order of magnitude as the thickness decreasing from 10-layer to 2-layer Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. Resembling other 2D semiconductors like TMDCs and BP, the light absorption and emission of few-layer InSe exhibit the same layer dependence as the band structures, which has been confirmed by PL measurements Where n is the refractive index of the material, me is electron mass and Eg is the energy of the interband transition. The dipole matrix element is expressed as ( ) , , cv P k k c e P k v  , e is the unit polarization vector, P is the interband momentum operator. () is proportional to the joint density of states. According to equation (1), the light absorption of solids is determined by dipole matrix element and the joint density of states. The in-plane dipole matrix elements vanish for monolayer InSe. Monolayer InSe has zz  mirror symmetry (the crystal structure of γ-phase InSe is displayed in the next section), so the wave function of valence/conduction band is either even or odd with respect to the mirror plane. Without considering the spin-orbit interaction, the wave functions for the highest valence band (Se-pz orbitals dominated), the deeper valence bands (Se-px/y orbitals dominated) and the lowest conduction band (In-s orbitals dominated) are even, odd and odd respectively with respect to the zz  mirror symmetry Where R and Rs correspond to the reflected light from the material and the substrate, n and ns are the refractive indices of the material and the substrate respectively. As illustrated in Fig. Although the band gap transition of few-layer InSe is forbidden for in-plane polarized light, the PL emission mainly contributed from the out-of-plane polarized light can be measured Strong excitonic effect was observed for bulk InSe at low temperature There are three exciton-related PL peaks, which are free exciton at 1.338 eV (X), biexciton at 1.335 eV (M), and P-band of the exciton-exciton (X-X) scattering at 1.320 eV (P). The nature of the biexciton and X-X scattering are confirmed by quadratic power dependence. The PL peaks below 1.3 eV correspond to the emission from a series of defect states There are at least three crystal phases for InSe, which are γ, β and ε phase The normal modes of vibrations can be decomposed as 4A1 (Γ1) + 4E (Γ3). One A1 and one E modes are acoustic, while the others are optical modes which are both Raman and infrared active The A1 (Γ1 1 )-LO and E (Γ1 3 )-LO phonon modes of InSe are forbidden according to selection rules or relatively weak in the backscattering geometry LO and E (Γ1 3 )-LO modes are observable with the excitation of 514.5 nm laser (2.41 eV). In contrast, these two phonon modes are not observed when Raman scattering is excited by 532 nm laser (2.33 eV) or 633 nm laser (1.96 eV) Few-layer InSe exhibits high carrier mobility as a 2D semiconductor. A large number of high performance field effect transistors (FETs) The highest mobility is 12700 cm 2 /Vs at liquid-helium temperature with carrier density n ≈ 8 × 10 12 cm -2 . Quantum Hall effect is observed based on InSe electronic devices as displayed in Fig. In addition, high carrier mobility can be achieved by fabricating InSe electronic devices on PMMA/Al2O3 substrates as shown in Fig. In summary, the high carrier mobility and high current on-off ratio make few-layer InSe promising for electronic and optoelectronic applications. A. External strain 2D materials exhibit great stretchability compared to their bulk counterpart. Therefore, the vibrational, optical and electronic properties of 2D materials can be effectively tuned by strain The strain effect on 2D materials such as graphene 119, 120 , TMDCs 121-123 and BP The in-plane tensile strain can weaken the In-Se bond strength and thus raise the bonding valence band (Se-pz oribital dominated) and lower the antibonding conduction band (In-s orbital dominated). It is usually difficult to tune the properties of bulk materials by stretching method. However, by taking advantage of superior flexibility, the band structures of bulk-like InSe (over 50 layers) can be effectively engineered by strain (see Fig. Since strain can efficiently tune the optical and electronic properties of few-layer InSe, the performance of flexible electronic and optoelectronic devices based on few-layer InSe can exhibit large tunability by strain Van der Waals heterostructures can be prepared by stacking various 2D materials. Since the materials are weakly coupled by vdW interactions, one can freely choose materials to achieve desired physical properties Most of these studies mainly focus on the electronic and optoelectronic devices of InSe heterostructures, while the basic optical properties of them are rarely mentioned. We will specifically introduce them in the next section. Herein, we highlight one recent study regarding the interlayer exciton at the InSe/TMDCs interface Few-layer InSe can be utilized in a variety of electronic and optoelectronic devices, such as FETs Benefiting from the layer-dependent band gap and the excellent electronic properties, few-layer InSe is suitable for high performance broadband photodetectors ). Tamalampudi et al. fabricated an photodetector based on the mechanically exfoliated few-layer InSe InSe has been fabricated into vdW heterostructure photodetectors with other 2D materials such as GaSe In this perspective, we systematically review the optical properties of few-layer InSe mainly from the experimental point of view. Few-layer InSe has been demonstrated as a promising 2D semiconductor with superior electronic properties and strongly layer-dependent band structures. To further discover intriguing optical properties of few-layer InSe and enhance the performance of its optoelectronics devices, how to effectively excite and detect the band gap transition is the first and foremost question we need to address. For instance, complex excitonic effects such as higher order states of free excitons, trions and biexcitons are expected to be observed. Although spin-orbital interactions can partially relax the transition selection rules Grazing incident light or coupling to planar waveguides can possibly play a role in future studies 155- . Secondly, as a natural quantum well, few-layer InSe exhibits potentials in optoelectronic applications in infrared and terahertz region by making use of the intersubband transitions Encapsulation by hBN is a widely applied method. The PL spectrum and electron transport properties can remain unchanged for several weeks or even months 