In this study, we investigate the structure-stability relationship of hypothetical Nd-Fe-B crystal structures using descriptor-relevance analysis and the t-SNE dimensionality reduction method. 149 hypothetical Nd-Fe-B crystal structures are generated from 5967 LA-T-X host structures in Open Quantum Materials Database by using elemental substitution method, with LA denoting lanthanides, T denoting transition metals, and X denoting light elements such as B, C, N and O. By borrowing the skeletal structure of each of the host materials, a hypothetical crystal structure is created by substituting all lanthanide sites with Nd, all transition metal sites with Fe, and all light element sites with B. High-throughput first-principle calculations are applied to evaluate the phase stability of these structures. Twenty of them are found to be potentially formable. As the first investigative result, the descriptor-relevance analysis on the orbital field matrix (OFM) materials' descriptor reveals the average atomic coordination number as the essential factor in determining the structure stability of these substituted Nd-Fe-B crystal structures. 19 among 20 hypothetical structures that are found potentially formable have an average coordination number larger than 6.5. By applying the t-SNE dimensionality reduction method, all the local structures represented by the OFM descriptors are integrated into a visible space to study the detailed correlation between their characteristics and the stability of the crystal structure to which they belong. We discover that unstable substituted structures frequently carry Nd and Fe local structures with two prominent points: low average coordination numbers and fully occupied B neighboring atoms. Moreover, there are only three popular forms of B local structures appearing on all potentially formable substituted structures: cage networks, planar networks, and interstitial sites. The discovered relationships are promising to speed up the screening process for the new formable crystal structures. There is a recurring and crucial demand for naturallysourced and formable materials. The discovery of these stable structures attracts significant attention from various fields. The field of material screening is widely spread from Heusler structures As a real example, we consider the geometry of per-manent magnets. The current strongest permanent magnet is Nd-Fe-B based magnet, whose the main phase is Nd 2 Fe 14 B. Before the Nd-Fe-B magnet was invented by Sagawa et al. in the early 1980s In this research, we investigate the structure-stability relationship hidden in the screening results of Nd-Fe-B hypothetical structures. Firstly, we collect all possible LA-T-X crystal structures with lanthanides (LA), tran-sition metals (T), and light elements X = B, C, N, and O from Open Quantum Materials Database We collected 5967 crystal structures from the Open Quantum Materials Database (OQMD) In this research, elemental substitution method was applied on the crystal structures in D host LA-T-X to generate new hypothetical structures consisting of Nd, Fe, and B. We substituted all lanthanide sites of a given host crystal structure with Nd, all transition metal sites with Fe, and all light element sites of with B to generate a new hypothetical Nd-Fe-B structures. The newly substituted structures were compared to each other and to the crystals in the D host LA-T-X dataset to avoid duplication. In the first step, we remove all possible structural duplications using the comparison procedure proposed by qmpy (python application programming interface of OQMD) First-principle calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) where ∆E f is the formation energy, and E H is determined by projecting from the chemical composition position to an endpoint appearing on the convex hull facets. Details of the algorithm for determining these convex hull facets from hull points and E H are given in In contrast, a material associated with ∆E > 0 is unstable. A material associated with ∆E lightly above the CH surface is considered a metastable phase. Referring to the prediction accuracy of formation energy (∼ 0.1 eV/atom by OQMD for potentially formable crystal structures and unstable crystal structures, respectively. D host Nd-Fe-B holds 35 Nd-Fe-B crystal structures that are used as references to build the Nd-Fe-B phase diagram. Among them, there are seven ternary crystal structures. To verify the reliability of the dataset in constructing the phase diagram and the definition of structure stability, we removed each ternary crystal then used the remaining crystals in D host Nd-Fe-B to determine its corresponding stability value. As a result, among the seven ternary materials, NdFe 4 B 4 and Nd 5 Fe 2 B 6 are two formable ternary crystals with ∆E = 0.0. Moreover, one material, NdFe 12 B 6 , is potentially formable (metastable) with its stability less than 0.1 eV/atom. Table We followed the computational settings of OQMD We employed DFT+U for Fe, and all calculations were spin-polarized with the ferromagnetic alignment of the spins. Initial values of the magnetic moment were set at 5, 0, and 0 μ B for Fe, Nd, and B respectively. For any new structure, we followed three optimization steps: 'coarse relax', 'fine relax', and 'standard' procedures of the OQMD for coarse optimization, fine optimization, and a single point calculation, respectively. The number of k-points per reciprocal atom (KPRA) was set as 4000, 6000, and 8000 for the 'coarse relax', 'fine relax', and 'standard' optimization steps respectively. We used a cutoff-energy value at 520 eV for all calculations. The total energy obtained from the "standard" calculation step was used to estimate the formation energy, ∆E DF T f . In the last step, the CH distance of a new structure is estimated from equation 1. Finally, we obtained 20 new Nd-Fe-B crystal structures that are not in D host LA-T-X , in which the CH distance of the corresponding optimized crystal structure was less than 0.1 eV. Figure In this study, we employed the OFM Orbital Field Matrix representation of local structure Atomic local environment one-hot vector of Fe: Ar 3d ! 4s 2 and Nd: Xe 6s " 4f 4 Voronoi polyhedral O, of atoms. Each vector O is filled with zeros, except those representing the electronic configuration of the valence electrons of the corresponding atom. The OFM of a local structure, named Θ, is defined as follows: where θ k is the solid angle determined using the face of the Voronoi polyhedra between the central atom and the index k neighboring atom; θ max is the maximum solid angle between the central atom and neighboring atoms. By removing the distance dependence in the original OFM formulation where p is the structure index, and l and N p are the local structure indices and the number of atoms in the unit cell of the structure p, respectively. A complete representation of the OFM matrix has 1056 dimensions. However, under a given investigation system, a large number of zero terms appearing in all structures representation due to the absence of other elements. In this investigation, Nd-Fe-B structures with three atomic types require 19 non-zero OFM variables. Details illustration of OFM descriptor are shown in Figure In this section, we focused on D host Nd-Fe-B and evaluated the relevance In detail, for a given set S of descriptor elements, we defined the prediction capacity P C(S) of S by the maximum prediction accuracy that a prediction model could achieve by using the variables in a subset s of S as follows: ΔE (eV/atom) Average atomic coordination number (s 2 , s 2 ) Unstable structure Potentially stable structure FIG. where R 2 s is the value of the coefficient of determination R 2 S i is denoted as set of descriptor elements after removing an element x i from the full descriptor element set S; S i = S -{x i }. A descriptor element is strongly relevant if and only if: By applying the descriptor relevant analysis in predicting the formation energy of the crystal structures in D host Nd-Fe-B it can be claimed that the descriptor (s 2 , s 2 ) is a strong relevant descriptor. Details of the result are shown in Supplementary materials. In Figure In the previous section, we investigated the structurestability relationship of substituted structures that are potentially formable. Correlations of different coordination numbers regarding the strong relevant feature, (s 2 , s 2 ), are discussed. In this section, we investigate distributions of Nd, Fe, and B local structures emphasizing on the stabilty of corresponding substituted structures on t-SNE embedding spaces The OFM description vector we used in this work (section 3.1) has 1056 dimensions. By omitting constant variables, in D subst-stable Nd-Fe-B , there are 19 remaining variables that need to represent these local structures. To visualize the distributions of local structures, a dimensionality reduction method is necessary. Herein, we employed t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) The second important parameter of t-SNE is the early exaggeration. This parameter controls the work of forming cluster at initial steps by forcing early clusters tightly knit together. Therefore, there is more empty space to help clusters moving around relative to others to archive an optimal global organization. Details explanation and practical effect in using these parameters are shown in the original paper To quantify the quality of a given embedding, we use the two following metrics: trustworthiness (M T ) and continuity (M C ) where Z = N k(2N -3k -1) with k is the size of the neighborhood; N is the total number of local structures. r(i, j) and r(i, j) are the rank of local structure j in the ordering according to the distance from i in the original and embedding space, respectively. U k (i) is the set of local structures that are approximately size k of the local structure i in the embedding space but not in the original space. V k (i) is the set of local structures that are approximately size k of the local structure i in the original space but not in the embedding space. In comparison, M T (k) measures the degree of reliability exhibited when local structures with further entrances join together in the embedding space, whereas M C (k) measures the degree of continuity exhibited when local structures with original locality are pushed farther away in the embedding space. M C and M T metrics are all in range from 0.0 to 1.0. The optimal value 1.0 indicates the most reliable for embedding methods as the distance metric on Potentially formable structure FIG. the embedding space totally matches the distance metric on the original space. On the other hand, the minimum value 0.0 indicates the least reliable results. Based on this interpretation, we performed grid-search parameters and then raised the optimal t-SNE's parameters by maximizing the simple average of M T and M C . In the grid-search, perplexity and early exaggeration parameters vary from 1 to 1000. Figure Figure In this research, we examined the structure-stability relationship of substituted Nd-Fe-B crystal structures using descriptor-relevance analysis and the t-SNE dimensionality reduction method. Hypothetical substituted Nd-Fe-B crystal structures are found using the elemental substitution method from LA-T-X host crystal structures with LA as lanthanide, T as transition metal, and X as light element (X = B, C, N, O). For each host crystal structure, a hypothetical crystal structure is created by substituting all lanthanide sites with Nd, all transition metal sites with Fe, and all light element sites with B. High-throughput first-principles calculations are used to evaluate the phase stability of the hypothetical crystal structures. Twenty of them are potentially formable. By performing the descriptor-relevance analysis on the orbital field matrix (OFM) materials' descriptor, the average atomic coordination number is shown as the most essential essential factor that effects to the structure stability of these substituted Nd-Fe-B crystal structures. 19 among 20 hypothetical structures that are found potentially formable have an average coordination number larger than 6.5. Under the use of the dimensionality reduction t-SNE method, concrete correlations between Nd, Fe and B local structures and the structural stability of these substituted crystals are revealed. Unstable substituted structures frequently contain Nd and Fe local structures with a low coordination number and fully occupied B neighboring atoms. On the other hand, potentially formable structures appear in three particular forms of B local structures: cage networks, planar networks, and interstitial. The extracted correlations between structural stability and different type of Nd, Fe and B local structures are validated with local structures of well known Nd-Fe-B crystals on OQMD. These structurestability relationships are promising to accelerate the process of screening new formable Nd-Fe-B structures. See separated supplementary materials the results from descriptor relevance analysis and details information of 20 substituted structures that are potentially formable in our study.