We show that the spin pumping from ferromagnetic insulator into the adjacent metallic spin sink can be strongly stimulated by the superconducting correlations. The key physical mechanism responsible for this effect is the presence of quasiparticle surface states at the ferromagnetic insulator/superconductor interface. We consider the minimal model when these states appear because of the suppressed pairing constant within the interfacial normal layer. For thin normal layers we obtain a strongly peaked temperature dependence of the Gilbert damping coefficient which has been recently observed in such systems. For thicker normal layers the Gilbert damping monotonically increases down to the temperatures much smaller than the critical one. The suggested model paves the way to controlling the temperature dependence of the spin pumping by fabricating hybrid normal metal/superconductor spin sinks. Introduction Spin transport and spin dynamics in superconductors have attracted significant attention recently In this way the suppression of GD with decreasing temperature T < T c in systems with superconducting spin sink 8 can be qualitatively understood as resulting from the the freezing out of quasiparticles in the superconductor In ferromagnetic insulator (FI) /superconductor (S) bilayers GdN/NbN the peaked behaviour of GD as a function of temperature has been observed In this Letter we suggest a minimal theoretical model which explains the large enhancement of GD in FI/S structures. The key physical mechanism responsible for this effect is the existence of quasiparticle states localized at the FI/S interface. Such states appear due to the suppressed pairing within the interfacial normal layer Near the interface at x = 0 the DOS is enhanced due to the subgap quasiparticle states which are formed in the N/S structure At low frequencies Ω ∆ 0 the DOS enhancement leads to the increased probability of the magnon absorption by conductivity electrons in the N/S layer. Qualitatively, at a given energy level this probability is determined by number of available states for transition N (ε)N (ε + Ω) ≈ N 2 (ε) and the difference of occupation numbers n 0 (ε + Ω) -n 0 (ε) ≈ Ω∂ ε n 0 where n 0 (ε) = tanh(ε/2T ) is the equilibrium distribution function. The product of these factors leads to the energyresolved magnon absorption probability P m = ΩN 2 ∂ ε n 0 . In Fig. Interestingly, besides explaining the large peak of the spin pumping for d N ξ 0 the model described above yields also the qualitatively different regime with almost monotonic increase of GD down to the temperatures T T c . This behaviour is obtained for d N ∼ ξ 0 when the bound states are pushed down to lower energies as shown in Fig. Model of spin pumping To quantify the spin pumping effect we consider the microscopic model of the spin-dependent scattering of electrons at the FI interface 37,39,40 . As we show below, it formally yields the spin current identical to the one given by the interfacial exchange interaction between the localized spins in FI and conduction elections in the adjacent metal Here S F 0 is the equilibrium spin density in F, d F is the F film thickness, H ef f is the effective field and α is the intrinsic Gilbert damping coefficient. The term i(t) can be interpreted as the spin current between FI and metal. To calculate S(t) we need to find the spin response of the superconductor to the interfacial exchange field. In the linear regime it is given by where we introduce the effective exchange field h ef f = J sd /d S , normal metal DOS at the Fermi level ν and the local spin susceptibility χ m . The spin-pumping related change of the GD is determined by the dissipative part of the susceptibility where the dimensionless coefficient determining the coupling strength between the FI and metallic films is 23 From there one can see that since Localization of surface states provides the effective decrease of d S which leads to the increase of C and the spin response. Calculation of the time-dependent spin response. What is left is to calculate the local spin susceptibility χ m in the Eq.4 for the FI/N/S structure in Fig. The magnetization of conduction electrons is determined by spin accumulation and can be written in terms of the Keldysh quasiclassical Green's function (GF) as g K is the (2×2 matrix) Keldysh component of the quasiclassical GF matrix ǧ = ĝR ĝK 0 ĝA which depends on two times and a single spatial coordinate variable ǧ = ǧ(t 1 , t 2 , r). GF ǧ obeys the Usadel equation where σk , τk , k = 0, 1, 2, 3 are Pauli matrices, D is the diffusion coefficient. The commutator operator is defined as [X, g] t = X(t 1 )g(t 1 , t 2 ) -g(t 1 , t 2 )X(t 2 ), similarly for anticommutator {, } t . The symbolic product operator is given by ( Spin relaxation is determined by the spin-orbital scattering self energy Σso = σ • ĝσ/(6τ so ) The self-consistency equation for the gap function is where λ is the pairing coefficient. In our model we assume the pairing constant to be suppressed in the N region λ(x < d N ) = 0.05λ(x > d N ) as compared to its value in S. We scan over the values of the diffusion coefficient in the N layer D N while keeping it fixed in S layer D S . The inelastic scattering is described by the Dynes Eq.7 is supplemented by the dynamical boundary conditions at x = 0 describing the spin splitting and pumping induced by the electron scattering at the FI interface with time-dependent magnetization. These boundary conditions are derived 37 from the spin-dependent scattering matrix Ŝ connecting the incident ψi and reflected ψr electronic waves ψr = Ŝ(t) ψi . For frequencies small compared to the exchange field in FI we use the adiabatic approximation which yields the expression Ŝ = e i(mσ)τ3Θ/2 , where Θ is the time-independent spinmixing angle. Then, assuming that |Θ| 1 and where m = m(t) is the time-dependent magnetization. Within the minimal band model of the FI , where px is the electron momentum projection on the interface normal. Eq.10 generalizes the static boundary condition at the spin-active interface Introducing the usual parametrization of quasiclassical Keldysh function in terms of the distribution function ĝK = ĝR • ff • ĝA we can identify the terms which are essential to calculate linear response in the low-frequency limit. Expanding the energy representation of ĝK to the first order in Ω we obtain the non-equilibrium correction where we parametrise the spin-dependent corrections as follows f = ( σm Ω )f h and δg R,A = ( σm Ω )δg R,A h . In contrast to stationary non-equilibrium situations where N = Tr(τ 3 ĝR )/2 is the local DOS and g R,A 3h = Tr(τ 3 ĝR,A h )/2 . Equations for zero-order spectral function ĝR,A 0 (ε, x), corrections ĝR,A h (ε, x) and the distribution function f h (ε, Ω, x) are obtained straightforwardly 37 from Eqs. (7, 10). The zero-order GF ĝR,A 0 (ε, x) are calculated in the N/S structure self-consistently together with the order parameter 9. This gives in particular the ∆(x) and N (ε, x) profiles shown in Fig. The peak is enhanced by decreasing the diffusion coefficient D N in the normal layer. Qualitatively, this leads to better localization of surface bound states and hence to the increase of surface DOS. As shown in the second column of Fig. The behaviour of δα(T ) obtained in Figs. The developed quasiclassical theory of spin pumping can be generalized to the case of metallic ferromagnets by introducing the finite spin-dependent tunnelling probability through the F/S interface Conclusions We have developed the general formalism to calculate spin-pumping in spatiallyinhomogeneous metallic films with spin-active interfaces. As an example we have considered the FI/N/S structure and found that the the presence of quasiparticle bound states localized near the spin-active interface provides strong enhancement of spin pumping which shows up in the strong increase of the GD coefficient with decreasing temperature below T c . The model explains large peak of GD in Gd/NbN structures and shows the way to controlling spin pumping properties in superconducting systems. The GF satisfies Gor'kov equations where r 12 = r 1 -r 2 and t 12 = t 1 -t 2 . Assuming the flat FI/M interface we consider transverse momentum components k z,y as conserved quantities. The perpendicular component k x changes to the opposite one upon electron reflection. We are interested in the components of GF which are slowly varying as function of the center of mass coordinate r = (r 1 + r 2 )/2 and thus can be written as follows The GF satisfies Gor'kov equations where Near the M/FI interface z = 0 we can establish the connection between amplitudes From these two relations we get Relations (B13,B14) can be obtained as follows. First, consider the vicinity of interface |x 1,2 | ξ where ξ = v x /∆. In this case we can use the simplified equation for GF neglecting the time derivative and order parameter Near the flat surface we have only the z-dependence dξ p τ3 Ĝk (k x + q, k x -q) where we denote r 12 = r 1 -r 2 , ξ p = (k 2 z + k 2 )/2m -ε F . Then at x = 0 we have dqdξ p τ3 Ǧk (-k x -q, -k x + q) dqdξ p τ3 Ǧk (k x + q, k x -q) (B20) Then using relations B15 dqdξ p Ŝ(t 1 )τ 3 Ǧk (-k x -q, -k x + q) Ŝ+ (t 2 ) ≈ Ŝ(t 1 )ĝ p (z = 0) Ŝ+ (t 2 ) where in the last relation we assume that Ŝ does not depend on q. Finally we get the time-dependent boundary condition for quasiclassical functions ǧp (x = 0) = Ŝ(t 1 )ǧ p (x = 0) Ŝ+ (t 2 ) (B21) Expanding Ŝ(t) ≈ 1 + iΘ σm(t)/2 in Eq.B21 we get the matrix current at the M/FI boundary where we denote [ X, ǧ] t = X(t 1 )ǧ(t 1 , t 2 ) -ǧ(t 1 , t 2 ) X(t 2 ), n = z is the normal to FI interface and denote the incident p • n < 0 and reflected p • n > 0 momenta. This expression can be simplified even more if we assume that due to the impurity scattering the anisotropic parts of GF are small. Then we can use two lowest order terms in the spherical harmonics expansion ǧp = ǧ + p • ǧa /p (B23)