Development of Urban Air Mobility (UAM) concepts has been primarily focused on electric vertical takeoff and landing aircraft (eVTOLs), small aircraft which can land and takeoff vertically, and which are powered by rechargeable (typically lithium-ion) batteries. Design, analysis, and operation of eVTOLs requires fast and accurate prediction of Li-ion battery performance throughout the lifetime of the battery. eVTOL battery performance modeling must be particularly accurate at high discharge rates to ensure accurate simulation of the high power takeoff and landing portions of the flight. In this work, we generate a battery performance and thermal behavior dataset specific to eVTOL duty cycles. We use this dataset to develop a battery performance and degradation model (Cellfit) which employs physicsinformed machine learning in the form of Universal Ordinary Differential Equations (U-ODE's) combined with an electrochemical cell model and degradation models which include solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) growth, lithium plating, and charge loss. We show that Cellfit with U-ODE's is better able to predict battery degradation than a mechanistic battery degradation model. We show that the improved accuracy of the degradation model improves the accuracy of the performance model. We believe that Cellfit will prove to be a valuable tool for eVTOL designers. The improving performance, increasing cycle life, and decreasing cost of lithium ion batteries spurred by the mass market adoption of personal electronics and electric vehicles (EV) has recently enabled the development of electric aircraft. The design trade-offs that arise from using Li-ion based batteries for electric aircraft designs are distinct from those with combustion engines, in large part due to the orders of magnitude difference in specific energy between Li-ion batteries and jet-fuel Estimating the state-of-charge over a duty cycle and the state-of-health over the lifetime of a cell has historically been performed using physics based models The development of machine learning based models requires relevant battery performance datasets to train and test the models. While datasets exist for testing Li-ion performance under a few duty cycles, To fill this gap, we generate an experimental battery performance dataset specific to the power requirements of an eVTOL. The dataset consists of 22 cells which sample a variety of operating conditions an eVTOL might experience during normal operation. The mission profiles follow the same generic format in all cases: (i) Take-off: the cell is discharged at a high constant power for a period, t to (ii) Cruise: the cell is discharged at a lower constant power for a longer duration, t cr (iii) Landing: the cell is discharged at high constant power (same rate as takeoff) for a slightly longer period of time, t la , (iv) Rest: the cell is allowed to rest until it cooled to a temperature of less than 27 • C, (v) Charging: the cell is charged using a constant current-constant voltage (CC-CV) charging protocol, (vi) Rest: The cell is allowed to rest until cell temperature reached 35 • C, then allowed to rest 15 minutes further before beginning the next cycle. Every 50 cycles, each cell undergoes a capacity test wherein it is discharged at constant current until its voltage was less than 2.5V. The cells were cycled until they reached less than 2.5V or a temperature of greater than For performance modeling, we use a physics inspired model A diffusion-like equation is used to model transport between and within the electrodes, and conservation of charge is enforced within this equation. Electrochemical reaction kinetics is modeled with the Butler-Volmer equation. The parameters used in this model cannot be directly obtained from physical measurements. However, they are physically motivated and correspond to processes which include electrochemical reactions, reaction kinetics, and transport. This combination strikes a compromise between accuracy, computational speed, and interpretability of the model. More details of the performance model can be found in methods. Parameter estimation for the performance model is performed against the training portion of the experementally generated eVTOL battery performance dataset. Specifically, the first cycle of each cell is used. A subset of the parameters of the performance model is chosen to capture the evolution of the performance model as the battery ages Parameters of battery models are often difficult to identify using local optimization methods Furthermore, the dimensionality of both the performance parameters and the aging parameters makes using global optimization tractable for these sets Cell voltage and temperature predictions from Cellfit for six cells at different points in their lifetimes are shown in Figure The mean square error for temperature and voltage as well as the error of maximum temperature prediction for each cycle shown in Table The discharge curves shown in Figure To estimate and model the aging parameters, those parameters must first be selected. This, in a process akin to hyperparameter optimization, is accomplished by first picking a set of initial The performance parameters have been estimated using the first cycle from each cell. The aging parameters for each cycle are estimated directly using the grid-based approach. The loss function does not substantially increase for most cycles with increasing cycle number, and stays relatively low throughout the cycles. Figure There are several advantages to the degradation modeling approach followed here. Firstly, the parameter estimation process for each cycle over the lifetime of the battery (the aging parameters) can be conducted independently, therefore, can be conducted in parallel, utilizing modern high performance computing architectures such as multi-core architectures and graphics processing units. Estimating the parameters in parallel theoretically allows us to estimate the parameters for each cycle over entire lifetime of a battery in the time required for a single cycle. Secondly, this approach results in accurate prediction of discharge characteristics throughout the battery's lifetime, which is vital for design, analysis, and safe operation of electric aircraft. Thirdly, the approach is model-agnostic, meaning that the degradation model can be physics-based, empirical, data driven, or any combination of them. We develop two degradation models: a physics-based mechanistic degradation model (MDM), which includes contributions from three different degradation mechanisms: SEI growth, lithium plating, and active material loss The MDM and UBDM are then trained alongside each other. For the estimation of these parameters, due to the high dimensionality and lack of interpretability of the neural network, we use a local optimization method (Adam) The loss function for this estimation is the weighted sum of the mean square errors of resistance and charge. The last column of Figure For the training set and the interpolative test set, the UBDM outperforms the MDM. In the training set, the error of the UBDM shows a 19.18% improvement over the MDM. In the interpolative testing set, the UBDM shows a 20.21% improvement over the MDM. On the other hand, the UBDM performs worse than the MDM on the extrapolative testing set. The first four columns of Figure While important, the model parameters of charge and resistance do not directly correspond to quantities used by aircraft designers. Therefore, it must be shown that improving the degradation model directly cascades to improvements of the performance model, particularly improvements in accuracy of predictions of voltage and temperature. Figure In this work, we have generated a battery performance and thermal response dataset specific to the urban air mobility use-case. We expect this dataset to rapidly accelerate the nascent field of batteries for electric aircraft. In order to learn this dataset, we develop a 'universal' battery modeling approach, which combines exact physical laws along with neural networks that can learn the residual (missing) physics. Using this modeling approach, we show incredible accuracy and com- The anode and cathode equilibrium potentials are modeled by the Redlich-Kister polynomials, and are given in equation ( The thermal model is based on a lumped parameter model with heat generation terms for ohmic heating and entropic heating. Cooling is convective cooling, owing to the test setup as described above. The equations for the thermal model is given in equation ( The cooling model is specific to this dataset; any cooling model can be used in lieu of new-tonian convection to best approximate cooling for any situation. Parameter Estimation and Identification Different parameters were estimated using different techniques. Performance parameters, including all Redlich-Kister coefficients, the diffusion coefficient, the reference potentials, all thermal parameters, and time constants were estimated using simulated annealing. A stochastic optimization technique was chosen to avoid the parameter identifiability issues described previously. The simulated annealing algorithm begins by evaluating the loss function at an initial point θ. Then, using gibbs sampling, a random parameter is chosen to iterate, and a new parameter vector θ candidate is created by adding a step λN (0, 1) where λ depends on the magnitude of the selected parameter, and the loss function is then evaluated at θ candidate . If the new loss function is lower than the previous loss function, then θ is replaced by θ candidate . If the new loss function is higher than the previous loss function, then θ is replaced by θ candidate with a probability calculated by the Boltzmann distribution: Over the course of the optimization, the temperature T is lowered to reduce the likelihood of moving to a less optimal parameter vector. This enables the algorithm to exploit and explore the parameter space. Exploration occurs when the temperature is relatively high, because the algorithm will allow movement to a higher loss value. This allows the algorithm to escape some local minima. Exploitation occurs when the temperature is relatively low, forcing the algorithm to move towards the local minima. We identified the aging parameters (charge and resistance) using a grid-based method. We chose this method for two reasons. Firstly, because there were only two parameters, and because of the aforementioned speed of the calculation of the loss function for this problem, a grid based method was tractable. Secondly, there was relatively little tolerance for optimization noise in these parameters, and the grid based method produced much less noise than a stochastic method such simulated annealing. In the grid based method, upper and lower limits for charge and resistance were first identified based on physical constants. The lower resistance limit was defined as 0.01 ohms, and the upper resistance limit was defined as 0.05 ohms. The upper charge limit was defined as 26000 coulombs, and the lower charge limit was set to around 15000 coulombs. Using these limits, a 10 by 10 grid was created and the loss function was evaluated at each point on the grid. At the best points (those with the lowest loss function) the grid was further subdivided and the loss function was re-evaluated for a specified number of subdivisions and number of subgrid points. Identifying the degradation parameters, including both the mechanistic and UBDM degradation parameters, involved a two-stage process. In the first stage, the parameters were initialized using simulated annealing following from a random starting point, as described above. In the second stage, the parameters were refined using a gradient-based optimization algorithm, Adam. This two-stage process was chosen to solve two problems: firstly, when integrated for a long time interval, such as a battery lifetime, random initialization of Neural Network parameters as is the norm in most machine learning applications can results in highly unstable systems, resulting in unphysical concentrations due to large charge losses or negative charge losses (charge gains). It is often not possible to calculate a gradient based on simulations with unphysical results which cause floating point errors, so a stochastic optimization method is required. Secondly, it is easy to see that initializing a gradient based optimizer with the zero vector results in an equilibrium point at the initialization point, and therefore, training does not occur. Additionally, there are too many parameters in the UBDM to ensure convergence of simulated annealing, and to give the two algorithms a fair comparison requires giving them the same training protocols. As briefly mentioned in the article, we used a custom loss function to identify the parameters. That function given in equation (7), where a tilde over the variable indicates that it is the average experimental of the data, and a t subscript indicates that it is taken at timestep t, W indicates the weight given to each part, and the subscript of the W 's indicates the part of the loss function to which that weight is applied. In this work, the weight was 10 for the voltage error and 1 for the other error terms. Degradation Modeling To model battery degradation, we follow a multistep process with three steps: first, find the parameters which change with aging. Then, fit those parameters to each (SOC) cycle for any given battery life-cycle, and identify whether or not the loss function is increasing as the battery ages Using this methodology, the precise degradation model can be chosen to fit the generated data once the parameters for each cycle have been estimated. For this work, we employed two separate degradation models. The first we refer to as the mechanistic model. It is based on physical principles and consists of charge loss due to SEI formation, Equation (8a), active material isolation, Equation (8c), and lithium plating, Equation (8b) 