We recently demonstrated a widely tunable THz molecular laser and reported mathematical formulas and a table for comparing how various molecules would perform as such lasers (Chevalier et al., Science, 15 November 2019, p. 856-860). Here we correct the value of a single parameter used to calculate the table (see Erratum for Chevalier et al.), thereby eliminating the concerns raised by Lampin and Barbieri (Lampin et al., arXiv:2004.04422). We also show that our simplified model for the output THz power is a better approximation than the alternative one proposed in the technical comment. In our paper 1P 234 -P 67 8 = η(P 234 -P 67 ) shows how the output power PTHz from a given rotational transition of frequency ν "#$ of a candidate molecule, pumped by a tunable QCL with frequency ν => , depends on the infrared absorption of the pumped ro-vibrational transition aIR, the total gas cell losses (ohmic and mirror losses) α @ABB , the output coupler transmission T, the pump power P 234 , and the threshold power P 67 , for which an expression was also presented in the original paper ) is not violated as long as < 1, which is almost always true in our compact QPML for pressures below 20 mTorr. To see this, we address a concern expressed by the authors of given in Here, and in the Erratum for and PTHz by a factor of 2.5 for every molecule without changing any of our conclusions. More importantly, it eliminates the concern about violating the Manley-Rowe limit, which occurs only if aIR > 15 m -1 in the ideal cavity and aIR > 75 m -1 in the lossy cavity we used (acell = 0.3 m -1 ). These values of aIR are larger than the one considered in Table To avoid this concern entirely, we may go beyond the assumption that the infrared absorption is small (i.e. aIR L << 1), where L is the cavity length. This is the limiting case of the more general expression where a0 is the absorption coefficient for the infrared ro-vibrational transition pumped by the QCL. The approximation used in the simple model reduces Eq. 2 to aIR ≈ a0, but this assumption can be removed by using the exact value from Eq. 2 in Eq. 1 without loss of generality. As pointed out by The updated table, using the corrected value of T and Eq. 2 for aIR, is below. When sorted by increasing Pth as before in By contrast, the approximation proposed in The approach that we proposed in our work instead focuses on a practical implementation of the QPML concept where the laser cavity is kept at the same short length and tuning is achieved by pumping different infrared transitions then adjusting the cavity length (by much less than a millimeter) to match a cavity mode to the lasing transition. In the experiment we have used the same short (15 cm long) laser cavity, filled with the same gas, pumped by the same QCL, at varying pressure between 20 and 50 mTorr to generate emission from 250 GHz to 950 GHz. The infrared absorption of the gain medium depends on the infrared frequency at which the QPML is pumped, which in turn determines the output terahertz frequency. Therefore, it is necessary to take the IR absorption a0 into account in order to understand how the performance of such a laser changes with output frequency and cavity pressure. The core of our paper reiterate that the authors of the technical comment 