The research on layered van der Waals (vdW) magnets is rapidly progressing owing to exciting fundamental science and potential applications. In bulk crystal form, CrCl3 is a vdW antiferromagnet with in-plane ferromagnetic ordering below 17 K, and CrI3 is a vdW ferromagnet below 61 K. Here, we report on the electron spin resonance (ESR) properties of CrCl3 and CrI3 single crystals upon photo-excitation in the visible range. We noticed remarkable changes in the ESR spectra upon illumination. In the case of CrCl3, at 10 K, the ESR signal is shifted from g = 1.492 (dark) to 1.661 (light), line width increased from 376 to 506 Oe, and the signal intensity is reduced by 1.5 times. Most interestingly, the observed change in the signal intensity is reversible when the light is cycled on/off. We observed almost no change in the ESR spectral parameters in the paramagnetic phase (>20 K) upon illumination. Upon photo-excitation of CrI3, the ESR signal intensity is reduced by 1.9 times; the g-value increased from 1.956 to 1.990; the linewidth increased from 1170 to 1260 Oe at 60 K. These findings are discussed by taking into account the skin depth, the slow relaxation mechanism and the appearance of low-symmetry fields at the photo-generated Cr 2+ Jahn-Teller centers. Such an increase in the g-value as a result of photogenerated Cr The van der Waals (vdW) layered magnets such as CrX3 (X = Cl, I) with a unique atomic-level exfoliable structure and rich physical properties (e.g. ferromagnetism at the atomic limit) are promising materials for next generation spintronic and magneto-electronic applications To advance the frontier of knowledge, photo-excitation investigations need to be extended to the above vdW materials. Numerous theoretical works In CrX3, Cr 3+ ions are arranged in a honeycomb network and located at the centers of edge sharing octahedral of six halogen atoms. CrI3 is a ferromagnet ESR spectroscopy is an indispensable technique for studying magnetic interactions in materials such as CrX3 containing unpaired electron spins. ESR spectroscopy has been extensively employed to study the spin interactions in other low dimensional materials such as graphene nanoribbons, carbon nanotubes, and other vdW crystals The experimental materials, methods, and procedures for quantum chemistry calculations are discussed in the Supplementary Materials (SM). To trace the ferromagnetic ordering temperature (TC), the temperature dependent magnetic measurements were performed (under dark) on CrCl3 single crystals, and confirmed that the magnetic order appeared near 17 K as shown in Fig. The ESR spectral parameters such as g-value, line width, and integrated intensity for both light ON and OFF signals, as plotted in Figs. Once we knew the TC, the light induced ESR measurements were performed on CrI3 across TC (10 K, 30 K, 60 K, 65 K, and 100 K). Similar to the case of CrCl3, the light in the visible region is employed for excitation. First, we will begin discussing the data collected in the paramagnetic phase (>60 K). Quite strikingly, unlike in the case of CrCl3, we observed significant changes in the ESR spectral properties in the paramagnetic phase. The data are plotted in SM Figs. The ESR signals were fitted with the Dysonian line shape equation However, we noticed that the results remain unaffected. Upon closer inspection, the g-value and linewidth obtained from these two compounds are quite different and is attributed to magnetic anisotropy arising mostly from the spin-orbit coupling on I -which exceeds that on Cr 3+ or Cl -by more than an order of magnitude Our experimental findings presented here resemble those of previous works The photo-induced electronic transitions create Cr 2+ ions in CrX3 according to the scheme Cr 3+ + e -→ Cr 2+ . The photo-activated electrons from the valence band are trapped on the octahedral Cr 3+ sites creating Cr 2+ centers. They are assumed to be formed between the valence band and Cr 2+ energy level situated below the bottom of the conduction band. The experimental results can be interpreted within the framework of a band model 24 (SM Fig. The changes in the g-value and signal width could be explained by taking into account the following two different mechanisms: (i) the slow relaxation mechanism in which the observed changes are attributed to Cr 2+, and (ii) the appearance of random low-symmetry fields acting on the Jahn-Teller Cr 2+ ions on the octahedral sites. In order to assess whether the observed increase in the g-value is related to the photo-generated Cr 2+ ions, we performed quantum chemistry calculations on finite-size models derived from the experimental crystal structure We found a g-value of 1.42 for CrCl3 and 1.92 for CrI3. In addition, we performed calculations assuming Cr 2+ octahedral units, obtained by adding an extra electron at the Cr site and properly adapting the embedding to ensure charge neutrality. The g-values obtained in the case of Cr 2+ ions are 1.79 for CrCl3 and 2.08 for CrI3. This drastic change in the g-values is in line with the experimental findings discussed above, hence indicating that the reduction of Cr 3+ to Cr 2+ ions is at the origin of the observed photo-induced evolution of the ESR spectra. This is also supported by our recent ultrafast optical pump-probe measurements (not shown) on CrI3. We suggest that the slight discrepancy between the quantum chemistry and experimental data can be traced back to the fact that only a fraction of the Cr 3+ ions are converted into the Cr 2+ ions upon photo-excitation. As learned from the above discussion, the system under investigation consists of two subsystems. The first is the ferromagnetically ordered Cr 3+ ions, in which, the spin-orbit coupling is known to be quenched. The second subsystem is formed by photo-generated Cr 2+ . This ion is characterized by strong spin-orbit coupling (40-60 cm -1 ). These two subsystems are coupled by an exchange interaction that, in general, is anisotropic. The interaction between these two subsystems can slow down the spin dynamics and cause the increase in linewidth as well as g-value due to the introduction of spin-orbit coupling from Jahn-Teller distorted Cr 2+ ion. Similar mechanisms can be extended to the case of photo-induced ESR spectral properties of CrI3, in which, the light induced changes are much stronger. In addition, the g-value and the linewidth in CrI3 are much higher than those of CrCl3 due to strong spin-orbit coupling of I as well as ligand induced giant magnetic anisotropy To conclude, we reported remarkable changes in the ESR spectra from CrX3 upon illumination. In the case of CrCl3, in the antiferromagnetic phase, with the light ON, it is observed that the ESR signal is strongly shifted from g = 1.492 (dark) to 1.661 (light), significantly broadened the signal from 376 (dark) to 506 Oe, and the signal intensity is strongly reduced by 1.5 times. Most importantly, the signal intensity is found to be completely reversible. In the case of CrI3, drastic changes were noted upon photo-excitation with the visible light. The ESR signal intensity is reduced by 1.9 times; the g-value increased from 1.956 to 1.990; the linewidth increased from 1170 to 1260 Oe in the paramagnetic phase. Most likely, the photo quenching effect, the slow relaxation mechanism and the appearance of low-symmetry fields at the photo-generated Cr 2+ Jahn-Teller centers, supported by theoretical calculations, could explain the changes in ESR spectral properties upon photo-excitation. This effort forms a significant step forward toward extending this type of work to mono-and bilayers of CrX3, which may provide unprecedented opportunities to study the light-induced magnetism in the two-dimensional limit. See supplementary materials for the experimental methods and materials, magnetic properties, additional ESR measurements and analysis, and quantum chemical calculations performed on CrCl3 and CrI3. Continuous wave (cw) X-band (9.45 GHz) ESR experiments were performed with a Bruker ELEXSYS II E500 ESR spectrometer (Bruker Biospin, Rheinstetten, Germany) equipped with a TE102 rectangular ESR resonator (Bruker ER 4102ST). A helium gas-flow cryostat (ICE Oxford, UK) and an ITC503 from Oxford Instruments, UK, were used for measurements at cryogenic temperatures. Additionally, all ESR experimental settings were kept constant for reproducibility. For all ESR measurements, the samples were inserted into a quartz tube under nitrogen. All the samples were carefully handled with nonmagnetic capsules to avoid contamination. The light source was a Solis-3c white (daylight) LED (Thorlabs). The sample was first cooled down to 10 K in the dark and the temperature was successively increased in steps. Then it was cooled down again to check for reproducibility/sample stability in several steps. It should be noted that the samples showed no sign of degradation before and after photo-excitation. Finally, all quantum chemistry calculations were performed using the MOLPRO package Additional ESR and Magnetic Measurements: