The discovery of two-dimensional (2D) materials possessing switchable spontaneous polarization with atomic thickness opens up exciting opportunities to realize ultrathin, high-density electronic devices with potential applications ranging from memories and sensors to photocatalysis and solar cells. First-principles methods based on density functional theory (DFT) have facilitated the discovery and design of 2D ferroelectrics (FEs). However, DFT calculations employing local and semilocal exchange-correlation functionals failed to predict accurately the band gaps for this family of low dimensional materials. Here, we present a DFT+U +V study on 2D FEs represented by α-In 2 Se 3 and its homologous III 2 -VI 3 compounds with both out-of-plane and in-plane polarization, using Hubbard parameters computed from first-principles. We find that ACBN0, a pseudo-hybrid density functional that allows self-consistent determination of U parameters, improves the prediction of band gaps for all investigated 2D FEs with a computational cost much lower than the Heyd-Scuseria-Ernzerhof hybrid density functional. The inter-site Coulomb interaction V becomes critical for accurate descriptions of the electronic structures of van der Waals heterostructures such as bilayer In 2 Se 3 and In 2 Se 3 /InTe. Pertinent to the study of FE-based catalysis, we find that the application of self-consistent U corrections can strongly affect the adsorption energies of open-shell molecules on the polar surfaces of 2D FEs. Ferroelectrics (FEs) with tunable electric polarization are technologically important functional materials used in a wide range of applications such as non-volatile memories, field effect transistors (FETs), sensors, and solar cells 1-4 . To realize high-density electronic devices, it is essential for a ferroelectric to maintain robust room-temperature polarization at the nanoscale. However, conventional perovskite ferroelectrics such as Pb(Zr, Ti)O 3 suffer from the finite size effect: the out-of-plane polarization will disappear when the film thickness is below a critical value of a few nanometers due to the depolarization field arising from an incomplete screening of surface charges. This becomes a major obstacle for the scaling of ferroelectric-based electronic devices. For example, the first commercial ferroelectric random-access memory appeared in the early 1990s In practice, 2D FEs with out-of-plane (OP) polarization is generally favored over those with in-plane (IP) polarization for high-density integration via downscaling of the lateral dimensions. Using DFT calculations, Ding et al. predicted a family of III 2 -VI 3 2D materials such as α-In 2 Se 3 (Fig. Similar to their perovskite counterparts, 2D FEs may also find their applications in the fields of solar cells, photocatalysis, and optoelectronics. An accurate prediction of their electronic structures is essential for guided design and development of 2D FE-based devices. The DFT method within the Kohn-Sham formalism has become the first choice for reliable and efficient numerical simulations of condensed matter systems. The accuracy of DFT relies on the approximations to the exchange-correlation (XC) energy functional, and the localdensity approximation (LDA) Here we focus on the DFT+U method However, as intrinsic to the Hubbard model, the U parameter should depend on the local atomic environment and is thus Hubbard-site specific. Since the Hubbard hamiltonian acts on atomic-like local orbitals that are often taken directly from pseudopotentials, the U value is also sensitive to the construction of the pseudopotential (e.g., the oxidation state of the reference state) The newly developed Agapito-Curtarolo-Buongiorno-Nardelli (ACBN0) pseudohybrid Hubbard density functional allows a direct self-consistent evaluation of U parameters In this work, we perform a self-consistent DFT+U study on 2D FEs represented by α- In this section, we offer a brief introduction to the DFT+U approach and selective firstprinciples methods for the calculations of Hubbard parameters. Interested readers should refer to the original papers for detailed discussions. The DFT+U (1) E DFT is the standard DFT energy obtained with an approximate XC functional such as LDA or PBE. E Hub is the Hubbard correction term that considers the on-site Coulomb interactions between electrons in localized orbitals of interest. E dc is the double-counting correction that removes the electronic correlations already included in E DFT . In the rotational-invariant formulation proposed by Dudarev et al. where σ is the spin index, m is the magnetic quantum number for a specific angular momentum l (-m ≤ l ≤ m), and U I and J I are the spherically averaged on-site Coulomb repulsion and exchange interaction, respectively. For a periodic system, the occupation matrix n Iσ is the projection of the occupied Kohn-Sham (KS) states |Ψ σ νk to localized states |φ I m : where N k is the total number of k points in the first Brillouin zone and ν is the band index that runs over N occ occupied bands. The total number of localized electrons N Iσ is expressed as N Iσ = m n Iσ mm . The Hubbard manifold on which the Hubbard Hamiltonian acts is defined through the projector P I m 1 m 2 = |φ I m 2 φ I m 1 |. The double counting term is assumed as the Hubbard energy when the occupations of each localized orbital are either 1 or 0 ((n σ mm ) 2 = n σ mm ), leading to with N I = σ N Iσ . The Hubbard correction then has a simple form: where U I eff ≡ U I -J I is the effective Hubbard interaction parameter. To unclutter the narrations, we will refer U eff as U and omit the spin index σ in the following discussions unless explicitly stated otherwise. The Hubbard correction depends strongly on the interaction parameter U. It is desirable to calculate U in an internally consistent way. Here we outline the key steps in LR-cDFT for first-principles calculations of Hubbard U where ρ is the (spin) charge density and λ I is the Lagrange multiplier employed to constrain the site occupation n I defined as the trace sum of the occupation matrix (Eq. 3). The physical interpretation of the Lagrange multiplier is to apply a perturbing potential of strength λ I to localized orbitals on site I. The Hubbard U I can then be computed as ∂ 2 E/∂(q I ) 2 via finite differences, a process requiring the evaluation of the total energy for a perturbed system with constrained q I . In practice, it is more convenient to work with the Legendre transform of Eq. 6 which leads to a modified energy functional that depends on {λ I }: Then the total energy as a function of on-site occupations n I (computed using the ρ that minimizes Eq. 7) is given via a Legendre transform, from which the first and second derivatives can be readily evaluated with Technically, the perturbed ground state |Ψ kν is obtained by solving following modified KS equation, where Ĥ is the unperturbed KS Hamiltonian and V J pert is the perturbing potential operator which is the sum of projectors on localized orbitals associated with atom J, V J pert = m P J mm . All the values of n I are then collected for the perturbed ground state; by varying λ J , we can construct the response matrix χ IJ = ∂n I /∂λ J , and the Hubbard U is the inverse of the response matrix: II , as derived from Eq. 10. However, as pointed out by Cococcioni et al. , the complete definition of Hubbard U is where χ 0 is the response matrix of independent electron systems, resulting from the rehybridization of localized orbitals due to perturbations. In realistic DFT calculations, χ 0 is evaluated with n I at the first iteration of the perturbed runs and χ is evaluated at selfconsistency. It is noted that the off-diagonal elements χ -1 IJ represent inter-site interactions V in the extended Hubbard model Recently, Timrov et al. reformulated LR-cDFT within the framework of DFPT where the LR KS wavefunction | ∂Ψ νk ∂λ J can be computed using the ordinary first-order perturbation approach (see details in ref. The second step is to recast perturbations in a supercell of size L 1 × L 2 × L 3 as sums over monochromatic perturbations in a primitive unit cell on a grid of q points defined by where {b 1 , b 2 , b 3 } are the reciprocal lattice vectors of the primitive unit cell, and k, l, m are integer numbers with 0 The atomic index I in a supercell now corresponds to two indices (s, l) which means the sth atom in the lth primitive unit cell. Similarly, J is replaced with (s ′ , l ′ ). The response matrix expressed in the reciprocal space has following form: where N q is the number of q points, R l is the Bravais lattice vector of the lth primitive unit cell, and ∆ s ′ q n s m 1 m 2 is the lattice-periodic response of the localized orbital occupation to a monochromatic perturbation of wave vector q. Detailed implementations of ∆ s ′ q n s m 1 m 2 can be found in ref. Agapito et al. introduced an efficient approach to calculate the U and J values selfconsistently where P Iσ mm ′ (σ = α, β) is the renormalized density matrices with NIσ Ψ νk being the renormalized occupations Following the treatment introduced by Mosey et al. The comparison of Eq. 16 and Eq. 5 leads to density functionals of U and J with the atomic index I omitted. In the extended Hubbard model or DFT+U+V approach, the inter-site Hubbard parameter V represents the strength of Coulomb interactions between neighboring Hubbard sites. Note that in Eq. 2, the Hartree integrals U I is expressed as Similarly, the inter-site interaction between atom I and atom J can be written as , where i and j are corresponding state indexes. The Hubbard energy in DFT+U+V is derived as The double-counting term including inter-site interactions is Finally, we obtain the DFT+U+V correction energy by substracting Eq. 22 from Eq. 21 The inter-site Hubbard integral shares the same Coulomb interaction of V with the on-site one but deals with its expectation value between orbitals at different positions unlike the on-site one for the same site. Thus, for the same orbitals belong to different positions, the values of V IJ should be proportional to U I . Here we mostly follow the procedure of extended ACBN0 (eACBN0) developed by Lee et al. that enables self-consistent calculations of both U and V In close analogy to ACBN0, the renormalized density matrix for the pair is given by After expressing the inter-site HF energy with renormalized density matrices and occupations for the pair, one can obtain a density functional for V IJ , where n IJσ ij is the generalized occupation matrix defined as For eACBN0 computations, we use the onsite Hubbard interaction as U eff ≡ U -J where U and J are given by Eq. 19 and Eq. 20, respectively, and the inter-site one by Eq. 26. All DFT calculations are performed with QUANTUM ESPRESSO A. Benchmark study of α-In 2 Se 3 We first focus on the electronic structure of 2D α-In 2 Se 3 given that its room-temperature ferroelectricty has been confirmed experimentally. The 2D α-In 2 Se 3 is a covalently-bonded quintuple layer stacked in the sequence of Se-In-Se-In-Se with each layer containing only one type of atom arranged in a triangular lattice. Our optimized IP lattice constant with PBE is 4.10 Å, and the band gap is 0.80 eV, in agreement with previous DFT results The structural origin of ferroelectricity in α-In 2 Se 3 lies at the displacement of the central Se layer with respect to the top and bottom In-Se layers, which breaks the centrosymmetry along both OP and IP directions (Fig. The projected density of states (PDOS) obtained with PBE (Fig. We note here that such electronic structure is very different from those of conventional fer- Table The LR values are significantly higher than those obtained with self-consistent schemes (U p = 3-4 eV). In a recent study of LiFePO 4 , it was also observed that the single-short LR value of U for Fe-3d is ≈ 7 eV, much higher than the DFPT value of ≈ 5 eV The band gaps computed using self-consistent Hubbard parameters (E g = 1.34 and 1.32 eV for DFPT and ACBN0, respectively) all improve upon the PBE value (0.80 eV), agreeing well with the HSE06 result (1.48 eV). We find that the band gap of α-In 2 Se 3 is insensitive to Hubbard corrections applied to In-4d states but correlates positively with U p (Se). As shown in Fig. The comparison of the band structures of PBE, ACBN0, and HSE06 is shown in Fig. We further perform DFT+U+V computations using the eACBN0 method to study the role of inter-site interactions V in improving the band gap of α-In 2 Se 3 . We obtain a band gap of 1.79 eV that is larger than those from DFT+U and HSE06. This trend is consistent with a recent study on low-dimensional materials (e.g., 2D black phosphorous) Since the band gap is insensitive to the inclusion of In 4d-orbital, we choose p-orbitals as a mainfold for onsite interaction and s-and p-orbitals for inter-site interactions, respectively. As shown in Table In Fig. From this benchmark study, we make following arguments. The on-site Hubbard U can be considered as a "fingerprint" of local atomic environment: it does not have a simple dependence on the element type or crystal structure, which highlights the necessity of using self-consistent values to be fully ab initio. The three self-consistent schemes for computing Hubbard parameters, DFPT, ACBN0, and eACBN0, give comparable values, and are numerically more stable than the single-shot LR method. The flexibility to choose the Hubbard manifold to some extent increases the variational degrees of freedom of DFT+U, though in practice it may be less straightforward to choose the optimal sets of localized states to apply Hubbard corrections. We argue band gaps computed using self-consistent U are less sensitive to the choice of Hubbard manifold, as supported by Table Figure . 5a compares the band gaps calculated using PBE, ACBN0+2U, ACBN0+5U, and HSE06. It is clear that PBE substantially underestimates the band gaps for all III 2 -VI 3 compounds. The band gaps predict with ACBN0+2U and ACBN0+5U are comparable to HSE06 results, with ACBN0+5U being slightly better that ACBN0+2U. This confirms the applicability of ACBN0 to a broader range of III 2 -VI 3 -type 2D FEs. We also note the correlation between the band gap, the electronegative (χ e ), and the self-consistent value of Hubbard U of group-VI elements (S, Se, and Te). First, the band gap increases with the difference in the electronegative (∆χ e ) of group-III and group-VI elements (Fig. The 2D vdW heterostructures consisted of multiple layers of 2D materials are becoming an increasingly important platform to realize novel emergent phenomena Likewise, the computed band gaps for α-In 2 Se 3 /InTe heterostructure highlight the important role of inter-site Hubbard interactions in 2D FE materials. The band gaps of the system from PBE and ACBN0 are found to be 0.06 and 0.14 eV, respectively, while the gap from eACBN0 is 0.37 eV (Fig. It is well established that ferroelectricity can affect the electronic structure of the surface and thus adsorption energies and catalytic properties, making ferroelectrics promising candidates for tunable catalysis However, local and semi-local density functionals often failed quantitatively to predict the adsorption energies of small molecules on metal surfaces (e.g.,CO on Cu) because of the incorrect predictions of the positions of the frontier orbitals of molecules Here we first carry out a benchmark study of the adsorption of hydroxyl radical (HO) on both surfaces of α-In 2 Se 3 by constructing the energy profile as a function of adsorption distance using PBE, ACBN0, and HSE06, respectively. The adsorption energy is defined as , where E total , E molecule , and E In 2 Se 3 are the energies of the gas molecules adsorbed on the In 2 Se 3 monolayer, isolated gas molecules, and In 2 Se 3 monolayer, respectively. Notably, we also investigate the effects of adding self-consistent U corrections to the oxygen 2p states of HO, denoted as ACBN0+U p (O). Four adsorption cases (Fig. The results are presented in Fig. eV on P -surface to -0.28 eV on P + surface, though the HSE value changes slightly from p can be understood by inspecting the spin-resolved band structures and density of states. As shown in Fig. J. F. Scott, Science 315, 954 (2007).