The present work critically investigates the influence of low-melting glasses on the fabrication of metal contacts, with the goal of advancing applications of bismuth-based oxide glass and screen-printed silver contacts for use in integrated circuits (ICs), solar cells, and sensors. In this study, novel electrode contacts were fabricated by screen printing composite pastes composed of mainly silver powder, Bi2O3 glass powder, and acyclic binder, and then firing the pastes in a belt furnace. The microstructures of the composite films after firing at 830~890°C were observed under different corrosion conditions, and the resulting layers were analyzed with X-ray diffraction (XRD) and the transfer length method (TLM). A series of investigations to determine the influence of Bi2O3 glass in silver paste involved various tests, including differential thermal analysis (DTA), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), electron probe Xray microanalysis (EPMA), secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM), to determine the effects of Bi2O3 mixed with silver and the efficacy of the resulting metal contacts in IC fabrications. It was observed that the additive, Bi2O3 glass, controlled the melting of the silver into the glass, influencing the precipitation of Ag crystallites. In addition, an increase in the firing temperature caused excessive growth of Ag crystallites and current leakage, and the size and the relationship of the Ag crystallites in the Bi2O3 glass were confirmed. In integrated circuits (ICs), solar cells, and various electronics, the most important material is the conducting paste, which facilitates the formation of metal contacts. The electrode contacts on top of the source, drain, and gate regions of a transistor or the front-side grid of a solar cell are usually fabricated by screen printing silver paste and then firing in a belt furnace. The composition, content, proportion, and process parameters of a conducting paste can influence the performance of the final electrode product. The existing commercial Ag pastes on the market consist mostly of Ag powder, lead-glass frit, and an organic transport system Of the main materials used to fabricate conducting paste, glass frit greatly improves the conductivity nd alters the microstructure of the paste. In recent decades, lead oxide (PbO)-based glass systems have become popular due to their high structural stability, low glass transition temperature (Tg) and good thermal and electrical characteristics. However, recent environmental regulations have restricted the wide use of PbO systems, so the development of Pb-free or low-Pb materials, which can replace pure PbO, has been of interest. Since bismuth oxide (Bi2O3)-based glasses are thermally stable against phase transformation, Bi2O3 has been investigated as a candidate material to replace PbO Many studies have shown that Bi2O3 glass is crucial in many fields, but its application is not limited to the use of Bi2O3 alone. In fact, numerous applications of Bi2O3 as an additive in ohmic contacts have revealed it high value, but many aspects of the material properties of silver paste containing additives remain unknown. Thus, more comprehensive, specific, and sound experimental results for the application of Bi2O3 glass with silver paste and the associated material properties are urgently needed During the fabrication of metal contacts, the main ways to improve the performance of ohmic contacts, improve the front-side grid, and increase the integrity of electrodes are to (i) decrease the fingerline resistance, (ii) decrease the finger-line width, (iii) increase the aspect ratio, and (iv) reduce the contact resistivity of the low-doped emitters Comprehensive investigation of these aspects is essential to improving the efficiency of electronics. Furthermore, several studies have reported that a good-quality ohmic contact is controlled by the properties of Ag crystallites and the glass layer thickness; thus, the firing process and glass frit are key factors for improving the efficiency of electronics Bi2O3-based glass powders were prepared with different formulas and compositions (Bi2O3, B2O3, and P2O5), which resulted in different properties and stabilities from those of commercial Bi2O3 glass powder (Bi2O3 and B2O3). It is of fundamental and technological interest to examine whether this homemade Bi2O3-based glass frit containing an additive plays a role similar to that of commercial glass powder in the formation of Ag crystallites. The effects of different glass transition temperatures and the silver electrode morphology were also investigated to improve the performance of the resulting ohmic contacts on both solar cells and ICs (Fig. The development of the metal pastes in this study is based on several important factors: (1) the shape and the proportion of metal particles, (2) the content of organic carriers, and (3) the thermal properties of the glass powder. The developed pastes contain three major components. The first is commercial silver powder with spherical particles. The amount of silver particles was controlled at 80~85 wt%. The second is the commercial polymer, or organic carrier, which was 10~15 wt%. The final component is the glass powder, which was added to a content of 3~5 wt%. To prepare the glass powder, high-purity Bi2O3 (Sigma-Aldrich Co., USA) (MAIDO Co., Ltd, 99.9%, Japan), B2O3 (MAIDO Co. Ltd., 95.3%, Japan), and P2O5 (Hoechst Co. Ltd., 99.7%, Japan) were used as raw starting materials. The powder was separated into 10 g quantities, which were placed in small plastic bottles, dry mixed by a ball mill without steel balls for 30 min, and then placed in a 50 ml alumina pot. The pot was placed in a 1050~1150°C air furnace, which heated the molten materials into a liquid by maintaining the temperature for 30 min. The liquid glass was poured into a water tank for rapid cooling. The glass powder was placed in a plastic bottle and then milled with zirconium balls for 14 days. The thermal properties (Tg) of the glass frits were determined in the beginning by thermogravimetricdifferential thermal analysis (TG-DTA; TG8120 Rigaku) as follows: The glass powder (20~30 mg) was placed in a DTA instrument (Seiko SSC5000), and the temperature was increased from room temperature to 800°C at 10°C/min, with air as the carrier gas (flow rate of 100 cc/min). The particle sizes of the commercial and homemade glass were measured by laser particle size analysis (Mastersizer 2000E). The absence of crystalline phases was then confirmed by XRD (Bruker Co., USA) (Model-D/MaxIIB, Riau, Japan). The silver powder, glass powder, and acrylic binder (butyl carbitol, DB, terpinel, α-terpineol, βterpineol, texanol, diethylene glycol monobutyl ether acetate, cellulose, nitrocellulose, and polymethylmethacrylate) were then mixed in a weight ratio of 80:3:17, placed in a 3-roll mixer, and homogenized until the high-molecular-weight polymer was monodispersed in the colloid. After the pastes were prepared, they were printed on silicon substrates, and the substrates were placed in a dryer for 30 min. When the solvent in the paste had evaporated, the substrates were removed for final sintering at 830~890°C. The microstructures of the metal contact were examined by corrosion tests. The degree of corrosion on the surface was observed at different stages. First, the surface of the silver electrode was corroded by nitric acid (99.8% HCl + 99.6% H2O2, 1:1, 10 min), hydrofluoric acid (4% HF, 2 min), and nitric acid (99.8% HCl + 99.6% H2O2, 2:8, 10 min). Four different surfaces can be observed after each corrosion stage. The relationships between each set of layers are discussed for the following four stages: (a) when the surface was completely covered by silver paste (uncorroded); (b) when the glass layer covered the crystallized silver; (c) when crystallized silver particles had precipitated on the silicon wafer surface; and (d) for different residual trace holes on the silicon wafer surface (silicon substrate). The microstructures on the surface were examined using scanning electron microscopy (SEM; JEOL-6500F) with energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) on an instrument operating at an accelerating voltage of 20 kV. X-ray diffraction (XRD, D2 Phase) was used for phase analysis of the silver surface. The specific contact resistance was determined by using the transfer length method (TLM) pattern, which was printed at the same time as the pattern on silicon. The samples were then cut into pieces to reveal the cross-sectional microstructure using SEM (FEI Corp., Quanta, USA) (JEOL, JSM-6060, Japan). Electron probe X-ray microanalysis (EPMA; JEOL, JXA-8600SX, Japan) was used to observe the fractured section of the silver paste/wafer material. The accelerating voltage was 20 kV, and a wavelength dispersive spectrometer (WDS) was used to quantitatively map the silver, oxygen, bismuth, silicon, and phosphor. Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS; Cameca, IMS-4f, France) was used to determine the composition below the corroded wafer surface, as the secondary ions detected were cations, which were from the silver and bismuth at a depth of 2 μm. In this experiment, O 2+ was selected as the ion source. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (FEI Corp., Tecnai, USA) (Philips FEI-TEM) was used to study the microstructures and features at the glass interface. Before fabrication, the particle sizes of the commercial and homemade glass and silver particles were measured by laser particle size analysis and SEM to be 8.81 μm, 1.18 μm, and 1.24 μm, respectively, as shown in Fig. Region 2 has an additional oxygen signal, indicating that the Ag melted in the glass was crystallized and precipitated. Ag particles that were not fully precipitated melted into the glass layer again, which is why the Ag signal occurred when using EDS even when there were no Ag precipitates Silver, silicon, bismuth, and phosphor signals were detected, indicating that the spherical silver nanoparticles were encased in a glass layer, as shown in Fig. The particle size and distribution of the Ag crystallites on the silicon wafer surface can be clearly observed during the third stage, as shown in Fig. In the fourth stage, on the basis of the microstructure, the corroded Ag crystallites left complete traces on the silicon wafer surface. Different traces were left on the substrate when the Ag crystallites grew in different directions on the silicon wafer surface. As seen in Fig. Multiple studies have proven that the addition of a small amount of glass improves the mechanical and electrical properties of the Ag layer and silicon substrate during the early stages where ρc, crystal is the silver crystal found at the interface of the silver thick film, Acrystalline silver is the fraction of surface area covered by crystalline silver, Acrystalline silver, direct is the fraction of crystalline silver in direct contact with the silver bulk, and ρc is the specific contact resistance of the silver thick film. First, from 830~890°C, the special contact resistance was 1.918x10 -4 Ωcm 2 , 2.922x10 -4 Ωcm 2 , and 6.322x10 -4 Ωcm 2 , and the Ag crystallite coverage on the entire surface obtained from all measured diameters according to Fig. The resistance of individual Ag crystals from 830~890°C was 2.9x10 -8 Ωcm 2 , 7.3 x10-8 Ωcm 2 , and 2.2 x10-7 Ωcm 2 , as shown in Table Schubert and Huster After we evaluated the effects of Ag crystallites, the influence of the silver powder on the fabrication of metal contacts was investigated. First, the conductivity tended to increase as the amount of silver powder added increased. The silver powder content was dependent the amount of high-molecular-weight polymer resin, which enabled the silver powder to reach an appropriate viscosity. For example, the dry paste (>90 wt% silver powder) did not pass through the screen easily, so the screen was susceptible to rapid wear. If the paste was too wet (<75 wt% silver powder), the pattern was likely to collapse after screen printing; thus, the efficiency would be reduced. The optimal composition was 80~85 wt%. Second, the reported resistance data in the current literature were compared on the basis of the silver powder size, resistivity, and sintering temperature, as shown in Table The third factor is the shape, and most commercial silver pastes use spherical silver powder. This experiment used spherical and angular silver powders to evaluate their differences. Some reported studies mixed multiangular or tree-like silver powder with spherical powder to increase conductivity → SiO2+2Ag, which indicates that the addition of Bi2O3 glass is effective for etching the antireflection layer of Si and SiNx. This experiment also used TEM to prove the formation of silicon oxide at the interface. Other studies have proposed a schematic of sintered silver crystallites on a silicon wafer. This study slightly corrected the model view proposed in Kontermann and Hörteis Silver crystallites can grow increasingly large on the surface of the silicon wafer as the temperature increases, and their shape is no longer spherical but multiangular. The contact resistance of these individual silver crystallites has attracted the attention of scholars. Table However, it is difficult to predict how many crystallites contact the silver layer in practice. The present literature indicates 0.1%~100%, and the value was 0.1% in this study, which has been reported in many other publications as well. Schubert and Huster Fig. In addition, the glass powder particle size influenced the quality of the conducting silver paste. Kim and Lim where SB is the silver solubility of the base, SA is the solubility of the glass additive, and SR is the ratio of the two solubilities. The literature indicates that the optimal addition of glass powder is 3~5 wt% To study the condition of the interface after the glass powder was added to the silver paste and silicon during sintering, a fractured sample section was polished and then surface scanned by EPMA to analyze the element distribution. Silver, oxygen, bismuth, silicon, and phosphor were detected. The top layer was silver paste, the lower layer was crystalline silicon, and the middle layer was glass. These samples were numbered #1 and #9 in system 3. Fig. SIMS was used to analyze the surface elements and glass layer thickness, which cannot be observed by EPMA but were indirectly obtained using this method. However, the part of the silver that was not covered with a glass layer was corroded, and the actual thickness of the glass layer could not be determined; however, a reference value could be used. Different combinations of the glass additive content and sintering temperature were compared. As shown in Fig. After analyzing the surface elements and the glass layer thickness, TEM was used to carefully observe the interface, and different crystalline phases were analyzed by EDS. The results are shown in Fig. This region was in the conversion zone, and the composition could not be accurately analyzed due to limitations of the EDS technique; however, the element contents provided some clues. the precipitation of silver in the glass phase; the detected elements included silver, bismuth, oxygen, and silicon. Fig. Ag crystallites in the glass layer were observed by high-resolution TEM (HRTEM). The lattice distance was 0.238 nm, as measured in Fig. In this study, we successfully fabricated a better metal-glass composite material that has superior mechanical and electrical properties, especially for ohmic contacts in ICs and solar cells, by a screen printing technique. During this study, the properties of the metal composite were investigated in depth. The structural properties of screen-printed Ag/Si contacts were investigated using SEM, EPMA and SIMS. The specific contact resistance was determined using the TLM pattern. The corroded surface was used to study the microstructures and features at the contact interfaces. Specifically, the Ag layer contacted the interface of the silicon substrate by precipitating nanoscale Ag crystallites on the interface to allow the electric current to smoothly flow through the substrate and reach the Ag layer. In fact, the Ag crystallites etched into the silicon substrate. The higher the temperature was, the more obvious the etching phenomenon. The following layers of the microstructure were observed: (1) silver crystallites connected to the silver directly; (2) silver crystallites in the glass; Moreover, the thickness of the interface glass layer varied with the Bi2O3 glass content. At low sintering temperatures, the thickness of the interface glass layers was low, and few Ag crystallites covered the interface. At high sintering temperatures, the thickness of the interface glass layers was high, and many Ag crystallites were present in the glass. The glass powder developed herein can uniformly precipitate Ag crystallites and achieve wetting of the silver surface and silicon wafer. Although the Tg of both glass powders was very low, the homemade glass powder produced an intense exothermic peak at 275°C, indicating that a crystalline phase had formed, which obstructed the silver from melting directly into the glass. In contrast, the commercial glass powder did not produce an intense exothermic peak, causing a large amount of silver to melt into the glass phase until it became saturated and caused the glass to flow to the interface, resulting in pores on the silver surface. The SEM, EPMA, SIMS and TEM results also confirmed that the precipitation of Ag crystallites was followed by the formation of an interface glass layer, and the continuity of the interface glass layer was controlled by the amount of added glass. This study provides a detailed analysis of well-controlled electrical properties, morphologies, and experimental details for silver contacts made from a novel composition consisting of Bi2O3, B2O3, and additional P2O5 mixed with Ag, which created properties and stabilities different from those obtained using a general formula consisting of commercial Bi2O3 glass powder (Bi2O3 and B2O3) mixed with Ag. This in-depth study provides more options and experimental details for metal contact processing for existing applications in TF electronics, solar cells, sensor cells, and ICs.