In this perspective, we explore the insights into the device physics of perovskite solar cells gained from modeling and simulation of these devices. We discuss a range of factors that influence the modeling of perovskite solar cells, including the role of ions, dielectric constant, density of states, and spatial distribution of recombination losses. By focusing on the effect of non-ideal energetic alignment in perovskite photovoltaic devices, we demonstrate a unique feature in low recombination perovskite materials -the formation of an interfacial, primarily electronic, selfinduced dipole that results in a significant increase in the built-in potential and device open-circuit voltage. Finally, we discuss the future directions of device modeling in the field of perovskite photovoltaics, describing some of the outstanding open questions in which device simulations can serve as a particularly powerful tool for future advancements in the field. TOC GRAPHICS ( , ) ( ) ( , ) ( , ) ( ) ( , ) Device modeling and simulation are powerful tools that have furthered the development of many electronic technologies. In the field of emerging photovoltaic technologies based on organic materials, device modeling has been extensively used to not only develop a deeper understanding of the physical principles governing the device function, Similarly, the Poisson equation also needs to be modified to account for the ions' charge. This additional complexity might deter researchers from attempting to develop a comprehensive device model for perovskite solar cells. In the following, we will discuss the role of ions within the device simulation and identify in which cases they must, or should, be included and when they can be left out from the simulations entirely. Another aspect of device structure that has been addressed by simulation is the effect of the perovskite's energetic alignment with the charge extracting layers of the device. The effects of the lateral In this perspective, we would like to introduce the basics of device modeling and highlight the key parameters that must be taken into account for such simulations to be particularly useful to the perovskite community. Our goal is to motivate the application of device modelling as a powerful tool to complement experimental efforts to understand the device physics of perovskite solar cells and further enhance their performance. To model perovskite-based photovoltaic devices, the following set of drift-diffusion equations has to be solved numerically: (1) where: ne, nh, nc, na are the densities (cm -3 ) of electrons, holes, cations and anions, respectively. D, μ, and E are the diffusivity, mobility and electric field. αG is the generation rate, where α accounts for not all photons converting into free charges. One may add traps and trap assisted recombination either in the bulk or at the interfaces; these will be discussed in more detail later. The numerical scheme to include the generalized Einstein relation can be found in ref 42. The above drift-diffusion equations are coupled to the Poisson equation, which accounts also for the ions' charge: (2) The boundary conditions for electrons and holes at the contacts are: (3) Here: and are the effective density of states for electrons and holes, respectively. ∆e and ∆h are the energy separation between the LUMO level and the contacts' Fermi level at the cathode and anode, respectively. Eg1 and Eg3 are the energy gaps of the semiconductor layers next to the cathode and anode, respectively. For the ions, the boundary conditions at the perovskite interface are taken to be blocking. When implementing the above equations one needs to account for discontinuities and in the present context one needs to also pay attention to the density of states Beyond the computational challenge of solving these equations, it is clear that the choice of certain parameters will greatly influence the outcome of the simulation. In the following, we will discuss some of these influences and motivate the choice of certain parameters for perovskite device simulation. To consistently demonstrate the influence of certain parameters, we will perform all the simulations shown in this prospective, rather than attempt to compare previous simulation results performed by other groups, which use different sets of parameters and are thus not directly comparable. The parameters used here are listed in Table The mixed conductor nature of perovskite materials suggests that both ions and charges are moving upon the application of an electric field. While it is clear that modeling of transient phenomena must include the movement of ionic species, numerical simulation of solar cell current-voltage characteristics, especially in the absence of hysteresis, can in principle be performed either with or without the inclusion of ions. It is known that even in the absence of hysteresis the ions are still moving and affecting the charge distribution across the device. This relation has been under debate and despite extensive numerical studies of perovskites cells, Generally, the built-in voltage (VBI) of a solar cell will depend on the energetic difference between the Fermi level positions of the cathode and the anode. In the presence of charge extraction layers, these levels are typically pinned within the gap of the extraction layers: a few 100 meV above the hole transport level or below the electron transport level for the anode and cathode, respectively. This means that for the ideal case of perfect energetic alignment between the charge transport levels of the extraction layers to those of the perovskite active layer, the built-in voltage is still lower than the optical gap of the active layer. Additionally, in reality, there are often energetic offsets between the charge transport levels of the extraction layers and those of the perovskite, decreasing the built-in voltage even further. Conflicting results regarding the importance of these energetic offsets have been reported in literature. Several studies showed that by increasing the ionization potential of the hole-transporting layer, a higher open-circuit voltage (VOC) can be attained due to a more optimal alignment with the perovskite valence band. We use identical sets of device and material parameters and run the simulations with and without the inclusion of ions. For the case where ions are included, we simulate a hysteresis measurement at a scan speed of 50 mV/s, which when normalized to the ion diffusivity, results in 5x10 13 mVcm - 2 . When one performs a hysteresis loop measurement one may miss capturing the hysteresis by either scanning very slow such that the ions closely follow the voltage change or very fast such that the ions do not move during the forward and reverse voltage sweep. To avoid the latter issue, we separate the loop into two scans. First, the cell is kept at low bias long enough to allow the ions reach steady state and then a forward scan is performed. For the reverse direction the device is held at a high bias voltage, long enough for the ions to reach steady state, followed by a backward voltage sweep. Using this methodology implies that faster scan rates are more likely to lead to the observation of hysteresis. For the current simulations, the stabilization bias for the forward and reverse scans are -0.15 V and 1.25 V, respectively. The energy level diagram for both scenarios, of with and without ions, is shown in Figure Correspondingly, the built-in potential in the device is lowered by ∆, making it 1.2-∆ eV. The relationship between the simulated open-circuit voltage and this built-in voltage, with and without including ions, is shown in Figure ∆=0 eV), a VOC of 1.23 V is predicted, which is only 0.03 V higher than the built-in potential. However, in the case of misalignment the VOC is ~0.35 V higher than the built-in potential, which shows the remarkable recovery of VOC in perovskite solar cells even in the case of large energetic offsets. Secondly, very strikingly, simulations performed without the contribution of ions show near identical results. In fact, the J-V curves of both the forward and the reverse scans overlap not only with each other, but also with the J-V obtained when no ions are included. To understand the origin of the VOC recovery, we turn our attention to the charge density distributions at V ≈ VOC for the case of ∆ = 0.3 eV, shown in Figure The fact that the two simulations (with and without ions) employ the same physical parameters and result in the same J-V characteristics supports the idea that neglecting the ions still allows to capture the correct physics (for devices with no hysteresis). This, however, could be associated with the relatively simple physical picture used in this example and one could argue that accounting for additional mechanisms would invalidate such a conclusion. Such an argument is potentially supported by the observation that unlike the similar densities of electrons and holes at the perovskite/HTL interface, the distribution of charges in the bulk of the perovskite active layer is very different depending on scan direction or whether ions are included or not. For the reverse scan the ions were stabilized at 1.25V which is close to VOC and hence they almost completely suppress the electric field in the bulk, generating an effective 'flat band' state. This results in the density of both charge carriers being nearly constant throughout the bulk of the perovskite layer. Upon illumination an interfacial, primarily electronic, dipole is formed in perovskite solar cells with non-ideal energetic alignment. This self-induced dipole strongly increases the built-in potential and device open-circuit voltage, suppressing the losses introduced by the misalignment and is a unique feature of low recombination perovskite semiconductors. In the forward scan, the scan speed does not allow the ions to fully screen the electric fields at VOC and naturally, without ions there is no screening at all. In the absence of ion-screening, the distributions of electrons and holes vary greatly in the bulk of the active layer. Similarly, at the perovskite/ETL interface, up to one order of magnitude difference in the density of charges occurs between the different scenarios. The stark difference between the charge carrier distribution curves (solid lines in Figure To sum up the above observations: if one scans the J-V at a normalized speed of at least 5x10 The results of the numerical simulations show that small energetic offsets (∆ ≤ 0.3 eV) introduce nearly no losses in VOC since the self-induced dipole can effectively compensate for this nonideality. Larger offsets negatively impact the VOC, but their effect is mitigated by the self-induced dipole by approximately 0.35 V. This observation is of critical importance for real life devices, since it significantly broadens the range of extraction layers that can be employed in perovskite photovoltaics, at least with respect to the requirements of their energetic alignment to the perovskite active layer. When considering these results in light of the reported inconsistencies in literature regarding the role of energetic alignment in determining the device open-circuit voltage, one has to remember that experimentally changing the extraction layer varies not only the energetic alignment with the perovskite layer, but also many other factors. For example, it has been shown that the charge carrier mobility of the extraction layer, disorder within the extraction layer 63 can all influence the photovoltaic performance. Moreover, comparing charge extraction layers on top of which the perovskite layer is deposited is further complicated by changes in the microstructure and defect density of the perovskite depending on the surface energy, roughness, and other properties of the underlying extraction layer. Regardless of whether one chooses to include the ions or not, the dielectric constant of the perovskite active layer is a key material parameter that needs to be known in order to solve the Poisson equation (see equation These results have two key implications: first, they show that the choice of ε for device modeling studies is of crucial importance, but far more importantly, it provides a critical insight into the device physics of perovskite solar cells, demonstrating the astonishing and surprising advantage of engineering perovskite materials with lower dielectric coefficients. It is generally considered that high dielectric coefficient values are desirable in order to lower the exciton binding energy in the photoactive material, however our results indicate that in the case of a non-ideal device structure, this can also lower the photovoltaic performance. With the ability to modify the dielectric properties of perovskites by varying their composition, it should be possible to balance the two effects and develop perovskites with sufficiently low exciton binding energy (i.e. comparable to kT), but also sufficiently low dielectric constants such that high photovoltaic performance can be obtained for a broad range of non-ideal device architectures. The exact value of the perovskite dielectric constant is critically important for device simulations. A low dielectric constant enhances the effect of the self-induced dipole, resulting in better photovoltaic performance for a broader range of energetic misalignments. While often neglected from discussion, the density of states plays an important role in determining the photovoltaic performance of materials. The effective density of states at the band edges, Ne0 and Nh0 in equation set (3), will dictate how close the Fermi level will approach the band when populated with a certain density of charges. Correspondingly, and perhaps counter intuitively, a lower effective density of states results in a higher VOC (Figure The population of the electronic states is also important. Most commonly, Boltzmann statistics are used to determine this population, but similarly to organic semiconductors, Where p is the particle concentration and η is the chemical potential. Simulated J-V characteristics with and without GER (in this example only, the simulations were run in the slow scan limit where ions are allowed to reach the steady state at each bias). Continuing with the example given above, we explore how neglecting the GER (i.e. using Boltzmann instead of Fermi-Dirac) influences the photovoltaic characteristics of simulated perovskite devices. Figure The observation that the GER or FD statistics must be employed for simulations of perovskite solar cells is related to their low effective density of states at the band edge, mentioned above. At VOC, the formation of the self-induced dipole at the perovskite/HEL interface results in a high density of electrons (Figure While it is generally agreed upon that recombination losses in perovskite materials are far lower than in other emerging semiconductors, the effects of bulk and interfacial recombination on the performance of perovskite photovoltaics are of great interest to the scientific community. The full Fermi-Dirac statistics, or Generalized Einstein Relation, must be considered when simulating perovskite based solar cells. and physical location in the device can be chosen at will. We follow up on our example from Figure Several critical observations can be made. As expected, the VOC of the device with an ideal energetic alignment (∆ = 0 eV) is significantly decreased compared to the prior case of low bulk recombination, and is now comparable to what previously was attained for ∆ = 0.4 eV. Interestingly, this means that the introduction of an energetic offset of up to ∆ = 0.4 eV no longer has an effect on the VOC, but has a tremendous negative effect on the fill factor of the device, manifesting itself as an 'S-shape' in the J-V characteristics. Moreover, the presence of high bulk recombination results in the appearance of hysteresis, which is particularly enhanced in non-ideally aligned devices. Figure However, this contribution is relatively small, suggesting that the dipole remains primarily electronic in nature even in the case of high recombination losses. It is particularly important to note that excluding the ions does not result in J-V curves that resemble the average between forward and reverse scans. This epitomizes that attempting to reconstruct the J-V characteristics of a device with hysteresis using a simulation that excludes ions will inevitably lead to inaccurate interpratation of the internal device. With the formation of a self-induced dipole largely suppressing the limitations imposed by the non-ideal energetics and low built-in potential, one could consider that the introduction of additional dipoles in the solar cell by interfacial engineering might be of benefit for VOC enhancement. Indeed, we and others have demonstrated that introducing dipoles into device architectures can significantly enhance its VOC. Increased recombination losses, either bulk or interfacial, result in S-shaped current-voltage characteristics, a loss in VOC and FF, and the appearance of hysteresis. To reproduce the internal mechanisms, devices in which large recombination losses are present must be simulated with the contribution of ions taken into account. In this perspective we describe the consequences of selecting certain aspects and parameters for perovskite device simulation, such as inclusion/exclusion of ions or the type of occupation statistics. We would like to emphasize that it is not categorically "wrong" to use Boltzmann instead of Fermi-Dirac statistics just as it is not "wrong" to not include ions. We demonstrated that under certain scenarios such a choice might be warranted. For example, we provide the presence of hysteresis as the criterion for when neglecting the ions may lead to an erroneous physical picture. Opting to use Boltzmann statistics in cases where the simulation predicts charge densities close to, or above, the effective density of states would also lead to inaccurate results. These issues, highlighted in this work, signify the early stage of perovskite device modeling where efficient codes that can handle mixed electronic-ionic conduction are not widely available. On the other hand, there are many other potential mechanisms that have not been fully addressed yet, Efficient, flexible and open source code models will enable not only the development of fundamental understanding of device physics of perovskite solar cells, but would also serve as device design guidelines to enhance the performance and stability of devices, reducing the current 'trial and error' experimental approach for advancing the field towards industrial application.