In this work we analyze the statistical thermodynamics of "Dice" lattice carriers employing a Green's function formulation to examine the grand potential, Helmholtz free energy, the grand and ordinary partition functions and entropy. This facilitates the calculation of the specific heat, and all evaluations are carried out for both the degenerate and nondegenerate statistical regimes. This work addresses the fundamental statistical thermodynamic properties of "Dice" lattice 1,2 carriers. This system is a two-dimensional psuedospin 1 lattice, and a recent study of it by Malcolm and Nicol 1 analyzed its dynamic, nonlocal polarizability underlying its plasmon spectrum and static shielding features. The "Dice" lattice is a recent addition to the list of Dirac materials, which have low energy spectra and associated Hamiltonians linearly proportional to momentum. Other such Dirac materials include Group VI Dichalcogenides 3 , Topological Insulators 4 , Silicene In Section 2, the Grand Potential, Helmholtz Free Energy and the grand and ordinary partition functions are formulated in terms of the retarded Green's function of Dice lattice carriers, and the Green's function is determined explicitly in frequency/momentum representation. Section 3 presents the determination of the Grand Potential as a function of temperature in both the degenerate regime (with the approach to the zero temperature limit) and the nondegenerate regime. In Section 4 we exhibit the results for entropy and specific heat at constant volume in both the degenerate and nondegenerate regimes. The specific heat is of particular interest as a measure of the ability of the material to assist in the management of dissipated heat, an issue of importance in electronic device operation and transport. Specific heat also plays an impor-tant role in a standard characterization technique employed to understand the underlying physics of the materials, as has been emphasized by Stewart Our formulation of the problem is focused on the Grand Potential, Ω, of the "Dice" lattice, where F is the Helmholtz Free Energy, N is particle number, κ B is the Boltzmann constant, T ′ is Kelvin temperature, μ is the chemical potential, Z is the grand partition function, β = 1/κ B T ′ and E γ represents the particle energy spectrum (which is summed over). A.H. Wilson 18 reformulated the expression for Ω in terms of the E γ -summand function, B(E γ ), on the right of Eq.(2.1) as an inverse Laplace transform (c represents the inverse Laplace transform integration contour): with p(s) as the Laplace transform of B(E), Wilson employed a special case of the convolution theorem for Laplace transforms ) where Z(s) is the ordinary (not "grand") partition function. Moreover, ) where f 0 (E) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function, so the calculation of Ω is conveniently reformulated in terms of the Fermi distribution at arbitrary temperature T ′ and the ordinary partition function: A particular advantage of dealing with the ordinary partition function Z(s) is that it may be conveniently obtained directly from the trace of the retarded Green's function G ret T >0 ( x, x ′ ; T ) at positive time difference T > 0 as ) where the 2D d 2 x-integral provides an area factor for a uniform sheet. Here, we have used the fact that e -iHT embedded in the structure of the Green's function is the time translation operator (T r denotes the pseudospin trace of the matrix Green's function). H is the Hamiltonian and for the Dice lattice in momentum ( K) representation it is given by the 3 × 3 pseudospin-1 matrix 1,2 and α = v/ √ 2 with v as the Fermi velocity. The determination of the Dice lattice Green's function G ret is done in frequency-momentum representation using the matrix equation (I is the 3 with the resulting matrix elements of G ret given by: where we note that G ij = G * ji due to hermiticity of the Green's function (and Hamiltonian). Here, (2.12) (2.13) where ω → ω + i0 + for the retarded Green's function. To obtain the ordinary partition function, Z, it is necessary to obtain the trace of the functional form of the Green's function in direct time representation with the substitution of its positive time difference argument T replaced by T → -iβ (2.17) Employing Eqns. (2.11-2.13) to determine the Dice lattice Green's function trace, the result may be exhibited in terms of its frequency/energy poles as and then (T > 0 and With the substitution T → -iβ, we obtain the ordinary partition function Z(β) (per unit area) as Bearing in mind that the underlying band structure departs from its low energy linear approximation at some maximum crystal momentum value K m , we introduce that as an upper cutoff on the K-integral, whence which yields the result and it is convenient to employ Z(βs ′ ) from Eq. (3.4), writing In the ensuing s ′ -integral of Eq. (3.9) to obtain Ω, we exponentiate the integrand denominator factor 1/s ′ = β ∞ 0 dxe -s ′ βx so that a particular term with energy E γ contributes as .11) Noting that the contour of z-integration along c is a straight line from z = -i∞ + 0 + to +i∞ + 0 + , we consider closing the contour with a parallel line (c ′ ) from i∞ -π + to -i∞ -π + on which dz c ′ = -dz c and sin(z c ′ ) = -sin(z c ). Consequently, the x-integration of Eq. (3.11) is given by and for the degenerate regime under consideration, we obtain the Grand Potential Ω as where Since K m >> μ/v >> k B T /v in the degenerate regime, I + is readily approximated as I -requires more careful analysis in the low wave number region of the K-integration: Integrating by parts, and integrating by parts again we obtain the Grand Potential in the degenerate regime as 23 Neglecting exponentially small terms, Ω is well approximated by To study the nondegenerate regime we employ Eq. (2.6) with the Fermi-Dirac distribution taken in its Maxwell-Boltzmann limit, and then the grand potential Ω is given by 21) (since the E-and s-integrals constitute a Laplace transform and its inverse). Employing Eq. (3.5), we have Ω in the nondegenerate regime as It is of interest to note that the density n is given in the nondegenerate regime by where A( K, ω) is the spectral weight embodied in the trace of the retarded Green's function as The entropy may be determined using the thermodynamic relation 