The structure of a 180-degree uncharged rotational domain wall in a multiaxial ferroelectric film is studied in the framework of an analytical Landau-Ginzburg-Devonshire (LGD) approach. Finite Element Modelling (FEM) is used to solve numerically the system of the coupled nonlinear Euler-Lagrange (EL) second order differential equations for two components of polarization. We show that the structure of the domain wall and corresponding metastable or stable phase of the film are controlled by a single parameter,the dimensionless ferroelectric anisotropy factor μ. We fitted the static profile of a solitary domain wall, calculated by FEM, with kink-like functions for polarization components, and extracted the five μ-dependent parameters from the fitting to FEM curves. The surprisingly high accuracy of the fitting results for two polarization components in the entire μ-range allows us to conclude that the analytical functions, which are trial functions in the direct variational method, can be treated as a high-accuracy variational solution of the static EL equations. We further derive exact two-component analytical solutions of the static EL equations for a polydomain 180-degree domain structure in a multiaxial ferroelectric film. Using these, we derive analytical expressions for the system free energy and analyze its dependence on the film thickness and boundary conditions at the film surfaces. The single-domain state is ground for zero polarization derivative at the surfaces, while the polydomain states minimize the system energy for zero polarization at the surfaces. Counterintuitively, the energy of the polydomain states split into two levels "0" and "1" for zero polarization at the surfaces, and each of the levels contains a large number of close-energy sub-levels, which structure is characterized by different number and type of the domain walls. The analytical solutions can become a useful tool for Bayesian analysis of HR STEM images in ferroelectric films. Multiaxial ferroelectrics are one of the most fascinating representatives of materials with multiple interacting order parameters and key objects for fundamental exploration of nonlinear and cooperative phenomena at micro, nano and atomic scales This interest is further stimulated by multiple applications in extant and emerging technologies in industrial, medical and consumer sectors, including transducers, filters, sensors, ultrasonic motors and actuators, electronics and information storage Theoretical modeling and practical control of the domain structure in multiaxial ferroelectrics is interesting from the fundamental viewpoint and also is important for many applications Seminal theoretical studies devoted to the structure of mixed Ising-Bloch-type Partially this dearth of studies has been related to the lack, until recently, of direct information on domain wall structure. Recently, the emergence of the high-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (HR STEM) has allowed direct insight into the structure of ferroelectric domain walls and interfaces at the atomic level. Enabled by the pioneering work by Jia et al. Nelson et al. To fill the gap in the knowledge, here we consider the dynamics of a 180-degree uncharged rotational domain wall in a miltiaxial ferroelectric film within the framework of analytical LGD approach (see Section 2). FEM is used to solve numerically the system of the coupled nonlinear Euler-Lagrange (EL) differential equations of the second order for two components of polarization (see Section 3). Next, using LGD approach, we derived and analyzed the analytical solutions of the static EL equations for a polydomain 180-degree domain structure in a multiaxial ferroelectric film, which contain enough free parameters to satisfy arbitrary boundary conditions at the film surfaces (see Section 4). We analyze the domain state free energy dependence on the film thickness and boundary conditions. Section 5 illustrates how the analytical solutions can be used for a Bayesian analysis of HR STEM data in thin ferroelectric films. Section 6 is a brief summary. Calculation details of analytical solutions and free energy with renormalized coefficients obtained by direct variation method are listed in Appendixes A and B in Suppl. Materials, respectively. Here we consider a stress-free ferroelectric film (or layer) under the absence of free charges in it, and assume that the polarization vector P of the ferroelectric has a specific structure leading to the absence of a depolarization field, namely divP = 0. The assumption corresponds to the case of uncharged domain walls, and is consistent with the ideal screening at the interfaces. However, in general case the depolarization fields will be present. External field is absent, since we are interested in a domain structure relaxation to a static equilibrium picture. Without electrostriction and flexoelectric coupling, the explicit expressions of LGD energy density for polarization P has the form: G = ∫(g L + g grad )dv + ∫ g S ds. (1a) Expressions for Landau (g L ), gradient (g grad ) and surface (g S ) energies in the ferroelectrics with the second order paraelectric-ferroelectric phase transition are where summation is performed over all repeated indexes. As a rule, the coefficients a i linearly depend on the temperature T, a i = a Ti (T -T C ); other coefficients are temperature independent, but can be affected by elastic strains via electrostriction effect Dynamic equations of state follow from the variation of action The coefficient ρ i > 0 in the kinetic term, Below we consider the two-component and one-dimensional case, when the polarization vector P(x 3 ) depends only on the coordinate x 3 that is normal to the film surface (see Fig. where ρ 1 > 0 is the kinetic coefficient, and Γ > 0 is the Khalantikov coefficient. The nonlinear coupled equations (3) are supplemented by boundary conditions at the film We note that a 11 > 0 , a 12 > -2a 11 , g 44 > 0, g 11 > 0, and a 1 S ≥ 0 for the system stability; and consider negative coefficients a 1 < 0 corresponding to the bulk ferroelectric state at T < T C . The boundary conditions (4a) significantly influence domain structure and evolution only in the case of relatively thin films, namely when the film thickness L is smaller than the several tens of correlation length R c = √-g 44 (2a 1 ) ⁄ , e.g. L ≤ 100R c . For thick films with L ≥ 10 3 R c the conditions (4a) have very little influence, and should be substituted by the conditions of periodicity or anti-periodicity for every polarization component and its derivative: Here the sign "+" corresponds to the periodic, and the sign "-"to the antiperiodic boundary condition. The sign choice is individual for each component. Note that the conditions (4b) are not equivalent to the conditions (4a), because (4b) are parity/periodicity conditions only. Complementary to the conditions (4b) one often need to impose some additional conditions on the polarization components, consistent with initial conditions. The first integral of the system (3) is I(x) = g L -g grad . The conservation of this dynamic invariant, I(x) = const, means that the system tendency to lower the domain wall energy (coming from the gradient energy g grad ) is compensated by the ferroelectric nonlinearity energy (coming from the Landau energy g L ). For FEM simulations, initial distributions are taken either in the form of a random small-amplitude polarization, or in the form of a solitary domain wall with superimposed random fields, or in the form of a small-amplitude sinusoidal modulation. Here we analyse the structure of the equilibrium uncharged 180-degree domain walls in the second order ferroelectric, which are relaxed solution of Eqs.(3). To analyse the domain wall structure, we introduce the dimensionless coordinate x, film thickness l, polarization components p 1 and p 2 , ferroelectric anisotropy factor μ, relaxation time τ and kinetic coefficient ρ: Here P S = √-a 1 (2a the values P S = (0.25 -1)C/m 2 and R c = (0.2 -0.5)nm at room temperature. Thus, the dimensionless thickness l = 100 corresponds to sufficiently thin films with l = (20 -50)nm. The anisotropy factor μ vary from -0.25 to +4.5 and can be temperature-dependent. The dimensionless EL equations, obtained from dynamic Eqs.(3), have the form: To study the polarization relaxation to a stable or metastable state, we set ρ = 0 and chose the calculation time t max much higher than the time τ of the polarization relation to an equilibrium state, e.g. t max ≫ 100 τ. Initial distribution of polarization used in FEM is chosen in the form of a solitary Ising-type domain wall perturbed by a small fluctuation: where the random fluctuation |δp = 0 [i.e. zero surface energy in Eq.(1a)], and the alternative, λ i = 0, which corresponds to p i | x=±l/2 = 0. The antiperiodic-periodic boundary conditions (4b) consistent with the initial condition (7a), which will be used for thick films with l ≫ 100, have the form: The boundary problem ( The dimensionless LGD free energy density and the first integral corresponding to Eqs. , μ > 1 . (8c) The free energy (8) as a function of polarization components p 1 and p 2 is shown in Fig. 1) Orthorhombic O-phase with the minimal energy density g LGD = - (see Figs. 2) Tetragonal T-phase with the minimal and energy density g LGD = - A detailed analysis of FEM results allows concluding that we can distinguish (somewhat arbitrarily) several different morphologies of the domain wall, shown in Figs. 1) The first region "1", where -1 < μ < 0, corresponds to the O-phase with Ising-Bloch domain walls (see Fig. The component p1 has an antisymmetric tanh-like profile across the domain wall; and the component p2 has a symmetric profile with a maximum at the wall. Both, the domain wall width for p1 and p2 components, and the maximum height for p1 component, increase with μ increase; at that the wall becomes very thick and diffuse at μ → 1 (see Fig. Because p 1 is zero and p 2 has a sharp maximum at the wall, the contrast of the HR STEM image across the wall looks as "dark-bright" thin pattern for 0 < μ < 1. 3) The third region "3", where 1 < μ < 3, corresponds to the T-phase with mixed-type Ising-Bloch domain walls (see Fig. Because p 1 has a zero plateau and p 2 has a flat maximum at the wall, the contrast of the HR STEM image across the wall looks as "dark-bright" thick pattern for 1 < μ < 3. 4) The fourth region "4", where μ > 3, corresponds to the T-phase with purely Ising-type domain walls (see Fig. To find equilibrium analytical solutions, direct variational method is applied for Eqs.( The constant amplitude a 0 ≡ 0 to satisfy the antisymmetric boundary conditions for p 1 (x) ). The length w and shift x w define the width of the p 1 (x) and p 2 (x) domain walls. These five variational parameters can be determined after substitution of Eqs. The choice of the trial functions ( Corresponding values of parameters a 1 , a 2 , b 2 , w, and x w are listed in Table From the fitting of FEM results we extracted the variational parameters a 1 , a 2 , b 2 , w, and x w , which dependences on μ are presented in Fig. Expressions (10a) are almost exact [see blue and black curves in Fig. The upper signs in the expression (10b) corresponds to red curves in Fig. The domain wall width, w, and shift, x w , have a strong peculiarity in the same region 0.9 < μ < 1.1 and can be approximately described by the spline-interpolation functions: Expressions (10c) correspond to brown and green curves in Fig. The high accuracy of the fitting results [shown in Figs. For the case of negative ferroelectric anisotropy factor μ ≤ - It is seen that Eqs.(11a) and (11b) are independent on each other for the specific case μ = 3, when they can be solved separately using elliptic Jacobi functions. The solution for μ = 3 has the form of elliptic sine ("snoid") functions: x w w where two "modules", 0 ≤ m ≤ 1 and 0 ≤ m ≤ 1, and two "shifts", x w1 and x w2 , of snoids should be defined from the boundary conditions, as shown below. Next, using the relations p 1 = (p + a) 2 ⁄ and p 2 = (p -a) 2 ⁄ , one obtains from Eqs.( Since the solution ( and x w2 , it pretends to be a general solution, but we cannot say that it is the one, because the existence and uniqueness theorem is not valid for solutions of nonlinear differential equations. The modules m and n define the shape and the period of the polarization profile (13). Appendix A in Suppl. Mat. [57], that the modules, m and n, satisfy the same transcendental equations for the two limiting cases of the boundary conditions (7b), λ i = 0 and λ i → +∞, namely: Here K(k) is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind, which determines the half-period 2K(k) of the elliptic functions. Also we introduced the numbers N x = 0, 1, 2 ... and N y = 0, 1, 2, ... corresponding to the number of "nodes" of p(x) and a(x) functions, which satisfy Eqs.(11a) and (11b), respectively. The situation with these nodes is similar to the eigen solutions of a wave equation, when the boundary conditions are satisfied by an infinite set of solutions with a different number of half-waves for a fixed thickness l. At the same time, we obtained that the shifts x w1 and x w2 depend on the boundary condition type, namely, and for the natural boundary conditions = 0 they have a relatively simple form: For zero polarization conditions p i | x=±l/2 = 0 the shifts are given by more complex expressions: where q and s are independent integers. From Eqs.( The case N x = 0 (or N y = 0, or both) requires a separate consideration, since it corresponds to the limiting cases m → 1 (or/and n → 1), respectively. The shift x w1,2 diverge as -log(√1 -k) at k → 1 (k = m, n) and the solutions ( Using the "decoupled" form where E(k) is the complete elliptic integral of the second type. Since the energy is independent on x w1,2 , it is the same for both cases λ i = 0 and λ i → +∞. The case m → 1 (or n → 1) is exceptional, and corresponding contributions to Eq.(15a) should be rewritten as follows: G The metastable and stable polydomain states have negative energy, which monotonically decreases with l increase for a fixed {N x , N y } in both cases λ i → +∞ and λ i = 0 (see Fig. The single-domain state with N x = N y = 0 is absolutely stable for λ i → +∞ (corresponding energy relief corresponds to the potential well) and unstable for λ i = 0 (corresponding energy relief corresponds to the saddle point) (compare horizontal dashed lines in Fig. The two-level energy structure of the polydomain states for λ i = 0 principally differs from the single level existing in the case λ i → +∞ (compare Fig. A2. Periodic-antiperiodic boundary conditions for the polarization components. If the periodic-antiperiodic boundary conditions (7c) are valid for two components of polarization, one can put m = n and x w1 = -x w2 = x w in the solution Anyway, the two parameters, m and x w , remained undefined from the Eqs. In the simultaneous limit m=n→1 the solution (13) transforms into a solitary wall solution (9), namely )] and p 2 (x 3 ) = The solution (13) can be considered as a trial function for -1 < μ < 3. For instance, in the case of the boundary conditions (7c) the trial functions for polydomain solutions are where "free" parameters, constant offsets a i and amplitudes b i , are introduced in the same way as in Eqs. For the case of high positive ferroelectric anisotropy μ > 3 the stable polydomain solution of Eqs.(6a) becomes of Ising type and μ-independent, since p 2 -component is absent. Corresponding polarization profile has the snoidal form: The snoid modulus m and shift x w should be determined from the boundary conditions The first integral is As it can be seen, Eqs.( Let us consider a model situation when we know the ferroelectric film thickness L, the temperature T is fixed, and the most of ferroelectric material parameters in Eqs.( In the previous section we calculated the energy levels, G[m, n], given by Eqs. where i = 1,2, and we introduced the designation λ = {λ i } for the sake of brevity. The maximal number of the energy states N m is defined from the condition N m = Trunc [ l π ], obtained from the Eq.( Here the statistical weight k N x,y the of the state p i (x, N x , N y , R c , λ ) is equal to 2 (when degeneration p 1 → -p 1 exists) or 4 (when degeneration p 1 → ±p 2 exists) depending on μ-value. Using the Bayesian approach described in Refs. where the "marginal" or "unconditional" probability W[N x , N y ] of the state p i (x, N x , N y ) realization is the sum and/or integral over all prior probabilities W[R c , λ] of the {R c , λ}-events: In practice one can determine the probability W[N x , N y ] by the fitting of analytical profiles As a toy model, let us assume that R c is determined reliably from the intrinsic width of domain walls, and consider only 2 possible and equiprobable events, λ = +∞ and λ = 0. Under these conditions, Eqs.(20) acquire much simpler form: where λ = +∞ or λ = 0. Alternatively, when all λ values can be regarded quasi-equiprobable in the region {0, λ max }, Let us consider a rather thick ferroelectric film (l ≫ 100) with zero polarization at its surfaces (p i | x=±l/2 = 0), which versatile domain morphology is determined by the maximal number of prior posterior domain walls N m ≫ 1, where N m is defined from the condition N m = Trunc [ ]. Corresponding energy structure is similar to the right part of the two-level system shown in Fig. Let us imagine that we initially excite the film polarization to the one of the 2N m polydomain states "1". When the system is released, it tries to thermalize its energy excess, and, if the dissipation is very small in a film without imperfections [i.e. ρ ≫ τ 2 in Eqs.( To elaborate the idea, we preliminary study the oscillatory dynamic of domain structure under the absence and in the presence of losses, for initial seeding in the form of a random polarization distribution and for the boundary condition p i | x=±l/2 = 0. We obtained that in some cases the polarization vector oscillates (with or without damping in dependence on the loss factor τ) between several metastable domain states, without smearing to all available states. This result can be considered as the direct demonstration of the Fermi-Pasta-Ulam-Tsingou (FPUT) paradox We considered the dynamics of a 180-degree uncharged rotational domain wall in a multiaxial ferroelectric film within the framework of analytical LGD approach. FEM was used to solve numerically the system of the coupled nonlinear EL differential equations of the second order for two components of polarization. It appeared, that the static wall structure (e.g. Ising, Ising-Bloch, or mixed type) and corresponding (meta)stable phase of the film are dependent on the single control parameterdimensionless factor of ferroelectric anisotropy μ, that can vary in a continuous range by FEM, with multi-parametric hyperbolic kink-like functions for the two-component polarization, and extracted the five μ-dependent parameters from the fitting to FEM curves. The surprisingly high accuracy of the fitting results in the entire range -1 < μ < 5, allows concluding that the analytical functions, which are trial functions in the direct variational method, can be treated as the highaccuracy variational solution of the static EL equations with cubic nonlinearity. Next, using LGD approach, we derived and analyzed the two-component and one-component analytical solutions of the static EL-equations for a polydomain 180-degree domain structure in a multiaxial ferroelectric film. The analytical solutions in the form of elliptic Jacobi functions, which contain 2 and 4 free parameters, respectively, are suitable candidates for a general stable solution of EL equations, since the number of free parameters is enough to satisfy the wide class of boundary conditions at the film surfaces The solutions are degenerate for definite boundary conditions, because they can contain different number of domains for p 1 , and p 2 components. However, the analysis of the free energy dependence on the number of domains for a fixed film thickness allowed us to select those single-or polydomain analytical solution, which corresponds to the minimal energy. In particular, we obtained that the single-domain state corresponds to the minimal energy for the case of the polarization zero derivative at the film surfaces, while the solution with Ising-Bloch domain walls minimize the system energy for zero polarization at the film surfaces. The analytical solutions can become a useful tool for Bayesian analysis of domain wall profiles reconstructed from atomic displacements measured by HR STEM in ferroelectric films For thick films with zero polarization at the surfaces the energy of the polydomain states split into two levels "0" and "1". Each of the levels "0" or "1" contains a large number of the close-energy sub-levels, which domain morphology is characterized by different structure of nodes for the twocomponent polarization p = {p 1 , p 2 }, namely {0, N y } for the level "1" and {N x , N y } for the level "0", where 1 ≤ N x,y ≤ N m and N m ≫ 1. Since zero polarization at the surface can be realized experimentally relatively easily by creation of sub-surface non-ferroelectric passive layers, one can switch the polarization state between the levels "0" and "1". Under certain favorable conditions, the two-level system can oscillate with some period between the excited states "1" and ground state "0", and the oscillations can be used for e.g. racetrack memory and q-bit operation imitation. )) -4 . This way, in the case of analytical expressions for the integrals, allows us to obtain analytical dependencies for the variational parameters on the master parameter μ. The results of the integration could be written as follows: Where Landau energy G L is proportional to the system size and independent on the domain wall parameters: G L = L (- Here we used the following designations for the expansion coefficients: , where the signs are independent. O-phase is realized for -1 < μ < 1. Further consideration is based on the minimization of Eq.(B.3c) with respect to the variational parameters b 2 , ξ and w after substituting the evident expressions for a 1 and a 2 . I. "P " phaseno domain walls, with a 1 , a 2 , w and b 2 equal to zero. II. In "T1" phase (with a 1 = ±1 and a 2 = 0) the domain wall contribution (B.3c) to the free energy could simplified as follows: G DW = . Let us consider the case when ξ → 0, here we obtained from Eq.(B.9a) the following expression for the energy: It could be easily shown that η0.52 It is seen from AII.