2D competitive systems shows a large variety of solid and aggregate patterns, reentrant fluid phase, a continuous melting as predicted by the KTHNY theory and, in some cases, waterlike anomalies. In this paper, we employ Langevin Dynamics simulations of a ramp-like core-softened fluid that have two characteristic length scales and all the features mentioned above. Analyzing the fluid phase of this system, Bordin and Barbosa [Phys. Rev. E 97, 022604 (2018)] reported the existence of two waterlike anomalous region. Now, we revisit this problem focusing in the low temperature regime and a larger range of densities looking for a relation between the origin of the anomalous behavior, the solid phases and the re-entrant melting. Now, not two, but three anomalous regions were observed. The extra anomalous regions are related to the re-entrant melting of a amorphous solid to a cluster fluid. They are ruled not only by the competition between the characteristic length scales in the potential, but also by extra competitions induced by the variety of particles conformations. These competitions extends from the solid to the fluid phase, reflecting in the structural waterlike anomaly. Our results shade some light in the complex behavior of two length scales competitive potential, and helps to elucidate the relation between the large number of solid phases and the existence of more than one waterlike anomalies region in these systems. In coarse-grained simulations a variety of effective potentials is applied as models for fluids and colloids. Among them, core-softened potentials are a special class employed to understand the behavior of systems with competition. Colloidal suspensions are a good example of such systems, where distinct conformations compete to rule the suspension behavior. Colloids are usually made of molecular subunits which form a central packed agglomeration and a less dense and more entropic peripheral area -what can be represented by core-softened potentials Going from 3D to 2D lead to interesting properties. Since the seminal work by Kosterlitz and Thouless about transition in superfluid films Recent studies have been dedicated to understand the relation between these anomalous behaviors In this way, we extend our previous work to see the relations between the solid phases, the melting and re-entrant melting, the extra anomalous regions and the length scales in the core-softened potential. As we will show, there are more than only two characteristic distances. If two characteristic distances lead to one anomalous region, extra length scales results in extra anomalous regions A. The Model FIG. In this work all the quantities are computed and presented in the standard Lennard Jones (LJ) reduced units where r ij = | r i -r j | is the distance between two disks i and j. Depending on the Gaussian parameters, distinct shapes can be obtained with this potential , where the force has a local minimum, and the long range repulsive scale , where the fraction of imaginary modes of the instantaneous normal modes spectra has a local minimum NV T constant molecular dynamics simulations were performed using the Espresso package We performed 3 × 10 7 steps to equilibrate the system. These steps are then followed by 5 × 10 7 steps for the results production stage. The time step was δt = 0.01, and the equations of motion were integrated using the velocity Verlet algorithm Once the interactions are pairwise important quantities can be calculated explicitly as integrals involving the radial distribution function (RDF) g(r ij ) It is related to the structural anomaly observed in core-softened systems To check for long range translational ordering using the RDF as basis we evaluate the pair correlation function h(r ij ) = |g(r ij -1| and the cumulative two-body entropy 65 Here R is the upper integration limit. For this work we used R = 15.0. At this distance C s2 converges for the fluid and amorphous solid phases and diverges for the ordered solid phases. Is important to address that the two-body excess entropy is a structural order metric which connects thermodynamics and structure, not a thermodynamic property of the system. Then it was employed to analyze structural characteristics of the core-softened system, as the waterlike structural anomaly. While the RDF provides insights on the translational order, the orientational order is checked using the bond orientational order parameter Ψ l , where is the local bond orientational order parameter. The sum n is over all the n N nearest neighbors of m -the neighboring particles were picked by Voronoi tesselation to analyze the long range orientational ordering. The orientational analysis utilized the Freud library We start our discussion with the structural anomaly observed in our system. As we show in the figure The question is how each one of this anomalous region -which starts in the solid, pass by the hexatic phase and enter the fluid phase -are related to re-entrant fluid phases and the transition between distinct solid phases. 2D colloidal systems shows a rich variety of solid phases. Our case is not different. At lower densities the system is frozen in a triangular solid phase -we will call it Low Density Triangular (LDT). Increasing the density it changes to a stripe solid, and then a kagome The smoothness of the transition can be observed in the p × ρ curves as well. Along the isotherm T = 0.03, shown in the figure For the well defined solid phases at intermediate densities, the stripe and kagome structures, the scenario is similar. As we show in the figure As we stated before, there are regions where the system melts from an amorphous solid to a cluster fluid phase that coincides with the re-entrant fluid phases and the fluid clustering. The structural transition from amorphous solid to colloidal fluid phase is shown in figure for densities in the first, second and third re-entrant region. Here we pick the densities that corresponds to the maximum penetration of the fluid phase -or the isochores with the smaller melting temperature. It is possible to distinguish in the h(r ij ) at distinct temperatures distinct behaviours. All of them shows a fast convergence for C s2 , characterizing a short range ordering in the system, as the figure for the three cases indicates that these morphology corresponds to mixtures of distinct clusters geometries. As ρ increases, in the solid phase, the system leaves the LDT phase and rearranges to the stripe phase. However, the aggregation in dimeric clusters leads to the amorphous solid phase, as the upper panel of the figure All this indicates similarities emerging from the amorphous solid phase to the re-entrant fluid phase. To relate it with the competitive structures in the system we can analyze the occupancy in the RDF peaks. We can expect a high occupancy in the potential length scales r 1 and r 2 . Likewise, the sum of these length scales should be relevant. However, the snapshots shows a large variety of clusters and solid patterns. For instance, in the stripe phase the length scale r h 12 , that corresponds to the hypotenuse of a right triangle with cathetus r 1 and r 2 , is favored. Similarly, in the kagome and HDT phases the length scale r h 11 , the side of a isosceles triangle with base r 1 , is relevant. To relate it with the competitions in the system, we evaluate the height g(r max ) and position r max of the first three maximum in the RDFs. They are shown in the figure Then the occupancy in the first peak -now at the first scale -decays and the occupancy of the second peak is higher. This is the dimer to polymer-like cluster arrangement -or the first amorphous phase. As the density and the polymer size increases the occupancy at r 1 increases as well. Likewise, now the third peak becomes more pronounced than the second one and moves into the direction of r 2 . The limit when the third and the second maximum merge to a single peak coincides with the rearrangement from the labyrinth like structure to the stripe ordering. The stripe ordering resembles a stretched square lattice. The square symmetry is clear in the Ψ 4 behavior, figure 8(b). But this pattern can also be related to the orientational order parameter Ψ 2 show in the figure With this, we see that the competition between the same rules the order-disorder transition in the solid phase, the re-entrant melting line and the waterlike anomalies. Interestingly, our findings corroborates the exact solution for 1D systems by Barbosa and co-workers They created potentials with multiples length scales, and showed that if the potential has L length scales it will have L -1 anomalous regions. Now, we extend the comprehension showing that even potentials with two length scales can lead to more than two anomalous regions once there are multiple competitions between the multiple conformations in these system. Finally, we show in figure In this paper we analyzed the behavior of a 2D system modeled by a core-softened potential with two characteristic length scales. The phase diagram has a variety of interesting phenomena, as a KTHNY melting scenario, a re-entrant fluid phase, disordered-ordered solid transitions and multiple waterlike anomalous regions. We show that the extra anomalous regions are related to length scales that characterize the multiple conformations patterns. In fact, the same competition between these scales that leads to different solid phases and induces the ordered/disordered transition at low temperatures is also responsible for the re-entrant phase with a cluster fluid and for the waterlike structural anomaly. This leads to some questions about the most important material in our planet: do bulk water have more than one anomalous region 71 due its liquid polymorphism and the variety of solid phases -17 experimentally observed ice structures and many more predicted by computer simulations 72 ? If not in bulk, but in quasi-2D limit: water confined inside narrow nanopores can have extra anomalous regions Y. D. Fomin, E. N. Tsiok, and V. N. Ryzhov, "Inversion of sequence of diffusion and density anomalies in core-softened systems," J. Chem. Phys. 135, 234502 (2011). T. Lafitte, S. K. Kumar, and A. Z. Panagiotoulos, "Self-assembly of polymer-grafted