A volume coil with squared slots-end ring was developed to attain improved sensitivity for imaging of rat's brain at 7 T. The principles of the high cavity resonator for the low-pass case and the law of Biot-Savart were used to derive a theoretical expression of the coil sensitivity. The slotted-end ring resonator showed a theoretical 2.22-fold improvement over the standard birdcage coil with similar dimensions. Numerical studies were carried out for the electromagnetic fields and specific absorption rates for our coil and a birdcage coil loaded with a saline-filled cylindrical phantom and a digital brain of a rat. An improvement of the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) can be observed for the slotted volume coil over the birdcage regardless of the load used in the electromagnetic simulations. The specific absorption rate simulations show an important decrement for the digital brain and quite similar values with the saline solution phantom. Phantom and rat's brain images were acquired at 7 T to prove the viability of the coil design. The experimental noise figure of our coil design was four times less than the standard birdcage with similar dimensions, witch showed a 30% increase in experimental SNR. There is remarkable agreement among the theoretical, numerical and experimental sensitivity values, which all demonstrate that the coil performance for MR imaging of small rodents can be improved using slotted end-rings. To investigate the effect of the squared-slot end rings, we used the formalism for the physical principles of the In vivo imaging of mice and rats is soundly established as a component of preclinical and translational biomedical research Volume coils for small animal investigations with MRI are a particularly popular choice for a number of reasons The design of dedicated RF coils is key to achieving the best preclinical and experimental results for MRI. The end rings of the birdcage coil are an important design aspect as they can modify the intensity and homogeneity In this paper, we developed a coil design based on the RF coil reported in There is an important difference between the end-rings in a standard birdcage coil and the modified design of the cavity resonator presented here. Fig. where R is the rung resistance and r is the slot resistance, and 2 , and where Z 0 is the impedance of the slot, and N is the number of rungs. To compute r, we use Q, the quality factor of the low-pass cavity resonator: Substituting for the resistances R, r using eqs. ( the ratio icav i0 in Eq. ( For comparison purposes, we proceeded similarly as above, so the birdcage end rings can be studied using the intensity of the rung currents Then, combining eq. ( In particular, for the 4-rung coil layout, Once we have computed the currents for the birdcage coil and the cavity resonator, we can now compare the transverse magnetic field B 1 . The B 1 at the coil's isocenter relative to the end-rings current for our coil design with 4 rung is where l and d represent the length and the diameter of the volume coil, respectively, and Eq. ( The electromagnetic field simulations of RF coils can serve to guide the development of specific designs for specific applications and demonstrate how this coil design interacts with the sample to be imaged To numerically calculate the electromagnetic fields of the slotted-end rings coil, perfect electric conductors (PEC) were assumed, and together with a four-leg configuration and a saline-solution cylindrical phantom were used. The phantom properties were σ = 5.55×10 -6 S/m, ε = 78.4,ρ = 998 kg/m 3 , and μ = 0.999991. A 1 V sinusoidal feed was applied, and the source and conductor impedances were set to 50 Ω (pure resistive). To calculate more realistic results, the rat's brain phantom (σ = 0.527133×10 -6 S/m, ε = 70, ρ = 1030 kg/m 3 , and μ = 1) reported in A safety evaluation of RF coils is especially important to protect the sample from heat and temperature increase To optimize SNR performance, the coil dimensions should match the size of a mouse while matching the homogeneous RF region. The size of the volume coil was chosen to accommodate rats while also taking into account that a 12 cm bore was available. For this study, our coil design was 64 mm in length, 40 mm in diameter, contained four rungs, and both end rings were composed of four equally spaced rectangular slots. Fig. We designed our coil with four rungs to attenuate the SAR as experimentally shown by Martin et. al. The prototype was tuned to 299.47 MHz (the proton frequency at 7 T) using nonmagnetic chip capacitors and trimmers. One 50 Ω-coax cable was attached to each channel (0 0 and 90 0 channels) for quadrature drive, tuning and matching. Rough tuning was achieved with eleven and six fixed-value chip capacitors (American Technical Ceramics, series ATC 100 B nonmagnetic) of 3.7 pF and 3.9 pF, respectively. 50-Ω matching and fine tuning was achieved using four nonmagnetic trimmers (Voltronics, Corp: 1-33 pF, NMAJ30 0736) two for each channel. The resonant frequency for each channel was measured using a network analyzer (Model 4396A, Hewlett Packard, Agilent Technologies, CA) as the loss return (S 11 ). After fine tuning and matching, both channels were decoupled at the desired frequencies by altering the balancing capacitor values. The quality factor (Q) of each channel in the coil was also experimentally determined by measuring the resonant frequency divided by the 3 dB bandwidth, Δω, with a quarter-wavelength coaxial cable at the input of the coil. The loaded Q value was measured while the coil was loaded with a saline-filled spherical phantom (3 cm diameter). To test the validity of this coil, cylindrical phantom images were acquired using a standard spin echo sequence. The acquisition parameters were: TE/TR = 25 ms/900 ms, FOV = 40 mm x 40 mm, matrix size = 256 x 256, slice thickness= 2 mm, NEX = 1. Additionally, images of mouse's head were acquired using gradient echo sequence and the following acquisition parameters: TE/TR = 6 ms/400 ms, flip angle = 90 0 , FOV = 35 mm x 35 mm, matrix size = 256 x 256, slice thickness = 1 mm, NEX = 1. All MRI experiments were performed on a 7T/21cm Varian imager equipped with DirectDriveTM technology (Varian, Inc, Palo Alto, CA) and, a SGRAD 205/120/HD gradient system capable of producing pulse gradients of 400 mT/m in each of the three orthogonal axes and interfaced to a VnmrJ 2.1B console. The animal procedures were approved by the Ethical Committee of UAM Iztapalapa. The RF penetration decreases when the coil is filled with a saline-solution phantom where μ(B 1 ) is the mean and o(B 1 ) standard deviation, n is the number of image voxels, and s is the image space. Our coil design was validated by full wave electromagnetic simulations, theoretical and experimental sensitivity and phantom images. To examine our coil design in more detail, electromagnetic field simulations included the electric magnetic field intensity maps of birdcage and slotted-end ring coils for the following loading cases: a) air-filled, b) saline solution-filled phantom and c) rat's digital brain phantom. Fig. Additionally, the B 1 pattern of the saline solution simulations for both coil designs (Fig. However, the air-filled coil case shows the best agreement. The pattern of the electric field reported by Kangarulu et. al. Additionally, to compare the SAR 1g results, comparison histograms and profiles were obtained for the both phantoms and the standard orientations. The SAR 1g bidimensional maps of Fig. Fig. The noise figures of both coil prototypes were computed according to eq. ( To characterise our coil design, the S-parameters and the Smith chart were experimentally measured. The Sparameter plots and Smith charts of both channels are in Fig. Phantom and rat's head images were also acquired: Fig. The histogram of the slotted end-ring coil clearly shows a better performance over the traditional birdcage coil. The SNRs were also calculated using the image data of Fig. An RF volume coil with a slotted end-ring was presented. The important parameters of this coil prototype have been calculated analytically and numerically, and confirmed experimentally on the bench and with the MRI. The slotted end-ring coil demonstrates better coil performance than the birdcage coil in terms of sensitivity, homogeneity, SNR and SAR reduction. We have demonstrated that using full-wave electromagnetic simulations and experiments in the Varian 7 T MR imager, the slotted end-ring coil can outperform the birdcage resonator for MRI of small rodents. This can prove to be advantageous when performing functional MRI of rats' brain where the coil performance plays an important role in acquiring optimal MR signals. V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.