Two-dimensional (2D) ferromagnetic (FM) semiconductors with high Curie temperature have long been pursued for electronic and spintronic applications. Here we provide a general strategy to achieve robust FM state in bilayer CrI3 of the monoclinic stacking, which intrinsically has interlayer antiferromagnetic (AFM) order and weak in-plane FM coupling. We showed that the proximity effect from bulk semiconducting substrates induces electronic doping and significantly increases the FM nearestneighbor exchange for bilayer CrI3, leading to the AFM-to-FM transition for the interlayer spin configuration as well as enhanced intralayer FM coupling. By firstprinciples calculations and Monte Carlo simulations, bulk and 2D semiconductors providing different interaction strengths from strong covalent bonding to weak van der Waals (vdW) interaction with CrI3 are compared to thoroughly address the substrate effect on magnetic behavior and Curie temperature of bilayer CrI3. These theoretical results offer a facile route for direct synthesis of 2D ferromagnets on proper semiconducting substrates to achieve high Curie temperature for device implementation. Two-dimensional (2D) magnetic materials have attached tremendous attentions owing to their peculiar spin-related phenomena and immense potentials for magnetooptics, magneto-electronics and spintronic devices For practical interests, large-area CrI3 sheets on semiconducting substrates are highly desirable, and an ideal scenario for device implementation is to select proper substrates to achieve robust FM order in CrI3 ultrathin films. Currently, monolayer and multilayer CrI3 can be synthesized by the exfoliation method and then transferred to insulating substrates, as well as be epitaxially grown on metal and nonmetal substrates, such as gold Previous studies have explored the proximity effect in several CrI3-based vdW heterostructures. In experiment, the heterostructure of monolayer WSe2 and few-layer CrI3 has been exploited for valley manipulation of WSe2 through control of the magnetization in CrI3 On the theoretical aspect, the mechanism for valley splitting in WSe2/CrI3 heterostructures has been elucidated by considering the effects of stacking geometry Directly growing or relocating CrI3 sheet on proper substrates for magnetism engineering can overcome the limitations inherent to doping, functionalization, and applying external fields, which may result in unintended clustering, disorder, or phase transition. However, current understanding of the proximity effect in CrI3 is based only on the aforementioned vdW heterostructures. How does the interlayer exchange of CrI3 vary with the bonding nature and strength of substrate? Is it possible to retain the magnetic order and semiconducting character of CrI3 covalently bound on a bulk substrate? Is there an optimal CrI3-substrate interaction strength that leads to robust FM coupling between CrI3 layers and high Tc for practical uses? These intriguing questions are all awaited to be solved. In this work, we explored bilayer CrI3 on a variety of non-metal substrates with a wide range of interfacial coupling strength, including bulk semiconductors (II-VI compounds, silicon) as well as 2D monolayer materials (group III and group IV monochalcogenides, transition metal dichalcogenides, phosphorene, etc.). By firstprinciples calculations, the geometries, electronic band structures, and magnetic behavior of the supported CrI3 sheet were systematically investigated. Strong FM order of bilayer CrI3 with Tc above 130 K was realized on selected bulk substrates, and the underlying exchange mechanism was elucidated. We further determined the key parameters that govern the exchange energy of bilayer CrI3 on various substrates, paving a way for precisely modulating the magnetism of CrI3 ultrathin sheets. The structure, electronic and magnetic properties of bilayer CrI3 on various substrates were investigated by density functional theory (DFT) calculations implemented in the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) The supercells for bilayer CrI3 on various substrates have lateral dimensions (L) of 6.76 ~ 21.20 Å and a vacuum space of 15 Å in the out-of-plane direction (Table The details of how to construct the heterostructure models are described in Fig. We considered bilayer CrI3 with the monoclinic lattice and C2/m space group symmetry, which is the HT phase observed in experiment at 210-220 K. It is formed by two CrI3 layers in AA stacking with one layer sliding by a/3 along the in-plane lattice vector a with respect to the other (Fig. to the opposite directions between the layers. This is because the interlayer FM coupling is dominated by the virtual excitation from t2g to eg orbital, which encounters a large energy separation of 1.33 eV and cannot compete with the AFM exchange governed by interlayer eg-eg and t2g-t2g hybridization To enhance the eg-t2g interaction and achieve robust FM order in bilayer CrI3, we take advantage of the proximity effect by placing the CrI3 sheet on a suitable substrate. To explore the specific influence of substrate interaction on the magnetic state of the supported CrI3 bilayer, we considered a variety of substrate materials, including (0001) surface of II-VI wurtzite compounds CdSe, ZnS and ZnO, bulk Si(111) surface, 2D group III monochalcogenide GaSe and InSe, 2D group IV monochalcogenide SnS, 2D transition metal dichalcogenide MoS2 and WSe2, phosphorene (Black P), and h-BN. The geometrical structures of these hybrid systems are displayed in Fig. where ECrI3 and Etot are the energies of freestanding and supported bilayer CrI3, respectively; Esub is the energy of the standalone substrate; NCr is the number of CrI3 formula units (f.u.) in monolayer CrI3 within the supercell model (which equals to the number of Cr atoms at the interface with substrate). The interlayer distance d is defined as the average vertical distance between the bottom I layer of CrI3 and the substrate surface. As revealed by Table Ebind (-0.28 ~ -0.41 eV/f.u.) and CT (≤ 0.06 e/f.u.). For all the systems, the monoclinic stacking of bilayer CrI3 is well retained, and the optimized structures of supported CrI3 sheets do not show any reconstruction owing to the small lattice mismatch with various selected substrates. However, the exchange interaction between two CrI3 layers is effectively modulated by the substrate, and consequently the preferred magnetic order of bilayer CrI3 would be modified as will be discussed in the following. The band structures and DOS of bilayer CrI3 on various substrates are presented in Fig. To characterize the magnetic coupling strength, we calculate the interlayer exchange energy as the energy difference between the interlayer AFM and FM spin configurations: where a negative value of EM indicates an AFM ground state. As given by Table For the substrates providing vdW interaction, we further explored strategies to strengthen the interlayer ferromagnetic order of bilayer CrI3 on the vdW substrate. We considered bilayer CrI3 on graphene (lattice mismatch is 0.38%) as a representative system feasible in the experiment and obtained EM = 2.31 meV/f.u., compared with EM = -0.24 meV/f.u. for freestanding CrI3 bilayer with AFM order. This means that an AFM-to-FM transition can be realized by placing bilayer CrI3 on graphene as a vdW substrate. By applying an external electric field perpendicular to the CrI3 sheet, EM further increases to 2.93 meV/f.u. at F = 0.2 V/Å (see Fig. Therefore, by depositing HT-phase CrI3 bilayer on a suitable vdW substrate to induce proper in-plane strain and meanwhile by applying a vertical electric field, it is possible to significantly enhance the interlayer FM order and raise the Curie temperature for device application. The AFM to FM transition in bilayer CrI3 is attributed to its electron transfer with the substrate, which alters not only the energy level but also the occupancy of eg orbital of the bottom CrI3 layer, as illustrated by Fig. ( ) d where D e g (E) is the density of states from the eg orbitals of the bottom CrI3 layer at a given energy E. Remarkably, for bilayer CrI3 sheets on the bulk semiconductors, the considerable charge transfer leads to the occupation of eg orbitals to be Nocc. = 6.03 ~ 12.60% (Table where Mi and Mj represent the magnetic moments at sites i and j, respectively, and we used the computed magnetic moments for each CrI3/substrate model from DFT calculations (see Table (4) (see Eq. (S1 ~ S12) in the SM for more details). For freestanding CrI3 bilayer, we obtained the interlayer nearest-neighbor J1┴ = 0.88 meV representing the FM coupling, while the second nearest-neighbor J2┴ = -2.03 meV is obtained for AFM coupling, consistent with the previous theoretical reports Fig. The substrates can not only trigger the interlayer AFM-to-FM transition in CrI3, but also enhance the stability of intralayer FM state. As listed in Table Since bilayer CrI3 involves two macroscopic spins Encouragingly, the FM order is strengthened by depositing bilayer CrI3 on bulk semiconductor as Tc increases by up to 3 times. According to the above discussions, the proximity effect on 2D CrI3 sheet from the semiconducting substrates originates from the interfacial electronic coupling and charge transfer, which greatly reduces the virtual energy gap and modifies the occupancy of eg orbitals, leading to enhanced eg-t2g hybridization and strengthened interlayer ferromagnetic order in bilayer CrI3. The interfacial charge transfer is correlated to the work function of the substrate relative to that of CrI3. Compared to the widely adopted approaches like heteroatom doping and functionalization with inherent limitations, depositing 2D magnetic materials on proper semiconducting substrates is a universe strategy to manipulate the spin configuration toward robust ferromagnetism with high Curie temperature for practical applications in spintronics. In much higher than that on 2D substrates with vdW interaction. Such strong proximity effect can be understood by the prominent charge transfer from II-VI semiconductors, leading to carrier doping to the band structure of CrI3, which significantly enhances the eg-t2g hybridization and strengthens the FM nearest-neighbor exchange. These theoretical results provide essential guidance for obtaining high Curie temperature 2D ferromagnets on semiconducting substrates for practical uses.