Mg grain boundary (GB) segregation and GB diffusion can impact the processing and properties of Al-Mg alloys. Yet, Mg GB diffusion in Al has not been measured experimentally or predicted by simulations. We apply atomistic computer simulations to predict the amount and the free energy of Mg GB segregation, and the impact of segregation on GB diffusion of both alloy components. At low temperatures, Mg atoms segregated to a tilt GB form clusters with highly anisotropic shapes. Mg diffuses in Al GBs slower than Al itself, and both components diffuse slowly in comparison with Al GB self-diffusion. Thus, Mg segregation significantly reduces the rate of mass transport along GBs in Al-Mg alloys. The reduced atomic mobility can be responsible for the improved stability of the microstructure at elevated temperatures. Al-Mg alloys constitute an important class of lightweight structural materials that find numerous automotive, marine and military applications Previous experimental and modeling studies have shown that Mg segregates to Al grain boundaries (GBs), modifying their thermodynamic and kinetic properties When the Al matrix is supersaturated with Mg, the excess Mg atoms diffuse toward and then along GBs and precipitate in the form of the Al 3 Mg 2 phase and/or possibly other, metastable compounds Surprisingly, while Al GB diffusion in Mg has been measured In this paper, we report on detailed atomistic computer simulations of GB segregation and GB diffusion in the Al-Mg system, focusing on a particular Al-5.5at.%Mg composition relevant to industrial alloys. Two representative GBs were selected, a high-angle tilt GB composed of closely spaced structural units, and a low-angle twist GB composed of discrete dislocations. The latter case essentially probes the dislocation segregation effect and the dislocation pipe diffusion. In addition to computing some of the key characteristics of Mg GB segregation over a range of temperatures, the simulations reveal some interesting features of the segregation, such as the formation of Mg clusters in the high-angle GB and the tendency of the clusters to have highly elongated shapes reminiscent of linear atomic chains. The diffusion coefficients and Arrhenius parameters have been computed for GB diffusion of both Al and Mg, and are compared with Al GB self-diffusion as well as diffusion of both components in liquid alloys. Atomic interactions in the Al-Mg system were modeled using the Finnis-Sinclair potential developed by Mendelev et al. The high-angle GB studied here was the symmetrical tilt Σ17(530)[001] GB with the misorientation angle of 61.93 • . The parameter Σ is the reciprocal density of coincident sites, [001] is the tilt axis, and (530) is the GB plane. This boundary was created by aligning the crystallographic plane (530) parallel to the x-y plane of the Cartesian coordinate system and rotating the upper half of the simulation block (z > 0) by 180 • about the z-axis. The lowangle GB was the Σ3601(001) twist boundary with the misorientation angle of 1.91 • . In this case, the GB plane is (001) and the two lattices are rotated relative to each other about the common [001] axis. The simulation blocks had approximately square cross-sections parallel to the GB plane. The block dimensions in the x, y and z directions were, respectively, 11.79 × 11.73 × 23.67 nm (1.97 × 10 5 atoms) for the high-angle GB and 24.27 × 24.27 × 48.56 nm (1.72 × 10 6 atoms) for the low-angle GB. Periodic boundary conditions were imposed in all three directions. The initial GB structures were optimized by the γ-surface method To create a thermodynamically equilibrium distribution of Mg atoms in the Al-5.5at.%Mg alloy, the hybrid MC/MD algorithm GB diffusion was studied by NPT MD simulations in the temperature range from 400 K to 926 K using the GBs pre-equilibrated by the MC/MD procedure. During the MD runs, the GB position could slightly vary due to thermal fluctuations. To account for such variations, the instantaneous GB position was tracked by finding the peak of the potential energy (averaged over thin layers parallel to the GB plane) as a function the z coordinate normal to the boundary. The GB position was identified with the center of the peak, while the GB width δ was estimated from the peak width. Based on these estimates, the GB core region was defined as the layer centered at the peak and having the width of δ = 1 nm for the high-angle GB and δ = 1.5 nm for the low-angle GB. The mean-square displacements, x 2 and y 2 , of both Al and Mg atoms parallel to the GB plane were computed as functions of time. The calculations extended over a time period ∆t ranging from 0.03 ns to 120 ns, depending on the temperature. The GB diffusion coefficients of both species were extracted from the Einstein relations D x = x 2 /2∆t and D y = y 2 /2∆t, respectively. For comparison, similar calculations here performed for Al self-diffusion in both GBs. In this case, the pure Al boundary was equilibrated by a 2 ns MD run before computing the mean-square displacements. For the low-angle GB, the symmetry dictates that D x and D y must be equal. Accordingly, the diffusion coefficients reported for this boundary were averaged over both directions. For further comparison, the same methodology was applied to compute the diffusion coefficients of Al and Mg in the liquid Al-5.5at.%Mg alloy at temperatures close to the solid-liquid coexistence (solidus) line. The simulation block had the dimensions of 11.73 × 11.73 × 11.73 nm (∼ 10 5 atoms) and was equilibrated by an MD run for a few ns prior to diffusion calculations. The excess energy of the equilibrated high-angle Σ17 GB was found to be 488 mJ m -2 . The 0 K structure of this boundary consists of identical kite-shape structural units arranged in a zigzag array as shown in Fig. The low-angle Σ3601 GB has a smaller energy of 127 mJ m -2 and consists of a square network of discrete dislocations (Fig. Mg was found to segregate to both GBs at all temperatures studied. The images in Fig. Equilibrium segregation profiles were computed by averaging the atomic fraction of Mg over thin layers parallel to the GB on either side of its current position. The composition profiles displayed in Fig. • Mg segregates to the high-angle GB much stronger than to the low-angle GB. • The height of the segregation peak increases with decreasing temperature, reaching about 21 at.%Mg in the high-angle GB and about 7 at.%Mg in the low-angle GB at the lowest temperature tested. • At high temperatures approaching the melting point of the alloy (> 850 K), the segregation profile of the high-angle GB significantly broadens, suggesting that the boundary undergoes a premelting transformation. At temperatures between 860 and 870 K, the premelted high-angle GB was observed to extend across the entire simulation block, transforming it into the bulk liquid phase. Based on this observation, the solidus temperature of the alloy was estimated to be 865 ± 5 K. This estimate compares well with the equilibrium phase diagram obtained by independent calculations in Here, N Mg and N Mg are the numbers of Mg atoms in two regions with and without the GB, respectively, and N and N are the total numbers of Al and Mg atoms in the respective regions. These regions were chosen to have the same cross-sectional area parallel to the GB, and the excess [N Mg ] was normalized by this area. Accordingly, the units of [N Mg ] reported here are the number of excess Mg atoms per nanometer squared. The average value and standard deviation of [N Mg ] were obtained by averaging over multiple snapshots generated during the MC/MD simulations. Fig. An alternative measure of the Mg segregation is the atomic fraction c GB of Mg atoms in the GB computed by averaging over a layer of the Gaussian width centered at the concentration peak (cf. Fig. Here, c is the alloy composition (atomic fraction of Mg), k is Boltzmann's constant, F s is the segregation free energy per atom, and α is the fraction of GB sites filled by Mg atoms when the segregation is fully saturated. F s represents the difference between the free energies of Mg atoms inside the GB and in the grain interiors. For both GBs, the temperature dependence of c GB could be fitted by equation ( It should also be noted that the clusters shapes are significantly elongated along the tilt axis. This elongation was quantified by the eccentricity parameter e = 1 -1 2 where l x represents the cluster dimension along the tilt direction, and l y and l z are the respective dimensions in the two perpendicular directions. The eccentricity was calculated only when the dimension along the tilt axis was longer than in the perpendicular directions, and was assigned a zero value otherwise. As evident from Fig. Figure The results of the diffusion calculations are summarized in the Arrhenius diagram, log D versus 1/T , shown in Fig. at all temperatures below the solidus temperature. Note that Mg segregation reduces or even eliminates the diffusion anisotropy in the high-angle GB. In pure Al, diffusion along the tilt axis is faster than in the direction normal to the tilt axis. This trend is general and was observed in both experiments and previous simulations, for example in Cu and Cu-Ag alloys Table In pure Al, the self-diffusivity in the high-angle GB was also computed at two additional temperatures (900 and 914 K) lying above the alloy solidus temperature but below the Al melting point (926 K). At these temperatures, the boundary develops a highly disordered atomic structure similar to a liquid layer. Accordingly, the GB diffusion coefficient shows a significant upward deviation from the Arrhenius behavior and approaches the self-diffusion coefficient in liquid Al (see inset in Fig. Atomistic simulations of GB structure, solute segregation and GB diffusion are computationally expensive and have only been preformed for a small number of GBs in a few binary systems. Systematic investigations covering a wide range of temperatures all the way to the melting point are especially demanding. For this reason, only two GBs have been studied in the present work. As such, we selected two boundaries belonging to very different classes: a low-angle GB, which essentially represents a dislocation network, and a high-angle GB with a structurally homogeneous core. Although each boundary is characterized by specific set of crystallographic parameters, many of the conclusions of this work are generic and should be valid for all low-angle and all high-angle GBs, respectively. In particular, the fact that diffusion in the low-angle GB is slower and is characterized by a larger activation energy in comparison with the high-angle GB, is consistent with the existing body of experimental data for many other alloy systems There are several findings in this paper whose explanation requires furthers research. One of them is the observation of the strongly elongated Mg clusters (atomic chains) in the high-angle GB. We hypothesize that such clusters, as well as other possible chemical heterogeneities in segregated Al GBs, can serve as precursors of Al-Mg intermetallic compounds during their nucleation in oversaturated alloys. The clustering trend also suggests that the GB solution has a miscibility gap. While this line of inquiry was not pursued in this work, it seems quite possible that Al-Mg GBs can exhibit 2D phases and phase transformations among them Although the GB diffusivities reported here cannot be compared with experiments, the Mg GB segregation in Al has been studied by several experimental techniques, including atom probe tomography (APT). The experiments show that Mg strongly segregates to Al GBs in most cases On the simulation side, Mg GB segregation in nanocrystalline Al-Mg was recently studied by the lattice Monte Carlo (LMC) method We have studied GB segregation and GB diffusion in the Al-Mg system by atomistic computer simulations combining MD and MC methods. A typical Al-5.5at.%Mg alloy and two representative (high-angle and low-angle) GBs were chosen as models. The conclusions can be summarized as follows: • In agreement with previous reports, Mg strongly segregates to high-angle GBs and, to a lesser extent, to low-angle GBs composed of dislocations. At low temperatures, such as 350 K, the local chemical composition in GBs can exceed 20 at.%Mg. • The amount of GB segregation increases with decreasing temperature. The effective free energy of GB segregation is estimated to be about -0.28 eV/atom for the highangle GB studied here and much smaller (∼ -0.01 eV/atom) for the low-angle GB. • Distribution of the segregated Mg atoms over a GB is highly non-uniform. In the high-angle tilt GB, the Mg atoms tend to form clusters containing 10 to 30 atoms, especially at low temperatures. Such clusters are elongated parallel to the tilt axis and are similar to linear atomic chains. • At high temperatures approaching the solidus line, the high-angle GB studied here exhibits a premelting behavior by developing a highly disordered, liquid-like structure. By contrast, the low-angle GB does not premelt and can be overheated past the solidus line. While the individual dislocations do become disordered, the dislocation network itself remains intact, demonstrating an extraordinary thermal stability. • Mg segregation strongly affects the rate of GB diffusion in Al-Mg alloys. Mg GB diffusion is slower than Al GB self-diffusion in pure Al. Furthermore, Mg segregation slows down the GB diffusion of Al itself. This diffusion retardation could be responsible for the microstructure stability in Al-Mg alloys. • The diffusion retardation effect caused by the Mg segregation is primarily due to the significant (about a factor of two) increase in the activation energy of GB diffusion (Table • Mg segregation reduces the anisotropy of GB diffusion. • Mg diffusion in high-angle GBs is several orders of magnitude faster than diffusion in low-angle GBs at the same temperature. In the absence of experimental data, the GB diffusion coefficients obtained in this work can provide useful reference information for further investigations of Al-Mg alloys. GB diffusion coefficients appear as input material parameters in many models describing processes such precipitation aging, solute drag, and micro-creep to name a few. 0 (m 2 /s) ⊥ twist axis 1.33 +0.93 -0.55 × 10 -8 1.27