Lyotropic chromonic liquid crystals (LCLCs) represent aqueous dispersions of organic disk-like molecules that form cylindrical aggregates. Despite the growing interest in these materials, their flow behavior is poorly understood. Here, we explore the effect of shear on dynamic structures of the nematic LCLC, formed by 14wt% water dispersion of disodium cromoglycate (DSCG). We employ in-situ polarizing optical microscopy (POM) and small-angle and wide-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS/WAXS) to obtain independent and complementary information on the director structures over a wide range of shear rates. The DSCG nematic shows a shear-thinning behavior with two shear-thinning regions (Region I at γ̇< 1 s -1 and Region III at γ̇> 10 s -1 ) separated by a pseudo-Newtonian Region II (1 s -1 < γ̇< 10 s -1 ). The material is of a tumbling type. In Region I, γ̇< 1 s -1 , the director realigns along the vorticity axis. An increase of γ̇ above 1 s -1 triggers nucleation of disclination loops. The disclinations introduce patches of the director that deviates from the vorticity direction and form a polydomain texture. Extension of the domains along the flow and along the vorticity direction decreases with the increase of the shear rate to 10 s -1 . Above 10 s -1 , the domains begin to elongate along the flow. At γ̇> 100 s -1 , the texture evolves into periodic stripes in which the director is predominantly along the flow with left and right tilts. The period of stripes decreases with an increase of γ̇. The shear-induced transformations are explained by the balance of the elastic and viscous energies. In particular, nucleation of disclinations is associated with an increase of the elastic energy at the walls separating nonsingular domains with different director tilts. The uncovered shear-induced structural effects would be of importance in the further development of LCLC applications. . Dynamics of nematic liquid crystals driven out of equilibrium by externally applied shear is a fascinating domain of soft matter physics. Over the last few decades, significant progress has been achieved in understanding shear-induced structures and rheology response of thermotropic low molecular weight nematics (LMWNs), nematics formed by surfactant-based wormlike micelles, viral suspensions, liquid crystal polymers (LCPs) and their solutions ) that specifies the average local molecular orientation. A combined effect of viscous, elastic, and surface torques produces a complex director field ( ) nr that often carries topological defects such as disclination loops, especially in the so-called tumbling nematics, in which the viscous torque is nonzero for any orientation of n There is a large class of self-assembled nematics, in which the building units are formed by weak non-covalent interactions. Among these are wormlike micellar nematics The nematic LCLC is formed by plank-like molecules that stack face-to-face on top of each, being attracted by noncovalent hydrophobic interactions, Fig. The interest in the structural and rheological response of LCLCs to the applied shear is both practical and fundamental. LCLC materials can be used in applications such as sensors of microbial presence Fundamental understanding of how the LCLC structure responds to shear is practically absent. In particular, it is not known for certain which of these materials are flow-aligning and which are tumbling, whether the shear flow could trigger nucleation of disclinations, what are the differences in the viscous response of different phases of LCLCs, such as isotropic, nematic, and columnar phases. Because of the relative weakness of the aggregation forces in LCLCs, one might expect that shear can influence not only the director but also the scalar order parameter, since the aggregates could dissociate into smaller units or connect into longer ones, thus producing new effects not readily observed in covalently-bound systems but expected for wormlike micelles The existing rheological studies of LCLCs focus mostly on the measurements of the average viscosity as a function of  in cone- plate rheometers, reported for two typical nematic materials, namely, disodium cromoglycate (DSCG), Fig. The objective of this study is to explore the director field response of the nematic LCLC DSCG under shear flow, by using plate-plate rheometry with an in-situ polarizing optical microscopy (POM) and small-angle and wide-angle x-ray scattering (SAXS/WAXS). The in-situ structural data are supplemented by the measurements of shear viscosity in a cone-plate geometry, which demonstrates shearthinning behavior. This paper is organized as follows. First, we describe the materials and approaches used. Second, we present the measurements of average shear viscosity which point to three distinct regimes of response, two shear-thinning and one of apparent Newtonian behavior. Third, we perform a detailed analysis of POM textures and SAXS/WAXS data, supplemented by the measurements of the effective optical retardance to establish the cascade of structural transformations in the system as a function of the shear rate. At the lowest shear rates, in the shear-thinning Region I,  - 1 1 s , the director realigns towards the vorticity axis, forming a log-rolling state. In the pseudo-Newtonian Region II,  -- 11 1 s 10 s , the flow creates two distinct types of regions, one with the director still along the vorticity axis and another with the director tilted towards the shear plane, defined by the velocity v (the x -axis in Fig. We explore the nematic phase of LCLC formed by 14wt% aqueous dispersion of DSCG, purchased from Spectrum Chemicals, Fig. The optical birefringence  = - eo n n n of DSCG is negative The second optical compensator, called Abrio LC PolScope (Cambridge Research Incorporation), is tunable. The LC PolScope relies on a monochromatic illumination of the wavelength  =546 nm and represents a liquid crystal slab that changes optical retardance under an applied electric field. Once the image is taken for a few different settings of the compensator, numerical analysis allows the unit to map the optical retardance  of the sample in the range (0 -273) nm and the in-plane orientation of the optical axis n X-ray diffraction is widely used to characterize LCLCs in equilibrium The SAXS pattern shows crescent-like peaks that identify the nematic phase. The SAXS patterns are analyzed in terms of the angular distribution of the scattering intensity. The intensity at a constant azimuthal angle  is integrated over the momentum transfer range  m qq with m q being the momentum transfer value corresponding to the maximum intensity and q is taken as the half-width at half maximum of the intensity vs q peaks. In the experiments, q m ≃ 0.13 Å -1 corresponds to the lateral distance ∼ 4.8 nm between the DSCG aggregates that is noticeably larger than the diameter ∼ 3.2 nm of the aggregates, in agreement with the previous studies When n is initially along the flow, the realignment time is  10 min t , Fig. , where  = 0.001 rad/s is the angular velocity of the moving plate, = 7.5 mm r is the distance from the center of the shear stage to the observation window, and h is the gap of the rheometer, thus   4.5 mm rt is the arc length distance traveled by the rotating disk with respect to the stationary disk at the point of observation. Shear-induced alignment along the vorticity axis is not perfect, as one often observes domains of typical scale (100-500) μm advected by the flow in which n can be aligned in any direction, Fig. -- 11 1 s 10 s , nucleation and dynamics of disclinations The director field in this shear range is highly distorted, forming a polydomain texture regardless of the initial alignment, as evidenced by the textures documented in various modes of optical microscopy and by SAXS, Fig. The small left and right periodic tilts of the director in stripe textures, Fig. As demonstrated by Zhou et al If n remains in the shear ( ) Er , the theory suggests that the nematic DSCG with a small twist constant should realign the director upon a weak shear towards the vorticity axis, as observed experimentally, Fig. The experimental data in Fig. , which is close to the experimental data for the explored DSCG A qualitative molecular picture that explains why DSCG is a tumbling nematic, as opposed to most of thermotropic LMWN that are flowaligning is presented in Fig. In Region III, the disclinations are replaced by the stripes parallel to the flow. The predominant director orientation is also parallel to the flow, with periodic left and right tilts towards the vorticity direction. Apparently, the flow enhances alignment along the x-direction and facilitates elongation of aggregates by connecting neighboring ends, which might explain a strong increase of phase retardation in Fig. We explored the viscoelastic and structural response of the nematic LCLC DSCG to the simple shear flow. The effective shear viscosity of DSCG shows a three-region behavior as the shear rate increases, similar to the behavior of liquid crystal polymers. In Region I,  - 1 1 s , the material shows a pronounced shear thinning, while the texture shows large domains tending to realign along the vorticity axis, which is most likely assisted by the small value of the twist elastic constant of DSCG. In Region II, , the director gradients at the chevron ridges become too strong and are relieved by nucleation of disclination loops. The disclinations replace director orientation along the vorticity axis with the director orientation along the flow direction. The loops appear first in the shear plane but realign along the vorticity-flow plane, which we relate to a small value of the twist elastic constant in DSCG. The density of the disclination loops increases with the shear rate. In Region III with a moderate shear-thinning behavior, the web of disclinations elongates along the flow direction, as the length x a of the domains increases with  until they become longer than the field of view. The disclinations are eventually replaced by a stripe texture in which the director is predominantly along the flow with alternating stripes of left and right tilts. The observed behavior points to the tumbling character of the DSCG nematic with the prevalent director orientation that can be either along the vorticity direction at low shear rates or along the flow at high shear rates.