The martensitic start temperature (M s ) is a technologically fundamental characteristic of high-temperature shape memory alloys. We have recently shown [Phys. Rev. B 94, 224104 (2016)] that the two key features in describing the composition dependence of M s are the T = 0 K phase stability and the difference in vibrational entropy which, within the Debye model, is directly linked to the elastic properties. Here, we use density functional theory together with special quasi-random structures to study the elastic properties of disordered martensite and austenite Ti-Ta alloys as a function of composition. We observe a softening in the tetragonal shear elastic constant of the austenite phase at low Ta content and a non-linear behavior in the shear elastic constant of the martensite. A minimum of 12.5% Ta is required to stabilize the austenite phase at T = 0 K. Further, the shear elastic constants and Young's modulus of martensite exhibit a maximum for Ta concentrations close to 30%. Phenomenological, elastic-constant-based criteria suggest that the addition of Ta enhances the strength, but reduces the ductile character of the alloys. In addition, the directional elastic stiffness, calculated for both martensite and austenite, becomes more isotropic with increasing Ta content. The reported trends in elastic properties as a function of composition may serve as a guide in the design of alloys with optimized properties in this interesting class of materials. Ti-Ta alloys are among the most promising candidates for high-temperature shape memory alloys (HTSMAs), materials which exhibit martensitic phase transformations to reversely convert heat into mechanical strain and that are currently being employed as, e.g., sensors or actuators in automotive and aerospace applications Recently, we have shown that the relative phase stability at T = 0 K and the difference in the vibrational free energy contribution (which within the Debye model is derived from the elastic properties) between the martensite (orthorhombic, α , low-temperature phase) and the austenite (cubic, β , hightemperature phase) phases in Ti-Ta are the two critical parameters that govern the composition dependence of M s Here, we use density functional theory (DFT) to investigate the single-crystal elastic constants and derived polycrystalline properties of the martensite and austenite phases of Ti-Ta alloys as a function of composition. Our results show that the tetragonal shear elastic constant of the austenite phase softens at very low Ta content and then gradually stiffens upon further alloying with Ta. This indicates that the mechanical stability of the austenite increases with increasing Ta content. The shear elastic constants of the martensite phase exhibit a non-linear behavior with a maximum value at intermediate Ta concentrations. The polycrystalline properties of the two phases derived from the single crystal elastic constants correspondingly reveal similar trends. Based on the empirical criteria proposed by Pugh The paper is organized as follows: In Section II we describe the computational details and the Voight-Reuss-Hill (VRH) approximation for polycrystalline elastic moduli. In Section III we present our ab initio results on the single crystal elastic and polycrystalline properties, as well as the elastic anisotropy. We conclude our findings in Section IV. First principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations were carried out using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) The elastic constants of the martensite and austenite phases were calculated using the stress-strain method as implemented in VASP For the austenite (cubic), C 11 = C 22 = C 33 , C 12 = C 13 = C 23 , and C 44 = C 55 = C 66 . Using SQSs to describe the chemical disorder results in a lowering of the symmetry and minor differences in the elastic constants that are equivalent in the cubic phase. Correspondingly, the elastic constants for the β phase have been averaged as The polycrystalline elastic moduli of the martensite and austenite phases have been computed within the Voigt-Reuss-Hill (VRH) approximation • Austenite phase: • Martensite phase: where S 11 , S 12 , etc. are the elements of the elastic compliance matrix with S = C -1 . B V , B R , G V , and G R are the bulk modulus and shear modulus from the Voigt and Reuss equations, respectively. Polycrystalline elastic properties such as B and G can be calculated from the elastic constants using the VRH approximation Furthermore, the Young's modulus (E) within the VRH framework is given by III. RESULTS In this section, we report the trends in elastic constants of the austenite and martensite as a function of composition. The elastic constants for pure bcc Ti and bcc Ta (see Table The austenite phase in Ti-Ta satisfies the Born-Huang stability criteria for all compositions studied, that is the austenite phase appears to be elastically stable (values are listed in Table S2 of the Supplementary Material). The tetragonal shear constant (C = (C 11 -C 12 )/2) is strongly dependent on composition, increasing with increasing Ta content as shown in Fig. In the right graph of Fig. The mechanical stability criteria for the orthorhombic martensite phase are 38 The elastic constants of the martensite are shown in Fig. [110] aus || [010] mar , [001] aus || [001] mar . To be consistent with common notations used in experiments for the martensite phase with lattice vectors a < c < b, we have The shear elastic constants C 44 , C 55 , and C 66 in Fig. At high Ta content, there seems to be an interesting pattern where the primary elastic constants (C 11 , C 22 , and C 33 ), offdiagonal elastic constants (C 12 , C 13 , and C 23 ), and the shear constants (C 44 , C 55 , and C 66 ) tend to converge to three dis- tinct sets of values, respectively (i.e., to say, C 11 , C 12 , C 44 ), cf. Fig. Using the values of elastic constants together with VRH approximation we studied various polycrystalline properties of the martensite and the austenite phase as a function of composition. The corresponding values for the bulk (B), shear (G), and Young's (E) moduli are shown in Fig. To investigate the brittle-ductile properties in these alloys, we follow a more recently discovered universal ductile-tobrittle criterion reported by Niu et al. Elastic anisotropy plays a crucial role in the formation of microcracks in materials understand their durability that, in turn, can assist the design of improved materials. In this work, we have computed two important anisotropy indices: (1) Universal elastic anisotropy (A U ) Both parameters have been extensively used in the materials community to study elastic anisotropy of materials The two, commonly used anisotropy indices are often not sufficient to fully depict the elastic behavior of different crystal phases. In order to further extend our description of the anisotropic behavior of the austenite and martensite phases we calculate the directional dependence of the Young's modulus as a function of composition. This approach has been well established for various systems Likewise, the direction-dependent Young's modulus for the austenite (cubic) is given by where S A = S 11 -S 12 -S 44 /2 and S i j are the elastic compliance matrix elements as introduced above. l 1 , l 2 and l 3 are the direction cosines, calculated using a spherical coordinate system i.e. and In Fig. We have investigated trends in the elastic properties of the martensite and austenite phases in Ti-Ta alloys over a wide range of compositions. The tetragonal shear constant of the high-temperature austenite phase strongly stiffens with increasing Ta content, making the phase more stable, which is in agreement with our previous work and existing literature. Below 12.5% Ta, the austenite phase becomes unstable. The martensite phase exhibits and unexpected non-linear trend in the shear elastic constants, with a maximum at ∼ 30% Ta. The polycrystalline bulk, shear, and Young's moduli of the austenite show a linear dependence on the composition, whereas the shear and Young's moduli of the martensite again behaves non-linear, similar to the single crystal shear elastic constants. This gives rise to different thermodynamic and mechanical properties observed in the two phases which may have potential applications in other sectors e.g. in the biomedical industry where materials with low Young's modulus are desirable. Using a universal brittle-ductile phase diagram re-veals that the addition of Ta enhances the strength but reduces the ductility in these alloys. Furthermore, the anisotropy in the Young's modulus is strongly composition dependent for both phases. With increasing Ta content the elastic properties become more isotropic independent of the phase which indicates that this originates mainly in the isotropic nature of Ta. This information is of particular interest in the study of microcrack formation. The class of Ti-Ta alloys is not only of importance as hightemperature shape memory alloys, but might also show potential for biomedical applications, as sensors or actuators. The presented trends in the elastic properties of the martensite and austenite phases in Ti-Ta alloys can be helpful in the design of new materials and aid experimentalists in the identification of promising alloy compositions. The ratio of shear modulus to bulk modulus (G/B) is a measure of the ductility/brittleness behavior of a material which was originally introduced by Pugh 11 + S 22 + S 33 ) -4(S 12 + S 13 + S 23 ) (8) +3(S 44 + S 55 + S 66 )]