We inspect the optical properties of dissipative double-negative metamaterials (DNMM) and find explicit expression for the total reflection angle and the correct Fresnel formulae describing the reflection and refraction for the DNMM at the oblique incident of the electromagnetic wave on the interface for TE as well as TM electromagnetic wave polarization. The reflectivity and transmissivity of DNMM film embedded in a positive refraction index (PIM) surrounding are presented and discussed. In recent years, we have been witnessed of the explosion of interest in a field of research, which is termed metamaterials. This area of research is characterized by an exponential growth of a number of publications, to mention just a few, there are two monographs It is worth mentioning that most of the proposed ever since designs of metamaterials were characterized by ever increasing sophistication of fabrication methods. Contrary to these, in our previous publications For the readers' convenience, here we outline briefly the main ideas. Let us assume we have a mixture of three materials, and each has granular or powder form, such that the grain sizes are much smaller than the electromagnetic wavelength propagating in the medium. We wish to match the properties of ingredients in such a way that the effective dielectric permittivity of the composite would be determined by the three components, while its magnetic permeability only by one of them, responsible for the magnetic properties of the mixture. This third ingredient by the assumption should determine the effective permeability of the hypothetical material. Suppose it to be metal magnetic nano-particles (or grains; we shall use these two words interchangeably). We treat these metallic grains as immersed or dispersed in a weakly conducting matrix. If the metallic particles are supposed to be single-domain, then we can take into account only the orientation alignment of their intrinsic magnetic moments and do not need to take into account their induced magnetic moments, as it can be proved (see The magnetic moments of these single-domain nanoparticles at room temperature are randomly distributed and we can describe their behavior in the framework of Langevin theory of paramagnetism. Note that the 'swarm' of magnetic nanoparticles immersed into another medium was already considered in scientific literature and even the term for describing this situation was already coined, namely, superparamagnetism. The point is that such system behaves like a paramagnet, with one notable exception that the independent moments are not that of a single atom, but rather of a single-domain ferromagnetic particle, which may contain more than 10 5 atoms. In the absence of an external magnetic field their magnetic moments are distributed at random, but being placed in magnetic field, magnetic moments of individual grains treated in terms of classical physics start to precess, that is why the frequency range in which Re[μ eff (ω)] is negative, appears in the vicinity of resonance ω 0 ≈ ω, where ω is the frequency of the electromagnetic wave incident of the medium and ω 0 = γH 0 . Here γ -is the gyromagnetic ratio and H 0 -external magnetic field. It turns out, for the composite to become a metamaterial it is important that the sizes of ferromagnetic nanoparticles, their magnetic moments, the relative concentration of the ingredients, Cd-or Sn-content in the semiconductor compounds, the temperature, and the external magnetic field have to have certain definite values. In our previous works it was shown that the mixture composed of a 'swarm' of single-domain ferromagnetic nanoparticles, small metallic particles (Ag, or Al or Cu) and the small semiconductor particles of Hg 1-x Cd x Te, or Pb 1-x Sn x Te) attains double-negative metamaterial properties in the frequency range 10 -100 GHz being placed in an external magnetic field. The reasoning behind this choice of Hg 1-x Cd x Te, or Pb 1-x Sn x Te is the following. The electrical properties of these materials crucially depend on cadmium (the same is about Sn, but for definiteness let speak of Hg 1-x Cd x Te and concentration of cadmium x. If x = 0, that is in case of HgTe, the material is semimetal with energy gap E g < 0, while in case of x = 1 (CdTe) material becomes semiconductor with wide energy gap of about 1.5 eV at 300 K. Thus, changing the concentration of cadmium, one can change the energy gap, and hence the concentration of free electrons. In terms of our model, it means that one can pass smoothly and continuously from Lorentz model for dielectric permittivity, where the electrons are almost tightly bounded to Drude model, where they are almost free to move. As a result, cadmium concentration becomes an important parameter of the model; by means of it-among others-one can control the frequency range where the real part of dielectric permittivity can be made negative and force it to overlap with the frequency domain, where magnetic permeability is negative. Here we use the term 'double-negative' to emphasize the negativity of the real parts of permittivity and permeability,that implies the composite refractive index Re[ñ] is negative Metamaterials may be engineered to exhibit a negative refraction Despite of this, many authors who explore metamaterials often treat them as non-absorbing (see, for instance, In the classical optics of non-absorbing media one often deals with plane periodic electromagnetic waves whose planes of constant phase and amplitude are normal to the wave vector. Such waves were designated by Voight as homogeneous waves. In absorbing media another type of waves appears for which the planes of constant phase and amplitude are no longer parallel; Voight designated them as inhomogeneous waves. It is interesting to note that a relatively small number of papers were devoted to the treatment the reflection and refraction of electromagnetic wave at oblique incidence on the interface between nonabsorbing and absorbing media, among them the papers by There are many papers and textbooks devoted to the propagation of electromagnetic waves in metamaterails (see for example, At the end of Introduction we would like to add some comments concerning terminology we use throughout the paper. Till now there is no unanimity as for this subject is concerned: some authors use the term 'negative group velocity materials', some others prefer the term 'negative phase velocity materials'. This is because the phase velocity and group velocity are directed against each other in case of such materials, and which direction is positive and which is negative is a matter of convention. For that reason we use the term double-negative metamaterial (DNMM) throughout, in order to emphasize that in this case the real parts of dielectric permittivity as well as magnetic permeability are simultaneously negative in some frequency domain. This paper is organized as follows. In section II we discuss the magnetic birefringence and Faraday effect in DNMM, in section III we treat the wave propagation in DNMM and in section IV we derive Fresnel formulae for it while in V we consider the reflectivity and transmittance of the DNMM-films. Metamaterial proposed in where Here and ω 0 = γH 0 , where τ is the magnetic moment relaxation time (see If the wave vector of incident electromagnetic wave aligned arbitrary with respect to external magnetic field, effective permeability is a tensor and the medium is anisotropic. However, if we consider the simplest case when k H 0 , then two circularly polarized waves can propagate in such medium for which the magnetic permeability and hence, the refraction indices are different (one for left-polarized wave, while the other for the right-polarized one). If one introduces the following auxiliary quantities χ ± = χ ± G , then the refraction indices for these two waves are ñ± = ̃ eff μeff,± , where μeff,± and ̃ eff stand for the effective magnetic permeability and effective dielectric permittivity of metamaterial, respectively. The effective dielectric permittivity and magnetic permeability were calculated in the framework of Bruggeman approximation often called the effective medium theory where i , i = 1, 2, 3 are the dielectric permittivities of three ingredients of the mixture f i is the volume filling fraction of the i -th material in the mixture. Obviously, these three quantities in a natural way obey the following additional condition: We calculated the roots of the equation numerically, because they depend on the concentrations of the constituent components of mixture. They were not known beforehand and it was more convenient from computational point of view to solve this equation numerically. Since we consider absorbing medium, we always chosen the root that had positive imaginary part. Since the magnetic permeabilities of two components other than 'swarm' of ferromagnetic nanoparticles, are equal to 1 in wide frequency range, the expression for effective magnetic permeability of the mixture takes more simple form, namely μ eff,± = where It is interesting and worth noting that in this case real part of refraction index is negative only for one of two waves propagating in a medium. The case of arbitrary k-vector alignment with respect to H 0 , is more complicated and will be considered elsewhere. here we simply state that propagation of the electromagnetic wave proceeds with two different phase velocities we conclude that it takes more time for "slower" wave to traverse the plate made of our material. The time delay between the two waves while traversing the plate or slab made of such material, is equal to (d is the slab thickness) For both waves the total revolution of E or H vector lasts for the wave period T = 2π/ω, meaning that the retarded wave (assuming |Re[ñ + ]| > |Re[ñ -]|) arrives at the opposite surface of the slab end with the E -vector revolved at a larger angle than the other E + . The difference in rotation angle is where λ 0 = cT . Note that the rotation of the polarization plane in this case is linearly proportional to the magnetic field parallel to the direction of wave propagation and hence, it is nothing else but the Faraday effect. Having in mind that ñ± = ̃ eff μeff,± and ̃ eff = eff + i eff , μeff,± = μ eff,± + iμ eff,± , where ̃ eff , μeff,± stand for the effective permittivity and permeability of the material we are talking about, we drop henceforth the subscript eff and find the expressions and from which the explicit expressions for Re[ñ + ] and Re[ñ -] follow. Since the functions χ(ω), G(ω) are complex-valued, the absorption of left-polarized and right-polarized waves are a bit different; this different absorption of the right and left circularly polarized light is known as magnetic-cicular dichroism. As a result, the initially linearly polarized wave which is the superposition of left-and right-polarized waves acquires during its propagation within such medium some ellipticity that is, becomes elliptically polarized. Now we consider the process of wave propagation in such material starting from Maxwell equations, in order to study the reflection and refraction on the boundary between two media, the first one is of positive refraction index (PIM) and the other one is double negative metamaterial (DNMM). It should be noted that the optical properties of absorbing materials were considered already by many authors, for example by Born and Wolf in their classical book For studying the wave propagation, reflection and refraction at the boundaries between two media, one of positive refraction index (PIM) and another one, double negative metamaterial (DNMM) one has to inspect the corresponding solutions to the the Maxwell equations. As we mentioned in the previous section, in case of considered metamaterial when the wave vector of incident electromagnetic wave aligned arbitrary with respect to external magnetic field, permeability is a tensor and the medium is anisotropic. However, if we consider the simplest case when k H 0 , one can consider medium as if it would be isotropic with two different values of refractive index for two waves. Keeping this in mind, for a homogeneous, absorbing, isotropic, linear, charge-free magnetic medium one can write down the Maxwell equations as: Here μ is the complex permeability, is the real permittivity and σ stands for the conductivity of the medium. For absorbing media such as metals the wave vector is complex Searching for a plane wave solution one gets: where μ = μ + iμ , ̃ = + iσ/ω = + i and k are now complex numbers. Remembering all the time that material which we consider is birefringent, we nevertheless dropped the subscripts ± in what follows in order to make formulae more readable. At the end of calculations one can simply choose the corresponding subscript + or -. Complex vectors, like in Eq. ( and thus The EM -waves with this property are called non-uniform (or inhomogeneous) EM -waves and of course, they were already considered in the literature and Equations ( The next interesting issue is the reflection and refraction of EM -wave on the boundary between positive refraction index material (PIM) and double-negative metamaterial (DNMM). In where the subscripts i and t correspond to the incident and the refracted waves respectively. Due to the complex refraction index, θ t is also complex and cannot be interpreted simply as a refraction angle. In order to use the complex refraction index, one may resort to ansatz elaborated for the absorbing materials Let the plane of incidence be the x -z plane. Then the space-dependent part of the wave phase in our absorbing material is equal to kr • e t . Here the superscript t stands for 'transiting', that is refracted wave, while the subscripts x and z denote the corresponding components of e t , the unit vector in the direction of the transmitted wave. Then, and we infer As in From Eqs. and for q 2 and γ The obtained Eqs. These are planes with normals making an angle θ t with the normal to the boundary plane Since the amplitude plane is parallel to the boundary, the angle between the vectors e 1 and e 2 (cf. Eq.( As for the possible applications of metamaterials, it is worth mentioning that there are some papers published already, in which the authors proposed to use these materials to construct the waveguides Suppose that the EM wave impinges on the boundary between PIM and DNMM at the side of DNMM. Assume also that DNMM is more optically dense, that is Re [ñ DN M M ] > n P IM . Writing the refraction law in the form n × k i = n × k t where n is the vector normal to a boundary and noting that we infer the expression for the critical angle α i,c (subscript c stands for 'critical'): With Eq.( where and n , n are determined by means of Eq.( Considering the Fresnel formulae for our absorbing DNMM, one may attempt to proceed as Born and Wolf Special attention should be given to the boundary conditions at interfaces, however where σ 1 , σ 2 , σ 3 , f 1 , f 2 , f 3 are the conductivities and the relative concentrations of the ingredients 1,2,3 in the composite, respectively, and σ eff is the effective conductivity of the composite. Generally, the equation roots depend on the relative concentrations of ingredients. For equal concentrations instead of Eq.( For an estimate, suppose that the first ingredient of our mixture is Ag, or Cu or Al (cf. -1 , σ Cu = 58.6 × 10 6 (Ω • m) -1 , and σ Al = 36.69 × 10 6 (Ω • m) -1 . So, assume σ 1 = σ Cu . For iron dioxide (cf. 2 ≈ 5.365 × 10 21 and hence, Q < 0. As a result, three roots of Eq.( where cos φ = - ), and q = -1 4 σ 1 σ 2 σ 3 Thus, only the first root is positive, while the other two are negative and unphysical. The numerical value of first root is about σ ≈ 5.415×10 4 in the last formula one should use the corresponding expression for τ ± ij and χ ± ij . Note also that the information concerning refraction index, reflectivity and transmissivity of absorbing media can be useful for studying the multiple reflections and transmissions in a bi-axial slab sandwiched between two anisotropic media q 1 q 1 q 2 q 3 Fig. As for the Figs. 8-11, we were interested to compare the reflectivity and transmissivity of the film made of metamaterial with these values for dielectric films considered by In this paper we studied the optical characteristics of double-negative metamaterials taking into account the fact that all metamaterials are inevitably absorptive and derived the explicit formulae for total reflection angle as well as correct Fresnel formulae describing the reflection and refraction coefficients for the DNMM in case of TE as well as TM EM wave polarization. The reflectivity and transmittance of DNMM film embedded in the PIM-surrounding are also presented. The values of real parts of and μ were