We propose a mechanism for opening a full bulk energy gap and inducing vortex Majorana zero modes (MZMs) in nodal superconductors (SCs). We show that this becomes possible by coupling the nodal SC of interest to a magnetic texture crystal. The latter consists of superpositions of magnetic textures which repeat periodically in space according to suitable wave vectors that enable spin-flip scattering between all pairs of nodes of the SC, and thus open a full gap in its bulk energy spectrum. In this event, MZMs can be trapped in spin or shift vortices introduced in the magnetic texture crystal. Our approach is generic and applies to nodal SCs of spin-singlet, -triplet, or -mixed type of pairing. Therefore, it promises to find application in a variety of nodal SCs, where the magnetic textures appear either spontaneously due to electron-electron interactions, or are imposed by nanomagnets, or become induced by coupling to a lattice of localized magnetic moments. The experimental study of bound states in superconductors (SCs) has recently witnessed a reheated interest. This came after a series of pioneering theory proposals which designated a plethora of pathways to induce non-Abelian anyons in both intrinsic 1-6 and engineered It has been theoretically demonstrated that MZMs can be trapped at various types of 0D defects 1-7, An additional crucial feature that a MZM platform is required to possess in order for its arising MZMs to be robust and long-lived, is to be characterized by a fullygapped bulk energy spectrum. In order to meet this stringent requirement, the vast majority of the abovementioned proposals have relied on the presence of a gapful pairing gap, i.e., of the s-and p x + ip y types. Concomitantly, this constraint has also almost exclusively discouraged the pursuit of vortex MZMs in an equally abundant class of SCs, namely the nodal SCs In this Article, we show that MZMs become accessible in nodal SCs which are under the influence of magnetic texture crystals (MTCs). The MTC is exchangecoupled to the spin of the electrons of the nodal SC and can be either driven by an attractive interaction in the magnetic channel, or, imposed externally to the system. MTCs recently got in the spotlight of both theoretical and experimental Within our proposal, MZMs can be trapped in spin 1. (a) Typical bulk energy spectrum for a nodal superconductor discussed here. The nodes come in pairs, and the n-th pair is dictated by opposite momenta ±kn and spin projections ↑, ↓. Thus, the nodes of a given pair carry the same helicity ζ = ±1 ({⊗, }). The nodes are assumed to be subsequently gapped out by the presence of a magnetic helix/stripe texture with a wave vector Qn, which may either appear spontaneously due to interactions or be externally imposed. (b) Sketch of a magnetic helix crystal with a spatial profile M ∼ cos[Q • r + η(r)] ẑ + sin[Q • r + η(r)] x. The wave vector is chosen as Q = (2π/3, 0). The texture additionally contains a discrete shift defect with vorticity υ shift = C ∆η/2π = 1. or shift vortices induced in the MTC. In fact, our topological analysis proves that MZMs appear in vortices of the MTC only when the underlying SC is nodal. Our theory applies to generic nodal SCs with spin-singlet,triplet or -mixed Our upcoming analysis provides a detailed study of the various topological scenarios that become possible in both 2D and 3D nodal SCs, for all the Majorana symmetry classes, i.e., BDI, D, and DIII. This is achieved by first constructing the topological invariant quantities which predict the emergence of Majorana quasiparticles in two fundamental situations, with these concerning systems belonging to class BDI in 2D and to class D in 3D. Notably, as we discuss here, nodal SCs coupled to MTCs which belong to class D harbor chiral vortex Majorana modes in 3D. Even more remarkably, we demonstrate that, despite the fact that MTCs break the standard TR symmetry (T ), symmetry class DIII SCs and Majorana Kramers pair solutions are still accessible in both 2D and 3D when a generalized TR symmetry Θ with Θ 2 = -1 appears The remainder of this manuscript is organized as follows. Section II contains the details of our theoretical model and sets the stage for our upcoming analysis. Section III gives an account of the various types of topological phases and Majorana excitations which become accessible. In Sec. IV we derive a low-energy model which describes the physics stemming from the nodes of the SC. Based on this low-energy mode, we proceed in Sec. V with the construction of the topological invariant for a class BDI system in 2D, which predicts the emergence of multiple vortex MZMs protected by chiral symmetry. Section VI presents a series of numerical investigations of BDI, D, and DIII models in 2D. In Sec. VII we focus on 3D systems and, in particular, we construct the topological invariant for the class D case. Section VIII present numerical results for the emergence of chiral vortex Majorana modes. Section IX gives an account of possible routes to experimentally realize our proposal, while Sec. X concludes this work with a summary and outlook. To model the physical situations of interest in a general manner, we employ the Hamiltonian operator: which acts in the basis defined by the Nambu spinor: Here, ψ ↑,↓ (r) annihilates an electron at position r with the spin projection indicated, while p = -i∇ with = 1. In 3D coordinate space, we define r = (x, y, z), tan φ = y/x, cos θ = z/r, r = ρ 2 + z 2 and ρ = x 2 + y 2 . The matrix Ĥ( p, r) defines the Bogoliubov -de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian operator: and is represented using the τ (σ) Pauli matrices defined in Nambu (spin) spaces, supplemented with the respective unit matrix 1 τ (1 σ ). For simplicity, we omit writing unit matrices throughout from now on. In the above, we consider that the two contributing magnetization terms always feature orthogonal orientations in spin space, i.e., their orientation vectors satisfy ên • ê n = 0 for all n. The nonmagnetic part of the BdG Hamiltonian takes the general form: where the appearing terms satisfy the relations: The above properties imply that Ĥ0 ( p) is invariant under translations and z-axis spin rotations, associated with the phases η n (r) and angles ω n (r), respectively. Vortices can be independently introduced in all ω n angles and η n phases, at the same or different positions. For a shift [spin] vortex defect with vorticity υ shift [υ spin ] we set η(r) = υ shift φ [ω(r) = υ spin φ]. In Fig. To infer the emergence of Majorana quasiparticles in our model, we employ standard classification methods, cf Refs. The relevant Majorana symmetry class, i.e., BDI, D or DIII, is inferred in the presence of the defect-containing variables. The effective classification dimension δ is obtained by the spatial dimensionality of the system d, after subtracting the dimension of the surface that can enclose the defect, i.e., here δ = d -1 since a circle S 1 can enclose a vortex. To construct the topological invariants, we view φ as a synthetic momentum which extends the base space to (k, φ). Based on the tenfold classification tables Similar to Ref. To simplify our upcoming analysis, we momentarily drop the terms ∆ s,p ( p) from the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Since {ε t (-k), ∆ t (-k)} = -{ε t (k), ∆ t (k)} we find that nodes at opposite momenta ±k n carry opposite spins σ z = ±1, i.e., possess the same helicity. See Fig. We now expand the Hamiltonian about the n-th pair of nodes by setting k ≈ ±k n + q with |q| |k n |. By introducing the ρ Pauli matrices in {k n , -k n } nodes space, the defect-free Hamiltonian in the vicinity of ±k n reads: ) where we used the shorthand expressions for f = ε, ∆: The nonmagnetic part of Eq. ( where we introduced: For M n = M n = 0, one defines the four states |ρ z = ±1; σ z = ±1 in ρ ⊗ σ space. Two of these give rise to the pair of nodes at ±k n , while the remaining two lie energetically away from zero. These two pairs of states can be distinguished by their helicity eigenvalue ζ = ρ z σ z = ±1. Hence, to obtain a Hamiltonian describing only the states related to the nodes, we project Eq. ( and end up with the following effective Hamiltonian for the n-th pair of nodes: where we introduced the velocities: along with the parameters: which quantify the influence of the MTC on the given pair of nodes. The unit 1 λ and Pauli λ matrices act in a given helicity subspace. The choice of basis for both ζ = ±1 is such, so that the spin Pauli matrix σ z coincides with λ z . Note that the terms ên • ẑ and ê n • ẑ drop out after the projection. Projecting the operator generating the vortices yields: Notably, the emergence of MZMs is guaranteed by the structure of Eqs. ( In this paragraph we prove in a detailed fashion that MZMs become accessible in the model of Eq. ( , in a basis where the latter is block off-diagonal. The winding number is defined as: Tr ĥ-1 ζ (q, φ) ∂ qx ĥζ (q, φ) where we momentarily drop the (n) index for simplicity. Using the relation ĥζ ĥ and the cyclic property of the trace, we find the equivalent expression: Since the following relation also holds: the winding number obtains the simplified form: where we introduced the shorthand notation: for the differential operator defining vorticity in q space. The above expression is nonzero even in the limit of a vanishing strength for the MTC, in which case, ĥ(q, φ = 0) → ĥ0 (q). When [ L, ĥ0 (q)] = 0, we evaluate the trace by introducing the eigenstates of L, in which basis, ĥ0 (q) is block diagonal. Hence, by further making use of: and taking into account that the upper off-diagonal block ĥ(n) 0;ζ (q) of Ĥ(n) 0;ζ (q) commutes with L(n) , we obtain: where we employed the eigenstates |λ of L(n) ζ , which here coincide with the eigenstates of λ z = ±1. In addition, we accordingly restricted the trace Tr, to a trace tr over the remaining degrees of freedom. By now making use of the identity tr ln ĥ(n) 0;ζ,λ (q) = ln det ĥ(n) 0;ζ,λ (q) , we write: The above implies that Eq. ( ζ,λ (q) contain q-space vortex defects, i.e., only when the underlying SC contains point nodes. The node with helicity ζ and z-axis spin projection σ z = ±1, carries vorticity υ , which is defined through the relation: and leads to the expression: To evaluate the above, it is required to determine the vorticities of the nodes. For this purpose, we consider the unitary transformation (Π + τ z )/ √ 2 onto the projected Hamiltonians, and obtain the upper off-diagonal blocks: ĥ We use the eigenstates of λ z → λ = ±1 and diagonalize ĥ(n) 0;ζ (q) as h ∆,ζ = 0, the vorticities of the nodes at q = 0 are opposite and of a single unit, hence, they satisfy υ Under the above conditions, we obtain our main result: which implies that both spin and shift vortex defects can independently induce a Z number of MZMs. Notably, the number of MZMs arising due to the simultaneous emergence of shift and spin vortices at the same position in coordinate space, are obtained by adding (for ζ = 1) or subtracting (for ζ = -1) the number of MZMs that would independently arise for each different type of defect. In this section we numerically verify our above predictions for a variety of models in symmetry classes BDI, D, and DIII. Our starting point for all these investigations is the lattice model defined by the following functions: In the absence of magnetism and for a suitable window of parameters, this model supports a nodal energy spectrum of the form depicted in Fig. We begin with the study of MZMs in a BDI class model in 2D. We consider that the two pairs of nodes emerging in the energy spectrum of the model in Eq. ( In accordance with the analytical predictions of Eq. ( We remark that the vortex MZM and the MFB do not couple since their wave functions have negligible spatial overlap. Panels (b) and (c) of Fig. Furthermore, in Fig. the defect, and two more near the edge. This becomes further transparent from Fig. The two MZMs comprising the MZM pair appearing at the core of the composite spin-shift vortex with {υ shift , υ spin } = {1, -1} do not couple to each other by virtue of the chiral symmetry which dictates the system. Notably, multiple uncoupled MZMs trapped at the core of the vortex are also expected to appear for a single shift/spin vortex when this carries a higher value of vorticity. To further verify this prediction, we study various cases numerically, by implementing the same lattice Hamiltonian defined by Eq. ( The result of Eq. ( For a full Hamiltonian belonging to class D instead, solely the parity of the winding number (-1) w (n) 3;ζ ∈ Z 2 is well defined, and allows for only up to a single MZM to be trapped at the core of a vortex defect. The above conclusions further imply that particular caution needs to be paid on the possible node degeneracies which can trivialize the Z 2 invariant. This takes place, for instance, when only ε s (k) and ∆ s (k) enter Ĥ0 (k). In this case, both helicities contribute, i.e., We now proceed with scenarios where a symmetry class transition BDI → D takes place by explicitly breaking the chiral symmetry of Eq. ( 3;ζ which can protect MZMs. This is confirmed in Fig. 3;ζ = 1, ultimately resulting into the hybridization of the MZMs, thus lifting them away from zero energy. In stark contrast, if we have an odd number of MZMs, i.e. (-1) w (n) 3;ζ = -1, a single pair of MZM persists in the presence of a magnetic field in z direction, as seen in Figs. Despite the fact that MTCs break the standard time reversal (T ) symmetry, Majorana Kramers pairs are still accessible when a generalized TR symmetry Θ with Θ 2 = -1 appears instead Such a symmetry emerges in the previously examined models when we consider, for instance, two bands labelled by a and b. After introducing the κ Pauli matrices in band space, the MTC terms contributing to the BdG Hamiltonian get promoted to matrices in band space, allowing for intra-and inter-band magnetic scattering terms proportional to 1 κ , κ z and κ x , respectively. In the remainder, we consider solely intraband magnetic scattering, with the magnetic texture term being proportional to κ z . Hence, the two bands feel opposite contributions from the MTCs. After considering that the two bands are dictated by identical nonmagnetic terms given by Eq. ( Since the above bands are completely decoupled, they yield pairs of Majorana solutions in the defect's core. Specifically, we find that the pair of MZMs is protected by the time-reversal symmetry Θ = κ x T . Notably, the above Hamiltonian possesses an additional U(1) symmetry with generator κ z , which enlists the present system in class BDI⊕BDI, instead of DIII. Hence, in order to obtain true Majorana Kramers pairs protected by Θ it is required to include band mixing terms which are simultaneously invariant under the action of Θ. In order to numerically study class DIII models in 2D, we consider the lattice extension of the two band Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Our numerics confirm the emergence of a MZM Kramers pair when considering a single shift/spin vortex defect, as seen in Fig. Similarly to the BDI models in 2D, we can also here reduce the symmetry of the system by adding a homogeneous external magnetic field. In Fig. To this end, we clarify that while Θ appears to be a fine-tuned symmetry which crucially depends on the here-assumed structure of the MTC, it may actually constitute a robust symmetry in realistic materials. This is for instance the case when the MTC develops spontaneously due to interactions. In such a scenario, a MTC changing sign on the two bands which is self-generated by the electrons of the SC is expected to be thermodynamically stable, since its emergence leads to a global minimum of the free energy the system. Having examined 2D systems in detail, we now proceed with exploring topological scenarios in 3D. Based on our topological analysis in Sec. III, 3D allows for two possibilities. Chiral/helical Majorana edge modes dispersing along a vortex line arising from a class D/DIII Hamiltonian. The construction of a class DIII Hamiltonian is possible by putting together two class D Hamiltonians following the prescription of the previous section. Since DIII class systems can be understood using an even number of class D copies, in the remainder we focus on the topological aspects of a single class D Hamiltonian. The emergence of a chiral vortex Majorana mode is now predicted by a second Chern number C 2 which is defined in 4D (q x , q y , φ, q z ) ≡ (p 1 , p 2 , p 3 , p 4 ) space and it is given by the following expression: 58 with nm s denoting the fully-antisymmetric tensor, where n, m, , s = 1, 2, 3, 4. We also note that repeated index summation was employed. The above formula is given in terms of the non-Abelian field strength tensor: which is defined in terms of the Berry vector potential: which is a matrix in the occupied eigenstates |Φ α (p) subspace, which are enumerated by the index α. The second Chern number can be equivalently expressed as a surface integral over the Chern-Simons 3 form. Here, we choose a surface S = S 2 × T 1 which contains a S 2 sphere in q space. We thus find: with n, m, = 1, 2, 3. When the following holds: Ĥ(q, φ) = e iφ L/2 Ĥ(q, φ = 0)e -iφ L/2 , ( we find the relation: |Φ(q, φ) = e iφ L/2 |Φ(q, φ = 0) , which implies Âq (q, φ) = Âq (q, φ = 0) and The above lead to the simplified expression: where we introduced the matrix Berry curvature Ω(q, φ = 0). The second Chern number is here generally nonzero also for a vanishing MTC strength. Under the assumption [ L, Ĥ0 (q)] = 0, we evaluate the trace by introducing the eigenstates of L, i.e. L |λ = υ defect λ |λ , in which basis, Ĥ0 (q) and the respective Berry curvature matrix Ω0 (q) of the nonmagnetic system are block diagonal. Thus, we conclude with the expression: with the trace acting in a given λ block. Under the assumption that the SCs under examination possess a zero first Chern number, the second Chern number above becomes nonzero only in the presence of monopoles in the Berry curvature of the SC. These monopoles correspond to q-space nodes in 3D space, which carry a topological charge defined through tr Ω0;λ (q) = Q λ q/(2|q| 3 ). For a 2 × 2 λ block, these monopoles define Weyl points, which carry a topological charge given by: From the above relation, we obtain the conclusive expression for the invariant, which takes the following form: with ζ,λ defining the monopole charge for the nodes of the n-th pair with helicity ζ and z-axis spin projection λ = ±1. The topological invariant C 2 obtained in the previous paragraph predicts the number of chiral Majorana modes emerging in the core of a vortex line. We first pursue gaining insight regarding the emergence of such dispersive chiral vortex Majorana modes using the following simple continuum model: which constitutes an anisotropic p-wave SC variant of the model in Eq. ( chiral Majorana modes emerge in a vortex line extending along the z axis. We now provide a numerical investigation of the above class D model in 3D, after considering a proper lattice extension. For this purpose, we consider that the bare Hamiltonian of Eq. ( and consists of the anisotropic 3D dispersion: in the additional presence of the anisotropic SOC term ε t (k) = α sin k y , and the chiral p-wave pairing which is defined in terms of the components: We consider the limit Λ t, in which, the pairs of nodes in the nonmagnetic phase are located only in the k z = 0 plane. After including the magnetic terms of the Hamiltonian and considering a vortex line which extends uniformly along the z axis, we observe that k z is a good quantum number since tan φ = y/x. In fact, for small k z , we can linearize the above Hamiltonian and see that for k z = 0 it possesses a chiral symmetry with Π = τ y σ z similar to the model of Eq. ( Away from k z = 0 the chiral symmetry is broken, lifting the states away from zero energy, ultimately resulting into dispersive chiral Majorana modes, as seen Fig. We now proceed with the discussion of potential candidate systems and mechanisms that may allow observing our theoretical predictions in realistic systems. As mentioned above, nodal superconducting materials are abundant in nature The first possibility is to actually impose the desired MTC externally with the help of tunable magnets. Such a direction has recently picked up substantial theoretical Another possibility is the interaction-driven MTCs, which can become stabilized in the presence of attractive interactions in the magnetic channel, in order to minimize the free energy of the system. In analogy to 1D spin-density waves 101 , which are promoted by the perfect nesting of the two points comprising the Fermi surface, here we expect a MTC to spontaneously appear and gap out the nodes. This is under the condition that other competing instabilities are subdominant to the MTC. The tendency of the system towards the spontaneous development of a magnetic helix crystal which gaps out a single pair of nodes can be here inferred by evaluating the respective spin susceptibility. In fact, the latter can be calculated using the low-energy model of Eq. (14). For this purpose, we restrict to the n-th pair of nodes and consider a magnetic helix crystal with projected components ζ;y , 0 . Moreover, we assume that the magnetic helix crystal is governed by a periodicity given by a wave vector which is equal to the wave vector 2k n connecting the nodes of the pair of interest. We note that, when the wave vector of the magnetic helix matches the one connecting the nodes, a gap opens on these with an infinitesimally weak strength of |M Nonetheless, a full gap is accessible also for detuned wave vectors, but in that event, a threshold strength of |M has to be reached. In the following, we restrict to the ideal scenario of perfectly matched wave vectors, since this is the configuration that yields the highest susceptibility and thus minimizes the free energy of the system. In the upcoming analysis, we suppress the (n) index from the various variables to simplify the notation. Since in the absence of magnetism the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( By transferring to polar coordinates q = q cos γ, sin γ , and after introducing a cutoff wavenumber q c , we end up with the expression: where we introduced the density of states ν c = q c / 2π ῡ which depends on the cutoff q c and the average velocity The final outcome for χ is decided by the precise values of the pa- encodes the velocity mismatch, and the relative angle γ 0 = γ ε -γ ∆ , which is defined in terms of the orientation angles γ ε,∆ given by υ We note that the final form of Eq. ( From Eq. ( Out of the various candidates mentioned earlier, Fe-SCs can support nodal phases, exhibit single-and double-Q magnetic stripe order The last possible physical realization of our theory relies on nodal SCs coupled with lattices of localized magnetic moments. Here, the MTC required for gapping out the nodes of the SC is considered to result from the magnetization of the localized moments. This third mechanism that we propose for engineering MZMs bears similarities to the ones proposed In a similar fashion to proposals for self-organized MZM platforms using magnetic adatom chains where the indices n, m label the impurity lattices sites R n,m , while α, β = x, y, z label the spin components of the moments. J denotes the strength of the magnetic exchange coupling between the moment and the electron spin. For a homogeneous nodal SC of a spatial dimension d, the spin susceptibility depends only on the difference R = R n -R m of the position vectors of the coupled magnetic moments and is defined by the expression: where we introduced the bare matrix Green function: with its momentum space counterpart being defined through: Ĝ-1 0 ( , k) = i -Ĥ0 (k), where Ĥ0 (k) is given by Eq. ( To further elaborate on this aspect, we explore a concrete example for a nodal SC with two pairs of nodes. Specifically, we consider the d = 2 model with υ ∆ > 0: which is obtained by means of dimensional reduction of the 3D model described in Eq. ( We now proceed with the evaluation of the spin susceptibility. For this purpose, we also consider a semiclassical approach in which k F is substantial, thus allowing to approximate the kinetic energy as ε(k y ) ≈ ±υ F k y ∓ k F , with the latter being expanded about the two Fermi points k y = ±k F with υ F = k F /m. Moreover, due to the presence of the strong anisotropy, it is preferrable to integrate over the k x variable first. Since the integrand peaks at k x = 0, we can safely consider that the integration is over (-∞, +∞), without worrying about the possible necessity to introduce a cutoff. In this case, employing standard residue theory provides: Ĝα=0 By now exploiting the assumed semiclassical limit, we introduce the variable ξ = ±υ F (k y ∓ k F ) which allows us to carry out the substitution k y = ±(k F + ξ/υ F ). After taking the limit k F → ∞, we obtain for X, Y = 0: Ĝα=0 By further restricting to situations where |X| is small with Θ = |X/Y | 1, we manage to obtain approximate closed-form expressions by replacing the exponential term Exp -ξ 2 + 2 |X|/υ ∆ ) by its factorized form Exp(-|ξ||X|/υ ∆ )Exp(-| ||X|/υ ∆ ) when evaluating the term ∝ τ x σ z , and by completely discarding it when evaluating the remaining two terms. These approximations lead to the expression: With the Green function at hand, we now determine the elements of the spin-susceptibility tensor. We find that for α = 0, the only nonzero elements are , which consist of the three non-negative contributions presented below: After the evaluation of ́+∞ -∞ du u 2 K 2 0 (|u|) = π 2 /16 and ́+∞ -∞ du u 2 K 2 1 (|u|) = 3π 2 /16, we find the following result: From the above, we conclude that when α = 0 and two magnetic moments are placed along a line which is parallel to the y direction, the RKKY coupling is spinisotropic since Θ = 0. This is to be expected since, in this case, the k x = 0 momentum is involved in the calculation of the Green function, which coincides with the line, along which, the pairs of nodes appear for the Hamiltonian of Eq. ( Let us now consider the effects of nonzero α which implies that the Rashba SOC in non-negligible. For a perfectly ordered array of localized magnetic moments with a spacing |Y | in the y direction, we find that the z axis susceptibility is unaltered and the components χ xz,zy remain zero. Nonetheless, there is now a modification of the strengths of the in plane susceptibilities. In addition to the above, the inplane off diagonal elements χ xy (R) = -χ yx (R) become now nonzero. These results are reflected in the expressions: Notably, a similar susceptibility structure has been discussed previously in Ref. 122 in connection to MZM platforms with magnetic chains. Here, the obtained spinsusceptibility transforms the emergent in plane FM order into an inplane magnetic helix texture, while it leaves the out-plane AFM order unaffected. Since the z components of the magnetization become projected out in the lowenergy model of Eq. ( We provide a novel pathway to engineer Majorana zero modes (MZMs), which relies on nodal superconductors (SCs) and at the same time does not require the presence of superconducting vortices. In contrast, we show that MZMs become accessible in nodal SCs which are under the influence of magnetic texture crystals (MTCs). At this point, we wish to clarify that our approach is distinct to Refs. 48, 125-129. There, isolated magnetic skyrmions, and not crystals as we consider here, have been employed as smooth defects which pin various types of bound states in fully-gapped SCs, these including MZMs Our analysis provides a detailed study of various topological scenarios in both 2D and 3D nodal SCs, which cover all three Majorana symmetry classes, i.e., BDI, D, and DIII. We present in detail the construction for two topological invariant quantities, which predict vortex MZMs in class BDI in 2D and chiral Majorana modes in class D in 3D. Topological invariants for the remaining cases can be constructed using these two fundamental invariants. Even more, we show how to render Majorana Kramers pair solutions still accessible, in spite of the violation of the standard time-reversal symmetry by the MTC. As an example we discuss a two-band model in 2D which harbors a single vortex Kramers pair of MZMs in 2D. Our analytical approach and predictions based on the various topological invariants are backed by our numerical simulations on the lattice. The last part of our investigation concerns the experimental realization of our proposals in connection to intrinsic nodal SCs. We discuss the following three different possible paths to engineer the required MTCs and concomitant vortex MZMs: (i) MTCs which are engineered using nanomagnets, (ii) MTCs that arise spontaneously by virtue of the interactions dictating the electrons of the SC, and (iii) MTCs which are harbored by a lattice of localized magnetic moments which are exchange-coupled to the nodal SC. We provide insight in the above possibilities and discuss their advantages and possible limitations. Regarding the stabilization of vortices in MTCs, we note that certain types of topological defects in MTCs, e.g., disclinations Apart from quantum materials, our idea may also be relevant for artificial platforms, such as a 2D electron gas (2DEG) in proximity to a conventional SC with strong Rashba SOC. Here, one wishes to harness the proximity effect to induce a mixed-spin type nodal pairing term in the 2DEG. This appears particularly promising for superconductor-semiconductor devices for which a strong debate has been raised recently N. Read and D. Green, Paired States of Fermions in Two dimensions with Breaking of Parity and Time-Reversal Symmetries, and the Fractional Quantum Hall Effect,