Despite often being dismissively described as exhibiting conventional Fermi-liquid-like behaviour, heavily overdoped high-Tc cuprates sport several unexpected features. Thermodynamic properties expected to be roughly constant with doping decrease towards zero, signalling that a growing fraction of carriers remain in the normal state below Tc. Near Tc, the superconducting energy gap fills in with temperature, contrary to the expectations of BCS theory. Most recently a transition in the Hall number of some cuprates was found to extend to a very high doping (x ≈ 0.27), far beyond the pseudogap critical point identified by a peak in thermodynamic properties (x = 0.19). This presents a challenge to the view that the pseudogap is a consequence of Fermi surface reconstruction. In this paper we present a consistent explanation for all these observations by combining pair-breaking scattering with a Fermi surface reconstruction model for the pseudogap. Notably, an increase in pair-breaking with doping leads to a separation of the points where reconstruction begins and the thermodynamic properties peak. This result highlights pair-breaking as an essential ingredient in the electronic recipe for heavily overdoped cuprate superconductors. The underdoped regime of the cuprate phase diagram is frequently explored because of its rich selection of exotic phenomena, including the pseudogap As doping, x, increases towards the edge of the superconducting phase where T c (x) → 0: i) A growing fraction of carriers in the ground state remain normal (i.e. they do not join the condensate). This is evidenced by specific heat Can these observations be reconciled? i), ii) and iii) can be linked by pair-breaking, but iv) presents a challenge to ii). Namely, if the pseudogap were to close at a higher doping, as suggested by the Hall number, then we would expect the specific heat jump and superfluid density to increase up to that point. In this paper we will show that the opposite is in fact possible. Our hypothesis is that pair-breaking is the dominant factor in the overdoped regime. We will address the Hall number first before continuing to the specific heat and superfluid density. In 2016 the author showed that Fermi surface reconstruction models involving nodal hole-like pockets and antinodal electron-like pockets would result in a transition in the Hall number from 1 + x to x 42 . One of these models, proposed by Yang, Rice and Zhang (YRZ) The present study is motivated in part by recent measurements of the Hall number on Tl 2 Ba 2 CuO 6+δ (Tl2201) and Pb/La-doped Bi 2 Sr 2 CuO 6+δ (Bi2201) But there is a problem. In the case of Tl2201 x = 0.27 is far beyond the pseudogap critical point as inferred from measurements of superfluid density (≈ 0.19) In cuprates that can be overdoped to the edge of the superconducting dome the jump in specific heat coefficient at T c , δγ(T c ), decreases with doping, and the residual term at low temperatures, γ(0), increases. Examples include Tl2201 In this section we will analyse the specific heat of Tl2201 using the two-lifetime phenomenological selfenergy proposed by Norman et al. 65 Γ single is a single-particle scattering rate and Γ pair is a pair-breaking scattering rate. The method is the same as used previously on optimally-doped Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ (Bi2212) So a T -and x-dependent Γ pair accounts for points i), ii) and iii) in the introduction. Can the pseudogap open under these circumstances, thereby reconciling point iv)? To answer this question we incorporate the self energy (1) into the YRZ Green's function as follows where, following ref. 42, we have dropped the xdependent Gutzwiller prefactor. E ± k are the upper and lower branches of the YRZ-reconstructed dispersion, and W ± k are corresponding the weight factors is the tight-binding energy-momentum dispersion and ξ 0 k = -2t(x)(cos k x + cos k y ) is the nearest-neighbour term. The tight-binding coefficients are the same as before δ(T ) is the normalised d-wave BCS temperature dependence. The pseudogap magnitude E g (x) and chemical potential μ p (x) are taken from the Hall number calculations in the previous section. We also adopt a superconducting gap given by ∆(x) = 0.07t 0 [1.0 -45.6(x -0.16) 2 ] (shown in fig. where the spectral function A(k, ω) = π -1 ImG(k, ω). Finally, the electronic specific heat coefficient γ(T ) is calculated in the usual way from The density of states is plotted in fig. The resulting temperature-dependent specific heat coefficient is plotted in fig. In the absence of the pseudogap and pair-breaking we expect the superfluid density (proportional to the inverse square of the penetration depth) to scale with the normal-state carrier density. But according to muon-spin rotation experiments on Tl2201 Like the specific heat, we will analyse the superfluid density of LSCO using the two-lifetime model (1). Again, the approach is the same as used previously for optimallydoped Bi2212 66 , and involves making a choice for the ∆(T ) and then finding the Γ pair (T ) that reproduces the data. A selection of T -dependent superfluid density curves for overdoped LSCO fluctuations. Figure Following the same pattern as the previous section, we will now see if it is possible for the pseudogap to open below x = 0.27 while ρ s (0) increases. We insert the self energy (1) into the YRZ anomalous Green's function F as follows Again for simplicity Γ single is set to a negligible value, = 0.001t 0 . Generalizing the expression for the superfluid density where B ± (k, ω) = π -1 ImF ± (k, ω) and the group velocities of each branch are v ± x = ∂E ± k /∂k x . Figure In this section we discuss the findings and pose some questions for future investigation. We have analysed the specific heat and superfluid density data of overdoped cuprates using an ansatz for the self energy, focussing on the effect of the pair-breaking scattering rate Γ pair . From this we have deduced that Γ pair increases with doping beyond x ∼ 0.2. This is responsible for the decrease in zero-T superfluid density and specific heat jump at T c , as well as the increase in residual specific heat. The divergence of Γ pair near T c reproduces the smooth tails associated with fluctuations. What is the origin of Γ pair ? Assuming that pair-breaking at T = 0 and near T c a common origin, then the interactions that give rise to pair-breaking become gapped below the pairing temperature T p . At low temperature, the interactions become less gapped in the strongly overdoped regime, which coincides with a weakening of the pairing strength and reduction in superconducting gap magnitude. A possible candidate for these interactions is the spin fluctuation spectrum. Inelastic neutron scattering studies show a suppression of antiferromagnetic spectral weight with overdoping By inserting Γ pair into the YRZ model we have shown that it is possible for Fermi surface reconstruction to begin far beyond the doping at which the thermodynamic properties peak. This reconciles the seemingly conflict-ing observations in Tl2201 of a decreasing Hall number, below x = 0.27, and an increasing δγ(T c ) & ρ s (0). At the onset of the reconstruction the pseudogap only affects a small number of occupied states below the superconducting gap edge, and so the thermodynamic properties are governed by pair-breaking. Near 0.19 where Γ pair is small, the growing pseudogap spans the Fermi level, becoming the dominant influence and weakening superconducting properties. It is here that the antinodal electron-like pockets lift away from the Fermi surface. Could Γ pair be linked to these pockets? Though perhaps coincidental, it's interesting to note that residual specific heat increases near 1/8th doping Observing the electron pockets directly will be difficult because only one side has appreciable spectral weight. Figure What triggers the Fermi surface reconstruction? The onset doesn't appear to be universal. In YBCO it is near 0.19 Looking across the phase diagram, the following summary can be made. In the underdoped regime there is a loss of normal states. The superconducting gap is large but it is truncated by a small Fermi surface. Pairbreaking is small. In the overdoped regime some states are normal below T c . The Fermi surface is large but the superconducting gap is small. Pair-breaking here plays a significant role.