Surface electronic structures of the photoelectrodes determine the activity and efficiency of the photoelectrochemical water splitting, but the controls of their surface structures and interfacial chemical reactions remain challenging. Here, we use ferroelectric BiFeO 3 as a model system to demonstrate an efficient and controllable water splitting reaction by large-area constructing the hydroxylsbonded surface. The up-shift of band edge positions at this surface enables and enhances the interfacial holes and electrons transfer through the hydroxyl-activesites, leading to simultaneously enhanced oxygen and hydrogen evolutions. Furthermore, printing of ferroelectric super-domains with microscale checkboard up/down electric fields separates the distribution of reduction/oxidation catalytic sites, enhancing the charge separation and giving rise to an order of magnitude increase of the photocurrent. This large-area printable ferroelectric surface and super-domains offer an alternative platform for controllable and high-efficient photocatalysis. Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting, which converts sustainable solar energy into green hydrogen fuel, provides a promising solution for the energy crisis and environmental pollution Ferroelectric semiconductors with switchable polarization provide an effective platform to control the surface/interface structures Polarization-dependent H 2 /O 2 evolution. Epitaxial BFO thin films were grown on (001) SrTiO3 (STO) substrates with conductive (La,Sr)MnO3 (LSMO) layer for PEC measurement. In this work, the thickness of the BFO thin films is 50 nm, which leads to a pronounced photocurrent density due to the carrier diffusion length 32 . The detailed growth, piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) and PEC measurements can be seen in Supporting Information. Fig. Reconstruction of surface chemical structure of the photoelectrode may increase the energy bands offset and thus facilitate charge transfer across the photoelectrode/electrolyte interface Interestingly, the BFO-OH photoelectrodes with high photo-stability (Supporting Figure A low charge transfer resistance in the Nyquist plot of the BFO-OH (Fig. implies a new process for electrons/holes transfer across the interface, which may benefit from a reconstructed surface electronic structure in the BFO-OH (no morphology changes before and after the hydroxyl modification, Supporting Figure The surface electronic structure of the BFO-OH was characterized by scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) 