Impact of the Corona, dielectric barrier discharge and low pressure radiofrequency air plasmas on the wettability of the medical grade polyvinylchloride was investigated. Corona plasma treatment exerted the most pronounced increase in the hydrophilization of polyvinylchloride. The specific energy of adhesion of the pristine and plasma treated PVC tubing is reported. The kinetics of hydrophobic recovery following the plasma treatment was explored. The time evolution of the apparent contact angle under the hydrophobic recovery is satisfactorily described by the exponential fitting. Energydispersive X-ray spectroscopy of the chemical composition of the near-surface layers of the plasma treated catheters revealed their oxidation. The effect of the hydrophobic recovery is hardly correlated with oxidation of the polymer surface, which is irreversible. A diversity of engineering applications calls for the modification of the surface properties of industrial polymer materials, including their adhesion and wettability. These applications include packaging, protective coatings, adhesives, textile, printing, etc. In the fields of medicine and biotechnology many products such as catheters and medical implants are completely or partly made of polymers. In contact with biological systems, compatibility of these materials is not always specified. Medical applications often demand modification of the properties of polymer surfaces. Plasma techniques supply an appropriate tool for the generation of the demanded surface properties. PVC CH18 suction catheters (diameter 6 mm, length 53 cm), supplied by Unomedical ConvaTec Lim. UK, were plasma treated in our experiments. For the purposes of the goniometric measurements of wettability the catheters were flattened under t = 80 0 C to and pressure of 1kPa during 40 min, followed by the cooling to ambient conditions during 1 hour. The de-ionized water, used for the study of wettability of catheters, was purified by a synergy UV water purification system from Millipore SAS (France) and its specific resistivity was ρ ̂= 18.2MΩ × cm at 25oC. Corona plasma device (3DT, MULTIDYNE 1000, Germantown, WI, USA) consisted of a treating head that contained two hook-shaped wire electrodes. The plasma was generated under high voltage at electrode 2 × 12 kV and a frequency of 50 Hz at atmospheric pressure conditions, using ambient air as a carrier gas. The distance between the electrode and the flattened catheter was 2±0.1cm. The parameters of an air low pressure radiofrequency plasma discharge were: the plasma frequency was 13.56 MHz; the power was 18 W; the pressure was 2 Torr; the times of irradiation were varied: 10, 20, 30 s; the volume of the discharge chamber was 840 cm The diffuse coplanar surface barrier discharge was created by the DBD plasma unit RPS 40, supplied by Roplass, Brno Czech Pepublic; the naximal power 40 W, frequency ~ 20 KHz. The distance between the electrode and the flattened catheter was 0.5mm. The time span of the plasma treatment was varied within 15-60 s. Apparent contact angles were established using the Ramé-Hart goniometer (Model 500). Eight measurements were taken to calculate mean apparent contact angles at ambient conditions. The apparent contact angles were taken on both sides of a droplet; the results were averaged. Contact angle hysteresis was established with the tilted plane method. A 5 μl water resin droplet was placed on the PVC sample mounted on the glass slide. The slide was tilted until the drop began to move. The front and rear contact angles at which the droplet started to slip are regarded as the advancing θadv and receding θrec contact angles, correspondingly, as depicted in Figure is called the contact angle hysteresis. All of investigated PVC tubing (namely pristine and plasma treated by different discharges demonstrated the partial wetting regime. governing the wetting regime was negative. where γ SA , γ SL and γ are the interfacial tension at the solid/air, solid/liquid and liquid/vapor interfaces correspondingly. It is recognized from the experimental data that the equilibrium water contact angle for PVC is close to θ ≅ θ Y ≅ π 2 . This means that γ SA ≅ γ SL takes place for PVC and this is an important conclusion, because the interfacial tension at solid/liquid interfaces is not a well-known physical value. Assuming γ SL ≅ 35 -39 mJ m 2 , The as-placed equilibrium contact angle does not exhaust the characterization of wettability of a solid surface. The advancing (maximal) θ adv and receding (minimal) θ rec contact angles should be established experimentally. Plasma treatment of the PVC tubing by all kinds of the studied plasma discharges increased the hydrophilicity of the PVC catheters as shown in Figure The change in the surface properties of polymers induced by the cold plasma treatment is lost with time. The pronounced hydrophobic followed the plasma treatment of plasma treated PVC tubing as illustrated with Figures where θ 0 is the initial apparent contact angle, taken immediately after plasma treatment of PVC catheters, τ is the characteristic time of restoring of the contact angle, θ ̃ is the fitting parameter, and θ sat = θ ̃+ θ 0 is the saturation apparent contact angle. The numerical values of the parameters of the exponential fitting for the investigated plasma discharges are supplied in Tables A number of common features are recognized for the hydrophobic recovery of PVC tubing exposed to various plasma discharges: i) the hydrophobic recovery following the plasma treatment is welldescribed by the exponential fitting for all kinds of the studied discharges; ii) the saturation contact angle θ sat is slightly lower than the initial apparent contact angle; in other words, the hydrophobic recovery following the plasma treatment of PVC is never complete. On the other hand, the characteristic time of the hydrophobic recovery is largest for the radiofrequency plasma discharge, namely τ ≅ 3.0 -6.0 days; it is intermediate for the Corona discharge, i.e. τ ≅ 1.0 -2.5 days; and it is small for the DBD discharge, namely: τ ≅ 0.5 -1.5 days. Thus, the hydrophobic recovery following the cold plasma treatment is the slowest for the radiofrequency plasma discharge, and it is rapid for the DBD plasma treatment. At this stage of our investigation we are far from the microscopic interpretation of these experimental findings, which are of a primary importance for the applications of the plasma processing of PVC, however some conclusions may be made from the energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (abbreviated further EDS spectroscopy) of the plasma-treated PVC catheters, discussed in the following section. the finding reported by the other research groups It was instructive to study the surface composition of the plasma treated PVC catheters after one week of ageing under ambient conditions. It is recognized from the data presented in Figure Cold plasma treatment is broadly used for modification of wettability of organic and nonorganic compounds. The Corona plasma treatment demonstrated the most pronounced influence on the eventual wettability of catheters. One-minute plasma treatment of the tubing by the Corona plasma discharge decreased the apparent contact angle from θ = 93 ± 0.5 0 to θ = 30 ± 0.5 0 . The energy of water adhesion of pristine and plasma treated PVC, estimated with the Dupre formula is reported. Kinetics of the hydrophobic recovery following the plasma treatment of PVS was explored. It is noteworthy that the kinetics of hydrophobic recovery following the plasma treatment is welldescribed by the exponential fitting suggested in ref. 28 for all kinds of the studied discharges. We established that the hydrophobic recovery following the cold plasma treatment is the slowest for the radiofrequency plasma discharge, and it is most rapid for the DBD plasma treatment of PVC. Energydispersive X-ray spectroscopy of the chemical composition of the near-surface layers of the catheters indicated their oxidation, emerging from the cold air plasma treatment. This oxidation was irreversible and changed very slightly under one week ageing under ambient conditions. Thus, we conclude that the phenomenon of the hydrophobic recovery is hardly correlated with oxidation of the polymer (PVC) Figure 1. Wettability of the pristine PVC catheter is illustrated. The apparent contact angle is close to