Two-dimensional Janus van der Waals (vdW) heterojunctions, referring to the junction containing at least one Janus material, are found to exhibit tuneable electronic structures, wide light adsorption spectra, controllable contact resistance, and sufficient redox potential due to the intrinsic polarization and unique interlayer coupling. These novel structures and properties are promising for the potential applications in electronics and energy conversion devices. To provide a comprehensive picture about the research progress and guide the following investigations, here we summarize their fundamental properties of different types of two-dimensional Janus vdW heterostructures including electronic structure, interface contact and optical properties, and discuss the potential applications in electronics and energy conversion devices. The further challenges and possible research directions of the novel heterojunctions are discussed at the end of this review. In recent years, two-dimensional (2D) layered materials, with graphene Different from single materials, vdW heterostructure that combines two or more different layered materials creates more opportunities for novel properties and potential applications Among the 2D vdW heterostructures, a special family has attracted more and more research attentions, namely the multilayer junction composed with at least one layer of Janus material (in the following, it is short for 2D Janus vdW heterostructure). Different from traditional vdW heterostructures, the intrinsic intralayer polarization from Janus material will couple with the interlayer built-in polarization field, which will provide an additional degree of freedom to modulate the physical/chemical property of the heterostructure, leading to the novel features and potentials for applications. Based on the recent research progresses, in the present review, after briefly introducing the theoretical stability of Janus vdW heterostructures, we then comprehensively summarize their fundamental electronic/optical/chemical properties (see Fig. Fig. As essential components of Janus vdW heterostructures, until now there are only two kinds of synthesized Janus layer materials, namely MoSSe and WSSe monolayers. Janus WSSe monolayer was fabricated by implanting Se species into WS2 monolayer with pulsed laser ablation plasmas Only when the temperature is between 750 °C and 850 °C, the selenium substitution reaction occurs at the top layer, but not at the bottom layer, leading to the successful synthesis of Janus MoSSe monolayer. It also has been found that the atmospheric pressure could enlarge the stable temperature window for the selenium substitution reaction at the top layer, but the long sulfurization time could not trigger the selenium substitution reaction at the bottom layer. For the fabrication of vertical heterostructures, there are mainly two strategies, either by manually stacking different exfoliated nanosheets However, the major drawback is that, the procedure of chemical intercalation or mechanical sonication process is neither scalable nor controllable Although there is no experimental report of the 2D Janus vdW heterostructures until now, the structural stability as a function of stacking patterns have been comprehensively investigated in numerous theoretical works, from the energetic, dynamical, thermal and mechanical perspectives. They were evaluated by the binding energy, phonon spectrum, molecular dynamics, and elastic constants respectively. For example, for VSe2-MoSSe, MoSSe-WSe2, MoSSe-WSSe, GeC-MoSSe, GeC-WSSe, and BlueP (blue phosphorus)-MoSSe vdW heterostructures, synthesized, indicate that the 2D Janus vdW heterostructure is stable and feasible to be fabricated in the near future. Due to the presence of intrinsic intralayer polarization from Janus materials and its coupling with interlayer polarization field, the electronic properties of 2D Janus vdW heterojunction will be significantly affected. The recent researches indicate that the band gap, band alignment, band edge positions, and band splitting will strongly depend on the stacking orders, external electric fields and mechanical strains. As a result of the intralayer, interlayer polarization and the strain induced by the lattice mismatch, the band gap of 2D Janus vdW heterostructures is susceptible to the external disturbance like strain and electric field. Take MoSSe-WSSe vdW heterostructure as an example, the band gaps can be significantly reduced with the external in-plane strains, as illustrated in Fig. Whereas, the vertical electric field gives rise to a direct-indirect transformation of band structure, see Fig. 3c As an important electronic parameter of heterostructures, the band alignment between the two components will determine the optical adsorption and charge separation, which is highly related with photovoltaic and photocatalytic application. Different from the traditional heterostructures, the band alignment of Janus vdW heterostructures can be tuned by the intrinsic polarization of Janus layer, where the direction can be adjusted by the stacking order. For example, when the stacking order is changed from BuleP-S-Mo-Se to BlueP-Se-Mo-S, the band alignment of BlueP-MoSSe vdW heterostructure turns from type-I into type-II as desirable for optical usage As displayed in Fig. For the type II heterostructure, the conduction band minimum (CBM) and valance band maximum (VBM) locate at different components. Moreover, due to the different electronegativity, the components have different vacuum potentials Due to the intrinsic polarization in a Janus material, the symmetry along out-of-plane direction for 2D Janus vdW heterostructure is absent. When the spin orbit coupling is considered, the intralayer and interlayer polarizations of the heterostructure will not only Reproduced from Ref. In 2D Janus vdW heterostructures, depending on the substrate and the relative polarization direction of the Janus layer, the spin splitting and Rashba effect become obviously different. Take ZnO-WSSe and ZnO-MoSSe vdW heterostructures as the examples, Rashba spin splitting and band spin splitting for both configurations could be observed in the band structure where , h , and h are the energy of Fermi level, VBM, and CBM, respectively. For the 2D Janus vdW heterojunction with appropriate vertical stacking pattern, low barrier contact has been found in the graphene-WSeTe Furthermore, the barrier height and contact type can be controlled by appropriate vertical external strains (through adjusting the interlayer distance) and electric field, and the thickness of Janus 2D materials. In graphene-WSeTe heterostructure with the stacking order of G-Se-W-Te, under the negative electric field or tensile strain, t increases and t decreases. When the negative electric field is strong enough (>0.2 V/Å), the intrinsic p-type contact turns into the n-type contact. On the other hand, under the positive electric field or compressive strain, t decreases and t increases These theoretical findings, on the controllable barrier height and contact type, demonstrate the feasibility to design high-efficiency field-effect transistors with 2D Janus vdW heterojunctions. Apart from contract barrier, tunnelling barrier is another important index to evaluate the performance of heterostructure based photoelectric nanosdevices. Generally, the tunnelling probability ( ) is calculated by replacing the irregular real barriers with square barriers according to the WKB formula 2D Janus vdW heterostructures have also been predicted to possess wide absorption wavelength and high optical absorption coefficient in the visible regions. For example, in the MoSSe-GaN and MoSSe-AlN vdW heterostructures, the main peaks of the optical absorption reach 2.74 × 10 5 and 1.86 × 10 5 cm -1 (at 425 and 536 nm), and 3.95 × 10 5 and 2.05 × 10 5 cm -1 (at 412 and 528 nm), respectively Moreover, the optical absorption coefficients could be effectively tuned by adjusting interlayer distance, external electric field and strains, see Fig. For MoSSe-SiC and WSSe-SiC vdW heterostructures, it was found that the optical absorbance can be enhanced by strain in the visible light by emerging absorption peaks, leading to the blue-shift of optical absorption spectrum Specifically, the stronger interlayer coupling (realized by reducing the interlayer distance) results in a higher optical absorption coefficient. Meanwhile, the in-plane strains can render the absorption spectrum red-shift, and the optical absorption coefficient rises under the electric field of 0.4 V/Å. where t means the photon flux defined as the number of photons per unit time per unit area where and represent the lead electrode and the effective transmission coefficient, respectively. The effective transmission coefficient can be calculated as: where Γ and / ph G   denote the line-width function, Fermi function, and greater/lesser Green's function including electron-photon interactions In addition, according to the calculated photocurrents at different polarization angle θ, shown in Fig. Additionally, the distinct properties of exciton render 2D Janus vdW heterostructure promising for optoelectronic and valleytronic devices. Based on the electronic and optical structures, it is found that, there is a drastic competition between intralayer and interlayer excitons in the MoSSe-WSe2 heterostructure. The built-in electric field, caused by intrinsic dipole of Janus MoSSe monolayer, can affect exciton significantly. In the case of S-Mo-Se-Se-W-Se stacking configuration, due to the weak interlayer coupling, the intralayer exciton plays a dominant role in exciton. Whereas, in Se-Mo-S-Se-W-Se stacking order, the powerful interlayer coupling induces a coherence cancellation at the edge of valence band, and finally causes a transition of bright-to-dark exciton Because of the rising energy demands, it is essential to search for renewable energy sources. Converting clean solar energy into chemical energy is considered as the most promising technology, which has received intensive interdisciplinary attentions SrTiO3 As is well known, the type-II band alignment in vertical heterojunction is beneficial to improve the charge spatial separation For example, on the basics of nonadiabatic molecular dynamics calculations, the MoSSe-WSeTe has been verified to be a potential direct Z-scheme photocatalyst for hydrogen evolution reaction. Through tuning the time difference between photo-excited carrier transfer and recombination at the interface, the stacking configurations, as well as the surface chalcogen vacancies could switch the charge transfer path from Z-scheme to O-scheme, as exhibited in Fig. To be an excellent photoelectric device, the high photo-responsivity is essential, which mainly depend on the photoexcitation dynamics and excitonic effects. Janus vdW heterojunctions, with type-II band alignment, have been designed to increase exciton and charge dissociation, such as the MoSSe-WSe2 vertical heterostructure. Both the photoresponse and absorption coefficients of the heterojunction are found to have optical activity in a broad range of the visible spectrum The ion battery, as the fastest growing electrochemical cell, is considered to be a significant improvement over the traditional nickel-cadmium batteries, and has been widely applied in wireless portable electronic products. Especially, the lithium-ion battery revolution brings great convenience to our life. Layered MoS2 with a high theoretical specific capacity (669 mAh/g), has attracted extensive attention for ion batteries With the suitable open circuit voltage (0.62 V for the monolayer and 1.01 V for the bilayer) vs. Li + /Li, the theoretical capacities even could achieve 776.5 and 452.9 mAh/g for the monolayer and bilayer, respectively. Besides, the good electrical conduction and the small Li-ion/Li-vacancy migration barrier (≤0.34 eV) declare a fast Li-ion diffusion In summary, here we reviewed the recent research achievements from the fundamental properties to potential applications of 2D Janus vdW heterojunctions. It is found that, due to the unique structures and complex intralayer-interlayer polarization interaction, these heterojunctions could exhibit novel physicochemical properties, such as tuneable band gap and band edge positions, wide light adsorption spectra, controllable contact resistance, and sufficient redox potential. These excellent electronic and optical properties render the 2D Janus vdW heterostructures promising to be used in energy conversion and electronics devices. Even so, the study for 2D Janus vdW heterojunction is still at an initial stage, with many challenges and opportunities. First of all, most of these investigations are from theoretical simulations, yet to be confirmed by experiments. To verify these outstanding performances forecasted by theoretical simulations, the highest priority is to fabricate this vdW heterojunction in reality. For achieving this aim, high-quality 2D Janus materials need to be synthesised first. However, up to now, due to the harsh synthesis conditions (strict requirements for the temperature and pressure), only Janus MoSSe and WSSe monolayers have been synthesised successfully. Especially, the Janus MoSSe monolayer prepared with the CVD method has significant levels of defects, which cause the weak photoluminescence and crack formation On the other hand, deeper understandings for several aspects of 2D Janus vdW heterostructures are essential to their practical application. For example, some important photocatalytic properties, such as the exciton binding energy, solar-to-hydrogen (STH) efficiency and photoexcited carriers driving force 