Materials with continuous dissipation can exhibit responses and functionalities that are not possible in thermodynamic equilibrium. However, there is still need for novel systematic approaches to drive non-equilibrium steadystates with emergent functionalities that can be maintained with reasonable and practical energy consumption. In this article, we propose that novel responses and functionalities can emerge when homogeneous nanoparticle dispersions are driven out of the thermodynamic equilibrium into inhomogeneous steady-states that are sustained by continuous dissipation (Fig. The electric field is approximately uniform and in-plane between the microelectrodes with an average value of E = U/d (Extended Data Fig. The role of the non-polar environment and the charge control agent (AOT) is important for the electroferrofluid behavior. Control experiments carried out in polar environment (aqueous dispersion of highly charged iron oxide nanoparticles) show no gradient formation -instead electrodeposition of the NPs on the ITO electrodes takes place (Extended Data Fig. The electrically controlled dissipative build-up of concentration gradients of superparamagnetic NPs allows electrically controlled non-equilibrium magnetic responses. In the first approximation, the magnetic susceptibility χ and the saturation magnetization M S of a NP dispersion is linearly proportional to the NP concentration c. As in voltage-controlled magnetism in solid state materials, For non-interacting NPs, χ ∝ c and M S ∝ c, and thus ∆χ = χ -χ 0 ∝ ∆C and ∆M S = M S -M S0 ∝ ∆C, so that ∆C is a fingerprint parameter linearly proportional to the local change in both the susceptiblity and the saturation magnetization. With help of Eq. ( The key feature of ferrofluids is their response to magnetic fields that enables several functionalities. Here we consider the elementary response of the electroferrofluid in the non-equilibrium gradient state to uniform magnetic field applied either perpendicular (Fig. to the microelectrode cell (see Extended Data Fig. In the perpendicular case (Fig. Similarly, increasing electric field strength (and thus susceptibility and magnetization contrast, Fig. i.e. transition from a steady gradient state (Fig. The behavior of the electroferrofluid in magnetic field parallel to the microelectrode cell and perpendicular to the microelectrodes (Fig. It is interesting to compare the magnetic response of the electroferrofluid (Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated a facile approach to drive colloidal NPs out of thermodynamic equilibrium with an electric field to create non-equilibrium dissipative states and responses. We foresee that this concept that we demonstrated using superparamagnetic nanoparticles will open new avenues in several fields of research. Firstly, the electroferrofluids with voltage-controlled magnetism (Fig. Iron oxide NPs were synthesised by coprecipitation method, Transmission electron microscopy (TEM): NP morphology and size distribution were determined using a transmission electron microscope (JEOL JEM-2800, 200 kV). TEM sample was prepared by diluting the NP stock dispersion with toluene approximately in ratio 1:1000 and pipetting a droplet of the diluted dispersion on a TEM grid with a holey carbon film (Agar Scientific S147-4) and allowing the toluene to evaporate. From individual TEM images (Extended Data Fig. The best fit was obtained with parameters given in Table resulting in μ = 8.31 ± 0.06 nm and σ = 2.64 ± 0.04 nm. y 0 A M S 0 ± 1 751 ± 23 2.069 ± 0.007 0.310 ± 0.007 Table Crystallographic structure of the iron oxide NPs was studied using X-ray diffraction (Rigaku SmartLab). Dry NP powder was prepared by allowing 500-1000 μl of stock NP dispersion to dry in a ceramic evaporating dish overnight. The dry powder was collected and deposited on a standard microscope glass slide. Large NP aggregates were crushed to a fine powder using another microscope slide. This fine powder on a glass slide was then used to measure XRD. The X-ray data was collected in the 2θ range of 5-90 • at a scanning speed of 1 degree/min with scan step of 0.04 • (Extended Data Fig. Raman spectroscopy: Crystallographic structure of the iron oxide NPs were studied using Raman spectroscopy (Horiba LabRAM HR). Similar sample as for XRD was used. Measurements were carried out with 632.8 nm laser (HeNe laser) in the range of 50-1800 cm -1 . The laser beam was focused on the NP powder using a 50x objective lens. Data was collected for 120 seconds and averaged over two cycles. The laser power was limited to below 0.6 mW to avoid beam damage (Extended Data Fig. A stock solution containing 300 mM of AOT in dodecane was prepared by mixing 4.01258 g of AOT and 19.7865 g of dodecane in a glass vial. The vial was sealed with parafilm to reduce moisture uptake from the ambient air. The vial was allowed to stand for two days to ensure complete dissolution of AOT. Solutions with lower AOT concentration (e.g. 150 mM) were prepared from the 300 mM stock solution by diluting with pure dodecane. First, the stock dispersion of iron oxide NPs in toluene was sonicated (Fisherbrand FB11207) for 10 min at a 37 kHz and filtered through a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) membrane with 0.45 μm pores (Thermo Scientific Titan3). 1 ml of the sonicated and filtered dispersion was mixed with 1 ml of a solution of AOT in dodecane with desired AOT concentration (e.g. 150 mM) in a glass vial. The vial was left open in a fume hood for ca. 36 hours until toluene was evaporated, which was confirmed with FTIR analysis (Nicolet 380, Thermo Fisher Scientific) by following the disappearance of the C-C vibration mode of the aromatic ring of toluene (Extended Data Fig. Magnetic characterization of the electroferrofluid (150 mM AOT) Magnetic properties of the electroferrofluid (150 mM AOT) were measured with a vibrating sample magnetometer (QuantumDesign PPMS VSM). Sample was prepared by filling a 3 cm long capillary tube (0.22 mm inner diameter) with with ca. 0.5 μl of the electroferrofluid. The capillary was sealed with UV curable adhesive (Norland Optical Adhesive 61) and cured under UV lamp (Thorlabs Solis 365C). The paramagnetic background was removed by fitting the data at large fields and subtracting it from the measured data (Extended Data Fig. Electrical connections to the microelectrode cells were done using thin insulated copper wires by attaching them to the cells with silver paste (SPI Supplies OK-SPI). The paste was allowed to dry at room temperature at least for two hours. The microelectrode cells were filled with the electroferrofluid using capillary action. The electroferrofluid was sonicated and filtered (similarly as during electroferrofluid preparation) just before filling the microelectrode cell for experiments on microscopic pattern formation (Fig. In other experiments (Fig. Electric potential and electric field inside the microelectrode cells (Extended Data Fig. Construction of the experimental setup for microscopic observation of the electroferrofluid under controlled electric and magnetic fields Magnetic field: A pair of small electromagnetic coils (GMW 11801523 and 11801524) connected to DC power supply (BK Precision 9205) was used to generate uniform magnetic fields (Extended Data Fig. Electric field: A high resistance meter / electrometer (Keysight 2987A) was used to apply electric field across the sample and simultaneously measure the current, typically at 0.1 s intervals. Before each measurement, the electroferrofluid sample was ensured to be in the thermodynamic ground state by applying 0 V for 40 seconds, during which the electric current decayed close to 0 A and a homogeneous NP concentration was established. The microelectode cell was illuminated in transmitted light configuration using an LED light source (Thorlabs MCWHLP1), a collimator (Thorlabs COP4-A) and a diffuser. Imaging was done with a 10x finite-conjugate objective lens (Nikon 10x/0.25 160/-WD5.6) or a 4x finite-conjugate objective lens (Nikon 4x/0.25 160/-WD25) connected to a 5 MP grayscale camera (Ximea MC050MG-SY). Image length scale was calibrated using a calibration target (Thorlabs R1L3S2P). Images were acquired using software provided by the camera manufacturer (Ximea xiCamTool 4.28). In most experiments, images were acquired at 100 frames per second (fps) with averaging of 5 consecutive frames to reduce noise, resulting in final acquisition rate of 20 fps. The Rosensweig-like instabilities (Fig. An aqueous ferrofluid consisting of maghemite NPs stabilized with citric acid (electrostatic double layer forces) was synthesized as described earlier. I-V measurements (Fig. Image acquisition, bit depth conversion and contrast adjustment: Microscopy images were acquired with 12-bit ADC and saved as 12/16 bit grayscale TIFF files. These high-bit images (raw data) were converted to 8-bit grayscale images with simultaneous histogram adjustment with ImageJ2/Fiji to improve contrast of the NP gradients and patterns (see Extended Data Fig. The raw 12/16 bit images of the steady state (U > 0 V, Extended Data Fig. The change in power dissipation upon pattern formation (Fig. First, the change in electric current upon application of magnetic field (resulting in pattern formation) was extracted from I(t) by performing a baseline fitting and subtraction (Extended Data Fig. Authors have submitted a provisional patent application on electrically controllable ferrofluids. All correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to *jaakko.timonen@aalto.fi. Extended Data Figure Video 5. Pattern formation in electroferrofluid (6% iron oxide NPs and 150 mM AOT) in 8 mT in-plane magnetic field. Video shows a series of microscopy images (video) and plots of electric current, electric field and magnetic field as a function of time in a microelectrode cell filled with an electroferrofluid when a static electric field (0.3 V/μm) is applied and followed by application of magnetic field (8 mT, in-plane). NPs first form steady-state dissipative gradients in electric field and further a Rosensweig-like pattern in magnetic field. Both pattern and gradient are reversible once magnetic and electric fields are turned off, respectively. Video 6. Pattern formation in electroferrofluid (6 % iron oxide NPs and 150 mM AOT) in increasing in-plane magnetic field. Video shows six series of microscopy images (video) of a microelectrode cell filled with an electroferrofluid (150 mM AOT in dodecane) when a static electric field (0.3 V/μm) is applied and followed by application of six different magnetic fields (from 4.4 to 8.8 mT, in-plane). In all cases, NPs first form steady-state dissipative gradients in electric field and further Rosensweiglike patterns in magnetic field with increasing amplitude with increasing magnetic field strength.