We demonstrate the enhanced robustness of the supercurrent through graphene-based Josephson junctions in which strong spin-orbit interactions (SOIs) are induced. We compare the persistence of a supercurrent at high magnetic fields between Josephson junctions with graphene on hexagonal boron-nitride and graphene on WS2, where strong SOIs are induced via the proximity effect. We find that in the shortest junctions both systems display signatures of induced superconductivity, characterized by a suppressed differential resistance at a low current, in magnetic fields up to 1 T. In longer junctions however, only graphene on WS2 exhibits induced superconductivity features in such high magnetic fields, and they even persist up to 7 T. We argue that these robust superconducting signatures arise from quasiballistic edge states stabilized by the strong SOIs induced in graphene by WS2. Magnetic fields are known to be detrimental to ordinary s-wave superconductivity because of the pairbreaking effect of the Zeeman component, which can flip the spins in the spin-singlet Cooper pair Spin-orbit interactions (SOIs) play a crucial role in mitigating these field-induced pair-breaking effects. Recently, Ising pairing in transition-metal dichalcogenides was found to confer the robustness of superconductivity owing to spin-momentum locking, by which the spin polarization of Cooper pairs is prevented In this Letter, we demonstrate that SOIs can enhance the superconducting proximity effect in high out-of-plane magnetic fields in graphene-on-WS 2 -based Josephson junctions. These junctions consist of graphene encapsulated between hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) and WS 2 , which induces the strong SOIs in graphene via the proximity effect We compare two types of samples: hBN/graphene/WS 2 (Gr/WS 2 ) and hBN/graphene/hBN (Gr/hBN) junctions. Graphene and hBN are mechanically exfoliated from graphite and hBN crystals, and monolayer WS 2 flakes are grown by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) We previously demonstrated via weak antilocalization that graphene on TMDs acquires by proximity strong SOIs, thanks to the heavy elements such as molybdenum (Mo) or tungsten (W) that they contain We first discuss the results in the normal state. Figure After cooling the sample below T c of the superconducting contacts, we measured the differential resistance (dV /dI) as a function of the dc current (I dc ) and magnetic field (B) around zero field. A small ac current I ac was added to I dc , and the corresponding ac voltage was detected by a lock-in amplifier, yielding dV /dI. Figure in the ballistic regime) and the superconducting gap ∆ 0 (= 1 meV) of MoRe, both L= 100 nm junctions are in the short-junction limit (E T > ∆) while the others are in the long-junction limit (E T < ∆). Interestingly, for the shortest, L = 100 nm junctions, a relatively large 100 nA-wide dip of dV /dI is observed in certain fields, even around 8000 G for both Gr/WS 2 and Gr/hBN junctions, and oscillates as a function of B. In the previous study on graphene ballistic Josephson junctions Whereas the field dependence is similar for both types of 100-nm-long junctions, we find a stark difference for the longer junctions, L = 300 and 500 nm: While superconducting pockets persist around B = 10000 G for Gr/WS 2 , they are clearly suppressed for Gr/hBN. We note that the typical oscillation field scale of the superconducting pockets is about 1.5 G, identical to the width of the Fraunhofer-like pattern main lobe. Beyond these dV /dI maps as a function of I dc and B in limited field regions, a broader picture can be obtained by following dV /dI at zero dc current bias (ZBR) over a wide range of B. ZBR oscillates between the normal state resistance when no superconductivity is induced and has a minimal dV /dI in the middle of the superconducting pocket when the superconducting proximity effect is strongest. Figure where ∆ 0 denotes the superconducting gap at T = 0. In the diffusive long-junction limit We find δI c ∼ 240 nA from Eq. (1) expected to be adequate for short Gr/hBN junctions but slightly larger than our experimental value. Reduced experimental values compared to the theoretical ones were already reported (1) and (2) were evaluated for zero field. The field dependence of the critical current was recently theoretically investigated in two-dimensional ballistic junctions similar to our samples In order to explain the robust supercurrent signatures that we find in the diffusive Gr/WS 2 junctions, it therefore seems necessary to consider the role of SOIs. SOIs favor the formation of edge states, epitomized by the topological quantum spin Hall phase. However, edge states can also exist in a nontopological system, and coexist with bulk states of the same energy. Such edge states are in general sensitive to scattering, but some degree of protection against smooth disorder may exist if the edge states are well separated from bulk states in momentum space. Moreover, spin can also provide additional protection if the spins of the edge state and those of the nearby bulk band are opposite. In the case of graphene on WS 2 , the analysis of weak antilocalization experiments We now examine the relation between these edge paths and the chiral edge states of the QH regime. The QH regime develops when the mean free path l e ≫ 2r c , where r c is the cyclotron radius (r c = k F /eB) Another effect of SOIs recently suggested theoretically is the generation of spin-triplet supercurrent flowing close to the edge in combination with magnetic field or exchange interaction in superconductor-normalmetal-superconductor junctions In conclusion, we have demonstrated robust proximityinduced superconductivity that persists in high magnetic fields for Gr/WS 2 Josephson junctions. Compared to the Gr/hBN control samples, all Gr/WS 2 junctions (with L between 100 and 500 nm) have lower mobility and are in the diffusive regime. Nevertheless, and most strikingly for longer junctions, superconducting pockets are still observable at 70000 G, whereas they are suppressed for Gr/hBN junctions with the same L. We argue that these robust superconducting signatures stem from quasiballistic states confined along the samples edges, stabilized by the SOIs. Because these edge states carry supercurrent at the micrometer scale, one could envisage further investigations, for instance using more elaborate structures for transport measurements, as well as other techniques such as scanning tunneling microscope (STM) or orbital magnetism measurements. Our findings provide important information for progress toward topological superconductvity in which the combined effects of superconductivity and SOIs play crucial roles.