The Mott transition is usually considered as resulting from the divergence of the effective mass of the quasiparticle in the Fermi-liquid theory; the dispersion relation around the Fermi level is considered to become flat toward the Mott transition. Here, to clarify the characterization of the Mott transition under the assumption of a Fermi-liquid-like ground state, the electron-addition excitation from the Gutzwiller wavefunction in the t-J model is investigated on a chain, ladder, square lattice, and bilayer square lattice in the single-mode approximation using a Monte Carlo method. The numerical results demonstrate that an electronic mode that is continuously deformed from a noninteracting band at zero electron density loses its spectral weight and gradually disappears toward the Mott transition. It exhibits essentially the magnetic dispersion relation shifted by the Fermi momentum in the small-doping limit as indicated by recent studies for the Hubbard and t-J models, even if the ground state is assumed to be a Fermi-liquid-like state exhibiting gradual disappearance of the quasiparticle weight. This implies that, rather than as the divergence of the effective mass or disappearance of the carrier density that is expected in conventional single-particle pictures, the Mott transition can be better understood as freezing of the charge degrees of freedom while the spin degrees of freedom remain active, even if the ground state is like a Fermi liquid. It is generally true that electrons in an interacting system are more difficult to move than those in a noninteracting system. As a result of the interaction, the effective mass increases, which implies that the dispersion relation around the Fermi level becomes flatter However, recent studies on electronic excitation near the Mott transition in the one-dimensional (1D), twodimensional (2D), and ladder Hubbard and t-J models Hence, the key question in this paper is how the electronic mode behaves if the ground state is like a Fermi liquid where the quasiparticle weight gradually disappears toward the Mott transition. In the Brinkman-Rice * Electronic address: KOHNO.Masanori@nims.go.jp picture In this paper, to resolve the above question, electronaddition excitation from the Gutzwiller wavefunction in the t-J model is investigated on a chain, ladder, plane, and bilayer in the single-mode approximation using a Monte Carlo method. The numerical results demonstrate that an electronic mode that is continuously deformed from a noninteracting band at zero electron density gradually loses its spectral weight and exhibits essentially the momentum-shifted magnetic dispersion relation in the small-doping limit, even if the ground state is assumed to be a Fermi-liquid-like state that exhibits gradual disappearance of the quasiparticle weight toward the Mott transition. This suggests that this characteristic of the Mott transition The t-J model is defined by the following Hamiltonian: where ci,σ denotes the annihilation operator of an electron with spin σ at site i under the constraint of no double occupancy, and i, j means that sites i and j are nearest neighbors. Here, n i,σ and S i denote the number operator with spin σ and the spin operator at site i, respectively, and n i = σ n i,σ . In this paper, we consider the t-J models on a chain (t i,j = t, J i,j = J), planar square lattice (t i,j = t, J i,j = J), ladder (t i,j = t and J i,j = J in the legs; t i,j = t ⊥ and J i,j = J ⊥ in the rungs), and bilayer square lattice (t i,j = t and J i,j = J in the layers; t i,j = t ⊥ and J i,j = J ⊥ between the layers). Hereafter, the numbers of sites and electrons are denoted by N s and N e , respectively. The electron density and doping concentration are defined as n = N e /N s and δ = 1 -n, respectively. At half filling, n = 1 and δ = 0. For a ladder and bilayer, the momentum in the interchain or interlayer direction is denoted by k ⊥ . The momenta on a ladder and bilayer are represented as (k x , k ⊥ ) and (k x , k y , k ⊥ ), respectively. The shorthand notations 0 and π are used for (0, 0) and (π, π), respectively. As a compact notation, k x and k y are sometimes denoted by k 1 and k 2 , respectively. In this paper, the numerical results for J/t = 0.5 on a chain and plane; J/t = 0.25, t ⊥ /t = 2, and J ⊥ /t = 1 on a ladder; and J/t = 0.25, t ⊥ /t = 4, and J ⊥ /t = 4 on a bilayer with t > 0 are presented. The calculations were performed under periodic boundary conditions on clusters of N s = 120 for the chain and ladder, N s = 400 for the plane, and N s = 200 for the bilayer. Typically, several millions of samples were generated following several hundreds of sweeps in the Monte Carlo calculations. In this paper, the ground state is assumed to be the Gutzwiller wavefunction |Φ , defined as where c † k,σ denotes the creation operator of an electron with momentum k and spin σ, and |0 represents the vacuum. Here, P d denotes the projection operator that forbids double occupancy. The excitation energy ε(k) and spectral weight W (k) of the electron-addition excited state c † k,σ |Φ averaged with respect to spin are obtained as follows: where ck,σ denotes c k,σ with the constraint of no double occupancy. The expectation value of an operator O by |Φ can be evaluated as the sample average of weight w i for configuration |i generated with probability p i using a Monte Carlo method where It should be noted that c † k,σ and P d commute: because c † i,σ P d |α i = P d c † i,σ |α i , where c † i,σ and |α i denote the creation operator of an electron with spin σ and a state (0, ↑, ↓, or ↑↓) at site i, respectively. Thus, the first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (3) can be calculated as the energy of the Gutzwiller wavefunction where an electron with momentum k and spin σ is added to the Fermi sea prior to projection. This can significantly reduce the computational complexity of the electron-addition energy. On the other hand, ck,σ P d |FS = P d c k,σ |FS in general. The chemical potential μ at N e = m can be calculated as follows: where E m±1 denotes the ground-state energy at N e = m ± 1 for μ = 0. In this paper, because the ground state is assumed to be expressed as the Gutzwiller wavefunction, μ can be calculated using the lowest energies of the Gutzwiller wavefunction with an electron added to (E m+1 ) and removed from (E m-1 ) the Fermi sea at N e = m prior to projection. Similarly, the Fermi momentum k F can be determined as the momentum where the dispersion relation of the Gutzwiller wavefunction with an electron added or removed prior to projection crosses the Fermi level. ] and ladder at n = 0.95 [(f)] obtained using the non-Abelian DDMRG method with 240 density-matrix eigenstates on a 120-site cluster The spectral function is defined as where ε l denotes the excitation energy of the normalized eigenstate |l from the ground state |GS . In this paper, the single-mode approximation is employed, where the electron-addition spectral function [A(k, ω) for ω > 0] is approximated as If the excitation is essentially represented by a dominant mode, the single-mode approximation can capture the essential excitation feature. It has been shown that the electron-addition excitation (ω > 0) can be effectively represented by a single mode in the t-J models near half filling (at each k ⊥ for the ladder and bilayer) [Figs. At zero electron density (n = 0), the spectral function for an added electron is the same as that in a noninteracting system [Figs. The validity of the results is confirmed by their comparison with the results obtained using the non-Abelian dynamical density-matrix renormalization-group (DDMRG) method for the chain [Fig. and that of the other modes can be expressed as on the ladder (d = 1) and bilayer (d = 2), where the x and y components of k F are denoted by k F1 and k F2 , respectively. In Fig. In the following sections, the changes in the dispersion relation and spectral weight with the electron density are discussed. At n = 0, because the added electron behaves as a noninteracting electron, the dispersion relation can be expressed as on the chain (d = 1) and plane (d = 2), and as where Q min and Q max represent 0 and π on the ladder, and 0 and π on the bilayer. For the chain and plane, the dispersion relation continues to disperse even in the limit of n → 1 [Figs. 2(a), 2(d), 3(a), and For the ladder and bilayer, the dispersion relation at k ⊥ = 0 shrinks to ω → 0 at k x = π and (k x , k y ) = π, respectively, in the limit of n → 1 [Figs. To clarify the nature of the electron-addition excitation in the limit of n → 1, we consider the excitation at half filling (n = 1), where the t-J model is reduced to the Heisenberg model. For the chain and plane, the dominant spin excitation exhibits the following spin-wave dispersion relation on the chain and for k x = k y = k on the square lattice, where the spinwave velocities of the Heisenberg models on the chain and square lattice have been obtained as v 1D = πJ/2 For the ladder and bilayer, the dispersion relation of the spin excitation at k ⊥ = π for J ⊥ ≫ J can effectively be expressed as on the ladder (d = 1) and bilayer (d = 2) The above results are consistent with the general relationship between the dispersion relation of the spin excitation in a Mott insulator (N e = N s ) and that of the electron-addition excitation in the small-doping limit (N e = N s -1) shown in Ref. for π/2 < k x < 3π/2 on the chain [k F = π/2; Eq. ( for π/2 < k < 3π/2 along k x = k y = k on the plane [k F = π/2; Eq. ( 2(h) and 2(k)], as in the case of the transition from a metal to a band insulator. However, the spectral weights on the chain, plane, and ladder at k ⊥ = π, as well as on the bilayer at k ⊥ = π gradually disappear toward the Mott transition (n → 1) [Figs. 2(g), 2(i), 2(j), 2(l), 3(b), 3(e), 3(h), and 3(k)]. These results imply the following: For the chain and plane, the dispersing mode crossing the Fermi level (Sec. III B), which is continuously deformed from that of a noninteracting electron at n = 0, loses its spectral weight and gradually disappears toward the Mott transition without flattening of the dispersion relation The momentum distribution function is defined as which can be calculated as n(k) = 1 -n/2 -W (k) owing to the sum rule As illustrated in Figs. In contrast, as discussed in Secs. III A-III C, the results on the chain and plane indicate that the mode crossing the Fermi level, which is continuously deformed from a noninteracting band at n = 0, does not become flat toward the Mott transition, but loses its spectral weight for ω > 0, even if the ground state is assumed to be a Fermi-liquid-like state with the same volume as the noninteracting Fermi sea and a nonzero Z that decreases continuously to zero toward the Mott transition. The results exhibiting Z = 0 on the chain [Figs. 2(g) and 3(c)] are due to the Gutzwiller wavefunction For the ladder and bilayer, Z remains nonzero even in the limit of n → 1 [Figs. 2(h), 2(k), 3(i), and 3(l)], as in the case of the transition from a metal to a band insulator. Nevertheless, similarly to the cases of the chain and plane, the dispersion relation of the antibonding band is deformed into the momentum-shifted magnetic dispersion relation in the small-doping limit [Figs. The characteristic discussed in this paper can also be demonstrated using a model whose ground state is the Gutzwiller wavefunction. It is known that the ground state of the 1D supersymmetric t-J model with 1/r 2 interaction (J/t = 2) is the Gutzwiller wavefunction , where e HS (k x ) denotes the dispersion relation of the dominant mode of the spin excitation at half filling (the Haldane-Shastry model) This clearly demonstrates that the characteristic discussed in this paper can appear even in a system whose ground state is a Fermi-liquid-like state exhibiting gradual disappearance of the quasiparticle weight toward the Mott transition [Fig. In conventional single-particle pictures, an electronic quasiparticle or a hole is considered as a carrier and the Mott transition is considered to be characterized as one of the following two possibilities In contrast, the characteristic discussed in this paper is not highly sensitive to the ground-state properties 2(a), 2(g), 3(a), and 3(b)], although the Gutzwiller wavefunction on a square lattice exhibits an antiferromagnetic long-range order at half filling It should be noted that the spin-charge separation in the metallic phase of a 1D system means that excitations in the low-energy limit are described in terms of independent spin and charge excitations Although there are physical quantities that can distinguish between an insulator and a metal, such as the Drude weight The emergence of electronic states in the Hubbard gap upon doping a Mott insulator has been recognized since the early 1990s If the magnetic excitation of a Mott insulator is gapless, the mode of the emergent electronic states should also be gapless in the small-doping limit. The behavior of the characteristic mode discussed in this paper can also be understood in the final interpretation above The physical picture of this characteristic of the Mott transition has been described as follows The above picture contrasts with conventional singleparticle pictures: the electronic quasiparticle becomes extremely heavy and immobile when m * → ∞, and the number of mobile holes disappears (full filling of electrons) when n c → 0. In these single-particle pictures, the decoupling of the spin and charge degrees of freedom toward the Mott transition is not considered. These pictures do not explain how a metallic state changes into a Mott insulating state that exhibits spin excitation in the energy regime that is much lower than the charge gap (the spin-charge separation characteristic of a Mott insulator). Electron-addition excitation from the Gutzwiller wavefunction was investigated in the 1D, 2D, ladder, and bilayer t-J models in the single-mode approximation using a Monte Carlo method. In all of these models, the numerical results demonstrated that an electronic mode that is continuously deformed from a noninteracting band at zero electron density loses its spectral weight and gradually disappears toward the Mott transition, exhibiting essentially the magnetic dispersion relation shifted by the Fermi momentum in the small-doping limit. Thus, this characteristic would be general and fundamental in the Mott transition, regardless of the dimensionally, lattice structure, and even the presence of a spin gap or antiferromagnetic long-range order in a Mott insulator. Because this characteristic can be obtained simply by assuming that the ground state is the Gutzwiller wavefunction, it would not depend on the ground-state details, but rather, reflects a general characteristic of a Mott insulator, namely, spin-charge separation (the existence of spin excitation in the energy regime that is much lower than the charge gap). This result contrasts with the conventional singleparticle pictures such as the Fermi-liquid quasiparticle picture and band picture (mean-field approximation). In these pictures, the divergence of the effective mass (the flattening of the dispersion relation) or disappearance of the carrier density is considered as the essence of the Mott transition, where the spectral-weight loss from a dispersing mode or continuous evolution to the spin excitation of a Mott insulator is not expected. Meanwhile, the characteristic mode shown in this paper has the same origin not only as a noninteracting band at zero electron density, but also as spin-excited states in a Mott insulator, and is continuously deformed between these two limits, even under the assumption of a Fermi-liquid-like ground state. In the future, experimental confirmation of this characteristic, as well as a reexamination of the material properties near the Mott transition that have been interpreted in conventional single-particle pictures, will be useful for deeper understanding of the Mott transition and electronic states in strongly correlated systems.