Wave is crucial to acquiring information from the world and its interaction with matter is determined by the wavelength, or frequency. Search for the ability to shift frequency often points to material nonlinearity, which is significant only when the excitation level is very high. Temporal modulated material is expected to shift sound frequency in a linear manner, but is so far not effectively realized due to inadequate modulation ratio. This study introduces a new class of temporal modulation material with a giant modulation ratio. When the modulation is given in a random time sequence, a monochromatic sound wave is converted to a white noise of a continuous frequency band. The demonstrated device is called a randomized acoustic meta-layer, consisting of a suspended diaphragm shunted by an analog circuit. The circuit alters the acoustic impedance of the layer which operates in two quantized states when the shunt is connected and disconnected by a MOSFET with a pseudo-random time sequence. The device has unprecedented potential applications such as converting annoying tones to white-noise-like hum to improve psychoacoustic quality, allowing encrypted underwater communication, and super-resolution imaging. Wavelength is the dominant parameter for manipulating a wave or using it to acquire information. The ability to change the time-base of a wave, or frequency, is highly desirable. Conventional materials, including spatial modulation metamaterials such as photonic and sonic crystals Linear temporal modulation mechanism can convert the frequency of electrical signal, which can be traced back to the amplitude modulation (AM) method in the telecommunication system However, the modulation ratio, which is defined as time-dependent magnitude to the DC magnitude of the time-varying parameter, is insufficient for existing temporal materials to achieve meaningful conversion of sound wave frequency. In this work, a linear acoustic meta-layer with a giant modulation ratio is introduced, which realizes two types of sound wave frequency conversions. The first is converting the color, or rather frequency in acoustics, of a monochromatic sound wave to another color with unprecedented efficiency, and the second is dispersing a monochromatic sound to white noise of any prescribed frequency band. The dynamic response of the second meta-layer is random in time. For the first time, a material has general randomness and the mechanism is here called a randomized acoustic meta-layer (RAML) contrasting to the conventional static and dynamic materials which are governed by deterministic dynamic equations. These attributes have many potential applications. First, random modulation dilutes the time-signature of the incident sound, rendering its echo undetectable. Second, the broadband modulation widens the frequency scope of energy pumping and can be a new building block for parametric gain medium The proposed RAML is shown in Figure When the G-terminal of the MOSFET is applied with a bias voltage exceeding a threshold, Vg > V0, the resistance between D and S is 4 m, and the shunt impedance Z is loaded. Otherwise the resistance is Roff = 4400  , and Z is unloaded. A state function g(t) = H(Vg(t)-V0) describes the MOSFET states, where H is the Heaviside step function. Figure where over-dot donates time-derivatives, pI(t) is the incident sound pressure on the diaphragm, v(t) is the velocity response of the diaphragm, I(t) is the electrical current in the shunt circuit, M, D and K are, respectively, the dynamic mass, damping and stiffness, A is the cross-section of the waveguide, 0 and c0 are the air density and speed of sound, respectively. The damping term with 20c0A accounts for the fluid loading on the downstream and upstream sides of the diaphragm when the waveguide is terminated by anechoic ends where over-hats denote Fourier transform, the convolution I ̂⨂G ̂ is calculated as , and G ̂(ω) is the Fourier transform of 2g(t)-1 (square wave with 0 bias). The presence of the convolution term, I ̂⨂G ̂, is the essence of the modulation device. It makes the solution of Equations ( p T (t) = ρ 0 c 0 v(t), p R (t) = p I (t) -p T (t). To demonstrate the basic characteristics of the proposed modulation mechanism, harmonic modulation is examined before random modulation is applied on the fully functional RAML device. We first scrutinize the static acoustic impedance for the meta-layer at MOSFET-on and MOSFET-off states using the impedance tube illustrated in Figure The voltage sequence of random modulation is obtained by setting positive and negative values of a band limited white signal to be Vg = 6 Volts (g =1) and Vg = 0 (g =0). This is illustrated in Figure In summary, we take a broad view of the meta-layer operating at the MOSFET-on and MOSFET-off configurations, each with its own eigen spatial mode. When a step discontinuity occurs from one to the other, the difference between the two modes forms an impulse whose energy is scattered to all frequencies. This is a time-domain phenomenon, or a time crystal [32], similar with the space refraction of waves by a sharp boundary or diffraction around a singularity. If the MOSFET switching is repeated periodically, the time slab limits the scattering to frequencies correlated with the modulation period. The essence of the demonstrated RAML is the broadband frequency scattering taking place at a single MOSFET switch, while randomized switching prevents destructive interference between different time-scatter events. The key performance parameter is the modulation ratio. The giant ratio demonstrated here will be crucial for the success of potential applications, such as tonal noise dispersion, linear acoustic diode, encrypted underwater communication or misleading Dopplerbased detection, parametric amplifier, super-resolution imaging and hologram, etc. Negative impedance converter The mechanical and electrical parameters of the diaphragm in Equations ( 