The wealth of structural phases seen in the rare-earth disilicate compounds promises an equally rich range of interesting magnetic properties. We report on the crystal growth by the optical floating zone method of members of the rare-earth disilicate family, R 2 Si 2 O 7 (with R = Er, Ho, and Tm). Through a systematic study, we have optimised the growth conditions for Er 2 Si 2 O 7 . We have grown, for the first time using the floating zone method, crystal boules of Ho 2 Si 2 O 7 and Tm 2 Si 2 O 7 compounds. We show that the difficulties encountered in the synthesis of polycrystalline and single crystal samples are due to the similar thermal stability ranges of different rare-earth silicate compounds in the temperature-composition phase diagrams of the R-Si-O systems. The addition of a small amount of SiO 2 excess allowed the amount of impurity phases present in the powder samples to be minimised. The phase composition analysis of the powder X-ray diffraction data collected on the as-grown boules revealed that they were of single phase, except in the case of thulium disilicate, which comprised of two phases. All growths resulted in multi-grain boules, from which sizeable single crystals could be isolated. The 1 Rare-earth disilicates, R 2 Si 2 O 7 , where R is a rare-earth element, were studied in the past due to the polymorphism exhibited by these compounds and their physical properties. At ambient pressure, R 2 Si 2 O 7 compounds can crystallise in seven different structural types. Rare-earth disilicate compounds containing large rare-earth elements (with R = La → Sm) crystallise in the tetragonal A-type structure. Compounds R 2 Si 2 O 7 that incorporate smaller rare-earth ions (where R = Eu → Tm) adopt a triclinic B-type structure. The smallest rare-earth elements, Lu and Yb, form disilicate compounds crystallising in the monoclinic C-type structure. At high temperature (950 ≤ T ≤ 1500 • C), rare-earth disilicate com-pounds R 2 Si 2 O 7 (where R = La → Tm) undergo one or more structural phase transitions. The number of phase transitions they undergo and their transition temperatures depend on the nature of the rare-earth ion. The successful growth of ytterbium and erbium disilicate crystals using optical FZ method The growth of R 2 Si 2 O 7 crystals opens up a route to further investigation of these materials, with the potential to unearth some very interesting magnetic properties, similar to what has been observed in Yb 2 Si 2 O 7 . There have been many attempts to grow crystals of the rare-earth disilicate compounds. Typical routes used to prepare R 2 Si 2 O 7 crystals include the Verneuil, This has motivated us to embark upon the study of the highly polymorphic rare-earth disilicate compounds. In the present work, we investigate three rare-earth disilicate compounds, R 2 Si 2 O 7 , where R = Er, Ho, and Tm, with focus on the crystal growth of these materials using the optical FZ method. Tm 2 Si 2 O 7 is dimorphic with temperature, whereas Er 2 Si 2 O 7 and Ho 2 Si 2 O 7 display a high degree of polymorphism. Rare-earth disilicate compounds have previously been grown in crystal form using the flux method, Erbium disilicate exists in three polymorphs (see Table Holmium disilicate exists in four polymorphs (see Table The holmium and thulium compounds have only been grown in crystal form using the flux method. The starting materials used for the synthesis of R 2 Si 2 O 7 (with R = Er, Ho, and Tm) polycrystalline materials were rare-earth oxides, Er 2 O 3 , Ho 2 O 3 and Tm 2 O 3 (all of 99.9% purity), and silica, SiO 2 (99.6%). Crystals of rare-earth silicate compounds were then grown using a double ellipsoidal optical image furnace (NEC SC1MDH-11020, Canon Machinery Incorporated), equipped with two 1.5 kW halogen lamps. The quality of the crystal boules was investigated using a Laue X-ray imaging system with a Photonic-Science Laue camera. Small quantities of each crystal were then ground and powder X-ray diffraction measurements were performed to determine the phase purity and to establish the crystallographic structure of the R 2 Si 2 O 7 crystals. It is essential to determine the structural type of each crystal. Room temperature diffractograms were collected on X-ray diffractometers (Panalytical and Bruker) using CuKα 1 and CuKα 2 radiation (λ Kα1 = 1.5406 Å and λ Kα2 = 1.5444 Å), over an angular range 10-70 • or 10-90 • in 2θ, with a step size in the scattering angle 2θ of 0.013 • (Panalytical) and 0.016 • (Bruker). The analysis of the X-ray patterns was performed using the Fullprof software suite. Magnetic susceptibility measurements as a function of temperature were carried out on a ground piece of the Ho 2 Si 2 O 7 crystal down to 1.8 K in applied magnetic fields of 100 and 1000 Oe using a Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System MPMS-5S superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometer. Heat capacity measurements in zero applied magnetic field at temperatures from 0.5 to 300 K were carried out on Er 2 Si 2 O 7 and Tm 2 Si 2 O 7 crystals in a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) with a heat capacity option using a two-tau relaxation method. each step of the synthesis to ensure good homogeneity and to facilitate the reaction of the starting materials. Nevertheless, even after 4 steps, each of long duration, a phase composition analysis by powder X-ray diffraction (goodness of fit (GOF) = 1.68) reveals that a small quantity of a SiO 2 deficient erbium monosilicate impurity phase is present (see Fig. Crystals of erbium disilicate were grown using the FZ method, in static air atmosphere, at ambient pressure. In order to optimise the growth conditions, we have carried out a systematic study, by varying the growth speeds and the rotation rates of the two rods (feed and seed). The crystal growths were carried out at growth rates in the range 5-12 mm/h, and the feed and seed rods were counter-rotated, each at a rate of 10-25 rpm. Initially, a polycrystalline rod was used as a seed and once a good quality crystal boule was obtained, a crystal seed was used for subsequent growths. Er 2 Si 2 O 7 appears to melt congruently, and no deposition was observed on the quartz tube surrounding the feed and seed rods. The best quality crystals (assessment based on the analysis of the X-ray Laue diffraction) were obtained when growth rates of ∼ 10-12 mm/h were employed. The crystal quality appears to be independent of the rotation rate used for the seed rod. Er 2 Si 2 O 7 crystal boules prepared were typically 4-6 mm in diameter and 70-85 mm long. The boules tended to have thermally generated cracks in most cases, regardless of the growth rate employed. The crystals developed facets as they grew and two very strong facets were present on more than half the length of the grown crystals. All the erbium disilicate boules were a cloudy pink colour. The crystal boules of erbium disilicate are very fragile and all the crystals broke along the crystal growth axis into two long halves. Moreover, these two pieces cleaved a second time, perpendicular to the growth axis, thus forming crystal fragments of ∼ 5×5×3 mm 3 . Figure D-type Er 2 Si 2 O 7 orders magnetically below 1.9(1) K, with a presumed four-sublattice antiferromagnetic arrangement of Ising-like moments. The two structural types of holmium disilicate that are promising from a magnetic point of view are the C and D polymorphs. The magnetic ions are arranged in these crystallographic structures, in such a way that they form a distorted honeycomb-like lattice (see Figs. An excess of 15% silica was added to the reacted stoichiometric powder obtained previously. The powder mixture was then heated in air for several days (in 1 step) at 1300 • C. Phase purity analysis was carried out and the diffractogram is shown in Fig. To ensure a higher reactivity of the starting silica reagent, silica was pre-annealed in air at 1400 • C for 24 h. To ensure that the chemical reaction is complete, we have started with a slightly larger amount of excess (14%) than determined previously to be optimal and we have reacted the powder mixtures in air for several days (in 3 steps). The sintered material was isostatically pressed into rods (typically 6-8 mm diameter and 70-80 mm long) and sintered at 1400-1450 • C in air for several days. The annealed rods were then used for the crystal growth. Figure We have first grown crystal boules of Ho 2 Si 2 O 7 using the FZ method, in static air atmosphere, at ambient pressure. The crystal growths were carried out at growth rates in the range 5-15 mm/h, and the feed and seed rods were counter-rotated, each at a rate of 15-25 rpm. Polycrystalline rods were used as seed rods. Ho 2 Si 2 O 7 appears to melt congruently, and no deposition was observed on the quartz tube surrounding the feed and seed rods. The crystals did not develop any facets as they grew and the crystal boules of holmium disilicate were very fragile. X-ray Laue photographs taken of these boules of Ho 2 Si 2 O 7 reveal a poor crystalline quality of the crystal boules. The crystal growth of Ho 2 Si 2 O 7 was also carried out in air at pressures in the range 1-2 bars, a flow of air of 0.1-0.2 L/min. A growth rate of 8 mm/h was used, with the feed and seed rods counter-rotating at a rate of 10 and 25 rpm, respectively. A boule prepared in static air atmosphere, at a growth rate of 15 mm/h was used as a seed for this crystal growth. The Ho 2 Si 2 O 7 crystal boule obtained was 5 mm in diameter and 75 mm long. The boule tended to have thermally generated cracks, and it developed facets as it grew and two very strong facets were present on more than half the length of the grown boule. All the holmium disilicate crystal boules obtained were a pale orange colour. Figure We have first grown a Tm 2 Si 2 O 7 crystal boule, in static air atmosphere, at ambient pressure, using growth rates in the range 5-7 mm/h. The feed and seed rods were counter-rotated, each at a rate of 15 rpm. A polycrystalline rod was used as a seed rod. No deposition was observed on the quartz tube surrounding the feed and seed rods, suggesting that Tm 2 Si 2 O 7 melts congruently. The crystal did not develop any facets and the crystal boule was very fragile. To minimise the thermal stress on the crystal boule and reduce the cracks, the rotation of the seed rod was reduced to 5 rpm. Analysis by X-ray Laue diffraction of the crystalline quality of the Tm 2 Si 2 O 7 crystal boule obtained revealed the presence of multiple grains. A second crystal growth was performed, using as feed the crystal boule obtained previously. The growth was carried out in air atmosphere, at ambient pressure, in a flow of air of 1-2 L/min, using a growth rate of 10 mm/h (see Fig. To date, the magnetic properties of C-type Tm 2 Si 2 O 7 have not been studied. Figure We have been successful in growing crystals of R 2 Si 2 O 7 (with R = Er, Ho, and Tm) using the FZ method. All the rare-earth disilicate compounds appear to melt congruently and no evaporation was observed for the growths. The crystal growths were performed using various growth rates, in air atmosphere. All the rare-earth disilicate crystals are very fragile and tend to have thermally generated cracks. In general, crystal boules of better crystalline quality were obtained using average or high speed of growth. A summary of the crystal growth conditions used for the growth is given in Table The quality and composition of the as-grown R 2 Si 2 O 7 boules were investigated using Xray diffraction techniques. The lattice parameters determined by powder X-ray diffraction are collected in Table 2 Si 2 O 7 and a few peaks of monoclinic monoclinic B-type Tm 2 SiO 5