Ultrananocrystalline diamond/hydrogenated amorphous carbon composite thin films synthesized via coaxial arc plasma possess a marked structural feature of diamond grains embedded in an amorphous carbon and a hydrogenated amorphous carbon matrix which are the largest constituents of the films. Since the amorphous nature yields much larger light absorption coefficients as well as a generation source of photo-induced carriers with UV rays, these films can be potential candidates for deep-UV photodetector applications. From some previous studies p-type conduction of the films has been realized by doping boron in experimental conditions. In addition, their optical and electrical characteristics were investigated previously. However, the bonding structures which largely affect the physical properties of the devices haven't been investigated. In this work, near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy characterizations are carried out. The result reveals that a bonding state σ* C-B of diamond surfaces is formed preferentially and structural distortion is caused at an early stage of boron-doping. Further doping into the films lessens the amount of unsaturated bonds such as π* C≡C, which may be a cause of the device performance degradations. Our work suggests a fundamental case model of boron-doping effects on a local structure of the film. Diamond thin films, which can be synthesized artificially by various vapor deposition such as hot-filament chemical vapor deposition (HFCVD) These potential diamond thin films can be classified by the crystallinity into single crystal and polycrystalline diamonds. While polycrystalline diamonds can be synthesized artificially using hydrogen, methane and/or argon gases via chemical vapor deposition (CVD) technique Polycrystalline diamonds are commonly composed of the micro-or nano-structures called microcrystalline diamonds (MCDs) and nanocrystalline diamonds (NCDs), respectively, and the later constituting of several-nanometer diamond grains are sometimes called ultrananocrystalline diamonds (UNCDs) As stated above, UNCD/a-C and UNCD/a-C:H thin films are deposited on various sorts of substrates via CVDs in general. Meanwhile, these films can also be synthesized via physical vapor deposition (PVD) methods such as pulsed laser deposition (PLD) A lot of experimental research on the films prepared by CAPD toward the applications to photovoltaics such as UV sensors have been accumulated until today, motivated by some theoretical and experimental studies. Common intrinsic UNCD/a-C:H films synthesized via CAPD possess optical properties such as an indirect optical bandgap of 1.7 eV stemming from the amorphous regions In this work, we report on the boron-doping effects by use of near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) spectroscopy, which is functional in quantitative analysis of local structures, studying the boron-and carbon-related bonds since C K-edge obtained by this technique is able to decern any bonding states of carbon. Recently, we have investigated the hydrogenation effect similarly by use of NEXAFS spectroscopy as well as X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR), and demonstrated an effectiveness of hydrogenation induced with a technological development of the film fabrication process (see Ref. We prepared five discrete samples with different boron contents to investigate boron-doping effects on UNCD/a-C:H films in this work. All the samples were fabricated via CAPD based on a conventional manner reported up to date First, boron K (B K)-edge spectra presented in Figure Secondary, the area in a photon energy of less than ~195 eV is considered. An absorption spectrum of the film prepared using a target with a boron content of 1.0 at. % exhibits a weak jump at 188.5 eV (labeled α). This would stem from metallic boron (B-B) as demonstrated in a couple of research on h-BNs To investigate how the carbon hybridization in the films varies quantitatively by doping boron, NEXAFS C K-edge spectra were examined at the same beamline and analyzed in detail. Each extracted data was processed based on some previous studies on UNCD/a-C:H films accumulated up to the present (see, for example, Refs. One of the most noticeable appearance changes are illustrated by the areas of Y and Z in Figure The decomposed spectrum deriving from carbon-oxygen bonds is split into two gaussian functions positioned at 289.3 and 290.3 eV which denote π* C=O and π* COOH, respectively, from that in reference to our latest work These chemical bonding state transitions unveiled by NEXAFS B Kand C K-edges summarize comprehensive mechanisms of boron-doping effects on the local structures of UNCD/a-C:H films deposited by CAPD technique. At an early stage of doping with its amount of less than 1.0 at. %, incorporated boron atoms form metallic boron without any hybridization with carbon atoms. This state of boron would be localized at GBs predominantly as reference to a report on boron-doped UNCD/a-C:H films By use of NEXAFS spectroscopic technique, borondoping effects on UNCD/a-C:H films deposited by CAPD have been studied to clarify the chemical bonding transitions of their local structures. The results indicate metallic boron is formed sparsely at GBs to exist at interfaces between UNCD crystallites and an a-C and/or a a-C:H matrices at an early stage of doping, and σ* C-B starts to be generated on the UNCD grain surfaces substitutionally with hydrogen atoms at the surfaces on a priority basis and dangling bonds subsidiarily from a certain point by the additional doping. This chemical bonding states should be an origin of a drastic enhancement of electrical conductivities of the films and play a part in accepter-like levels localized above the valence band, which would be helpful in inducing hopping conductions This work is succeeded from Yoshitake Research Group (Kyushu University) mainly directed by Dr. Satoshi Takeichi affiliated with OSG Corporation at present, and is completed by the author's volunteering. The author expresses deep appreciations to Dr. Satoshi Takeichi for his cooperation of sample fabrications, XPS and NEXAFS experiments, Dr. Eiichi Kobayashi (Kyushu Synchrotron Research Center) and Mr. Seiya Uchida (Kyushu University) for the help of XPS and NEXAFS measurements. We provide here additional discussion on electrical characteristics that the UNCD/a-C:H films possess revealed in some previous research and correlate them with the results obtained this time to draw brief perspectives on a possible application toward UV photodiodes. Electrical properties and transport mechanisms of the films in each doped level can also be explained simultaneously by comparing the above discussion with some previous research. Hereupon, we review the outcomes regarding the films accumulated up to now before initiating correlation. As introduced in Section 1, heterojunction diodes comprising boron-doped UNCD/a-C:H films and n-type Si substrates were successfully fabricated with CAPD technique and the electrical characteristics as well as the transport mechanism have also been investigated. It should be noted that CAPD UNCD/a-C:H thin films occupy their constituents mostly of a-C and a-C:H matrices accompanied by a great number of GBs differently from those fabricated with various conventional CVD techniques which own denser polycrystalline diamonds with less other components such as amorphous and GBs. This compositional difference may have generated their distinguished optical and electrical properties represented by the three different optical gaps deriving from a-C and/or a-C:H matrices, GBs, and diamond particulates. As for the electrical transport mechanism, it has been explained that firstly electron-hole pairs are generated at UNCD grains with UV irradiation. After that the created electron and hole transfer through mainly GBs in addition to their amorphous fractions supported by incorporated nitrogen and boron impurities in n-and p-type CAPD UNCD/a-C:H films, respectively. Recently, Katamune et al. reported the electrical characteristics of boron-doped UNCD/a-C:H films by use of hard X-ray photoelectron emission microscopy (HAXPES). From an accompanied investigation, it is known that the activation energy of the films rises with a drop of boron content and that more doped films with the amount of dopant more than 2.0 at. % exhibited clear tendencies in a hopping model In lightly-doped films with its amount of presumed 0.5 at. %, photo-induced carriers generated at UNCD crystallites with UV illuminations would pass mainly through GBs with an assistance of metallic boron via three-dimensional VRH and secondary through an a-C and a a-C:H matrices as discussed in our recent work Thus, we have conducted close correlation between chemical bonding states and electrical properties of borondoped UNCD/a-C:H thin films prepared via CAPD in each doping level in this section. The result to be emphasized the most is a bonding state σ* C-B would be an origin of enhancing electrical conductivities of the films. However slight the quantitative variation is, it surely serves to improve device performances in the p-n heterojunction diodes.