We investigate chiral symmetry breaking in a model of Dirac fermions with a complexified coupling constant whose imaginary part represents dissipation. We introduce a chiral chemical potential and observe that for real coupling a relativistic BCS-BEC crossover is realized. We solve the model in the mean-field approximation and construct the phase diagram as a function of the complex coupling. It is found that the dynamical mass increases under dissipation, although the chiral symmetry gets restored if dissipation exceeds a threshold. One of the fundamental tenets of modern quantum mechanics and quantum field theory is that Hamiltonians should be Hermitian. It ensures that energy levels are real and the time evolution is unitary. However, it has been perceived in recent years that there are situations in which physics can be effectively described in terms of non-Hermitian Hamiltonians Non-Hermitian formulations can nowadays be found not only in condensed matter physics but also in high-energy physics. In studies of hot QCD, it is one of standard approaches to quarkonia to postulate a complex-valued interquark potential Superfluidity and superconductivity are amongst the most salient and fascinating phenomena in quantum many-body physics The primary goal of the present paper is to generalize the analysis of In this paper we investigate χSB in the NJL model with a complex coupling. Generally, χSB is considered to be a strong coupling phenomenon and a weakly coupled BCS picture does not apply. However, at finite chiral chemical potential Two caveats are in order here. First, to keep the presentation as simple as possible, 1 Properties of non-equilibrium fermionic systems with attractive interactions (such as the exciton BEC 2 Although we will not consider superfluidity (diquark condensation) in this work. Second, although a chirally imbalanced matter in gauge theories is intrinsically unstable due to the axial anomaly We consider a model with the partition function Z = DψDψ exp - where the Euclidean Lagrangian is given by It is invariant under U(1) V × U(1) A symmetry transformations. μ is the quark chemical potential and μ 5 is the chiral (or axial) chemical potential. We set the current mass to zero. Eq. (2.1) is the same model as in It is straightforward to introduce N f flavors of quarks and let N f → ∞ with G ∝ 1/N f , which allows us to rigorously justify a saddle point analysis, but we shall stick to N f = 1 for simplicity of exposition. With the Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation, quarks can be readily integrated out and yields The bosonic fields are related to fermionic observables as σ = G ψψ and π = G ψiγ 5 ψ . In the mean-field approximation, we have (2.4) where V 4 ≡ V 3 /T is the Euclidean spacetime volume, and we used where a momentum cutoff Λ was introduced to remove UV divergences. (See section 5 for a discussion on an alternative UV regularization.) Let us define dimensionless variables which leads to a dimensionless action S ≡ S/Λ 4 given by (2.8) In the following, we will assume 0 < μ 5 < 1 so that the Fermi surface stays inside the domain of integration. In generic open quantum systems, temperature is not well defined, and we treat t as a formal parameter used to define the path integral for the partition function, as in Let us begin with a discussion for real coupling g > 0. In the zero-temperature limit t → +0, (2.8) reduces to occurs for any nonzero coupling. This is the catalysis effect emphasized in e.g., The dynamical mass increases monotonically with μ 5 . What is the distinction between the BCS regime and the BEC regime? In nonrelativistic systems the unitarity limit marks a crisp boundary, but what about relativistic systems? The locus of a "transition" between the two regimes is not uniquely defined. As suggested in Next we proceed to the analysis for nonzero μ. The phase diagrams are shown in Figure Finally we complexify the coupling constant. Throughout this section we set μ = 0 to simplify the ensuing numerical analysis. Eq. (2.8) reduces to where g ∈ C and M ∈ C. When M is purely imaginary, (x ± μ 5 ) 2 + M 2 may be exactly on the branch cut of the complex square root, which makes the zero-temperature limit t → +0 ill-defined. When M is not purely imaginary, we have for t → +0 This integral can be performed with the formula where tanh -1 (z) = 1 2 log 1+z 1-z is the inverse function of tanh(z). This way we obtain Since S is a function of M 2 , the trivial vacuum M = 0 is always a solution to ∂S/∂M = 0. We are interested in the gap equation for M = 0, which reads We have varied g on the complex plane and numerically searched for a solution to (4.6) for each g. It turned out that there was no solution for Re g < 0, indicating that chiral symmetry is unbroken for Re g < 0. This is natural because Re g < 0 is a repulsive interaction. Furthermore, the phase structures for Im g > 0 and Im g < 0 are symmetric about the real axis of g. Hence we will assume Re g > 0 and Im g > 0 in the following. By monitoring the magnitude of the gradient ∂S/∂M we found an interesting mechanism that changes the number of saddle points of S. In Figure When there are multiple saddles, the dominant one is definitely the one that has the lowest value of Re S, since it has the largest magnitude of e -S and dominates the partition function as a sum over saddles Z ≈ n c n e -Sn provided that all c n 's are of the same order. Following • Normal phase: (4.6) has no solution, i.e., M = 0 is the only saddle of S. • Metastable χSB phase: there are solutions to (4.6), but their Re S are higher than that for M = 0. • Stable χSB phase: there are solutions to (4.6) whose Re S are lower than that for M = 0. In Figure Figure It is instructive to compare our findings with preceding works. • Ref. Finally we turn to the quasiparticle excitation spectra E(p) = (|p|/Λ -μ 5 ) 2 + M 2 which is generally complex for complex g. The real and (scaled) imaginary parts of E(p) are displayed in Figure In this section, we investigate what happens to the phase diagram when the sharp momentum cutoff used in section 4 is replaced with a more smooth UV regulator. Since the numerical search of a solution to the gap equation requires high numerical precision, it is mandatory to choose a regulator such that the momentum integral for the action S can be evaluated analytically. For this reason, we choose smooth form factors and 1 Then the action, in dimensionless form, reads as (5.6) Then we have for the gradient We numerically searched for a solution to (5.7) with varying g ∈ C and, if there was any solution, investigated its stability as compared to the trivial vacuum M = 0. The result is shown in Figure In summary, we have investigated χSB of Dirac fermions in four dimensions at finite chiral chemical potential for a complex-valued four-fermion coupling. We varied the coupling over the entire range from the weakly bound BCS regime to the tightly bound BEC regime, and numerically constructed the phase diagram. Our primary result is that the imaginary coupling tends to enhance χSB up to a certain threshold; when the imaginary coupling exceeds the threshold, the chiral symmetry is restored, although a nontrivial solution to the gap equation continues to exist. We illustrated how complex saddles of the action come into existence and go away through the imaginary axis of the complex gap plane along which the action has a branch cut. We also worked out the complex energy spectra of quasiparticles. Our results can in principle be tested in experiments using ultracold atomic gases and other materials that host Dirac fermions There are miscellaneous future directions in which this work can be extended. A partial list is given below. • To incorporate the competition between the chiral condensate and the diquark condensate (i.e., a competition between a Dirac mass and a Majorana mass) along the lines of • To analyze the structure of Cooper pairs as a function of the complex coupling, and provide a more precise description of the non-Hermitian BCS-BEC crossover • To use the renormalization group to improve the mean-field analysis • To clarify how to apply the Lefschetz thimble approach A complex-valued chemical potential has been widely used in Monte Carlo simulations of QCD as a means of mitigating the sign problem It is conceivable that the creation of a chirally imbalanced matter in experiments is highly challenging.Creating a chirally balanced Dirac fermions at finite quark chemical potential would be easier, for which our results would be qualitatively correct if the dynamical mass is replaced with a superfluid gap.