We report a new metastable γ polymorph of mixed metal borohydride LiSc(BH4)4. Using Density Functional Theory calculations with dispersion corrections, we prove importance of van der Waals H...H interactions for correct theoretical description of the title compound. We propose the ordered ground state structure (α form) and revise the recently reported β phase, now describing it as a solid solution, LiSc(BH4)4-xClx, x≈0.7. The LiSc(BH4)4 polymorphism is rationalized using Zr(BH4)4 type structure with Sc → Zr and Li in the interstitial face-centered positions. Quest for hydrogen-rich compounds has been extremely vivid during the last two decades, with those showing high gravimetric contents of hydrogen being at the focus of the research. The first tetragonal α polymorph of LiSc(BH4)4 with P-42c unit cell, V=444.2 Å 3 and Z=2 was reported in 2008 (Figure The cell offers three non-equivalent interstitial tetrahedral sites for the lithium counter cation at the edge (1⁄2,0,0), face (1⁄2,1⁄2,0) and centre (1⁄2,1⁄2,1⁄2), with tetrahedral coordination by four borohydride groups on each site (Figure Their key structural features including coordination polyhedra and type of connectivity are listed in Table The most important findings of the computations are as follows: (i) The P-42c model originating from face-centred site occupation in Li(1⁄2,1⁄2,0)b (Figure Importantly, our P-42c ground state model yields better Rietveld fit for the α form § § § than the literature P-42c model (cf. Lattice dynamics (phonons) was calculated using direct method implemented in the program PHONOPY. We have calculated phonon dispersion curves for LiSc(BH4)4 in Zr(BH4)4 type structure with Li placed in the (1⁄2, 1⁄2, 1⁄2) position (Figure As simulated diffraction pattern of P-42c ordered ground state seems to successfully reproduce experimental pattern of α phase, Rietveld refinement of a polycrystalline sample containing this phase was re-examined. Results of two refinements were compared showing that fit parameter wRp gets lower while using ordered model than while using previously reported disordered model of α phase. During both refinements, several restrains concerning H atoms positions and atomic displacement parameters (ADP) were defined. BH4 groups were fixed in a tetrahedral geometry with B-H distances set as 1.15 Å (tolerance of 0.01 Å) and H-B-H angles restrained to 109.47° (tolerance of 0.01°). ADP of all H atoms are equal and 1.2 times larger than ADP of B atom. Crystal structure of the β phase was originally resolved in tetragonal I4/m space group with half occupancies assigned to half of the lithium atoms. To validate the structure, we have built and optimized several ordered models following two approaches. In the first one, we have constructed two ordered models based on originally determined I4/m structure by removing half of the partially occupied lithium positions in the unit cell (model 1) and supercell 1x1x2 (model 2) respectively. The experimentally refined unicell contains eight lithium positions with half occupancy. These positions are numbered in Figure Second approach is based on our observation that β is a thermal decomposition product of NH4Sc(BH4)4. Here, we have assumed that NH4 + evolved from the sample while being heated and LiCl manifested its presence by substituting ammonium cation with Li. The NH4Sc(BH4)4 type structure is partially supported by the fact that a close-to-tetragonal β type representation of the NH4Sc(BH4)4 crystal exists (compare first two columns in Table All models are illustrated in Figure lowering is obtained also for the I-4 structure (42 meV), while in case of the remaining models the energy lowering is even larger (61-174 meV), consistently with changes in the H...H separations (further details in Figure of cell parameters (a, b, c in Å; V/Z in Å