Rare-earth monopnictides display rich physical behaviors, featuring most notably spin and orbital orders in their ground state. Here, we grow ErBi single crystal and study its magnetic, thermal and electrical properties. An analysis of the magnetic entropy and magnetization indicates that the weak magnetic anisotropy in ErBi possibly derives from the mixing effect, namely the anisotropic ground state of Er 3+ (4f 11 ) mingles with the isotropic excited state through exchange interaction. At low temperature, an extremely large magnetoresistance (~10 4 %) with a parabolic magneticfield dependence is observed, which can be ascribed to the nearly perfect electron-hole compensation and ultrahigh carrier mobility. When the magnetic field is rotated in the ab (ac) plane and the current flows in the b axis, the angular magnetoresistance in ErBi shows a twofold (fourfold) symmetry. Similar case has been observed in LaBi where the anisotropic Fermi surface dominates the low-temperature transport. Our theoretical calculation suggests that near the Fermi level ErBi shares similarity with LaBi in the electronic band structures. These findings indicate that the angular magnetoresistance of ErBi could be mainly determined by its anisotropic Fermi surface topology. Besides, contributions from several other possibilities, including the spin-dependent scattering, spin-orbit scattering, and demagnetization correlation to the angular magnetoresistance of ErBi are also discussed. Ever-increasing interest in the rare-earth-based intermetallic compounds is due, in part, to the fact that the hybridization between localized 4f and conduction electrons can sometimes induce intriguing electronic and magnetic states Recent attention is given to the NaCl-type rare-earth monopnictide RPn (R=rare earth; Pn=Sb, Bi) family Recently, Xu et al found similar case in the paramagnetic phase of CeSb as well However, a series of additional minima at 45°, 135°, 225°, and 315° are observed below TN, which is ascribed to the enhanced electron scattering from magnetic multidomains generated by the first-order Γ8 (1) orbital-flop The physical properties of a series of magnetic RPn (R=Nd, Sm, Dy, Ho) which are isostructural analogues of CeSb, have been intensively studied in the literature Here, we report the growth of ErBi single crystal, and study the structure, magnetic susceptibility, magnetization, specific heat, resistivity, and magnetoresistance. We find that in the magnetic ground state of ErBi the first excited isotropic doublet state is admixed to the anisotropic quartet, which yields weak magnetic anisotropy and releases 72% of magnetic entropy Rln4 at TN. And for this reason, ErBi shares the similarity with LaBi and GdBi in the magnitude of residual resistivity and angular magnetoresistance. Our finding suggests that the anisotropic Fermi surface topology is largely responsible for the angular magnetoresistance of ErBi. ErBi single crystals were prepared by Bi self-flux method. Chips of Er (99.9%) and Bi powders (99.999%) were placed in alumina crucibles with an atomic ratio of 1:19 and sealed in evacuated quartz tubes. All the operations were conducted in an oxygen-free glove-box filled with nitrogen. The sealed tubes were heated up to 1473 K in 12 hours, kept for 24 hours, and then slowly cooled to 773 K in 400 hours. At this temperature, the excess Bi flux was decanted in a centrifuge. Crystal symmetry of the as-grown samples was determined using a back-reflection Laue camera. X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectrum was obtained by a Rigaku x-ray diffractometer. Elementary composition of the single crystals was checked by a scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with an energy-dispersive x-ray (EDX) spectrometer. Magnetization measurements were performed on a System-Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (VSM). Resistivity was measured by a conventional four-probe method and symmetrized to remove the effect of misalignment of the voltage wires ( ρ xx = ρ xx (B)+ρ xx (-B) ). Specific-heat measurements were performed using the time-relaxation method. All the physical property characterizations were conducted on a Quantum Design physical property measurement system (PPMS). The inset of Fig. The main panel of Fig. 40. Likewise, when the above mentioned Θ D LaBi is substituted by Θ D LuBi = (12π 4 NR/5β) 1/3 = 169.2 K (N = 2), Θ D ErBi takes a value of 170.9 K (close to 171.2 K). Figure Here, we fit the Cm data using γ'T+CSch (with the antiferromagnetic temperature region excluded), where CSch is the Schottky specific heat for ErBi, which is slightly larger than that of LaBi (0.85 mJ•K -2 •mol - 1 ) = Rln16 = 23.05 J/K mol. Thus, it can be concluded that thermal population of the CEFsplit states in ErBi is not fully complete at this temperature. Besides, the magnetic entropy at TN is evaluated to be 8.1 J/K mol which corresponds to 1.4Rln2 and 0.72ln4, suggesting that the first excited state mingles with the Γ8 quartets at CEF ground state Figure presents the temperature-dependent inverse magnetic susceptibility χ -1 , where the experimental data above 100 K can be well modeled by the Curie-Weiss law χ = C/(T-θCW) A linear fit of the χ -1 data gives θCW = -8.33 K, which implies the electronic correlation in ErBi is antiferromagnetic in essence and three quartets (Γ8 (1) , Γ8 (2) and Γ8 (3) ), all of which carry a magnetic moment. Previous results suggest that the ground-state CEF level for ErBi is Γ8 (3) quartet It is clear that the isothermal magnetization in Fig. , are found. The one corresponding to the low field could be attributed to the fielddriven spin-flop, while the latter one may be ascribed to the antiferromagnetic to ferromagnetic phase transition induced by the applied magnetic field. For comparison, we carefully checked the magnetization and its derivative dM/dB at 5 K as well in Fig. As plotted, the magnetization initially varies linearly with increasing magnetic field and then exhibits a tendency to saturate as is expected in the paramagnetic region. Besides, dM/dB at this temperature decreases gradually with the increasing magnetic field, which indicates that the anomalies in magnetization curve at 2 K are of spin origin. This is reminiscent of the isothermal magnetization in ErSb which shows similar behaviors Figure ) from the two-band magnetoresistance model by assuming that the electron and hole densities in ErBi are perfectly compensated Figure Generally, field-induced excitonic gaps in the linear spectrum of Coulomb interacting quasiparticles are always attributed to the resistivity crossover. However, the normalized temperature-dependent magnetoresistance curves [Fig. ) m ] in light of the Kohler's rule It clearly shows that the resistivity under magnetic field is composed by two parts, ρ0 and Δρ = ρ (H=0) α( B ρ (H=0) ) m ∼ 1 ρ (H=0) (m = 1.96 ∼ 2) with opposite temperature dependence, which yields a minimum or a metal-insulator-like crossover in resistivity. As discussed in Ref. in the framework of semiclassical model, where m, τ and e are the effective mass, relaxation time and electron charge, respectively. It thus can be seen that the anisotropy of effective mass acts as a key ingredient in determining the anisotropic magnetoresistance and is a macroscopic reflection of the Fermi surface topology. Here, we introduce a factor εφ to scale the magnetic field, and thus the magnetoresistance curves in Fig. Actually, our calculations (see the Supplemental Material) on the ferromagnetic state of ErBi confirm the presence of elongated ellipsoidal electron pockets centered at the X point in the Brillouin zone. Similar to those in other RPn (1.5×0.2×0.3 mm 3 ) for φ = 0° and 90°, respectively. Since the internal magnetic flux density Bint = Bapp + μ0(1-D)M at φ = 90° is slightly smaller than that at φ = 0°, a tiny difference of the magnetoresistance between these two φs can come into being. Here, Bapp is the applied magnetic field. Nevertheless, it is clear that the shape of angular magnetoresistance of ErBi is quite similar to that of LaBi, suggesting that Fermi surface topology plays a major role in determining the magnetoresistance anisotropy in ErBi. We have successfully grown the cubic ErBi single crystals using Bi-self flux method, and systematically studied their magnetic, electrical, and thermal properties by means of susceptibility, magnetization, resistivity, magnetoresistance, specific heat and so on. Our data reveals that ErBi orders antiferromagnetically at TN~4 K which decreases with increasing magnetic field. Below TN, field-induced phase transitions are observed in the isothermal magnetization curves. Resistivity measurement evidences that ErBi is metallic at the ground state and a given magnetic field can yield upturn behavior. Normalized magnetoresistance at different field clarifies that the metal-insulator-like transition in resistivity does not originate from gap opening effect. Besides, anisotropic magnetoresistance with twofold and fourfold symmetries are also observed in ErBi, which resemble those of LaSb and LaBi. Our electronic band structure calculations suggest that ErBi is an antiferromagnetic semimetal candidate with the same Fermi surface topology as obtained in the La-based sister compounds. Besides, we find that the angular magnetoresistance is barely affected by the spin and orbital orders, but mainly dominated by the anisotropy of Fermi surface morphology. 