The precise determination of the elastic modulus of metallic foils is non-trivial. • Multiple elastic loadingunloading cycles led to reproducible and accurate determination compared to monotonic testing. • Results were interpreted using Electron Backscatter Diffraction and X-Ray Diffraction methods. • Foil cross sections were prepared and analysed. Accurately measuring the mechanical properties of metallic foils and ribbons is challenging. Due to their thicknesses and the tendency to deform while handling, foils need to be treated with care. There are several approaches to measure the elastic properties of foils, ribbons and films such as tensile testing , resonance method When tensile testing foils many factors that are straight forward when testing bulk samples can hinder the accurate measurement of mechanical properties. These factors include gripping problems, proper sample alignment between the grips, and sample production, all of which can be a challenge to overcome in the case of foils and seriously affect the outcome of the experiments. According to the ASTM standard (ASTM E345-16 It is evident that the accurate determination of strain is crucial for determination of elastic properties. It has been shown that for foils > 100 μm the strain can still be measured by contact extensometers In this paper, a nanoindentation inspired Two industrially manufactured ED Cu foils were investigated (Foil A and Foil B). Due to the production process, the foils have two surfaces that differ in terms of appearance and roughness. This is a result of the growth of the foils on a cathode out of a chemical bath. ED foil surfaces generally can be distinguished as a shiny side facing the cathode and a matte side which faces the bath during deposition as also described by A scanning electron microscope (SEM, LEO 1525 Zeiss Inc., Oberkochen, Germany) was used to obtain SEM images and EBSD analysis was performed with a Bruker e -Flash FS detector of the microstructures of the foil surfaces and cross-sections. EBSD scans of the foils were made on samples that were electro-polished using a Struers TegraPol-5 from the matte side resulting in an average thickness of 28 μm. The used parameters were 35 V, a flowrate of 13 for 10 s and the used electrolyte (Struers -Electrolyte D2) was kept cool in a freezer before use. Producing cross sections was found to be challenging, and different mechanical, electro-polishing, and ion polishing methods were explored to find the optimal way of production as similarly described in The samples for tensile testing were made according to ASTM E345-16 The laser-cut foils were strained in uniaxial tension using a ZWICK/ ROELL Z100 equipped with 200 N Load Cell type ZWICK/ROELL Xforce P with a sensitivity of 2 mV/V combined with flat grips ZWICK/ROELL Type 8033. To ensure proper gripping, the grips were sand blasted and pre-tests were performed to ensure no slipping occurred. A LSE detector ZWICK/ROELL laserXtens HP TZ was used to measure strain of the samples. A gauge length of 50 mm was used. The tensile device and the LSE detector were controlled with the testXpert III-V1.2 software. To enable proper alignment of the LSE detector a preload of 20 N was used. The tests were performed using force control always going up to 87.5 N and down to 20 N. A crosshead speed of 0.6 mm/min was used for all experiments. Only samples without artefacts in the cyclic regime were considered. Six samples per foil type (A and B) were evaluated with 60 load-unload cycles in the elastic regime per test. For each foil type, the elastic modulus was determined by calculating the average for different combinations of unloading and loading segments of the engineering stress-strain curve, with the first loading segments being markedly different, as will be shown later. The evaluation was performed in different stress regimes, and the plateaus of the modulus values between 80 and 140 MPa were most stable as will be demonstrated later. This is valid for both the loading and unloading cycles. Fig. EDS scans showed that Foil A was nearly impurity free (within the limit of detectability of EDS) and Foil B was found to contain sulphur impurities. Sulphur can be considered a residual of the electrodeposition process The EBSD scans in Fig. where A i is the area and ν i the grain size of grain i. The sieve analysis shows that in Foil B over 40% of the grains are smaller than 1 μm whereas in Foil A only about 30% are in this regime. Foil B shows a minor part of grains larger than 4 μm up to 7 μm. Foil A shows a slight decrease in the slope of the curve at about 2.5 μm, meaning that with increasing grain size the proportions of grains in this regime becomes smaller. The cross sectional EBSD scans are shown in Fig. To enable interpretation of the macro-texture using only θ -2θ scans (Fig. where I hkl is the measured peak intensity, I hkl 0 is the intensity of the powder pattern in the ICSDpattern Fig. SEM images of the foil surfaces can be interpreted according to Comparing the measured elastic moduli of both foil types one can see that they differ (see Table It was shown in As a result of the presented calculations and the fact that the preparation by ion slicing methods can lead to artefacts, it has to be concluded that the severe differences in the measured elastic modulus should not be purely attributed to microstructural differences or grain boundary sliding, but also to the described problems with standard tensile test evaluation procedures. The reproducibility of the evaluation of loading-unloading cycles was first demonstrated for thin freestanding films In the current study presented here another approach to find the optimal range for evaluation was used and accomplished by plotting the gradient of stress over the gradient of strain for each data point (loading or unloading segment) of the initially rectilinear (straight) portion of the curve. The calculated value resembles the local tangent modulus of the stress-strain curve. In a perfect test without any measurement fluctuations of an ideally elastic material the local tangent modulus will show a constant value over a significant stress range. When the same approach is applied to the first loading segment of the stressstrain curves measured for Foils A and B, a constant value was not observed (Fig. The results presented illustrate that evaluation of the elastic properties of copper foils using only the first straining part of the curves can lead to severe differences compared to other methods and theoretical texture based calculations. The high anisotropy of the elastic modulus of copper ranging from 66.7 GPa for (100) oriented copper Values significantly lower should be handled with care. The method proposed here allows controlled evaluation of elastic properties of foils, minimizing experimental influences such as curtaining. It was shown on two 40 μm thick electrodeposited copper foils that evaluation of the elastic modulus is not trivial for metallic foils. The importance of a controlled procedure was emphasized using experiments and comparisons to literature. Measurements have to be performed in a way that minimizes influences of other effects not related to the purely elastic behaviour of the material. Therefore, a cyclic tensile straining approach in the elastic regime was introduced and evaluated using the local tangent moduli as an indicator of the most linear segment of the stress-strain curve, enabling the measurement of the elastic modulus with high accuracy. As a result of the different deposition methods of the foils, different microstructures and textures were achieved leading to different elastic modulus values. The evaluated elastic modulus for Foil A was found to be 120 GPa and for Foil B slightly lower at 98 GPa. The lower value is most likely due to the differences in texture. Both foils have reasonable elastic modulus values for polycrystalline Cu. It Fig. First loading averages evaluated in different stress regimes of the experiments evaluated in Table a ⁎ Indicates that the first loading was excluded in the mean analysis.