Herein we report experimental evidence of directional SERS from molecules situated inside a single nanowirenanoparticle junction cavity. The emission was confined to a narrow range of wavevectors perpendicular to the axis of the cavity. In addition to this, the molecules excite multiple guided modes of the nanowire which were imaged using leakage radiation Fourier microscopy. We further characterize the emission wavevectors as a function of output polarization. The excited guided modes of the wire show interesting polarization signatures. All the results were corroborated using finite element method based numerical simulations. Essentially, we provide an important connection between gap-cavity enhanced Raman scattering and its directionality of emission. The results may be of relevance in understanding the cavity electrodynamics at the nanoscale and molecular coupling to extremely small gaps between a one dimensional and a zero dimensional plasmonic nanostructure. Cavity assisted molecular emission finds relevance in addressing various aspects of fundamental and applied scientific problems. enhancement and the modification of the local density of optical states, molecular emission inside extremely small cavities can be enhanced many fold. Nanocavities have been utilized to achieve single molecule strong coupling, Nanocavity assisted surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) has been studied, in the recent past, with an emphasis on intensity enhancement and sensing capabilities. With the above motivation in mind, we probed a novel nanocavity prepared using a nanoparticle and a nanowire. Single nanowirenanoparticle junction cavities have unique advantages as they can be excited remotely. They are relatively easier to prepare using wet chemical approaches and do not require sophisticated lithography techniques. Molecules can be situated inside the nanowirenanoparticle junction cavity and can be excited using an objective lens. Since the distance between nanoparticle and nanowire in a typical junction is on the order of 4 -5 nm, the molecules will experience very large electric fields and hence enhanced Raman scattering. Probing momentum signatures of molecular SERS from these extremely small junctions can be very illuminating. In the past, nanowire-nanoparticle junctions have been utilized to understand the input polarization dependence and SERS enhancement, Here we present momentum space imaging of bi-phenyl thiol (BPT) molecular SERS by situating BPT molecules inside a single nanowire-nanoparticle junction. Using Fourier plane (FP) imaging, we show that a nanowire-nanoparticle cavity not only enhances the SERS emission, but also directs it to a specific range of wavevectors. Further we show that the SERS carries interesting output polarization signatures. We perform 3D finite element method (FEM) based numerical simulations to corroborate experimental findings. Figure Since the thiol based molecules have an affinity towards the surface of gold, they preferentially attach to the gold nanoparticle surface. Excess molecules were then washed off and the particles were redistributed in ethanol. Typical nanowire-nanoparticle junctions were prepared by dropcasting silver nanowires on a glass coverslip and allowed to dry. The nanoparticle solution was then dropcast onto the nanowire coated glass coverslip to create nanowire-nanoparticle junctions. The detailed procedure can be found elsewhere Inset (i) of figure Molecules that are sandwiched in between the nanoparticle and the nanowire experience large electric field enhancement in the cavity. Since the molecules are anchored on the particle, the SERS signal is essentially generated at the junction (see figure To understand the polarization characteristics of the system, we performed both input and output polarization resolved spectroscopy on the nanowire-nanoparticle junction. The junction was excited using two orthogonal input polarizations (transverse and longitudinal with respect to the axis of the wire) and the resulting SERS signals from the system were captured. The outcoupled light was collected from the entire nanowire-nanoparticle system and no spatial filtering was performed. Figure After analyzing the spectral characteristics of the system, we now perform Fourier plane imaging of the outcoupled emission from the system, as shown in figure For thinner nanowires (size ~ 100 nm), the leaky modes cease to exist. The FP image for such a system should not contain the leaky guided modes. This is shown in figure To quantify the emission further, we consider the line profile of emission across the emission maxima, as shown in figure As the nanowires are thick (~ 300 nm in diameter), one can see multiple leaky modes, at the Raman wavelength of the molecule. Next we quantify the emission from the junction. The profile of the black dotted line parallel to the leaky modes (see figure With the understanding of the Fourier plane signatures of SERS emission from the nanowire-nanoparticle system, we measured output polarization resolved FP images. Polarization resolved imaging is very important for this system as the modes of the nanowire show rich polarization signatures and that can affect polarization of the SERS emission from the entire nanowire-nanoparticle system. Figure To further understand the process of emission from the nanowirenanoparticle junction, we performed 3D finite element method (FEM) electrodynamic simulations using COMSOL 5.3. The silver nanowire was modeled with a pentagonal cross-section of diameter 300 nm and of length 10 μm. The nanoparticle is placed at the center of the nanowire (equidistant from the ends). The gold nanoparticle was modeled as a sphere of diameter 200 nm and placed close to the nanowire. The refractive indices of silver and gold were taken from Ref. One can see strong electric field enhancement at the junction between the nanoparticle and the nanowire. Hence the molecules sandwiched between the wire and the particle experience strong Raman enhancement (of the order 10 4 )(see figure To further model the near-field coupling of molecular SERS to the propagating plasmon modes of the wire, we placed three spatially co-incident oscillating point dipoles each oriented along x, y, and z axes respectively inside the nanowirenanoparticle cavity. The dipolar emission now couples to the propagating modes of the wire as shown in the near field electric field map in Figure This clearly shows that molecular emission from the cavity essentially generates the guided plasmon modes in the wire, which leak into the medium of higher refractive index. The emission from the junction itself follows the scattering pattern from the junction. Hence, the convolution of these factors affect the complete FP as seen in figure Exact and faithful modeling of SERS emission from a nanowirenanparticle cavity is, of course, very challenging. Nevertheless this simple model of scattering and near-field excitation sheds light on the generation and directionality of the emission from the system under consideration. In summary, we have shown that the single nanowirenanoparticle junction cavity directs the SERS emission from molecules fixed inside the cavity to a narrow range of wavevectors. We also probed output polarization resolved momentum signatures from the system. The molecules inside the cavity also generate guided modes of the nanowire which have unique polarization properties. The experimental results are corroborated with FEM based numerical simulations. We believe that the results presented will have wider relevance in understanding molecular coupling to extremely small cavities, those prepared with a combination of a zero and one dimensional nanostrutures. Specifically in understanding coupling of SERS to the multiple guided modes of the geometery which shows very interesting and non-trivial momentum and polarization signatures. This experiment can be extrapolated to study single molecule SERS in remote excitation configurations, and can be harnessed as a potential test-bed for spin-orbit interaction based Raman emission. 