The structural and electronic properties of ATiO3 (A=Ca, Sr, Ba) have been investigated under strain-free situation and with realistic constraints using first-principles calculations. We endeavored to find out the interplay between mild lattice distortions and bandgap in three ATiO3 family members that has remained skeptical to date. We found out that the electronic structure was particularly sensitive to strains (compressive or tensile) as expected in most materials science studies. Our results indicate that under mild strains; the bandgap (Egap), increased under compression and decreased under tension. In all the three materials, the bandgap and the lattice parameter (a) were found to relate as Egap ∝ 1 a x for mild distortions with 2.19 < x < 3.1. All these changes are attributed to the interplay of electrostatics and covalency in these crystals. This work acts as a yardstick on bandgap engineering to achieve desired properties in these titanates for feasible future applications. Transition metal oxides (TMOs) have catapulted interest in both academia and industry for the last over fifty years. The ever growing interest is similar to that of semiconductor physics that came in to play many years ago Perovskites are a family of materials in the TMOs with a chemical formula ABO 3 . With five atoms in the unit cell in their high-symmetry cubic phase, they contain new and magnificent physics. Materials in this class all have similar atomic structures 2 . The structural stability in the ABO 3 class is remarkable for a wide choice of A and B cations Here we give a focus on ATiO 3 perovskites. These materials have intrinsic properties that are tied on their atomic constituent. It has been found out that perovskite-like oxides in which CaTiO 3 , SrTiO 3 and BaTiO 3 are embedded, work efficiently as catalysts due to their high melting points and also provide successful oxygen flow carriers Many years ago, Dalven 14 deduced an empirical relation E 0 ∝ 1 a 2 0 , between the energy gap E 0 and lattice constant a 0 for a wide range of semiconductors with the cubic NaCl crystal structure. These findings dictated that applied strain on a crystal always affected its intrinsic properties In this work, the authors intend to investigate the effects of strains on the structural and electronic properties of ATiO 3 by performing first principles calculations. The output from this work may be of help in revealing the driving mechanism in the relationship between lattice and bandgap as reported by The remaining parts of the paper are organized as follows: In Sec. II we account for the technicalities in our calculations. In Sec. III, we present the structural properties of the three titanates in comparison to other works (Sec. III A), the electronic structure in an unstrained case (Sec. III B), the various active orbital contributions (Sec. III C) and the response of the bandgap to various lattice strains (Sec. III D). Conclusion and future perspectives regarding the work are given in Sec. IV. The simulations were done on ATiO 3 , (A=Ca, Sr, Ba) by employing the numerical atomic orbital method as implemented in the Siesta method In order to obtain a converged system, a two step procedure was performed: Step one, to relax the atomic structure and the one particle density matrix using a sensible number of k-points (6×6×6 Monkhorst-Pack 31 k-point mesh) and step two, freezing the already relaxed structure and density matrix, a non-self consistent band structure calculation was performed using a much denser sampling of 60×60×60 in the real space integrations. In this calculation, the atomic coordinates were relaxed until the forces were smaller than 0.01 eV/ Å and we ensured that the stress tensor components were below 0.0001 eV/ Å3 . The schematic representation of the unit cell of titanates in this study, the green represents A-cation (Ca, Sr, Ba), the blue colour inside the octahedra represents the B-cation (Titanium) while the red represents the oxygen atoms. By a simple inspection, we can tell that the Acation portrays a 12-fold oxygen coordination while B-cation shows a 6-fold oxygen coordination, forming the BO 6 octahedara which is a critical signature in the functional unit of perovskites. The positions of the atoms are as follows A(0.0,0.0,0.0), B(0.5,0.5,0.5), O 1 (0.5,0.5,0.0),O 2 (0.5,0.0,0.5), O 3 (0.0,0.5,0.5). A. Structure of the three titanates In Fig. Another comparison between the three titanates is the measure of the respective bond-lengths. Bond-lengths may predict the hardness of any material. In principle, a shorter bond will be stronger than a longer bond. By inspection, there exists a relationship between the ionic radii and the lattice parameter (a) of the ATiO 3 , (A=Ca, Sr, Ba). If one has a clear picture of the crystal in mind, then the bonds A-O and B -O can be calculated from Table II as 2 and a 2 , respectively. This is yields Table B. Band structure of the titanates when in equilibrium In Fig. It is clearly seen that the nine valence bands near the Fermi level are mostly made up of O-2p are triply degenerate. In this case, the splittings observed originate from the crystal field splitting and the electrostatic interaction among the O-2p orbitals. From Fig. An examination of Table IV reveals the significant underestimation of E gap in this case. This is not a new thing as far as DFT is concerned and it should be taken as such. In this case, our E gap calculations were complicated by the self-interaction error coming from the occupied states in standard DFT It will be prudent to mention that the electrostatics on the T i-cation site splits the five-fold degenerate d states into two as shown in Fig. 1. Application of a uniform tensile strain on the 3 lattices of ATiO3, (A=Ca, Sr, Ba) The main reason why these kind of materials are popular is because their properties can be altered in a precise manner to obtained any desired feature. In this section, we performed lattice distortions and monitored the bandgaps to ascertain the variation between the bandgap and the lattice parameter in the three titanates. When a tensile strain was applied, the system had less repulsion and the bands became smaller as seen in Fig. 2. Application of a uniform compressive strain on the 3 lattices of ATiO3, (A=Ca, Sr, Ba) It was noted that when the system underwent a compression, the bands enlarged as shown in Fig. First and foremost, it is worth noting the remarkable power of first principles calculations since our results have been seen to be in full agreement with existing experimental values reported by authors cited herein. We appreciate the fact that we now understand the nature of bonding in the selected ATiO 3 crystalline structures to be an admixture of covelent and ionic character. Apart from the lattice differences in the ATiO 3 titanates, we see from the PDOS that the contribution of the A cation is correlated to the atomic number of a given titanate. Also discussed was the various orbital contributions in the bandstruture with O-2p and Ti-3d t 2gs being dominant near the Fermi in all the three materials. We have equally seen that the bandstructure is highly sensitive of the lattice distortion as predicted by Dalven 14 many years ago in semiconductors. In our case, we found a lattice bandgap relationship of the form E gap ∝ 1 a x with 2.19 < x < 3.1. In the case of compressive strains, we predict that hopefully similar effects may be achieved by sizable pressure applications on the titanates. Although we have mentioned that our results are comparable, in future, it may be prudent to use an improved exchange-correlation energy functional like a hybrid. Equally, phonon dispersions for these titanates under strains should be computed to analyse the possibility of instabilities. The study of cooperative Jahn-Teller distortions have not been studied herein and this should open an avenue for new research in this line. We acknowledge George Manyali for the extremely useful discussions we had regarding the ATiO 3 class of materials. The authors also gratefully acknowledge the computer resources, technical expertise, and assistance provided by the Centre for High Performance Computing (CHPC-MATS862 & MATS0712), Cape Town, South Africa.