Electronic excitations and ionisations produced by electron impact are key processes in the radiation-induced damage mechanisms in materials of biological relevance, underlying important medical and technological applications, including radiotherapy, radiation protection in manned space missions and nanodevice fabrication techniques. However, experimentally measuring all the necessary electronic interaction cross-sections for every relevant material is an arduous task, so it is necessary having predictive models, sufficiently accurate yet easily implementable. In this work we present a model, based on the dielectric formalism, to provide reliable ionisation and excitation cross-sections for electron-impact on complex biomolecular media, taking into account their condensed-phase nature. We account for the indistinguishability and exchange between the primary beam and excited electrons, for the molecular electronic structure effects in the electron binding, as well as for higher-order corrections to the first Born approximation. The resulting approach yields total ionisation cross-sections, energy distributions of secondary electrons, and total electronic excitation cross-sections for condensed-phase biomaterials, once the electronic excitation spectrum is known, either from experiments or from a predictive model. The results of this methodology are compared with the available experimental data in water and DNA/RNA molecular building blocks, showing a very good agreement and a great predictive power in a wide range of electron incident energies, from the large values characteristic of electron beams down to excitation threshold. The proposed model constitutes a very useful procedure for computing the electronic interaction crosssections for arbitrary biological materials in a wide range of electron incident energies. Charged particles interacting with matter lose their energy mainly through electronic excitations and ionisations, which result in the ejection of secondary electrons and the ensuing generation of electron cascades Plenty of experimental information is available on electron-impact ionisation cross-sections (total probabilities as well as energy spectra of ejected electrons) of relevant biomolecules (such as water or DNA nucleobases), * pablo.vera@um.es however it is usually limited to the gas phase A convenient alternative for studying ion-impact ionisation of condensed-phase organic and biological materials, based on the dielectric formalism In this work, we extend the dielectric response model The resulting methodology yields the total ionisation and excitation cross-sections, as well as the energy distribution of secondary electrons. Calculations for liquid water, all the DNA/RNA bases (adenine, thymine, guanine, cytosine and uracil) and tetrahydrofuran (THF, an important analogue molecule of the sugar component of the phosphate-deoxyribose backbone of DNA), in the condensed phase, are presented and compared to available experimental data, showing an excellent general agreement. The model presented in this work provides a convenient and universal approach for reliably evaluating the main quantities involved in electron transport and effects within arbitrary organic and biological materials (accounting for their condensed-phase state) in a wide energy range. The methodology and data presented in this work will result very useful in the field of ionising radiation interaction with matter, either for medical or technological applications. The work is organized as follows. In Section II we provide the theoretical background and introduce the necessary improvements, whose results are analysed and compared with available experimental data in Section III. Finally, we present in Section IV a summary and the conclusions of our work. The doubly differential cross-section (DDCS) for the scattering of a charged particle, having kinetic energy T , with an atom or molecule gives the probability for the incident particle to lose some specific amount of energy E and of momentum k as a result of the interaction. In the quantum theory of scattering, the DDCS can be related to the direct f ( k 1 , k 2 ) and the exchange g( k 1 , k 2 ) scattering amplitudes where k 1 and k 2 are, respectively, the momentum of the scattered and excited particles in the final state. The last term in Eq. ( An incident ion and an excited electron are distinguishable particles, so the exchange and interference terms vanish in Eq. ( and the dielectric formalism provides a compact expression for the DDCS for a charged particle scattered in a condensed-phase medium where M is the incident particle mass, Z is its charge, and ρ(k) is the Fourier transform of its charge density. For electron projectiles, Z = 1, ρ(k) = 1 (since they are point charges) and M = m is the electron mass. The socalled energy-loss function (ELF), Im -1 ǫ(k,E) , represents the electronic excitation spectrum of the target material, with ǫ(k, E) = ǫ 1 (k, E) + iǫ 2 (k, E) being the complex dielectric function. N is the target atomic (or molecular) density, which relates the microscopic σ and the macroscopic cross-section Λ (or inverse mean free path, IMFP) as Λ = λ -1 = N σ, with λ being the electronic inelastic mean free path. The ELF of the target material accounts for the excitation and ionisation spectrum of its outer-and inner-shell electrons: where the sum goes over all the j-inner shells of the atoms forming the material, whose ELF can be straightforwardly calculated by means of hydrogenic generalized oscillator strengths Figure When considering ion-impact ionisation The DDCS, Eq. ( where the limits in the momentum transfer integrals are given by: with E = W + B α , where α = out/j for the outer/inner-shells. Further integration in energy of Eq. ( ) and the total electronic excitation cross-section (TECS) is given by: with the integration limits of the momentum transfer given by Eq. ( Experiment shells of the target are considered here. Let us now examine the integration limits in the energy transfer appearing in Eqs. ( For ionisation, the limits become: Equation ( The mean binding energy for outer shell electrons can be easily estimated from the ionisation energies for biomolecules reported in the literature, most frequently coming from quantum chemistry calculations The terms 1 in the numerator are weights for each individual contribution to B mean , while the denominator ensures normalisation (see Table As noted by Tan et al. where B l is the ionisation threshold immediately below T . As it will be discussed later, such a correction will notably improve the calculated cross-sections for electrons with energies T < B n . It should be noted that electrons Step functions correspond to the values provided by Eq. ( with energies below the first ionisation threshold B 1 will, in fact, not be able to ionise the medium, and will be only capable of producing electronic excitations with the energy transfer limits given by Eq. ( Noteworthy, the behaviour of B out (T ) is rather similar for the different biomolecules, and can be fitted, for convenience of the numerical implementation, with a logistic function of the form: ) with a, b, c and d being fitting parameters (given in Table where d 2 σ(T,E,k) represents the exchange term. Several methods have been developed to account for this exchange term Ochkur From Eqs. ( where and are the BO exchange correction factors to the DDCS| FBA given by Eq. (2). It should be noted that the BO exchange term for ionisation, which is based on a quantum mechanical treatment of the problem, reproduces the classical Mott exchange for binary collisions In the case of slow electrons (T ≤ 100 eV), the energy loss is no longer negligible with respect to the primary electron energy and the FBA becomes inaccurate. There exist several alternatives to correct the FBA at low energies, ranging from heuristic or phenomenological but easily implementable approaches where B α is the electron binding energy (B α = B out (T ) for the target outer shells and B α = B j for the inner shells j), and E i is the energy of the i-th discrete electronic transition (see Fig. The relevant TECS, ionisation SDCS and TICS quantities can now be expressed including low energy (higherorder, HO) corrections to the direct term plus the exchange term. The resulting TECS will be: where E ± are given by Eq. ( For ionisation, the SDCS is written as: and the TICS is: where W ±,α are given by Eqs. ( for the outer shells, Eq. ( In what follows we apply the present methodology to calculate ionisation singly differential (SDCS), total ionisation (TICS) and total excitation (TECS) cross-sections for the impact of electrons, in a wide energy range, on the relevant condensed-phase biological materials, namely liquid water and the DNA/RNA molecular components (THF, cytosine, adenine, guanine, uracil, and thymine), whose properties are summarized in Table We start by considering liquid water, the most abundant material in living beings, whose ELF is experimentally available for several values of the momentum transfer [12], it is important to have in mind the differences in the energy spectra of the liquid and gaseous phases, which results in a shift of the position of the maximum in the energy spectrum from ∼ 3 eV (vapour) to ∼ 10 eV (liquid), according to detailed calculations. Further comparison of the calculated energy distributions of secondary electrons ejected from liquid water for different primary energies T is provided in Fig. the available experimental data (symbols) for the gas phase Dash-dotted and solid lines in Fig. The results for excitation of water, appearing in Fig. The meaning of the lines in 5(b) is the same as in Fig. The developed methodology allows us to obtain ionisation and excitation cross-sections for any condensedphase biological material for which the atomic composition and density are known, irrespectively of whether its optical ELF has been experimentally obtained or not. For most of the materials studied in this work the experimental optical ELF is available (see Table For the case of THF, our calculated ionisation SDCS by electron impact are compared to available measurements Exp., solid Exp., gas Exp., gas cross-section (dotted line) agrees very well with the experimental data (for the gas phase) from Results for the TICS and TECS for cytosine are presented in Fig. The parametric model for predicting the optical ELF of these biomaterials The above results for THF and cytosine show the reliability of the methodology, even when the optical ELF of the material is not experimentally available. However, in principle, results are expected to be more accurate when this information is at hand, as it is the case for the other DNA/RNA bases (adenine, guanine, thymine, and uracil), whose calculated TICS and TECS are shown by solid lines in Fig. In order to further benchmark the performance of the predictive model for the optical ELF One more clarification can be done regarding the comparison between the calculated and experimental TECS for THF (Fig. Exp., gas for biomolecules Figures From the above discussion, we can conclude that the proposed scaling laws for ion impact ionisation work well for the electron-impact TICS too. This is true, in principle, for the entire electron energy range, although the linear scaling works better for the larger electron energies. Also, the scaling laws seem more reliable when expressed as a function of the effective number of electrons where the values of the parameters β and γ are given in Table tion of biomaterials by electron impact, we provide another important quantity for assessing radiation biodamage, namely the electronic stopping cross-section (SCS) due to both electronic excitations and ionisations SCS = SCS excit +SCS ionis . The quantities SCS excit and SCS ionis are obtained by integrals similar to Eqs. ( The calculated SCS for all the relevant biomaterials are presented in Fig. The calculated SCS for all the RNA/DNA bases (uracil, adenine, guanine,cytosine, and thymine) appear in Fig. We have extended the dielectric response model, previously developed for the ion-impact ionisation of arbitrary condensed-phase organic media Such extension to incident electrons required the consideration of a series of improvements to the original model, namely: (i) accounting for the indistinguishability between the primary and the secondary electrons (which affects the range of possible energy transfers in the inelastic collisions), (ii) modification of the concept of an energy-independent mean binding energy for the targets outer-shell electrons when the primary particle has very low energy (in such a case, the projectile cannot ionise all the targets outer shells), (iii) inclusion of exchange interaction between the primary and scattered electrons (for both electronic excitations and ionisations), and (iv) introduction of higher-order corrections to the first Born approximation (FBA, on which the dielectric formalism is based) when the energy transfer is comparable to the primary electron energy. All these effects have been incorporated into our model, defining an energydependent mean binding energy for the outer-shell electrons on the basis of quantum chemistry data (which show a rather universal behaviour for all analysed materials), accounting for exchange factors for excitation and ionisation processes from the quantum-mechanical Born-Ochkur approximation, as well as implementing a simple higher-order Coulomb-field correction to the FBA, all the above allowing straightforward calculations of single differential and total cross-sections for arbitrary condensedphase biomaterials. As a result of such improvements, we have produced a comprehensive set of excitation and ionisation crosssections for a wide set of biomolecules, including the main constituent of biological tissue, liquid water, as well as the relevant molecular components of DNA/RNA, namely the analogue molecule of the sugar component of the phosphate-deoxyribose backbone, THF, and all the bases adenine, guanine, cytosine, thymine and uracil. Such data comprises the well-studied total ionisation cross-sections (TICS), but also the energy distributions of secondary electrons (singly differential cross-sections, SDCS) as well as the total excitation cross-sections (TECS), for which available data are much scarcer. Moreover, we have calculated the stopping cross-sections (SCS), also related to biomolecular damage. This information is provided over a very wide electron energy range, which covers the high energies characteristic of electron beams, photoelectrons or delta-electrons produced by ion impact, as well as for electrons with kinetic energies down to electronic excitation threshold, so important in molecular damage, constituting by itself a comprehensive and important compilation of crosssections. The calculated SDCS, TICS and TECS have been compared with available experimental data that are limited to molecules in the gas phase, except for TECS in DNA bases. Particularly, plenty of experimental data is available for the SDCS and TICS for water and THF, the most studied molecules. The agreement between the model calculations and these experiments is remarkable, having into account the expected differences between the con- Exp., solid As for the DNA/RNA bases, certain underestimation of the calculated TICS around their maxima is observed for some of them, which can be attributed, most likely, to the expected phase effects: in general, the cross-sections for the condensed phase are expected to be lower than for the gas phase, due to the dielectric screening in the electron gas in the solid; nonetheless, the generally large dispersion between different sets of experimental data prevents drawing more definitive conclusions. In any case, the shape and positions of the TICS agree well with experiments, and their absolute values follow well the linear scaling law with the number of effective valence electrons recently proposed on the basis of quantum calculations Regarding the calculated TECS for the DNA bases, there is a general satisfactory agreement with experimental data in the condensed phase for energies below 10 eV. Deviations are identified for larger electron energies. However, it has been shown that, in several of these cases, such discrepancies seem to arise from the limited energy-loss range analysed in the electron energy loss spectroscopy experiments, as calculations limiting the energy-loss values to a similar range yield partial TECS that, at least for cytosine and adenine, and in part also for thymine, reproduce rather well the experimental results. The TECS, however, do not seem to scale well with the number of valence or effective electrons, what seems to arise from their dependence on a greater number of target material parameters apart from the number of electrons, namely the threshold energy for electronic excitations and the mean binding energy for outer-shell electrons. Finally, the stopping cross-sections (SCS) due to both excitation and ionisation processes, relevant to evaluate electron-induced molecular damage, have been obtained and compared with the reference data available for liquid water and all the DNA/RNA bases. The agreement is in general rather good with the most recent datasets obtained from experiments and calculations by Rezaee et al. for ultra-low energy electrons All in all, having into account the generally good comparison between calculations and experiments and the dispersion inherent to the measured data, the proposed model is deemed to produce very good estimates for the electron excitation and ionisation cross-sections in biomaterials in the whole energy range. Moreover, the current approach delivers comprehensive information on these interactions, which is not limited to the TICS, as it happens with other simple models, but also provides the energy distributions of secondary electrons (SDCS) as well as the TECS, which are very difficult to obtain from other approaches, as far as we know. Very importantly, the model we have presented is relatively simple to implement, allowing the prediction of the electronic interaction cross-sections for organic or biological condensed-phase materials even when their optical electronic excitation spectrum is unknown (either experimentally or theoretically), by means of applying the parametric approach that provides the optical ELF of the material on the basis of its atomic composition and density 