Metal halide perovskites are known to suffer from rapid degradation, limiting their direct applicability. Here, the degradation of phenethylammonium lead iodide (PEA2PbI4) twodimensional perovskites under ambient conditions is studied using fluorescence, absorbance and fluorescence lifetime measurements. It is demonstrated that a long-term stability of twodimensional perovskites can be achieved through the encapsulation with hexagonal boron nitride. While un-encapsulated perovskite flakes degrade within hours, the encapsulated perovskites are stable for at least three months. In addition, encapsulation considerably improves the stability under laser irradiation. The environmental stability, combined with the improved durability under illumination, is a critical ingredient for thorough spectroscopic studies of the intrinsic optoelectronic properties of this material platform. Metal halide perovskites (APbX3, A = methylammonium, formamidinium, Cs; X = I, Br, Cl), have recently emerged as a promising material class for light harvesting Despite these advantages, the study and applicability of metal halide perovskites remain challenging due to their poor environmental stability An alternative strategy to improve the stability of perovskites is through encapsulation, which prevents water and air molecules from reaching the perovskite crystal in the first place Here, we study the feasibility of the hBN encapsulation strategy to provide long-term stability of phenethylammonium lead iodide (PEA2PbI4) 2D perovskites. While unprotected flakes degrade within hours, hBN encapsulated perovskite flakes display no observable degradation in their optical properties for at least three months. Further, we report a significantly improved resistance towards laser radiation. The environmental stability, combined with the improved durability under illumination, is a critical ingredient for thorough spectroscopic studies of the intrinsic opto-electronic properties of this material platform. This is of particular importance for thin flakes, where degradation effects are more pronounced. Chemicals: Chemicals were purchased from commercial suppliers and used as received: lead(II) iodide PbI2 (Sigma Aldrich 900168-5G), phenethylammonium iodide PEAI (Sigma Aldrich 805904-25G), g-butyrolactone (Sigma Aldrich B103608-500G), hexagonal boron nitride hBN (HQ Graphene). 2D Perovskite Synthesis: Layered perovskites were synthesized under ambient laboratory conditions following the over-saturation techniques reported previously Exfoliation: The synthesized PEA2PbI4 perovskite crystals were mechanically exfoliated using the Scotch tape method (Nitto SPV 224). After an appropriate flake thickness was obtained, the flakes were exfoliated one last time with polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS, Gelfilm from Gelpak®), which is better suited for the precise placement of the flakes. Following this method, we were able to obtain thin single crystals with sizes up to hundreds of microns. After several exfoliations between two scotch tapes and exfoliation with the PDMS, we transferred the flakes on a glass substrate. We found that retracting the tape and PDMS stamp quickly transfers thick and large crystals, while retracting slowly yields thinner crystals. Characterization: Fluorescence and absorption spectra were recorded using a spectrograph and an EMCCD camera from Princeton Instruments (SpectraPro HRS-300, ProEM HS 1024BX3) with a 300 g/mm grating with a blaze of 500 nm. The samples were excited by a LED (Thorlabs M385PLP1-C5, l = 385 nm) for fluorescence measurements (0.55 mWcm -2 , 1 min exposure) and by a white light LED (Thorlabs MCWHLP1) for absorbance measurements (0.12 mWcm -2 , 1 min exposure). Fluorescence lifetime measurements were performed with a laser diode of l = 405nm (PicoQuant LDH-D-C-405, PDL 800-D, Pico-Harp 300) and an avalanche photo diode (APD) from micro photon devices (Micro Photon Devices PDM). The repetition rate was 1 MHz and the peak fluence per pulse was 1 nJcm -2 . X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed using a Bruker D8 Advance operating at 40 kV and 30 mA using a copper radiation source (1.54060 Å). XRD measurements were taken from the dropcast perovskite films. 2D perovskites PEA2PbI4 are synthesized by a one-step drop casting from a saturated precursor solution. The crystalline integrity of the perovskite film is confirmed by performing x-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. As shown in Figure Only minutes after their exfoliation, the 2D perovskite flakes start to degrade into transparent and non-emissive PbI2 Following the same procedures as for the un-encapsulated perovskite flake, we monitor the fluorescence, absorbance and fluorescence lifetime of the encapsulated flake. After three months, no significant degradation is observed on the encapsulated flake. This can be seen qualitatively in Figure In conclusion, we have shown that it is possible to prevent the degradation under ambient conditions of PEA2PbI4 perovskite flakes through encapsulation with hBN and that hBN encapsulated flakes are stable for at least three months. Further, encapsulated flakes show an increased resistance to laser illumination. As a result, hBN encapsulation allows more thorough spectroscopic studies of the intrinsic opto-electronic properties of this material platform. Especially studies of few-layer perovskites can benefit from the increased stability, as they are particularly sensitive to environmental and light exposure. The presented encapsulation technique is not restricted to hBN but can be extended to other 2D materials that prevent the diffusion of water and air molecules, offering the possibility to have an integrated encapsulation in perovskite-2D material heterostructures. The four columns of the figure correspond to 0, 1 day, 1 week, and 1 month of ambient exposure. The un-encapsulated flake degrades within one day, while the partially encapsulated flake is stable for a much longer time. However, the hBN seal of the partially encapsulated flake has a leak in the seal (indicated by an arrow), which allows air molecules to slowly diffuse towards the perovskite flake leading to the degradation of the flake which spreads from the leak inwards.