We investigate both pure and mixed states Floquet dynamical quantum phase transition (DQPT) in the periodically time-dependent extended XY model. We exactly show that the proposed Floquet Hamiltonian of interacting spins can be expressed as a sum of noninteracting quasi-spins imposed by an effective time dependent magnetic field (Schwinger-Rabi model). The calculated Chern number indicates that there is a topological transition from nonadiabatic to adiabatic regime. In the adiabatic regime, the quasi-spins trace the time dependent effective magnetic field and then oscillate between spin up and down states. While in the nonadiabatic regime, the quasi-spins cannot follow the time dependent effective magnetic field and feel an average magnetic field. We find the range of driving frequency over which the quasi-spins experience adiabatic cyclic processes. Moreover, we obtain the exact expression of the Loschmidt amplitude and generalized Loschmidt amplitude of the proposed Floquet system. The results represent that both pure and mixed states dynamical phase transition occurs when the system evolves adiabatically. In other words, the minimum required driving frequency for the appearance of Floquet DQPT is equal to the threshold frequency needed for transition from nonadiabatic to adiabatic regime. Recent experimental advances on synthesizing various quantum platforms, including ultra-cold atoms in optical lattices Lately, a new area of research named dynamical quantum phase transitions (DQPTs) The concept of DQPT originates from the analogy between the equilibrium partition function of a system, and boundary partition function, which measures the overlap between an initial state and its time-evolved one, termed as Loschmidt amplitude (LA). As the equilibrium phase transition, characterized by nonanalyticities in the thermal free energy, in DQPT, nonanalytic behavior manifests as singularities in the LA, a dynamical analog of the equilibrium free energy It has been also established that there exists a dynamical topological order parameter (DTOP), analogous to order parameters at conventional quantum phase transition, which can characterize DQPTs Most researches on DQPT, are associated with both sudden and slow quantum quenches of the Hamiltonian In addition, the theory of DQPT has been recently extended to Floquet systems In the present work, we contribute to expand the systematic understanding of Floquet DQPT by introducing the exactly solvable periodically time-dependent extended XY model in the presence of a staggered magnetic field. We analytically study the pure and mixed states DQPT characteristics, especially the underlying topological features. We show that, pure state DQPT occurs when the system enters into the adiabatic regime. In other words, the minimum required driving frequency for appearance of Floquet DQPT is equal to the threshold frequency needed for transition from nonadiabatic to adiabatic regime. In the nonadiabatic regime, the quasi-spins (i.e. noninteracting effective spins) feel a constant effective Zeeman field, which does not induce Rabi oscillations between spin up and down states The Hamiltonian of the one-dimensional harmonically driven extended XY spin chain in the staggered magnetic field is given by where, N is the size of the system, h s is the magnitude of staggered magnetic field and ω is the driving frequency. Here we impose periodic boundary condition and S α n are the spin half operators at the nth site, i.e. S α n = 1 2 σ α n ; α = {x, y, z}, where σ α are Pauli matrices. The first and second terms in Eq. (1) describe the time dependent nearest neighbour XY and staggered Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions The Hamiltonian, Eq. ( , the Fourier transformed Hamiltonian can be expressed as sum of independent terms acting in the twodimensional Hilbert space generated by k The Bloch single particle Hamiltonian H k (t) in Eq. ( (2) implies that the Hamiltonian of N interacting spins (Eq. ( A. Exact solution of the time-dependent Schrödinger equation The noninteracting (quasi-spin) Hamiltonian H k (t) is exactly the same as Schwinger-Rabi model 70 of a spin in the time dependent effective magnetic field . In such a case, the polar and azimuthal angles of effective magnetic field, are θ k = arctan(h xy (k)/h z (k)) and Φ(t) = ωt, respectively. Using the time-dependent Schrödinger equa- in the rotating frame given by the periodic unitary transformation and For simplicity and without loss of generality we take J 1 = 1, and J 2 , h s , ω > 0, henceforth. The eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the timeindependent noninteracting Hamiltonian H k are where It is worthy to mention that, the time independent extended XY model in the presence of the renormalized staggered magnetic filed with h ef f s = h s -ω/2, results the noninteracting (quasispin) Hamiltonian H k , the same as Eq. ( , where the system transforms from the Spin Liquid phase (h ef f s < J 2 /2) to the long-range ordered antiferromagnetic phase (h ef f s > J 2 /2). An adiabatic cyclic process associates with slowly changing the periodic parameters driving a physical system. In such a case, the system returns to its initial state after a cycle. However, a quantum state may gain a phase factor that can be given as the sum of a dynamical phase that depends on the Hamiltonian parameters and an extra term of geometrical origin. The latter is known as the Berry phase and can be determined from the geometric properties of the path expressed by the driving parameters in the parameter space of the Hamiltonian Consider the instantaneous non-degenerate eigenstates |m, R of the system for a given set of parameters R in , where E m (R) is the corresponding eigenvalues. Hence, the Berry phase is expressed as Υ m = A m (R), where A m (R) is the so-called Berry connection expressed as a (local) differential one-form 75 Using Stokes theorem, we arrive at Υ m = S F m (R), where F m (R) is the Berry curvature two-form given by 75 Here, ∧ is the antisymmetric wedge product and dA m stands for the exterior derivative of the Berry connection one-form A m . The Chern number, which is given by the integral of the Berry curvature over the whole parameter space, encodes the information of a topological transition between two different driving regimes (see Appendix D). In the adiabatic regime, a spin can adapt to the variation of effective magnetic field and will remain in its instantaneous eigenstate during the slow evolution. In contrast, in the nonadiabatic regime, the spin cannot align with the magnetic field and hence is exposed to an average magnetic field where Θ(x) is the Heaviside step function. According to the calculated Chern number (Eq. ( and for different values of ω. As seen, γ k changes from 0 to nearly π (dotted line), where the driving frequency is ω = 6π and forces system to evolve adiabatically. On the other hand, in the nonadiabatic regime (ω = 4π, 8π), cos(γ k ) is roughly constant, which means that quasi-spins cannot align with the effective magnetic field. As mentioned in the Introduction, there has been recently a renewed focus in the study of DQPTs, probing nonanalyticities of the dynamical free energy of a quenched system in both pure and mixed states In addition, these nonanalyticities are signaled by the zeros of Z(z), known as Fisher zeros According to the results of section II A the time-evolved ground state |ψ - k (t) of the quasi-spin Hamiltonian H k (t), is given by Due to the decoupling of different momentum sectors, the initial and time-evolved ground states of the original Hamiltonian exhibit a factorization property that is expressed by It is straightforward to show that the LA corresponding to the ground state of the proposed model is given by The Consequently, the nonanalyticities in the rate function of the LA and DQPT occur for the driving frequency, at which the system evolves adiabatically (Fig. Im(z) The real time instances at which the DQPT appears is exactly equal to the time instances at which at least one factor in LA becomes zero i.e., L k * (t * ) = 0. According to Eq. ( with the period T p = t * = 2π/ω. This result is in agreement with the numerical simulation shown in Figs. As mentioned, nonanalyticities of the LA rate function are accompanied by Fisher zeros of the boundary partition function. The boundary partition function of our model is given by Zeros of Eq. (15) coalesce in the thermodynamic limit to the family of lines labeled by a number n ∈ Z: The sketches of lines of Fisher zeros are shown in Fig. We have also plotted the density plot of time dependent expectation values of quasi-spin components σ α , shown in Fig. As stated in Sec.I, dynamical topological order parameter has been proposed to represent the topological characteristic associated with DQPTs. The DTOP displays integer values as a function of time and reveals unit magnitude jumps at the critical times at which the DQPTs occur. The DTOP is given by where the geometric phase φ G (k, t) is obtained from the total phase φ(k, t) by subtracting the dynamical phase φ D (k, t), i.e., φ G (k, t) = φ(k, t) -φ D (k, t). The total phase φ(k, t) is the phase factor of LA in its polar coordinates representation, i.e. L k (t) = |L k (t)|e iφ(k,t) , and The DTOP has been displayed in Fig. In experiments where ρ k (0) is the mixed state density matrix at time t = 0, and U (t) is the time-evolution operator. The mixed state density matrix and time-evolution operator of Floquet Hamiltonian (Eq. ( respectively, where is the inverse temperature with Boltzmann constant K B = 1. A rather lengthy calculation yielding an exact expression for GLA The density plot of GLA has been plotted versus time t and k in Figs. Analogous to the pure state DQPT, topological invariant has been established for mixed state DQPT to display its topological characteristics. In the mixed state DQPT the total phase and dynamical phase are defined as φ(k, β, t) = Arg T r ρ(k, β, 0)U (t) , and φ D (k, β, t) = -t 0 T r[ρ(k, β, t )H(k, t )]dt , respectively. Hence, the topological invariant ν D (t) can be calculated for mixed state using Eq. ( We have studied both pure and mixed states Floquet dynamical quantum phase transition in the periodically driven extended XY model in the presence of staggered magnetic field. We have shown that the proposed Floquet Hamiltonian with N interacting spins can be mapped to N/2 noninteracting quasi-spins subjected to the time dependent effective magnetic field (Schwinger-Rabi model). The calculated values of Chern number reveals that there exists topological transition from the nonadiabatic to adiabatic regime. In the adiabatic regime, the quasi-spins follow the time dependent effective magnetic field and then oscillate between up and down states. However, in the nonadiabatic regime the quasi-spins cannot trace the time dependent effective magnetic field and feel an average magnetic field. We have obtained the range of driving frequency over the system experiences adiabatic cyclic process and shows DQPT. It can be understood that for very high frequencies the adiabatic evolution is lost, while, at very low frequencies period of cyclic dynamics diverges, which prohibits a recursion to show DQPT at finite time. This justifies the presence of a window frequency over which the DQPT is observed. We would like to stress that our model has a single gapless critical point and the observed DQPTs within a window frequency is different from the observed counterparts in Ref. [10], which possesses two distinct critical points, which define the window frequecy. We have also obtained the exact expression of Loschmidt amplitude and the generalized Loschmidt amplitude of proposed Floquet system. Our results confirm that both pure and mixed states dynamical phase transitions occur whenever the system evolves adiabatically. In other words, the minimum frequency needed for emerging the dynamical phase transition is equivalent to the threshold driving frequency, which is necessary to drive the system into the adiabatic regime. Furthermore, we have observed that for the mixed state dynamical phase transition there is a crossover temperature above which the nonanalyticities in the rate function of generalized Loschmidt amplitude and quantization of the mixed state DTOP get completely wiped out. Floquet systems may show the pre-thermal phase protected by discrete time-translation symmetry in the absence of disorder and integrals of motion Similar to the exact solution in section II A, the above timedependent Hamiltonian is transformed to the corresponding time-independent form: where, the time independent Floquet operator H F k is in the rotating frame expressed as The eigenstates |χ ν k are given by Eq. ( Consequently the Floquet state is calculated as Accordingly, Floquet states require time periodicity, which fixes the values of quasi-energies to Then, the time-dependent Floquet states and time-dependent eigenstates of Floquet Hamiltonian of Eq. ( 