We have studied the pressure effect on the rattling of tetrahedrite Cu 10 Zn 2 Sb 4 S 13 (CZSS) and type-I clathrate Ba 8 Ga 16 Sn 30 (BGS) by specific heat and x-ray diffraction measurements. By applying pressure P , the rattling energy for CZSS initially decreases and steeply increases for P > 1 GPa. By contrast, the energy for BGS increases monotonically with P up to 6.5 GPa. An analysis of the pressure dependent specific heat and x-ray diffraction indicates that the out-of-plane rattling of the Cu atoms in the S 3 triangle of CZSS originates from the chemical pressure, unlike the rattling of the Ba ions among off-center sites in an oversized cage of BGS. The rattling in CZSS ceases upon further increasing P above 2 GPa, suggesting that Cu atoms escape away from the S 3 triangle plane. 1 Localized vibrational states of atoms in solids are attracting much attention in the fields of solid state physics and materials science Rattling vibrations in caged compounds depend on the difference between the cage size and the guest size Recently, rattling phenomena have been found even in non-caged compounds in which a rattling atom has a planar coordination. For example, large amplitude out-ofplane motion, which is called "planar rattling" The tetrahedrite crystallizes in a cubic structure with space group I 43m as shown in the inset of Fig. The rattling mode in caged compounds manifests itself in a broad peak of the specific heat C divided by T 3 , whose temperature is approximately 1/5 of the characteristic energy of rattling In this Rapid Communication, we have compared the pressure dependences of the rattling modes for CZSS and BGS by specific heat measurements to shed light on the mechanism of the rattling in CZSS. We have found that application of pressures P up to 0.7 GPa reduces the rattling energy of CZSS but increases monotonically that of BGS. This opposite changes strongly indicate that the origin of anharmonicity in the rattling is different between CZSS with the planar coordination and BGS with the oversized cage. Upon further increasing P above 2.4 GPa, the rattling contribution to C/T 3 for CZSS is fully suppressed, while the vibrational density of states in BGS at P = 6 GPa remains more than 50% of that at P = 0. The cessation of rattling for P > 2.4 GPa causes a profound change in the vibration of the Cu atom from anharmonic rattling to a rather harmonic vibration in the local minimum of the potential out of the S 3 triangle. The splitting of the Cu site is corroborated with synchrotron x-day diffraction measurements under pressure. Samples of polycrystalline Cu 10 Zn 2 Sb 4 S 13 (CZSS) and single-crystalline Ba 8 Ga 16 Sn 30 (BGS) were synthesized in the manners as described elsewhere By analyzing the diffraction patterns, we determined the atomic position and interatomic distances. Figure Thus, the planar rattling mode of Cu2 is totally suppressed by the application of pressure. The pressure effect on the planar rattling of Cu2 is very distinct from that on the rattling of Ba in a cage of BGS. The C/T 3 data of BGS at P = 0 show a broad maximum at 4 K, whose value agrees with that previously measured by PPMS (open circles) as shown in Fig. Next, we turn our attention to the upturn of C/T 3 observed at T < 1 K for both CZSS and BGS. As shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. ), where W is the characteristic energy of the potential, x is the dimensionless displacement of the vibrating unit, and D 1 and D 2 are the coefficients of the asymmetry and harmonic-potential terms which vary from mode to mode Figures Table Based on the structural parameters for CZSS, we discuss the change in the rattling energy of the Cu2 atom upon applying pressure up to 0.7 GPa. As shown in Fig. Lai et al. claimed that covalent-type "out-of-plane bonding" between Cu2 and Sb via the lone pairs leads to a rattling of Cu2 In turn, we discuss the relationship between E R of the Cu2 atom and the S 3 triangle area S tri . It was reported that E R decreases with decreasing S tri on going from CZSS, CSS, Cu 10 Zn 2 As 4 S 13 , to Cu 12 As 4 S 13 We now turn to a discussion of the vibrational state of the Cu2 atom in CZSS for the range P > 1 GPa. As shown in Figs. In summary, we have studied the pressure effect on the rattling mode in tetrahedrite Cu 10 Zn 2 Sb 4 S 13 (CZSS) and type-I clathrate Ba 8 Ga 16 Sn 30 (BGS) by specific heat measurements up to 6 GPa. For P = 0, the C/T 3 data for both systems exhibit a maximum at 4 K, five times of which is a measure of the rattling energy. With increasing pressure, the energy for CZSS initially decreases and steeply increases for P > 1 GPa while that for BGS increases monotonically. Furthermore, the upturn of C/T 3 at T < 1 K for CZSS hardly changes with increasing pressure while that for BGS decreases drastically. These contrasting responses of C/T 3 are attributed to distinct mechanisms for the rattling between the two systems. For the Ba guest ions in an oversized cage of BGS, an application of pressure shifts the potential minimum from the off-center sites to the center in the cage, and thus increases the harmonicity in the vibration of Ba ions. For CZSS, the synchrotron powder x-ray diffraction measurement has revealed that the area of S 3 triangle, the S tri , decreases with increasing pressure up to 1.9 GPa. The systematic dependences of the rattling energy on S tri by an application of pressures and substitutions strongly indicate that the dominant parameter controlling the rattling of the Cu2 atom in CZSS is not the distance d(Cu2-Sb) but the area S tri . These findings support that the rattling in CZSS originates from the chemical pressure inherent in the triangle to squeeze the Cu2 atom out of the plane. On further increasing pressure up to 2.4 GPa, the specific heat due to the rattling modes completely disappears. This is consistent with the splitting of the Cu2 site as indicated by the x-ray diffraction analysis on the data at 1.9 GPa. At P > 2 GPa, the Cu2 atom is likely to vibrate near the local potential minimum out of the S 3 triangle. Our study verified high-pressure specific heat measurement as a strong tool to investigate the rattling modes in solids. Furthermore, the pressure-sensitive planar rattling modes found 