We investigate the specific heat, c, near an Ising nematic quantum critical point (QCP), using sign problem-free quantum Monte Carlo simulations. Cooling towards the QCP, we find a broad regime of temperature where c T is close to the value expected from the non-interacting band structure, even for a moderately large coupling strength. At lower temperature, we observe a rapid rise of c T , followed by a drop to zero as the system becomes superconducting. The spin susceptibility begins to drop at roughly the same temperature where the enhancement of c T onsets, most likely due to the opening of a gap associated with superconducting fluctuations. These findings suggest that superconductivity and non-Fermi liquid behavior (manifested in an enhancement of the effective mass) onset at comparable energy scales. We support these conclusions with an analytical perturbative calculation. Introduction.-Understanding the continuous formation of order in a Fermi liquid remains a central challenge in the study of strongly correlated electron systems. This problem is complicated by the presence of the gapless quasiparticles at the Fermi surface, which makes the canonical Landau-Ginzburg-Wilson approach of quantum criticality inapplicable The metallic state in the vicinity of the QCP may follow one of two distinct scenarios A salient feature expected for a nearly-critical Fermi liquid, along with the enhancement of quasiparticle scattering, is a divergence of the effective mass, m * In recent years, it has been demonstrated that models for quantum critical metals can be efficiently simulated using the numerically exact determinant Quantum Monte Carlo (DQMC) method without suffering from the notorious fermion sign problem Previous works on the this model focused on the selfenergy and transport properties, finding signatures of the breakdown of Fermi liquid behavior, in an extended temperature window above the superconducting critical temperature T c near the QCP Model & method.-The model is defined on a twodimensional square lattice with a single (spinful) fermionic state per lattice site and a pseudo-spin 1/2 boson on each nearest-neighbor bond (Fig. Here, ψ † i,σ creates a fermion on site i of spin σ =↓, ↑, ⟨i, j⟩ denote nearest-neighbour bonds, and t, μ are the hopping amplitude and chemical potential, respectively. The pseudo spins, represented by the Pauli matrices τ α=x,y,z i,j , are governed by a transverse field Ising model. The interaction strength between spins on nearest-neighbor bonds ⟨⟨i, j⟩ ; ⟨k, l⟩⟩ is given by V > 0, h sets the transverse field strength, and α is the dimensionless coupling strength between the pseudospins and the fermions. Physically, the pseudospins can originate from a purely electronic interactions via Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation, or from bosonic degrees of freedom such as phonons. More importantly, the model is designed to host an Ising nematic critical point, which separates an ordered phase, where the C 4 rotational symmetry of the lattice is spontaneously broken, from a C 4 symmetric phase. In the ordered phase, the expectation value of τ z on horizontal bonds becomes different from that of τ z on vertical bonds, breaking the 90 ○ rotational symmetry of the lattice. The transition can be tuned by the transverse field h, and remains continuous down to low temperature We use the ALF package In the following, we focus on two parameter sets, (α = 1.5, V t = 0.5) and (α = 1, V t = 1). The chemical potential is fixed to μ t = -1. We point out that there is a van Hove singularity in the band dispersion at μ = 0. In the Supplementary Material Results.-We begin by reviewing the phase diagram for the model of Eq. ( with the nematic order parameter N i = ∑ j ζ ij τ z ij , where ζ ij = 1 4 for r ij = ±x (blue squares in Fig. We now turn to the specific heat c(T ) at and away from the QCP. Fig. At the weaker coupling strength (α = 1), such a clear peak is absent. At the lowest temperatures, there is an enhancement of the specific heat relative to the tightbinding model. This enhancement is most pronounced near the QCP. It is likely that c T drops to zero at even lower temperatures, resulting in a finite-T peak in c T , as in the α = 1.5 case. An enhancement in c T may originate either from an opening of a gap in the quasiparticle spectrum or from an increase of the quasiparticle effective mass In order to identify the origin of the low-temperature enhancement of the specific heat, we study the spin susceptibility, where Ŝz . χ S z is shown in Fig. The temperature where the suppression of χ S z onsets is comparable to the temperature at which c T begins to rise (Fig. The temperature range where χ S z is approximately constant, above the onset of the spin gap, can be interpreted in terms of a Fermi liquid. This interpretation is supported by the fact that, in the same regime, c T is not strongly temperature dependent, as shown in Fig. Here, F a 0 is the isotropic, spin-antisymmetric component of the Landau quasiparticle interaction. Hence, at temperature above the onset of a spin gap, we can explain our data qualitatively by assuming that for α = 1, Z ≈ 1 and F a 0 is small. For α = 1.5, in contrast, Z decreases substantially and F a 0 grows as h approaches h c . Combining the above arguments suggests the following picture for the behavior at h ≈ h c : (i) In a broad temperature range below the Fermi energy E F , the system's thermodynamic properties are roughly consistent with Landau's Fermi liquid theory. (ii) Below a certain temperature, smaller than E F but significantly larger than the superconducting T c , c T is enhanced, more or less concomitantly with a suppression of the spin susceptibility and the single-particle density of states. All these effects are most probably due to the onset of a gap due to superconducting fluctuations. (iii) At the lowest temperatures (below T c ) superconductivity is established. Perturbation theory.-It is useful to relate our findings at strong coupling with the results of the standard RPA analysis where q is the momentum transfer, g 2 is the coupling strength, and f k is the nematic form factor: The parameter r 0 is used to tune the system to the QCP, which occurs at r 0 = r c > 0. At r 0 = r c , the specific heat is given by where A ≈ 0.19. The second term in the square brackets in Eq. ( showing no significant deviation of c T relative to the non-interacting value for T ≳ 0.2 Discussion.-In this work, we have examined the specific heat in the vicinity of a quantum critical point in a metal, using unbiased, numerically exact QMC simulations. We find that, upon cooling the system towards the quantum critical point, c T is enhanced relative to the band structure value. The enhancement of c T onsets at roughly the same temperature where the spin susceptibility and the single-particle density of states exhibit a downturn, signalling the appearance of a gap, most likely due to the onset of superconducting fluctuations. c T is suppressed sharply upon entering the superconducting phase which covers the QCP. Thus, our main conclusion is that within our model, there is no broad non-Fermi liquid regime characterized by a diverging c T near the QCP. This is most probably because the quantum critical enhancement of c T is preempted by the opening of a pairing gap. These observations are qualitatively consistent with the expectation from the weak-coupling RPA analysis, which predicts that T NFL and T c are of the same order of magnitude. However, in our simulations (performed in moderate to strong coupling) we find that the gap due to superconducting fluctuations appears at a temperature significantly above T c , in contrast to the weak-coupling analysis in which the superconducting transition is essentially mean-field like. Above the gap opening temperature, we find a broad temperature regime where c T shows no significant enhancement relative to the band structure value. This is surprising, since in this model, the same temperature regime has been shown to exhibit strong deviations from Fermi liquid theory in the frequency dependence of the self-energy and the temperature dependence of the transport scattering rate We end with two comments regarding the implications of our study for experiments in quantum materials. First, our results imply that observing a divergence of m * near a QCP generally requires suppressing superconductivity, e.g., by applying a magnetic field (which is unfortunately impossible in our simulations without introducing a fermion sign problem). Second, it is interesting to note that in FeSe 1-x S x , a broad regime of quasi-linear resistivity is observed near the putative nematic QCP In this supplementary material, we elaborate on the techniques we used to measure the specific heat and determine the phase transition lines. Additional data and analysis is presented for the single-particle density of states at the Fermi level. We elucidate in some more detail the role of the van Hove singularity in the band structure. We present data showing the finite size effect on our QMC results. Finally, we present details of the perturbative RPA analysis. We are using the same setup of the DQMC simulation here as discussed in Ref. As mentioned in the main text, we also use the Wolf algorithm for global updates in order to reduce the autocorrelation and warmup times. We design a cluster of spins to be updated solely according to the bosonic part H b of the action. The acceptance of this cluster update is determined according to the contribution of the rest of the Hamiltonian, H f + H int , to the Boltzmann weight (given by the fermion determinant). This procedure respects detailed balance. The optimal number of global moves per sweep of single spin flips depends on the system size L and inverse temperature β, as well as on the distance from the critical point. Typically, we use a few hundred global updates per single spin-flip sweep. In addition, we reduced finite size effects by including an orbital pseudo-magnetic field that couples oppositely to spin up and spin down electrons, preserving time-reversal symmetry. There is a single flux quantum through the entire system, such that the field vanishes in the thermodynamic limit The specific heat c is known to be a challenging quantity to compute in determinantal quantum Mote Carlo simulations. Two equivalent definitions of c can be used: In the following we list a few arguments concerning the statistical errors of the two approaches. Note that in a Fermi liquid c ∝ T , such that ⟨H 2 ⟩ -⟨H⟩ 2 ∝ T 3 and ⟨H⟩ = E 0 +const.× T 2 +O(T 3 ). Hence, the variance of the energy is a difference of two, much larger quantities, unless E 0 = 0. Thus, a Monte Carlo estimation of Eq. (S.1) typically suffers from large statistical errors. This problem is partially mitigated by measuring ⟨H 2 ⟩ and ⟨H⟩ 2 using the same Monte Carlo configurations, such that their errors tend to cancel. Additionally, the calculation of ⟨H 2 ⟩ involves a high order correlation functions, e.g., computing H 2 int includes the calculation of 6-point correlators. Typically, in Monte Carlo, the statistical error increases with the the order of the correlation function. The expectation value of an observable O is ⟨O⟩ = ∑ C p(C)⟪O⟫ C where C is a given Monte Carlo configuration, p(C) the configuration's probability, and ⟪O⟫ C is the value of the observable for the given configuration. It is not guarantied that a configuration with high probability p(C) also has a large contribution to the observable. Instead, there may be configurations with a small p(C) but a large p(C)⟪O⟫ C . In such a case, the statistical error can be very large, since the observable is dominated by rare configurations. Such a mismatch between the configurations' probability and their contribution to the observable is more likely for high order observables. The alternative approach, Eq. (S.2), extracts the spe- cific heat from the energy E(T ) = ⟨H⟩ as a function of temperature via a numerical derivative ∆T , where ∆T should be sufficiently small. Here, one has to distinguish two different sources of error. On one hand, there is the statistical error in E(T +∆T 2)-E(T -∆T 2), which decreases with increasing ∆T . On the other hand, there is a systematic error in the estimate of the derivative that increases with ∆T . A priori, it is not obvious which of the two approaches is more efficient for a fixed amount of computing resources. A comparison is presented in Fig. The finite-temperature nematic phase boundary can be estimated by using finite-size scaling techniques for the classical two-dimensional Ising transition, characterized by a correlation length critical exponent ν = 1 and a susceptibility critical exponent γ = 7 4. In the vicinity of T c , the nematic susceptibility χ N satisfies: where F is a universal scaling function. We use different system sizes and estimate by data collapse the critical transverse field for a given temperature. An example of this kind of procedure is illustrated in Fig. The same finite size scaling method is used to calculate T c of the superconducting BKT transition. We have computed the s-wave superconducting susceptibility χ SC , which is defined as where ∆ i (τ ) = c i↑ (τ )c i↓ (τ ). In the vicinity of the critical temperature, the finite size scaling of the superconducting susceptibility satisfies where η(T ) increases monotonically with increasing T between η(T = 0) = 0 and η(T = T c ) = 1 4 . We can therefore estimate T c by locating the crossing point between different system sizes upon setting η(T = T c ) = 1 4 . An example for the estimation of T c using this procedure is illustrated in Fig To shed further light on the origin of the lowtemperature enhancement of c T , we study the integrated density of states (DOS) around the Fermi level in an energy window set by the temperature. We recall the relation of the fermionic spectral function A(k, ω) = -π -1 Im G R (k, ω) (where G R is the retarded Green's function) and the imaginary time-displaced Green's function We further introduce the following integral over the Green's function which can be considered a proxy for the single-particle DOS at the Fermi level. Then, an opening of the gap is manifested by a rapid suppression of ν0 at low temperatures (Fig. To test the effect of the proximity to the van Hove singularity, we have studied the case of moderate coupling α = 1 with μ = -0.5 (which brings us closer to the van Hove singularity relative to the case μ = -1, studied in the main text). Fig. The behavior of the nematic susceptibility near the critical point for the different values of h is presented in Fig. To verify that our conclusions do not depend on the system size, examined the finite size dependence of the results. The nematic susceptibility has been shown in Fig. We consider the following effective Hamiltonian where ε k = (k 2 -k 2 F ) 2m, α, β = 1, . . . , N are fermion flavor indices (the physical case corresponds to N = 2), and (S.9) The system can be tuned to the vicinity of a nematic QCP by tuning r 0 . The nematic form factor is f k = cos k x -cos k y . The specific heat follows from the free energy per unit volume F = F L 2 where L is the linear system size, according to (S.10) In the following, we employ a canonical field-theoretic formulation of the problem. In the RPA approximation, justified formally in the large-N limit, the interaction contribution to the free energy is given by the sum of all rings of particle-hole bubbles, i.e. with the nematic correlation function Π(q) being defined as For the problem at hand, a number of simplifying assumptions can be taken for the nematic correlation function (Lindhard function). Most importantly, since T ≪ E F , to leading order, the temperature dependence of Π can be disregarded. Near the QCP, the typical transfer momentum q is much smaller than the Fermi momentum k F . Hence, the form factors reduce to f k-q 2 f k+q 2 ≈ f 2 k . In summary, one recovers the standard low-energy approximation for the density-density correlation function As it turns out, the free energy is dominated by regions in phase space where v F q ≫ ω m , such that the square root in Eq. (S.13) can be replaced by ωm v F q . Performing the sum over n in Eq. (S.11) to obtain a logarithm and then keeping only the temperature dependent piece of F RPA , we are left with where A = πv F 2mg 2 . The Matsubara summation can be turned into the contour integral over the upper half plane in z, This integral is divergent, but ∂F RPA ∂T is finite, ≈ 12.78 (S.17) Together with the free fermion part, the specific heat is thus given by c(T with J = I 2 5 3 π 8 3 ≈ 0.19, as mentioned in the main text. We also confirmed numerically that the simplifying assumptions taken in this derivation are justified. To this end, we compare in Fig. To account for lattice effects, we have also calculated the specific heat within the RPA using the tight binding dispersion of the main text [Eq. ( We now briefly comment on the expected superconducting transition temperature, Tc , within the pertubative RPA analysis. The scaling of Tc can be gleaned from the linearized Eliashberg gap equation, that reads where the dressed boson propagator is given by (neglecting the form factor for simplicity) D(q, ω) = (q 2 + g 2 ν ω q) -1 , (S.21) with ν the DOS at the Fermi level. The gap equation thus becomes (S.23) Therefore, the superconducting transition temperature is of order Tc ∼ g 4 N 3 E F , in accordance with similar estimates in the literature Crossovers in the electron Green's function near a QCP In this section, we discuss the general structure expected in the electron self-energy near a QCP. In par-ticular, we emphasize the possible existence of crossover regime where the electronic quasiparticles are coherent and their effective mass enhancement is small, but nevertheless their scattering rate is different from that of a Fermi liquid. For concreteness, let us assume that the electron selfenergy near the QCP has a power-law form: Σ(iω n ) = i(T NFL ) 1-α sign(ω n ) ω n α , (S. The condition that T NFL is much smaller than E F is naturally satisfied if the interactions are weak. Surprisingly, our simulations indicate that T NFL remains substantially smaller than E F even for moderate to strong interactions, as can be seen by the small enhancement of c T compared to the band structure value (Fig. 