We have developed a comprehensive theoretical model for predicting the magnetic field response of a parallel SQUID array in the voltage state. The model predictions are compared with our experimental data from a parallel SQUID array made of a YBCO thin-film patterned into wide tracks, busbars and leads, with eleven step-edge Josephson junctions. Our theoretical model uses the Josephson equations for resistively shunted junctions as well as the second Ginzburg-Landau equation to derive a system of coupled first-order nonlinear differential equations to describe the time-evolution of the Josephson junction phase differences which includes Johnson noise. Employing the second London equation and Biot-Savart's law, the supercurrent density distribution is calculated, using the stream function approach, which leads to a 2D second-order linear Fredholm integro-differential equation for the stream function with time-dependent boundary conditions. The novelty of the model is that it calculates the stream function everywhere in the thin-film structure to determine during the time-evolution the fluxoids for each SQUID array hole. Our numerical model calculations are compared with our experimental data and predict the bias-current versus voltage and the voltage versus magnetic field response with unprecedented accuracy. The model elucidates the importance to fully take Meissner shielding and current crowding into account in order to properly describe fluxoid focussing and bias-current injection. Furthermore, our model illustrates the failure of the simple lumped-element approach to describe a parallel SQUID array with a wide thin-film structure. In this paper we develop a comprehensive theoretical model for a parallel SQUID array with over-damped Josephson junctions (JJs), made from a high-T c superconducting thin-film with wide tracks, busbars and leads, exposed to an applied magnetic field while driven by a bias-current into the voltage state. Opposite to the commonly used lumped-element model, our model can describe for the first time the experimental data of a parallel SQUID array with unprecedented accuracy. Highly accurate predictions are important for the optimisation of magnetometers, low noise current amplifiers and high frequency AC magnetic field sensors. Enhanced quantum interference in a parallel SQUID array was first mentioned by Feynman et al. The often used lumped-element model can only be applied if a SQUID array consists of sufficiently narrow superonducting tracks such that Kirchhoff's law can be applied at well defined current vertices The main goal of this paper is to calculate the voltage response of a thin-film parallel SQUID array to an applied perpendicular magnetic field and compare our results with our experimental data for a YBCO thin-film parallel SQUID array. Contrary to the commonly used lumped-element model As an example, Fig. In our case the width w J of the JJs is much less than the Josephson penetration depth λ J 30 (short junction) and the applied magnetic induction B a is sufficiently small such that the JJ current density is nearly constant across junction areas. In this case, the current across the junctions is described by the Josephson equation I ck sin φ k (t) Because in high-temperature superconducting materials, like YBCO thin-films, the capacitance of the fabricated JJs is small, one can apply the resistively shunted junction (RSJ) model to describe the time-dependent total current I k (t) flowing through the junctions, i.e. Here R k is the normal resistance of the k th junction and V k (t) the voltage across that junction, which according to the Josephson equation is where Φ 0 is the flux quantum. I N oise k (t) in Eq.( From the second Ginzburg-Landau equation 32 it follows that (3) with k=1, ..., N -1. Here μ 0 is the permeability of free space, λ the London penetration depth, j(r, t) the supercurrent density with r a spatial vector, the symbol • means scalar product and dl is an integration line element. The integration contour ∂Ω k is chosen as the inner boundary contour of hole k as indicated in Fig. The time-dependent total flux Φ k (t) through the k th hole of the array is the sum of two parts, where Φ (a) k is the static applied flux through the hole Ω k , i.e. Φ (a) k = B a A k with A k the area of the hole k and B a the applied magnetic inductance, B a = μ 0 H a where H a is the applied magnetic field. Here we restrict our investigation to the case where all hole areas A k are of the same size A h , with A h = 2 h w h (Fig. We will show in the following how the flux Φ (J) k (t) can be calculated and how the junction currents I k (t) in Eq. ( dx dy , where j x and j y are the x and y components of the supercurrent density j. One can express j x and j y in Eq. ( This type of stream function approach has been used previously by To be allowed to integrate Eq. ( over small intervals around their singularity points. This leads to where the kernel Q F (x, y, x , y ) is defined in Appendix B, and x -x y -y • n dl . Here dl is the integration line element and n is a 2D normal vector in the xy plane which is perpendicular on the domain boundary ∂Ω, pointing outwards, away from the area Ω. The contour ∂Ω includes the hole-boundaries of the array. Exploiting the stream function symmetry about the x axis, i.e. g(x , y , t) = g(x , -y , t), one can restrict the integration domain Ω in Eq. ( where the integration is now only over the upper domain Ω u with a kernel Q given by Q(x, y, x , y ) = Q F (x, y, x , y )+Q F (x, y, x , -y ) , (10) and Here f u s is defined by Eq. ( In order to obtain an equation to calculate the stream function g(x, y, t) we use the second London equation which has the form where H is the total magnetic field. Again, because λ > d, and thus j(x, y, z) = j(x, y), we can employ the 2D second London equation which from Eq. ( Here in 2D, the magnetic field and the stream function are governed by the 2D screening length or Pearl length where H a is the applied magnetic field in z direction, one finds, using Eqs. ( x -x y -y • n dl . In order to solve Eq. ( Figure Thus, the junction currents I 1 (t) and I N (t) at the ends of the array are I 1 (t) = g1 (t) + I b /2 and I N (t) = -g N -1 (t) + I b /2, while between holes, the junction currents are With the above boundary conditions one can calculate f s (x, y, t) (Eqs. ( where both P 0 (x, y) and P k (x, y) are independent of time t and P 0 (x, y) := P u 0 (x, y) + P u 0 (x, -y) (19) and P k (x, y) := P u k (x, y) + P u k (x, -y) . Here P u 0 is the part of the integral in Eq. ( The total magnetic flux Φ k (t) (Eq. ( where the integration is over the hole domain Ω k (see Fig. Using Eqs. ( where μ 0 H a A h is the applied magnetic flux that penetrates each hole of area A h , and with j = 0, 1, ...N -1. Furthermore, in Eq. ( where Q(x, y, x , y ) is given by Eq. ( In order to calculate numerically the stream function g(x, y, t) with Eq. ( = H a + P 0n for all n Ω u . Here P 0n := P 0 (r n ) and P nk := P k (r n ) . In vector notation, the relationship in Eq. ( where g is the N -1 dimensional stream function vector, g = (g 1 , ..., gN-1 ) for the holes. In Eq. ( The stream function vector, g(t) := (g 1 (t), ..., g Ng (t)), represents the stream function g(x, y, t) at all grid point elements in Ω u . The matrix D is an N g × N g matrix corresponsing to the Laplace operator in Eq. (24), where (D) nm := [ -4 δ nm + δ N b nm ] /w with w = (∆x) 2 and δ N b n,m = 1 if r m is a nearest neighbour of r n and zero otherwise. The matrix Q is also an N g × N g matrix, defined as (Q) nm := Q(r n , r m ). The symbol 1 Ng in Eq. ( In vector notation, using Eqs. ( where L 0 := (L 10 , ..., L N -1,0 ) with L k0 given by Eq. ( Furthermore, we rewrite the Ginzburg-Landau equation Eq. ( where N is an (N -1)×N matrix defined as (N ) kj = -1 for k = j and (N ) kj = 1 for k = j -1 and zero otherwise. The phase difference vector φ(t) is N dimensional, φ(t) := (φ 1 (t), ..., φ N (t)). Using Eqs. ( where the contour integration is counterclockwise along the boundary ∂Ω k of the hole k (see Figs. Josephson phase differences for a parallel SQUID array with wide thin-film structure Using Eq. ( Note that Ĩ(t) is an (N -1) vector and its components do not contain the junction current I N (t) across the last JJ. But, since I N (t) = I b -N -1 k=1 I k (t), the current I N (t) is well defined and thus, Eq. ( It is convenient to define I c as the average junction critical current, I c = N k=1 I ck / N and R as the average junction resistance, R = N k=1 R k / N . Note that R is not the total array resistance. Then, Eq. ( where τ is the reduced time in dimensionless units, and ). The standard deviations for R k and I ck in YBCO thin-film SQUID arrays can be as large as 0.3 At this point it is convenient to write Eq. ( Here the components of the vector φ(τ ) are dφ k (τ )/dτ and the components of the vector S(τ ) are -ξ k η k sin φ k (τ ), where k = 1, ..., N -1. The matrix ξ is an (N -1) × (N -1) diagonal matrix with diagonal elements ξ k /I c , where k = 1, ..., N -1, and ĨNoise (τ ) := (I N oise 1 (τ ), ..., I N oise N -1 (τ )). Please note that K(τ ) and g(τ ) are both functions of time τ since the supercurrent density distribution in a SQUID array undergoes periodic changes with time. To make the set of coupled differential equations for φ k (τ ) of Eq. ( Equation ( Please note that Eqs. (34) and (35) together with Eq. ( The time-averaged normalised voltage, V /(RI c ), between the leads of a parallel SQUID array, is given by time averaging the right-hand side of the Josephson equation Eq. ( where k can be any k {1, ..., N }. One has to choose τ 0 large enough such that numerical self-adjustment for the initial φ k 's has occurred and τ has to be taken sufficiently large. In the case where Johnson noise can be neglected, one finds where τ p is the period of oscillations of the φ k (τ )'s. In the case of non-negligible Johnson noise, Eq. ( where τ has to be chosen sufficiently large. The wide tracks, busbars and leads focus magnetic flux into the array holes. In addition, the Meissner shielding current crowding near the holes, enhance the j•dl term. An effective area, A ef f k can be defined for each array hole k via the fluxoid it contains as A ef f k can also be defined in the limit of B a → ∞ instead of I c and I b → 0. From the definition in Eq. ( where the subscript 0 in K 0 and g 0 means that g in Eq. ( Parallel SQUID arrays were fabricated lithographically by growing thin-films of YBCO on 1 cm 2 MgO substrates. Steps were etched into the MgO surface using a well established technique based on argon milling To measure the V (B a ) response, the array was placed on a measurement probe, that generated a perpendicular applied induction B a (magnetic field H a ), and then dipped into a dewar of liquid nitrogen and zero field cooled down to a temperature of 77 K. To screen out the earth's magnetic field, the dewar was surrounded by five layers of mu-metal shielding. A bias-current I b , with a value which optimised the SQUID array response (maximised transfer function dV /dB a ), was injected into the top bias-lead and the voltage V at different B a was measured using the standard four-terminal method. In the following we discuss in detail the calculated and experimental results for a parallel SQUID array with N = 11 junctions with 8 μm wide fluxoid focussing busbars and bias-leads. A micrograph of this device is shown as an inset in Fig. Figures From the supercurrents that are flowing parallel and very close to the junctions we can calculate the fluxoids in the junctions. We find that for the largest magnetic induction B a = 190 μT, the value for the fluxoids in junctions is about 0.06 Φ 0 . Thus, the critical current of JJs is not affected by the applied magnetic field which is sufficiently small so that our initial assumption of a nearly constant critical current density across junction areas is well justified. It is interesting to compare the results from our comprehensive model with the simpler lumped-element model We have also fabricated and measured 8 other parallel SQUID arrays with numbers of JJs ranging from N = 4 to N = 81 In this paper we have presented a comprehensive theoretical model that allows us to calculate with high accuracy the magnetic field response of an N = 11 parallel SQUID array with wide thin-film geometric structures, operated in the voltage state. The model calculates the fluxoids for each SQUID array hole during the time-evolution of the phase differences of the JJs. This was achieved by solving numerically the second-order linear Fredholm integro-differential equation for the stream function, derived from the second London equation and Biot-Savart's law, with boundary conditions that are updated for each time step. The fact that the London penetration depth of YBCO thin-films at 77 K is greater than the thickness of our thin-film, allows us to solve the intero-differential equation in 2D. The Josephson equations and the second Ginzburg-Landau equation for the phase differences lead to a system of coupled first-order nonlinear differential equations which depend on the stream function which describes the time-varying supercurrent density within the thin-film array structure. The equations also take into account the Johnson noise from the JJs. Compared to the much simpler and far less accurate lumped-element model approach, our comprehensive model, while computationally much more demanding, leads to highly accurate predictions. We have tested the predictive power of our model by comparing our model results with our experimental data for an N = 11 parallel SQUID array with wide thin-film structures. The theoretical model requires only two parameters, i.e. the junction critical current density I c and the London penetration depth λ. Both parameters were adjusted to give the best allover agreement with the experimental V (B a ) curve of the array. The model predicts with unprecedentedly high accuracy the V (B a ) curve of the array over a wide applied magnetic field range and also describes well the experimentally observed thermal rounding of the I b versus V (B a = 0) curve. The model reveals that the observed envelope modulation of the experimental V (B a ) curve is due to the non-equal effective hole areas of the array, where the centre holes have a larger effective area. Spreads in I ck and R k lead to B a -asymmetry of the V (B a ) curve. For wide thin-film geometric structures, the lumped-element model fails to correctly predict the V (B a ) array response, because it cannot describe fluxoid focussing and in particular fails to appropriately handle the bias-current injection. We also have tried a method suggested by Brandt 26 in order to avoid the singularity in Eq. ( Appendix B: Analytical expressions for the functions P u 0 (x, y) and P u k (x, y) Using Eqs. ( Equivalent equations for the Laplacian are used for other ∂Ω u boundary lines and along junctions. Special attention has to be given to points r n near corners. We assume that the uncorrelated Johnson noise from the normal resistances of the junctions are the dominant noise sources, compared to junction shot noise or thermal fluctuations in critical currents and k B is the Boltzmann constant and T the temperature the device is held at (here T = 77 K). When applying the above concept to a single resistively shunted JJ, our numerical results agree with the Fokker-Planck calculations of Ambegaokar and Halperin 45 .