The efficiency of semiconductor light emitting diodes (LEDs) has continuously improved since the first fabrication of an infrared device in 1960. The key metric has been the external quantum efficiency, which describes the number of photons externally radiated per injected electron. Rapid initial progress was achieved in enhancing the carrier injection efficiency through bandgap engineering in heterostructure and, subsequently, quantum well devices. The current evolution in LED design involves enhancing the external extraction of photons generated in the active region. This letter presents a novel theoretical and experimental design for a III-nitride RCLED grown on low-cost Si substrates. This development presents an opportunity to significantly improve the efficiency and cost structure of III-nitride based LEDs. A RCLED can overcome the inherent limitation of total internal reflection associated with planar LEDs, where only light that is emitted into the escape cone can be extracted. Light propagating towards the surface at an angle greater than critical angle is subjected to total internal reflection and may not be extracted (θc = sin -1 (nair / ns), where ns is the index of refraction of the semiconductor). An RCLED is one solution to redistribute the spontaneous emission pattern into the desired extraction cone. In such a structure, a light emitting region with an optical thickness on the order of the emission wavelength is surrounded by two mirrors. The bottom mirror consists of a high reflectance (R2 > 95%) multi-layer Bragg mirror or single-layer metal layer. The top mirror is of lower reflectance (40% > R1 > 70%) to allow greater transmission. Thus, a multi-layer Bragg mirror is typically used for the top mirror to minimize absorption, although a very thin multilayer metallic mirror can also be used as will be described in this letter. This structure creates a Fabry-Perot cavity with an optical length of where Lc is the cavity thickness and mc is the cavity order. which is dependent on the angle θ from the normal to the surface. Thus, the extraction efficiency is inversely proportional to the mode order, ηext ≈ 1/mc. This efficiency is further decreased by the broadening of the Airy function by the spectral spread, σ, of the source (s), . [4] The inverse finesse term, 1/F, of the cavity is typically insignificant for a weak-coupling planar micro-cavity The extraction efficiency within the critical angle is which can be evaluated by a discrete summation. Figure Several samples consisting of a single quantum well (SQW) UV-LED on a 7x GaN / AlN DBR on a Si substrate were grown in a MOCVD system. LED structure consisting of a 100nm GaN:Si, a 20-nm / 10-nm / 20-nm AlGaN:Si / GaN-undoped / AlGaN:Mg SQW, and a 125-nm GaN:Mg layer were constant in all samples studied, while the thickness of the GaN and AlN layers in the DBR were adjusted to set the peak reflectance to various wavelengths in the UV and visible light regime. A top Ni or Ni / Au contact provided contact to the p-GaN, while the silver paste was applied following an HF etch and SC1 clean of the conductive n + Si substrate to remove the native oxide to provide a reliable backside contact. The electroluminescence (EL) spectrum presented in Figure This letter reports on the metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) of RCLED devices based on an AlN / GaN superlattice structures grown directly on Si(111) substrates. The alternating sequence functions optically as a high-reflectance DBR and structurally as a strain compensating superlattice. The growth was carried out in a modified vertical-impinging-flow chemical-vapor-deposition reactor. Two-inch Si wafers were cleaned via a modified Radio Corporation of America process followed by an in situ H2 bake. An Al seed layer was deposited prior to the onset of NH3 flow to protect the Si surface from nitridization. The AlN/GaN superlattice was deposited at 1050°C and 50 Torr. The reflection band-width for the DBR structure can be tuned to any point in the near-UV or visible by adjusted the thicknesses of the AlN and GaN layers in the DBR. For example, the DBR with a reflection band-width centered at 385 nm (UV) required alternating 45.6-nm AlN and 43.0nm GaN layers. Following growth of the DBR layers, an identical GaN SQW LED device was deposited at 1020°C at 150 Torr directly on the various DBR structures, as well as on a control GaN on Si structure. The n-and p-type doping was accomplished with disilane and Cp2Mg, respectively. Topside metal contacts were deposited and patterned on the p-type GaN layer along with blanket silver contact deposition on the backside of the Si wafer. Optical characterization of the various LEDs was performed on multiple diodes with varying DBR thicknesses, in an effort to quantify the overall spectral output and its dependence on the DBR properties. Circular nickel and gold metal contacts were deposited across the top surface of the device and silver paste was used to make contact to the backside, following an HF etch and SC1 NH4OH:H2O2:H2O) clean to remove any native oxide that had formed to ensure the best possible contact was made. A constant current between 2.5 and 200 mA was injected into the LED via the top metal contact using a Keithley 2400 Source Measurement Unit. EL spectra were collected using a Mitutoyo microscope and 100X (0.7 NA) objective and the spectral output were directed via an optical fiber into an Ocean Optics USB2000 spectrometer with an effective spectral range of 200 to 850 nm. Non-linearities of the spectrometer were corrected for via comparison of a measurement of the output of a tungsten lamp with a calculated 3100K color temperature spectral plot, to ensure that accurate intensity comparisons were obtained. The ex situ reflectance was measured at normal incidence using a tungsten lamp as a source and the reflected beam was dispersed through an Ocean Optics USB2000 spectrometer with a 50-μm slit.