Weyl superconductors feature Weyl points at zero energy in the three-dimensional (3D) Brillouin zone and arc states that connect the projections of these Weyl points on the surface. We report that higher-order Weyl superconductors can be realized in odd-parity topological superconductors with time-reversal symmetry being broken by periodic driving. Different from conventional Weyl points, the higher-order Weyl points in the bulk separate 2D first-and second-order topological phases, while on the surface, their projections are connected not only by conventional surface Majorana arcs, but also by hinge Majorana arcs. We show that the Weyl-point connectivity via Majorana arcs is largely enriched by the underlying higher-order topology and becomes anisotropic with respect to surface orientations. We identify the anisotropic Weyl-point connectivity as a characteristic feature of higher-order Weyl materials. As each 2D subsystem can be singled out by fixing the periodic driving, we propose how the Majorana zero modes in the 2D higher-order topological phases can be detected and manipulated in experiments. Introduction.-The particular excitations of topological semimetals and nodal superconductors emerge around gapless degeneracies and constitute one of the main research activities in the field of topological materials Recently, inspired by higher-order topology In this Letter, we show that HOWSCs with broken time-reversal symmetry can be realized by periodically driving a 2D second-order odd-parity topological superconductor. The periodic driving breaks time-reversal symmetry and offers an unprecedented way to extend the 2D superconductor to a third dimension with periodic boundary conditions. Weyl points can be generated in this dynamic process, which split the system into different regions of first-(FOTP) or second-order topological phases (SOTP), leading to a HOWSC. In sharp contrast to the surface Majorana arcs protected by a bulk Chern number in the FOTP regions, the hinge Majorana arcs in the SOTP regions, which are protected by inversion symmetry, depend strongly on the surface orientation due to the higher-order topology. This results in an intriguing and diverse recombination of surface and hinge Majorana arcs upon orientation change, leading to an anisotropic Weyl-point connectivity. By developing an effective boundary theory capable of describing both surface and hinge Majorana arcs, we thoroughly analyze this intricate Weyl-point connectivity of Majorana arcs in every surface orientation. Furthermore, both the FOTP and SOTP can be individually investigated as the periodic driving offers an advantage to single out each 2D slice of the system by fixing the driving parameters. We propose to control and detect the Majorana zero modes in the SOTP regions via circularly polarized light (CPL) in experiments. Realization of HOWSCs.-Our starting point is a 2D second-order odd-parity topological superconductor that respects time-reversal symmetry. Different from previous proposals for higher-order topogical superconductors , we consider an inter-orbital s-wave pairing potential with a constant magnitude ∆ 0 , which may be induced via the proximity effect. The minimal Hamiltonian in momentum space can be written as where m(k) = M 0 -2m(cos k x +cos k y ) and the Pauli matrices s, σ and τ act on spin, orbital, and Nambu spaces, respectively. μ is the chemical potential, M 0 , m and v are material dependent parameters. The Hamiltonian is invariant under time-reversal (T ) and particle-hole (C) symmetry. The pairing interaction is of odd parity as indicated by Ph ∆ P -1 = -h ∆ with the inversion operator P = σ z . Correspondingly, the BdG Hamiltonian is symmetric under inversion PH(k) P-1 = H(-k) with P = τ z P. Furthermore, spin rotation about the z axis J z = τ z s z is preserved. Due to the second-order topology, our model features two 0D Majorana Kramers pairs at a disk boundary in the horizontal direction, which are protected by time-reversal and inversion symmetries [Fig. Next, we show that HOWSCs can be generated on the basis of the model (1) through periodic driving. For concreteness, we consider periodic driving in the form of CPL which is shed on the system in the z direction and described by the vector potential A(t) = A 0 (cos(ωt), sin(ωt + φ), 0). φ characterizes the phase shift, A 0 the strength and ω the frequency. The CPL couples to the electrons(holes) via the Peierls substitutions k → k ± eA(t). To proceed analytically and elucidate our main results, we employ Floquet theory and derive a static effective Hamiltonian where The model in Eq. ( In Fig. Anisotropic Weyl-point connectivity.-In conventional Weyl superconductors, the surface Majorana arcs that connect the projections of the Weyl points in the surface Brillouin zone are protected by a non-zero Chern number. Figure To visualize the Weyl-point connectivity, we calculate the surface density of states (SDOS) for different surface orientations. Remarkably, the form of the Weyl-point connectivity is strongly anisotropic with respect to the surface orientation. Three typical cases of (100), (010), and (110) surfaces are displayed in Figs. Effective boundary theory.-For a better understanding of the orientation-dependent connectivity of the Majorana arcs, it is instructive to develop a boundary theory applicable to any surface orientation. To do so, we first derive two boundary states (Ψ e↑ , Ψ h↓ ) for each φ in the absence of pairing interactions where v ± = v(1 ± 2mI cos φ/ω), θ is the angle between the boundary and x direction, and k is the momentum along the boundary (see Fig. with sgn(•) being the sign function. The prefactor F stems from the overlap of the boundary state wavefunctions The chemical potential μ can be absorbed in k in the square root and the band gap is given by 2| ∆(θ)|. For simplicity, we set μ to zero in the following discussion. Notably, Eq. ( When 2mI/ω > 1, v + v -changes sign at φ = φ j with j ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}, φ 1 = -φ 4 = π -arccos(ω/2mI) and φ 2 = -φ 3 = arccos(ω/2mI). As a result, the positions in Eq. ( Manipulating Majorana zero modes.-The realization of detectable and tunable Majorana zero modes is one of the main research goals in Majorana physics To elucidate this manipulation, we calculate explicitly the wavefunctions of the Majorana zero modes and hence their spin polarizations. Starting with the boundary Hamiltonian Eq. ( which is independent of θ. A phase diagram for the spin polarization of the Majorana zero modes with respect to the phase shift φ and intensity I is plotted in Fig. Conclusions and discussions.-We have proposed to realize time-several symmetry broken HOWSCs in second-order topological superconductors with oddparity pairing potential by periodic driving. We have revealed an important characteristic feature of higherorder Weyl materials, namely, the anisotropic Weyl-point connectivity of the surface and hinge Majorana arcs. We have further shown the possibility to detect and manipulate the Majorana zero states by CPL. To generate Weyl points and realize the position switching of Majorana zero modes, the frequency and intensity of CPL need to satisfy 2mI/ω > 1. For typical values m 50 eV• Å2 (e.g., for inverted Hg(Cd)Te quantum wells This work was supported by the DFG (SPP1666 and SFB1170 "ToCoTronics"), the Würzburg-Dresden Cluster of Excellence ct.qmat, EXC2147, project-id 390858490, and the Elitenetzwerk Bayern Graduate School on "Topological Insulators".