The Dirac nodal-line semimetals (DNLS) are new promising materials for technological applications due to its exotic properties, which originate from band structures dispersion and nodal-line behavior. We report a study on effects of several possibilities of strains in ZrSiSe DNLS on band structure dispersion and nodal-line behavior through the means of the density functional theory (DFT) calculations. We found that the Dirac nodal-line of ZrSiSe is robust to all strain with reasonable magnitude. Although, there are significant changes in gap, amplitude, and energy relative to Fermi energy. We also found the effective strains to tune the nodal-line and band structures are equi-biaxial tensile, uniaxial (100) tensile, and uniaxial (110) tensile strain. (a) (b) (c) In the last decade, discovery of a single-atom-thick honeycomb carbon layer -graphene -become one of main breakthroughs in science and technology The Dirac nodal-line semimetals (DNLS) have attracted experimental and theoretical researches due to its exotic properties such as their topological nature Inducing strain to tune properties of known materials are common practice, especially band structures such as in silicon In this study, we aim to understand the robustness of DNLS under several types of strains such as equi-biaxial tensile, equi-biaxial compression, hydrostatic, uniaxial (100), and uniaxial (110). We focus on ZrSiSe as a typical DNLS which slightly gapped due to spin-orbit coupling and its Dirac nodal-line shows sinusoidal oscillation along the closed loop in BZ. We found that the k z = 0 nodal-line was robust through all previously mentioned strains under reasonable magnitude. However, the gap and amplitude of nodal-line changed. In several cases, the strains also introduce lowering of conduction bands, turning it into a topologically trivial metallic compound. ZrSiSe is a layered crystal with a tetragonal structure and space group P4/nmm (No. 129). The structure of ZrSiSe is shown in Fig. We also analyze the DNL near the Fermi energy by plotting the conduction bands and valence bands along k ∥ at k z = 0. The equi-biaxial tensile strain reduces the global energy dispersion while keeping similar sinusoidal profile as shown in Fig. There are two-step changes in the kz = 0 nodal-line. Firstly, small compression increases the amplitude of sinusoidal nodal-line energy. Secondly, further compression will elevate the valence band from full to partial occupation as shown in Fig. Various strain in different magnitudes and directions have been studied in gapped nodal-line of ZrSiSe by the means of density functional theory (DFT). Equi-biaxial tensile tends to reduce DNL energy relative to the Fermi energy, while equi-biaxial compression, uniaxial (100) tensile, hydrostatic compression, and uniaxial (110) tensile strain tends to increase it. The nodal-line gap average relatively stays the same except in uniaxial (100) 5% tensile strain where it decreased by 14%. These nodal-line changes are easiest to be observed in equi-biaxial tensile strain, uniaxial (100) tensile strain, and uniaxial (110) tensile strain considering stress and pressure magnitude. Finally, we conclude, under the definition of nodal-line as a continuous Dirac node over k-space, that ZrSiSe nodal-line is robust against previously mentioned types and magnitudes of strain with different energy deviation to the Fermi energy and difference between maximum and minimum Dirac node. All strains might induce electronic topological transition (ETT) near Γ -points while equi-biaxial tensile, uniaxial (100), and uniaxial (110) might induce ETT near Z -R points. No degeneracy lifting occurs in all strains.