driven domain wall motion 14 2. Field-driven domain wall motion 14 3. Equilibrium stripe domain pattern 17 4. Magnetic stripe annihilation 17 5. Nucleation field 18 6. Domain wall stray fields 19 7. Domain wall internal structure imaging 19 D. Advantages and limitations 24 III. Spin wave methods 26 A. Method overview 26 B. Theory and models 26 1. Quantum spin wave theory 26 2. Classical spin wave theory 28 C. Experimental results 30 1. Brillouin light scattering 30 2. Time resolved magneto optical imaging 32 3. Propagating spin wave spectroscopy 34 4. Spin-polarized electron energy loss spectroscopy 38 D. Advantages and Limitations 38 IV. Spin Orbit Torque method 40 A. Method overview 40 B. Theory and models 40 C. Experimental Results 41 D. Advantages and Limitations 42 V. Comparison of the methods and discussion of problems in the determination of the DMI constant 43 A. Comparing the DMI constants obtained by the different methods 43 B. Comparing the DMI constants in different materials 45 C. Influence of growth conditions on the DMI constant 48 D. Outlook and conclusion 48 Topological spin structures such as chiral domain walls (DWs) and skyrmions are emerging as promising information carriers for future spintronics technologies The DMI is an anisotropic exchange interaction favoring a canted spin arrangement and has a net contribution only in systems without a center of inversion. It originates from the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) which acts as a perturbation on localized spin states. Given two neighboring spins S i and S j , the DMI contributes to the Hamiltonian locally with a first bilinear energy term described by the following expression: where D i j = D i j (r i j × n) is the local DMI vector which can be described by its magnitude D i j , with ri j being the unit vector linking the two neighboring spins and n being along the direction of symmetry breaking. This expression is part of a generalized exchange interaction, which relates D i j to the isotropic exchange -J i j S i • S j with exchange constant J i j , i.e. Heisenberg exchange in the case of localized electrons with a direct orbital overlap, or any other direct or indirect exchange described by the above Hamiltonian. Contrary to the Heisenberg type exchange, which favors collinear alignment, the DMI promotes an orthogonal arrangement between S i and S j , with a chirality imposed by the direction of D i j . The DMI was first proposed in the 1950s for antiferromagnets such as α-Fe 2 O 3 to account for the existence of a weak ferromagnetism From an experimental point of view, the development of sophisticated imaging techniques to visualize the magnetic state, such as spin-polarized scanning tunnel microscopy (SPSTM) or spin-polarized low energy electron microscopy (SPLEEM), was crucial for triggering a renewed interest in the topic at the beginning of the century, highlighted in the important works More recently, the presence of DMI was also demonstrated in thin magnetic multilayers with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy and shown to be localised at the interface between the layers Figure Bilayers composed of a thin magnetic film with PMA and a heavy metal are particularly interesting from the application point of view, due to the fast domain wall motion driven by an electric current in presence of DMI. Early experiments on current-induced domain wall motion in such systems were not able to fully unravel the driving mechanisms behind such motion. The conventional spin-transfer torque (STT) theory Considering the ferromagnetic film itself isotropic (i.e. without special crystal symmetries, leading to an additional symmetry breaking), the DMI vector simplifies to D = D(r i j × n) The most commonly used experimental techniques that in recent years have been employed to measure D in HM/FM structures can be broadly divided into three categories: 1. Domain wall methods, where D is extracted by either measuring the domain wall velocity or energy as a function of an in-plane magnetic field, or by measuring domain wall spacing in stripe domain phases, or by directly measuring the domain wall internal structure; 2. Spin wave methods, where D is extracted by measuring the non-reciprocity of propagating spin waves, owing to the presence of DMI, in in-plane magnetised films; 3. Spin-orbit torque methods, where D is extracted by measuring the field shift of the out-of-plane hysteresis loop under an in-plane magnetic field. With this literature review we aim at providing an accurate analysis of the current state-of-the-art regarding measurements of the interfacial DMI constant D based on the different techniques summarized above. Therefore, Sections II, III, and IV are devoted to analyze each of the three main classes of techniques mentioned above. In particular, in each section we start with a theoretical background, followed by an overview of the relevant experimental methodologies and then a number of detailed tables with a collection of the relevant results published in the literature. Finally, for each of the three above sections, we will provide a critical discussion of advantages and limitations of each experimental technique. The last section of this review article, Section V, is devoted to a comparison and discussion of the methods and results obtained by the three classes of methods analyzed in the previous sections, as well as to final considerations about open problems and challenges. In particular, we address crucial aspects of the current research, such as the reliability of the different techniques, the choice of material combinations to achieve large/small, negative/positive DMI, and the reasons for the spread of the results (e.g. sample/interface quality, growth conditions and reliability of the measuring techniques). We anticipate that, with regard to the available literature, it is out of the scope of the present work to give definitive recipes to prepare specific interfaces with a controlled value of DMI, evaluate the level of uncertainty of the different measurement methods, or classify the methods clearly according to their applicability. Therefore, one should consider our synoptic Figs. 28-29 as general guides to explore measurement methods and ranges of values of common heterostructures. We emphasize instead the need for more systematic studies and hope that this review will stimulate the community to tackle metrological aspects of the measurement of the DMI at interfaces. In ultra-thin films with PMA, Bloch domain walls are magnetostatically favored over Néel DWs The direct observation of chiral magnetization states in presence of a DMI Following these early investigations The origins of the 1D models can be traced back to the original description of Bloch walls by F. Bloch More recently, several other contributions have been included in the 1D model to take into account newly discovered effects, such as the STTs where M S is the saturation magnetization, and ∆ = √ A/K eff is the DW width parameter, with A being the exchange stiffness and K eff = K U -1 2 μ 0 M 2 S the effective perpendicular anisotropy constant, corresponding to the intrinsic perpendicular anisotropy constant K U decreased by the demagnetizing energy 1 2 μ 0 M 2 S . Additions of thermal fluctuations Here, we provide a summary for the different DW-based techniques, explaining the underlying models (Sec. II.B), reviewing the main results achieved regarding the determination of D (Sec. II.C), and highlighting the respective advantages and limitations (Sec. II.D). The driving mechanism behind the current-induced motion of DWs in heavy metal/ferromagnet bilayers with PMA is now widely believed to be due to a combination of SHE and DMI, while the iSGE torque is considered to be negligible where θ SH is the spin Hall angle, J e is the electron current density, d is the thickness of the ferromagnetic film, and Φ is the internal in-plane DW angle as defined in Fig. The current-driven DW dynamics is dramatically affected by the application of an in-plane magnetic field H x along the current direction. It is indeed due to this that DW velocity measurements as a function of H x provide a means to quantify D. Given a fixed J, it is observed that Néel DWs with the same chirality ↑→↓ and ↓←↑ have the same velocity when H x = 0, while they move with different velocities under a non-vanishing H x . In particular, for a given sign of H x , the DW type for which H x is parallel to H DMI moves faster while the other kind, where H x partially compensates H DMI , slows down with respect to its velocity at H x = 0. The situation is reversed by changing the sign of the applied H x . This remarkable behaviour has an important consequence: both DWs stop moving for a certain |H x |, equal in strength but opposite in sign for ↑→↓ and ↓←↑ DWs respectively, as schematically shown in Fig. The applied H x under which these Néel DWs stop moving -typically referred to as the "compensating" or "stopping" field -is the field that, opposing the DMI, restores a Bloch DW configuration, for which indeed no motion is expected via SHE-SOT. As such, this "compensating" field H * x can be considered equivalent in strength (but opposite in sign) to the H DMI acting locally across the DWs. In other words, because of the change in the DW internal magnetization angle x with H DMI is valid only if conventional STT, due to the spin-polarized current in the ferromagnet, x and H DMI in the 1D model becomes where μ B is the Bohr magneton, P is the spin current polarization, and γ is the gyromagnetic ratio. Eq. 2.3 implies that H * x can depend on the amplitude of the current used to drive DWs. When only a modest dependence of H * x on J e is observed, as for instance in The dependence of the DW velocity on an in-plane field for a fixed current density can be analytically described in the context of the 1D model, taking into account STT, SHE-SOT and DMI x , and some experimental works derive H DMI by linearly fitting the data x (Lo A few papers have shown that D can also be quantified through current-driven DW dynamics by measuring the dependence of the DW depinning efficiency, rather than the DW velocity, on the in-plane field H x and is measured as the slope of the out-of-plane depinning field as a function of J e . The DW depinning efficiency changes as a function of H x , due to the corresponding variation of the DW internal structure. In particular, is found to vanish at a certain H * x , equal in strength but opposite in sign for ↑→↓ and ↓←↑ DWs. Similarly to what was already discussed for the DW velocity dependence on H x , this in-plane field H * x for which = 0 represents the field at which a Bloch DW configuration is restored, and can thus be identified with H DMI . The simplest and most common way to move DWs in PMA materials is by applying a perpendicular field H z . To minimize the Zeeman energy associated with H z , domains with magnetization along the field direction expand at the expense of the others, leading to DW motion. Field-driven DW dynamics are typically classified into three distinctive regimes -creep, depinning, and flow -which occur in succession upon increasing H z , as shown in Fig. For sufficiently low driving fields DWs move in the thermally activated creep regime where they interact strongly with disorder, and their velocity grows exponentially as v ∼ exp(-H z ) -1/4 With the exceptions of a few works a. Creep regime In the creep regime, DWs are driven by modest fields (typically down to a few percent of H dep ) and move slowly by thermal activation, interacting strongly with disorder of various origin (pinning defects, film thickness variations, M S inhomogeneities, etc). The DW creep dynamics is understood in terms of the motion of a one-dimensional elastic line in a two-dimensional disordered potential. The dependence of the DW velocity v on the applied field H z is described by the so-called creep law where v 0 is the characteristic speed proportional to the attempt frequency for DW propagation, ζ is a scaling constant, and μ = 1/4 is the scaling exponent for the 1D elastic line. Creep motion of DWs driven by a perpendicular field H z is significantly altered by the simultaneous presence of an inplane field H x , similarly to what already discussed for the current-driven case (see Sec. II.B.1). Indeed, it is observed experimentally that when a circular magnetic bubble expands under the application of H z only, the radial symmetry is maintained and the bubble grows isotropically -thus retaining its original shape. However, the symmetry is broken when the bubble is expanded under the application of both H z and H x , as Néel ↑→↓ and ↓←↑ DWs acquire different velocities along the direction of the applied H x . This circumstance was first observed in The first model proposed to explain the asymmetric motion of Néel DWs with the in-plane field where ζ 0 is a scaling constant and σ is the DW energy density. The dependence of DW energy density on the in-plane field has been calculated as when the condition |H x + H DMI | < 4K D /πμ 0 M S is satisfied. In this case the effective field acting on the DW is not strong enough to fully convert it into a Néel DW. Otherwise, for higher fields and fully Néel DWs the expression becomes: In these equations, σ 0 = 4 √ AK eff is the Bloch DW energy density, ∆ = √ A/K eff is the domain wall width parameter, and K D = N x μ 0 M 2 S /2 is the DW shape anisotropy energy density The field H * x = -H DMI at which Néel DWs are converted into Bloch DWs is then equal in magnitude but opposite in sign for ↑↓ and ↓↑ DWs, respectively. It is important to notice that, differently from the current-driven case, field-driven Bloch DWs do not stop moving under the in-plane field H * x , since the perpendicular field H z keeps expanding the magnetic bubble to minimize Zeeman energy. Rather, in field-driven experiments, |H * x | = H DMI corresponds to a minimum in DW velocity. In this simple model, the velocity for each type of DW should be symmetric around its own minimum, as in Fig. This modified creep model, in which the in-plane field affects DW dynamics only through a variation of domain wall energy, has been successfully applied to fit several experimen- Note that the velocity in the direction orthogonal to the in-plane field (black squares) remains symmetric. From To explain these non-symmetric results, several different mechanisms have been suggested. Several analytical and numerical studies were devoted to understanding these features. b. Flow regime According to the 1D model where α is the Gilbert damping constant where γ 0 is the gyromagnetic ratio. In contrast to the prediction of the 1D model, it is found experimentally and confirmed by 2D micromagnetic simulations that in samples with large DMI, the DW velocity does not decrease at fields larger than H W , but instead reaches a plateau The demagnetized state of PMA materials consists of a complex domain pattern, usually in the form of labyrinth structures of domains pointing either up or down. If the thickness of the sample is very small, the equilibrium domain width can exceed the sample dimensions and such structures are not expected. Examples of the typical patterns are shown in Fig. For domain widths much larger than the domain wall width, as is generally the case for PMA materials, the magnetostatic contribution comes only from the surfaces charges at the top and bottom surfaces, so that DW energy is calculated as: where Φ is the same angle of the internal DW magnetization defined in Fig. The analytical expression for the DW energy σ DW as a function of the periodicity w of the domains, which is twice the domain width, is where d is the thickness. From the experimentally obtained domain width one can then calculate the domain wall energy, and estimate the DMI constant using one of the previously derived approximations. This general method has been applied in three different ways: comparisons to micromagnetic simulations (Legrand From Supplementary Materials of Two parallel domain walls in a thin film with strong enough DMI are homochiral Néel walls. Since the chirality of the domain walls is the same, either left-handed or right-handed, the core magnetization of those parallel domain walls point in opposite directions. Such a pair of domains constitutes a topological structure. This situation is different from the case of absence of DMI, where the core magnetization of the Bloch walls point in the same direction but not in a fixed orientation. The annihilation of these two parallel Néel walls depends on the strength of the DMI due to the topological configuration. This fact was confirmed by simulations The analytical formula for the domain wall energy σ DW obtained from the minimum domain width w min is given by: (2.13) As in the previous method this allows extracting the value of the domain wall energy density which is also a function of the DMI constant. Using the same expressions for the energy density as given in the previous section, one can estimate its value. As stated above, the energy of a domain wall is reduced by the presence of DMI. This modification also affects the energy barrier relevant for nucleation of reversed domains. where σ is the domain wall energy associated with the bubble, T is the temperature and p is the factor related to the waiting time according to τ = τ 0 exp(p) where τ 0 is the attempt frequency. The DW energy is a function of the in-plane field and the DMI constant. From the best adjustment of their numerical model to the experimental results, they were able to estimate the DMI constant in Pt/Co/AlOx. In the case of a bubble domain away from the edges, More recently, Therefore, the critical field above which a change from a constant nucleation field to a field dependent nucleation is observed is a measure of the DMI constant, since it coincides with the DMI field H DMI . Experimentally, this can be de-termined from the dependence of the out-of-plane nucleation field on the in-plane field. Another method taking into account the static DW structure is the direct measurement of the stray field in the DW. The stray field has a typical profile along the axis perpendicular to the DW including information on the angle Φ and the strength and sign of D (see Fig. With the progress in the development of advanced microscopy techniques with nanometric resolution and magnetic contrast, it has become possible to access not only the size and distribution of magnetic domains, but also to study the detailed structure of domain walls. As discussed in the previous sections, the domain wall structure is influenced by the presence of DMI, so that from a detailed identification of the wall structure one can in principle quantify the DMI strength. Basically four methods for spin sensitive imaging were used in literature: pioneering works were performed by spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (SP-STM/STS), the most quantitative works were done by spin-polarized lowenergy electron microscopy (SPLEEM) and in a few more recent works Scanning electron microscopy with polarization analysis (SEMPA) and Lorentz-transmission electron microscopy (L-TEM) were employed. Some of the earliest evidences that the DMI influences domain wall energies and alters DW configurations was obtained from SP-STM of ultrathin magnetic films deposited on heavy metal substrates such as single atomic layers of Mn or Fe on W(110) substrates More recently, spin-polarized low-energy electron microscopy (SPLEEM) has been successfully exploited to achieve a quantification of the DMI strength in different systems Measurements of current-driven DW motion are performed in wires with typical widths ranging between 1 μm and 5 μm and lengths of a few tens of μm. Usually, the magnetization in the wire is initially saturated by applying an out-of-plane field H z . H z is then removed and a current pulse (with duration of a few tens of ns) is applied either directly to the wire or to an Oersted line patterned on top of the wire. In either case the current pulse nucleates a reversed magnetic domain and a DW is thus injected into the wire. Alternatively, one can use a magnetic field pulse to generate domains in injection pads, and inject them in the wires. For measurements of DW velocities, current pulses are applied to the wire to move a DW, while the DW position along the wire is imaged by magneto-optical Kerr effect (MOKE) microscopy in polar configuration. The number and duration of the applied current pulses is chosen to obtain a significant displacement of the DW, at least over a few μm. Typical values of current densities fall in the range between 10 10 A/m 2 and 10 12 A/m 2 . The velocity of the DW is calculated as the ratio between the current-induced DW displacement and the total duration of the pulses. Finally, velocities are measured for both ↑↓ and ↓↑ DWs under different strength of H x , keeping the current density fixed, in order to determine the "compensating" field H * x of Fig. x for which = 0. Measurements of current-driven DW motion as a function of the in-plane field H x have been used to extract H DMI in several material stacks, with Co/Ni/Co, Co 20 Fe 60 B 20 or Co as ferromagnetic films, different heavy metals as underlayers and either a heavy metal or an oxide as overlayers. Tables I, II, and III present a summary of the DMI values measured for Co/Ni/Co, CoFeB, and Co, respectively. For Co/Ni/Co films (see Table For CoFeB films with Ta and MgO as underlayer and overlayer (see Table Finally, for Co films, Pt is the only underlayer investigated, while overlayers are either oxides or metals (see Table Experiments of field-driven DW dynamics are mostly performed in continuous films where magnetization reversal proceeds by nucleation and growth of magnetic bubble domains. Only few works report studies of planar DW dynamics (i.e. straight walls) in continuous films Regarding the strength of the applied fields, values differ greatly depending on the material and DW motion regime investigated. For measurements in the creep regime only modest μ 0 H z are needed -usually of a few mT depending on the depinning field -while μ 0 H z of hundreds of mT are used to drive DWs in the flow regime. The maximum values of applied μ 0 H x depend instead on the strength of the DMI. In samples with large DMI in-plane fields up to 350 mT have been used Table For Co/Ni multilayers (see Tab. IV), Regarding CoFeB films (see Tab. V), both the respective Co and Fe compositions In the case of the equilibrium stripe domain pattern method, the DMI constant is estimated by measuring magnetic domain widths from nanometric magnetic microscopy images. The values and systems analyzed using this method are presented in Table Many of the analysed films are multilayers because the additional dipolar contribution between layers stabilizes skyrmions and increases the sizes of stable skyrmions Wedges of Ni on top a Fe layer with a Cu(001) substrate were analyzed with Threshold Photoemission Magnetic Circular Dichroism with PhotoEmission Electron Microscopy (TP-MCD-PEEM) by With this method, the first step is to nucleate two domain walls in a perpendicularly magnetized sample. The two walls are then manipulated with an out-of-plane field to minimize their distance until the two domain walls collapse. This annihilation field and the minimum width of the domain separating the walls before its collapse depend on D. The values of D extracted using this method are shown in Table A reversed domain is nucleated in a perpendicular magnetized material and the out-of-plane nucleation field as a function of the in-plane applied field is analyzed. The latter can be particularly large, up to 1 T as in In NV magnetometry, the value of D is obtained by measuring the magnetic stray field generated by a 180 • Bloch wall in PMA materials In The tunneling current I is sensitive to the relative orientation of the magnetization of the tip (M T ) and the sample (M S ), according to I = I 0 + I sp M T • M S , where I sp is the spin polarized part of I. This allows for an atomic scale imaging of magnetic nanostructures fied by calculating the stray field energy for a wall structure with a given film thickness. This approach has been followed in a number of quantitative studies that are collected in Ta-bleXIII. As for Lorentz-TEM microscopy, it was exploited to derive the value of the DMI The pioneering approach of these methods was among the first allowing an experimental determination of the DMI and observing directly its influence on the magnetic structure, and therefore the area remained very active and substantial progress towards a quantitative determination of the DMI was achieved (see TableXIII). In general, methods based on domain walls require an accurate estimation of several magnetic parameters in order to evaluate the interfacial DMI (see. Eq. 2.1). Among these, the exchange stiffness A, which enters both in the expression of the DMI field and in the DW energy, is notoriously difficult to measure for ultrathin films leading to an uncertainty in the quantification of D. Both, measurements of current-driven and field-driven DW dynamics in presence of an in-plane magnetic field allow quantifying not only the magnitude of D but also its sign, which gives information on the DW chirality. On the other hand, in the creep regime, the dependence of the DW velocity on the in-plane field does not always follow the simple linear dependence when driven by current (see Fig. Current-driven DW motion is overall a more complex technique to determine the interfacial DMI, both for experimental realization and for the interpretation of the results. A standard lithography process is required to pattern films into wires of appropriate geometry and high in-plane fields, especially for samples with large DMI, need to be applied and properly aligned. Furthermore, the torque generated by large applied currents can also result in a tilt of the DW Field-driven DW motion has the advantage of being a relatively simple method to implement experimentally, as it allows the measurement of interfacial DMI in continuous films, without the need for any lithographic patterning. However, the application of high in-plane fields, particularly for samples with significant DMI, requires a perfect alignment of the in-plane field, with no out-of-plane components. Indeed, in the creep regime any unwanted component of the field perpendicular to the sample plane would influence the DW velocity in an exponential manner (see Eq. 2.5). Several precautions should be taken into account to achieve an optimal alignment of the in-plane field Regarding measurements of DW velocities in the flow regime, here the main difficulty lies in the generation of large and short magnetic field pulses and the measurement of very large velocities. The determination of the DMI constant from the Walker DW velocity (or the saturation velocity after the Walker field) does not need the knowledge of the exchange constant (see Eq. 2.10), but on the other hand, may not be accessible when hidden in the creep regime. Among the methods that are based on the DW energy to evaluate the interfacial DMI, imaging the equilibrium stripe domain pattern is particularly straightforward due to its experimental simplicity. Indeed, this method is compatible with any magnetic imaging technique like Kerr microscopy or MFM -which has to be chosen according to the expected domain width -and does not require the application of perpendicular nor in-plane fields. On the other hand, imaging the equilibrium domain configuration does not provide information on the sign of D. For multilayer samples with large DMI, small A or any situation that yields small values of the left hand side of Eq. 2.12, high resolution imaging is needed in order to resolve precisely the small domain widths. Experimentally, several problems can emerge that may render it unusable (see Supplementary material of From the experimental point of view, the domain widths measured may be different for samples demagnetized with inplane or out-of-plane fields, up to 20% Similar considerations hold for the method based on magnetic stripe annihilation. Here too, it is only possible to extract information on the absolute value of D, and not its sign. From an experimental point of view, the original application of this technique requires the presence of parallel DWs, which may not apply to the case of materials with irregular wall profiles. Those irregular walls can appear for materials that can host skyrmion phases, due to the intrinsic faceting of the DWs in such films. This fact can lead to a deviation from the analytical theory, which was derived for parallel stripe domains. Another drawback is that as the domain walls are closer together the corresponding energy barrier for thermally induced domain wall annihilation is reduced and is also affected by the presence of defects, which can yield an error in the determination of the DMI value. Since it relies on the nucleation of a reversed domain, the process of bubble nucleation to extract the interfacial DMI is intrinsically a statistical process and several repetitions of the same experiment need to be carried out to achieve a reliable measurement of the nucleation field. In contrast, for instance, imaging the equilibrium domain configuration in a film can automatically provide averaged information of the domain width, from which the DMI is quantified, if a large enough area is imaged. Bubble nucleation experiments can be performed both at the edge of patterned structures, such as nucleation pads or wires, as well as in continuous films. In the former case, the method can be used to determine both the absolute value of D as well as its sign. Specifically, the sign of D is related to the nucleated bubble position with respect to the direction of the applied in-plane field. On the other hand, bubble nucleation measurements in continuous films provide only the absolute value of D. Concerning the methods based on domain and domain wall imaging, it has been shown on different magnetic systems (see TableXIII) that SP-STM and SPLEEM (and, to a lesser extent, SEMPA and L-TEM) can be used to achieve a quantitative estimation of the DMI strength, looking at the domain structure or at the transition from Néel to Bloch wall as a function of thickness. One should consider that SP-STM and SPLEEM require a complex apparatus with ultra-high vacuum and insitu operation, since they are sensitive to the first atomic layers, so that they cannot be employed for samples grown else-where and the sample has to be perfectly clean. Use of DFT or Monte Carlo simulations may help in refining the extraction of DMI, but requires a remarkable computational effort. However, the main advantage of these methods is the direct determination of the structure and chirality of the DW. Since their formation and propagation depend on the magnetic energies present in a material or a thin film, spin waves (SWs) are used as a sensitive tool to extract magnetic properties such as susceptibility, anisotropy, Gilbert damping, exchange stiffness, etc. These properties, together with the geometry of the sample and the excitation, determine the spin wave frequency, linewidth, relative amplitude and attenuation length. The DMI does not only modify the equilibrium magnetic ground state In the literature we find basically two theoretical approaches to describe spin wave spectra in thin film samples with DMI. One is based on the classical theory of magnetostatic spin waves (see e.g. The usual quantum formalism for spin waves uses the Holstein Primakoff method where J is the exchange constant, g the Landé factor, μ B the Bohr magneton. As described in textbooks As mentioned already in the introduction, in a microscopic approach the DMI is considered a generalized exchange interaction leading to a non-collinear spin configuration described by D•( S 1 × S 2 ), where the direction of D depends on the crystal symmetry. This leads to an additional term in the Hamiltonian where ẑ is perpendicular to the axis of symmetry breaking. The related term which has to be added in the spin wave dispersion (Eq. 3.2) is linear in k: A first study of DMI in bulk Ba 2 CuGe 2 O 7 , an antiferromagnet with a weak helimagnetic distortion A quantum approach was also used in Since in most experimental investigations (as in BLS) the wavelength of the detected SWs are in the range between a few microns and a few hundreds of nanometers, one can ignore the discrete nature of the spins. Therefore, a classical formulation, assuming a continuum medium, is more suitable. Traditionally, spin waves in magnetic thin films are treated as magnetostatic spin waves, neglecting exchange interaction Figure Considering a sample geometry as shown in Fig. The vector M has to be decomposed in one large static component, of modulus M s directed along the z-axis and two small dynamic components that describe the precession around the equilibrium direction: M = M s m( x, t) = M s (m x x, m y ŷ, ẑ) with |m x |, |m y | 1 and x,ŷ,ẑ are the unitary vectors of the reference frame, chosen such that the y-axis is perpendicular to the sample plane, according to Fig. where J = 2A/μ 0 M s is the exchange constant. In case of unpinned exchange boundary conditions the dipolar field for a thin film can be written as that, in the case of ultrathin films with thickness d, where kd 1, reduces to P(kd) = |kd|/2 when performing a series expansion of the exponential function. The anisotropy field, written for the case of a uniaxial perpendicular anisotropy constant K u out-of-plane, is H ani = 2K u μ 0 M s m y ŷ The correct expression for the DMI field H DMI in the continuum theory is not that straightforward to obtain as it depends on the crystal symmetry considered. For bulk, the first approach from a spin to a continuum model was performed by Dzyaloshinskii himself The DMI energy can be described as a combination of Lifshitz invariants, depending on the crystal symmetry x, m y ŷ, ẑ) the DMI field can then be obtained as The dispersion relation is then given by that is valid also for values of φ k different from π/2, as shown in Fig. where the angles are defined in Fig. It is worth noting that the above dispersion relation is valid up to a certain threshold of the DMI strenght, above which the dispersion relation becomes zero and the ground state is not uniform but rather chiral and the theory may not be applicable. By numerical calculations it is shown that the asymmetry does not only regard frequency but also amplitude and attenuation length Let us also notice that the above description is valid only for a film consisting of a single monolayer. An attempt to take the finite film thickness correctly into account by using mixed exchange boundary conditions at the surface is shown in In summary we want to point out that the complete solution in the continuum theory for the bilayer system is not trivial, requiring assumptions concerning the boundary conditions. Especially, care has to be taken if one wants to take all contributions to the spin wave dispersion non-reciprocity (such as surface anisotropies) into account correctly. However, in most cases the theory required for modeling experimental results is simplified by the fact that by subtraction (as explained in the following sections) the DMI related term in the spin wave dispersion relation is directly determined. The most popular and widely employed technique for the measurement of the DMI constant from the non-reciprocal spin wave propagation is Brillouin light scattering (BLS) is in contact with a HM material (such as Pt, W, Ta, etc.). One of the first BLS experimental works reporting values of the DMI constant determined by BLS was done on Co/Ni multilayers BLS is a classical tool to study spin wave dispersion in general and non-reciprocity in particular. As sketched in Fig. For the case of a FM/HM bilayer, as sketched in Fig. A comparison of the value and the sign of the DMI constant measured using BLS for Co, CoFeB, and a collection of different magnetic materials are reported in Tables XIV, XV, XVI and XVII, respectively. When the values were not explicitly given in the original manuscript, we have calculated or extracted them from the figures and reported them in italic. Note that the signs in the Tables are consistent with the convention of axes, field, D, k vector and frequency difference as previously described in Figs. 17 and 20. If the authors in the original manuscript have used a different coordinate system and/or method of calculating the frequency asymmetry we recalculated the sign according to our convention. Many papers discuss the dependence of the DMI constant as a function of the ferromagnetic layer thickness Similarly, the dependence of the DMI on the heavy metal thickness has been studied for both Co The sign of the DMI constant was investigated for several material combinations by changing both the stacking order and the multilayer composition Let us notice that several studies were able to correlate the presence of a sizeable DMI not only to the frequency position of the BLS peaks but also to their linewidth, i.e. to the damping that affects spin waves. Already Very recently, several works reported that a sizeable interfacial DMI can also arise at the interface between an oxide layer and a ferromagnetic one In summary, BLS has rapidly become the most used technique for measuring DMI using spin waves. A reasonable complexity of the experimental setup and a high accuracy in the determination of the spin wave dispersion, together with the fact that no external excitation is needed for this technique, which relies on thermal excitation, contribute to the success and spreading of this technique. Time resolved magneto-optical Kerr microscopy (TR-MOKE) allows detecting propagating spin waves in real space and as a function of time enabling the determination of the spin wave k-vector and decay. TR-MOKE was employed by sample as shown in Fig. Apart from the necessity of a pulsed laser system, the complexity of a TR-MOKE experiment is comparable to BLS, as far as the optical signal acquisition is concerned. However, SWs need to be excited by a CPW which has to be prepared by lithography directly on top of the sample. The k-vectors that can be excited are limited by the CPW geometry. Broadband excitation can be obtained by a single line (as e.g. in Table XV Overview of DMI measurements for Co thin films via BLS (publication years 2019 to 2021). FM and NM stand for ferromagnetic and non-magnetic layer, respectively. D is the interfacial DMI constant and D s = D • d, with d being the thickness of the ferromagnetic film. Numbers in roman were quoted in the reviewed papers, while numbers in italics were either extracted from figures or calculated using the parameters provided. Signs with * are according to the convention used in this paper and opposite to that in the original manuscript. Propagating spin wave spectroscopy (PSWS) (see Fig. In In On the brink of this review is the recent paper In summary, the electric SW measurement is rather straightforward and only commercially available equipment is required. Among the SW techniques it has a very good frequency resolution of a few MHz. As in the TR-MOKE experiments, the excitation of SWs is performed by CPWs, which have to be prepared by EBL in order to obtain high wave numbers, and therefore larger DMI signals. Usually only few wave vectors are available, since each wave vector requires its own CPW geometry and values are limited to about 10 μm -1 using conventional techniques. Only sophisticated techniques allow to reach higher values Following the theoretical work of The main advantage of SPEELS is that the wave vector k = 500-1200 μm -1 is hundreds of times larger than for the above techniques, allowing to explore exchange-based spin waves. Since the energy difference of spin waves with opposite k vector grows linearly with k the asymmetry detected is about 100 times larger, so that even very small D constants can be measured. On the other hand, one can recall the necessity of ultra-high-vacuum conditions and the impossibility of applying magnetic fields. Furthermore, spin wave energies calculated usually from a Heisenberg model have to take into account the itinerant character of the spins in ferromagnetic metals by effective exchange constants. A quantitative estimation of the effective exchange constants (isotropic J as well as anisotropic D) requires complex ab initio approaches combined with spin dynamic simulations The main advantage of spin waves methods for determination of the DMI constant is the rather simple expression for the measurable frequency difference that occurs when the sign of k is changed, as seen in Eq. 3.11. This also means that not only the size, but also the sign of the constant can be easily determined, provided that the geometry of the experiment and the polarity of the applied field are specified. However, attention has to be paid to several aspects. First of all, as it is the case for DW methods, the saturation magnetization should be determined by external means, such as vibrating sample magnetometry (VSM) or SQUID magnetometry. Then, the gyromagnetic factor and the anisotropy constants can be obtained by either FMR or BLS measurements as a function of the intensity and the direction of the external field. Furthermore, the thickness of the magnetic active layer has to be evaluated correctly in the derivation of D s from measurement of ω DMI . Not always it coincides with the nominal layer thickness due to interlayer mixing (dead layer) It was shown by numeric calculations and experimentally by Care has to be taken not only with respect to frequency nonreciprocity, but also to amplitude non-reciprocity. Also here there might be effects due to different boundary conditions at the interfaces of the ferromagnetic film. For example a metallic boundary condition at one side would attenuate strongly the spin wave travelling close to it. Furthermore, methods as PSWS show an amplitude non-reciprocity due to the fact that the CPW couples more to one wave vector than to the other due to the symmetry of the CPW Probably the strongest experimental limitation of the methods based on spin waves is that the sample has to be magnetized in-plane in order to be able to detect DE modes. Therefore for samples with strong out-of-plane anisotropy (perpendicular magnetic anisotropy, PMA) it is necessary to apply a sufficiently high in-plane field, which can be experimentally difficult. Furthermore, ultrathin PMA films, give rise to a low signal to noise ratio, not only due to their thickness but often also due to the high damping, so that fitting procedures may have quite large uncertainties. This sets a lower limit to the values of D that may be measured by spin wave methods and therefore these may be considered as reliable for either magnetic film thicknesses above a certain threshold, or with low damping, or high DMI constant. When a charge current is applied to a HM/FM bilayer, spin torque effects occur due to the strong spin-orbit interaction at the interface. A charge current J e flowing in the HM along the x axis will generate a transverse spin accumulation σ along the y direction through the spin Hall effect and/or inverse spin Galvanic effect As shown in Fig. Data of DMI constants determined using the SOT method are reported in Tab. XIX. Initially, Recently, measurements have demonstrated the presence of DMI in heavy metal/magnetic insulator heterostrucures, where the DMI is strong enough to stabilize skyrmions Being different from the methods based on DW motion and asymmetric spin-wave propagation, the method based on current-induced shifts of the anomalous Hall loops is a straightforward way for determining the DMI field without involving complicated mathematical models. However, this method requires perpendicular magnetic anisotropy of the ferromagnetic material, which typically limits this method to ultrathin ferromagnetic materials. Non-square shapes of the AHE-loops also lead to inaccuracies in the determination of H DMI . To determine the DMI constant, one requires a numerical value for the exchange stiffness; usually an assumed value is used. Moreover, this method is not capable to determine the sign of DMI. Table XIX Overview of DMI measurements of various FM materials by spin-orbit torque induced effective field under an in-plane bias magnetic field. FM and NM stand for ferromagnetic and non-magnetic layer, respectively. D is the interfacial DMI constant and D S = D • d, where d is the thickness of the FM. Numbers in roman were quoted in the reviewed papers, while numbers in italics were either extracted from figures or calculated using the parameters provided. it is important not only to consider the advantages and limitations of each individual method, which influences their applicability, but also their intrinsic differences, which might influence the measurement result. The aim of this section is to discuss the intrinsic differences and make some hypotheses about their influence on the measurement result, although currently systematic studies comparing the various methods are unfortunately rare. Furthermore, in most of the available studies, samples are investigated where the different techniques agree well, while the disagreement is rarely discussed. We suppose that the presence of defects or disorder evidences some of the intrinsic differences between the techniques. In general, methods based on domain wall motion are affected by the fact that pinning influences DW dynamics. Pinning is a local phenomenon that -in the case of domain wall motion -may nevertheless have a global influence on the average domain wall movement and thus may complicate the quantitative determination of D. Furthermore, quasistatic methods based on imaging usually rely on observing the DW or a number of domains in a certain position, and therefore close to pinning sites. They depend on the local energy landscape at a pinning site which may be different from the one far from the pinning site and the result of the measurement may vary even from spot to spot in a single sample due to the distribution of inhomogeneities and defects. Analytical models and simulations usually do not take these imperfections into account and use average parameters, which may lead to intrinsic errors. Considering a larger sample area may reduce such an effect. Also nucleation of domains, as it is needed also for measurements in creep regime, occurs at pinning sites and single measurements may not be representative. In addition, strain in the thin films might play a role and, in fact, several recent works investigate defect-or strain-induced DMI Dynamic methods often average out these effects. Note however, that an average D value obtained across a large film area in presence of inhomogeneities might not represent the intrinsic value. DW creep motion can be considered an intermediate regime, where DWs move due to thermal activation from one pinning site to the next. These measurements show generally good agreement with static methods, such as the stray field measurements by NV center magnetometry SW methods have the advantage of a more straightforward evaluation of the DMI constant by measuring a frequency shift, which is possible with high accuracy. Concerning the model, only the gyromagnetic ratio γ and the saturation magnetization M s have to be known (the exchange constant is not needed for long wavelength SWs), parameters more easily to be accessed experimentally. Pinning sites usually do not influence the dispersion relation of spin waves directly, but only affect the measured spin wave decay length which is reflected in the line width in frequency domain methods. The most widely employed, direct and effective method is BLS, as it does not require any external spin wave transduction or any kind of patterning, contrary to TR-MOKE and PSWS. Influence of defects, grain boundaries, inclusions and surface roughness play a marginal role, as is generally the case for the spin wave methods. To this respect, it has also to be considered that the revealed SW have wavelength ranging from half a μm to a few microns and that measurements average over a rather large sample area. In the case of BLS and TR-MOKE the typical spot size is of the order of 10 μm and in the case of PSWS a typical CPW is also about 10 μm long, while DWs have a width of the order of 10 nm. Moreover, the propagation distance of SW, even for thermal SW detected by BLS, is of the order of several microns and the influence of nanometric inhomogeneities is averaged out (for instance they may result in a broadening of the BLS peaks, with a minor influence on the mean frequency) so that SW methods are rather insensitive to them due to the different length scales involved. Another simplification of spin wave methods might be that the measurement does in general not require measuring (and evaluating by a model) the spin wave dispersion ω(k) itself but only the difference ω(k) -ω(-k), and is therefore a kind of differential method. The differences in applicability of the various methods explain why a direct comparison on the same sample is rarely reported in the literature. Only in few papers Concerning methods that determine the DMI field under the influence of a current (such as current induced DW motion and SOT field measurements), the main difficulty is the interpretation of the results, taking into account the different contributions of spin orbit torques. Damping and field like torques may have different origins as the SHE and the iSGE, and both contribute to the observed dynamics. Furthermore, in metallic stacks, the current flow in the plane is not well defined as it is partly in the FM and partly in the HM material, depending on the relative resistances and the interface scattering and transparency An attempt to classify the applicability of three methods (BLS, SOT efficiency, and DW velocity) according to DMI strength and FM layer thickness was performed by The two most common material combinations investigated in the literature are heterostructures of a) HM/CoFeB/MgO and b) Co with Pt as a top or bottom layer. We begin by focusing on Pt/Co/X heterostructures, with the top layer X = W, Pt, Ir, Au, Ta, Al, Gd, AlO x , GdO, and MgO, as shown in Fig. The interpretation of the data for the X/CoFeB/MgO het-Figure erostructures (with X = IrMn, Hf, Pt, Ta, TaN, W as shown in Fig. Despite all these difficulties, a few conclusions can be reached concerning the sign and strength of the DMI. If the order of the stack is reversed, then one finds a reversal of the sign by symmetry. The strength of the DMI may be different due to the different growth conditions of a reversed stack, but the sign reversal is effectively verified as in Pt/Co/Ta and Ta/Co/Pt trilayers measured by BLS Due to the large spread of materials used, the investigation of the influence of growth condition on DMI is not conclusive so far. In this review nearly than one hundred and fifty articles measuring interfacial DMI have been analyzed. The interest in this topic is still growing, as illustrated by the rapidly increasing number of publications and citations. It may be surprising that only in recent years the topic of chiral magnetism gained such a relevance in the research community, as parity breaking and chirality is intrinsic to magnetic systems. New opportunities have been foreseen recently moving the interest away from the traditional HM/FM bilayers towards synthetic antiferromagnets (SAF) and oxides. SAFs exploit the RKKY exchange interaction between two ultrathin FM layers separated by a non magnetic spacer layer, which can be tuned by the spacer layer thickness A second topic that has come up recently, and which brings us to the microscopic origin of DMI, is DMI in FM oxides A third new emerging topic investigates the possibility to stabilize chiral spin textures in centrosymmetric magnetic insulators, where high DW speeds (up to 400 ms -1 are reached with minimal currents of 10 6 A/cm-2 A fourth and very important research field is that related to the search for systems with large and tailored DMI, paving the way towards the stabilization and exploitation of topological spin structures, such as spirals, helices, merons, skyrmions and anti-skyrmions at temperatures well above room temperature and supporting high-frequency dynamics Finally, even if this review was focused on experimental methods and results, it is clear that new challenges and advances for this research field, also in terms of functionalization/engineering of materials, are connected with achieving a better understanding of the microscopic origin of DMI, relying on quantum mechanical and atomistic calculations a The highest and lowest DMI values reported do not necessarily correspond to the extremes of the bottom layer thickness range (for instance the highest DMI value could occur at mid thickness range). a Different DMI values correspond to different annealing temperatures. b Different DMI values correspond to different doses of He + ion irradiation. itez et al. (2015) measured a value for D of 0.33 mJ/m 2 (D s = 0.27 pJ/m) in a film Pt/Co/AlO x , but they considered it a lower limit because of a possible underestimation of the annihilation field due to thermally activated processes. A DMI value of D s = 0.44 pJ/m (D=0.73 mJ/m 2 ) was measured in W/ a The two values of DMI reported derive from two different values for the exchange constant A. Often called B20 according to classification of the journal "Strukturbericht" Here direct imaging of the domain wall chirality The sign of D depends on the convention chosen in relation with the Hamiltonian 1.1 which can be either positive or negative. Throughout this review we use the plus sign in the Hamiltonian, so that positive D corresponds to Néel domain walls with the right-handed (clockwise) chirality (↑→↓ or ↓←↑), while negative D corresponds to Néel domain walls with the lefthanded (anticlockwise) chirality (↑←↓ or ↓→↑), where up direction is defined by the normal in Fig.2 However, Néel DWs become energetically more favorable when the film is patterned into very narrow wires The 1D model was reported earlier by L. R. Walker, Bell Telephone LaboratoriesMemorandum, 1956 (unpublished). A description of this work can be found in J.F. Dillon Jr., Domains and Domain Walls, in: Magnetism, Vol. III, edited by G. T.Rado and H. Suhl (Academic, New York, 1963). 6 According to these conventions, Φ = 0 (π) corresponds to a right (left) handed chiral Néel DW, while Φ = ±π/2 corresponds to a Bloch DW. To be precise, field-like and damping-like torques can occur as a result of iSGE or SHE effects. K D represents the fact that Bloch DWs are magnetostatically more stable in the absence of DMI due to the high PMA of the films. In this paper the minimum velocity is found at μ 0 H x ∼ 50 mT, a value compatible with other publications which report much smaller D/D s values as e.g. inKim et al. (2015a). The difference is the model used to evaluate D from the velocity minimum. This does not occur for arbitrary directions of DMI vector and spin wave propagation as we will explain further below, and special experimental geometries have to be realized. 11 As we will show further below, the DMI -induced frequency shift is linear with wave vector k of the involved spin waves. Note: The real temperature depends on the thermal properties of the material under investigation (including the substrate material), as well as on the numerical aperture of the exploited lens (that determines the size of the focused light spot). Note, however, that the DW methods use additional parameters with respect to the spin wave methods, as e.g. the exchange stiffness, which may be adapted in order to fit the BLS results. Note: The plot contains both compositions of CoFeB, the Fe rich Co 20 Fe 60 B 20 and the Co rich Co 40 Fe 40 B 20 .