Raman spectroscopy is one of the most extended experimental techniques to investigate thin-layered 2D materials. For a complete understanding and modeling of the Raman spectrum of a novel 2D material, it is often necessary to combine the experimental investigation to density-functional-theory calculations. We provide the experimental proof of the fundamentally different behavior of polar 2D vs 3D systems regarding the effect of the dipole-dipole interactions, which in 2D systems ultimately lead to the absence of optical phonons splitting, otherwise present in 3D materials. We demonstrate that non-analytical corrections (NACs) should not be applied to properly model the Raman spectra of few-layered 2D materials, such as WSe2 and h-BN, corroborating recent theoretical predictions [Nano Lett. 2017, 17 (6), 3758-3763]. Our findings are supported by measurements performed on tilted samples that allow increasing the component of photon momenta in the plane of the flake, thus unambiguously setting the direction of an eventual NAC. We also investigate the influence of the parity of the number of layers and of the type of layer-by-layer stacking on the effect of NACs on the Raman spectra. Inelastic light scattering is one of the most widespread non-destructive characterization techniques used in materials science. In the increasingly important field of van der Waals two dimensional (2D) materials, such as graphene, hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), it plays an important role in the determination of the thickness of few-layer flakes. Besides this common use, Raman spectroscopy is also employed for carrying out a thorough investigation of the flakes' lattice dynamics to gather information on exciton-phonon interaction Ab initio calculations based on density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) are a valuable tool to assist in the interpretation of the experimental Raman studies, and have demonstrated to be able to predict the vibrational properties of solids with great accuracy The use of NACs in polar 2D materials is not straightforward. For a start, in a DFPT calculation of the Raman spectrum the direction along which NACs should be applied is obtained from the directions of the incident and scattered light, because the difference in photon momenta must equal the momentum of the generated phonon; as a matter of fact, only selecting the proper NAC direction yields results in agreement with the experiments in the different scattering geometries In this work we provide experimental evidence based on Raman spectroscopy of few-layer WSe2 and h-BN that TO-LO splitting is indeed absent in polar 2D materials, and that an agreement with theoretical predictions within ab initio DFPT can only be attained if NACs are not included in the calculations. We also perform measurements on tilted substrates, with the purpose of increasing the fraction of photon momenta that is transferred to the plane of the material, thus removing the ambiguity in the choice of the NAC-direction, should they be needed. Finally, we discuss the effect of the parity of the number of layers and the role of inversion symmetry on the effect of NACs on the computed Raman spectra. This work focuses on the Raman investigation of thin-layers of WSe2 and h-BN. In particular, we have measured flakes containing monolayer (1L), bilayer (2L), trilayer (3L), and quadrilayer (4L) of WSe2 and flakes containing 1L and 3L of h-BN. To obtain the WSe2 flakes, the bulk crystal was first mechanically exfoliated on a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp (see also the Methods section). Therein, the exfoliated flakes were localized in an optical microscope by transmission measurements (the PDMS stamp being transparent). The desired flakes were deterministically transferred onto a SiO2 substrate by using a micro-manipulator. Optical images and atomic force microscopy (AFM) analysis can be found in ref Polarization-resolved Raman scattering experiments and DFPT calculations were performed in backscattering geometry (see also methods section). The incident (scattered) photon wavevector is antiparallel (parallel) to the z axis, which is perpendicular to the plane of the flake (xy) when the flake is not tilted. Spectra were collected (and calculated) by selecting scattered light polarized either parallel or perpendicular to the polarization direction (x) of incident light, namely in the xx or xy scattering geometries, respectively. Due to energy and momentum conservation laws, first-order Raman scattering can typically provide access only to phonons at the Γ point. Let us start our Raman-DFPT investigation with WSe2. Based on our calculations, as well as on previous experimental observations ( In Figure Due to the experimental lineshape broadening, some of these modes are merged and become indistinguishable. Therefore, in Supplementary Figure In order to compare our experimental results with theoretical spectra obtained with NACs, we must first determine the proper NACs direction. Given that most Raman experiments are carried out in a backscattering geometry at perpendicular incidence with respect to the flake, it would be tempting to take the z direction as the one along which the NACs should be computed. Indeed, if one takes this approach, no splitting is obtained from the calculations, in agreement with experiments. This accidental agreement might be the reason why the absence of NAC-induced splitting has not previously received more attention. However, there is an obvious problem with taking the NACs axis as z. While it is true that backscattered photons have had their change of k mainly along z, this momentum kick is not provided by a phonon with a well-defined qz. Rather, the strong confinement of the vibrational mode in the z axis can be thought of as containing a large superposition of qz's. In other words, the non-periodic character of the layer along z renders qz an undefined quantity, forbidding any approach to Γ along the z-axis. On the other hand, given that Raman-scattered photons are measured, phonons must have been created in the flake and, since the flake is planar, these phonons must be characterized by some in-plane q, which readily indicates that the correct NAC direction to consider for comparison with the experiment is in-plane. The specific direction will depend on the specific q of the phonon generated and we know that phonons must be generated isotropically in the plane. However, the macroscopic equivalence of the x and y axes means that all the in-plane directions will yield the same amount of splitting, so we finally settle for NACs along the x-axis as representative of the physically meaningful NACs approach direction in our experimental geometry. With these considerations in mind we now turn our attention to the theoretical spectra obtained with inplane NACs, in the common formalism developed for bulk 3D materials, and compare them with the experimental results. Basically, the NACs introduce a TO-LO splitting, which impacts the spectra in the xy geometry as the LO mode is allowed only in that geometry. In the 1L in xx scattering configuration the TO2 mode is at 250.76 cm-1 and the ZO2 mode at 251.31 cm-1, as in the case without NACs (given the finite FWHM of the modes, the TO2 and the ZO2 modes also here are indistinguishable in the calculated spectrum). In xy, instead, only the LO2 mode is visible, but it shifts at 252.86 cm-1, which is in disagreement with the experimental results (those in Fig. Figure In the following, we discuss measurements performed by tilting the flake in the xz plane, such that the momenta of the exciting and detected photons are still directed along the z axis (backscattering geometry), but the flakes are lying on a plane that forms an angle of 23° with the xy plane (see the sketch on the top part of Figure Clearly, the experimental spectra collected on tilted flakes are very similar to those collected on the planar flake and displayed in Figure To further corroborate our results concerning the suppression of the TO-LO splitting, we have also studied h-BN, an atomically-thin 2D materials that features some important differences with WSe2. In particular, as we discuss below, the presence of NACs would induce a much larger TO-LO splitting and, consequently, it is much easier to rule out its existence. The analysis is further simplified by the fact that the flexural ZO mode is well separated from the other optical modes, which, because of the very strong B-N covalent bonds, lie at very high frequency The experimental frequency of the TO/LO mode is ~ 1370 cm-1 in 1L h-BN and decreases with increasing layer thickness Figure A clarification is now in order regarding the dependence of the intensity of the TO and LO modes on the tilt angle. Since NACs are applied in the flakes' plane, the frequency of the TO and LO modes and, therefore, the TO-LO splitting, does not depend on the tilt angle of the flake (see, e.g., the third row in Figure For h-BN flakes containing two or more layers, two types of stacking along the z direction can be experimentally observed: AA' and AB, with AA' being the more frequent one We point out that if the number of layers were even, as in the 2L, the situation would be similar to the 3L case, the only difference being that upon application of NACs, in the xy geometry in case of AA' stacking, the LO would be Raman-forbidden rather than allowed with a small intensity (see Figure Conversely, if the stacking is AB there is no inversion symmetry and the theoretical and experimental data can only be reconciled if the NACs are not included. Since it is not possible to reliably assess which type of stacking is adopted in our samples, the agreement between theory and experiment that we find when investigating the flakes thicker than a monolayer is not fully conclusive. Only the measurements displayed in Figure Finally, we attribute the lack of attention that the degeneracy of TO and LO modes has received in 2D materials so far to the serendipitous combination of circumstances (i.e. no splitting when the NACs areincorrectly-applied along the z direction, little or zero Raman activity for the eventually split modes) that prevent a clear understanding of the Raman experiments. We have presented a combination of Raman spectroscopy experiments and DFPT calculations of 1-4L WSe2 and of 1L and 3L h-BN to experimentally verify the fundamentally different behavior in polar 2D vs 3D systems regarding the effect of the dipole-dipole interactions that translates into the need to avoid nonanalytical corrections when properly calculating the Raman spectra of TMDs and polar 2D materials in general. As a peculiar result of inversion symmetry, the application of the NACs in the case of polar 2D materials with even number of layers might lead to results consistent with the experiments, but only because the affected modes would be Raman inactive. This latter effect might occur in certain materials (e.g. h-BN) also for odd number of layers depending on the type of stacking, because in the types of stacking providing the flakes with an inversion center (e.g. AA') the modes affected by NACs would have a negligible Raman intensity. Our WSe2 bulk crystals were purchased from hqgraphene. The samples were prepared by mechanical exfoliation followed by the dry-transfer of the flakes on a PDMS stamp All the samples are considerably larger than the diffraction-limited laser spot and far enough from samples having different layers' thickness, which made the spectroscopic measurements reliable even in the tilted geometry. Raman measurements were performed in backscattering geometry on WSe2 and h-BN flakes at temperature, with excitation wavelength of 632.8 nm provided by a HeNe laser and of 514 nm provided by a Ar+Kr+ laser. The power was 0.1 mW for WSe2 and 1.5 mW for h-BN (selected after checking that no heating/damaging effects were induced). The laser beam was focused with a 100x objective (numerical aperture of 0.80) and the measured spot size is diffraction-limited (< 1 μm). The scattered light was collected by a T64000 (Horiba) triple spectrometer in subtractive mode and equipped with 1800 g/mm gratings and liquid-nitrogen cooled multichannel charge couple device detector. Polarization-resolved Raman scattering experiments were performed with the incident and scattered light polarization vectors, ε i and ε s , in the xy plane (x=100, y=010). Spectra were collected (and calculated) by selecting scattered light polarized either parallel or perpendicular to the polarization direction (x) of incident light, in the text indicated as xx and xy for simplicity. The xy plane is the plane of the sample when the sample is planar. For realizing the measurements on the tilted flakes, the flakes are mounted on a rotational stage (able to provide rotations in the xz plane with a resolution of ±2°). In both the planar and tilted geometries, the samples are mounted on a xy micrometric stage (with a resolution of 50 nm) for optimal positioning on the desired layers. All the Raman spectra were acquired with a 120s acquisition time for WSe2 and 210 s for h-BN, and they were averaged from 3 to 5 times (depending on the noise level). We have calculated the ground-state geometry, the electronic structure and the Raman spectra of thin layers and bulk WSe2 and h-BN. In the case of WSe2 multilayers, we have considered the 2H structure, which is the most stable polytype. We have used the ABINIT code Frequencies estimated by DFPT are at 0 K, while all the experimental ones are measured at room temperature. Considering that in WSe2 the A'1/E' modes upshift only by ~1 cm-1 In order to perform the calculations in the very same geometry of the experiments, the Raman intensity of each mode n has been calculated as where R n is the Raman susceptibility tensor calculated ab initio in the reference system of the experiment, while ε i and ε s are the polarization vectors of the incident and scattered light, respectively. This method is thoroughly explained in references Details on the exfoliation of h-BN flakes and on their AFM characterization, calculated frequencies of phonon modes of WSe2 1L-4L samples, calculated Raman spectra with small FWHM of WSe2 and h-BN with and without NACs. Effect of the type of stacking on the calculated Raman spectra on 2L and 3L h-BN samples. The hexagonal boron-nitride (h-BN) flakes are obtained by exfoliating bulk BN crystals using the adhesive tape ELP BT-150P-LC supplied by Nitto. The transfer from the tape to the Si/SiO2 substrate was done by a technique established by refs. The thickness of the flakes was determined by AFM, as shown in Supplementary Figure Supplementary table 