A dynamic mitigation mechanism of the two-stream instability is discussed based on a phase control for plasma and fluid instabilities. The basic idea for the dynamic mitigation mechanism by the phase control was proposed in the paper [Phys. Plasmas 19, 024503(2012)]. The mitigation method is applied to the two-stream instability in this paper. In general, instabilities appear from the perturbations, and normally the perturbation phase is unknown. Therefore, the instability growth rate is discussed in fluids and plasmas. However, if the perturbation phase is known, the instability growth can be controlled by a superimposition of perturbations imposed actively. For instance, a perturbed driver induces a perturbation to fluids or plasmas; if the perturbation induced by the perturbed driver is oscillated actively by the driver oscillation, the perturbation phase is known and the perturbation amplitude can be controlled, like a feedforward control. The application result shown in this paper demonstrates that the dynamic mitigation mechanism works well to smooth the non-uniformities and mitigate the instabilities in plasmas. A dynamic mitigation mechanism is presented and discussed for the plasma two-stream instability in this paper. In general, instabilities grow from a perturbation, and normally the perturbation phase is unknown. Therefore, it would be difficult to control the perturbation phase, and usually the instability growth rate is discussed. However, if the perturbation phase is controlled and known, we can find a new way to control the instability growth. One of the most typical and well-known mechanisms is the feedback control in which the perturbation phase is detected and the perturbation growth is controlled or mitigated or stabilized In this paper we first compare our dynamic mitigation mechanism with another dynamic stabilization mechanism proposed by In plasmas the perturbation phase and amplitude cannot be measured dynamically. However, by using a wobbling beam or an oscillating beam or so If the driver beam wobbles uniformly in time, the imposed perturbation for a physical quantity of F at t = τ may be written as Here δF is the amplitude, Ω the wobbling or oscillation frequency, and Ωτ the phase shift of the superimposed perturbations. At each time t = τ , the wobbler provides a new perturbation with the controlled phase shifted and amplitude defined by the driving wobbler itself. After the superposition of the perturbations, the overall perturbation is described as At each time of t = τ the driving wobbler provides a new perturbation with the shifted phase. Then, each perturbation grows with the factor of e *, . At t > τ the superimposed overall perturbation growth is modified as shown above. When Ω ≫ γ, the perturbation amplitude is reduced by the factor of γ Ω A , compared with that for the pure instability growth (Ω = 0) If the growth rate γ is negative, the system concerned is stable. Even in this case, Eq. ( From the analytical expression for the physical quantity F in Eq. ( When the inverted pendulum shown in Fig. Here l is the length of the pendulum. When A=0, the inverted pendulum becomes unstable. However, the second term of the righthand side is added to the system, and stable windows appear in the inverted pendulum system This dynamic stabilization mechanism works on the inverted pendulum in Fig. However, it would be difficult to apply this mechanism to our tall buildings, bridges or large structures in our society and also to fluids and plasmas. In Ref. 25, this dynamic stabilization mechanism is applied to the two-stream instability stabilization, in which the classical twostream instability driven by a constant relative drift velocity is modified by the additional oscillation on the relative velocity In plasmas the two-stream instability appears commonly, when one component has a relative speed to another component In the x direction two modes are imposed, and one mode is introduced in y and z as the initial perturbation. Figures 5 shows the two-stream instability by two counter-streaming electron beams with the wobbling motion of ne+. In this case, initially one of the two electron beams moving in +x has the density perturbation in ne+ with the wobbling motion. The wobbling motion in this case is introduced in the perturbation δne+ of the amplitude of 5% additionally with the sinusoidal oscillation in y and z. The spatial amplitude of the wobbling oscillation is 10km, that is, the half wavelength of the δne+ perturbation in both y and z, and the oscillation frequency is defined as Figure In this paper we have discussed the dynamic stabilization and mitigation of the twostream instability in plasmas. The dynamic mitigation mechanism based on the phase control was proposed and applied to the mitigation of plasma instabilities including the RTI, the 