An electrospun membrane for vascular stent coating made of 2-methacryloyloxyethyl phosphorylcholine and butyl methacrylate copolymer (MPC-co-BMA), also known as (PMB), reinforced with functionalized and nitrogen doped reduced graphene oxide (f-NrGO) is presented. This membrane due to the nitrogen doped reduced graphene oxide (NrGO) negative electric charge has the capacity to repeal low density lipoproteins (LDL), which under specific conditions are the main cause of atherosclerotic disease. The NrGO functionalization process is detailed, as it creates strong bonds between NrGO and PMB, avoiding NrGO sheets to detach from the membrane. The copolymer synthesis was characterized by FTIR and chemical bonds between f-NrGO and PMB were proved by XPS and HNMR. Additionally, a simplified test bank that simulates blood flow conditions demonstrated the NrGO functionalization effect over the membrane. For the electrospinning process, optimal parameters were a voltage of 14.5 kV, and a flow rate of 0.3 mL/h, which lead to better properties of the membrane for the application. DMA results confirmed that the best reinforcement percentage of f-NrGO in terms of mechanical properties was 0.1 wt% and AFM images indicated the presence of the f-NrGO sheets over the fibers. Finally, the contact angle revealed the repulsion response to LDL, such behavior is promising to applications like cardiovascular coated stents. Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death and morbidity worldwide, and in most cases, the underlying cause of the cardiovascular event is atherosclerosis PMB is highly used in biomedical applications, most of the times as coating for metal, ceramic or plastic substrates, whereby is suitable for the development of a reinforced stent coating membrane, processed by specific techniques such as electrospinning, which is a very used technique due to the simplicity and inexpensive nature of the setup needed As well as polymer science, advances in carbon related materials are also protagonists in this field. These advances have driven the development of many interdisciplinary investigations. Within these materials is graphene, a single-layer carbon sheet with a hexagonal packed lattice structure However, as large amounts of graphene cannot be easily obtained NrGO was obtained by chemical exfoliation of graphite powder from Merck without purification, following the methodology reported previously To generate strong bonds between NrGO and the copolymer, a functionalization process was carried out to incorporate cysteamine to the terminal functional groups of the NrGO. The cysteamine attaches from its amine end to the carboxylic groups of NrGO and from its thiol end to the copolymer. Hydrobromic acid 48% (HBr), oxalic acid, N-(3-Dimethylaminopropyl)-N-ethylcarbodiimide≥97%, phosphate buffered saline, N-Hydroxysuccinimide 98%, cysteamine hydrochloride ≥98% and ethyl alcohol were purchased from Merck and used without purification. First, a stock of 30 mL of NrGO was prepared (2.5 mg/mL in aqueous solution), and sonicated for 1 h, then 5 mL of HBr were added under vigorous stirring at room temperature for 12 h, then, 1.50 g of oxalic acid were added and stirred for 4 h, the resulting material was filtered and dried at 50 °C under vacuum for 24 h. Thereafter 1 mg/mL of the resulting NrGO was dispersed in water, subsequently, 2.2 mmol/L of 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylamino) propyl carbodiimide (EDC) and 1.5 mmol/L of N-Hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) in a phosphate buffered saline (PBS) at a pH of 7.4 were added, finally the solution was treated with 130 μmol/L of cysteamine hydrochloride for 1 h and stirred at room temperature for 48 h. The resulting solution was purified by a 5 times centrifugation process at 14000 RPM to remove the saline solution and finally lyophilized, obtaining cysteamine functionalized NrGO (f-NrGO). For copolymerization process, 2-methacryloyloxyethyl phosphorylcholine (MPC), butyl methacrylate stabilized for synthesis (BMA), ethanol, azobisisobutyronitrile (AIBN) and petroleum ether were purchased from Merck and used without further purification. 1 g of MPC was added in a two-necked flask, immediately 1.237 g of BMA, 10 mL of ethanol and 18.8861 μL of AIBN as an initiator were added and the solution was stirred under a nitrogen atmosphere at 60 °C for 15.5 hours, after cooling, 200 mL of petroleum ether were added to separate the residues of the polymerization. Finally, the decanting was recovered and deposited in a TeflonTM paper inside a desiccator for 24 h (Figure Two different concentrations of f-NrGO powder (1 wt% and 0.1 wt%) relative to the amount of monomer were introduced into the copolymer following the same process previously described, but implementing a slight modification: f-NrGO powder was dissolved in the ethanol used for the polymerization process and this mixture was sonicated for 30 min. The other steps of the process continued without any modification. Figure A horizontal configuration electrospinning was used with a high voltage DC power supply (Gamma High Voltage Research Inc., USA) that reaches 30 kV and a syringe pump (New Era Pump System, Inc., USA) for the solution flow rate control; also, grounded 10 cm 2 aluminum plates were used as collectors. Electrospinning of the polymer was carried out with a fixed distance from the needle to the collector (10 cm) and a fixed needle diameter (21G, external nominal diameter 0.8mm). All the fiber diameters mentioned in this work are the average of 150 fibers measured in 3 different samples. The fiber diameters were calculated using the free image processing software Image J. A SEM analysis of the electrospun membranes (fiber morphology, fiber diameters and defects) was carried out in order to find the electrospinning conditions that generates a nonwoven membrane similar to biological tissue, such as highly interconnected fibers, presence of both, large and small fiber diameters (bimodal distribution), and few defects. These characteristics enhances biocompatibility, simulates native tissues, helps to reendothelialization and improves the physicochemical properties of the membrane First, PMB without f-NrGO was electrospun using different voltages (10.5 kV, 12.5 kV, 14.5 kV), flow rates (0.1 mL/h, 0.3 mL/h, 0.5 mL/h) and copolymer concentrations in ethanol (8 wt%, 10 wt%) to find out through the analysis of SEM micrographs, and membranes physical appearance the best conditions for electrospinning the material. A set of experiments was carried out first leaving the copolymer concentration fixed at 10 wt% and alternating the three different flow rates with the three different voltages, the sample with the best characteristics for the application was then analyzed with 8 wt% of copolymer concentration, finally PMB + 0.1 wt% f-NrGO and PMB + 1 wt% f-NrGO were electrospun using the previously identified electrospinning and fluid conditions to determine the f-NrGO concentration that promotes the formation a membrane similar to native tissue. Low density lipoproteins from human plasma, copper (II) sulfate and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid were obtained from Merck and used without further purification. As LDL oxidation is promoted by the atherosclerosis disease, an artificial oxidation process is carried out to analyze the results under conditions similar to the real biological environment. Following the protocol reported by Chnari et al. Low density lipoproteins from human plasma were purchased from Merck. The wettability of each MPC specimen was evaluated by the measurement of the static contact angles of droplets of low density lipoproteins (5 μL each) on the sample surfaces. The contact angle measurements were carried out at five different locations of each specimen at room temperature. The results of the measurements are expressed as the mean of ten replicates. A simplified stent test bank was fabricated to experimentally validate the generation of chemical bonds between the f-NrGO sheets and the electrospun copolymer, also the membrane resistance to the simulated bloodstream flow was proved (Figure The test bank is a 1:1 prototype of a blood vessel. It uses simulated body fluid (SBF), at corporal temperature, this fluid is a solution with an ionic concentration similar to human plasma Two types of membranes were analyzed, (PMB + functionalized NrGO electrospun membrane) and (PMB + non functionalized NrGO electrospun membrane). SBF was continuously flowing through the tube and in contact with each membrane for 24 hours, thereafter, a sample of SBF from each experiment was analyzed by Raman spectroscopy looking for the presence of NrGO sheets that may have detached from the membranes. The morphology of the electrospun fibers was investigated by SEM (Fei Nova NanoSEM 200). The presence of the f-NrGO sheets over the fibers was confirmed by AFM (ASYLUM RESEARCH MFP3D-SA) in non-contact mode, with a speed range of 0.20 to 0.75 Hz and a silicone cantilever with a rectangular geometry of 240 mm in length, completely covered with a Ti/Ir film. A Thermo Scientific XPS spectrometer model Escalab 250Xi and Thermo Scientific iS50 infrared spectrometer were used for the identification of the NrGO changes produced by the functionalization process. For the determination of the thiol-polymer bonding H-NMR was performed in a Bruker spectrometer (300 MHz), spectra were acquired in 5 mm NMR tubes using deuterated methanol as solvent. Also, a Dynamic Mechanical Analysis was performed in a Q800 V21.3 Build 96 equipment, to investigate the mechanical properties of the membranes with a DMA module controlled force and 0.1 N/min, the samples had dimensions of 9.82 mm, 5.30 mm width and thickness respectively and 0.1 mm in length. The fluids from the test bank were analyzed using a high-resolution Raman model Labram HR from Horiba Jobin Yvon with a 632 nm laser. Finally, a Dataphysics OCA 15 Plus goniometer was used to measure the contact angle between the electrospun membranes and the oxidized LDL. NrGO was functionalized with cysteamine to achieve strong chemical bonds between NrGO and the copolymer, this procedure aims to prevent the bloodstream from dragging the f-NrGO sheets out of the membrane once in contact with blood flow. The functionalization was carried out from the remaining carboxylic and epoxy functional groups of the NrGO NrGO functionalization mechanism is shown in Scheme 1. First, the remaining epoxy groups of the NrGO were transformed into hydroxyl groups through a ring opening reaction catalyzed by concentrated hydrobromic acid (Scheme 1a). The second step is the generation of an esterification reaction by introducing oxalic acid to interact with the hydroxyl groups reaching carboxylation (Scheme 1b). The third step is the activation of the carboxyl groups to increase the reactivity with the copolymer and the addition of the linker molecule (cysteamine), which has at one end amine groups that bind to the NrGO carboxyl groups by reacting with its OH part, turning into HN; the other end of the cysteamine molecule has thiol groups by which the molecule is anchored to the copolymer ending groups. XPS was used to analyze the first steps of the functionalization process. C1s and O1s core levels spectra of NrGO after carboxylation are presented in Figure As the carboxylation step of the functionalization process aims to increase the number of carboxylic groups in the sheets, a comparison of the areas of the peaks corresponding to these groups before A characterization via FTIR-ATR was performed as shown in Figure MPC was copolymerized with BMA to improve the elasticity capacity The bond between NrGO terminal groups and the amine end of the cysteamine molecule was verified by XPS, nevertheless, it is also important to prove that the other end of the cysteamine molecule (the thiol end) is chemically bonded to the copolymer, which will lead to a strong bond between NrGO and the PMB, ensuring good adhesion characteristics for the application, because the permanence of the NrGO over the polymer is crucial to avoid the NrGO detachment from the polymeric membrane. H-NMR was conducted on both samples, PMB with f-NrGO (Figure Nevertheless, the most important contributions to corroborate the formation of a chemical bond between the PMB and the cysteamine functionalized NrGO are the double-doublets that appear in 5.7 ppm and 6.25 ppm corresponding to the geminal hydrogens (two hydrogens linked to the same carbon), attributed to the double bond between C and terminal CH2 of PMB Figure Figure In addition to the PMB electrospinning, PMB with two different f-NrGO concentrations (0.1 wt% and 1 wt%) were electrospun using the best previously identified voltage, flow rate, and copolymer concentration. It is important to highlight that f-NrGO incorporation during the polymerization achieves not just a physical but a chemical bond with the PMB as proved by H-NMR results, due to the possibility of interaction between the thiol group of cysteamine molecules and terminal groups of PMB, this chemical bond is fundamental to prevent f-NrGO agglomeration, as other studies propose Both electrospun samples, PMB + 1 wt% f-NrGO and PMB + 0.1 wt% f-NrGO present a very homogenous physical appearance as shown in Figure Nevertheless, the PMB + 1wt% f-NrGO sample has a range of diameter variation from 134 nm to 1000 nm but most of the fibers have diameters nearer to 1000 nm (44% of the fibers are bigger than 800 nm and only 15% are smaller than 200 nm). The lack of more fibers within or near the nanometric range could be a problem due to the diminution of the reendothelization process, this fiber diameter distribution is attributed to the high f-NrGO reinforcement percentage, that may lead to a bad mixing with the copolymer creating agglomeration points that changes the fluid characteristics and negatively impact the electrospinning results. On the other hand, the sample with 0.1 wt% f-NrGO has the widest range of fiber diameter variation, ranging from 60 nm to 1350 nm. Fibers with diameters from 60 nm to 200 nm represent the 30% and fibers between 800 nm to 1350 nm the 43%, this feature gives the membrane all the benefits the nanometric fiber diameters but also allows the formation of spider net like junctions and improves the mechanical properties. Differential mechanical analysis (DMA) tests were performed to analyze the mechanical behavior of electrospun PMB reinforced with 1 wt% and 0.1 wt% f-NrGO, then the presence and the distribution of the f-NrGO sheets over the PMB electrospun fibers were determined by AFM, also a contact angle test was carried out to analyze the effect of the f-NrGO reinforcement on the electric charges repulsion and finally, the membrane was proved with a test bank to experimentally verify the effect of the functionalization in sheets capacity to remain attached to the copolymer while in contact with a fluid. DMA analysis was carried out to determine the stress-strain curve of three samples: PMB, PMB + 0.1 wt% f-NrGO and PMB + 1 wt% f-NrGO as shown in Figure All samples exhibit a typical polymer mechanical behavior, the PMB and PMB + 0.1 wt% f-NrGO showed a characteristic behavior of flexible plastics (plastic, non-linear) and the PMB + 1 wt% f-NrGO behaves as a rigid plastic (linear and without plastic zone). The main parameter to observe in these graphs is the Young Modulus that expresses the stiffness of a material, where a larger value means that the material is more rigid In the stress-strain curve of the PMB and the PMB + 0.1 wt% f-NrGO there is a non-linear plastic behavior, however, both have a tendency to linearity in the proportionality zone, for this type of material, it is possible to calculate the Young modulus through the use of various methods such as obtaining the slope of a secant line, tangent method, and chord method, in addition to linear approximations with respect to the curve in the proportionality zone These results are in agreement with other studies Nevertheless, studies as the presented by Hwang and Yu To verify the presence and distribution of the f-NrGO sheets on the electrospun fibers, AFM characterizations were performed. Figure This contact angle almost reaches superlipophobicity and it is attributed to the presence of f-NrGO sheets over the copolymer fibers, enhancing coating capacity to repel negative electric charges, due to the nitrogen present in the f-NrGO lattice generating a negative charged electronic cloud at the membrane surface. The contact angle tests were performed over three different membranes with the same characteristics using 10 drops per sample; obtaining an average contact angle for the oxidized LDL upon electrospun of 103.4° and an average contact angle for oxidized LDL on electrospun PMB + 0.1 wt% f-NrGO of 142.3°. These results demonstrate the membrane capacity to avoid accumulation of LDL in highly oxidized states, thus helping to prevent the progression of the atherosclerotic disease. A simplified test bank was used to test the sheets attachment in 2 different membranes, PMB + f-NrGO and PMB + NrGO (the last sample was obtained following the exact same process explained in the methodology section but using NrGO without cysteamine functionalization). The SBF in contact with these membranes was analyzed by Raman spectroscopy. Figure Cysteamine functionalization of NrGO ensures chemical bonds between NrGO and PMB due to the reaction of its amine end with NrGO carboxylic groups, and its thiol end with PMB terminal groups, thus avoiding sheets detachment from the membrane. This functionalization process also contributes to the distribution of the sheets in the electrospun copolymer, leading to a good distribution of them over the fibers during electrospinning. It is also notable that the percentage of f-NrGO reinforcement in the copolymer plays a crucial role in membrane mechanical properties; 0.1 wt% f-NrGO reinforcement lowers electrospun PMB Young modulus and enhances its stress and strain at fracture, behavior attributed to the synergy between the fiber diameter distribution and good distribution of sheets in the copolymer given by the right amount of bonds between f-NrGO and PMB, which are enough to ensure a strong attachment but not so much to mitigate the elongation capacity of the polymer. This reinforcement percentage is also enough to generate a high repulsion to negative electric charges as the ones present in LDL, due to the highly negative surface of the NrGO distributed all over the electrospun fibers, characteristic that is retained even after the functionalization process. According to these results the present membrane is promising for its application as cardiovascular stent coating. Authors have no competing interests to declare.