Samples consisting of one ferromagnetic and one diamagnetic component which are immiscible at the thermodynamic equilibrium (Co-Cu, Fe-Cu, Fe-Ag) are processed by high-pressure torsion at various compositions. The received microstructures are investigated by electron microscopy and synchrotron X-ray diffraction, showing a microstructural saturation. Results gained from microstructural investigations are correlated to magnetometry data. The Co-Cu samples show mainly ferromagnetic behavior and a decrease in coercivity with increasing Co-content. The saturation microstructure of Fe-Cu samples is found to be dual phase. Results of magnetic measurements also revealed the occurrence of two different magnetic phases in this system. For Fe-Ag, the microstructural and magnetic results indicate that no intermixing between the elemental phases takes place. Creating materials with tailored functional properties has been a large field of interest for many years. In the field of magnetism, for example, it was shown that the magnetic moment of γ-Fe 2 O 3 can be tuned electrochemically As covered by Herzer In this study, supersaturated solid solutions are prepared by HPT consisting of one ferromagnetic and one diamagnetic component. The microstructure of the as-deformed samples, which are already available in bulk form, are characterized and correlated to their magnetic properties. The investigated binary compounds consist of Co-Cu, Fe-Cu or Fe-Ag. To obtain any desired chemical composition, conventional powders are used as starting materials (Fe: MaTeck 99.9% -100+200 mesh, Co: GoodFellow 99.9% 50-150 μm, Cu: AlfaAesar 99.9% -170+400 mesh, Ag: AlfaAesar 99.9% -500 mesh). An Ar-filled glovebox is used to store the powders and prepare the powder mixtures, which are hydrostatically compacted in Ar-atmosphere at a nominal pressure of 5 GPa applied. Pre-compacted samples are then severely deformed by HPT for 50 or 100 turns at the same pressure at room temperature. A detailed description of the used setup is given in Ref. Figure Vickers hardness measurements are carried out as the measurements are very sensitive to small changes in the microstructure. Hardness values plotted versus shear strain showed a saturation behavior starting at r ≥ 2 mm, indicating the as-deformed microstructures reached a steady state above this position. Figure Figure From the TKD analysis, it was shown that high Co-containing compositions exhibit smaller grain sizes than low Co-containing compositions. Comparing the coercivity of the samples with their grain sizes, it can be seen that the coercivity decreases with decreasing grain size, entering the regime of random anisotropy due to exchange coupled nanograins. Apart from the decrease in grain size, the various chemical compositions may also lead to deviations of the micromagnetic properties. (a) magnetization versus applied field for Fe-Cu samples measured at 300 K. Saturation is not achieved, even at the highest applied field; (b) ZFC-FC for Fe-Cu samples at 50 Oe. Splitting is not pronounced for Fe7wt.%-Cu. For Fe7wt.%-Cu and Fe14wt.%-Cu a cusp at the FC-curve is found. In Figure Binary solid solutions are processed by HPT. Three different systems, immiscible at the thermodynamic equilibrium and consisting of one ferromagnetic and one diamagnetic component, are investigated (Co-Cu, Fe-Cu, Fe-Ag). Correlating microstructural and magnetic data lead to the following results: for Co-Cu samples, fcc-structures can be processed in the medium composition range. Higher Co-containing compositions show the smallest grain sizes as well as the lowest coercivity, demonstrating that the coercivity can be tuned by varying the chemical composition. Co-Cu HPT samples are near the crossover of free-domain motion and exchange-coupling of ultra-small grains exhibiting randomization of anisotropy, with nearly identical initial susceptibilites independent of Co-composition. On the other hand, Fe-Cu samples deliver phase separation of Fe-grains with monodomain magnetism obeying Stoner-Wolfarth behavior with strongly composition dependent slopes of hysteresis curves and a typical magnetic blocking effect. For Fe-concentrations below 20 wt.%, a partial dissolution of Fe in Cu is expected with spin-glass behavior (to be probed 