We have shown that the weak-coupling limit superconductors are well described by q ∼ 1, where q is a real parameter which characterizes the degree of nonextensivity of Tsallis' entropy. Nevertheless, small deviations with respect to q = 1 provide better agreement when compared with experimental results. We have also shown that the generalized BCS theory with q > 1 exhibit power-law behavior of several measurable macroscopic functions in the low-temperature regime. These power-law properties are found in many high-T c oxides superconductors and motivated us to extend Tsallis entropy calculations to these systems. Therefore, we have calculated the phase diagram and the specific heat and we compare our results with the experimental data for the YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ family of compounds. The superconductivity interaction in high-T c oxides remains one of the greatest puz-zle in condensed matter physics, possibly due to their complex stoichiometry. Despite some evidences towards a phonon-mediated interaction, there is still the question of how a single mechanism produces such a rich phenomenology which includes great charge inhomogeneities, possibly in a stripe morphology, that decreases with the doping level, the appearance of a pseudo-gap at a temperature T above the superconducting phase transition at T c Consider the following Hamiltonian where there is a on-site Coulomb repulsion, U, which stands for the electron correlations, and a phenomenological attractive interaction, which is responsible for the formation of Cooper pairs, The strength of the interaction shall be treated as an adjustable parameter. Following the BCS method, the self-consistent gap equation is given by where E k = e 2 (k) + ∆ 2 (k) and f q is the generalized Fermi function. This gap energy may be considered as the order parameter of the phase transition. According to experimental data available order parameter is anisotropic in agreement with d-wave superconductor, ∆(k A constant nearest-neighbor attraction which favors the formation of singlet Cooper pairs in the d-wave channel is given by a x and a y are lattice parameters given by X-ray experiments. At T = T c , the gap equation is zero and Eq. ( where c represents the sum over the Brillouin Zone at T c , that is, at the temperature of vanishing gap. Thus, Eq. (3) furnishes T c self-consistently. On the other hand, the hole concentration is given by the q-expectation value of the number operator in the k state, which is simply written as The system formed by Eqs. ( We use also the simplified version of the q-dependent free fermion distribution function where e x q ≡ [ 1 + (1 -q) x ] 1/(1-q) is the generalized q-exponential function. Still, the sums are replaced by integrals and we use a tight binding dispersion relation for a 2-d orthorhombic lattice. To apply this formalism to the experimental data for YBCO, we will use the dispersion relation given by Arpes experiments which yields the following values for the hopping parameters We have solved numerically Eqs. ( Further, the cuprates present a linear decayment for the electronic specific heat, which is the behavior expected for a free fermion gas. Experimental data 