We address the question of the degree of spatial non-locality of the self energy in the iron-based superconductors, a subject which is receiving considerable attention. Using LiFeAs as a prototypical example, we extract the self energy from angular-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) data. We use two distinct electronic structure references: density functional theory in the local density approximation and linearized quasiparticle self consistent GW (LQSGW). We find that with the LQSGW reference, spatially local dynamical correlations provide a consistent description of the experimental data, and account for some surprising aspects of the data such as the substantial out of plane dispersion of the electron Fermi surface having dominant xz/yz character. Hence, correlations effects can be separated into static non-local contributions well described by LQSGW and dynamical local contributions. Hall effect and resistivity data are shown to be consistent with this description. Introduction. The origin of superconductivity in the iron pnictides and chalcogenides is an outstanding open problem in condensed matter physics Answering this question requires a proper understanding of the degree of spatial locality of electronic correlations in the normal state. This has been addressed previously by a comparison of theoretical calculations to experiments. Some results favor the local picture Here, we take a different approach and address this question by a direct examination of experimental data from angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), following the approach which was successful for Sr 2 RuO 4 Our results offer a solution to the local vs. non-local conundrum Method. Ignoring photoemission matrix elements, extrinsic and surface effects, we relate the measured photoemission spectra to the spectral function associated with the one particle Green's function: In this expression, H(k) is a reference Hamiltonian matrix expressed in a localised basis of orbitals m, σ (σ is the spin index), ω is the frequency, and k is the wavevector in the Brillouin zone. Σ(k, ω) is the self-energy matrix for the given reference Hamiltonian H(k). The chemical potential is included in H(k). We consider two different choices for the reference Hamiltonian H(k). The first is the Kohn-Sham Hamiltonian obtained from density-functional theory in the local density approximation (DFT-LDA) using the Wien2k software package We first discuss the electronic structure associated with H(k), i.e. in the absence of the self-energy. In Fig. The procedure for extracting the self-energy from ARPES data follows Ref. To facilitate the determination of Σ, we restrict its functional form as follows. We assume that, in the local orbital basis, it is independent of the out-of-plane momentum k z and that the off-diagonal (inter-orbital) matrix elements are absorbed into the renormalization of the SOC The components of the self-energy within the non-local Σ ansatz are obtained by fitting the experimental hole bands at K=Γ and electron bands at K=M separately. We also note that this ansatz is physically motivated by the AFM wave-vector of spin fluctuations and corresponding Brillouin zone folding (Fig. Results. Our main results are summarized in Figs. Table Fig. We now turn to the results of the self-energy obtained by using LQSGW for the reference Hamiltonian, using k z = 0.55 in this case when fitting the electron bands around M . The results in Table Comparing to available experimental data, we see that the LQSGW reference combined with a quasi-local selfenergy provides: (i) a good description of the k z dependent hole bands (α', α, and β) dispersions in comparison to the ARPES data of Refs We compare in Fig. We now turn to the electron bands in Fig. In summary, our analysis demonstrates that an LQSGW reference We finally turn to transport measurements, as reported in Ref. Several authors have pointed at some discrepancies between experimental data and the predictions of LDA+DMFT, which is usually interpreted as a failure of the DMFT to take into account non-local effects We acknowledge useful discussions with Andrea Damascelli and Ryan Day (who also kindly shared their unpublished ARPES data) as well as with Roser Valenti. This work was supported by the DOE CMS program (MK and GK). SC was supported by the U. In this section, we describe details of the construction of the reference Hamiltonian in the LDA, H LDA . We construct maximally localized Wannier function (MLWF) of LiFeAs for the p -d model approach (Fe(d) and As(p)) using the Wannier90 and the Wien2Wannier packages. In this section, we describe details of the construction of the reference Hamiltonian in the LQSGW, H LQSGW . LQSGW calculation is performed by using FlapwMBPT package In this section, we describe comparisons of bands in between ARPES and H(k) of LDA and LQSGW to provide background information for the extraction of self-energy. Fig. LDA ref erence-For hole pockets with k z =0.00, following factors are shown in Fig. LQSGW ref erence-For hole pockets with k z =0.00, following factors are shown in Fig. There is a significant shrinking of the xz/yz driven δ band in the ARPES with respect to the band from H LQSGW (k), with a much larger amount with respect to the case of xz/yz driven α and α ′ . (ii) There is an agreement of the Fermi momentum of the xy driven γ band in the ARPES with respect to the band from H LQSGW (k). (iii) There are renormalizations of bands in the ARPES from the H LQSGW (k) for δ and γ bands. In this section, we describe the procedure for the extraction of the self-energy of LiFeAs. For H(k), we assume the reference Hamiltonian of LDA+λ SOC (λ SOC =50 meV) and LQSGW+λ SOC (λ SOC =25 meV) as described in sections I and II. In order to extract the self-energy (real part) from the ARPES data, we define the |d| of Eq.S1 from the Green's function which is defined in the main text. The momentum (k) of the maximum of the momentum distribution curve (MDC) of the ARPES for each band (of index of ν) are noted as k MDC ν assigned to each frequency of ω as shown in Eq.S1. The quasiparticle spectra of (ω,k) is given by the condition of det(G -1 (k, ω)) = 0 with the condition of ImΣ=0. Thus, the variable |d| should be minimized for each frequency. From the defined reference Hamiltonian of H(k), the variable |d| is a function of the self-energy for each frequency. We minimize |d| as a root finding procedure from the self-energy variable for each frequency. From this procedure, the self-energy is extracted. Several assumptions for the simplification of self-energy is made to solve Eq.S1. The first, for the low energy, most of orbital character is xz/yz and xy. Thus, we consider the self-energy of xz/yz and xy of Fe(d) only as shown in Eq.S1. The second, we assume that self-energy is k z independent. The third, for the in-plane momentum dependence of the self-energy, we employed two ansätze, namely, the local Σ ansatz and the non-local Σ ansatz as shown in Eq.S2 In the local Σ ansatz, the self-energy is momentum independent, and all bands of ν index for the given frequency is considered for the minimization of |d| as shown in Eq.S2. In the non-local Σ ansatz, the self-energy is a coarse grained constant in the momentum space for K of Brillouin zone (BZ) patch as shown in Eq.S2. We used the 2 dimensional BZ patch in the main text, in relation to the existing antiferromagnetic (AFM) correlation with q vector close to M . From the symmetry of the lattice of LiFeAs, we assumed that self-energy of Fe(d) is orbitally diagonal. From Refs. S46-S48, it is shown that for the regime of Hund's metal, due to the larger energy scale of Kondo screening in the orbital sector (T o K ) with respect to the SOC (λ SOC ), T o K > λ SOC , SOC is not effective on the orbitally diagonal self-energy having a frequency dependent coherence-incoherence crossover. For orbitally off-diagonal self-energy, in Refs. S46 and S47, it is shown that from the example of Sr 2 RuO 4 , this off-diagonal term could be absorbed into the renormalization of SOC. We assume that this orbitally off-diagonal self-energy is zero. We confirmed that this assumption properly describes the SOC effects on the ARPES near the zero frequency. Table In this section, we describe the relation in between (i) the variable of k z for electron pockets for the reference Hamiltonian H(k) and (ii) the spatial locality of self-energy and the validity of the Luttinger's theorem, as discussed in the main text. The Fermi momentum and the mass of the xz/yz driven electron band (δ band) computed with both LDA and LQSGW reference Hamiltonians depend strongly on k z as shown in Fig. LDA ref erence -Table In summary, for the LDA reference, there is no k z for electron sheet such that fulfills both the locality of self-energy and the Luttinger's theorem together. LQSGW ref erence -Table In summary, for the LQSGW reference, there is single value of k z =0.55 for electron pockets which (i) fulfills the Luttinger's theorem and (ii) provides a validity of the spatially local self-energy. Table In this section, we describe the procedure for the extraction of the error bar in the self-energy. In the extraction of error bar of zero frequency self-energy (Σ m (K, 0)) and quasiparticle residue (Z m (K)) from the ARPES, we consider two independent sources of error (i) in plane k error and (ii) out of plane k z error, with consideration of the MDC peak width of 0.01 (π/a) (0.008 Å -1 ). There is an intrinsic uncertainty in the value of k z Table In this section, we present dynamical part self-energies in the LDA reference and LQSGW reference, in the main text, with k z =0.35 for electron bands fit in the LDA reference and k z =0.55 for electron bands fit in the LQSGW reference. The full frequency dependence of the extracted self-energies is presented on Fig. To show the validity of the extracted self-energy of the LQSGW+non-local Σ ansatz from the quasiparticle of the ARPES experiment in the main text, we compared spectra from the LQSGW+non-local Σ ansatz to the ARPES of Ref. In this section we estimate the admixture of xz/yz and xy orbital character near the Fermi level near the Γ point. Fig. The λ(l • s) t2g of Eq.S3 is given by Eq.S4, in the order of xz, ↑, yz, ↑, xy, ↑, xz, ↓, yz, ↓, and xy, ↓ states. The strong and weak λ cases are shown in Fig. The single particle states A, B, and C of Eq.S5 and Eq.S6 is connected with the variable of λ/ε t . Fig. In the region of parameters that correspond to the Γ point of LiFeAs, ε t correspond to ∼250 meV λ SOC =50 meV, within LDA, hence the ratio λ SOC /ε t is less than 0.2 for LiFeAs.This estimate of the upper limit of λ SOC /ε t also holds for LQSGW+λ SOC . In this section, we analyze transport data to show that a spatially local scattering rate of LiFeAs, motivated by the LQSGW+local Σ ansatz, provides a natural explanation for the transport experiments of Ref. Fig. Assuming that the scattering rate (1/τ ) depends on the orbital but not on whether the pocket is electron or hole like, we apply the scattering rate, (1/τ ), of the xz/yz to α and δ Fermi surfaces, while the scattering rate of the xy is applied to β and γ Fermi surfaces. m ν is the bare mass of each FS which we estimate from our LQSGW reference as shown in Table We checked that variations in m δ in the range of [1.00m e ,1.80m e ] gives rise to similar trends for the extracted scattering rate, and the converted transport data. For the carrier number of each FS, we take the value from the LQSGW+non-local Σ ansatz as shown in Table ρ -1 (T ) = Figure The scattering rate of the xz/yz orbital is nearly proportional to T 2 from 0 K (0 K 2 ) to 265 K (70000 K 2 ), implying that a Fermi liquid behaviour for this temperature range. The scattering rate of the xy orbital is nearly proportional to T 2 from 0 K (0 K 2 ) to 100 K (10000 K 2 ), and there is a coherence-incoherence crossover around the temperature of 150 K. This result of the scattering rate (Fig. To check the validity of the orbital dependent spatially local scattering rate in Fig. * garix.minjae.kim@gmail.com