A detailed zero-field and transverse-field muon spin relaxation/rotation (μSR) experiemnts have been carried out on the recently discovered non-centrosymmetric superconductor W3Al2C to speculate about its superconducting ground state. Bulk nature of superconductivity below 7.6 K is confirmed through magnetization measurements. No change in the μSR spectra collected above and below Tc is visible, ruling out the possibility of spontaneous magnetic field below Tc. This confirms that time-reversal symmetry is preserved for W3Al2C upon entering in the superconducting ground state. Temperature dependent superfluid density [ρs(T )], which directly reflects the superconducting gap symmetry is obtained by the analysis of spectra obtained from the transverse-field μSR experiments. Despite a non-centrosymmetric structure, W3Al2C adopts a fully gaped spinsinglet superconducting ground state with a zero temperature value of gap ∆0 = 1.158(8) meV with gap-to-Tc ratio 2∆0/kBTc ≈3.54, classifying this material as a weakly-coupled superconductors. In the quest of achieving superconductivity (SC) at high temperature, there has been enormous research on cuprates, Fe-based pnictide superconductors, heavy fermion superconductors etc. The research in the field of NC superconductors was triggered after the discovery of unusual superconducting ground state namely line nodes in heavy fermion compound CePt 3 Si. To look for such a possibility, recently, Ying et al. were able to successfully grow single phase superconductor W 3 Al 2 C with T c ≈7.5 K, where Mo was replaced by heavier element W to enhance ASOC. This paper is organized in the following manner: Section II describes the sample-preparation and initial characterization procedure including the results of magnetization measurements, as well as the details about the μSR experiments. Section III is dedicated to results and discussion part involving TF and ZF μSR experiments. The conclusions are reported in Section IV. The polycrystalline W 3 Al 2 C sample was synthesized by the high-pressure method with the detailed description being reported in the Ref. FIG. the base temperature in presence of a magnetic field and then spectra were collected during warming up. To minimize the statistical error bars, typical counting statics was kept at ≈10 7 positrons events for each data point. The TF and ZF μSR spectra were analyzed with the help of the free software MUSRFIT. To elucidate the nature of superconducting order parameter, we have carried out transverse field (TF) μSR experiments in the mixed superconducting state of W 3 Al 2 C with various applied magnetic fields: 30, 100, 300, and 600 mT. The TF-μSR asymmetry spectra were collected at several temperatures between 1.5 K to 10 K for GPS spectrometer. Fig. Here, A TF (0) is the initial asymmetry belonging to the sample. γ μ /2π = 135.5 MHz/T is the muon gyromagnetic ratio. B int is the local internal magnetic field sensed by muons implanted in the sample, φ is the initial phase offset of the initital muon spin polarization T i m e ( μs -1 ) FIG. with respect to positron detector. σ total is the muon depolarization rate, which is comprised of the following two terms: σ total 2 = σ sc 2 +σ nm 2 . Solid lines in the Fig. The magnetic field and temperature evolution of σ sc (T, B) has been obtained by fitting Eq. 1 to the experimentally observed asymmetry-time spectra. Firstly, we have measured TF-spectra at base temperature 1.5 K in presence of various fields ranging from 0.01 T to 0.7 T. Fig. Here, b = B/B c2 is the reduced magnetic field, with B c2 as the upper critical field, ξ is the coherence length, and λ is the penetration depth. B is the mean field within FLL. The reciprocal lattice vector q = 4π/ √ a(m √ 3/2, n + m/2), adapted for hexagonal flux line lattice, with a being the intervortex distance, m and n are the integer numbers. The applied magnetic field B app B c2 (predicted value of B c2 = 15.4 T from previous study), The temperature dependent σ sc (T ) for four different applied fields is shown in Fig. with f = [1 + exp(E/k B T )] -1 being the Fermi distribution function and φ is the azimuthal angle along the Fermi surface. ∆(T, φ) = ∆(T )g φ , where ∆(T ) is the temperature dependence and g φ is the angle dependence of gap function, with latter has a value g φ = 1 for s-wave, and cos2φ for d-wave pairing symmetry. The temperature dependence of the gap function ∆(T ) is approximated in the standard way: ∆(T ) = ∆ 0 tanh{1.821[1.018(T c /T -1) 0.51 ]}, In order to search for possible magnetic field (static or fluctuating) in the superconducting state of W 3 Al 2 C, we collected various ZF-spectra in the temperature range from 1.6 K to 10 K. For representative manner, we have shown in Fig. where G KT is the Gaussian Kubo-Toyabe function, 32 accounting for the the muon depolarization rate associated with the static randomly oriented local field due to nuclear magnetic moments. A s and A bg are the initial asymmetries associated to the sample and background, respectively. Λ represents the electronic spin relaxation rate, which is additionally introduced in order to to account for any possible distribution of fields due to electronic spins. Gaussian Kubo Toyabe function G KT has following functional form: where σ ZF is the width of the nuclear dipolar field (the local field distribution < B μ > = σ/γ μ , where muon gyromagnetic ratio γ μ = 135.53 MHz/T) experienced by the muon-spin ensemble. The Gaussian depolarization rate σ ZF was fixed to a value 0.1893 μs -1 , estimated from fitting a spectra well above T c . Fig. and many others. Thus, we can argue that TRS breaking is not an immanent feature of NC superconductors. The superconducting properties of noncentrosymmetric superconductor W 3 Al 2 C has been examined by means of magnetization, zero field and transverse field μSR experiments. A sharp superconducting transition with transition width 0.1 K is seen at 7.5 K in the temperature dependent magnetization measurement. The ZF μSR spectra show no additional contribution in the relaxation rate below T c , excluding the possibility of time-reversal symmetry breaking in the superconducting state. The Gaussian muon depolarization rate σ sc (T ) obtained after the analysis of TF spectra could be reconstructed well with a single gap s-wave model. The field dependence of muon depolarization rate σ(B) is analyzed using modified London model for single gap s-wave symmetry. 