The development of high-density magnetic recording media is limited by the superparamagnetism in very small ferromagnetic crystals. Hard magnetic materials with strong perpendicular anisotropy offer stability and high recording density. To overcome the difficulty of writing media with a large coercivity, heat assisted magnetic recording (HAMR) has been developed, rapidly heating the media to the Curie temperature Tc before writing, followed by rapid cooling. Requirements are a suitable Tc, coupled with anisotropic thermal conductivity and hard magnetic properties. Here we introduce Rh2CoSb as a new hard magnet with potential for thin film magnetic recording. A magnetocrystalline anisotropy of 3.6 MJm -3 is combined with a saturation magnetization of μ0Ms = 0.52 T at 2 K (2.2 MJm -3 and 0.44 T at room-temperature). The magnetic hardness parameter of 3.7 at room temperature is the highest observed for any rare-earth free hard magnet. The anisotropy is related to an unquenched orbital moment of 0.42 μB on Co, which is hybridized with neighbouring Rh atoms with a large spin-orbit interaction. Moreover, the pronounced temperature-dependence of the anisotropy that follows from its Tc of 450 K, together with a high thermal conductivity of 20 Wm -1 K -1 , makes Rh2CoSb a candidate for development for heat assisted writing with a recording density in excess of 10 Tb/in 2 . The pace of doubling of information density on magnetic recording media has slackened in recent years, as the effective size of the perpendicularly recorded grains approached the superparamagnetic blocking diameter, which is the lower size limit for stable ferromagnetism, directly related to the magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy K1. To resist demagnetization by random thermal fluctuation, the volume V of a magnetic material must satisfy the empirical condition that K1V/kBT > 60 (K1V > 1.5 eV), where kB and T are the Boltzmann constant and ambient temperature, respectively The development of modern magnetic recording media spanned three generations. The first generation for tapes and discs depended on the shape anisotropy of acicular fine particles of ferrimagnetic or ferromagnetic oxides, γFe2O3 or CrO2 To achieve sufficient anisotropy, a non-cubic crystal structure (for example tetragonal or hexagonal) and a large spin-orbit interaction with the right sign is needed. When looking for new materials with uniaxial magnetocrystalline anisotropy, a significant deviation of the c/a ratio from 1 for tetragonal or for hexagonal structures, is sought. Moreover, it is important to pair a 3d metal (Mn, Fe, Co) that provides a substantial magnetic moment with a heavy atom that enhances the spin-orbit interaction. Rh is a 4d element where the spin-orbit interaction is larger than in 3d elements, and it acquires a small induced magnetic moment when paired with a 3d metal. Therefore, it is worthwhile looking for new opportunities in magnetic recording among Rh-based alloys with a tetragonal or hexagonal structure. Heusler alloys are a large family of compounds with formula X2YZ, where X and Y are usually transition metals and Z is a main group element properties. Rh2CoSb has a c/√2a ratio of 1.24, the largest among all reported Rh-based magnetic Heusler compounds (c/√2a is used to describe the tetragonal distortion relative to a cubic lattice). A magnetic moment per formula of 1.4 μB in an 0.7 T applied field and a Tc of about 450 K were reported for polycrystalline samples many years ago Here we study the anisotropic magnetic, thermal and transport properties, as well as the temperature-dependent anisotropy of single crystals of Rh2CoSb and investigate the contribution of rhodium to the magnetism. Magnetic Heusler alloys with a tetragonal structure are often Mn-based with space group I m2 Magnetic properties were measured along the c and a axes of single crystals as illustrated in Figure However, a field μ0Ha of 17.5 T is required to saturate the sample along the a axis, where Ha is the anisotropy field. The magnetocrystalline anisotropy constant K1 = 1⁄2 μ0HaMs is 3.6 MJm -3 , which is larger than for any other rare-earth free compound except for CoPt and FePt. Its relatively small Ms makes  larger than for these materials and coercivity may exceed that of FePt 3 . Both μ0Ms and K1 decrease with increasing temperature, as shown in Figure Detailed measurements of the magnetization along c and a at different temperatures are reported in the Supplemental information. The Curie temperature is deduced to be 450 K from the temperature scans of magnetization in a 10 mT field. The M-T curve measured along the hard axis in a magnetic field of 0.5 T exhibits a sharp peak at 440 K, indicating a rapid built-up of anisotropy just below Tc. The slope dK1/dT is ~ 20 kJm -3 K -1 (twice as large as for FePt Hopkinson peak along the c axis All the indications are that Rh2CoSb has the potential to be a good hard magnet with strong uniaxial anisotropy. There is no structural transition, avoiding the problems of decomposition (MnBi decomposes at 628 K) or twinning (like many nearly-cubic rare-earth free magnets such as MnGa, MnAl, FePt and CoPt Thanks to the strong K1 at 300 K, Rh2CoSb promises a significant reduction in thermally stable grain size from diameter D = 7-9 nm in today's perpendicular Co-Cr-Pt media down to D = 4-5 nm in future Rh2CoSb media, resulting in a potential storage density of more than 10 Terabit/inch 2 (for D = 5 nm with half area occupied). Detailed calculation can be found in Supplemental information. HAMR media with grain diameters of only a few nm are hard to fabricate because the grains musts be exchange decoupled by an intergranular material. Powder XRD data revealed the presence of a few percent of a RhSb secondary phase in our polycrystalline samples. Nonmagnetic RhSb appears at the grain boundaries, pinning the domains and creating hysteresis. It is a candidate for separating the nanocrystal grains in Rh2CoSb thin film media. Transport properties of Rh2CoSb are presented in Figure The Seebeck coefficient is about -10 WK -1 m -1 at 300 K along both axes (c and a) with an error of ±10%. The opposite signs of the Hall effect (positive) and Seebeck coefficient (negative) indicate the co-existence of both light holes and heavy electrons at the Fermi energy The measured thermal transport properties in Figures. 3b and 3c along c and a axes are also highly anisotropic. The total thermal conductivity along c is about twice as large as along a, and it is mainly explained by the carrier contribution, following the Wiedemann-Franz law Little information is available about the magnetism of hard magnetic 3d-4d intermetallic compounds, other than FePd, which has the tetragonal L10 structure with K1 = 1.8 MJm -3 , and YCo5 which has the hexagonal CaCu5 structure We also prepared polycrystalline Rh2FeSb with the same crystal structure, which exhibits easy-plane magnetization. At 300 K under 7 T, the incompletely saturated moment reaches 3.8 μB per formula, far greater than the 2.2 μB of metallic iron. The Curie temperature of 510 K is even higher than that of Rh2CoSb, which is in contrast with other isostructural Fe and Co intermetallics. A detailed comparison of the spin and orbital contributions for Rh2FeSb and Rh2CoSb deduced from ab-initio calculations is provided in the Supplemental Information. All the evidence illustrates that Rh plays an important role in the ferromagnetism of these ternary compounds. In fact, it has already been shown to carry an induced moment in binary Fe-Rh and Co-Rh alloys that is roughly one third of the 3d moment To reveal the site specific magnetic moments of Rh and Co, X-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) measurements were performed at the L2,3 edges of Co and Rh, respectively. The spin and orbital moments of each element The XMCD signal has the same sign in the spectra obtained at the Co and Rh L2,3 edges, which proves that the coupling between Co and Rh is ferromagnetic. The XMCD signal at the L3 edge for Co is considerably larger than that at the L2 edge, which indicates a sizeable orbital contribution. Sum rule analysis reveals that spin and orbital moments for Co are 1.53 ± 0.15 μB and 0.42 ± 0.04 μB, respectively. The orbital moment of Co in Rh2CoSb far surpasses that of elemental Co, where the value is 0.15 μB The spin and orbital moments of Rh obtained from the sum rule analysis are 0.28±0.03 μB and 0.020±0.002 μB, respectively, resulting in a total moment of 0.30±0.03 μB. These values account for the reduced photon polarization at high energies. Using these moments, together with those of Co, the total magnetic moment of Rh2CoSb should amount to 2.55±0.22 μB, which is in good agreement with the magnetic measurement of 2.6 μB. In many Heusler compounds, the martensitic transition from a cubic to a tetragonal structure is explained by a band Jahn-Teller effect By avoiding any such transition, Rh2CoSb is superior to other Rh2CoZ alloys for HAMR media. Our work will help to design new rare-earth free materials with strong uniaxial magnetocrystalline anisotropy, for which we need: 1) a low-symmetry crystal structure (tetragonal or hexagonal); 2) heavy atoms with a large spin-orbit interaction (4d, 5d or 5f elements); 3) another possible element with the right electronegativity to help stabilize the structure and help produce an advantageous electronic structure. The magnetic moments of heavy non-rare-earth elements are small at best. Therefore, the design rule for rare-earth free metallic magnets is to pair a 3d metal (Mn, Fe, Co) that can provide most of the magnetization with a heavy atom that supplies a large spin-orbit interaction. Rh, Ir, Pd and Pt are all possible choices, since they are in the same group as Co or Ni and they may exhibit a significant induced magnetization Ref. 16 reported the preparation of Rh2CoSb films by sputtering or ion-beam deposition between 373-873 K. A large perpendicular anisotropy was observed. Disorder is common in sputtered films. Our experiments indicate that the Rh is well ordered, but there might be some disorder between Co and Sb atoms. From ab-initio calculations, the most stable crystal structure for both ordered and disordered phases is the tetragonal D022 structure and the lattice constant is very similar. The total magnetic moment in the fully Co-Sb disordered state is about 20% larger compared to the completely ordered state. The orbital moment is nearly constant and independent of the degree of disorder, so the increase of the total moment is attributed to the spin moment. We compare Rh2CoSb with L10 FePt 5 for HAMR in Table Single crystal growth. The single crystals of Rh2CoSb were grown by the Bridgeman method. First, the high purity (> 99.99%) elements Rh, Co and Sb were cut into small pieces and arc-melted together to prepare polycrystalline samples. The initial atomic ratio of Rh, Co and Sb was 2:1:1.03. Additional Sb was added due to compensate for its high vapor pressure. From powder XRD data, there were always a few percent of a RhSb secondary phase in the polycrystalline samples. Hence the polycrystalline materials were heated up to 1600 K (above the melting point of RhSb at 1583 K) for 3 days to achieve a homogeneous liquid before beginning the single crystal growth, which took about 5 days during cool down to 1273 K. The composition of the crystals was checked by wavelength dispersive X-ray spectroscopy that showed a homogenous composition of Rh50.3Co25.6Sb24.1. The crystals were characterized by powder X-ray diffraction as single-phase with a tetragonal structure. The orientation of the single crystals was confirmed by the Laue method. Magnetization measurements. These were conducted on single crystals with the magnetic field applied along either the a or c axis using a vibrating sample magnetometer (MPMS 3, Quantum Design). The sample size was 3.80 0.78 1.30 mm 3 . For measurement with the field along the a axis, the sample was carefully immobilized with glue in view of the strong torque. High-field magnetization measurements were performed in the Dresden High Magnetic Field Laboratory using a pulsed magnet. Magneto-optical Kerr microscopy. Domain images were performed by using the polar Kerr effect in a wide-field magneto-optical Kerr microscope at room temperature with a polished 1 mm thick single crystal with (001) surface. Detailed description of the method can be found elsewhere Electrical transport measurements. The longitudinal and Hall resistivities were measured on a Quantum Design PPMS 9 using the low-frequency alternating current (ACT) option for data below 320 K. The longitudinal resistivity was measured with standard four-probe method, while for the Hall resistivity measurements, the five-probe method was used with a balance protection meter to eliminate possible magnetoresistance signals The accuracy of resistivity measurement is ±5%. Thermal transport measurements. The thermal conductivity and Seebeck thermopower were measured adiabatically in the Quantum Design PPMS using thermal transport option (TTO). The uncertainty of the radiative heat losses at high temperature and the uncertainty of the geometry is estimated as ±10%. Measurements are performed on a polished (001) crystal surface in a flow of helium vapor, using a mechanically sharpened Nb tip in the absence of an external magnetic field. Data are analyzed using the modified BTK model, as detailed elsewhere XMCD measurements. X-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) was measured at the beamline BL29 (BOREAS) of the synchrotron ALBA in Barcelona (Spain). XMCD spectra at the L2,3 absorption edges of Co and Rh were taken at a temperature of 25 K in a vacuum chamber with a pressure of 10 -9 mbar. The x-ray absorption spectra (XAS) were measured using circular polarized light with photon helicity parallel (μ + ) or antiparallel (μ -) to the fixed magnetic field in the sequence μ + μ -μ -μ + μ -μ + μ + μ -to disentangle the XMCD. An induction field of 6 T was applied along the c axis. The polarization delivered by the Apple II-type elliptical undulator was close to 100% for the Co L2,3 edges and 70% for the Rh L2,3 edges. The spectra were recorded using the total yield mode. The composition of Rh2CoSb single crystal has been identified by both energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) and wave length dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (WDX), which shows a homogenous composition. The average values and standard deviation are shown in the Table The quality and orientation of the single crystal were confirmed by Laue method, which shows clear spots in both c and a axes, fitting well with the simulation. The tetragonal structure was identified by both powder X-ray diffraction and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The data show that Rh2CoSb has a well-ordered tetragonal D022 structure with a = 4.0393 (6) Å and c = 7.1052 (7) Å. Here, the 4d (0 0 1⁄4) site is occupied by Rh, 2b (0 0 1⁄2) by Co, and 2a (0 0 0) by Sb. The tetragonal distortion is c/ a = 1.2436(3). Differential scanning calorimeter (DSC) and thermogravimetric (TG) analysis (see Fig. The single crystal magnetization curve along the c axis is shown in Fig. The Seebeck coefficient was measured both along c and a axes. From Figure The spin polarization P of the electrons at the Femi level was deduced from point contact Andreev reflection measurement at 2 K that is shown in Fig S10 . Data are analysed using the modified BTK model, as described in detail elsewhere Magneto-optical Kerr microscopy study shows the surface domains of a two-phase branched domain pattern of higher generation on the (001) surface, which is usually observed in uniaxial magnets. For such a pattern, the domain walls are aligned parallel to the c-axis only in the volume of the bulk crystal. When approaching the surface, the magnetization strictly follows the c-axis, but the domain walls does not follow, as shown in Fig. The electronic and magnetic structures of Rh2CoSb were calculated by means of the first principles computer programs Wien2k 2) Results. The electronic and magnetic structure calculations confirm the uniaxial magnetocrystalline anisotropy with Ku 1.4 MJ/m3 . A total moment of 2.19 μB is found from the GGA calculations using SPRKKR, the spin and orbital moments have values of 2.04 μB and 0.15 μB, respectively. From the spin and site resolved data, it is found that Co contributes per atom a magnetic moment of 1.81 μB of which about 0.14 μB is the orbital moment, and the major part of 1.67 μB is the spin moment. A small spin moment of about 0.2 μB and negligible orbit moment is carried by Rh. Both, anisotropy constant and magnetic moments are smaller than the experimental values. Indeed, Ku does not include any temperature or macroscopic magnetic effects e.g.: domains and domain walls. The orbital magnetic moment of Co is larger in the XMCD measurements. However, these measurements observe an excited state. Using the orbital corrected potential of Brooks Figures Table The superparamagnetic blocking radius Rh2CoSb has a mass density of ρ = 11 10 3 kg m -3 and its formula weight is 386.5 g mol -1 . We calculate the heat capacity to be Cp = 4 3R=100 J mol -1 K -1 or a volume heat capacity of Cv = 2.85 10 6 J m -3 K -1 . The time for each grain to cool down is calculated to be τV = Cv•A/λ. That is τV = 3.56 10 -12 s, when using a thermal conductivity of λ = 20 Wm -1 K -1 and assuming an area for each grain (5 nm in diameter) of A = 2. moment of 0.42 μB on Co that arises from hybridization with the surrounding Rh, where spin orbit coupling is strong. The magnetic hardness parameter of κ = 3.7 at