In recent years, metasurfaces composed of lumped circuit components, including nonlinear Schottky diodes, have been reported to be capable of sensing particular electromagnetic waves even at the same frequency depending on their waveforms, or more specifically, their pulse widths. In this study, we report analogous waveform-selective phenomena using only linear circuits and linear media. Although such linear metasurfaces are analytically and numerically demonstrated to exhibit variable absorption performance, it cannot strictly be categorized as waveform-selective absorption. It is due to the fact that the waveform-selective responses in the linear metasurfaces are originated from the dispersion behaviors of the structures rather than the frequency-conversion seen in nonlinear waveform-selective metasurfaces. We thus refer to these linear structures as pseudo-waveform-selective metasurfaces. Additionally, we show that the pseudo-waveform-selective metasurfaces have limited performance unless nonlinearity is introduced. These results and findings confirm the advantages of nonlinear waveform-selective metasurfaces, which can be exploited to provide an additional degree of freedom to address existing electromagnetic problems/challenges involving even waves at the same frequency. Artificially engineered subwavelength periodic structures, or so-called metamaterials The conventional nonlinear waveform-selective absorption mechanism is achieved in metasurfaces by using both rectification to zero frequency and transient responses in the time domain Equation ( For instance, the 1-ns pulse contains nonnegligible frequency components in addition to the oscillation frequency due to the discontinuity of the waveform at its beginning and end. Such spectral differences are exploited below. As opposed to the above structure, which contains nonlinearity, the metasurface reported in this study is composed of ideally linear circuits and linear media, although in practice, nonlinearity may need to be included to some extent. More specifically, its periodic unit cell consists of a ground plane (perfect electric conductor: PEC), a dielectric substrate (3-mm-thick Rogers 3003 but without dielectric loss for simplicity), conducting patches (PEC, 9 mm × 9 mm), and a lumped capacitor, inductor, and resistor with 10 mm periodicity (see Figure C and L can be adjusted not only by means of a periodically metallized pattern containing geometric capacitive and inductive components C 0 and L 0 but also by lumped circuit elements 1 (see also Equation ( To derive A P LS , suppose that b + and b -denote an incident waveform and a reflected waveform, respectively. Then, the energy spectral density of a reflected pulse E r is calculated as where † represents the conjugate transpose. Based on Parseval's theorem, Hence, the normalized energy spectral density of the reflected pulse, R P LS , is Since the normalized energy spectral density of the corresponding absorbed pulse, A P LS , is A P LS = 1 -R P LS , According to this equation, A P LS varies with b + . This absorption mechanism is different from the case of waveform-selective absorption, in which it is assumed that the incoming spectrum remains at almost a constant value (or at least is sufficiently narrow compared to the bandwidth of the structure). Nonlinear waveform-selective metasurfaces primarily exhibit variation in S 11 in the time domain. In contrast, for linear metasurfaces, it is impossible for A P LS to vary because S 11 remains the same unless b + itself changes. For this reason, we refer to the variations seen in Figure where ∆λ represents the operating bandwidth associated with wavelength, i.e., ∆λ = λ 1 -λ 2 . Under the assumptions that A M S = 1 -|S 11 | 2 , λ = c/f , where c is the speed of light, and the operating frequency f 0 is the central value between f 1 and f 2 (i.e., f 0 -f 1 = f 2 -f 0 ), Equation ( Equation In addition, linear structures also have poorer performance than nonlinear waveform-selective metasurfaces in terms of controlling long pulses. The pulse energies absorbed by the above linear structures are compared to those absorbed by nonlinear waveform-selective metasurfaces in Figure where R d = 2R 0 and R 0 is the effective resistive component of one of the diodes used. Note that Equation ( The Rozanov limit mentioned in Equations ( varied in the vicinity of 10 ns, but most Wi-Fi signals generated from commercial Wi-Fi modules have pulse widths of 50 μs or longer, indicating that the applicability of linear metasurfaces in the field of wireless communications is severely limited (see We have reported the absorption performance of linear metasurfaces using pulsed incident waves. We have shown that although they behave like recently reported nonlinear waveform-selective metasurfaces, which can exhibit absorptance variations even at the same frequency, these linear structures exhibit only pseudo-waveform-selective absorption behavior. Moreover, such pseudo-waveform-selective metasurfaces are found to have limited performance unless nonlinearity is introduced. This study has clarified the performance of linear waveform-selective metasurfaces and confirmed the advantages of nonlinear waveformselective metasurfaces, which can be exploited to provide an additional degree of freedom to address a range of electromagnetic problems/challenges involving even waves at the same frequency.