Understanding the detailed flame transport in IC engines is important to accurately predict ignition and combustion phasing, rate of heat release and assess engine performance. This is particularly important for RANS and LES engine simulations, which often struggle to accurately predict flame propagation and heat release without first adjusting model parameters. Detailed measurements of flame transport in technical systems are required to guide model development and validation. This work introduces an experimental dataset designed to study the detailed flame transport and flame/flow dynamics for spark-ignition engines. Simultaneous dual-plane OH-LIF and stereoscopic PIV is used to acquire 3D measurements of unburnt gas velocity (U ⃑ ⃑ gas ), flame displacement speed (S D ) and overall flame front velocity (U ⃑ ⃑ Flame ) during the early flame development. Experiments are performed in an optical engine operating at 800 and 1500 RPM with premixed, stoichiometric isooctane-air mixtures. Analysis reveals several distinctive flame/flow configurations that yield a positive or negative flame displacement for which the flame progresses towards the reactants or products, respectively. For the operating conditions utilized, S D exhibits and inverse relationship with flame curvature and a strong correlation between negative S D and convex flame contours is observed. Trends are consistent with thermo-diffusive flames, but have not been quantified in context of IC engines. Flame wrinkling is more severe at the higher RPM, which results in a broader S D distribution towards higher positive and negative velocities. Spatially-resolved distributions of U ⃑ ⃑ gas and S D are presented to describe in-cylinder locations where either convection or thermal diffusion is the dominating mechanism contributing to flame transport. Findings are discussed in relation to common engine flow features, including flame transport near solid surfaces. Findings provide a first insight into the detailed flame transport within a technically relevant environment and are designed to support the development and validation of engine simulations. In many combustion systems, such as spark-ignition (SI) engines, combustion efficiency is largely determined by the speed at which a flame transverses through a fuel-air mixture. Accordingly, one of the overarching goals in combustion science is to understand the detailed mechanisms of flame transport. In this context, we are concerned with the speed at which a wrinkled flame front traverses a certain distance. In turbulent combustion, the velocity of the flame front is denoted as the vector sum between local convection (U ⃑ ⃑ gas ) and thermal diffusion (S D ) in the flame normal direction (n ⃑ ) [1]: S D is commonly referred to as the flame displacement speed and is a central quantity in the understanding and modelling of turbulent premixed combustion While detailed investigations in laboratory-scale flames have provided a comprehensive understanding of flame dynamics in well-defined flame/flow geometries, flame behavior in technical systems (e.g. SI engines) is far less understood. In SI engines, we are not only interested in the intrinsic behavior of S D at high pressures, but also the capacity of U ⃑ ⃑ gas to provide a fast, efficient flame transport. Additionally, it is important to resolve the stochastic nature of U ⃑ ⃑ gas because previous studies have demonstrated that local flow variations can lead to favorable or unfavorable flame development, including misfires A comprehensive understanding of flame transport in SI engines requires detailed experimental measurements resolving the coupling between chemical reaction and the turbulent flow. Laser diagnostics such as flame imaging coupled with velocimetry measurements are well-suited to achieve this goal. Several investigations have utilized simultaneous flame-flow imaging methodologies in internal combustion (IC) engines Recognizing limitations in 2D measurements, Peterson et al. utilized a multi-planar approach to resolve local 3D flame displacement speeds in an optical engine The multi-dimensional, multi-parameter measurements presented in The work presented in this study expands on the measurements in Experiments were performed in a single-cylinder optically accessible SI engine (AVL). The engine is equipped with a 4-valve pentroof cylinder head, centrally-mounted spark plug, and quartz-glass cylinder and flat piston. Details of the engine are described in Ignition timing was chosen such that the OH-LIF and SPIV measurement quality was optimized. As the piston approached top-dead-center (TDC), the field-of-view (FOV) became much smaller, particularly for SPIV because the cameras operated at an angle relative to the imaging plane. Additionally, laser reflections at surfaces reduced SPIV quality near TDC, while higher gas temperatures near TDC reduced OH-LIF signal-to-noise ratios. At 800 RPM, measurements were optimized at -14 o CA (crank-angle degrees; referenced to TDC compression). Ignition at -19 o CA provided sufficient time (5 o CA or 1040μs) to initiate a flame kernel such that images captured the early flame kernel development when less than 5% of the mixture was consumed and the in-cylinder pressure was insensitive to the flame development. At 1500 RPM, an imaging timing of -18 o CA provided a similar in-cylinder pressure to -14 o CA at 800 RPM (11.1 bar). Ignition at -27 o CA provided 9 o CA (888μs) for flame development, which provided similar flame imaging conditions to those at 800 RPM (i.e. flame consumed less than 5% of the mixture and in-cylinder pressure was insensitive to flame development at image timing). These ignition timings provided optimal combustion stability (COV of IMEP < 2%) with indicated mean effective pressure (IMEP) greater than 5 bar. The experimental setup, shown in Fig. A half-wave plate and polarizing beam splitter were used to combine UV beams into two parallel paths. The beams travelled through focusing optics, providing two parallel UV light sheets (0.2 mm thickness) offset by 1 mm. A dichroic beam splitter combined the UV sheets with the path of the SPIV laser and directed the UV light into the engine. UV light sheets were offset by ∆z = ±0.5 mm on each side of the PIV light sheet (see Fig. An optical crank-angle encoder (AVL) was used to synchronize all lasers and cameras to the engine. The LIF systems were synchronized by a programmable timing unit (LaVision, PTU) to provide images at a fixed o CA. Each double-pulsed LIF system operated at 10 Hz providing two temporally resolved LIF images (t 0 , t 0 + ∆t LIF ) in each plane. The UV pulse separation (∆t LIF ) was set to 50 μs and 25 μs for 800 and 1500 RPM, respectively. For each RPM, ∆t LIF was optimized to detect clear movement of the flame front. LIF images were recorded at a fixed o CA after ignition; at 800 RPM, LIF images were recorded at -14 o CA, while at 1500 RPM LIF images were recorded at -18 o CA. The UV pulses for each laser system were offset by 400 ns to avoid cross talk between LIF images in each plane. SPIV lasers and cameras operated at 4.8 kHz to measure the three-component (3C) velocity field. At 800 RPM, SPIV measurements were recorded every o CA from -20 o to -2 o CA, while at 1500 RPM measurements were recorded every two o CAs from -28 o to -4 o CA. The pulse separation for SPIV (∆t PIV ) was 25 μs and 10 μs for 800 and 1500 RPM, respectively. The selection of ∆t PIV was chosen to achieve a maximum particle shift of 1⁄4 the final interrogation window size. The values of ∆t PIV and ∆t LIF differ because each technique detects the movement of separate substances (BN particle vs. OH layer) and because of the fundamental differences between SPIV and LIF processing approaches. When combined with LIF imaging, the first SPIV laser pulse was triggered ∆t PIV 2 ⁄ after the first UV laser pulse. LIF images were recorded every other cycle for a 200-cycle sequence, while SPIV images were recorded for 200 consecutive cycles. The absolute velocity of the flame front (U ⃑ ⃑ Flame ) is defined as the sum of the local unburnt convection velocity and the flame displacement speed relative to the flow in the flame-normal direction. This is shown schematically in Eq. (1) and in Fig. The image process procedure utilized to reconstruct a 3D flame surface and determine S D is described in It is recognized that OH is a post-flame gas. Thus, the maximum OH gradient is located behind the physical flame front reaction-zone. Calculations using a 1D flamelet simulation A NURBS spline interpolation The 3D flame displacement speed was determined by transporting the position of the flame front at t 0 , z = 0 mm by the local 3C velocity. The remaining distance between the transported contour and the nearest point on the reconstructed flame surface at time t 0 + ∆t LIF in the flame normal (n ⃑ ) is representative of the local displacement speed, S D . Local values were determined for individual points spaced 20 μm along the flame contour (i.e. pixel resolution) on the SPIV plane. The limited spatial resolution (80 μm LIF) is greater than the laminar flame thickness (δ L = 45 μm). The detected flame front in the measurements is therefore recognized as a spatially filtered quantity. SPIV images were processed with a commercial software (LaVision, DaVis 8.1). Spatial calibration and dewarping of the SPIV images were accomplished with a 3D target (LaVision, Type7). Selfcalibration was accomplished from 200 Mie scattering images before ignition and provided a remaining average pixel disparity less than 0.01 pixels. Image cross-correlation and vector calculations were performed with a decreasing window size multi-pass algorithm. The final interrogation window size was 24 x 24 with 75% overlap, providing a 0.15 mm vector spacing. Due to the limited spatial and temporal resolutions of each diagnostic, the quantities of S D , U ⃑ ⃑ Flame , and U ⃑ ⃑ gas reported in this work are considered to be filtered quantities. The effect of the limited measurement resolutions are discussed within Sect. 2.4. A detailed uncertainty and sensitivity analysis has been presented in Given the aforementioned uncertainties, a root mean square estimation for S D provides a 1σ uncertainty of ±1.5 m/s and ±3.0 m/s at 800 and 1500 RPM, respectively. Maximum uncertainties yield ±3.4 m/s and ±6.7 m/s at the respective RPMs. Peterson et al. also performed a rigorous sensitivity analysis on the calculation of S D Statistical distributions of the flow field and burnt gas locations are presented to provide an overview of the turbulent flow and flame environment in the SI engine. Figure Directly before spark timing, a clockwise tumble motion exists for both RPMs. At 1500 RPM, however, velocity magnitude is greater and the tumble center is shifted approximately 6 mm further to the right within the FOV. Differences of the tumble center location with RPM have been reported by the authors in previous work At the OH-LIF image timing, the flow patterns for each RPM are qualitatively similar, while higher velocity magnitudes are shown for 1500 RPM. The flow patterns exhibit a "sweeping" like flow motion from right-to-left in the lower-half of the FOV. This sweeping flow motion is primarily due to the piston movement towards TDC. For both RPMs, the highest velocities in the FOV exist southwest of the spark plug and are symmetrically centered near the cylinder axis (i.e. x = 0 mm). The upperhalf of the FOV exhibits lower velocity magnitude, particularly to the right of the spark plug where the tumble center is located. At 1500 RPM, the tumble center location is captured within the FOV, while at 800 RPM, SPIV images preceding -14 o CA suggest that the tumble center is located directly next to the spark plug and is not as clearly identified in the FOV. The burnt gas distributions exhibit several similarities between 800 and 1500 RPM. In brief, a flame develops radially outward from the spark plug with a greater tendency to propagate towards the exhaust side owing to the predominant left-to-right flow direction near the spark plug prior to ignition. At 1500 RPM, however, the enflamed gas region is larger and extends further towards the exhaust side of the cylinder. Before ignition, the tumble center location being further from the spark plug and the overall higher velocity magnitudes are such that the flow at the spark plug is more strongly directed towards the exhaust side of the cylinder for 1500 RPM than for 800 RPM. Higher velocity magnitudes at 1500 RPM transport the flame further from the spark plug, which is also responsible for the larger enflamed area in the negative y-region. For completion, RMS velocity fields are shown in Fig. Overall, the velocity and enflamed gas distributions presented in Figs. 4 and 5 demonstrate a similar initial flame development between 800 and 1500 RPM at the selected image timings. Thus, with similar thermodynamic conditions and only minor differences in flow patterns between 800 and 1500 RPM, the selected operating parameters provide a practical environment to study flame propagation for different convective velocity magnitudes and turbulence levels. In this work, values of S D , U ⃑ ⃑ gas , and U ⃑ ⃑ Flame are spatially measured along flame surfaces. PDFs of these velocities are presented in Fig. For each velocity, the magnitude and the direction relative to the flame normal are of interest. S D is always normal to the flame surface. Thus, the sign of S D will automatically determine its magnitude and direction relative to the flame surface; a positive S D indicates transport toward the reactants, while a negative S D indicates transport towards the products. The latter is identified as a negative flame speed. This phenomenon is discussed further in Sects. 4.1 and 4.2. U ⃑ ⃑ gas and U ⃑ ⃑ Flame do not have a fixed angle to n ⃑ . Within this manuscript, U ⃑ ⃑ gas and U ⃑ ⃑ Flame values are referred to as velocity magnitude and unless otherwise stated, they will always exhibit a positive value. U ⃑ ⃑ gas cos (α) and U ⃑ ⃑ Flame cos (β) velocities are used to indicate the direction relative to the flame normal. These velocities can be either positive or negative depending on the vector angle; positive velocities indicate transport towards the reactants, while negative velocities indicate transport towards the products. The vector angles α and β are calculated from the 3D projection of U ⃑ ⃑ gas and U ⃑ ⃑ Flame onto n ⃑ . Distributions of U ⃑ ⃑ gas cos (α) and U ⃑ ⃑ Flame cos (β) are also included in Fig. Referring to Fig. Although the PDFs presented in Fig. This section presents local distributions of S D , U ⃑ ⃑ gas , and U ⃑ ⃑ Flame resolved along flame contours to describe local flame transport. Section 4.1 discusses unique flame/flow interactions that yield positive or negative flame displacement for which the flame progresses towards the reactants or products, respectively. Section 4.2 presents locally resolved S D velocities with respect to 2D flame curvature to discuss flame dynamic behaviour that increases or decreases S D velocities. Finally, findings presented in Sect. 4.3 describe the in-cylinder locations where S D or U ⃑ ⃑ gas is the dominating mechanism responsible for flame transport. Within the following discussion we use the words 'convection' and 'thermal diffusion' to refer to U ⃑ ⃑ gas and S D , respectively. It is acknowledged that physical mechanisms such as mass diffusion, flow dilatation, and surface density can also contribute to S D . The Lewis number (Le) for the C8H18-air mixtures in this work is 1.99 (see Sect. 4.2). It is anticipated that thermal diffusion will have a more dominant role than mass diffusion. Several investigations (e.g. This section evaluates flame/flow interactions that describe the local flame displacement. This analysis is first presented for an individual engine cycle at 1500 RPM. Figure Figure For clarity and brevity, the detailed flame transport is described within a small flame segment highlighted by the rectangle shown in Fig. S D velocities (Fig. U ⃑ ⃑ gas velocities shown in Fig. Flame/flow interactions for all cycles are described in Fig. Data points in Fig. The data points in Fig.  Flame displacement is positive (i.e. U ⃑ ⃑ Flame cos(β) > 0) when α < 90 o and S D is a positive value. Such data is located in quadrant II. In this scenario, both convection and thermal diffusion work in unison to support flame displacement towards the reactants.  Flame displacement is also positive beyond α > 90 o when 0 < U ⃑ ⃑ gas S D ⁄ < 1. Such data is located in quadrant I. Although the convection velocity transports the flame towards the products in this scenario, the thermal diffusive velocity, directed towards that reactants, is always greater such that the overall flame displacement progresses towards the reactants.  Flame displacement has the highest (positive) value when α < 90 o and/or when thermal diffusion is more dominant than convection (i.e. 0 < U ⃑ ⃑ gas S D < ⁄ 1). This data is highlighted in dark blue in Fig. This occurs as the flame-normal convection velocity (U ⃑ ⃑ gas cos (α)) increases and contributes towards the positive flame displacement towards the reactants.  Flame displacement is negative when S D < 0 and α > 90 o . This data is located in quadrant IV. In this scenario, both convection and thermal diffusion transport the flame towards the products.  Flame displacement is also negative when S D < 0 and α < 90 o . Such data points are located in quadrant III where 0 > U ⃑ ⃑ gas S D ⁄ > -1. In this scenario, although convection transports the flame towards the reactants, thermal diffusion, which is directed towards the products, is the dominant velocity that leads to the negative flame transport. In quadrants I and III, positive or negative flame displacement can exist in regions of |U ⃑ ⃑ gas S D ⁄ | > 1 and is dependent on the values of U ⃑ ⃑ gas S D ⁄ and α. In particular:  In quadrant I, α > 90 o such that flame displacement will be positive as long as S D > U ⃑ ⃑ gas cos (α). In this scenario, thermal diffusion transports the flame towards the reactants, while convection opposes S D and transports the flame towards the products. The flame will propagate towards the reactants as long as the flame-normal convection velocity is less than the thermal diffusion transport.  As α increases in quadrant I, the convective transport, directed towards the products, will exceed the thermal diffusion transport directed towards the reactants. Flame displacement will become negative when U ⃑ ⃑ gas cos(α) > S D .  In quadrant III, S D transports the flame towards the products, while U ⃑ ⃑ gas transports the flame towards the reactants. Flame displacement will be positive as long as the flame-normal convection velocity is greater than thermal diffusion, i.e. U ⃑ ⃑ gas cos(α) > |S D |.  As α increases in quadrant III, the convection velocity towards the reactants decreases. Flame displacement will become negative when thermal diffusion towards the products exceeds the flame-normal convection velocity, i.e. |S D | > U ⃑ ⃑ gas cos(α). This analysis reveals the complex nature of flame transport and discusses the numerous flame/flow configurations that exist in the engine. The percentage of data for positive and negative U ⃑ ⃑ Flame cos (β) is reported in Fig. While the flame/flow interactions leading to positive or negative U ⃑ ⃑ Flame cos(β) values has been analyzed extensively, the large variation of S D values is less understood. In this section, S D is evaluated with respect to flame curvature (κ) to understand variations of flame speed along a flame contour in order to describe the S D distributions discussed in Sects. 3.2 and 4.1. Due to the limited zresolution, local flame curvature is evaluated in 2D using the relation where s is the curvilinear coordinate. For this definition, curvature is considered positive (negative) when the flame is convex (concave) towards the reactants. When analyzing each individual flame wrinkle, an inverse relationship between S D and κ becomes apparent. In particular, as κ decreases along concave flame wrinkles, there is a notable increase in S D , while for convex flame wrinkles there is a notable decrease in S D as κ increases. This inverse relationship is valid for both small and large changes in curvature (|Δκ| = 0.5 -3.0). In some locations, however, deviations from the inverse relationship between S D and κ can exist. For example, cycle 28 shown in Figs. For cycle 35, shown in Figs. The relationship between S D and κ is further evaluated for all engine cycles. In this analysis, the average derivative between the inflection point and the crossing at the κ = 0 axis is considered for each flame wrinkle as described in Eq 3. where Y indicates the parameter S D or κ, the subscript i indicates values at the inflection point, and subscripts 1,2 indicates values at the κ = 0 crossing. In this analysis, S D has units of m/s, κ has units of 1/mm and dx Flame has units of mm. The derivative for each data point along the flame contour is not considered because, as shown in Fig. Figure where subscripts E,D represent the excess and deficient species, respectively and A is defined as: where β is the Zeldovich number and φ is related to the equivalence ratio and is either equal to or greater than unity. The effective Le proposed in At 800 RPM, 16.7% of the data is located outside the region |dκ dx Flame ⁄ | ≤ 5, |d(S D ) dx Flame ⁄ | ≤ 10 (dashed rectangle). At 1500 RPM, the data is distributed within a larger domain and 35.6% of the data fall outside of this region. The PDF of κ along each contour point (100 cycles) is shown in Fig. It is important to emphasize that the notion of a negative S D does not pertain to rates of fuel consumption or heat release, but instead pertains to the flame displacement relative to the flow. Several experimental and computational studies have reported negative S D The data points shown in Fig. Thus far, the analysis has revealed the mechanisms that can lead to positive or negative, slow or fast S D and U ⃑ ⃑ Flame velocities. In this section we evaluate how U ⃑ ⃑ gas , S D and U ⃑ ⃑ Flame are spatially distributed throughout the FOV. In this section, U ⃑ ⃑ Flame is reported as a positive(negative) velocity if the flame is transported to the reactants(products). This is different than previous sections where U ⃑ ⃑ Flame was strictly positive and U ⃑ ⃑ Flame cos (β) (i.e. the flame-normal component) was evaluated as positive/negative to determine the velocity transport towards reactants/products. In this section, it is more meaningful to report the velocity magnitude rather than individual components, while still indicating the direction of the overall flame progression. Figure Region 2 is a general region directly above the piston and beneath the spark plug. R2 exhibits the sweeping flow motion as described in Sect. 3.1, for which velocity magnitude increases from right-toleft. Consequently as one progresses from right-to-left along the flame contour in R2, U ⃑ ⃑ gas exceeds S D , revealing that convection becomes the more dominating mechanism for flame displacement. Both individual cycles also show local regions of U ⃑ ⃑ Flame < 0 where convection opposes the flame normal (i.e. α > 90 o ) and exceeds thermal diffusion transport directed towards the reactants. Regions 3 is a general region containing the flame furthest to the left of the spark plug and towards the intake. The flame contour in R3 experiences the highest U ⃑ ⃑ gas velocities in the FOV. In some locations S D is comparable to U ⃑ ⃑ Flame , but otherwise S D is primarily less than U ⃑ ⃑ gas in R3. In most locations U ⃑ ⃑ gas and S D both transport the flame towards the reactants such that U ⃑ ⃑ Flame exhibits the highest (positive) values in R3. Thus, the flame typically experiences the fastest flame development in R3. Figure Figure The velocity maps (Fig. Below the spark plug in R2, Fig. The ratio U ⃑ ⃑ gas U ⃑ ⃑ Flame ⁄ and S D U ⃑ ⃑ Flame ⁄ are also extracted along individual flame contours. In this analysis, all velocities are considered to have positive values (i.e. purely velocity magnitude). Figure For each RPM, S D U ⃑ ⃑ Flame ⁄ values are consistently highest directly southeast of the spark plug and within R1. In these regions, U ⃑ ⃑ gas is the lowest and S D is the highest within the FOV. At 800 RPM, 50-60% of flame transport is governed by thermal diffusion in this region but decreases to 40-50% at 1500 RPM. The velocity maps shown in Figs. 14-16 are based on 100 engine cycles. As depicted in Fig. Grid cells with less than 10 data points only include velocity information from single cycles, however several cycles may make up the entirety of these regions. Regions with less than 10 data points are small and located along the perimeter of the spatial domain. Cells containing 10-20 data points typically include velocity information from 1-2 cycles. However, regions containing 10-20 data points per cell are large and 10's of cycles are located within such regions. For example, the region of 10-20 data within R3 contains 17 cycles for 800 RPM and 35 cycles for 1500 RPM. Similarly, the 10-20 region within R2 for 1500 RPM contains velocity data from 28 cycles. Other regions within R2 and R3 contain higher sample sizes per grid cell and comprise of even more cycles. On average, R1 contains the largest sample size per cell with up to 70-80 and 40-50 data points per cell for 800 and 1500, respectively. Overall, approx. 90% of the cycles contain a flame contour within R1 for both RPMs. The limited number of samples within the 100 cycles is a limitation within this work and will contribute to some of the spatial variance of the distributions shown in Figs. This work presents a novel experimental dataset to study the detailed flame transport within a homogeneous charged SI engine. Dual-plane OH-LIF and SPIV were performed to resolve the thermal diffusive and convective flame transport components in a thin 3D domain. Experiments were performed at 800 and 1500 RPM during early flame kernel development when less than 5% of the fuel was consumed. Ignition and image timings were carefully selected to provide similar thermodynamic conditions at each RPM, while the difference in engine speed provided a practical environment to study flame propagation for different convection velocity and turbulence levels. As engine speed increases, PDFs revealed that flame transport velocities show a broader distribution to both higher positive and negative velocities. Negative velocities indicate that the flame is transported towards the products rather than reactants. Analysis of flame/flow interactions was performed to describe the flame/flow configurations that lead to positive and negative flame transport. The overall flame transport is a result of the relationships between U ⃑ ⃑ gas , S D and their vector angle with the flame normal n ⃑ . While S D remains normal to the flame surface, the vector angle (α) between U ⃑ ⃑ gas and n ⃑ exhibits large variations, especially in regions of flame wrinkling. Positive or negative flame transport is depicted by the sign of U ⃑ ⃑ gas cos (α) and S D . When these velocities are positive, both U ⃑ ⃑ gas and S D participate to transport the flame towards the reactants and often yield the highest U ⃑ ⃑ Flame velocity. The measurements revealed several flame/flow relationships that describe the complex nature of flame development for turbulent flows within SI engines. S D was evaluated with respect to flame curvature (κ) to understand the variation of S D along flame contours. The flame speed behavior is consistent with that for thermo-diffusively stable flames. Analysis also shows a strong correlation between negative S D and convex flame contours. Until now, such flame dynamics have not been studied in detail within engine environments. Moreover, at the higher engine speed, more severe wrinkling was correlated to larger changes in S D , which describes the broader S D distribution towards higher positive and negative velocities. U ⃑ ⃑ gas , S D and U ⃑ ⃑ Flame velocities were analyzed in detail to understand their spatial distribution within the cylinder. This analysis provided the opportunity to quantify the relative contribution of convective and thermal diffusive flame transport within the FOV. The ratio S D U ⃑ ⃑ Flame ⁄ is greatest downstream the spark plug where unburnt gas velocities are lowest behind the spark plug and near the tumble center. Beneath the spark plug, a strong sweeping flow motion exists for which convection is the most-dominating mechanism of flame transport. Near the piston surface, cycles exhibit lower (and sometimes negative) S D , which may indicate local flame quenching. In combination with adverse convection transport, several locations with negative U ⃑ ⃑ Flame exist above the piston. As the flame enters into the intake domain of the cylinder, the flame/flow angle (α) is more aligned with n ⃑ and the flame is rapidly transported towards the reactants by U ⃑ ⃑ gas and S D . The flame in this region exhibits rapid flame development which likely demonstrates the transition from early flame development to the main combustion phase. Overall, the convection transport becomes greater in all regions at higher RPM. These measurements provide a first insight into the detailed 3D flame transport based on statistical analysis of instantaneous 3D time-resolved quantities within a technically relevant environment. While some local phenomena may be specific to this engine's operating conditions, most phenomena are described to common flow features (e.g. tumble, squish) in SI engines. Therefore, findings are anticipated to be a great use to the combustion and modelling community to predict more accurately the flame transport and subsequent heat release. The measurements also reveal the need to develop models that predict negative S d and U ⃑ ⃑ Flame velocities due to flame wrinkling, adverse convection and potential flame quenching near surfaces.