The old asperity model of Fuller and Tabor had demonstrated almost 50 years ago surprisingly good correlation with respect to quite a few experiments on the pull-off decay due to roughness of rubber spheres against roughened Perspex plates. We revisit here some features of the Fuller and Tabor model in view of the more recent theories and experiments, finding good correlation can be obtained only at intermediate resolutions, as perhaps in stylus profilometers. In general we confirm the predictions of the Persson & Tosatti and Bearing Area Model of Ciavarella, as stickiness depends largely on the long wavelength content of roughness, and not the fine features. Therefore, multi-instruments measurements should hopefully not be needed. Although there is no doubt that roughness has a crucial effect on many aspects of tribology, there are very few quantitative models today finding its role in details. This is true for the earlier attempts to describe roughness with "asperities" Perhaps one of the few exceptions to this general trend in tribology can be found in the mechanics of adhesion, where a very simple and very approximate model by In orther to further collapse the curves, a rather crude model was introduced based on the at the time popular model of "asperities", assuming a large number of largely spaced identical ones whose height follows a Gaussian distribution. However, in these models the asperity "radius" is a quantity hard to define 1/3 → 0 where σ th is theoretical strength, E * the plane strain elastic modulus, and R asp is the radius of the asperity. Here, l a = ∆γ/E * is an adhesive representative length scale, being ∆γ the nominal surface energy of the pair of materials in contact. Despite these strong approximations, FT experiments suggested quite good correlation with the model (see Fig. 10. This is quite remarkable but is surprising in view of the weaknesses of asperity models we know today. Can this be a pure coincidence? We therefore discuss some recent theoretical and experimental findings, commenting also the original FT results. There has been considerable effort after FT in modelling the role of adhesion in contact mechanics (see a review in ≃ πZ H q -H 0 and so it clearly depends on the long wavelength components and not the detailed measurements, as it is obvious. Let us then consider just the "threshold" of stickiness, i.e. the condition where pull-off between the two solids becomes zero, or anyway many orders of magnitude smaller than the value for smooth surfaces. For this case, very simple results are obtained using The two theories reach (almost) the same conclusion despite starting off from quite different perspectives, and neither of them has any parameter related to rms slopes or curvatures. PT obtain their simple model arguing with a energy balance between the state of full contact and that of complete loss of contact that the effective energy available at pull-off with a rough interface is where U el is the elastic strain energy when we squeeze the roughness flat, and A 0 is the nominal contact area. This elastic energy U el (ζ) generally depends on magnification, but converges quite rapidly (therefore eliminating the dependence on the smallest scales in the spectrum, those affecting slopes or curvatures) for the most general case of low fractal dimension, suggesting there is a true "fractal limit" to the adhesive contact problem, in agreement also with other, completely different theories, namely The FT asperity model leads to a single parameter encapsulating all parameters in the adhesion problem. Stickiness is virtually destroyed (more precisely pull-off is reduced exponentially by several orders of magnitude, see As we have anticipated, one parameter of the FT dimensionless factor 1 ∆c that clearly is very delicate to estimate is the asperity radius R asp . A "common" value is found in FT experiments (Tab.3) for the mean "radius" of the asperities of all "bead-blasted" surfaces despite the change of center line average roughness and density of asperities, having the quite round value R asp = 100μm, whereas it varies a little for the "abraded surface", as R asp = 150μm. The fact that the radius of asperities is a very "difficult" quantity to measure is well known and for any power law tail of PSD, is given as , where q 1 the upper truncating wavevector of roughness. The quantitative agreement between FT predictions and their experiments is therefore dependent on the choice of q 1 , and although R asp appears elevated to a power 1/3 which makes the dependence weaker, in today's view which makes it possible to measure various decades of roughness, a change of a factor 1000 in q 1 would mean ≃ 1000 (0.8-2)/3 = 6. × 10 -2 factor change in 1 ∆c . But let us discuss for the moment how the threshold (4) compares with more recent proposals (1, 2). Elaborating eqt.( i.e. typically for H = 0.8 Comparing therefore with the other theories (1, 2), we find, perhaps unexpectedly, exactly the same parametric dependence on the l a and λ L quantities, which means the same dependence on elastic modulus, surface energy, and longest wavelength in roughness of Persson-Tosatti and BAM. This is encouraging and may explain already partly the success of the FT model, despite the largely crude origins of the finding. However, we also find a spurious dependence on "magnification" ζ, and hence, exact correspondence between FT and PT stickiness thresholds occurs only when i.e. quite low magnifications. The comparison will be further elucidated in the next paragraph. The PT theory gives naturally not only the threshold but the full decay curve of pull-off (or surface energy), and in particular for the usual case of H = 0.8, or D = 2.2, we obtain under the power law PSD simplifying assumption For this case, the FT parameter (4) can be reinterpreted as and therefore the full Persson-Tosatti curve (8) can be written in terms of the FT parameter as Using the FT curve for the pull-off decay as taken from the original FT paper, we can compare it with the PT theory prediction (10) for ζ = 10, 100, 1000, in Fig. While the literature abounds of measurements of hard small particles adhesion, where the effect of elasticity is very limited, the measurements with soft materials like those in FT are scarce. A very detailed set of experiments, similar in principle to FT, has been discussed recently by This term Atrue A 0 or the surfaces of where γ 1 is the surface energy of the elastomer alone. Given Atrue A 0 ≃1.3 for all surfaces and they take γ 1 = 25mJ/m 2 , this correction corresponds merely to a decrease of all measured values of ∆γ ef f of a factor 7.5mJ/m 2 . This is probably why We shall attempt to apply the FT model, knowing that we expect the choice of the mean asperity radii R asp to be critical. Given the results in the previous paragraph, we anticipate the radii obtained with the full spectrum measured down to the atomic scale is too small. For example we may reduce the upper wavevector cutoff, which in the original data is q 1 = 1.6 × 10 10 m -1 , by three orders of magnitude to q ′ 1 ≃ 10 7 m -1 , approximately the limit of stylus profilometer investigations (see Fig. With this we don't want to suggest that FT parameter is a better choice than PT or Dalvi's modified form in general, as we are convinced that asperity models cannot be regarded as accurate today, and we prefer a model which is not sensitive to the measuring instrument. Indeed, it is not acceptable that the correlation with experiments becomes extremely poor outside the range we indicated. However, particularly in view of the fact that today there is consensus that stickiness depends mostly on the longest wavelengths in the power spectrum, it is reasonable to assume that the asperity model captures reasonably well the physics at those scales. This, at least, seems to explain why FT seemed to obtain a good correlation of their theory with experiments, at their time. Notice that, due to the large hysteresis, there is an additional complication in modelling retraction curves, and there is no attempt by Another recent paper on the subject was proposed by It may be instructive to do a quick calculation, since the full PT theory seems to involve integration processes over the full PSD curve which requires in general a digitalization. If we apply the PT theory as simplified for a pure power law PSD as in eqt.12 of Ciavarella (2020), assuming constants indicated in the 3 * 10 6 / (1 -0.5 2 ) 0.38 * 10 -3 2 * 0.8 -1 π * 0.8 = 2.4μm which gives the correct order of magnitude although not the exact value since it should be a rms-roughness between the 0.78μm and 1.73μm for surface 1 and 2. Given there are only two experimental points, it is not possible to compare with the FT theory, apart from the general considerations in the first paragraph. We have shown that part of the apparent quantitative excellent correlation between theory and experiment of the Fuller and Tabor asperity model paper was due to a correct functional dependences on the problem's parameters (mainly, elastic modulus), but part of it was certainly a coincidence in measuring the asperity radius with low resolution measurements. In fact, even in more recent experiments, the FT model would possibly give still good correlation if one uses simple measurement techniques like stylus profilometers. It has taken nearly 50 years after the original experiments of Fuller and Tabor, to have finally a clearer understanding of the issue of "scaledependency" of the roughness measurement in the model, although we still do not have a complete picture of of soft solids against rough surface, since the problem is complicated, as for example the Dalvi et al experiments suggest in the difference between the loading and unloading curve behaviour. As recent experiments have clarified that stickiness depends on the long wavelengths of spectrum, perhaps this explains the relative success of the Persson-Tosatti's theory which in the end is simpler than the Fuller and Tabor one. Complex multi-instrumental measurements of roughness over many decades of wavelengths should not generally be required. We neglect to consider the correction due to increase of surface area which is included in the original paper of