Transmission electron microscopy at very low energy is a promising way to avoid damaging delicate biological samples with the incident electrons, a known problem in conventional transmission electron microscopy. For imaging in the 0-30 eV range, we added a second electron source to a low energy electron microscopy (LEEM) setup, enabling imaging in both transmission and reflection mode at nanometer (nm) resolution. The latter is experimentally demonstrated for free-standing graphene. Exemplary eV-TEM micrographs of gold nanoparticles suspended on graphene and of DNA origami rectangles on graphene oxide further establish the capabilities of the technique. The long and short axes of the DNA origami rectangles are discernable even after an hour of illumination with low energy electrons. In combination with recent developments in 2D membranes, allowing for versatile sample preparation, eV-TEM is paving the way to damage-free imaging of biological samples at nm resolution. Electron microscopy, in particular Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM), has become a major tool for disciplines ranging from archaeology To acquire TEM micrographs at low energies, we have modified an Aberration-Corrected Low-Energy Electron Microscope (AC-LEEM) by placing a miniature electron gun (0-100 eV) The theoretical resolution of our system depends on the angular spread α of electrons contributing to the image, which can be adjusted with the contrast aperture (Fig. , with electron wavelength λ at the column energy E=15 keV, energy spread ΔE and the aberration coefficients C 5 , C C3 and C CC reported in is the same in both modes. (b) Resolution in aberration corrected LEEM and eV-TEM depends on the acceptance angle of electrons, which is adjusted by the contrast aperture. To determine the resolution of eV-TEM, a highmagnification micrograph of a few-layer graphene sample was recorded. For this, we first coated a holey silicon nitride (SiN) grid (2.5 μm holes, PELCO® Holey Silicon Nitride Support Film from Ted Pella) with 5 nm Pt/Pd. Using the polymer-free method described in In Fig. From the image in Fig. The experimental values for Δx are to be compared to the theoretical limit (Fig. Spectra were measured by scanning the electron energy from 0 to 75 eV and recording an image every 0.1 eV in LEEM and eV-TEM mode. From these datasets, we extract reflectivity (Fig. The spectra exhibit characteristic maxima and minima, which can be explained to a large extent by a simple toy model inspired by thin film optics In that model, the splitting of the reflectivity minimum (transmissivity maximum) around 5 eV has been understood as the destructive (constructive) interference of the electron wave function as it is partially reflected and transmitted from each graphene layer If we consider the broader trend over the probed energy range, we find that the reflectivity decreases roughly exponentially with energy, whereas the transmissivity reaches a minimum at approx. 28 eV. The increase in transmissivity towards higher energies signifies a slowly increasing MFP. The overall trend in transmissivity (disregarding resonant oscillations) is in qualitative agreement with the 'universal' MFP curve, which estimates the minimal MFP to be at about 30-40 eV. However, we also stress that the layer-oscillations seen below 20 eV are in striking disagreement this 'universal' curve Thin support films based on layered materials are common in TEM As a first high-contrast example, we imaged gold nanoparticles (10 nm diameter) in both LEEM (Fig. In Fig. To demonstrate the applicability of eV-TEM to biological samples, we imaged rectangular DNA origami molecules (Gattaquant Gatta-AFM nanorulers, http://www.gattaquant.com/products/ gatta-afm.html). We deposit an aqueous solution with DNA on graphene oxide and let it dry, as graphene oxide is hydrophilic and DNA origami can self-assemble on it. The sample was stored in the microscope load-lock vacuum chamber (pressure in range of 10 -8 mbar) for one week to allow outgassing of residues, as adsorbed water on the hydrophilic surface prevents imaging with low energy electrons (note that heating would disintegrate the DNA). The DNA origami patches appear as dark spots in the eV-TEM micrograph (Fig. In both modes we analyze line profiles across DNA origami patches, along the short and long axis of the feature. In the line profiles (colors in Fig. The eV-TEM micrograph (Fig. We have presented transmission micrographs of Au NPs and DNA origami, acquired at electron energies below 10 eV instead of tens to hundreds of keV as in conventional TEM. Thereby, eV-TEM circumvents the problem of electron beam damage to organic and biological samples to a large extent. As eV-TEM is an extension to the standard LEEM setup, we can readily switch between reflection and transmission images of the same area. Sample preparation does not require staining, as shown by depositing objects from solution on graphene and graphene oxide. Furthermore, we have examined the transmission and reflection spectra of few-layer graphene in the 0 to 75 eV energy range. Similar to many other materials ('universal' curve), the transmissivity increases at energies below the MFP minimum at about 30 eV. The characteristic oscillations in the spectra that we attribute to interference of the electron waves is not predicted by the 'universal' MFP curve. Further experiments will show if these oscillations generalize to other multilayer materials as expected for a simple interference phenomenon. It is noteworthy that similar oscillations have also been observed for hBN using LEEM Thus, eV-TEM provides new opportunities for damage-free imaging in transmission electron microscopy. As it operates in a very different energy range than conventional TEM, we expect new insights into biological matter such as proteins, DNA or cell membranes from eV-TEM. As realization of eV-TEM imaging capabilities requires only very modest modification of the sample holder and electronics, LEEM/PEEM instruments already in operation around the world can adopt this new technology at low cost.