Sodium ion batteries become popular due to their low cost. Among possible anode materials of sodium ion batteries, phosphorus has great potential owing to its high theoretical capacity. Previous research that yielded high capacity and long duration of phosphorus anode used expensive materials such as black phosphorus (BP) and phosphorene. To take advantage of the low cost of sodium ion batteries, we report a simple and low-cost method to fabricate anode: condensing red phosphorus on carbon xerogel. Even with large particle size (~ 50 μm) and high mass loading (2 mg cm -2 ), the composite cycled at 100 mA g -1 yielded a capacity of 357 mA g -1 or 2498 mAh g -1 P based on phosphorus after subtracting the contribution of carbon. The average coulombic efficiency is as high as 99.4%. When cycled at 200 mA g -1 , it yielded a capacity of 242 mAh g -1 or 1723 mAh g -1 P , with average degradation rate only 0.06% in 80 cycles. Our research provided an innovative approach to synthesize anodes for sodium ion batteries at extremely low cost, with performance exceeding or comparable to state-of-the-art materials, which will promote their commercialization. Sodium ion batteries (SIBs) have been attracting much attention due to abundant resources of precursors and the potential low cost. Phosphorus has a great potential to serve as the anode of sodium ion batteries owing to its high theoretical capacity (2596 mAh g -1 by forming Na3P) Various methods have been attempted to increase the capacity of phosphorous anode The principal strategy for making anode with P is to fabricate a conductive base that can help to transfer electrons and sodium ions into or out of phosphorus. This motivated us to use carbon xerogel to build a carbon network. Carbon xerogel is a carbon skeleton with interconnected porous structure and high surface area. Xerogel is similar to and sometimes regarded as a subcategory of aerogel which is attractive as electrodes for electrochemical double layer capacitors and electrosorptive processes In this paper, we report a method to condense red P on carbon xerogel to synthesize anode with low cost, high capacity, and good capacity retention. We mixed resorcinol with formaldehyde and carbonized the polymer at 1000 °C to obtain carbon xerogel. Carbon xerogel was sealed with red P in vacuum and heated up to 900 °C to condense phosphorus vapor on the carbon skeleton. The composite took advantage of the high conductivity of carbon and the high theoretical capacity of phosphorus. We achieved a maximum capacity of 2498 mAh g -1 P and degradation rate as low as 0.06% per cycle. In addition, we would like to note that xerogel has higher density than aerogel, which gives a good volumetric capacity as well. The fabricated electrode has a density similar to a graphite electrode. Our method is easy to implement with low cost, ready for commercialization to meet the large demands of energy storage. Carbon xerogel (CX) was prepared by a typical procedure 0.05 g of CX prepared in the previous step was sealed in a quartz tube with 0.05 g commercial red P. The tube was heated to 900 °C at a heating rate of 4 °C min -1 , and held for 4 hours for phosphorus to diffuse into CX. Next, the tube was cooled down to 280 °C at a rate of 1 °C min -1 and held for 24 h to convert white P that might be generated from red P during the previous high temperature back to red P. After cooled down, the product of phosphorus/carbon xerogel (P@CX) was washed by CS2 to remove any white P formed during condensation (Figure Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was conducted by a thermal analysis device TGA 5500 (TA Instruments) to measure the mass ratio of phosphorus in the P@CX composite. Samples were immersed in 25 mL min -1 nitrogen gas flow and purged for 30 min at room temperature prior to heating. Assuming that all phosphorus would evaporate when the temperature reached around 400 °C, we heated the samples till 500 °C which was sufficient to cover the range of interest The P@CX composite was granulated into powder by zirconium oxide beads in SpeedMixer. The powder (80 wt.%) was mixed with CMC-Na binder (10 wt.%), super P (10 wt.%) and water to make a homogeneous slurry. The slurry was pasted on 9 μm-thick Cu foil (MTI Corp.) and vacuum-dried for 4 hours at 60 °C. The electrode sheet, which had a total mass loading of about 2 mg cm -2 , was cut into disks. Next, the electrode disks were assembled to sealed 2032 type coin cells (MTI Corp.) with sodium metal counter and reference electrode and with a separator (Celgard 2320). The assembly was performed in an argon-filled glovebox (MBraun) containing less than 0.1 ppm oxygen and moisture. The electrolyte solution was 1 M sodium perchlorate (NaClO4) dissolved in a mixture (1:1, v/v) of ethylene carbonate (EC, Sigma Aldrich) and dimethyl carbonate (DMC, Sigma Aldrich). Fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC, 5 wt.%) and vinylene carbonate (VC, 1 wt. %) were added to stabilize and reduce the thickness of solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layers The TGA result in Figure The pores of the samples are characterized by nitrogen adsorption and desorption. Condensing phosphorus greatly reduces the Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) specific surface area from 591 m 2 g -1 (CX) to 118 m 2 g -1 (P@CX). As shown in Figure Here the stationary points are used to calculate the mass loss. (b) Pore size distribution, investigated by the density functional theory (DFT) method. The BET specific surface area of CX and P@CX is 591 m 2 g -1 and 118 m 2 g -1 , respectively. The scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of P@CX are presented in Figure Figure Our strategy is to use the carbon xerogel with interconnected skeleton for enhanced electron conduction and sodium ion transport, rather than relying on making particle size smaller to enhance the transport. Therefore, we purposely did not seek to granulate the material to finer powder. In fact, the large particle size and the high mass loading of 2 mg cm -2 place our electrode at a challenging situation. Despite these, we show that the electrode gives excellent performance. (c) Capacity and coulombic efficiency over 80 cycles, cycled at 100 mA g -1 (0.92 A g -1 P calculated based on phosphorus) between 0.01~1.5 V. Contribution of P is estimated by Eq. ( Figure As shown by our TGA result and previous studies on phosphorus/carbon hybrid To accurately calculate the phosphorus contribution in the composite, we need to subtract the contribution from carbon (CX). We obtain the capacity of phosphorus by Sodium ion batteries are attractive for the low material cost and the great potential to meet the need for cheap and efficient energy storage systems. In many previous reports of anode materials, expensive materials and sophisticated synthesis procedures are required to achieve reasonable capacity and duration. Otherwise, the capacity, duration and coulombic efficiency are impractical for real applications. We proposed a method to synthesize anode with good performance comparable with state-of-the-art materials but with extremely low cost and simple manufacturing process. In our P@CX material, the mass ratio of P was measured to be 10.85% by TGA. The reversible capacity is around 357 mAh g -1 at 100 mA g -1 and 242 mAh g -1 at 200 mA g -1 , with coulombic efficiency as high as 99.4% and 99.2% respectively. Subtracting the contribution of carbon, the capacity of P was estimated to be 2498 mAh g -1 P and 1723 mAh g -1 P at current densities of 0.92 A g -1 P and 1.84 A g -1 P , respectively. From the results we can conclude that carbon xerogel could help phosphorus to achieve high capacity. There still remains much room for improvement. Despite high capacity contribution from P, the capacity of the composite P@CX is not high enough due to low phosphorus ratio. Two major strategies can be implemented in future works: optimizing the carbon skeleton and enhancing the phosphorus condensation conditions. For the carbon xerogel, many parameters (e.g., precursor ratios, temperature and time) can be tuned to achieve higher surface area and thus more adsorption sites. The surface area could also be increased by carbon oxide activation . Cycled at 25 mA g -1 ~200 mA g -1 (calculated based on CX) between 0.01~1.5 V. The maximum capacity values are 96 mAh g -1 , 61 mAh g -1 , 44 mAh g -1 and 32 mAh g -1 , respectively, corresponding to C-rates of 0.26, 1.2, 2.3 and 6.2. 