The sensitivity of materials properties, particularly those of perovskite oxides, to epitaxial strain has been exploited to great advantage to create materials with new or enhanced properties. Although it has certainly been recognized that mismatch in the thermal expansion coefficients of the bulk and substrate material will contribute to the misfit strain, the significance of this contribution for ferroelectric perovskite thin-films has not been systematically explored. We use first-principles density functional theory and the example of ferroelectric PbTiO 3 thin-films on various substrates to show that ignoring the thermal expansion of the substrate (that is, assuming that the in-plane lattice parameter of the film remains roughly constant as a function of temperature) results in ferroelectric transition temperatures and structural trends that are completely qualitatively different from calculations in which thermal expansion mismatch is properly taken into account. Our work suggests that the concept of a misfit strain defined as a single number is particularly ill-defined for PbTiO 3 and invites further study of the interplay between thermal expansion mismatch and structural and functional properties in other thin-film materials. Strain engineering has been an enormously successful technique for tuning the ground-state properties of materials. The particularly strong coupling between the polarization and strain in ferroelectric perovskites It has been noted in previous work The full range of theoretical techniques have been used to explore the properties of strained thin-films, from first-and second-principles techniques We use density functional theory (DFT) and the quasiharmonic approximation (QHA) to reveal the critical role played by the mismatch in thermal expansion coefficients in giving rise to the structures of strained ferroelectric (P4mm) PbTiO 3 thin-films on SrTiO 3 , DyScO 3 and (La 0.29(5) Sr 0.71(5) ) A site (Al 0.65(1) Ta 0.35(1) ) B site O 3 (LSAT) as a function of temperature. Ignoring the in-plane thermal expansion of the substrate results in structural and transition temperature trends that are completely qualitatively different from those in which thermal expansion mismatch is properly taken into account. Our work illustrates how the structural and thermal properties of thin-films can differ significantly from bulk even when the initial misfit strain is nominally zero (PbTiO 3 on SrTiO 3 , for example) and provides a foundation for further development of recently proposed dynamical strain tuning strategies. All calculations were performed using density functional theory, as implemented in Quantum Espresso 5.3.0. Finite temperature structural parameters were predicted using a quasiharmonic approximation (QHA) to the Helmholtz free energy -in this study, we closely follow the framework outlined in Ref. The QHA only explicitly includes the contributions of phonon-strain coupling to thermal expansion, while neglecting phonon-phonon contributions. However, extensive testing by us in a previous study where a substrate (T ) is the lattice parameter of the substrate at some temperature T , and a bulk (T ) is the in-plane lattice parameter of bulk PbTiO 3 at the same temperature from our QHA calculations. Note that Equation Since cubic Pm 3m PbTiO 3 is unstable to both zone-center ferroelectric and zone-boundary distortions The misfit strain as defined in Equation 1 contains the effects of both lattice mismatch and thermal expansion coefficient mismatch. As a first step, we would like to separately understand the effects of each of these sources of stress on the lattice parameters and transition temperatures of strained ferroelectric PbTiO 3 thin-films. In other words, we would like to consider the misfit strain as a sum of two contributions, where ε T =300 a is the intrinsic lattice mismatch defined with respect to some temperature (we use the usual convention of 300 K). Films also experience a temperature-dependent thermal stress due to the mismatch in in-plane thermal expansion coefficients between the bulk (α bulk a ) and substrate (α a ). We denote the strain that arises from this source of stress as ε thermal a , where Equation 3 emphasizes that ε thermal a changes with temperature depending on the thermal expansion coefficients of the bulk and substrate material. In bulk, PbTiO 3 undergoes a phase transition from a cubic Pm 3m phase to a ferroelectric P4mm phase at ∼760 K. Figure Our results so far indicate that for the particular substrates considered here, α a is roughly the same for each substrate and so ε thermal a of Equation 2 is roughly the same. The properties of PbTiO 3 thin-films on SrTiO 3 (say) are different to those of PbTiO 3 on DyScO 3 because the initial lattice mismatch is different. The initial lattice mismatch does not just change the properties of thin-film materials, it changes how they change with temperature. For a given initial lattice mismatch, how-ever, what would the effect of changing α a be? That is, if we had two different substrates that imparted the same strain at 300 K but different α a , how would the properties of the films on those two substrates differ? The answer to this question is revealed by Figure Why does the thermal expansion coefficient of the substrate have such a significant effect on the properties of ferroelectric PbTiO 3 thin-films? How much does it change the misfit strain as a function of temperature? Figure Finally, we consider some of the broader implications of our results. Although all the substrates we considered have roughly the same, fairly low, thermal expansion coefficients, we can imagine how the structural and functional properties of ). Squares denote c-axis lattice parameters from our QHA calculations, circles denote a-axis lattice parameters (experimental data temperature upon cooling the system to room temperature results in a residual tensile strain in the SrTiO 3 ; the magnitude of this strain depends on the growth temperature. It would be particularly interesting to employ this strategy on a system that undergoes a phase transition in range of the growth temperature, to compare films relaxed above and below the phase transition. Our work helps build a theoretical basis by which to predict how this process, and other strategies for dynamical tuning of structural properties using thermal strain The results of our first-principles study of PbTiO 3 thinfilms show that both the intrinsic lattice mismatch and the thermal expansion coefficient mismatch play critical roles in determining how the structures and functional properties of PbTiO 3 thin-films evolve with temperature. We showed that when the in-plane lattice parameters of the substrate is held constant and the only difference between thin-films on different substrates is the intrinsic lattice mismatch at 300 K, the evolution of the c-axis with temperature is qualitatively different and can even change sign compared to results when the thermal expansion is taken into account. The intrinsic lattice mismatch does more than just specify the 'initial conditions' of the lattice parameters however, it also has important implications for how the lattice parameters of the film will change with temperature. Correctly capturing these responses is critical for understanding not only how the structural properties of the film evolve with temperature but also all the properties linked to the c/a ratio, such as the ferroelectric polarization. We further showed how transition temperatures and structural properties can qualitatively differ based on the thermal expansion coefficient of the substrate, even when the intrinsic lattice mismatch at 300 K is constant. While we expect that the ther-mal expansion mismatch plays an important role in giving rise to the structural properties of thin-films of materials other than PbTiO 3 , the magnitude of the effect will of course be different. This is because the materials properties most likely to control the microscopic mechanisms underlying the behavior discussed here -elasticity and vibrational effects -are material dependent. Understanding the microscopic mechanisms that drive these behaviors is an exciting avenue for future work, and we plan to explore these details in a forthcoming publication.