Spontaneous symmetry breaking constitutes a paradigmatic classification scheme of matter. However, broken symmetry also entails domain degeneracy that often impedes identification of novel low symmetry states. In quantum matter, this is additionally complicated by competing intertwined symmetry breaking orders. A prime example is that of unconventional superconductivity and density-wave orders in doped cuprates in which their respective symmetry relation remains a key question. Using uniaxial pressure as a domain-selective stimulus in combination with x-ray diffraction, we unambiguously reveal that the fundamental symmetry of the charge order in the prototypical cuprate La 1.88 Sr 0.12 CuO 4 is characterized by uniaxial stripes. We further demonstrate the direct competition of this stripe order with unconventional superconductivity via magnetic field tuning. The stripy nature of the charge-density-wave state established by our study is a prerequisite for the existence of a superconducting pair-density-wave -a theoretical proposal that clarifies the interrelation of intertwined quantum phases in unconventional superconductors -and paves the way for its high-temperature realization. From subatomic to cosmological length scales, spontaneously broken symmetry represents a conceptual cornerstone with broad relevance in fields such as physics, chemistry, biology and medicine. In condensed matter research, symmetry allows for the classification of matter and can often provide critical insights in their properties without knowledge of microscopic details A pair-density-wave (PDW) a superconducting state characterized by an order parameter that is spatially modulated in such a way that its spatial average vanishes is a major contender for such a mother state We address this experimental constraint by employing a domain-selective stimulus to unambiguously establish the existence of unidirectional CDWs in cuprates. This is illustrated in Fig. Our key finding is that application of uniaxial pressure applied to La 1.88 Sr 0.12 CuO 4 (LSCO) lifts domain degeneracy (see Fig. Charge-density-wave order manifests itself, in Labased cuprates, by satellite reflections at Q = τ + q i . Here τ represents fundamental lattice Bragg peaks and q 1 = (δ, 0, 0.5) and q 2 = (0, δ, 0.5) with δ ≈ 1/4 reciprocal lattice units 9,15-17 using lattice parameters a ≈ 3.8 ≥ b and c ≈ 13.2 Å. In-plane pressure along the b-axis produces a compressive (C b i ) strain. In turn, tensile strains propagate along the orthogonal in-(T a i ) and out-of-plane (T c o ) directions (Fig. We find that a c-axis magnetic field has no impact along the C b i direction. The CDW order remains completely suppressed even in a 10 T magnetic field (Fig. The enhanced charge order diffraction intensity is insensitive to the applied stress magnitude. We find that a strain of a = 0.01% is enough to trigger the stripe order structure (Fig. This incommensurability effect could indicate a uniaxial-pressure-induced change of orthorhombic structure On a phenomenological level, charge-density modulation δρ(r) structures are described by where r is a two-dimensional spatial coordinate. The am- plitudes |Φ x | and |Φ y | are non-zero for biaxial structures. Stripe order, by contrast, refers to the case with only one non-zero amplitude. For diffraction experiments, domains of stripe order is virtually indistinguishable from biaxial structures. Further more, the amplitudes are doubling across both a biaxial to stripe order transition and the detwinning of stripe order. The detwinning or biaxial to stripe order transitions are captured by a simple Ginzburg-Landau Hamiltonian: where κ 1 , κ 2 , α, β, γ and ∆ are phenomenological parameters First and foremost, our study reveals charge stripe order in LSCO in its purest form. Notably, we demonstrate that stripe order that is coupled with unconventional superconductivity is an intrinsic electronic property of underdoped cuprates. In the limit of static charge stripe ordering, coupling to superconductivity is a key condition to realize an exotic PDW state Beyond the cuprates, unconventional superconductivity and charge ordered states such as CDWs and electronic nematic states are coexisting or neighbouring in many material classes such as the iron pnictides Methods: High-energy (100 keV) x-ray diffraction experiments were carried at the P21.1 beamline at PETRA III (DESY) on La 1.88 Sr 0.12 CuO 4 single crystals (T c = 27 K) grown by the floating zone method Our uniaxial pressure device (See Extended Data Fig. Extended Data Figure 