The development of super-hard materials has recently focused on systems containing heavy transition metal and light main group elements. Niobium carbides and nitrides have previously been identified as potential candidates, however, the volatility of carbon and nitrogen during synthesis make them prone to formation of anionic vacancies, which have the ability of changing the electronic structure, dynamical stability and adversely affecting the mechanical properties. Here, we present ab initio Density Functional Theory calculations that probe the occurrence of anionic vacancies as a function of concentration, thereafter, pertinent mechanical properties are investigated. Our results showed that the presence of anionic vacancies in NbC and NbN tend to deteriorate the mechanical properties and ultimately the mechanical hardness due to vacancy softening that can be attributed to defect induced covalent to metallic bond transition. Further, it was observed that anionic vacancies in NbC tend to modify its toughness, in particular, NbC in ZB becomes brittle while NbC in WZ becomes ductile in presences of C vacancies of up to 6%. On the other hand, the toughness of NbN was found to be insensitive to defect concentration of even up to 8%. Consequently, stringent control of anionic defects during synthesis of NbC and NbN is critical for realization of the desired mechanical response that can make these materials ideal for super-hard and related applications. Increased demand for hard materials whose performance in the ultra-hard materials industry is comparable or better than that of diamond but with low cost has inspired research and development of compounds that incorporate light elements such as carbon and nitrogen with 3d, 4d or 5d transition metals Indeed, studies have shown that TMCNs are a promising alternative towards achieving low cost, robust, and versatile hard materials Synthesis of TMCNs generally occurs at elevated temperature and pressure Despite the substantial amount of work already focused on TMCNs, there are still open questions that are yet to be addressed. For example, the effects of anionic vacancies concentration on the mechanical properties and relevant mechanisms towards achieving better control of such defects are still unclear, yet this is necessary for tailoring these materials for mainstream applications All calculations reported in this work were performed using ab initio DFT approach by solving the Kohn-Sham equation Generalized gradient approximation (GGA) has been used to describe the exchange correlation energy as proposed by Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) Reliable vacancy formation energies are obtained by adopting larger supercells that ensure errors stemming from vacancy self-interaction are minimized. Here, we consider supercells of 3x1x1; 24 atoms, 2x1x1; 32 atoms, 3x2x1; 48 atoms, 2x2x2; 64 atoms, and 2x3x2; 96 atoms. The preferred defect site was determined by calculating the defect formation energies for the various sites and the site with the lowest formation energy considered to be preferred and was used in the subsequent calculations, as shown in Figure Using these parameters, optimization of defective structure was conducted using the optimized bulk lattice parameters as a starting point. The vacancy formation energy is calculated as shown in equation 1, As shown in Figure under equilibrium conditions. In carbides, the RS phase was found to favour carbon vacancies formation, compared to other phases, although, with increase in defect concentration, formation energies tend to increase (towards positive), as shown in Figure On the other hand, the anionic defects in NbN tend to favour WZ phase compared to other phases considered in this work. a general observation is that with a rise in defect concentration, there is a corresponding increase of the formation energy (more positive) though mildly up to 8%, thus defect occurrence at higher concentration is not anticipated. Whereas RS and ZB phases report higher formation energies compared to WZ phase, anionic vacancy defects occurrence is generally not favoured in these phases, as shown in Figure Generalized Hooke's law provides parameters that can be used to investigate the mechanical response of materials via the stress-strain relationship. Elastic constants are essential parameters that give insights into the relationship between crystal structure, bonding, and stability. In this work, elastic constants are determined by introducing small distortions on the cell and then relaxed via energy minimization The elastics constants investigated in this work were found to be sensitive to defect concentration, and in all cases a decrease in magnitude of elastic constant is observed with increase in defect concentration. In the case of pristine structure, our calculated lattice and elastic constants were found to be consistent with those of previous studies Thus, the non-directional stress leads to a small change in the values of these elastic constants. It is further established that, C11 and C33 for NbN in WZ, and C12 for NbC in ZB showed significant reduction, for example of up to 54 % in case of C11 for NbC in ZB phase compared to pristine value, as shown in Figure In the case of WZ phase, increase in the vacancies concentration tend to strongly affect C11 with a decrease being observed in NbC, as shown in Figure Similarly, in NbN, C33 decreases with increase in vacancies concentration, while other elastic constants are only mildly affected, as shown in Figure This study also explored dynamical stability of the various phases considered using phonon calculations, where phonon dispersion curves were obtained at arbitrary wave-vector of the Brillouin zone. If a crystal lattice with n-atoms per unit cell is considered, then 3n branches NbC (RS, ZB, and WZ structures) and NbN (WZ) are insensitive to presence of C and N vacancies, respectively, and remain dynamical stable, as shown in Figure Mechanical properties such as bulk modulus (B), shear modulus (G), and Young's modulus (E) are essential in predicting the applications where materials such as NbC and NbN can be used. These are determined using the Voight-Reuss-Hill approximation Where and (4) With k=G/B being Pugh's ratio while G V and G R are Reuss and Voigt shear modulus, respectively. Using the elastic constants, it is possible to predict Vickers hardness (HV) of materials and despite the challenges associated with assessment of hardness, fitting functions based on the calculated B and G values have proved reliable in prediction of intrinsic hardness of a wide range of materials Both shear modulus and Vickers hardness showed a decrease in magnitude with increase in defect concentration beyond 1.5%, consistent with other mechanical properties considered in this work, as shown in Figure In the presence of defect concentration of up to 8%, our systems of interest would still be classified as hard material (with HV > 0). However, hardness is significantly deteriorated in all structures considered and they may not perform well in hardness related application. For example, NbC in RS structures loses hardness by up to 36 % at 8% defect concentration when compared to pristine structure. Therefore, we can deduce that stringent control of defect concentration in TMCNs is essential for their utilization in hardness related industries. Toughness is another critical parameter that measures the degree of plastic deformation (ductility) of a solid under mechanical loading and can be used to predict the robustness of the materials. In this work, ductility is analyzed using the Pettifor criterion Changes that occur in bonding due to anionic vacancies not only affect the bond-lengths but also modify the electronic structure. In this work, we analyzed projected density of states (PDOS) of pristine and defected structures shown in Figure In summary, this study has investigated in detail through ab initio DFT simulations the effect of anionic vacancies on the mechanical, elastic and some electronic properties of NbC and NbN in RS, ZB and WZ structures as well as their dynamical stability. The formation of low concentrations of anionic defects was found to be favoured in NbC, while their occurrence in NbN can only be achieved under non-equilibrium conditions. The phonon dispersions curves of pristine niobium carbide and nitride showed that NbC (in RS, ZB, and WZ structures) with NbN in WZ structure are dynamically stable while NbN (in RS and ZB structures) are dynamically unstable. Additionally, NbC (in RS, ZB, and WZ structures) and NbN (in WZ) are insensitive to presence of C and N vacancies, respectively, and remain dynamically stable whereas NbN in RS and ZB becomes dynamically stable with the presence of N vacancies. Our results showed that the presence of C and N vacancies in NbC and NbN, respectively leads to an overall depletion in bulk modulus, shear modulus, Young's modulus, elastic constants, and Vickers hardness. For instance, the Vickers hardness of NbC in RS is reported to have been reduced by 36% in the presence of anionic vacancies at 8% defect concentration. The deterioration of the mechanical properties can be attributed to vacancy softening due to decrease in the number of covalent bonds and increased occupation of anti-bonding states. The states at the Fermi level tend to increase slightly with increase in C/N vacancies and these can be associated with rise in dd bonding states between Nb atoms with decrease in C/N content. Further, it was observed that anionic vacancies in NbC tend to modify its toughness; in particular, NbC in ZB becomes brittle while NbC in WZ becomes ductile in the presences of C vacancies of up to 6%. The toughness of NbN was found to be generally insensitive to defect concentrations of upto 8%. Therefore, stringent control of anionic defects in NbC and NbN is critical for their optimal mechanical response.