Modern nanophotonics has witnessed the rise of "electric anapoles", destructive interferences of electric dipoles and toroidal electric dipoles, actively exploited to cancel electric dipole radiation from nanoresonators. However, the inherent duality of Maxwell's equations suggests the intriguing possibility of "magnetic anapoles", involving a nonradiating composition of a magnetic dipole and a magnetic toroidal dipole. Here, we predict, fabricate and observe experimentally via a series of dark field spectroscopy measurements a hybrid anapole of mixed electric and magnetic character, with all the dominant multipoles being suppressed by the toroidal terms in a nanocylinder. We delve into the physics of such exotic current configurations in the stationary and transient regimes and predict a number of ultrafast phenomena taking place within sub-ps times after the breakdown of the hybrid anapole. Based on the preceding theory, we design a non-Huygens metasurface featuring a dual functionality: perfect transparency in the stationary regime and controllable ultrashort pulse beatings in the transient. Over the past few years, all-dielectric nanophotonics has become one of the cornerstones of modern research in nano-optics The ability to properly describe and predict electromagnetic scattering is of prime importance to manipulate the behavior of light at the nanoscale. For this purpose, different types of electromagnetic multipole expansions were introduced The electric toroidal dipole is now widely exploited in nanophotonics and metamaterials, active photonics In the aforementioned scenario, an anapole state corresponds to a scattering minima from a given multipole channel Furthermore, the vast majority of the investigations on anapole states are limited to the electric dipole term only Spherically symmetric structures are unable to support hybrid anapole states Here we design and demonstrate experimentally for the first time the existence of such exotic states, schematically illustrated in Figure We fabricate a series of individual silicon nanocylinders supporting the effect and validate experimentally our theoretical predictions via dark field spectroscopy measurements. Contrarily to a conventional anapole state, the hybrid anapole preserves its nonradiating nature in the presence of any dielectric substrate. We unveil the physical mechanism behind such a counterintuitive effect, and demonstrate its breakdown in the transient regime, where the spatiotemporal maps reveal relevant changes in the beating pattern of the decaying modes that explicitly depend on the substrate refractive index. Finally, based on the preceeding theory, we design and demonstrate a dual-functional metasurface consisting of hybrid anapole particles displaying full transparency in the stationary regime, and highly tunable spatiotemporal response in the transient one. The analysis of the optical response of a nanoparticle is usually carried out via the decomposition of the scattering cross section as a sum of multipoles, which represent independent scattering channels of the object. Here we utilize the irreducible Cartesian multipole expansion derived in Ref. Here we have denoted th n order electric or magnetic moments with () e P and () m P and corresponding electric and magnetic toroidal moments with For the sake of clarity, in the rest of the manuscript, we will rely on the widespread notation for low-order multipoles, i.e. p , m for electric and magnetic dipoles, and () e Q , () m Q for electric and magnetic quadrupoles. Under conventional plane wave illumination, hybrid anapole states of homogeneous spherical particles are hidden by the contributions of high order multipoles Let us consider a cylindrical silicon nanoparticle in air. Starting now, we will use amorphous silicon (a-Si) in both theoretical and experimental studies (for details refer to the Supporting Information). The illumination scheme is presented in the left inset of Figure ) corresponds to the hybrid anapole state. (c) Left plot: measured (solid lines) and simulated (dashed lines) scattering spectra of single isolated nanocylinders with different diameters D. The spectral positions of the hybrid anapoles are indicated by the colored regions. Right plot: SEM micrographs of the corresponding nanocylinder samples. The colored edges in each micrograph are associated to the legend entries in the measurements. (d) Amplitudes and phase differences between the multipoles and their toroidal counterparts. Panels from left to right, respectively: the basic electric and electric toroidal dipoles, the basic magnetic and magnetic toroidal dipoles, and the basic electric and electric toroidal quadrupoles. Amplitudes correspond to the left ordinate-axis, and phase differences are read from the right ordinate-axis. The design methodology is based on the following: We note that the spectral positions of the full (basic and toroidal parts) electric dipole and magnetic quadrupole anapoles are mainly dependent on the cylinder's radius, while the wavelengths of the full magnetic dipole and electric quadrupole anapoles change both as functions of the cylinder height and radius. Figure The total scattering cross section and its multipole decomposition after the numerical optimization are shown in Figure The different panels in Figure To confirm our theoretical predictions on the novel hybrid anapole state, we have carried out direct scattering spectroscopy measurements for a set of standalone nanocylinders with tailored dimensions in the optical spectral range (Figure , where the most pronounced hybrid anapole state results in a large drop in scattering efficiency, of almost two orders of magnitude, rendering the nanocylinder virtually invisible. We note that the other dips indicated in the measured spectra also correspond to hybrid anapoles, although their overlap is not as much pronounced, but still results in a significant scattering reduction. Noteworthy, the near-zero values of the full scattering coefficients do not imply the induced polarization currents in the particle to be also close to zero. This is in agreement with the usual anapole behavior While Cartesian multipoles are suitable for the description of far-fields, in this section we employ the natural QNM expansion (2) Here ( ) ( )  and  are, respectively, the induced modal scattering current distribution as a function of the internal mode field, the excitation coefficient of the sth mode describing its contribution to the total current at a given frequency, and the permittivity contrast with the host environment. We use a modified version of the freeware MAN developed by the authors of Ref. The results of the QNM expansion are displayed in the different panels of The spectral behavior of each resonant QNM is described by a Fano lineshape In Figure A completely different picture arises within the resonator. Figure The electric field distributions of the 120 TE and 113 TM modes are shown in Figure where uv z is the th v root of the th u Bessel function of the first kind for TE modes, or its first derivative for TM modes. For FP modes, 0  and the denominator in Eq. ( As a final remark, we point out that the quality factors of the 120 TE and 113 TM modes in the structure are, respectively, 12 and 33. A direct comparison with the 120 TE supporting a conventional anapole disk (see Supporting Information) shows that the quality factor of the 113 TM mode at the hybrid anapole is more than four times larger. Therefore, we anticipate much better performance of the hybrid anapole for second and third harmonic generation processes with respect to conventional anapole disks, since nonlinear scattering cross sections scale linearly with the quality factors of the modes involved We will now proceed to illustrate in detail a novel effect, unique to the hybrid anapole, by which its nonradiating nature can be preserved in the stationary regime when deposited on any dielectric substrate. We then exploit the underlying mechanism behind the phenomena to modulate the transient response of the isolated nanocylinder. In comparison with any other scattering phenomena including conventional anapoles, the hybrid anapole state is remarkably robust in the presence of a substrate. This particular behavior is illustrated in Figure The standing wave pattern of the 113 TM resembles a one-dimensional Fabry-Perot cavity on a dielectric substrate. The QNMs of this simplified model has the advantage of being analytically solvable Equation ( With proper normalization, and employing the notation of the inset in Figure  (see Supporting Information for details). Plane waves reflected from the substrate are thus decreased with decreasing index contrast. Consequently, the same occurs to the lower field maxima of the 113 TM . While this prediction is observed in the simulations for relatively low contrasts, the behavior at very small contrasts is very different (see the case with 3 s n = in Figure Contrarily, it is noteworthy that even comparably small contrast (3 -3.87) leads to enough contribution of the 120 TE mode to still preserve the scattering dip (see Figure While the effect might not seem remarkable at first glance, it opens the possibility to realize ultrafast time modulation of the scattered signal in the transient regime. To illustrate this novel concept, we outline here a temporal coupled mode (TCM) scheme to model the transient behavior of the resonator with a set of linear equations: , In the absence of incident radiation (all 0 i s + = ), the solution of Eq. ( The colorbars are saturated for better visualization. where the characteristics of the mode beating of the system can be fully grasped. At high contrasts, the 113 TM mode leaks from the resonator, and a well-defined beating pattern is observed. The beating is even along the x-axis, reflecting the symmetry of the fields of the dominant modes. At lower contrast, the decreased contribution of the 113 TM mode leads to damping at longer times. This is explained by the smaller Q-factor of the 120 TE mode, which results in a shorter transient. The potential that transient modulation offers can be fully exploited in practice by fabricating metasurfaces inheriting (and enhancing), the single particle mechanism described in the previous section. In particular, the effect can be harnessed to design fully transmissive, all-dielectric metasurfaces without relying on the well-known Huygens condition Each term in the previous sum is proportional to the corresponding total multipole moment (basic and toroidal contributions). When Eq. ( In analogy with the single particle behavior, the metasurface induces ultrafast beating of the scattered field in the transients at the beginning and the end of a plane wave pulse (see Figures The sub-ps relaxation times of the metasurface, together with the high substrate sensitivity of the transients, opens an exciting pathway towards the spatiotemporal control of ultrafast dynamic effects. Among the interesting perspectives, ultrashort laser pulses can be effectively modulated in time by tailoring the transient phenomena. The high substrate sensitivity can be exploited in order to dynamically tune the transient response of the metasurface in different temporal regimes by selecting the appropriate modulation technology In the stationary regime, we have theoretically predicted and experimentally confirmed the existence of hybrid anapoles, exotic non-scattering states requiring the simultaneous destructive interference of electric and magnetic cartesian multipoles with their toroidal counterparts. For the first time, dynamic toroidal quadrupoles, as well as magnetic anapoles have been confirmed experimentally in isolated subwavelength nanoparticles. In order to broaden our knowledge of anapole electrodynamics beyond the electric dipole approximation, we have developed a solid physical picture In the transient regime, the prior analysis has allowed us to design at will the breakdown of the hybrid anapole conditions to obtain ultrafast modulation of the scattered power. The present theory shows that efficient spatiotemporal control of the transients mediated by the underlying substrate can be achieved, while maintaining scattering in the stationary regime at vanishing level. Following the established theoretical guidelines, we propose and verify numerically a non-Huygens, subwavelength metasurface obeying the same principles and therefore featuring a double functionality: (i) substrate-independent full transparency in both amplitude and phase mediated by the hybrid anapole in the stationary regime, and (ii) ultrafast, substrate-dependent signal modulation in the transient regime, mediated by its breakdown. The necessary changes in the substrate refractive index to observe appreciable modifications of the transient response of the metasurface are found to be well in the range of available technologies for dynamic tuning 