Spectral behaviors of photonic resonators have been the basis for a range of fundamental studies, with applications in classical and quantum technologies Photonic resonators appearing in myriad forms ranging from macro-scale to nano-scale have been the mainstay of light-based fundamental studies and applications Strong nonlinearities in photonic resonators can lead to a variety of rich phenomena. Nonlinear driven dissipative systems existing in non-equilibrium steady states exhibit self-organization Other salient examples include behaviors in laser systems Specific to the parametric oscillation regime, a variety of nonlinear dynamical behaviors has been predicted and demonstrated such as bi-stability, self-pulsation, limit-cycles Phase transition marks a universal qualitative regime change in system properties as the control parameter is varied around a critical/transition point Realizing phase transitions based on the optical parametric processes can provide unique opportunities for sensing. For instance, in phase-transition-based detectors and transition-edge sensors Spectral phase transitions in OPOs can also open opportunities for computing and quantum information processing. Phase transition occurring at the oscillation threshold of OPOs has been utilized as a promising computing resource in optical Ising machines Phase transition occurring in the spectral domain can provide additional computing capabilities in them or enable similar non-Von Neumann computing architectures operating in the spectral domain. In this work, we consider a doubly-resonant OPO The driving is accomplished by the synchronous pulsed pump centered around the frequency 2ω 0 , while the resonant signal and the idler constitute the longitudinal modes of the resonator centered around the half-harmonic frequency (ω 0 ).The interaction among the modes is engendered by the quadratic non-linearity (Fig. The inherent coupled nature of the signal and idler in a doubly-resonant OPO gives rise to rich nonlinear dynamics including the appearance of bi-phase states around degeneracy In the CW-driven high-finesse limit, the OPO is governed by the mean-field evolution equation: where, a describes the signal envelope under the slowly varying envelope approximation limit. Here ξ, t refers to the slow time and the fast time respectively where Γ = ∆φ + β2 2 (δω) 2 . Analyzing the eigenvalue (growth rate) (Eq(2b)) of the linear stability matrix we arrive at two scenarios. First, when sgn(∆φ) =sgn(β 2 ), we find that the most unstable frequency of oscillation is δω = 0, and the corresponding threshold (i.e. when λ + = 0) is |g| th = α 2 + (∆φ) 2 , leaving the OPO in the degenerate phase. However, when sgn(∆φ) = -sgn(β 2 ), the most unstable frequency of oscillation is given by δω , and the associated threshold is |g| th = α, leaving the OPO in the non-degenerate phase. This can be understood as cavity detuning (∆φ) counterbalancing the GVD induced detuning in the nondegenerate regime. This can happen for positive cavity detuning in the anomalous regime, where GVD induced detuning is negative and they cancel exactly at ω 0 ± δω, thereby experiencing more gain in the non-degenerate phase resulting in OPO selecting non-degeneracy over degenerate oscillation. This proves the existence of the spectral phase transition which is demonstrated in Fig 2 . The spectral phase transition takes place around the detuning, ∆φ = 0. The behavior in the normal GVD regime (Fig. We further characterize the quadratic OPO around the phase transition point (Fig. When two OPOs are coupled, the transition from degenerate to non-degenerate operation can occur as a first-order phase transition. presence of the coupling, the competition between the two second-order phase transitions (as shown by the gain curve in Fig. The demonstrated spectral phase transitions can be described by the universal Swift-Hohenberg equation which is also known to govern nonlinear pattern formation dynamics For the Kerr OPO, we consider a conservative system governed by the nonlinear Schroedinger equation. ∂A ∂z = -i β2 e) The spectrum considering the wavelength experiencing the maximum gain around which the signal/idler is centered. At the first-order transition, there is a discontinuous jump from the non-degenerate spectrum to the degenerate spectrum. nonlinear co-efficient and β 2 stands for the second order GVD co-efficient. Degenerate parametric oscillation can be realized in a Kerr medium using dual pumps (Fig. ) and possesses a detuning of ∆ from the center of degeneracy. Owing to the symmetry, we assume the parametrically generated signal (A s ) and idler (A i ) to be detuned by δω from the center of degeneracy. We express the field as given by the following expansion: A(z, τ ) = A 1 e i∆τ + A 2 e -i∆τ + A s (z)e iδωτ + A i (z)e -iδωτ . Parametric gain at the onset of the phase conjugation parametric process can be determined via a linear stability analysis. The growth rate due to phase conjugation parametric process can be expressed as e λz (a) Figure where λ is given by The spectral phase transition is shown in Fig. The presented spectral phase transition can also be utilized in computing architectures. For example, in the OPObased Ising machines, which have been strictly operating at degeneracy so far Tuning the spectrum of parametric oscillation between degeneracy and non-degeneracy is a well-known concept, and the same is achieved by manipulating the phase matching curve via temperature, voltage control, etc. The presented spectral phase transition is in sharp contrast to intensity-dependent bifurcation ubiquitous in nonlinear optical systems. The spectral bifurcation doesn't arise due to the gain saturation induced nonlinearity (see Supplemental Section 9) In summary, we have performed complete characterization of this second-order phase transition both in the temporal and in the spectral (optical and radio-frequency) domain. Experimental results are backed by numerical simulations of the underlying spatio-temporal phenomena and corroborated using mean-field analytical descriptions. We have shown that some of the non-equilibrium spectral behaviors of OPOs can be formulated as a universal phase transition. The semi-classical spectral phase transition considered in this work can be extended to the quantum regime below threshold opening a path toward a quantum phase transition in the spectral domain. The ability to engineer the dispersion of integrated χ (2) and χ (3) devices The nonlinear interaction inside the PPLN waveguide is governed by: The evolution of the signal(a) and the pump(b) envelopes in the slowly varying envelope approximation are dictated by (4a) and (4b) respectively Eq To explain the spectral phase transition phenomenon numerically and analytically we adopt a two-pronged approach. First, we develop a mean-field model in the high finesse, CW driven limit and provide an analytical description for the occurrence of the spectral phase transition. This model, though does not inherit all the characteristics of the synchronously pumped optical parametric oscillator, is able to encapsulate the qualitative nature of the spectral phase transition. Secondly, we calculate the eigenvalue which is related to the gain of the signal/idler per roundtrip by assuming the pump in the OPO to be effectively CW having an average power being equal to the peak power of the pump pulse (see Supplemental Section 4) For Kerr OPO, the evolution of the optical fields in the non-resonant Kerr nonlinear medium is governed by the nonlinear Schrodinger equation. The larger eigenvalue ( λ) of the linear stability matrix of the phase conjugation nonlinear interaction determines the gain and is obtained in the undepleted pump approximation (see Supplemental 