Using a new class of (BH4) -substituted argyrodite Li6PS5Z0.83(BH4)0.17, (Z = Cl, I) solid electrolyte, Li-metal solid-state batteries operating at room temperature have been developed. The cells were made by combining the modified argyrodite with an In-Li anode and two types of cathode: an oxide, LixMO2 (M = 1⁄3 Ni, 1⁄3 Mn, 1⁄3 Co; so called NMC) and a titanium disulfide, TiS2. The performance of the cells was evaluated through galvanostatic cycling and Alternating Current AC electrochemical impedance measurements. Reversible capacities were observed for both cathodes for at least tens of cycles. However, the high-voltage oxide cathode cell shows lower reversible capacity and larger fading upon cycling than the sulfide one. The AC impedance measurements revealed an increasing interfacial resistance at the cathode side for the oxide cathode inducing the capacity fading. This resistance was attributed to the intrinsic poor conductivity of NMC and interfacial reactions between the oxide material and the argyrodite electrolyte. On the contrary, the low interfacial resistance of the TiS2 cell during cycling evidences a better chemical compatibility between this active material and substituted argyrodites, allowing full cycling of the cathode material, 240 mAhg -1 , for at least 35 cycles with a coulombic efficiency above 97%. Besides other storage means, to date, batteries are considered among the best candidates to store energy. In particular, nowadays, the Li-ion technology offers the best compromise between reliability, cost, and energy density. However, developments are still needed for this latter technology to fulfill the energy density targeted by the market of electric vehicles (EV). In this regard, the solid-state battery (SSB) is considered the most promising candidate providing high energy and power with improved safety. Indeed, SSB are expected to mitigate some hazards related to the use of current liquid organic electrolytes (flammability, dendrite formation with Li, Solid Electrolyte Interface (SEI) growth) and to allow for thinner electrolyte layers, allowing higher power and energy densities. The enhancement on the performance of SSBs ties in closely with the development of solid electrolytes (SE), providing a high ionic conductivity, a sufficient electrochemical stability, and chemical compatibility with the active materials Among the range of inorganic SEs, sulfides are excellent candidates due to their high ionic conductivity (as high as 10 -2 S cm -1 ) at room temperature (RT) and high lithium transference number (~1) Recently, borohydride-based solid electrolytes have been reported showing high ionic conductivity near room temperature In a previous work, we reported a new type of argyrodite in which the halide Z -ions are partially substituted by (BH4) -units. The SE is prepared by mechanical milling of argyrodite precursors (Li2S, P2S5, and LiZ) and LiBH4, with a molar ration LiBH4/LiZ of 1/6 Reagent-grade Li2S (Sigma Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA, 99.98%), P2S5 (Sigma Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA, 98%), LiBH4 (Rockwood Lithium, Geesthacht, Germany, 97.8%), LiCl, and LiI (Sigma Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA, 99.99%) were used as precursors. Powders were mixed in stoichiometric ratio to form the nominal compositions Li6PS5Cl0.83(BH4)0.17 (Cl-SE) and Li6PS5I0.83(BH4)0.17 (I-SE). To prepare the electrolytes, 1 g of mixture of the reactants was milled under argon atmosphere in a planetary ball-milling equipment (Pulverisette 7, Fritsch, FRITSCH GmbH Idar-Oberstein, Germany ) at 600 rpm for 20 h using 25 stainless balls (ρ = 7.8 g cm -3 ) of 7 mm in diameter. More details about SE preparation can be found elsewhere For the high-voltage cell, commercial LiMO2; M = 1⁄3 Ni, 1⁄3 Mn, 1⁄3 Co (NMC, Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA, 98%) was used as active material. The practical capacity for NMC is 175 mAhg -1 (i.e., 0.6 Li) due to the non-uniform conductivity of LixMO2 at different states of charge Solid-state cells were assembled by pelletizing together 3-5 mg of the cathode mixture and 80 mg of the solid electrolyte (either Cl-SE or I-SE) in a 10 mm diameter die applying 2 tons. A bilayer of Li and In foil (250 μm and 100 μm thickness) was placed with the In-side facing the solid electrolyte. The Li-In|SE|cathode materials were assembled in a home-made sealed Teflon Swagelok cell and conditioned overnight at 75 °C to form the In-Li alloy The electrochemical performance of the cells was evaluated by galvanostatic cycling. The rate capability of the NMC and TiS2 cells was evaluated on a multichannel battery tester (MPG-2, Biologics, Seyssinet-Pariset, FRANCE ) in the 2.0-4.0 V and 0.8-2.2 V range, respectively, at the following C-rates: 0.02 C, 0.2 C, 0.1 C back to 0.02 C for NMC; 0.01C, 0.5C, 1C back to 0.01 C for TiS2. The NMC cell was cycled at 25 °C and 40 °C to study the impact of the temperature upon cycling. The In-Li anode has been used to decrease the reduction potential by 0.6 V vs. Li/Li + thus limiting the reactivity with TiS2 Figure Figure The EIS of the TiS2|I-SE|In-Li cell was recorded at 25 °C before and after 20 cycles (Figure Electrochemical properties obtained at 25 °C for the different cells studied in this work (σ: ionic conductivity of the solid electrolyte; CE: coulombic efficiency; R1, ZW1 and ZW2 are defined in Figure The SSBs using substituted argyrodites either with NMC or TiS2 as active cathode materials have been cycled for up to thirty-five cycles. Several differences at the performance level of the cells were found as a function of the cathode material. Regarding potential, the measured voltages were in line with the used active materials, in the range of 3.2-3.8 V for NMC and 1.3-1.9 V for TiS2 (vs. In-Li + /In-Li). Both batteries presented plateau-like behavior though sloping effects were observed. For NMC, this can be related to the interface between the oxide cathode and the sulfide electrolyte, where a space-charge layer can form as result of their different chemical potentials. This layer creates a large interfacial resistance, leading to a potential slope prior to the delithiation plateau of the oxide electrode in the charge profile as reported in Using the same anode and electrolyte, it is worth comparing the behavior of the two studied active materials in the light of their different chemistry. TiS2 behaved much better than NMC in SSBs using the borohydride-substituted argyrodites as electrolyte. Looking to the EIS measurements, R1 and Zw1 showed comparable values for NMC (with both Cl-and I-SE) and TiS2 (with I-SE) that agreed well with the assignment of R1 to the electrolyte and Zw1 to the charge transfer resistance at the anode. This was not the case for Zw2, and such differences were indeed caused by the cathode counterpart for which the resistive values Zw2 were much higher for NMC (up to 62 kΩ) than for TiS2 (around 3 kΩ). Such a difference can be attributed to two phenomena. First, given its poor cycling efficiency, the cathode rapidly forms a mixture of LixNMC at different lithiated states, having very high resistivity variations (i.e., 10 -7 Scm -1 for x = 0 and 10 -2 Scm -1 for x = 0.75, as reported by Amin et al. The electronic conductivity of the In-Li alloy was of the order of 10 -6 Ohm cm and therefore the resistance Zw1 was mainly attributed to Li diffusion at the anode-electrolyte interface. For NMC, the values were around 1.1 kΩ increasing up to about 1.8 kΩ after 20 cycles, independently of the SE nature (Cl-SE or I-SE). Surprisingly, although the cathode chemistry was not expected to play a role at the anode/SE interface, the values of Zw1 appeared lower for TiS2 (170 and 118 Ω, respectively). The main difference between cell impedances remained for the cathode counterpart. Recently, solid-state batteries using metallic or complex hydrides as anodes or electrolytes have been reported In summary, using a new class of (BH4) -substituted argyrodites Li6PS5Z0.83(BH4)0.17, (Z = Cl, I), room temperature solid-state batteries have been set up by combining NMC or TiS2 cathodes with In-Li anodes. The use of oxide cathode allowed developing batteries with high voltage and good nominal capacity, but the cell suffered from interfacial reaction at the cathode side, leading to a strong resistance increase and fading of the reversible capacity over cycling. This might have been overcome by coating the active material with a protective layer (e.g., LiNbO3) The following are available online at www.mdpi.com/xxx/s1, Figure 