Chemical interaction and changes in local electronic structure of Cr, Fe, Co, Ni and Cu transition metals (TMs) upon formation of an Al 8 Co 17 Cr 17 Cu 8 Fe 17 Ni 33 compositionally complex alloy (CCA) have been studied by X-ray absorption spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. It was found that upon CCA formation, occupancy of the Cr, Co and Ni 3d states changes and the maximum of the occupied and empty Ni 3d states density shifts away from Fermi level (E f ) by 0.5 and 0.6 eV, respectively, whereas the Cr 3d empty states maximum shifts towards E f by 0.3 eV, compared to the corresponding pure metals. The absence of significant charge transfer between the elements was established, pointing to the balancing of the 3d states occupancy change by involvement of delocalized 4s and 4p states into the charge redistribution. Despite the expected formation of strong Al-TMs covalent bonds, the Al role in the transformation of the TMs 3d electronic states is negligible. The work demonstrates a decisive role of Cr in the Ni local electronic structure transformation and suggests formation of directional Ni-Cr bonds with covalent character. These findings can be helpful for tuning deformation properties and phase stability of the CCA. During the last 15 years, a new emerging family of metallic alloys, i.e. high entropy alloys (HEAs) and compositionally complex alloys (CCAs), revealed outstanding mechanical properties, thus great potential for many applications opening a new door for modern alloy design. In the review by Miracle & Senkov, However, the substantial lack of experimental and theoretical data appears to be a large obstacle to further development of the multi-principal element alloy design strategy, because of the tremendous amount of possible HEA/CCA compositions. For the same reason, answering the question about the individual roles of each element in HEA/CCA formation is of primary importance. Thus, the development of fundamental approaches based on revealing chemical roles of alloying elements, especially their role in electronic structure, are imperative. Recent studies have already drawn attention to the prediction of HEA/CCA mechanical properties on the basis of electronic structure properties of alloying elements, such as the valence electron concentration (VEC) parameter. Opposite results were obtained by Sheikh et al. for a bcc refractory HEA (RHEA) using an electron theory: "Intrinsically ductile RHEAs can be developed by alloying elements from group VI or group V, with elements from group V or group IV, or in other words by decreasing the number of valence electrons (s + d electrons), in single-phase bcc solid solutions". In the current study we attempt to reveal these fundamentals behind HEA and CCA formation by focusing on an fcc structured Al been selected because i) it shows a simple fcc structure, and ii) it is single-phase at a large temperature window (about 900 -°C), segregating in a twophase system only below °C. The alloy is studied along with its corresponding pure transition metal ( In Figure Differences in reflection intensities are given by preferred crystallite orientation. Le Bail refinements were performed, Besides the main L 3 and L 2 features, the spectra of Ni (Figure Noteworthy, comparison of the Fe and Co spectra of the CCA acquired in TEY and FY modes demonstrates good agreement between the bulk (FY mode) and surface (TEY mode) signal as the edges positions remain the same. Here and in the following, a spectrum edge position is defined as the inflection point of the edge. In contrast to the Fe and Co spectra, the CCA spectra of Cr, Ni and Cu deserve more attention. Comparative analysis of the TEY Cr(CCA) and pure Cr (Figure Another candidate to cause the aforementioned modifications in the Ni(CCA) spectra (Figure In order to obtain more detailed information on the observed transformation of the local electronic structure of the TMs upon CCA formation, an integral intensity and branching ratio analysis of the NEXAFS spectra was carried out. NEXAFS originates from transitions of electrons from a core level to empty electron states and the resulting NEXAFS spectrum is proportional to the X-ray absorption cross-section of the excitation process. According to the Fermi's golden rule, the cross-section is proportional to the density of empty states and the dipole matrix element squared or, in other terms, spectral density of the oscillator strengths. The integrated value of the latter equals the total number of electrons in the system. In order to extract the information about the occupancy change, an integral intensity analysis was carried out. The contribution of the resonance part ( p → 3d) to the total intensity of the NEXAFS L 2,3 spectrum was separated from the p → continuum absorption by subtraction of the two step-like functions representing the electron transition from 2p 3/2 and 2p 1/2 core electron states to continuum. Additional information on 3d states can be obtained through analysis of the branching ratio (BR) of the L 2,3 spectrum: BR = I(L x )/(I(L 2 )+I(L 3 )), where I(L x ) is the integrated intensity of the resonance part of L x (x = 2, 3) edge. The BR parameter is known to be very sensitive to the ground state symmetry. The BR values derived in this work (Figure The observed energy displacement of the NEXAFS spectra can be induced either by energy shift of the initial 2p level or/and by energy redistribution of the final empty 3d states. In order to shed light on the behavior of the occupied 3d states upon CCA formation, XPS measurements of the valence bands were performed for the CCA and CCA sans Al. Besides, a VB spectrum was recorded from an additional specimen -CCA sans Cr (Al 9.6 Co 20.4 Cu 9.6 Fe 20.4 Ni 40 ) -in order to assess the influence of Cr on the occupied Ni 3d states. The VB spectra are presented in Figure Contribution of the TM 4sp states and the Al sp states to the spectra can be neglected due to the low σ i values compared to those of the TM 3d states. Comparison of VB(CCA), VB(CCA sans Al) and VB(CCAsansCr) with the VB(Ni) spectrum demonstrates that the maximum of the alloys VB spectra is displayed to higher binding energy relatively to VB(Ni). For the CCA, the spectrum maximum is shifted by ∆ = . ± . eV. The VB(CCA sans Al) spectrum has no significant difference from VB(CCA). Removal of Cr from the CCA composition, preserving elements concentration ratio, leads to a decreased shift (∆ = . ± . eV) between the VB (CCA sans Cr) and VB(Ni) maxima. To finalize the overall picture of the Ni 3d DOS redistribution upon alloys' formation, the VB spectra of the alloys were compared to the corresponding Ni L 3 -edge spectra, including the Ni L-edge spectrum of CCA sans Cr (Ni(CCA sans Cr)) (Figure First of all, the Ni(CCA sans Cr) spectrum is shifted only by . ± . eV compared to the pure Ni spectrum. This is a relevant decrease to the Ni spectrum shift relatively to the already observed 0.60 ± . eV shift of Ni(CCA) and Ni(CCA sans Al) spectra (Figure The performed comparison of the CCA and CCA sans Cr VB and L 3 -edge spectra allows concluding that the presence of Cr is the main reason for the Ni 3d states density redistribution upon CCA formation. The results obtained by NEXAFS analysis of the CCA and its precursors clearly show that, although Al has the lowest electronegativity and the highest nominal atomic radius among the alloyed elements in the CCA, Al influence on the 3d states of the TMs (i. e. the 3d bands occupancy and empty states density distribution) is negligible. One can, therefore, conclude that Al-TMs interaction in the CCA does not involve any significant transformation of the TMs 3d bands upon alloying. This fact suggests two possible cases of the Al-TMs bonding: i) the TMs 3d states are involved in the Al-TMs bonding but an even distribution of Al atoms around the TMs atoms results in blurring of the Al-TM bonding influence on the 3d states; ii) the Al-TMs chemical bonding in the CCA does not involve the localized 3d states of the TMs. Considering the fact that directional Al-TM bonding in Al binary and ternary alloys with 3d TMs is reported to occur generally through mixing of Al 3sp and TM 3d states and redistribution of electrons between the states, Nevertheless, this suggestion seems to be barely acceptable due to the Al-TM chemical preference in the CCA reported previously by Fantin et al.: higher affinity of Al for heavier 3d metals in the CCA with the Al-Ni preferred pair and less preferable Al-Cr and Al-Al pairs were found in the CCA. The established in the Ni 3d states DOS unambiguously imply decrease in the Ni 3d states density at E f due to the CCA alloying, which is shown in the proposed scheme. Noteworthy, similar behavior of Ni 3d states was previously found and theoretically predicted in Ni-based binary alloys with 3d TMs having higher electronegativity compared to Ni (Sc, Ti, Cr, Mn). The performed analysis revealed that Cr and Ni are the most affected elements, in terms of 3d states structure transformation by the alloy formation of the CCA. The preference of Cr to bind with smaller TM elements, amongst them Ni, is corroborated by the findings of Fantin et al. on the same alloy by means of EXAFS analysis. Interestingly, despite the 3d occupancy variation of TMs, charge neutrality of TMs atoms is preserved. This can be rationalized by previously offered concepts for TM alloys: intraatomic redistribution of electrons (e.g. between Ni 3d and Ni 4p states) The presence of such bonding can be decisive for tailoring of the material deformation properties as the bonds with uneven distribution of bonding charge density introduces anisotropy into the material matrix resulting in shear modulus increase, change in the grain boundary cohesive strength with variation in the material ductility and micro-hardness. The performed NEXAFS and XPS study of Al 8 Co 17 Cr 17 Cu 8 Fe 17 Ni 33 allowed for the first time to experimentally investigate electronic structure and chemical interaction of the elements in a compositionally complex alloy. It was established that the Ni 3d band gains electrons along with the redistribution of the DOS upon CCA formation: the occupied and empty Ni 3d states density maximum shifts away from E f by 0.5 and 0.6 eV, respectively, resulting in pseudo-gap formation. The Cr 3d band transformation upon alloying is opposite to that of Ni: occupancy of the band decreases and the maximum of the empty 3d states shifts slightly by 0.3 eV towards E f . Besides these transformations, the Cu 4s states with admixture of Cu 3d states symmetry (3d/4s) gain electrons, the Co 3d band loses electrons and the Fe 3d band preserves the structure of the empty states and the band occupancy upon alloying. According to the XPS analysis, the net charge transfer between the elements is negligible, despite the observed changes in the 3d bands occupancy. This fact is rationalized by compensation of the changes in the 3d states occupancy by redistribution of delocalized s-and p-electrons of the TMs in a way that the net charge flow on and off sites in the alloy is absent. It was found that Al contribution to the 3d electronic structure changes is negligible, despite the expected Al-TMs covalent bonding. The most noticeable changes in the TMs electronic structure are attributed to the chemical interaction of Ni and Cr atoms and formation of directional bonds with covalent character, which result in occupancy change and DOS redistribution of the Ni and Cr 3d bands. The presence of such bonding in the CCA is expected to make possible tailoring the material deformation properties by varying covalent character of the Ni-Cr bonds. The L 2,3 NEXAFS spectra were acquired in a wide energy range: at least 50 eV (100 eV for the pure metals spectra) below the absorption edge and 60 -100 (150 eV for the pure metals spectra) eV above the absorption edge. Normalization of the NEXAFS spectra was performed in two steps using the software ATHENA 1 : i) pre-edge background removal ii) edge step normalization using a polynomial function interpolated far above the edge region. Contribution of the resonance part ( p → 3d) to the total intensity of the NEXAFS L 2,3 spectrum was separated from the p → continuum absorption by subtraction of the two step-like functions representing the electron transition from 2p 3/2 and 2p 1/2 states to continuum: , where -height of the edge jump, -position of the absorption edge, = /τ -2p atomic level width, where τ denotes the life-time of the core hole. The edge positions (E 0 ) of the spectra were determined as the inflection point of the L 3 and L 2 edges, respectively (see Table The integral intensity uncertainty was given by the normalization procedure i. e. integral intensity scatter induced by the freedom of the pre-edge background removal and edge jump normalization. 