Indium selenide (InSe), as a novel van der Waals layered semiconductor, has attracted a large research interest thanks to its excellent optical and electrical properties in the ultra-thin limit. Here, we discuss four different optical methods to quantitatively identify the thickness of thin InSe flakes on various substrates, such as SiO2/Si or transparent polymeric substrates. In the case of thin InSe deposited on a transparent substrate, the transmittance of the flake in the blue region of the visible spectrum can be used to estimate the thickness. For InSe supported by SiO2/Si, the thickness of the flakes can be estimated either by assessing their apparent colors or accurately analyzed using a Fresnel-law based fitting model of the optical contrast spectra. Finally, we also studied the thickness dependency of the InSe photoluminescence emission energy, which provides an additional tool to estimate the InSe thickness and it works both for InSe deposited on SiO2/Si and on a transparent polymeric substrate. Two-dimensional (2D) materials, thanks to their remarkable mechanical, electrical, optical, and optoelectronic properties, have been considered as promising candidates for future nano-electronic and optoelectronic device applications. In this context, a comprehensive comparison of different optical microscopy based methods • Optical transmittance Thin InSe flakes are fabricated using mechanical exfoliation method from single crystal bulk InSe grown by the Bridgman method. It is well known that graphene, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs), TiS3, franckeite, mica, antimonene and MoO3 flakes deposited on a SiO2/Si substrate presents different colors depending on their thickness and on the SiO2 thickness. The number of layers of InSe flakes that have been deposited on the SiO2/Si substrate can be further determined more accurately by quantitatively analyzing their reflection spectra. In Figure The differential reflectance spectra are acquired in normal incidence with a modified metallurgical microscope (BA 310 MET-T, Motic) and experimental operation details have been described in our previous work. where the subscript 0 refers to air, 1 to InSe, 2 to SiO2 and 3 to Si. Under normal incident condition, Φ i = 2πn ̃id i /λ is the phase shift induced by the propagation of the light beam in the media i, in which n ̃i, d i and λ are the complex refractive index, thickness of the media and wavelength, respectively; r ij = (n ̃i -n ̃j)/(n ̃i + n ̃j) is the Fresnel coefficient at the interface between the media i and j. The reflection Fresnel coefficient in a three media (the case of the bare substrate without being covered by InSe flake) is expressed as: Where sub index 0 is air, 1 is SiO2 and 2 is Si. Using equations ( Then the optical contrast can be obtained through the following equation ( Interestingly, we found that using the thickness of the with the Fresnel-based model. We find the fitted flake thicknesses of 15 nm, 24 nm and 32 nm are consistent with the flake heights measured by AFM, with a small error of ± 2 nm. In order to benchmark this thickness determination method for InSe, in Figure • Photoluminescence (PL) Photoluminescence (PL) is another important method to identify the thickness of 2D semiconducting flakes. In contrast to MX2, layered InSe exhibits a direct-to-indirect band the PL can be employed for layer number n determination of thin InSe in a larger thickness range at room temperature. In Figure which the black line indicates the best fit to the present data points with the parameters are determined to be a = 3.25 ± 0.44 eV•nm 2 , b = 1.27 ± 0.01 eV. Our fit presents a good agreement with the results previously reported data in the literature. In summary, we have provided several fast and non-destructive complementary optical methods to evaluate the number of layer of thin InSe deposited on different substrates. The results from the four proposed techniques are summarized in Table . * h is the estimated InSe thickness in nm.