We report on the optoelectronic properties of GaN(0001) and (1 100) surfaces after their functionalization with phosphonic acid derivatives. To analyze the possible correlation between the acid's electronegativity and the GaN surface band bending, two types of phosphonic acids, n-octylphosphonic acid (OPA) and 1H,1H,2H,2Hperfluorooctanephosphonic acid (PFOPA), are grafted on oxidized GaN(0001) and GaN(1 100) layers as well as on GaN nanowires. The resulting hybrid inorganic/organic heterostructures are investigated by X-ray photoemission and photoluminescence spectroscopy. The GaN work function is changed significantly by the grafting of phosphonic acids, evidencing the formation of dense self-assembled monolayers. Regardless of the GaN surface orientation, both types of phosphonic acids significantly impact the GaN surface band bending. A dependence on the acids' electronegativity is, however, only observed for the oxidized GaN(1 100) surface, indicating a relatively low density of surface states and a favorable band alignment between the surface oxide and acids' electronic states. Regarding the optical properties, the covalent bonding of PFOPA and OPA on oxidized GaN layers and nanowires significantly affect their external quantum efficiency, especially in the nanowire case due to the large surface-to-volume ratio. The variation in the external quantum efficiency is related to the modication of both the internal electric fields and surface states. These results demonstrate the potential of phosphonate chemistry for the surface functionalization of GaN, which could be exploited for selective sensing applications. Adsorbates on the surface of an inorganic semiconductor can perturb the equilibrium of charges established between bulk and surface states In this context, well-defined hybrid interfaces should be preferred, as those provided by self-assembled monolayers (SAMs). A SAM corresponds to a densely packed single layer of molecules, all covalently bonded to the surface through an anchor group. Each molecule additionally features a functional group, independent from the anchor group and adequately chosen for tailoring the surface properties. SAMs on metals and semiconductors (organic and inorganic) are widely reported and recurrently used as immobilizers as well as to tune the surface work function and the surface wettability Here, we analyze the optoelectronic properties of GaO x /GaN(0001) and (1 100) surfaces after their functionalization by grafting phosphonic acids. In particular, our work seeks to establish a correlation between the GaN surface band bending and the electronegativity of the attached acid, as theoretically proposed and experimentally demonstrated in the case of ZnO The GaN(0001) and (1 100) surfaces studied in this work are obtained from free-standing substrates purchased from Suzhou Nanowin Science and Technology. These substrates feature a low threading dislocation density (< 5 × 10 6 cm -2 ) and a root mean square roughness below 0.2 nm. The surfaces are prepared by the vendor using chemo-mechanical polish-ing, which does not necessarily produce well-defined surfaces with atomic steps. Thus, to ensure reproducible surfaces, we grow an ≈ 1 μm thick GaN layer by plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy (PA-MBE) on the as-received free-standing substrates. To preserve the substrate smoothness, the growth is performed at ≈ 700 • C under intermediate Ga-rich conditions In addition to the layers, we prepare two GaN nanowire ensembles by PA-MBE using self-assembly as growth approach Prior to the SAM deposition, both the GaN layers and the nanowire ensembles are cleaned and oxidized using the following subsequent steps: O 2 plasma (OP) exposure, HCl etching, and a second OP exposure. In detail, the OP exposure step is 5 min long and performed using a O 2 pressure of 0.3 mbar and a forward power of 900 W. For the HCl etching step, the samples are immersed for 10 min in a 32% HCl solution. Before the characterization of the samples by photoluminescence spectroscopy (Section II C), we use, however, a different OP system. In this case, the OP exposure is 10 min long and carried out using an O 2 pressure of 0.5 mbar and a forward power of 100 W. Besides the elimination of pollutants, the cleaning process also initializes the surface into a well-defined reference state, which is characterized by the formation of a ≤ 1 nm thick GaO x capping layer The electronic properties of the GaN surfaces are probed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) in a PHI Versa Probe II equipped with a monochromatized Al K α anode as X-ray source (1486.6 eV). The base pressure of the measuring chamber is in the 10 -9 mbar range. The kinetic energy of the photo-emitted electrons is measured by a concentric hemispherical analyzer. The angle between the analyzer and the X-ray source is 54.7 • and the takeoff angle 90 • . All the spectra are referenced in binding energy with respect to the Fermi edge of Ag. The secondary electron edges are calibrated according to the work function of an in situ sputter-cleaned Ag foil. The work function of the Ag foil is determined by ultravi- olet photoelectron spectroscopy. XPS fits are performed using Voigt line profiles after subtraction of a Shirley background The optical properties of the GaN samples are characterized by continuous-wave photoluminescence spectroscopy (cw-PL) using the 325 nm line of a He-Cd laser. A lens with a numerical aperture of 0.3 focuses the laser beam onto the sample surface with a spot size of ≈ 50 μm. When measuring nanowire ensembles, 1-3 × 10 5 nanowires are then probed at the same time. The PL is collected in backscatter geometry, dispersed by a 80 cm monochromator, and detected by a charge-coupleddevice (CCD) detector cooled down with liquid nitrogen. The samples are mounted with silverpaint on a cold-finger cryostat for measurement at cryogenic temperatures. All measurements are performed in a low 10 -6 mbar vacuum. The excitation density is attenuated using neutral density filters. The tendency of PFOPA and OPA to self-assemble into a monolayer on oxidized GaN(0001) and (1 100) surfaces is examined by XPS. Figure We also derive by XPS the work function of the GaN layers grafted with OPA or PFOPA from the electron kinetic energy at the secondary electron cutoff (SEC). As shown in Fig. The presence of a SAM can affect the surface band bending, since it will modify the equilibrium of charges existing between GaN donor states and GaO x surface states For both GaN surface orientations, in the presence of PFOPA or OPA, the core levels show a reduced intensity and the O 1s signal is asymmetrically broadened toward larger binding energies. Since the inelastic mean free path of the core electrons is 1-2 nm For undoped or lightly doped material, the surface band bending extends over a length scale 10 nm, a value that largely exceeds the probing depth of XPS (1-2 nm). A modification of the surface band bending would then rigidly shift the GaN/GaO x core levels and the VBM binding energies. In contrast, the covalent bonding of the phosphonic acids at the GaO x surface can alter the oxidation state of the Ga and O atoms differently. Consequently, as the result of such an effect, different shifts are expected for the core levels and the VBM binding energies. To isolate the contribution of the GaN surface band bending to the core level shifts shown in Figs. For GaN(0001), the deposition of either PFOPA or OPA SAMs induces moderate core level shifts (< 0.2 eV) and increases the surface band bending by ≈ 0.1 eV. The surface band bending is thus not very sensitive to the electronegativity of the SAM functional group for GaN(0001). In contrast, the grafting of phosphonic acids on GaN(1 100) largely affects both the core levels and the VBM. Specifically, after grafting of PFOPA, the GaN surface band bending is reduced by 0.2 eV and the oxidation states of Ga and O atoms exhibit a slight increase. Relative to PFOPA, the coating with OPA further decreases the GaN surface band bending by 0.25 eV, and increases the oxidation states of Ga and O atoms. These results evidence a strong impact of the SAM electronegativity on the inner GaN electrostatic potential landscape in the case of the (1 100) surface. A similarly weak sensitivity of the GaN(0001) surface band bending toward the electronegativity of grafted phosphonic acids has been reported for oxidized GaN(0001) The modification of the surface electronic properties caused by the grafting of phosphonic acids should also impact the EQE of GaN. In particular, the decrease of internal electric fields Both the treated layers and the nanowire ensembles exhibit intense band-edge luminescence. Normalized spectra taken at 10 K are shown in Fig. The recorded PL peak intensities after the different treatments (OP, PFOPA and OPA) are shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. where Φ 0 is the band bending amplitude, N D the donor concentration, and ε r ε 0 the permittivity of GaN (ε c r = 10.4 and ε ⊥c r = 9.5). The calculated values reported in Table For lightly doped nanowires, the amplitude of the surface band bending may additionally depend on their diameter. Indeed, below a critical diameter, full electronic depletion of the bulk donors by surface states occurs where Φ 0 is the band bending amplitude when the nanowire is not fully depleted. Assuming a similar doping than for the GaN layers (N D = 8 × 10 16 cm -3 ), d c amounts to 230, 178 and 72 nm after the OP, PFOPA and OPA treatments, respectively. Examining the diameter distributions shown in Fig. Besides altering internal electric fields, the covalent bonding of phosphonic acids onto the GaO x surface certainly impacts the properties and nature of surface states, which may be a source for the nonradiative recombination of excitons. Yet, surface excitons only exists in nanowires with low surface electric fields (F < 10 kV/cm), since they would otherwise be instantaneously field-ionized From this analysis, the change of the GaN nanowire EQE resulting from the grafting of PFOPA and OPA can be attributed to three different contributions: (i) for thick nanowires (d > 72 nm), to a variation in the width of the exciton dead layer, (ii) for very thin nanowires (d < 26 nm), to a modification of the surface recombination velocity, and (iii) regardless of the nanowire diameter, to the parasitic light absorption caused by the presence of the organic SAM. Consequently, nanowires with diameters between 26 and 72 nm are unaffected by the first two contributions. Yet, we note that under large excitation power densities (higher than those used in this work) photo-screening of the band bending will occur We found that phosphonic acids equally bind to oxidized GaN(0001) and (1 100) surfaces, resulting in both cases in the formation of dense SAMs. The binding is verified by the significant change of the GaN work function (± 0.5 eV) observed after the grafting of PFOPA or OPA. These two types of phosphonic acids furthermore affect the GaN surface band bending. For the oxidized GaN(1 100) surface, this effect scales with the electronegativity of the phosphonic acid's tail, a phenomenon that enables an external control of the GaN surface band bending. The oxidized GaN(0001) surface is, in contrast, rather insensitive to the electronegativity of the phosphonic acid's tail. This insensitivity is likely due to a larger density of surface states and/or an unfavorable level alignment between the acid's HOMO and the GaO x surface states. Upon the grafting of phosphonic acids, PL measurements evidence a significant modification in the EQE of oxidized GaN(1 100) layers and nanowires. Besides the parasitic absorption caused by the organic SAM, these changes are attributed to the modification of the surface band bending and/or of surface states. The large sensitivity of the GaN(1 100) electronic properties towards the adsorbate electronegativity is a key feature for the realization of chemo-sensors. In particular, selective sensing may be simply enabled by transforming the phosphonic acid's functional group into an anchor group that only binds to a targeted analyte As described in the main text, the modulation of the nanowire photoluminescence intensity seen upon grafting of phosphonic acids points to the existence of a strong nonradiative decay taking place at the nanowire surface. This conclusion, however, differs from the results reported in Ref. Paul-Drude-Institut für Festkörperelektronik, Leibniz-Institut im Forschungsverbund Berlin e. V., Hausvogteiplatz 5-7, 10117 Berlin, Germany † † InnovationLab, Speyerer Str. 4, 69115 Heidelberg, Germany