It has been known for many years that metallic nanoparticles can catalyse various chemical reactions, both in the dark and under illumination, through different mechanisms. In the last decade or so, many claims of plasmon-assisted "hot" electron driven catalysis of bond-dissociation reactions have been put forward. These claims were challenged in a recent series of papers, where both the underlying theory of "hot" electron generation and the use of specific experimental setups to discover them in chemical reactions were examined in detail. The conclusion that arose from these works is that as long as temperature gradients exist inside the system (as for typical experimental setups) a quantification of non-thermal effects is close to impossible. Instead, a standard thermal theory was shown to be capable of explaining the experimental findings quite accurately. Here, we review the central lines of thought that led to these conclusions, from a personal perspective. We lay out the key aspects of the theory, and point to the specific caveats one must be aware of in performing photo-catalysis experiments. Finally, we provide some future directions of study. Metal nanoparticles (NPs) are known to exhibit unusual optical properties, in particular, for having absorption and scattering cross-sections that exceed their physical size. This was predicted to enable a long list of potential applications in diverse fields 1 . Unfortunately, however, the strong absorption in the metal severely limits many of these applications 2,3 . Since the energy absorbed in the metal gets converted to heat almost in its entirety Adding to these, one of the most promising such applications was predicted to be the speeding up of chemical reactions, usually referred to as plasmon-assisted photocatalysis. In particular, it was envisioned that the absorption of photons promotes the generation of a non-equilibrium (also known as non-thermal, or "hot") carrier distribution such that electrons in the high-energy tail of this distribution can tunnel out of the metal into high-energy orbitals of the surrounding molecules, and then catalyse the chemical reaction. This was usually referred to as the "hot carrier mechanism" (or "indirect" plasmon-assisted photocatalysis The "hot" electron mechanism was introduced to explain two main phenomena. First, it explained the ability of a high energy metal electron to tunnel through the Schottky barrier to an adjacent semiconductor and then be used for photodetection at frequencies lower than the gap energy of the semiconductor Potentially because of the complex multi-disciplinary nature of this problem, the exact manner in which "hot" electrons assist the reaction rate was not supported by a quantitative, first-principle type theory, but instead, has remained at the phenomenological level. Moreover, not only was it unclear how the "hot" electrons mechanism related to the socalled "direct" mechanism From a more general perspective, the relative importance of thermal and non-thermal effects in illuminated plasmonic NPs remained an issue under debate In a series of recent works, we have shown how to separate thermal and non-thermal effects using a simple addition to standard theoretical approaches Below, we review this line of work, aiming at the nonexpert audience. Notably, we do not aim to review all the vast literature on the topic (especially not all the experimental work), noting that since our first publications in the field Evidence for thermally-driven photo-catalysis from theory and analysis of experimental data. The starting point of our work was a simple question -what happens to a small piece of metal when it is continuously illuminated? This simple looking question turns out to be hard to answer. Specifically, there seems to be a clash between the näive intuitive answer "it heats up" and the strict physical statement that since the metal is out of equilibrium, temperature is no longer welldefined and one cannot talk about heating at all. This may have been the reason that several theoretical papers tried to answer the aformentioned question by considering only how light would affect the electron distribution inside the NP (see e.g., Refs. [62 and 63]) or considering heating by taking the temperature of the electrons as a fixed parameter (and guessing it rather than calculating it), and even worse, assuming that phonons do not heat up at all To reconcile the apparent paradox described above, in Ref. [4] we took a simple route of using the Boltzmann equation, which takes into account all possible energy transfer pathways in the system, and augmenting it with nothing more than the law of energy conservation in the whole system, i.e., including not only the photons and electrons, but also the lattice and the environment. More specifically, we demanded that at the steady-state, all the power that is pumped into the system via photon absorption must leave it via heat current to the surrounding host. Further simplification was obtained by naturally separating the electron distribution into a "thermal" and 'non-thermal" parts, where the thermal part is a Fermi distribution, with a temperature which is different than the ambient temperature. These two points allowed us to calculate correctly both the electron temperature and the steady-state electron non-equilibrium distribution (including the "hot" electrons) under continuous wave illumination. Thus, unlike previous studies of the electron non-equilibrium, this approach allowed us to evaluate the full non-equilibrium electron distribution, while naturally accounting for the effect of nanoparticle size and shape, as well as the thermal properties of the host on the rate of heat transfer to the environment. Two central findings came out of this approach. The first is that, due to the fact that the electron-electron relaxation time is incredibly short in metals, almost all of the power coming from the illumination goes into heating the electrons and the phonons (which maintain almost the same steady-state temperature), and only a tiny fraction goes into skewing the electron distribution and generating "hot" electrons. Importantly, our calculations have shown clearly that the dominance of thermal effects over non-thermal ("hot" carrier) effects become more significant as the illumination intensity becomes lower. This result invalidates a common claim These two findings seem to be at odds with many claims of photocatalysis being accelerated by illuminated plasmonic nanoparticles, most specifically with some of the seminal papers in the field Following these apparent discrepancies, the question arises: can experimental reports of faster reaction rates in the presence of metal NPs be explained solely based on thermal ef-fects, assuming that the only thing that is happening in experiments is that the sample heats up? The answer to this question turns out to be yes. It requires, however, recognizing that the measured temperature, T M , may be lower than the actual temperature T of the catalyst (this assumption will be proven correct in the following sections, as was discussed in Refs. [41 and 53]). Why is this important? because, according to the standard Arrhenius theory of chemical reactions, the reaction rates obey where E a is the activation energy, k B is the Boltzmann constant. Thus, if the measured temperature, T M , is smaller than the actual temperature T of the catalyst (as shown in To demonstrate that this is a plausible claim, we rely on the simple connection between the catalyst temperature, the measured temperature and the incident illumination intensity I inc , ( where T dark is the temperature of the reactor when no illumination is present. The photothermal conversion coefficient a depends on a number of system-specific parameters (NP size and shape, material, density and number, illumination wavelength, thermal properties of the host etc.) Eqs. ( Nevertheless, as noted in Ref. 41, from an Arrhenius fit alone, one cannot determine with absolute certainty if the illumination only changes the temperature without changing the activation energy, or contributes to both effects (a point which was later raised also by Jain On the importance of understanding temperature gradients. The remarkable reconstruction of the experimental data with Arrhenius theory confirms that there is a substantial difference between the temperature of the catalysts (T ) and the measured temperature (T M ) in the studies analyzed in Fig. Here, we wish to stress what we believe is a key issue in all experiments attempting to separate thermal from nonthermal contributions, namely, the correct account for temperature gradients. This topic has been discussed at length in [44 and 54], so we wish to demonstrate its importance via an example. Consider a (rather standard) photo-catalysis experiment, where a ∼ 1mm sample is illuminated from above and heated from below. How would one go about and isolate the non-thermal contribution to the reaction rate? A naïve approach would be to measure the reaction rate under illumination, record the surface temperature, measure the reaction rate at the recorded temperature in the dark, and subtract the latter reaction rate from the former. Such a protocol has indeed been employed on various works to extract the "hot" electron contribution to the reaction rate However, there is an essential flaw in this protocol, as it completely neglects temperature gradients On the other hand, heating the sample using an external heater (i.e., in the dark), typically leads to a more uni- form temperature distribution (in fact, there might be temperature gradients in the reverse direction to the illuminated case, see [44] in the presence of a bottom heater; this possibility is ignored for the sake of simplicity). In these cases, when heating to the surface temperature, the entire bulk is at the surface temperature recorded in the photocatalysis experiment. Therefore, subtracting from the illuminated reaction rate the reaction rate in the dark at the surface temperature is meaningless. Similarly, the non-negligible transverse gradients (see [55]) are likely to cause additional differences between the experiment and its control; higher-order moments of the temperature distribution may be playing a role, yet to be understood The only way around this problem, at least for thick samples, is to have a thermal control experiment in the dark that fully reproduces the temperature gradient under illumination. While attempts in this direction have been made More systematic evaluation of the temperature distribution in plasmon-assisted photocatalysis samples. In [55], we generalized the discussion of the temperature calculations for plasmon-assisted photocatalysis samples. First, we validated the effective medium approach presented in [41], and provided a simple analytic formula for the temperature rise in characteristic samples. This formula enables an immediate evaluation of the importance of the thermal effects; it also opens the way to inclusion of fluid dynamics effects, see below. Then, we studied the dependence of the temperature distribution on the various parameters of the system. We showed that since typically these samples are designed to absorb all the incoming light, the steady-state temperature distribution shows overall insensitivity to the illumination spectra, temporal pattern, particle density, size and shape; this result contradicts a wide range of popular claims that can be found in prior literature and verbally-presented conceptions, which usually do not follow from a proper thermal analysis. In that sense, the temperature distribution is determined by macroscopic considerations, i.e., the balance of total heat generated in the sample and the heat transfer to the surroundings (rather than by the microscopic details). This also shows that while the use of metal nanoparticles for heating was initially motivated by the localized nature of heat generation at the nano-proximity of the particles, in practice, the (steady-state) temperature distribution generated by an ensemble of NPs is not so different from that created by an external heat source. The results of this analysis reflects some rather intuitive conclusions. First, thermal effects accumulate with the number of NPs, whereas "hot" carrier effects do not -for a given level of illumination, they are independent of the number of NPs. This implies that further to the local considerations presented above (see [5]), reactions in dense systems of NPs are more likely to be catalyzed by heating rather than by nonthermal effects. Second, while the initial intention was to speed up chemical processes with high activation energy (e.g., [23]), these are particularly sensitive to increasing temperature All the above implies, somewhat ironically, that "hot" electrons are (typically) useful only under conditions which are the exact opposite to those in which they were originally envisioned to be efficient! Whether there is a practical advantage for speeding up chemical reactions occurring across a large volume using such dilute suspensions of metal NPs remains to be proven. Outlook. Our re-interpretation Second, while our work discussed at length photo-catalysis experiments in hydrostatic and dry conditions, many of the experiments in the field involve fluid flow and electro-chemical charge transfer (in solution) Third, one has to account for the effect of high illumination intensities and high temperatures on the optical properties of the system. Indeed, in many cases, the ambient temperature is increased significantly, to increase the (dark) reaction yield, so that the material permittivities change significantly (see e.g., Finally, the theory should include, when necessary, also considerations related with the non-locality of the electron response, as well as quantum mechanical considerations associated with electron state discretization Many of the above elements were already developed. However, a complete theory that includes all these components is yet to be compiled and implemented for a quantitative comparison to experimental data. This will allow us, as a community, to embark upon a proper re-evaluation of past results, on one hand, and to design meaningful experiments and interpret them thoroughly, on the other. In parallel to the extension of the theoretical framework, the experimental characterization of the temperature profile has to be improved. Indeed, measuring the temperature at only two points (as e.g., in [44, 71, and 79]) gives no information on unavoidable 55 transverse gradients. Such gradients may strongly affect reaction rates, yet are many times un-accounted for. High resolution thermometry techniques have been developed While the above elements are necessary for the characterization of the macroscopic properties, many recent experiments addressed the challenging problem of measuring the reaction rate on the single NP level Final Thoughts. The comprehensive critical studies published over the last year or so (see [41, 53, 54, 56-61]) and the vibrant ongoing discussion in the field seem to have re-directed the study of plasmon-assisted photocatalysis into a more reliable, quantitative scientific routine. Detailed thermal calculations are becoming more com-mon and accessible (e.g., [41, 47, 55, 58, and 74]) and the awareness to the characteristics of the temperature distribution Yet, some problematic practices still persist, for instance, the use of different samples for the photocatalysis experiment and the thermocatalysis control We wish to end this perspective with a more general note. We believe that the ongoing debate reviewed above proves that there is room within the current publishing climate for more critical (self-)reflective research of the type that we described in our recent manuscripts; this may even be considered as a sort of necessary gadfly. Thus, addressing the scientific criticism in one's own papers, encouraging debate and publishing controversial (and sometimes editorially inconvenient) papers, will catalyse uprooting of incorrect claims, unfounded beliefs and wrong practices. Erratum. Following lengthy discussions with L. Besteiro, we realized that one aspect of the criticism described in Ref. [4 and 116] over his previous work In particular, the formulation developed in Ref. [64] relies on a unique parameter defined as T e f f . While this parameter has no analog in similar formulations (see e.g., Refs. [4, 94, and 95)], and its origin is not clearly explained, its description can be easily lead one to understand that it represents the electron temperature. However, Besteiro clarified that this parameter is extracted from the numerical evaluation of the electron excitation/relaxation rate (Fig. In that sense, our comparison of the choices of T e f f to the predictions of classical heat equations (in Refs. [4 and 116]) is irrelevant. We apologize for the confusion caused. This issue, however, has only a small impact on the overall criticism expressed on the formulation of Ref. [64] in Refs. [4, 5, and 116]. In a nutshell, that formulation assumes that the thermal and non-thermal distributions can be decoupled, and treats the latter only. As shown in Ref. [4 and 5], this decoupling is not valid when going beyond the relaxation time approximation for the electron-phonon interaction (as adopted in Ref. [64]) such that global energy conservation in the whole system (consisting of the photons, electrons, phonons and the environment) is considered. A potential exception is the case of very weak illumination. This subtle yet fundamental issue will be clarified in a future publication in detail.