Pyroelectric energy converter is a functional capacitor using pyroelectric material as the dielectric layer. Utilizing the first-order phase transformation of the material, the pyroelectric device can generate adequate electricity within small temperature fluctuations. However, most pyroelectric capacitors are leaking during energy conversion. In this paper, we analyze the thermodynamics of pyroelectric energy conversion with consideration of the electric leakage. Our thermodynamic model is verified by experiments using three phase-transforming ferroelectric materials with different pyroelectric properties and leakage behaviors. We demonstrate that the impact of leakage for electric generation is prominent, and sometimes may be confused with the actual power generation by pyroelectricity. We discover an ideal material candidate, (Ba,Ca)(Ti,Zr,Ce)O 3 , which exhibits large pyroelectric current and extremely low leakage current. The pyroelectric converter made of this material generates 1.95μA/cm 2 pyroelectric current density and 0.2 J/cm 3 pyroelectric work density even after 1389 thermodynamic conversion cycles. Energy harvesting from waste heat is an emerging research field in sustainable energy science When utilizing the first-order phase transformation to pyroelectric energy conversion, the converted electricity can be drastically magnified due to the abrupt jump of polarization caused by the structural change from ferroelectric to paraelectric phases. Without any applied bias field, the generated pyroelectric current by a bulk phase-transforming capacitor, i.e. 150 nA Removal of the bias electric field re-defines the thermodynamic cycle for pyroelectric energy conversion from small temperature fluctuations. Depending on the initial condition, a couple of new thermodynamic models were proposed to analyze the power output for the power-source-free pyroelectric generators We consider the phase-transforming capacitor as the thermodynamic system. When the system thermally fluctuates about the phase-transformation temperature T c , the charges Q held by the capacitor accordingly fall and rise due to the alternation of capacitance caused by the first-order phase transformation between ferroelectric and paraelectric phases. The charge can be expressed as a function of the temperature of the phase-transforming capacitor, T , and the voltage on the capacitor, V , i.e. Q = Q(V, T ). During the cyclic thermodynamic processes between the states (Q L , V L , T L ) and (Q H , V H , T H ) where T L < T c < T H , all three state variables (Q, V, T ) change simultaneously without an application of a bias electric field e - e - e - Electric field (a.u) FIG. (b) Schematic of polarization versus electric field at ferroelectric (T L ) and paraelectric (T H ) phases by which the power-source-free thermodynamic cycles where V 0 is gained by connecting the whole electric circuit in Fig. Consequently, the stored charges in ferroelectric phase decrease after every cycle. If such a leakage continues, there would be no charges left after a finite number of energy conversion cycles, which ceases the electricity generation process. At t = 0, the total charges in the system are calculated by where C ref denotes the capacitance of the non-transforming capacitor, considered as the reference capacitor in our experiment. At t > 0, the charge balance can be expressed as where Q ref is the time-dependent function of charges held by the reference capacitor for t > 0, the function I c represents the charge leakage current in the phase-transforming ferroelectric capacitor, which is non-zero after energy conversion starts. Considering the electric circuit in Fig. where V d is voltage on the load resistor. Substituting (3) into ( Since Q is a function of V , the equation ( Therefore, the governing equation can be written as The equation ( where A is the area of the planar capacitor, q(E, T ) and J(E, T ) are the charge density and leakage current density. Modulated by the area A, the equation ( According to the constitutive relation where ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity and the constitutive function P (E, T ) is the polarization of the phase-transforming ferroelectric material. The first and second order time derivatives can be calculated directly from ∂T 2 , and P ,T E = ∂ 2 P ∂T ∂E , in which κ = P ,T is an important ferroelectric property, defined as the pyroelectric coefficient. It has been widely used to judge the performance of the pyroelectric generators The constitutive relations P (E, T ) and J(E, T ) are experimentally characterized by the aixACCT TF ferroelectric analyzer 2000E system. Fig. where It can be solved numerically under the initial conditions In order to benchmark materials of different geometry under various experimental setting, the dimensionless variables are used to represent the governing equation by the symbol with an overhead bar, •. For a specific phase-transforming pyroelectric planar capacitor with thickness d, the initial charging voltage V (0) = V 0 associated with the electric field E 0 = V 0 /d at temperature T L lower than the phase transition temperature, the nondimensional voltage, electric field, temperature and time are defined as where the working temperature range of the device is between T L and T H such that T L < T c < T H . It takes τ seconds per cycle, which fully covers the duration of phase transformation. According to The corresponding derivatives are and Substitute ( where which can be solved numerically under the initial conditions We use three Barium Titanate based ferroelectric materials to investigate the influences of electric leakage on pyroelectric energy conversion, and to verify our numerical model in The powders of CaCO 3 (Alfa Aesar, 99.5%), CeO 2 (Alfa Aesar, 99.9%), ZrO 2 (Sigma Aldrich, 99%), BaCO 3 (Alfa Aesar, 99.8%) and TiO 2 (Alfa Aesar, 99.8%) were weighed according to the stoichiometric formulation Ba 0.95 Ca 0.05 Ti 0.98 Zr 0.01 Ce 0.01 O 3 , dissolved in the ethanol and milled by zirconia balls in the planetary ball miller at 630rpm for 24hrs. The ball-milled solution was dried and calcined at 1000 • C for 10 hours to obtain the tri-doped Barium Titanate powder through solid state reaction. Under 30MPa hydrostatic pressure for 30 minutes, the powder was hot-pressed into a rod-shaped green body of 6mm diameter and 10mm length. The green body was sintered to form the feed and seed rods in the four-mirror Infra-red furnace (Quantum Design IRF11-001-00) by passing through the focal point slowly with the axial speed 3mm/hr and the angular speed 3rpm. The feed and seed rods were aligned vertically for the floating zone experiment using the same Infra-red furnace at the growth speed 10mm/hr and relative angular speed 50rpm in air. The molten zone was created and monitored throughout the entire growth period. Finally, the as-growth rod was solidified and sliced along the growth direction. Within the testing temperature range, all samples undergo the first-order phase transformation accompanying with an abrupt polarization jump, P from ferroelectric to paraelectric phases. Among them, the tri-doped BTO exhibits the largest polarization (11μC/cm 2 ) in ferroelectric phase, making it an ideal candidate for pyroelectric energy conversion. In Fig. , the electric leakage of tri-doped BTO has been reduced magnificently, which is about 1/6 of value for BTO and 1/200 of value for BZT in ferroelectric phase. Under the working condition for energy conversion, the benchmark of leakage current density is shown in Fig. In sharp contrast to BZT and BTO, the leaking in the new ferroelectric material is much suppressed even in the temperature regime higher than its phase-transition temperature. In addition, we observed that the morphotropic phase boundary of tri-doped BTO gets relatively more gradual than that of BZT, which indicates that the pyroelectric coefficient at phase transformation is moderate compared to BZT. The measured pyroelectric coefficients are 0.42μC/cm 2 K for BTO, 1.89μC/cm 2 K for BZT, and 0.87μC/cm 2 K for tri-dope BTO. We used these three materials as the dielectric layer to fabricate planar capacitors with geometries 37.44mm 2 × 0.74mm for BTO, 59.44mm 2 × 0.257mm for BZT, and 66.59mm 2 × 0.445mm for tri-dope BTO. Using the energy conversion electric circuit in Fig. The pyrocurrent was characterized as the current passing through the load resistor, R, calculated as where is the pyrocurrent density for an area A. It is attributed to the charge flow driven by the change of polarization and the internal leakage in the pyroelectric capacitor. As a result, the electric field across the pyroelectric capacitor is continuously decreasing throughout the energy conversion process. In experiment, the measured pyrocurrent (red) is shown in Fig. But it is a bad insulator with non-negligible leakage. Considering a full loop of phase transformation, its averaged pyrocurrent density of the first cycle is 1.17μA/cm 2 , which degrades to 0.34μA/cm 2 after five cycles. Since the charge leakage is unidirectional, both measured and computed pyrocurrent for BZT are biased to the negative direction with respect to neutral point. The contribution of the leakage current to the work done on the load resistor sometimes covers the true electric energy converted by the pyroelectric material As a result it shows 1.95μA/cm 2 pyrocurrent density without degradation at the end of fifth cycle. Note that the pyrocurrent achieved in tri-doped BTO is almost 3 times bigger than the largest pyrocurrent reported by far in single crystal Barium Titanate with polar axis aligned with the electric field We use the least leaking pyroelectric capacitor (i.e. tri-doped BTO) to conduct more cycles under different working conditions. Fig. Solving the equation ( It means that after N * cycles, the electric field on pyroelectric capacitor has been reduced to half of its initially charged value. If we only consider the current output from the pyroelectric energy conversion, the output electric energy density on the load resistor is calculated as where q denotes the current density passing through the load resistor R. Consider the work done by the electrostatic force in the pyroelectric capacitor during the cyclic thermodynamic processes, we define the pyro-work as Here the electric field should satisfy the governing equation ( Without leakage, the output electric energy is supposed to be the same as the electrostatic energy produced by the pyroelectric capacitor To design a power-source-free pyroelectric energy conversion system that can continuously harvest electricity from the waste heat, both pyroelectric property and leakage current density should be taken into account. Our work provides useful reference in future development of high performance ferroelectric materials and the design of energy conversion systems. * 