Herein, we discuss the conditions for excitation of symmetryprotected toroidal dipole modes in all-dielectric metasurfaces composed of trimer or twin-trimer clusters of dielectric disks. Such metasurfaces permit enhanced light-matter interaction due to spatially confined light in resonant systems with a high-quality factor. To describe characteristics of toroidal modes existing in the clusters, we use the magnetic dipole moments approximation, group-theoretical methods, group representation theory, symmetry-adapted linear combination method, and circuit theory. To validate the obtained theoretical results, we fulfill both full-wave numerical simulations and microwave experiments. In particular, we have shown that the toroidal dipole mode appears as a quasi-dark state of the trimer. It can be excited in the metasurface by the field of a linearly polarized wave, providing the symmetry of the trimer is properly reduced. In the metasurface, the properties of the toroidal dipole mode are determined primarily by the parameters of a single trimer and are not a consequence of the periodicity of the array. The coupling of the toroidal dipole modes in the twin-trimers can appear in both bonding and anti-bonding fashion resulting in different orders of the net toroidal dipole moment. Due to the unique field configuration of these modes, the proposed metasurfaces can be considered as a platform for efficient light-matter interaction for enhanced absorption, nonlinear switching, and sensing. Macroscopically, an electric dipole originates from the separation of positive and negative charges, while a magnetic dipole is generated by a closed loop of electric currents. If several magnetic dipoles are arranged into a closed loop in a head-to-tail fashion, the polar toroidal moment arises Natural multiferroic materials bearing toroidal states are scarce, and the manifestation of the toroidicity in such materials is usually weak. Therefore, special attention is paid to the implementation of the toroidicity in artificial media such as metamaterials The spatial feature of the toroidal states is straightforwardly related to three-dimensional (3D) structures (metamaterials) composed of clusters with circular arrangement of subwavelength particles. When the operating frequency of a metamaterial increases, the size of the corresponding constituent particles decreases, and the implementation of such a metamaterial becomes cost-inefficient. Therefore, there is a need to develop two-dimensional (2D) platforms (meta-surfaces) with highly optimized meta-molecule designs supporting toroidal moments In particular, the toroidal mode existing in metasurfaces is considered as symmetry protected state, when it cannot be excited by normally incident waves without the symmetry breaking of the metasurface unit cell This coupling results in the arising narrow resonance in the metasurface spectra. Moreover, due to low inherent losses in constituent materials, the symmetry-protected toroidal modes in all-dielectric metasurfaces benefit from very high-Q factor of corresponding resonances and strong nearfield confinement. To realize the excitation of toroidal modes, several metasurface cluster designs have been recently proposed. The manifestation of toroidal modes is revealed to be possible in meta-molecules composed of a single particle When analyzing electromagnetic characteristics of isolated dielectric particles with high structural symmetry, the analytical approach of multipole expansion is widely used to derive the fields induced by incoming radiation inside and outside of the particles Different numerical methods can be useful in this case. For analysis of the structures with quasi-dark modes, along with numerical methods, some valuable information about the characteristics of electromagnetic fields can be obtained by using semianalytical techniques, such as the method of complete multipole expansion accounting for the toroidal modes Among the approximate models, one can mention the classical model of coupled harmonic oscillators Group-theoretical methods based solely upon the symmetries of their underlying constituent particles are very effective for revealing general electromagnetic properties of metasurfaces In our study, we propose a generalized theory describing characteristics of a toroidal dipole mode, which is implemented in cluster-based all-dielectric metasurfaces. In particular, we discuss general conditions for the toroidal mode existence in trimer and twin-trimer clusters forming the metasurface, and propose a way to access this mode with the field of a normally incident linearly polarized wave. Our theoretical description involves the magnetic dipole moments approximation, group-theoretical methods, group representation theory, symmetry-adapted linear combination method, and circuit theory. Obtained theoretical findings are checked against numerical simulations performed with the commercial COMSOL Multiphysics solver and experimental measurements for the metasurface prototypes designed to operate in the microwave range. In what follows, we consider a metasurface composed of dielectric disk-shaped particles. The disks are distributed in the x-y plane, forming an infinitely large two-dimensional (2D) array. We assume that the main building block of the array consists of three disks (i.e., it is a trimer). The disks are located in the trimer at the vertices of an equilateral triangle. We perform a comparative study of characteristics of two particular designs of the metasurface. For the first design, trimers are disposed into a square unit cells, while for the second design, two trimers are ordered into a twin-trimer cluster to construct either rectangular or rhomboid unit cells of the metasurface. Drawing analogy with molecular physics, the hierarchy of the constituent elements of the metasurface in our study can be established as follows: the dielectric disk can be considered as a meta-atom, while the trimer and twin-trimer can be associated with a meta-molecule and meta-macromolecule, respectively. This hierarchy in the metasurface composition can be understood from the schematic representation shown in figure We suppose that the metasurface under consideration is illuminated by a normally incident k = {0, 0, k z } linearly polarized wave. The wavelength of the incident wave is λ = 2πc/ω, where c is the light velocity in free space and ω is the angular frequency. In general, the excitation of a resonant system can be provided by different components of the incident electromagnetic field. In our case, it is convenient to discuss the problem using the magnetic field of the incident wave as an excitation source. By definition, the in-plane symmetry of the disk is C ∞v (in the Schöenflies notation For an informative description of the symmetry of a periodic array forming the metasurface, one should consider the scheme of symmetry points of an extended Brillouin zone in the reciprocal space A dynamic toroidal magnetic dipole can be approximately interpreted as a state produced by a set of magnetic dipoles, which are azimuthally distributed in space The contribution of the lowest-order multipoles to the scattering cross section is shown in figure In the chosen spectral range, the strongest resonance in the scattering cross-section arises from the magnetic dipole attributed to the manifestation of the lowest hybrid HE 11δ mode where c is the light velocity and n = √ ε d is the refractive index of the material from which the disk is made. Equation (1) corresponds to the first resonance of an infinitely extended dielectric cylinder, whose lateral surface is substituted by a perfectly magnetic conductor (TM 11 mode, J 1 (x) = 0, x = 1.841 Considering small dimensions of the disk with respect to the wavelength in free space, the fields related to this mode can be presented in quasi-static approximation. In linear regime, the moment m of the magnetic dipole is proportional to the incident magnetic field H as follows: where α is the magnetic polarizability. This polarizability can be obtained by the methods described elsewhere The 2D symmetry of the magnetic dipole is C s with the dipole axis oriented perpendicularly to the plane of symmetry σ (see the inset in figure A polar toroidal dipole may arise in different types of meta-molecules having a rotational arrangement of their meta-atoms It is revealed When dielectric disks are combined into a cluster, the overall meta-molecule response is determined mainly by the near-field coupling between the particles inside the clusters rather than by the electric and magnetic dipole modes of individual disks. The out-ofplane toroidal dipole moment arises from a collective mode originating from the excitation of three magnetic dipole moments, where each magnetic moment belongs to a particular resonator forming the cluster. The electromagnetic field distribution in each resonator corresponds to the characteristics of the HE 11δ mode. Under such conditions, each resonator supports the dipole moment m located in-plane (i.e., in the xy plane). In the collective mode, the magnetic moments of the three resonators are oriented along the circumference passing through the centers of the resonators (see the inset in figure To corroborate the existence of a toroidal dipole in the trimer, we employ multipole decomposition accounting for the toroidal dipole term to quantify the contribution of each multipole to the scattering cross-section. In the multipole decomposition where J z = iωε 0 (ε d -1)E z is the dominant component in the polarization current J and r is the position vector. In our simulation, both the lateral and the frontal irradiation of the trimer by a linearly polarized wave are investigated. For each geometry, two possible orthogonal polarizations of the incident wave are considered. The results of the multipole decomposition are summarized in figure Under the lateral irradiation of the trimer, when the vector E is oriented along the z axis, a maximum appears in the curves related to the magnetic dipole, electric quadrupole, and toroidal dipole at the wavelength which is close to the resonant wavelength fixed above in figure Therefore, it is revealed that a toroidal moment is observed only in the case when the trimer is irradiated laterally, although it is somewhat masked by the electric quadrupole. Due to symmetry of the trimer, this toroidal moment cannot be excited under the frontal irradiation, since the initial dipole magnetic moments are compensated along the x and y axis in this case. For such a geometry, the polar toroidal dipole turns out to be a dark state for the fields of a linearly polarized wave In the 2D symmetry (i.e., in the x-y plane for the given problem geometry), the highest group of symmetry of the trimer whose identical disks are disposed at the vertices of an equilateral triangle is C 3v . This group consists of elements C 3 and C -1 3 describing the anti-clockwise and clockwise rotations on 2π/3 around the triangle center, respectively, and contains two 1D representations A and B, and one 2D representation E (see IRREPs of the C 3v group in table B1 of Appendix B). Three vertical planes of symmetry of the trimer are denoted as σ 1 , σ 2 , and σ 3 . They pass through the center and the vertices of the triangle (see figure The structure of the dipole moments for the eigenmodes of the trimer belonging to the C 3v symmetry is calculated involving the SALC method. In general, there are six eigenmodes in the cluster. The polar toroidal mode belongs to IRREP A, the radial mode belongs to IRREP B, and two degenerate dipole modes and two degenerate quadrupole modes belong to IRREP E (see table C1 in Appendix C). In the problem under consideration, all eigenmodes are separated and mutually orthogonal due to the rigorous group-theoretical approach. Among these eigenmodes, only the dipole modes D x and D y can be excited in the trimer by a linearly polarized wave under the frontal irradiation conditions. All six eigenmodes of the trimer are also identified in reference In the frontal geometry of the problem, the polar toroidal dipole is a symmetry-protected state (i.e., it behaves like a dark mode). Access to such a state can be realized by reducing trimer symmetry. The C 3v group has two subgroups, namely, C 3 and C s (the correspondence of IRREPs of the C 3v , C 3 , and C s groups is given in table B2 of Appendix B). Thus, we study the characteristics of the trimer whose symmetry is reduced to either C 3 or C s group, revealing the conditions for the polar toroidal dipole excitation. Transformations related to the C 3 group imply the rotation of the trimer around its axis as shown in figure A straightforward way to reduce the trimer symmetry is a deposition of a cluster of three identical disks with the C 3v symmetry into a square unit cell with the C 4v symmetry when constructing metasurface, as shown in figure Another kind of perturbation can be performed by changing the arrangement of particles in the trimer while fixing all the disks identical and keeping one of the planes of symmetry σ unchanged (i.e., this perturbation transforms the equilateral triangle Here ω i (i = 1, 2, 3) is the resonant frequency of the HE 11δ mode in the corresponding resonator, ω T is the frequency of the collective (toroidal) mode, and the subscript t means the magnetic dipole moment projection on a circle, i.e., it is related to the tangential components of m. forming the trimer into an isosceles one). The resulting perturbed trimer is presented in figure A resonant system coupling with an incident wave depends on several factors, in particular, on polarization of the incident wave and on the angle of its incidence. In accordance with the optical theorem where E m and H m are the electric and magnetic fields of the m-th mode of the resonator, and E i and H i are the electric and magnetic fields of the incident wave, respectively. In the group-theoretical description, the selection rule (4) can be presented in the following form where ⊗ means the direct product of IRREPs, Γ ∂i defines the IRREP of a partial derivative of the Maxwell equations in the i direction, Γ V is an IRREP of the perturbation operator, and Γ m is an IRREP of the unperturbed m-th mode (all the details of this approach can be found in reference Symmetry of the magnetic field H of the incident wave in the x-y plane is described by the C s group. The H x and H y components of the magnetic field and the m x component of the magnetic dipole moment belong to IRREP B 1 of the C s group. The m y components of the magnetic dipole moment belongs to IRREP A 1 . It means that if the incident field has only the H y component, the polar toroidal dipole moment cannot be excited in the trimer. Nevertheless, access to the toroidal dipole mode can be provided by the H x component of the magnetic field, because H x and m x have the same parity, i.e., they belong to the same IRREP B 1 . In the C 3v symmetry, the H y component of the incident magnetic field excites the m y components in the disks forming the trimer [figure Further, we assume that a particular resonator in the trimer is perturbed. In this case, the resonant frequency of the perturbed resonator is shifted concerning the resonant frequency of the remaining two resonators in the trimer (ω 1 = ω 2 = ω 3 ). Here, for the excitation of the toroidal mode, the orientation of the magnetic dipole moment in the perturbed resonator is important. Thus, when the trimer is excited by a wave having the H y component, the m 1 component of the magnetic dipole moment in the perturbed resonator is orthogonal to the circle, the m 2 and m 3 components compensate each other, and the toroidal dipole mode does not arise [figure Changing parameters of a particular disk in the trimer, e.g., its diameter D, thickness h d , or refractive index n, one can realize access to the toroidal dipole mode of the trimer. However, such perturbations also affect on the frequency of the corresponding resonance. This influence can be evaluated qualitatively using equation (1) and the circuit theory. In the framework of the circuit theory, the trimer can be considered as a sequence of three RLC circuits. In the case of a small perturbation introduced into one resonator in the trimer, the resonant frequency of the mode can be obtained using equation (D.4) given in Appendix D. In particular, for the diameter perturbation, the Taylor expansion of equation ( where ω 0 is the resonant frequency of the unperturbed trimer and ∆D is the value of the diameter perturbation. The coefficient 1/3 is due to the perturbation of only one of the three resonators forming the trimer (this is consistent with equation (D.7) of the circuit theory given in Appendix D). A similar expression can be derived for the case of the trimer perturbation via the refractive index of a particular disk. The disk thickness does not enter to equation (1) as a parameter. To qualitatively evaluate the influence of the thickness perturbation on the toroidal mode resonance, one can consider that the resonant frequency of the disk is inversely proportional to its volume and, consequently, to its thickness. The quality factor of a sharp Fano resonance is inversely proportional to the square of the coupling strength κ where P is the coefficient which depends on physical and geometrical parameters of the structure. In our foregoing analysis, we have found out that the toroidal mode can be excited in the metasurface composed of trimers with reduced symmetry by a normally incident plane wave with a proper polarization. In this section, we consider a metasurface composed of trimers arranged in square unit cells. Such a metasurface has been investigated experimentally in To simulate the eigenfields and optical response of the metasurface irradiated by a linearly polarized plane wave, we use the RF module of the commercial COMSOL Multiphysics finite-element electromagnetic solver. In the solver, we impose the Floquet-periodic boundary conditions on four sides of the unit cell to simulate an infinite two-dimensional array of the trimers. The solver allows us to calculate the transmission spectra of the metasurface as well as the resonant distribution of the inner electromagnetic field within the unit cell. We start our study from the eigenwaves analysis to recognize the appearance of the toroidal dipole mode of interest. From this analysis, the corresponding wavelength range is determined, where the toroidal mode exists in the given metasurface. Then in the chosen wavelength range, the transmission spectra of the metasurface is calculated for the incident waves of two orthogonal polarizations. The results of our simulation of the metasurface composed of trimers disposed in square unit cells are collected in figure This figure presents the transmission spectra evolution related to the toroidal dipole mode for non-perturbed and perturbed trimers with the C 3v symmetry and its reduction, respectively, while keeping the symmetry of the square unit cell unchanged [see figure In particular, figure It is obvious that the toroidal mode is a hybrid mode of the trimer. The characteristics of the corresponding resonance depend on the degree of electromagnetic coupling between this hybrid mode and incident field. Therefore, when the distance between the disks increases, the area occupied by the trimer becomes larger. In this case, the electromagnetic coupling strength between the trimer and the incident field increases, which leads to a decrease in the quality factor of the corresponding resonance in the metasurface spectra as equation ( We also consider here the situation when the asymmetry of the trimer is enhanced by the dislocation of one of the resonators along the symmetry plane σ [see figure Regarding perturbations related to a change the diameter, thickness, or material of one disk in the trimer [figure Thus, if the trimer is located in a square unit cell, an electromagnetic coupling arises between the mode and the field of the incident wave. However, the ability to maintain high-Q factor resonant conditions in such a structure is somewhat limited. The quality factor of the toroidal mode resonance increases as the disks in the trimer approach each other. However, in close proximity, the disks should not touch each other to ensure that the conditions for the existence of a hybrid mode of the trimer persist. To avoid this limitation, in what follows, we consider twin-trimer designs of the unit cell which allow to obtain a very high-Q factor toroidal resonant response. Several trimers can be combined together to form complex clusters (meta-macromolecules). In this section, we consider a metasurface whose metamacromolecules are composed of two trimers disposed into either rectangular or rhomboid unit cells. In such clusters, there are two equal trimers, where one trimer is rotated by 180 • with respect to another trimer, as shown in figure The twin-trimer deposition into a rectangular unit cell does not break the C 2v symmetry. To make a perturbation, one disk can be dislocated along the σ 2 plane. This reduces the twin-trimer symmetry to the C s group [figure If one disk in each trimer forming the cluster is substituted by a disk with another material or with different geometrical parameters (these disks are indicated in figure Since twin-trimers in rectangular unit cells possess the C 2v symmetry, the toroidal dipole mode turns out to be a quasi-dark state for such systems. The eigenwaves analysis shows that although the toroidal dipole mode exists in the twin-trimer cluster, it has a purely real eigenfrequency, and, therefore, has no electromagnetic coupling with the incident wave field. Breaking the symmetry of the twin-trimer by dislocating one disk opens access to this state. This mechanism of excitation of the toroidal dipole mode in the twin- trimer metasurface is illustrated in figure From this figure, one can conclude that as soon as the symmetry of the twin-trimer is broken, a resonance with high-Q factor appears in the transmission spectra of the metasurface. This feature does not depend on which side the disk is dislocated [figure As another perturbation parameter, we consider the distance between trimers inside the unit cell [figure At the same time, in the twin-trimer, there is an electromagnetic interaction between adjacent trimers, and the modes of individual trimers become to be coupled. As known, in the result of this interaction, the modes can be coupled either inphase (symmetric) or out-of-phase (anti-symmetric) reflecting correspondingly, the 'bonding' and 'antibonding' nature of such configurations At the end of our theoretical consideration, in this section we study the manifestation of a toroidal dipole mode in metasurfaces composed of twin-trimers disposed in rhomboid unit cells. In particular, we present here the results of our numerical simulation for the metasurfaces, whose unit cells are disturbed by the out-of-plane symmetry breaking associated with the symmetries given in figures 7(c) and 7(d). As a perturbation parameter of the unit cell, we consider the change in the thickness of two disks in the twin-trimer. The results of our simulation of the transmission spectra of the metasurfaces and the corresponding inner resonant magnetic field distributions are summarized in figure As reference data, figure Figures The most distinctive feature of the metasurfaces with rhomboid unit cells is that the toroidal dipole mode coupling in the twin-trimers occurs in the antibonding fashion. This net toroidal dipole mode configuration is characterized by the out-of-phase distribution of the in-plane magnetic moments in two trimers, while the corresponding toroidal dipole moments appears to be oriented contra-directional. This effect can be considered as the manifestation of specific anti-toroidic order In this section, the goal is to confirm our theoretical findings and find out the resistance of the toroidal mode to internal losses inherent in real metasurfaces. To this end, we apply a microwave approach In our experimental study, we utilize an inexpensive technology, where particles are mechanically fabricated from commercially available ceramic plates. The particles are assembled into metasurfaces whose microwave characterization is performed by using standard equipment. This approach allows us to measure the distribution of both magnetic and electric components of the near-field in close proximity above the metasurface. In combination with the far-field analysis, it gives us a complete picture of the appearance of the toroidal dipole mode in real metasurfaces. In our approach, the microwave ceramic is used as a dielectric material for the disks fabrication. According to the manufacturer's data sheet, the relative permittivity of this ceramic is 22 ± 1 and loss tangent is tan δ ≤ 1 × 10 -3 referenced at 10 GHz. The disks are fabricated with the use of a precise milling machine. The production resolution of the machine is 0.1 mm. The diameter of the disks is 8 mm. In our study, we utilize two sets of disks with thicknesses 3.5 mm and 5 mm. An additional set of disks with thickness of 2.5 mm is prepared for their use to compose 'perturbed' trimers. To arrange the disks into a lattice, special arrays of holes are milled in holders made of rigid-foam plates. The depth of holes in the holders corresponds to the thickness of the disks used. At the first stage, we perform the far-field measurements to find out the corresponding resonances in the metasurface transmission spectra. For these measurements, we use a pair of antennas operating in the frequency range from 8.2 GHz to 12.4 GHz. The measurements are performed with the use of the Vector Network Analyzer (VNA) Rohde & Schwartz ZVA50. All resonances of interest can be readily recognized in the transmission spectra, although they are somewhat suppressed by actual losses existing in the metasurfaces (corresponding spectra are not presented here, partially they can be found in After the position of the toroidal mode resonance is determined on the frequency scale, we perform the mapping of near-fields to plot the electric field distribution close to the metasurface plane. In particular, to measure the distribution of the real part of the z-component of the electric field, the sample is irradiated by a quasi-plane wave with a proper polarization, while the dipole probe is situated normally to the sample surface. The near-field imaging system is used to perform the movement of the probe along the metasurface plane. The scanning area covers several unit cells (see details on the measurement technique in references Foremost, one can conclude that our measured data are in reasonable agreement with the simulation and indeed demonstrate the behaviours typical for the toroidal dipole mode discussed above. In the first design the symmetry of the trimer is broken by the square unit cell [figure In the third design, two trimers are paired together in such a way that a rhomboid cluster appears [figure In this paper, we have suggested a systematic study of conditions for the appearance of a toroidal dipole mode in all-dielectric metasurfaces. Our theoretical analysis involves the techniques from the point group theory, SALC, and circuit theory. A cluster of three particles (trimer) is considered as a structural element (metamolecule) of the metasurface. The developed approach is also applied to the metasurface composed of more complex twin-trimer clusters (meta-macromolecules). Our theoretical findings are supplemented by both the full-wave numerical simulation and experimental study. We have shown that selection rules for the toroidal dipole mode can be expressed in the explicit electromagnetic formulation and described in the group-theoretical language. The latter provides a simple and efficient way to choose a corresponding design of the metasurface supporting toroidal dipole mode. We have shown how the quality factor of the toroidal resonance depends on the asymmetry introduced into the trimer-based unit cell. Presented above results show that symmetry of the complex system is various for different complexity levels. In our case, the symmetry of the disk is C ∞v , the symmetry of the magnetic dipole and perturbed trimer is C s , and the symmetry of the perturbed twintrimer can be either C 2v , C 2 , or C s . The structure of the inner electromagnetic field of the toroidal dipole mode is defined by the local symmetry of the trimer, which in the perturbed case is C s . However, the far-field characteristics depend on the global symmetry of the meta-(macro)molecule. In general, this problem can be associated with the theory of point defects in crystals. We have noticed that the intensity of the electromagnetic field inside the perturbed resonator can be higher or lower than that in the remaining two resonators in the trimer. This perturbed resonator can be considered as an active center for other resonators forming the cluster. Our results can provide remarkable opportunities for facilitating the interaction of light and matter in all-dielectric structures intended for light emission, nonlinear switching, sensing, and so on. vector, therefore, it is transformed in accordance with equation (A.1) as well. IRREPs of the C 3v group and SALCs of an unperturbed trimer are presented in table where the summation is performed with respect to the elements R of the C 3v group. These elements are e, C 3 , C -1 3 , σ 1 , σ 2 , and σ 3 . Γ is a representation A, B, or E of the C 3v group (see table B1 in Appendix B), χ Γ kj (R) is the kj-th component of the IRREP Γ of the element R, Rm i is a basis element m i transformed by the operator R, and g is the order of the group (in our case, g = 6). The normalized eigenvectors of the trimer are presented in the third column of table C1. Corresponding eigenmodes are also identified performing the full-wave simulation in reference An equivalent RLC circuit of a dielectric disk at a resonance can be described via the impedance Z=R + jX , where R is the resistance and X is the reactance. If we consider a series RLC scheme, the impedance and resonant frequency are Z = R + j(ωL -1/ωC) and ω 0 = 1/ √ LC, respectively. The reactance slope parameter x of the circuit is defined as In a narrow-band case, the reactance is where ∆ω = (ω -ω 0 ). If Z includes internal and radiation losses, the loaded quality factor of the circuit is and the -3dB fractional bandwidth (BW) of the resonator is defined as BW = ω 0 /Q L . A trimer composed of three resonators can be represented by three RLC circuits connected in series. The resonant condition for this contour is For the perturbed trimer discussed above in the main body of this paper, we have X 3 = X 2 and ω 3 = ω 2 . From equations (D.2) and (D.4) one can derive the condition for the resonant frequency of the toroidal mode ω T in the trimer: where ω i and x i (i = 1, 2) are the resonant frequencies and reactance slope parameters of the individual resonators, respectively. If the linewidths of the resonances are equal (i.e., x 2 = x 1 ), equation (D.5) is reduced to From this equation, one can conclude that the frequency ω T always lies between ω 1 and ω 2 since X 1 and X 2 have different signs only on this interval and, therefore, equation (D.4) can be satisfied. For the case ω 2 = ω 1 , the condition ω T = ω 2 holds as expected. The normalized spectral spacing between ω T and ω 2 is One can see from equation (D.7) that the higher perturbation (i.e., the higher difference between ω 1 and ω 2 ), the more spacing between frequencies ω T and ω 2 . Table x , H x , H y