We have studied helicity dependent photocurrent (HDP) in Bi-based Dirac semimetal thin films. HDP increases with film thickness before it saturates, changes its sign when the majority carrier type is changed from electrons to holes and takes a sharp peak when the Fermi level lies near the charge neutrality point. These results suggest that irradiation of circularly polarized light to Dirac semimetals induces an effective magnetic field that aligns the carrier spin along the light spin angular momentum and generates a spin current along the film normal. The effective magnetic field is estimated to be orders of magnitude larger than that caused by the inverse Faraday effect (IFE) in typical transition metals. We consider the small effective mass and the large g-factor, characteristics of Dirac semimetals with strong spin orbit coupling, are responsible for the giant IFE, opening pathways to develop systems with strong light-spin coupling. Conservation of the spin angular momentum plays an essential role in the interaction between light and electron spin in solids. The optical selection rule, i.e., the Fermi's golden rule, sets the transition rate of electrons from the ground state to the excited state upon light irradiation. Exploiting the selection rule, one can excite spin polarized carriers in semiconductors Significant light induced effects have also been observed in metals, where there is no band gap. For example, application of ultrashort polarized laser pulses to magnetic thin films allows manipulation of the magnetization Here we show, from helicity dependent photocurrent measurements, that irradiation of circularly polarized * Equally contributed light to Bi-based Dirac semimetals Semimetal thin films are deposited on SiO 2 substrates using RF magnetron sputtering. Here we show representative results from Bi, Bi 1-x Sb x alloy, Sn-or Te-doped Bi thin films with a thickness of t (see supplementary material for the details of sample preparation and device characterization). A seed layer of 0.5 Ta/2 Cu (thickness in nm) is inserted for the Bi 1-x Sb x alloy film. The influence of the seed layer on the photocurrent will be discussed elsewhere. A metal shadow mask is inserted between the substrate and the sputtering target to form a wire Schematic illustration of the experimental setup and the coordinate axis are shown in Fig. Representative results of the photocurrent are plotted in Figs. where C represents the difference in the photocurrent when left and right handed polarized light are illuminated. L 1 and L 2 are the changes in the photocurrent under illumination of circularly and linearly polarized light. The last term I 0 is a constant term that is independent of α. α 0 is an offset angle associated with the optical setup and is ∼ -1 • here. The fitting results are shown using the orange solid line in Figs. Based on the results presented in Fig. where θ SH is the spin Hall angle, e is the elementary charge (e > 0), n is the carrier density, σ is a vector that represents the spin angular momentum of the carriers and v σ is the velocity of the carriers with spin σ. v σ is defined as ), where μ is the carrier mobility and u σ is the chemical potential of carriers with spin σ. For a reason that will be discussed later, we assume that σ points along, or against, the light propagation direction (l). Since v σ is parallel to the light intensity gradient (along z in Fig. To clarify how the electronic structure of Bi influences the generation of helicity dependent photocurrent, we have doped Bi with Sn and Te to vary the carrier concentration and change the position of the Fermi level with respect to the Dirac point The inset of Fig. From the magnitude of C, we first provide a rough estimate of the light induced spin density per unit volume (n s ). n s can be obtained from N F , the density of states at the Fermi level, and u s , the difference in the chemical potential of carriers with σ parallel and antiparallel to the in-plane component of l, via the relation n s = N F u s . As a first order estimation, we assume that u s varies linearly from u s,max at the surface of the semimetal to 0 over a distance (λ s,p ) set either by the larger of the spin diffusion length (λ s ) and the light penetration length (λ p ). Consequently, a spin current of j s = σ xx u s,max 2eλ s,p Substituting ) and N F ∼ 1.4 × 10 28 (eV -1 m -3 ) ), where S is the laser irradiation area. Even with a spin Hall angle of ∼ 1 The ∆n dependence of C is presented in Fig. where C v,c represents C due to carrier type c (e -: electrons. h + : holes) at valley v (L or T ). (Note that the T valley only accommodates holes). We assume that the spin density is equal to the product of the Zeeman energy and N F for each valley, i.e., n s,max ∼ μ B g eff h eff N F , where μ B , g eff and h eff are the Bohr magneton, the effective g-factor and the y-component of h eff , respectively. Using Eq. ( where σ SH ≡ σ xx θ SH is the spin Hall conductivity. Theoretical calculations suggest that σ SH is larger for the electrons in the L valley than that of the holes in the T valley In the calculation, we adjust the peak value of h eff g eff so that the maximum C at ∆n ∼ 0 is ∼ 1 nA (θ SH ∼ 1 is assumed), in accordance with the experiments. Past studies have shown that the electrons in the L valley possess large g eff , of the order of ∼100 to ∼1000 Theoretical calculations show that the strength of IFE increases with increasing light wavelength (λ) In summary, we have shown that a giant light induced effective magnetic field emerges in Dirac semimetals. A spin density that scales with the light intensity is created by the IFE, causing a spin current along the film normal. The spin current is converted to charge current via the ISHE, giving rise to HDP. The carrier transport characteristics of Dirac semimetals with strong spin orbit coupling are responsible for the giant IFE. These results demonstrate the unique optical response of Dirac semimetals that can be exploited to develop systems with strong light-spin coupling.