Capillary condensation of water is ubiquitous in nature and technology. It routinely occurs in granular and porous media, can strongly alter such properties as adhesion, lubrication, friction and corrosion, and is important in many processes employed by microelectronics, pharmaceutical, food and other industries The Kelvin equation predicts that capillaries become spontaneously filled with water at the relative humidity RHK = exp (-2σ/kBTdρN) where σ ≈ 73 mJ m -2 is the surface tension of water at room temperature T, ρN ≈ 3.3×10 28 m -3 is the number density of water, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and d is the diameter of the meniscus curvature. For a two-dimensional (2D) confinement created by parallel walls separated by a distance h, d = h/cos(θ) where θ is the contact angle of water on the walls' material. For capillary condensation to occur at relative humidity (RH) considerably below 100%, equation 1 dictates that d must be comparable to 2σ/kBTρN ≈ 1.1 nm. For example, under typical ambient RH of 40-50%, water is expected to condense in slits with h < 1.5 nm and cylindrical pores with diameters < 3 nm, if θ is close to zero. Even stronger confinement is required for capillaries involving less hydrophilic materials. So far, a broad consensus has been reached that the Kelvin equation remains accurate for menisci with d ≥ 8 nm As for theory, the Kelvin equation is also believed to reach its applicability limit for confinement containing a few molecular layers because, at this smallest scale, the properties of water notably change To detect RH at which capillary condensation occurred in the described 2D capillaries, we exploited the fact As described in Supplementary Information ('Remnant sagging above the condensation transition'), these two parameters define the stiffness of the top crystal and, hence, how deep it bends inwards. We found that, for w ≈ 150 nm, the top crystal should be ∼50-70 nm thick to exhibit the sagging depth δ of several Å. If either w or H were changed only by a factor of 2, the strong dependence δ ∝ w 4 /H 3 resulted in either collapsed channels (the top crystal attached to the bottom one) or such small δ < 1 Å that the condensation transition was impossible to discern by AFM. The studied capillaries were typically 5 to 10 μm long. As shown in Fig. It is surprising that the macroscopic Kevin equation using the characteristics of bulk water describes so well condensation in our mica capillaries and, also, provides qualitative agreement for the graphite capillaries. As mentioned in the introduction, strong discrepancy is expected for the angstrom-scale confinement where only 1 or 2 layers of water fit inside capillaries. Before trying to explain the unexpected agreement between the experiment and the macroscopic Kelvin equation, we note that RHC in Fig. where γSV and γSL are the surface energies for solid-vapor and solid-liquid interfaces, respectively, and γSV -γSL = σcosθ. The former energy γSV is largely independent of h because the interaction of gas molecules with surfaces should depend little on confinement. Also, ρN changes relatively little for nearly incompressible water For further analysis, we employed molecular dynamics simulations (SI) to evaluate ∆γ and the resulting corrections to the macroscopic Kelvin equation, which are given by the factor exp(2∆γ/hkBTρN) according to equation 2. Examples of the calculated ∆γ(h) are shown in Fig. Finally, we note that elastic adjustments should also play an important role in real-life capillaries responsible for condensation phenomena under ambient humidity. Indeed, capillary pressures at 1nm scale typically exceed 1 kbar and the resulting elastic response of even infinitely thick walls can exceed 1 Å for the case of 2D confinement ('Remnant sagging above the condensation transition'). This should force atomic-scale capillaries to elastically adjust their geometry Fabrication procedures. The studied capillary devices were fabricated following the procedures described in refs. 26&27 and shown in the flow chart of fig. In parallel, we prepared a suspended silicon nitride (SiN) membrane with a rectangular hole in the center (fig. The two-layer assembly consisting of the bottom crystal and graphene spacers (fig. After each crystal transfer, samples were cleaned in acetone, deionized water and isopropanol. This was followed by annealing at 400°C in a hydrogen-argon atmosphere for 3 h. Such thorough cleaning was essential to remove polymer residues and other possible contamination, which could otherwise block the capillaries. In our experiments, we used only those capillaries that exhibited uniform sagging along their entire length, such as those shown, for example, in Fig. The contact angle for muscovite mica and natural graphite used for making our devices was measured by Drop Shape Analyzer 100S from KRÜSS. We found θ ≈ 80-85° for graphite and 15-20° for mica after exposure to ambient air for a few days, in agreement with the previous reports (see, e.g., refs. 28&29). AFM topography under controlled humidity. Our setup for AFM measurements is shown in fig. The SiN wafer containing a capillary device such as shown in fig. Non-hysteretic behavior of the condensation transition. Capillary condensation in nanochannels is often accompanied by hysteresis such that RHC required to reach the transition depends on whether external RH is increased or decreased Then we increased RH to 80% and equilibrated for 1 h, following the experimental procedures described above. The 5% change in RH led to a pronounced jump in the sagging depth δ, indicating the condensation transition (cf. black and red curves in fig. Effect of initial sagging. For 2D channels with the same N, their heights h = Na -δ0 could vary considerably because of different H and slightly different w, which control the initial sagging δ0. This resulted in different RHC observed for capillaries with the same N. This behavior is illustrated in fig. S5a had the top layer with H ≈ 70 nm and exhibited initial sagging of ∼4 Å. The transition in this device occurred at RHC = 82.5% as seen in fig. The above observations strongly suggest that h is the size parameter that describes best the condensation transition in our atomic-scale capillaries. This means that it is the central region between the sagged-top and flat-bottom crystals where the condensation process is effectively initiated. This is not entirely unexpected because molecular dynamics (MD) simulations previously showed that corner menisci in narrow channels were unfavorable for condensation Remnant sagging above the condensation transition. Nanometer-thick suspended crystals are known to exhibit considerable sagging, which is believed to be caused by their vdW adhesion to sidewalls In all our measurements, the sagging depth δ0 became abruptly smaller at the condensation transition but did not completely disappear. Only if RH was increased further, the remnant sagging gradually decreased, approaching zero at 100% RH, so that the top layer became essentially flat (Figs. 1d,e of the main text; fig. The negative pressure P forces the top crystal to bend downwards, resulting in its sagging given by 41 where E ≈ 60 GPa is Young's modulus of mica in the out-of-plane direction The condition of partially sagged but open capillaries (that is, a few Å < δ0 < Na, as in our devices) is rather difficult to satisfy experimentally. Indeed, if we were to decrease H or increase w by only a factor of 2 with respect to the found optimal design, δ in equation 3 would increase by an order of magnitude because of the high powers. On the other hand, the capillary pressure P in equation 4 depends on RH only logarithmically, which means that even at very low humidity (e.g., 5%), it would be thermodynamically favorable for the top layer with the non-optimal w or H to bend all the way down and reach the channel's bottom. Therefore, such non-optimized 2D channels are unstable with respect to spontaneous water condensation under low-humidity conditions. If we were to do the opposite and increase the top crystal's stiffness (by using twice smaller w or twice larger H), δ in equation 3 becomes so small (< 1 Å) that changes in the sagging would be impossible to detect by AFM. The above consideration shows that there is a subtle interplay between materials parameters and 2D channels' design, and stringent rules should be followed in order to detect the condensation transition in experiment. Following this insight, we usually increased H by ∼50% for our smallest 2D channels with N = 2 and 3, which ensured that they remained open. Also, when making graphite capillaries, we used top crystals slightly (∼20%) thicker than in the case of mica capillaries with the same N because mica has a higher Young's modulus than graphite where νν is Poisson's ratio and G is the shear modulus. This equation yields the sagging If we take as an example the elastic properties of graphite with G ≈ 10 GPa and ν ≈ 0.3 Molecular dynamics simulations of water-surface interaction under strong confinement. To investigate the dependence of the solid-liquid surface energy γSL on h, MD simulations were performed using LAMMPS Having established parameters for the desired contact angles, we proceeded to another simulation setup that consisted of two flat 4-layer graphite sheets immersed in a water box containing 40,000 molecules. The dimension of each graphene sheet was 102.2 × 100.9 Å 2 whereas the water box was 140.0 × 140.0 Å 2 in size, which allowed water molecules confined between the rigid graphite sheets to exchange easily with outside molecules. After an equilibration run of 1.0 ns, the two sheets were brought progressively closer in steps of 0.2 Å. Each time the system was equilibrated for 0.1 ns and its total potential energy was calculated for further analysis. Periodic boundary conditions were imposed in all three directions. All the simulations were carried out with the isothermal-isobaric ensemble at 298 K. The density profiles found in our simulations are shown in fig. The deviations ∆γ in the solid-liquid surface energy γSL from its bulk value may be considered as extra work spent to rearrange water molecules into the strongly layered structures shown in fig. Using equation 2 and the numerically found ∆γ, it is straightforward to calculate the RH required for water condensation inside atomic-scale capillaries. The results are plotted in Fig. water condensation in mica channels of different heights h. Experimental observations: blue circles; their size reflects the 3.5% experimental uncertainty in determining RHC ('AFM topography under controlled humidity' in SI). Two solid curves: RHK given by equation 1 with bulk water's characteristics for the range of possible θ for mica (color coded). The upper curve (black circles) with its own Y-axis and the common X-axis shows our MD calculations for changes in γSL caused by restructuring of water inside 2D channels (θ ≈ 10°). The arrows mark the energy minima that correspond to the integer