We provide experimental and theoretical evidence for the realization of the Peierls-type structurally distorted state in the quasi-one-dimensional superconductor Sc3CoC4 by a phonon-softening mechanism. The transition from the high-to the final low-temperature phase below 80 K proceeds via an extended intermediate temperature regime between 80 K and 150 K characterized by phonondriven atom displacements. In support of the low-dimensional character of the title compound we find a highly anisotropic correlation-length of these dynamic distortions. Due to recent advances in nanofabrication and nanopatterning dimensionality effects in physical phenomena have become a very active field of research. Even nanowires or two-dimensional films of decidedly three-dimensional materials such as perovskites have become available for further studies. 1,2 Still, the majority of publications in this field is dedicated to a narrow range of materials with structurally inherent low-dimensional features. These are for example NbSe 3 A characteristic physical phenomenon in many structurally low-dimensional materials is the existence of a subtle competition between a structurally distorted state (e.g. due to the formation of a charge-density wave) and a superconducting state. The balance between these usually conflicting states may be influenced by external factors such as hydrostatic pressure, Single crystals of Sc 3 CoC 4 were grown according to methods described in the literature Resistivity measurements of single crystals of Sc 3 CoC 4 contacted in a four-point geometry were carried out using a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS, QUANTUM DESIGN). Geometry relaxations of the HT and LT phase of Sc 3 CoC 4 starting from the structural parameters from Eickerling et al. The PHONOPY code 45 was used for phonon dispersion calculations on Sc 3 CoC 4 with a 2 × 2 × 2 supercell. Forces were calculated with the VASP program employing the PBE density functional 43,44 , a 4 × 4 × 2 k-point mesh and an energy cutoff for the plane wave basis set of 500 eV. We focus on the results of the electrical resistivity measurements on single crystalline samples of Sc 3 CoC 4 first (see Fig. Details about structural changes connected to the two anomalies in the electrical resistivity are provided by the results of detailed temperature-dependent single-crystal X-ray diffraction measurements on Sc 3 CoC 4 outlined in the following. A concise analysis of temperature-dependent changes in diffraction space allows insight into the evolution of the LT structure of Sc 3 CoC 4 from the HT structure. The intensity of the superstructure reflections I XRD (T ) with k = ± 1 2 , ± 1 2 , 0 that result from a fourfold enlargement of the orthorhombic HT unit cell in its ab-plane Our measurements reveal an increase of I XRD (T ) (see Fig. Moreover, the coinciding positions of both, diffuse rods and pinpoint superstructure reflections, can be taken as a hint to their common origin. Similar transitions from precursor diffuse features in reciprocal space to pinpoint superstructure reflections are known for other structurally low-dimensional materials featuring low-temperature periodic distortions, e.g. 1T -TaS 2 , 13,60 K 0.3 MoO 3 9,61 or NbSe 3 . 61,62 Based on the temperature-dependent changes in diffraction space, three different temperature regimes for the structural properties of Sc 3 CoC 4 may be assigned: (I ) a HT-regime above ≈ 150 K characterized by unmodulated (or only weakly) modulated diffuse rods along c * in reciprocal space, (II ) a pre-LT-regime between ≈ 150 K and ≈ 80 K with coexistent diffuse rods and weak superstructure reflections, and (III ) a LT-regime below ≈ 80 K marked by the exclusive presence of strong and pinpoint superstructure reflections. This partitioning into temperature regimes fits equally well with the anomalies in the electrical resistivity ρ(T ) (see Fig. Starting point for the interpretation of the above results is the structural model of the Sc 3 CoC 4 HT-phase. The existence of rod-shaped features in diffraction space may be related to layered structural moieties in real space. Taking into account the orientation of the rods along c * , these layers must extend parallel to the crystallographic ab-plane of the orthorhombic HT cell and can be associated with stacked ribbons of interconnected [ Co(C 2 ) 2 Co ] hexagons (shaded in red and green in Fig. In a simplistic picture, the diffuse rods may be attributed to disorder between the layered building units of the HT-structure along c. However, the characteristic intensity modulation of the rod intensity perpendicular to c * (see profile above Fig. To conclude, we provide experimental and theoretical evidence for a soft-phonon-driven formation of a Peierlstype structurally distorted state in Sc 3 CoC 4 upon cooling. Based on the new results, the interplay between two distinct transitions, i.e. a charge-density wave transition at 150 K and a Peierls-type distortion at 80 K, discussed in earlier publications where the number of unit cells is denoted by N and the one-electron scattering intensity by I e . Every sum contribution is weighted by a thermal occupation factor 1 ωq,j coth ωq,j 2kB T for phonon j at wave vector q with frequency ω q,j . 64 Thus, the contributions of low-frequency phonons to TDS are dominant. The dynamical structure factors F j derive from the phonon-specific shift of the atoms s in the unit cell as with atomic scattering factor f s , atomic mass μ s and Debye-Waller factor M s . Size and direction of the atom shifts are described by the polarization vector e q,j,s . 64 Special attention should be paid to the double meaning of the wave vector q: On the one hand, q is the sum of the reduced phonon wave vector in the first Brillouin zone k and a reciprocal lattice vector Due to the periodicity of the phonon dispersion in reciprocal space, ω q,j and ω k,j are identical. On the other hand, q indicates the position of the considered TDS feature and K q the position of the adjacent Bragg reflection in reciprocal space. The dominant diffuse reciprocal space features in the HT regime of Sc 3 CoC 4 are the rods along c * . The location of all points on the diffuse rods with respect to the adjacent Bragg reflections can be described by wave vectors k = 1 2 , 1 2 , l with l varying between 0 and 1 2 . Thereby, the boundary points k = 1 2 , 1 2 , 0 and k = 1 2 , 1 2 , 1 2 represent positions on and exactly midway between the superstructure reflections appearing in the pre-LT and LT regime. From this information, a low-frequency, flat phonon branch connecting the zone-boundaries at W ( = 1 2 , 1 2 , 0) and T ( = 1 2 , 1 2 , 1 2 ) may be postulated for the HT regime. Indeed, an acoustic phonon mode with extraordinarily low frequency between W and T is found in the ab-initio phonon dispersion relation based on the idealized ground-state structure of HT Sc 3 CoC 4 (highlighted in green in Fig. Focusing on the intensity modulation of the TDS, diffuse rods and pinpoint superstructure reflections show similar intensity alternations along the reciprocal space directions a * and b * (see Fig. reflection positions in the (h, 1.5, l)-plane are shown for each of the temperature regimes of Sc 3 CoC 4 postulated in section V. The similarity of the line profiles in Fig. In the following, we will relate the characteristic scattering intensity variation along the line [h, 1.5, 0] to a simplified model of the displacive modulation pattern in Sc 3 CoC 4 . Only scattering contributions from the set of atoms most affected by shifts from their high-symmetry positions, i.e. the cobalt and the scandium atoms capping the [ Co(C 2 ) 2 Co ] hexagons (see Fig. In a first step, the contributions of the cobalt and scandium atoms to the structure factor F (h) are treated separately. The general structure factor equation for a one-atom structure subjected to an arbitrary displacement wave is detailed elsewhere. FIG. Sc 3 CoC 4 at the position of superstructure reflections can be described by the simplified formula The position of the superstructure reflections is referred to by the reciprocal space vector h, while J 1 (2πha) and G(h) denote the structure factor of the unmodulated structure and the first-order Bessel function, respectively. The displacement wave is characterized by its amplitude vector a, wave vector q and phase φ. Concerning the cobalt substructure, a phase φ = 0 may be put for the displacements 72 leading to so that in a first step the variation of J 1 (2πha) and G(h) along the line [h, 1.5, 0] must be considered. As the cobalt atom displacements are directed along the crystallographic a-direction (a = (a, 0, 0) T ), the argument of J 1 reduces to the scalar ha. Non-zero values of G Co (h ± q) may only occur, if a vector ±q = ±(0.5, 0.5, 0) T connects the reciprocal space position h of the considered superstructure reflection to the position of a non-extinct main reflection. However, every second superstructure reflection along [h, 1.5, 0] is absent (crossed out in Fig. The same strategy can be applied in the derivation of the structure factor contribution of the scandium atoms F Sc (h). Displacements of the scandium atoms towards long Co• • •Co contacts 75 are accounted for by putting a value of π for the displacement wave phase φ, so that is obtained. In contrast to the cobalt atoms, the scandium atom displacements point along the crystallographic b-direction (a = (0, a, 0) T ), so that the argument ha of the Bessel functions in Eq. B3 is constant along [h, 1.5, 0] and J 1 (ha) = const. > 0 over the whole range of h-values. Approximating the structure factor for the contributing main reflections of the unmodulated scandium substructure 76 in analogy to the cobalt atom substructure again yields a weakly h-dependent value of G Sc (h ± q) with G Sc (h + q) > 0 and G Sc (hq) ≈ -G Sc (h + q). Therefore, the structure factor contribution F Sc (h) of the Sc atoms at the superstructure reflection positions along [h, 1.5, 0] shows only slight variation with h and is invariably negative (see solid red line in Fig. Due to their larger size with an approximate thickness of 150 μm and an approximate lateral extension of 300 μm (see Fig. In order to verify, that the type of the sample does not affect the results discussed in the main text, measurements were performed on both types of single-crystals. In analogy to the platelet-like single-crystals, weak diffuse rods can be recognized in the room-temperature reconstruction of the (h, 1.5, l)-plane for a needle-shaped single-crystal (Fig. -ray For a more accurate estimate of the maximum domain size the rotation of a twinned crystal in an X-ray beam with Gaussian profile (90 μm FWHM) was simulated. Thereby, the crystal shape was taken from the experiment and partitioned into lamellar domains of varying thickness (see Fig. For the creation of reciprocal layer reconstructions from experimental X-ray diffraction data the program htd2predict was used. The only requirement is the use of an area detector for the acquisition of the diffraction data. Thereby, the following procedure is used: First, the orientation matrix describing the crystal orientation with respect to the laboratory axis system is determined with the program DIRAX 17 and refined with the program EVAL14. Due to different characteristics of diffuse rods and superstructure reflections adapted approaches had to be used in the extraction of their intensities. The superstructure reflections are pinpoint and spread only over few X-ray diffraction images collected in φ-scanning mode. This situation allows the usage of single unprocessed diffraction images to track the temperature-dependent intensity of a representative (-1.5, 0.5, 0) reflection. The diffuse rods, by contrast, are weak and span a large number of X-ray diffraction images. Thus, the intensity extraction scheme was based on reciprocal-space reconstructions that were generated with the program htd2predict 15 (see Sec. IV). Thereby, the intensity at positions (2.5, 1.5, 0.5), (2.5, 1.5, 1.5) and (2.5, 1.5, 2.5), 