High critical temperature superconductivity often occurs in systems where an antiferromagnetic order is brought near T = 0K by slightly modifying pressure or doping. CaKFe4As4 is a superconducting, stoichiometric iron pnictide compound showing optimal superconducting critical temperature with Tc as large as 38 K. Doping with Ni induces a decrease in Tc and the onset of spin-vortex antiferromagnetic order, which consists of spins pointing inwards to or outwards from alternating As sites on the diagonals of the in-plane square Fe lattice. Here we study the band structure of CaK(Fe0.95Ni0.05)4As4 (Tc = 10 K, TN = 50 K) using quasiparticle interference with a Scanning Tunneling Microscope (STM) and show that the spin-vortex order induces a Fermi surface reconstruction and a fourfold superconducting gap anisotropy. Iron pnictide superconductors mostly crystallize in a tetragonal structure. Optimal T c appears in a phase diagram that shows structural, nematic or magnetic order in the vicinity of superconductivity Following this idea, electron doping by substituting Fe with Co or Ni leads to antiferromagnetic order in CaKFe 4 As 4 (Fig. We study single crystals of CaK(Fe 0.95 Ni 0.05 ) 4 As 4 which have been obtained using the method of Ref. When zooming into a small region we observe strong electronic scattering due to defects. The field of view shown in the topographic constant current image of Fig. When plotting the bias voltage dependence of the scattering pattern along the high symmetry directions Γ-X and Γ-M (Figs. In Fig. In what follows we investigate the origin of the three scattering vectors identified in Fig. We discuss now the observed fourfold modulation of the superconducting gap in CaK(Fe 0.95 Ni 0.05 ) 4 As 4 (Fig. It has been also reported that, similar to what is found in 122 compounds Ba 1-x M x Fe 2 As 2 with M = Co, Ni and Rh In conclusion, we have measured the spatial dependence of the tunneling conductance in the SVC state of CaK(Fe 0.95 Ni 0.05 ) 4 As 4 and report direct evidence for a strong mutual influence between superconductivity and SVC antiferromagnetic order. Quasiparticle interference measurements supported by band structure calculations demonstrate a Fermi surface reconstruction and anisotropic pairing through an in-plane fourfold modulation of the superconducting gap. The comparison to CaKFe 4 As 4 , where there is no antiferromagnetic order and the superconducting gap shows no in-plane anisotropy, strongly suggests that the SVC antiferromagnetic state is responsible for the anisotropic pairing in