Electron density oscillations with acoustic dispersions and sustained at boundaries between different media provide information about surface and interface properties of hetero-structures. In ultra-thin metallic films these plasmonic excitations are heavily damped. Superconductivity is predicted to reduce dissipation allowing detection of these resonances. Emerging low-loss interface Cooper-pair waves have been studied before, however, the observation of surface-confined Josephson plasmons has remained elusive. Here, we report on generation and coupling to these excitations in an ultrathin single-crystal film of high-temperature superconductor La1.85Sr0.15CuO4. The film becomes brighter than Au below the critical temperature when probed with sub-gap THz photons. We show that the enhanced signal in the superconducting state, which can be visualized with a spatial resolution better than λ/3,000, originates from near-field coupling of light to surface Josephson plasmons. Our results open a path towards non-invasive investigation of enhanced superconductivity in artificial multilayers, buried interface states in topological hetero-structures, and non-linear phenomena in Josephson devices. Propagating sound-like collective modes in superfluids are converted to higher-energy plasma modes in superconductors There is also a practical interest in materials hosting stacks of conductive metallic sheets ordered with atomic scale precision as they can be used as building blocks for plasmonic devices. Along with doped semiconductor superlattices or modern two-dimensional (2D) materials, superconducting cuprates are examples of such layered systems Systems of coupled metallic layers harbor a variety of plasmonic branches and here we describe their salient features (see also Supplementary Note 4 and Supplementary Figure In high-Tc copper oxides the normal state transport is extremely anisotropic: it is metallic in the ab-plane (parallel to the CuO2 layers) and insulating/incoherent in the perpendicular, c-axis, direction. Below Tc, copper oxides behave like a series array of intrinsic Josephson junctions Here 'S' and 'N' stand for the superfluid and normal components, ωp is the plasma frequency (for the c-axis direction ωJ = ωpS,c/√ε∞,c) and Γ is the scattering rate. The first term in Eq. ( In optimally doped La1.85Sr0.15CuO4 (LSCO) the ratio of the in-plane to the c-axis superfluid plasma frequencies is ωpS,c/ωpS,ab ≈ 25 at low temperatures We achieved coupling to SJPWs in a 13 nm thick LSCO film by using a customized cryogenic system based on Atomic Force Microscopy combined with Scanning Near-Field Optical Microscopy During the growth, we kept the ozone partial pressure at p = 2 × 10 -5 Torr and substrate temperature at Ts = 650 oC. To protect the film surface, we cover the films in situ with 10 nm thick layer of gold, deposited at room temperature. The device shown in the inset of Fig. The AFM-SNOM system was optimized for laser light access and large collection throughput, as well as for AFM tip positioning and device visualization In Fig. The energy scale and the non-monotonic temperature dependence of the near-field signal across the superconducting transition provide strong constraints to possible interpretations of our data. Phonons do not display any abrupt changes at Tc. Moreover, the energies of optical and acoustic branches are either too high or too low to match the energy and range of momenta probed in our experiment In contrast, we show here that SJPWs explain observations quite naturally. This scenario accounts for all key features of our experiment: the coupling mechanism, the abrupt and non-monotonic behavior of the relative LSCO/Au signal with reversal of intensity upon crossing Tc as well as the energy scale which is consistent with the Josephson plasma energy ωJ inferred from far-field measurements. Coupling to plasmonic excitations is enabled by evanescent modes waves with high in-plane momenta in the proximity of the AFM tip and it is well documented in the literature where ε1 is the permittivity of the isotropic medium while εab(ω) and εc(ω) are the ab-plane and caxis dielectric constants of the anisotropic material. Note that if εab = εc, we recover the textbook dispersion formula of surface polariton in isotropic media, see ref. The energies and spectral weights associated with Josephson plasma modes in our film can be seen in Fig. The AFM-SNOM momentum form factor is also shown in panel (a) of this figure by a white dashed line. Within the dipole model its functional form is given by q 2 •exp[-2qz0] where z0 is the distance of minimum approach, chosen here to be equal to the tip radius rtip ~ 20 nm, see also Supplementary Note 6. The closely spaced branches above unity represent propagating modes inside the film, while the feature at ω/ωJ ~ 1, nearly dispersionless in this momentum range, correspond to SJPWs. The vertical axis in Fig. (2) for multilayers because even thin-film devices contain at least two interfaces: vacuum-LSCO and LSCO-substrate, in our case. In this configuration there are two SJPW branches whose energies at high momenta can be read off directly from the zeros of the denominator in Eq. ( Thin films allow for the hybridization of surface modes that are either symmetric or anti-symmetric with respect to the reflection in horizontal symmetry plane. In the presence of a substrate these modes cease to have strict odd/even parity but crosstalk between them is in principle still allowed. In our experiment, i.e. for the range of momenta defined by our form-factor (see white dashed line in Fig. Furthermore, the energy scale and the momentum distribution of our experiment (the white dashed line in Fig. Last but not least, the scenario invoking surface Josephson plasmons is also able to explain the temperature dependence observed in Fig. As expected, the spherical dipole model is not able to account quantitatively our data. For reasonable fitting parameters it renders values for the LSCO/Au intensity ratio that are too small. The shortcomings can be understood and are essentially related to the simplifying assumptions about effective tip polarizability, near-field distribution, field enhancement factors and the neglect of retardation effects. Indeed, increasing the tip polarizability or taking into account a more realistic shape of the AFM tip would lead to a larger LSCO/Au contrast than that shown in Fig. Using the value of the Josephson plasma frequency ωJ = 0.8 THz at T = 0.8 Tc, at optimal doping we obtain a critical current density of the c-axis junction Jc ~ 2•10 5 A/cm 2 and a Josephson penetration depth λJ = c/ωJ ~ 375 μm, indicating that our 20 μm wide wire is in a quasi-1D long Josephson junction regime. For insulating barriers, ωJ tracks, in turn, the superconducting gap Δ. Using the normal-state conductivity evaluated from far-infrared reflectance data The energy scales and the temperature dependence of the LSCO/Au near-field ratio constrain the interpretation sufficiently so that we can assign our observations to SJPWs. Other signatures compatible with this interpretation may exist in theory, for example real-space interference patterns of propagating plasmonic excitations 8 . We did not find observe such fringes experimentally. The reasons for their absence can be understood as the result of the d-wave gap and strong quasi-particle damping at temperatures T ≈ 0.8•Tc, which are close to the base temperature of our system. Customized AFM tip radii may be also needed to maximize the coupling efficiency. Plasma waves such as the ones reported here for LSCO have not been observed yet in Fe-based superconductors In addition to deep sub-diffractional resolution, light demodulation at different harmonics of the AFM tapping frequency provides dielectric depth information A. La 1.85 Sr 0.15 CuO 4 (LSCO) film synthesis and device fabrication. Optimally-doped, LSCO films with a thickness of 13 nm were grown on LSAO substrates using ALL-MBE. The stoichiometry was controlled before and during deposition by a scanning quartz crystal monitor and by a calibrated custom-built 16-channel atomic absorption spectroscopy system, respectively. Film thickness was monitored in-situ by counting the reflection high-energy electron diffraction oscillations and post growth by AFM, profilometry and the finite-thickness oscillations in X-ray reflectance and diffraction. The latter also attest to the film being atomically smooth. The substrate temperature during the growth was 650 oC and the ozone partial pressure was kept at p = 2 × 10 -5 Torr. The device, part of which is shown in Fig. Near-field and AFM data were acquired simultaneously in a custom-built AFM-SNOM setup. The sample chamber was optimized for laser light access to the AFM tip, sample visualization and a large numerical aperture in the collection path. AFM tips are reproducibly obtained by etching 100 μm diameter W wires in a 2M-NaOH solution and using a two-ring geometry. Voltages (peak-topeak) in the 2 -10 V range and frequencies between 5 Hz and 800 Hz can be used for shaping the AFM tip shaft and apex radius. The tip radius used here is ~20 nm as imaged by Scanning Electron Microscopy. The tips were glued to a piezo-actuated quartz tuning fork (TF) resonator operated at its resonance frequency of 28.38 kHz (the resonance frequency without the mounted tip was 2 A custom made DAQ system was built in order to analyze the SNOM signal in-real time, simultaneously with AFM topography data. The hardware consists of a PC computer, a National Instruments high-speed digitizer and a microcontroller. Custom software provides the graphical user interface and synchronizes the operation of the system. The reference clock of the digitizer, reduced to its sampling frequency of a few MHz, is sent to the microcontroller which serves as a digital counter. The microcontroller also triggers the digitizer to start recording time-series data upon receiving pixel pulses from the ASC500 unit, which is the Attocube scanning probe microscope (SPM) controller. At each pulse, the microcontroller sends the current value of its counter to the PC to precisely identify each pixel within the digitizer's data streams. Two data streams are digitized and sent to the PC simultaneously: a reference sine wave output at the tuning fork's resonance frequency (ΩTF) from an output of the ASC500 controller and the actual detector signal. The reference has a dual purpose: (i) it allows for clock-independent measurements of ΩTF for subsequent Fourier analysis of the detector signal at each pixel and (ii) it allows the SNOM-DAQ to operate the SPM in both amplitude and frequency modulation modes. A lock-in method allows demodulation of the SNOM signal at desired multiples of ΩTF. The calculated values for each pixel are then used to construct 2D dielectric SNOM images of the material surface. Fig. In this section we also illustrate qualitatively the evolution of the dispersions of the two surfaces modes as a function the dielectric properties of the surrounding media. The characteristic matrix for an anisotropic medium such as the film in Supplementary Figure The transmitted / reflected fields are at z = 0 and z = d, respectively. Using the boundary conditions along with Fresnel equations, Supplementary Equation ( where r = rP(q,ω) is the reflection coefficient plotted in Fig. The '-' signs here only account for the downward propagation of light, opposite to the positive direction of the z-axis as defined in Supplementary Figure An illustration of the meaning of Supplementary Equations (8 -12) is given in Supplementary Figure As discussed at the end of Supplementary Note 3, anisotropy in the plasma frequencies pushes the asymptotic energies of both these branches close to ωJ. In Supplementary Figure With this discussion we can see how Supplementary Figure Increased scattering due to larger far-field reflection coefficients in the superconducting state cannot account for the observations. Similarly to a normal metal, the temperature-induced changes of the far-infrared in-plane reflectivity in optimally doped LSCO are very small: by less than 2% on cooling from room temperature to T = 5 K and by less than 1% below Tc, ref. We conclude this Supplementary Note by discussing other electronic scenarios compatible, in principle, with near-field coupling. Associating our results with the critical behavior of the dielectric function around the percolation threshold Here we briefly comment why these more exotic candidates are unlikely to explain our data. The coupling to Carlson-Goldman modes is expected to be weak because of almost complete charge neutrality of this excitation. Furthermore, disorder is also expected to heavily damp this response There is no direct optical coupling to pair-breaking excitations or to the Higgs mode of the order parameter The AFM-SNOM momentum form-factor shown with the white dashed line in Fig. The main approximation of the spherical dipole model is the replacement of the actual tip with a spherical particle. The two adjustable parameters of the model are the effective tip polarizability ∝ a 3 , where a is roughly given by the AFM apex radius, and z0, which is the distance of closest approach of the sphere center. The latter parameter should be also of the order of the tip radius. Considering the typical shapes of AFM tips obtained from etched metallic wires, see for example refs. These quantitative limitations were also observed in the infrared range. It is expected that the THz regime amplifies them because wavelengths are in the millimeter range. A more realistic tip-shape is going to improve of the agreement with the experiment. Indeed, increasing the effective tip polarizability in the spherical model or the elongation of a prolate spheroid in the quasi-static approximation 