This study investigates the transport properties of a chiral elemental semiconductor tellurium (Te) under magnetic fields and pressure. Application of hydrostatic pressure reduces the resistivity of Te, while its temperature dependence remains semiconducting up to 4 GPa, contrary to recent theoretical and experimental studies. Application of higher pressure causes structural as well as semiconductor-metal transitions. The resulting metallic phase above 4 GPa exhibits superconductivity at 2 K along with a noticeable linear magnetoresistance effect. On the other hand, at ambient pressure, we identified metallic surface states on the as-cleaved (10 10) surfaces of Te. The nature of these metallic surface states has been systematically studied by analyzing quantum oscillations observed in high magnetic fields. We clarify that a well-defined metallic surface state exists not only on chemically etched samples that were previously reported, but also on as-cleaved ones. Strong spin-orbit interaction (SOI) realizes several types of spin-polarized electronic bands in materials not possessing spatial inversion symmetry. The coupled spin and charge degrees of freedom in this class of materials result in non-trivial dynamics of spins and charges. To elucidate the fundamentals of this coupling, it is crucial to conduct in-depth studies on simple materials; in particular, materials having charge carriers with high mobility and low density provide a promising platform for the extraction of a non-trivial component. In this context, elemental tellurium (Te) is a suitable material on which to carry out studies regarding anomalous phenomena. At ambient pressure, Te is a narrow-gap semiconductor that forms a trigonal structure, as shown in Figs. where A = -3.4 × 10 -15 eV cm 2 , B = -4.6 × 10 -15 eV cm 2 , S = 2.67 × 10 -8 eV cm, and ∆ 1 = 32.2 meV As seen in Fig. Metallic states of pure Te can also be realized on the surface of Te at ambient pressure. In 1971, von Klitzing and Landwehr observed SdH oscillations in pure Te Here, we studied the magneto-transport properties of Te in high magnetic fields up to 55 T at ambient pressure and high pressure up to 8 GPa at 0 T with cubicanvil-type pressure cell. In our measurements, pressureinduced metallization within the trigonal phase was not observed. On the other hand, we identified SdH oscillations in the metallic surface state in Te without chemical etching, which indicates the inevitable influence of this surface state when measuring the physical properties of Te in the atmosphere. Single crystals of Te investigated in this study were prepared by the Bridgman method. Samples were prepared by cleaving large ingots (typically 3 mm×3 mm×5 mm) in liquid nitrogen. For transport measurements, gold wires were attached to the cleaved shiny surfaces using carbon paste, as shown in Fig. Firstly, we focus on transport properties under pressure. As mentioned previously, a recent theoretical calculation predicted the emergence of the Weyl semimetal phase without inversion symmetry above 2.2 GPa. Such metallization should be probed by the change in the temperature dependence of the resistivity or the emergence of SdH oscillation under applied pressure. Figure In classical electron-hole two-carrier model, the magnetoresistance is known to have quadratic magnetic field dependence in weak magnetic field and then saturate in sufficiently high magnetic field. Large magnetoresistance is widely observed in compensated semimetals with high mobility carriers. In elemental Te, each Te atom has an even number of electrons. Therefore, the gapless state in the Te II phase should be a compensated semimetal. This semimetallic state could be the essential point of the observed large positive magnetoresistance in this phase. The linear magnetoresistance is expected to occur in the quantum limit state of a system having a linear energy dispersion ; disorder effects As shown above, we could not realize bulk metallic states in trigonal Te under pressure. In the case of black phosphorus, which also has a direct band gap of ∼0.3 eV at ambient pressure, absorption of alkali-ions can close the gap at the surface instead of the application of hydrostatic pressure We measured the magnetoresistivity (ρ xx ) and the Hall resistivity (ρ yx ) in pulsed magnetic fields up to 55 T at various T from 1.4 to 20 K. Here, magnetic fields were applied normal to the (10 10) plane, while the currents flowed along the [0001] axis. As shown in Figs. Here, we consider dimensionality of the Fermi surface. If the surface is three-dimensional, the carrier density (n 3D ) is related to the SdH frequency F as where e and represent the elemental charge and reduced Planck constant, respectively. g s and g v represent the spin-and valley-degeneracy, respectively. g s = 1, since the top of the valence band has no spin-degeneracy, as mentioned previously. g v is equal to either 2 or 4 when the Fermi surface is a dumb-bell or a pair of ellipsoids, respectively. In both cases, however, by substituting F = 68 T into Eq. ( We can estimate n 2D as 3.3×10 12 cm -2 (6.6×10 12 cm -2 ) with g s g v = 2 (g s g v = 4), which is the same order of magnitude as for surface states in the chemically etched Te From the present data, we constructed the Landau level fan diagram, as shown in Fig. Next, we show the field angular dependence of the SdH oscillations in pulsed magnetic fields. Figures The dependence of resistivity on thickness further confirms the contribution of metallic surface conductivity in pristine Te. Figure Our results indicate that a well-defined metallic surface state exists on samples without a chemical etching process. The underlying local band structure should be determined by future spectroscopic measurements. Owing to its high mobility, the contribution of the surface state is not negligible in bulk measurements, which is evident from the observation of SdH oscillation at a temperature of a few Kelvin and the thickness-dependent conductivity. This factor should be always considered regarding any measurement of transport properties for bulk Te. We investigated the transport properties of elemental tellurium. Under applied hydrostatic pressure up to 8 GPa, we observed a structural phase transition from the trigonal to the Te II structure at 4 GPa with a sharp drop in resistivity at room temperature. The semiconducting temperature dependence of resistivity is retained up to the structural phase transition, whereas metallic character is seen in the Te II phase. We cannot find any indications of a semiconductor-metal transition within the trigonal structure reported by recent theoretical and experimental studies. At ambient pressure, we observed clear Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations on the as-cleaved (10 10) surface in pulsed magnetic fields up to 55 T. The oscillation contains two frequencies (68 T and 4.6 T). These results indicate that the metallic surface state makes a significant contribution to the studies of transport properties in bulk crystals of Te, even on as-cleaved surfaces without chemical etching.