The origin of dielectric breakdown was studied on 4H-SiC MOSFETs that failed after three months of high temperature reverse bias (HTRB) stress. A local inspection of the failed devices demonstrated the presence of a threading dislocation (TD) at the breakdown location. The nanoscale origin of the dielectric breakdown was highlighted with advanced high-spatial-resolution scanning probe microscopy (SPM) techniques. In particular, SPM revealed the conductive nature of the TD and a local increase of the minority carrier concentration close to the defect. Numerical simulations estimated a hole concentration 13 orders of magnitude larger than in the ideal 4H-SiC crystal. The hole injection in specific regions of the device explained the failure of the gate oxide under stress. In this way, the key role of the TD in the dielectric breakdown of 4H-SiC MOSFET was unambiguously demonstrated. Silicon carbide (4H-SiC) is a suitable material for high power and high temperature electronics In particular, metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistors (4H-SiC MOSFETs) are desired in automotive applications, as they guarantee a better efficiency in power conversion Since 4H-SiC MOSFETs are typically fabricated using SiO2 as a gate insulator, one would expect a breakdown kinetics similar to the SiO2/Si system. However, the breakdown kinetics of the SiO2/4H-SiC system is more complex. In fact, while the behaviour of thin thermal gate oxides obeys to the percolation theory Premature failure for SiO2/4H-SiC system, i.e., breakdown at zero time, has been often attributed the presence of crystalline killer defects (pipes, carrots, bars, etc) It should be pointed out that literature studies on the breakdown kinetics are typically based on the characterization of small MOS capacitors, which are unlikely to represent the behaviour of real power MOSFETs (i.e., having a larger area and a different geometry). In addition, due to the nanoscale size of the TDs and the large area of power MOSFETs, only local analyses based on advanced highspatial-resolution techniques can enable to explain the origin of the breakdown in real devices. This paper reports a clear correlation between threading dislocations (TDs) and dielectric breakdown (BD) on 4H-SiC planar MOSFETs, by the use of several advanced nanoscale electrical and structural characterization techniques. In fact, since the TDs appear on the 4H-SiC as narrow spot-like defect having a radius < 100 nm, only high-spatial-resolution measurements can provide useful insights on the physics involved in the device failure. Furthermore, numerical TCAD simulations explained the impact of the TD in terms of electric field and minority carrier distribution. Several hundreds of 4H-SiC MOSFETs, designed to operate at 650V, were stressed in a HTRB test at 140 °C and VDS=600 V for 10 7 s (three months). The population of devices that survived to the stress test was a large fraction (98%) of all the tested devices. The remaining 2% of failed devicesshowing a high slope in the Weibull distribution -was studied to understand the origin of the long time HTRB "intrinsic" failure mechanisms. The HTRB test was performed using an Infinity 1000 Qualitau Equipment, able to collect simultaneously the current flows for each device. This capability is fundamental to distinguish the failed device and to record the information on each single BD event, defined from the abrupt increase of the gate current. First, a PHEMOS1000 Emission microscopy (EMMI) was used to identify the coordinates of the breakdown event and a focussed ion dual beam (FIB) to mark the position of the breakdown. Afterward, the devices were completely delayered to expose the 4H-SiC bare surface. Nanoscale resolution current and capacitance mapping on the 4H-SiC surface were carried out by conductive atomic force microscopy (C-AFM) and scanning capacitance microscopy (SCM), respectively, using a DI3100 AFM by Veeco equipped with a Nanoscope V controller. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were performed using a Hitachi HD2300 STEM operated at 200 kV. Current -voltage (I-V) measurements were carried out using an Agilent B1505A parameter analyser. Numerical simulations of the electric field and carrier concentration were performed using Silvaco TCAD tools. Fig. Then, local capacitance mapping The electronic structure of the TD has been theoretically investigated in literature The band gap narrowing produces a quantum well for holes ("hot spot") that are collected from the surrounding 4H-SiC material (Fig. 