We present a new method for the control of waves based on inverse multiple scattering theory. Conceived as a generalization of the concept of metagrating, we call metaclusters to a finite set of scatterers whose position and properties are obtained by inverse design once we have defined their response to some external incident field. The particular focus is on designing passive metaclusters that do not require an external source of energy. The method is applied to the propagation of flexural waves in thin plates, and to the design of far field patterns, although its generalization to acoustic or electromagnetic waves is straightforward. Numerical examples are presented to the design of uni and bidirectional "anomalous scatterers", which will bend the scattering energy along a specific direction, "odd pole" scatterers, whose radiation pattern presents an odd number of poles and to the generation of vortical patterns. Finally, some considerations about the optimal design of these metaclusters are discussed. Active and passive control of the energy transfer in electromagnetic and mechanical waves is a challenging problem with a large number of applications, such as focusing, imaging, beam forming, cloaking and energy harvesting, among others. More recently, the concept of "metasurface", conceived as artificial planar metamaterials, has attracted an increasing interest. Being thinner and less dissipative than bulk metamaterials, these structures allow for more efficient ways of manipulating the wave energy, with the additional simplification in fabrication that planar structures present in comparison with bulk structures. To overcome these difficulties, several approaches have been explored recently to simplify the design of metasurfaces by means of diffraction gratings, The paper is organized as follows: After this introduction, section II develops the idea of the direct and inverse multiple scattering problem. Section III explains how the method can be applied to the design of far field patterns and section IV shows numerical examples of specific patterns. Finally, section V summarizes the work and some mathematical results are given in Appendices A and B. When some incident field ψ 0 impinges on a cluster of N point-like scatterers the total field ψ(r) can be expressed as the sum of the incident plus the scattered fields, ψ(r) = ψ 0 (r) + ψ s (r). (1) The scattered field is where G(r) = G(|r|) is the Green's function and the coefficients B β are obtained from the multiple scattering equation 17 This provides a system of N equations with N unknowns. The quantity t α is the strength of each point-like scatterer and it is the only quantity that contains information about its physical properties. This describes the direct multiple scattering problem, in which the number of scatterers, N , their strengths t α and locations R β are known, from which we compute the B α coefficients to finally determine the field in all of space. The inverse problem is as follows: assume that the scattered field can be expressed as a linear combination of basis functions φ n such that then we specify the inverse problem as determining a finite number N p of A n coefficients, for n = 1 . . . N p , so that the scattered field will have a specified radiation pattern in the far-field. In general there will be a matrix S such that therefore, if we select the number N of particles in the cluster equal to the number N p of modes to design, equation (5) constitutes a determinate system of N equations with N unknowns from which we can solve for the B β coefficients. Once these are known, we can obtain the t α elements from equation (4) as Thus we can obtain the physical properties of each particle. The main challenge is to find a cluster configuration giving physically acceptable particles. For the case of flexural waves on thin elastic plates, ψ is the plate deflection, G is the solution for a point force per unit area applied in the positive ψ-direction, and is the point force per unit area of scatterer α, see Appendix A. The parameter t α is an effective point impedance which can be interpreted in terms of a single degree of freedom system with mass, stiffness and damping. Physically acceptable particles cannot supply energy, i.e. they must be passive. Assuming time dependence e -iωt , the passivity constraints require that one or other of the following is met Equation (8a) requires that the cluster be globally passive, meaning that some of the scatterers can provide energy but there should be a negative energy balance adding all the contributions of the scatterers. Equation (8b), or equivalently Im t α ≥ 0, is a more restrictive condition, since it requires that all scatterers be passive systems (see Appendix A for details). The equality holds for zero dissipation in both equations. The goal of the inverse multiple scattering problem is to obtain a set of particles all simultaneously satisfying the first or both constraints. For the first, global passivity, constraint we assume that although some scatterers may require energy supply, this energy can be transferred from other, locally passive, ones (see Appendix A). The specific problem addressed below is to engineer the cluster of point scatterers to provide a close approximation to a desired far field scattering response. In the next section we outline the steps necessary to achieve this in an optimal sense. The functions φ n of (4) are chosen as the infinite set where the position is expressed in polar coordinates r = (r, θ) with respect to an origin at r = 0. This allows to uniquely identify the coefficients A n of (4) as far field amplitudes of the scattered wave. In order to see this, first note that the far-field for a source at This approximation holds whether the Green's function is for the Helmholtz equation or for the Kirchhoff plate equation. In both cases, the far-field response depends only on the large argument approximation of H (1) 0 (x). The scattered far-field of the cluster follows from ( with the far-field radiation function Alternatively, where the infinite set of coefficients {A n } is related to the N coefficients {B β } by (5) with For a unit amplitude incident plane wave propagating in the direction θ = 0 the radiation pattern function satisfies the optical theorem where the scattering cross-section σ sca and absorption cross-section σ abs are defined in Eq. (A6). Further details can be found in Appendix A. The cross-sections can also be expressed directly in terms of the coefficients {A n } and {B β }, see Eq. (A8), leading to the explicit form of the optical theorem We define the energy efficiency of a cluster as the ratio of scattered to total input energy, which can be calculated from the scattering and absorption cross-sections of Eqs. (A6) as In the inverse source problem we are given f (θ) and seek the cluster that optimally reproduces this scattering pattern. The radiation pattern, defined by the coefficients {A n } in the form (13), is infinite dimensional, whereas the cluster comprises a finite set of N sources. We define the error where ||X|| 2 = X † X with X † the Hermitian transpose of vector X. Minimizing E for given A and S yields the solution where S † S -1 S † may be identified as the Moore-Penrose inverse of S. The approximated radiation pattern is f (N ) (θ) where n , n ∈ Z, are the elements of and the non-negative definite Hermitian matrix P is It is shown in Appendix B that the matrix P is infinite dimensional but finite rank with N non-zero eigenvalues equal to +1, see Eq. (B5). It therefore acts as a projection from the infinite dimensional space of far-field pattern functions to the N -dimensional set of approximate pattern functions: The optimal solution (21) yields an error where In practice we will be interested in the relative error 1. Invisibility? Can the cluster be invisible, in the sense that there is no scattered wave? Setting A to zero implies Hence B α = 0, and therefore t α = 0, meaning there are no scatterers, the null solution. We conclude that the inverse scattering cluster scheme does not provide a useful route to invisibility or cloaking. Based on the above findings, the inverse scattering design can be formulated as follows. 1. The N scatterer positions R α , α = 1, . . . , N are defined. 2. The desired far field pattern f (θ) is specified, or equivalently the set of far field modal amplitudes {A n , n ∈ Z} are given (see ( 3. Frequency (equivalently wavenumber k) is given. 4. The matrices S and P are evaluated (see ( 5. The source strengths B α , the optimal approximation to the far field pattern f (N ) (θ), i.e. {A (N ) n , n ∈ Z}, and the relative error E rel are calculated (see (13), ( 6. An incident wave field ψ 0 (r) is defined, and the particle impedances t α , α = 1, . . . , N , are calculated (see ( The first two items are geometrical, independent of frequency and the incident wave. Once the frequency is defined, the approximation f (N ) (θ) to the scattered far field is optimal in the sense of an N -dimensional solution according to the setup, and it is independent of the incident field. The form of the incident wave, combined with the source amplitudes B α , defines the required particle impedances t α in Eq. ( The inverse algorithm defines the configuration mechanical properties, i.e. the t α , for a given incident wave ψ 0 . If the incident wave changes, then the new scattering coefficients B α are defined by the system of equations ( The question that must be addressed is whether or not all of the scatterer impedances satisfy the passivity constraints (8a) or (8b). A. Far field patterns and the matrix P Two groups of cluster patterns are considered, namely regular polygons, where scatterers are uniformly distributed over a circle, and finite lattices, where scatterers are regularly distributed in a 2D finite grid. We describe how different arrangements of the scatterers influence the matrix P of Eq. ( Let us assume that the N scatterers lie on the circle of radius R at θ β = 2πβ/N . We consider A corresponding to each of the modes e imθ , m ∈ Z, so that ||A|| 2 = 1 and E ≤ 1 with E 1 indicating the desired scattering mode is well approximated. The results of numerical experimentation are as follows. For small kR relative to N , E is small for modes m = 0, ±1, . . . , N -1 2 if N > 1 is odd, and for modes m = 0, ±1, . . . , N -2 The accuracy diminishes as kR increases. In other words, for small kR the N unit eigenvalues of P correspond to modes m = 0, ±1, . . . , N -1 2 if N > 1 is odd, with analogous association for N even. Since the modes are multiply degenerate (all of eigenvalue unity) it follows that any linear combination of these modes is an eigenvector. We now assume that the scatterers are distributed in a square but finite lattice. The lattice is M × M ≡ N with lattice spacing a. For instance, with M = 3 and ka = 1 we find that the 9 eigenvectors of P of eigenvalue +1 span the space Ω 4 ≡ {e imθ , m = 0, ±1, . . . , ±4}. This result is arrived at by inspecting the error E for each mode, and noting that it is small, on the order of 1e -4 typically, while higher modes have error of approximately unity. However, for the same ka = 1 but the larger lattice with M = 4 (N = 16) we find that the nontrivial eigenspace is Ω 5 Ω 6,10 where Ω 6,10 is a five dimensional subspace formed from {e imθ , m = ±6, . . . , ±10}. Numerical experiments on matrix P for different spatial configurations of the clusters show that for large and moderate kR there are exactly N eigenvalues of P with values close to 1. For large kR, the corresponding eigenvectors (i.e. patterns of scattering modes of the cluster) are highly irregular and sensitive to both kR and scatterers positions (while the number of eigenvalues of value 1 equals N ). For kR c ≈ 0.5 and smaller, where R c is the characteristic size of the cluster, the eigenvalues of P begin to differ and assume values other than 1. For kR c 1 the number of nonzero eigenvalues reduces and low order scattering patterns are preferred. Some general remarks on the number of scatterers (N ) and scattering properties of the cluster can be formulated as follows. The larger N , the larger number of cluster modes, thus more complex scattering patterns can be reproduced accurately. Large number of scatterers in the cluster, on the other hand, may result in overconstraining the minimization problem and lack of locally or globally passive solutions. For moderate kR c typically the number of regular patterns (eigenvectors of P) is similar to N , while more degenerate patterns and/or smaller number of similar eigenvalues (≈ 1) are observed for large or small kR c . The inverse design of metaclusters is illustrated with the scatterers arranged on regular polygons or square lattices, as outlined in Sec. IV A. Here we present the target scattering patterns that will be later reproduced by proper selection of passive impedances. Uni-directional scattering in the direction θ = θ 0 corresponds to A bi-directional scattering pattern is of the form . We consider patterns that are symmetric or anti-symmetric about the x-direction (θ = 0), corresponding to θ 1 = -θ 0 and C 1 = ±C 0 . We may choose C 0 = 1 with no loss in generality, and define Odd-pole patterns have p scattering lobes directing energy towards that preferential directions. The odd-pole scattering pattern and the corresponding A n coefficients are given as where θ = θ mod 2π is used to ensure that f (θ) is a 2π-periodic function. a. A tripole For a tripolar pattern, p = 3, there are three main lobes spaced every 2/3π. An example of a tripolar pattern is shown in Fig. b. A pentapole Similarly, for p = 5, a pentapole scattering pattern is obtained. Figure A vortex generates uniform constant amplitude pattern with angle-dependent linearly changing phase behavior. The corresponding formulas for the vortex of order p ∈ Z are Directional characteristics of amplitudes and phases for the vortex pattern are shown in Fig. Designing a metacluster requires finding all t α for a given cluster topology and the desired scattering pattern. The procedure outlined in Sec. III C is employed here to find t α . We first present metacluster scattering patterns corresponding to the desired patterns from Sec. IV B, obtained for different clusters configurations. Since the inverse procedure frequently leads to active particles, we next impose the condition (8b) to find locally passive optimal metaclusters and present their scattering responses. For all presented examples we introduce the incident wave -without loss of generality -assumed to be a plane wave in the -x direction (θ = π). Scattering patterns obtained for selected cluster topologies are shown in Fig. Our design objective is the set of point impedances {t α , α = 1, . . . , N }. We aim at fulfilling the local passiv-ity condition, Eq. (8b). Define then Eq. ( and rewrite Eq. ( Here the complex number z defines the scaling of the pattern function, which goes as z -1 . The important point is that z can be chosen arbitrarily; in particular, we use it as an optimization parameter. The fact that the pattern function amplitude is inversely proportional to |z| for unit amplitude incident wave suggests that smaller |z| is preferred for maximizing efficiency of energy conversion. The optimization problem is as follows: given the N complex numbers p α associated with the incident wave and the N complex numbers s α associated with the point sources, find z of Eq. ( In cases where the search procedure for t α failed to find locally passive metaclusters, a rigid rotation was applied to the cluster (equivalent to changing the incidence angle) and the search was repeated. Numerical experimentation shows there are metacluster configurations for which the inverse impedance solutions are all passive. Examples of the uni-and bidirectional scattering patterns for a square lattice metacluster are shown in Figure The examples in Figure Similarly, Fig. t -1 α t -1 α ka = 1.9 ka = 2.8 (-0.50, -0.50) 0.0662 -0.0050i 0.0438 -0.0000i (-0.50, 0.50) -0.0243 -0.0000i 0.0214 -0.0618i (0.50, -0.50) 0.1120 -0.0000i -0.0651 -0.1138i (0.50, 0.50) -0.0413 -0.0316i -0.0524 -0.0009i TABLE I: The admittances t -1 α for the 2 × 2 array of passive particles sending the wave incident at θ = π into the θ = 3/4π direction at two frequencies, see Figure Analogously to the previous search, we look for optimal passive clusters capable of generating a scattering tripole. The admittances t -1 α for the 2 × 2 array of passive particles sending the wave incident at θ = π for ka = 5.4 into the tripole pattern, see Figure Figure Figure Rα t -1 α ka = 5.3 (0.95, 0.31) 0.0007 -0.0020i (0.00, 1.00) 0.0009 -0.0021i (-0.95, 0.31) 0.0011 -0.0020i (-0.59, -0.81) -0.0045 -0.0002i (0.59, -0.81) 0.0064 -0.0003i α for the five-element circular array of passive particles sending the wave incident at θ = π for ka = 5.3 into the pentapole pattern, see Figure Finally, we present a locally passive metacluster capable of transforming the incident wavefield into the firstorder vortex, p = 1, as shown in Fig. We have shown that an inverse multiple scattering method can be applied for the design of the radiation Admittances of the cluster are give in Table Rα t -1 α ka = 5.5 (0.28, -0.65) 0.0683 -0.0160i (-0.65, -0.28) -0.0658 -0.0068i (0.65, 0.28) 0.0536 -0.0341i (-0.28, 0.65) 0.0676 -0.01952i TABLE V: The admittances t -1 α for the 2 × 2 square array of passive particles sending the wave incident at θ = π for ka = 5.5 into the vortex pattern, see Figure The proposed metaclusters can be considered a generalization of the notion of a metagrating, where the inverse design is performed in the amplitude of the diffraction orders and the structures are periodic gratings. However, in contrast with the infinite number of scattering elements in a metagrating, the present results are based on clusters of very few scatterers. In light of the small number of elements employed, the scattering directivity is remarkable in our opinion. With the alternative presented here we could design not only finite gratings but also flat lenses, beam splitters and even cloaking devices. We consider therefore that this work opens a new direction towards the design of passive devices for the control of mechanic and electromagnetic energy. These are orthogonal, V † α V β = λ α δ αβ , but not orthonormal. We define the orthonormal set U α = λ -1/2 α Su α , α = 1, . . . , N, (B5) so that P is in canonical form, Hence P is finite rank with N non-zero eigenvalues equal to +1. Alternatively, P is a projection onto the N -dimensional subspace span{U α , α = 1, . . . , N }, and satisfies the projector property We note some other properties of P and related matrices. Multiplying (22) on the right by S and on the left by S † gives PS = S, S † P = S † . (B8) The fundamental matrix S of ( The Moore-Penrose inverse of S is Similarly, the matrix Q of ( It follows from this, or from its definition in (24), that the matrix Q satisfies where I N is the identity on span{U α , α = 1, . . . , N } Finally, the physical vectors for the far field pattern function and source strengths of Eqs. ( 