Electrical resistivity, magnetic susceptibility, and specific heat measurements on single crystals of LaTr 2 Al 20 with Tr = Mo and W revealed that these compounds exhibit superconductivity with transition temperatures T c = 3.22 and 1.81 K, respectively, achieving the highest values in the reported LaTr 2 Al 20 compounds. There appears a positive correlation between T c and the electronic specific heat coefficient, which increases with increasing the number of 4d-and 5d-electrons.This finding indicates that filling of the upper e g orbitals in the 4d and 5d bands plays an essential role for the significant enhancement of the superconducting condensation energy. Possible roles played by the d electrons in the strongly correlated electron phenomena appearing in RTr 2 Al 20 are discussed. Ternary intermetallic compounds containing rare-earth ions are the subject of continuous interest in the fields of strongly correlated electron physics. Among them, a family of RTr 2 X 20 (R : rare earths, Tr : transition metals, X : Al, Zn, and Cd), which crystallize in the cubic CeCr 2 Al 20type structure (Fd 3m, #227), have attracted considerable attention in recent years, because a wide variety of exotic electron states caused by strong hybridization of f -electrons with nonf -ligands have been observed. A heavy fermion (HF) behavior appears in YbCo 2 Zn 20 with an electronic specific heat coefficient of 8 J/(mol K 2 ), which is the largest among Yb compounds The SC appearing in RTr 2 X 20 with nonmagnetic R ions has been discussed in terms of the cage structure, which is one of the characteristic features of the CeCr 2 Al 20 -type crystal structure. The R ions at the 8a site with cubic T d symmetry are located at the center of an X 16 cage. In R x V 2 Al 20 with R = Al and Ga (the SC transition temperatures T c are 1.49 and 1.66 K, respectively), the cage-center R ions show anharmonic large-amplitude oscillations as observed in filled skutterudites Superconductors of R = Sc, Y, and Lu seems to have similar features Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) equipped with a Helium-3 cryostat. The magnetic susceptibility χ was measured down to 2 K using a QD Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS). Single crystal X-ray diffraction analysis was performed using a Rigaku XtaLABmini with graphite monochromated Mo-K α radiation. The structural parameters refined using the program SHELX-97 The temperature dependence of resistivity ρ(T ) divided by ρ(300 K) is shown in Fig. suggesting that H c2 (0) is determined by the orbital depairing effect. The temperature dependence of H c2 can be well described by the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) clean-limit expression where φ 0 and ξ GL are the quantum magnetic flux and the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) coherence length, respectively. The GL parameter κ GL , which is equal to the Maki parameter where ∆C vol is measured per unit volume [unit: erg/(K cm 3 )], and β A = 1.16 for a triangular vortex lattice. The thermodynamic critical field H c (0) = α (6/π)γ vol T c The obtained characteristic parameters are summarized in Table The electron-phonon coupling constant λ e-ph is obtained using McMillan's formula where the Coulomb coupling constant μ * is assumed to be 0.13 In the crystal structure of RTr 2 Al 20 , the Al 16 cage includes a guest R ion at the center (8a site) as shown in the inset of Fig. ) )/16 is the average distance between R and Al in the cage, and r R and r Al are the covalent radii for R and Al ions, respectively analysis shown in Table this is a revised one of Fig. On the contrary, for the 4d and 5d compounds, 