Shock wave lithotripsy (SWL) has been widely used for non-invasive treatment of kidney stones. Cavitation plays an important role in stone fragmentation, yet may also contribute to renal injury during SWL. It is therefore crucial to determine the spatiotemporal distributions of cavitation activities to maximize stone fragmentation while minimizing tissue injury. Traditional cavitation detection methods include high-speed optical imaging, active cavitation mapping (ACM), and passive cavitation mapping (PCM). While each of the three methods provides unique information about the dynamics of the bubbles, PCM has most practical applications in biological tissues. To image the dynamics of cavitation bubble collapse, we previously developed a sliding-window PCM (SW-PCM) method to identify each bubble collapse with high temporal and spatial resolution. To further validate and optimize the SW-PCM method, in this work, we have developed tri-modality cavitation imaging that includes 3D high-speed optical imaging, ACM, and PCM seamlessly integrated in a single system. Using the tri-modality system, we imaged and analyzed laser-induced single cavitation bubbles in both free and constricted space and shockwave-induced cavitation clusters. Collectively, our results have demonstrated the high reliability and spatial-temporal accuracy of the SW-PCM approach, which paves the way for the future in vivo applications on large animals and humans in SWL. Kidney stone disease is a major health problem Both optical and acoustic methods have been used for cavitation detection. High-speed photography can be applied to capture bubble distribution in vitro, but it is only applicable to optically transparent media The essential task in PCM is to reconstruct the cavitation distribution from the raw signals emitted by individual bubble collapses. Different PCM methods have been used in a variety of medical applications such as high intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU), histotripsy, and acoustic angiography (T. Temporal or frequency domain passive projection shifts the channel data based on the travel time of the acoustic signals to reconstruct cavitation distribution, assuming that all bubbles collapse at the same time In this study, we have developed a sliding-window PCM (SW-PCM) algorithm modified from the classic delay-and-sum method widely used in ultrasound and photoacoustic imaging. The temporal randomness of shockwave induced bubble collapses is taken into consideration during the cavitation reconstruction. Each individual bubble collapse can be precisely reconstructed temporally and spatially. We performed cavitation mapping of both laser-induced single bubbles and lithotripter shockwave induced bubble clusters. More importantly, we have constructed an integrated tri-modality system, and for the first time, the cavitation's temporal and spatial distributions by PCM were validated concurrently using a 3D high-speed camera and ACM, respectively. The SW-PCM results have an accuracy of more than 90% for single bubbles and 83% for bubble clusters. These tri-modality results collectively demonstrate the reliability of our SW-PCM method. The schematic of the tri-modality cavitation mapping system is shown in Fig. A bandpass filter (cutoff frequencies: 3.5 MHz and 6.5 MHz) was first applied to the raw channel data before the image reconstruction. In ACM, the reflected ultrasound signals by the bubbles were reconstructed using the conventional delay-and-sum method, with the ultrasound transmission moment designated as the time origin. For each bubble event, the ACM reconstructed image size was 40 mm by 40 mm with a pixel size of 67 μm. In PCM, the bubble bursts were considered as sparsely distributed point acoustic sources, and the bubble collapses were reconstructed by using our previously developed sliding-window reconstruction method (M. where H(r s ⃗⃗ ) is the reconstructed signal amplitude at location r s ⃗⃗ inside the imaging plane, a denotes the ultrasound probe's angular detection sensitivity, n is the index of the ultrasound probe element, r n ⃗⃗⃗ is the location of the nth probe element, p is the signal recorded by the nth element, t is the sliding window position, i.e., delay after the laser pulse firing, and c is the speed of sound (1500 m/s in water). At each reconstruction instance, the PCM reconstructed image size was 40 mm by 40 mm with a pixel size of 65 μm. The sliding step size of the reconstruction window was 0.2 μs, which corresponded to a spatial resolution of 300 μm. An illustration of this sliding-window method is shown in Supplementary Video 1. The whole searching process in PCM can be projected onto a single imaging plane (lateral-axial plane of ultrasound transducer), as shown in Supplementary Fig. The accuracy of PCM-detected bubble collapse time and location was first validated by laserinduced single bubbles. To validate the collapse time, PCM results were compared with the high-speed camera recordings. Bubbles in each camera frame were extracted by applying a Matlab boundary detection algorithm and then projected as a spatial-temporal plot to show the dynamics. The true bubble collapse time captured by the camera was usually between the two frames with the minimal bubble sizes. The energy density of the PCM results was computed and compared with the corresponding camera recording. Four representative cavitation events were presented to demonstrate the system's repeatability. To validate the collapse location, the PCM results were compared with the ACM results. The spatial distribution of the PCM-and ACM-detected bubbles were analyzed, and the discrepancies were quantified. The reconstructed bubble locations by the two modalities were combined into a 3D space-time matrix and rendered by using Volview (Kitware, NY). A total of 30 cavitation events were analyzed to demonstrate the system's repeatability. To mimic cavitation in blood vessels, a constrained environment, the laser beam was focused into the cross-sectional center of a transparent plastic tube through a small opening on the tube wall (S3TM-E3603, Saint-Gobain Tygon; ID, 2 mm; OD, 3 mm). Both high-speed camera imaging and ACM were acquired to validate the PCM results. To enhance the ultrasound reflection by the bubbles in ACM, the ultrasound transmission was performed 60 μs after the laser firing, which allowed the bubbles to expand. To improve the image contrast of the bubbles, ACM without laser excitation was first performed to obtain the background signals from the tube wall, which were then subtracted from the ACM images with laser excitation. A total of 40 cavitation events were statistically analyzed. Other settings and data processing methods were the same as in the free water space experiment. After validating the tri-modality cavitation mapping system on laser-induced single bubbles, we further applied the system to study the lithotripter shockwave induced cavitation clusters. Shockwave pulses were generated by a focused shockwave generator (Piezoson 100, Richard Wolf, Germany), which was mounted at the bottom of the water tank. The shockwave generator transmitted microsecond shockwave pulses with a pulse repetition rate of 1 Hz and a focal distance of 65 mm. The resultant cavitation bubble clusters distributed sparsely in a volumetric space around the focal zone, which was approximately 1 cm laterally by 2 cm axially. Again, we used the high-speed camera and the linear-array ultrasound probe to capture the shockwave-induced bubble clusters. With a relatively large depth of focus, the high-speed camera can project all the bubbles throughout the whole shockwave focal zone into a single 2D image. However, the ACM and PCM can only detect bubbles located within the ultrasonic transducer's imaging plane, i.e., a thin 2D slice cutting through the shockwave focal zone. In other words, the ultrasonic transducer would only detect a portion of the bubbles captured by the high-speed camera. Therefore, it is challenging to directly correlate cavitation bubbles captured by the high-speed camera and the ultrasonic transducer. To address this issue, we implemented a 3D camera system (F. As shown in Fig. A 3D reconstruction of the bubble cluster was extracted from the two projections. We aligned the imaging plane of ultrasonic transducer through the shockwave focus, with an angle of 45° relative to both illumination paths. The lateral direction of the ultrasonic transducer corresponds to the z direction of camera captured images (Fig. The bubble-extraction algorithm used in laser-induced single bubble detection was applied here to quantify the bubble size and location in the 3D camera images. Distinctively separated and relatively large bubbles from the camera images were chosen for further analysis and comparison with the ACM/PCM results. To determine the group of bubbles within the image plane of the ultrasonic transducer, we computed the acoustic detection sensitivity in the imaging plane, using the ultrasound simulation toolbox Field II A. Tri-modality cavitation mapping of laser-induced single bubbles in free water space Figure show that the laser-induced bubbles occur consistently at nearly the same position after each laser pulse, i.e., at the laser focal spot. ACM can also detect randomly distributed residual microbubbles caused by the collapse of previous bubble event, which typically have weaker reflection than the current bubble. Moreover, due to the floating effect, the residual microbubbles are usually above the current bubble. The bubble positions from the ACM and PCM images agree reasonably well for all of the cavitation events. Figure . The depth discrepancy was likely due to the asymmetric bubble collapse in constraint space. The lateral positions were also compared between the ACM-and PCM-detected bubbles, showing an average difference of 1.5 mm. The lateral discrepancies were larger than that in the free space due to the asymmetric bubble collapse and potentially bubble-induced streaming effect In the PCM image, six out of ten initial bubbles were detected by PCM and the undetected two bubbles are indicated by the green arrows. The PCM-detected bubbles do not individually match the camera captured bubbles, but they show similar group distribution. There are 4 groups of bubbles observed from the camera images. Within each group, the average diameter of bubbles is ~1 mm and the average distance between two adjacent bubbles is ~0.5 mm. Strong bubble-bubble interactions due to the secondary Bjerknes forces are therefore expected within each group of bubbles For example, the first shockwave pulse generated a total of 11 bubbles. Eight bubbles were within the ultrasound detection zone, seven of which were detected by ACM. A total of 19 resultant collapse events were detected by PCM. Among them, six collapse events were from the initial bubbles and the remaining 12 collapses were from the rebound bubbles. Over the five shockwave pulses, the average bubble detection rates of ACM and PCM are 86.5% and 89.2%, respectively. Cavitation is a significant concern for tissue injury in SWL, and thus it is important to monitor the spatial-temporal distribution of cavitation bubbles to improve the therapeutic efficiency and safety. In this study, we have developed a tri-modality cavitation mapping system that seamlessly incorporates 3D high-speed camera imaging, ACM and PCM. We have thoroughly validated the PCM results by using the high-speed camera and ACM results. Our experiments of both laser-and shockwave-induced cavitation have demonstrated the high temporal and spatial accuracy of the PCM method, which is the most useful for SWL in vivo With the acquired cavitation information, urologists may be able to assess the hemorrhage potential, and thus adjust the treatment procedure and parameters to avoid severe tissue injury. It is worth noting that one drawback in this study is that the PCM uses a linear-array ultrasound probe and can only detect cavitation bubbles in the 2D imaging plane. In clinical settings, it is highly desirable to capture the shockwave-induced cavitation bubble distribution in 3D. One possible solution is to mechanically rotate the ultrasonic probe around its central axis, and thus the cavitation bubbles generated in the entire shockwave focal zone can be reconstructed at the cost of the imaging speed Overall, future work is warranted to refine our cavitation detection methods for real-time monitoring of bubble dynamics during clinical SWL and correlation with stone fragmentation and tissue injury. 