A few decades earlier, Kirkaldy and Lane proposed an indirect method of estimating the tracer and intrinsic diffusion coefficients in a ternary system (without showing experimental verification), which is otherwise impossible following the Kirkendall marker experiments. Subsequently, Manning proposed the relations between the tracer and intrinsic diffusion coefficients in the multicomponent system by extending the Onsager formalism (although could not be estimated by intersecting the diffusion couples). By solving these issues in this article, we have now proposed the equations and method for estimating these parameters in pseudo-ternary diffusion couples in which diffusion paths can be intersected in multicomponent space. We have chosen NiCoFeCr system for verification of this method because of the availability of good quality diffusion couple experiments and estimated tracer diffusion coefficients of all the components measured by the radiotracer method. An excellent match is found when the tracer diffusion coefficients estimated following the newly proposed method are compared with the data estimated following the radiotracer method. Following, the intrinsic diffusion coefficients are estimated experimentally in a multicomponent system for the first time highlighting diffusional interactions between the components. We have further shown that the intrinsic diffusion coefficients are the same (if the vacancy wind effect is negligible/neglected) when estimated from other types of diffusion couples (pseudo-binary and body diagonal) in the same multi-component system. This method can be now extended to the Al, Ga, Si containing systems in which the estimation of tracer diffusion coefficients following the radiotracer method is difficult/impossible because of various reasons. The diffusion community suffered during the last many decades because of the lack of experimental methods for the estimation of the diffusion coefficients in inhomogeneous multicomponent systems. All types of diffusion coefficients could be estimated only in binary systems, whereas, only the interdiffusion coefficients could be estimated in ternary systems. No diffusion parameters could be estimated from interdiffusion profiles in a system with more than three components until recently. This led to an unbridgeable gap between the fundamental studies conducted in simpler systems and the need for understanding the diffusion phenomenon in various multicomponent systems in applications. The newly proposed pseudo-binary (PB) and pseudo-ternary (PT) diffusion couple methods in the multicomponent system by Paul and his co-workers Irrespective of the recent developments, a very important aspect could not be fulfilled until now based on a purely experimental analysis in a multicomponent system. The intrinsic diffusion coefficients, which are fundamental diffusion coefficients of components under the influence of thermodynamic driving forces, can be estimated following the Kirkendall marker experiment only in binary diffusion couples As already mentioned, we can now estimate the interdiffusion coefficients by intersecting the diffusion couples in multicomponent space utilizing the concept of PT diffusion couples The data estimated following this PT diffusion couple method using the newly proposed relations are compared with the tracer diffusion coefficients measured by the radiotracer technique to find a very good match. Therefore, now, one can first estimate the tracer diffusion coefficients of all the components following the radio-tracer method or the pseudo-binary and pseudo-ternary diffusion couple methods. Following, utilizing the relations proposed, one can calculate all types of intrinsic and interdiffusion coefficients in a multicomponent system. Therefore, there is no need to conduct experiments following the conventional method since anyway we cannot estimate these coefficients by intersecting the diffusion couples in a multi-component space. At present, only a very few groups have the facility for measuring tracer diffusion coefficients using radioisotopes because of stringent restrictions of maintaining the facilities. On the other hand, the diffusion couple methods are easier to practice. Therefore, the analysis described in this study will open various new possibilities. The relations for estimating the interdiffusion coefficients in a PT couple are described earlier The interdiffusion flux ( ) and the interdiffusion coefficients ( ) in a n component system are related considering a constant molar volume by This leads to the estimation of the interdiffusion coefficients with one component (let us say component n in the above equation) as the dependent variable since we have (n-1) independent interdiffusion fluxes (see supplementary file). The interdiffusion flux of component i can be calculated from the composition profile using where " = * is the Sauer-Freise composition normalization variable In lattice fixed frame of reference, the intrinsic fluxes are related to the intrinsic diffusion coefficients by The intrinsic fluxes of different components are related to the vacancy flux ! + ) by and the interdiffusion and intrinsic fluxes are related by Using Equation 1f and comparing Equations 1a and 1d, the interdiffusion and intrinsic diffusion coefficients are related by The intrinsic flux of a component at the Kirkendall marker composition can be calculated from (see supplementary file) If a component, which is kept with the same composition in both the ends of a diffusion couple, remain constant in the whole interdiffusion zone, the interdiffusion and intrinsic diffusion flux will be zero. This can be understood from Equation 1c and 1h. If a component indeed remains constant without developing the diffusion profiles in an interdiffusion zone, both $ " %& * ' and $ !1 -" )%& will be zero. In a non-ideal condition, one component which is kept with the same composition in two ends of the diffusion couple may develop the diffusion profile and the interdiffusion flux of that component will not be zero. In such a situation, the interdiffusion flux cannot be calculated utilizing Equation 1c because of the term ! * -), which will otherwise calculate the interdiffusion flux as zero wrongly. Therefore, we should use the relation proposed by Matano-Kirkaldy, as given in the supplementary file. In this case, the diffusion couple should not be treated or even named as PB or PT diffusion couples, since in a PB couple only two components and a PT couple only three components should develop the diffusion profiles keeping all other components constant. One may still consider a very small non-ideality for calculation without introducing mentionable error i.e. when the composition profile is found to deviate within the error of composition measurement of Electron Probe Micro Analyzer from the constant average value. Since only three components (let us say components 1, 2 and 3) develop the diffusion profiles in an ideal PT diffusion couple keeping all other components (4 to n) constant and, further, we have also + + -= 0, because 3 = ⋯ . . = 0. Therefore, Equations 1a and 1b expressed with compositions should be expressed with modified compositions 6 7 fulfilling this condition such that + ; : + < : = 1 (2b) where 8 = 3 ... + is the sum of the composition of components which remain constant (fixed) and + = + + -is the sum of the composition of components which contribute to the development of interdiffusion profiles. It should be noted here that the components which are kept constant do not contribute to the interdiffusion flux but take part in the redistribution of the components. Therefore, the composition profiles ( vs. x) should be converted first to modified composition profiles (6 7 vs. x). The modified compositions should be expressed differently in an intermetallic compound compared to solid solutions, which is discussed in Ref. This can be expanded to The interdiffusion flux can be expressed as (see supplementary file) where " ,7 = = > * = > = > = > is the modified composition normalization variable. Wrong value of the interdiffusion flux will be calculated if Equation 1c is used instead of 3e since the sum of compositions of the components which produce the diffusion profiles at any location i.e. + + -≠ 1 leading to wrongly + + -≠ 0. The interdiffusion and intrinsic fluxes in a PT couple are related by (see supplementary file) In lattice fixed frame of reference, the intrinsic flux of component i ( ) is related to the intrinsic diffusion coefficients ( ) with respect to the modified composition profile. Considering component 1 as a dependent, this can be expressed as where the Kirkendall marker velocity B C is related to the vacancy flux + and the molar volume = . The Darken equation Taking as the sum of the above equation for all the components (i.e. 1, 2 and 3, which produce the diffusion profiles) and from Equations 1b and 2c, we have Comparing Equations 3, 4 and 5, the interdiffusion and intrinsic diffusion coefficients in a PT couple can be related as (see supplementary file) This can be expanded to relate the four interdiffusion coefficients with six intrinsic diffusion coefficients in a PT couple as -= --6 7 ! -+ -+ --) (6c) The interdiffusion coefficients can be estimated at the composition of the intersection of two PT diffusion couples in a multi-component space In the meantime, Kirkaldy and Lane In this article, we adopt this concept proposed in a ternary system by extending it to PT diffusion couples in a multicomponent system. Therefore, we first need to establish the relations in the PT diffusion couple in which only three components develop the diffusion profiles keeping other components constant. Moreover, instead of calculating these parameters with respect to the chemical potential gradients, which was proposed by Kirkaldy and Lane The intrinsic flux can be related to the chemical potential gradient H and the phenomenological constants I by Manning where and Q R is the structure factor. In FCC crystal the value of Q R is 7.15 This applies to the conventional diffusion couple in which all the components develop the diffusion profiles. Taking a sum over all the components and since + = -∑ where Le Claire where First Equation 9a is expressed for intrinsic fluxes of all the components i.e. , and -. After taking sum and then by replacing ! + + -) = -+ !see Equation Replacing this in Equation 9a, we have Kirkaldy and Lane Equation 9b by neglecting the vacancy wind effect (i.e. by neglecting all the terms containing S) can be expressed as Following Onsager In a PT couple, since only components 1, 2 and 3 develop the diffusion profiles c b = ⋯ O = 0d, we have We should realize that the chemical potential or the activity gradient of a component in different diffusion couples at the composition of the intersection will be different depending on the developed composition profiles. Therefore, for the sake of ease of analysis and to correlate the diffusion coefficients in different types of diffusion couples, we express these relations using the concept of thermodynamic factor. Equation 10c can be rewritten with respect to activity (e ) of component i (since f = f R + gEhie ) where is the thermodynamic factor. The subscript D and q in ∅ can vary from 2 to n and indicates that the derivative is taken after eliminating in the expression for hie . Dividing by + != + + -) in both numerator and denominator in the right-hand side of the equation 10d, we have Therefore, Equation 10a can be rewritten with respect to the thermodynamic factors for different components developing the diffusion profiles and can be expressed as Comparing Equations 5 and 11, we have Comparing the coefficients of the differentials, the intrinsic and tracer diffusion coefficients in PT couple are related to the thermodynamic parameters by These are the same relations expressed (by neglecting the vacancy wind effect) when the data are estimated from conventional diffusion couples in a multicomponent system by producing the diffusion profiles of all components (see supplementary file for details) only if we could intersect the diffusion paths. Now let us relate the interdiffusion coefficients with respect to the tracer diffusion coefficients, which can be expressed by combining Equation Therefore, one can follow the steps for calculation of tracer and intrinsic diffusion coefficients at the intersection of two PT diffusion couples as: (i) First, estimate the interdiffusion coefficients at the composition of the intersection of two diffusion couples directly from the calculated interdiffusion fluxes (see Equation One is suggested to take a different combination of three different equations in rotation and calculate the tracer diffusion coefficients. Following, take an average of the calculated tracer values and calculate back the interdiffusion coefficients to make sure that the backcalculated interdiffusion coefficients are similar to the values estimated directly from the diffusion profiles. (iii) These equations are very sensitive to the experimental data and sometimes may produce an illogical value, which should not be considered for calculation of average tracer diffusion coefficients. This is not witnessed in our analysis in NiCoFeCr but may be witnessed in other systems depending on the quality of experiments, measurement of compositions and correctness of a calculation or even because of wrong thermodynamic parameters. The back-calculation of the interdiffusion coefficients from the average tracer diffusion coefficients as suggested in the previous point will instil confidence if the tracer diffusion coefficients are not already available to compare. In this study, we have considered the four-component NiCoFeCr system since we can compare the tracer diffusion coefficients calculated in this study with the data measured following the radiotracer method. (iv) As a next step, we can calculate the intrinsic diffusion coefficients utilizing the thermodynamic parameters from Equation One can even estimate the tracer and intrinsic diffusion coefficients directly from the calculated interdiffusion fluxes at the composition of intersection by replacing Equation As discussed in the next section, it will help to extend this method by considering only two diffusion couples following the body diagonal method in a multicomponent system in which the diffusion couples may not intersect but may pass closely. Now we discuss the relations considering the vacancy wind effect. Equation 9b in a PT diffusion couple considering component 1 as the dependent variable can be expressed as This is expressed for the three diffusing components as ) ) Replacing, Equation 10e in Equation These can be written for different components from Equation Rearranging Equation Therefore, Equation Equating Equation 5a with 19, we have > * ul + S U7 !6 7 * l + 6 7 * l + 6 - Such that, the contribution of the vacancy wind effects can be expressed as 1 + w -= 1 + S U7 n6 7 * x 9< 9 x < 9 + 6 7 * x ;< 9 x < 9 + 6 - Since S U7 = M N 0= 9 > J 9 * *= ; > J ; * *= < > J < * 1 and Q R = 7.15 in FCC crystal Therefore, one can see that Equation 21 reduces to Equation 13 when we neglect the vacancy wind effect by neglecting the terms w and w -. Therefore, comparing Equations 5b-d and 21a-b, the intrinsic diffusion coefficients of individual components can be expressed as --= - * rl --+ S U7 !6 7 * l -+ 6 7 * l -+6 - One can then write the interdiffusion coefficients with the vacancy wind effect by replacing Equation Another important aspect should be described here which is not derived earlier in the PT diffusion couples. This is useful for the discussion in this article. If we consider the composition profiles of 2 and 3, we estimate the interdiffusion coefficients with component 1 as the dependent variable, which are described above. Similarly, we can estimate the interdiffusion coefficients with component 2 as the dependent variable when we estimate these data from the composition profiles of components 1 and 3. We can also estimate the interdiffusion coefficients considering component 3 as the dependent variable when we consider the composition profiles of components 1 and 2 for this estimation. Since we have + + -= 0 and }6 7 + }6 7 + }6 - 7 = 0, we can find how these interdiffusion coefficients considering different components as the dependent variable are related to one another. The relations considering component 1 as the dependent variable are expressed in Equation 3. Similarly, the interdiffusion coefficients keeping component 2 as the dependent variable are expressed as The interdiffusion coefficients with component 3 as the dependent variable are expressed as Equating 24b and 3d, we have Comparing the modified composition on both sides, we have --= ---- Equating 25b and 3c Replacing }6 -= -!}6 + }6 ), we have Comparing the modified composition gradients on both sides, we have In a PT couple, we can write Expressing with Equation 24a, with Equation 3c, -with Equation 3d, we have Replacing }6 = -!}6 + }6 -), we have Comparing the modified composition gradients on both sides, we have Final Expression of Equation 26f is found by replacing Equation 26e in it. Again expressing with Equation 25a, with Equation 3c and -with Equation 3d, we have Replacing }6 = -!}6 + }6 -), we have Comparing both the sides, we have Final Expression of Equation 26h is found by replacing Equation 26g in it. Table *Component dependent variable (CVD). **The relations in a PT diffusion couples are similar to the ternary system but the number of components in the system are different. Therefore, the values of interdiffusion coefficients are different and not comparable in systems with different number of components. It should be noted here that these relations in PT couples are similar to the equations one would derive in a ternary system In this article, we also compare the data estimated in PB and PT couples in the same system to explain the similarities/differences between the intrinsic and interdiffusion coefficients. Let us assume that only components 1 and 2 develop the diffusion profiles keeping all the components constant throughout the interdiffusion zone. Therefore, we have + ; : = 1 (27b) where 8 = -+ 3 ... + is the sum of the compositions of components which remain constant and + = + is the sum of compositions of components which contribute to the development of the diffusion profiles. 6 ~ is the modified composition profile in PB diffusion couple. It should be noted here that 6 ~ in PB and 6 7 in PT diffusion couples are different because of the difference in + in these couples. In a PB couple:, + = 0, -= ⋯ = = 0, In a PB couple, we have }6 ~+ }6 ~= 0 and + = 0. Therefore, we have = = . It further means that, like the binary system, we will have the same value of the interdiffusion coefficient estimated considering diffusion profile of any of the component for the estimation of the data in a PB couple. Because of this reason, we can estimate composition-dependent diffusion coefficients from a single PB diffusion couple similar to the binary system. Therefore, the interdiffusion flux and the diffusion profiles are also different in the PB diffusion couple compared to PT and conventional couples. The interdiffusion flux in a PB couple can be expressed as (see supplementary file) where Equating, Equation 28 and 29a, the interdiffusion coefficient in a PB couple can be directly estimated from the composition profile utilizing In lattice fixed frame of reference, the intrinsic fluxes are related to the intrinsic diffusion coefficients with respect to modified composition profiles. Following the same argument as above, it can be expressed from Equation 1d with respect to the modified composition profiles as The intrinsic fluxes of different components are related to the vacancy flux by where the Kirkendall marker velocity B C is related to the vacancy flux + and the molar volume = by The interdiffusion and intrinsic fluxes following the Darken relation Taking sum of these interdiffusion fluxes for two components and since + = 0 and 6 ~ + 6 ~= 1, we have From Equations 31 and 32, we have Writing it for any of component 1 or 2 (for example component 2), we have Replacing Equation 28 and 30 in 34 and since }6 ~+ ∂6 ~= 0, we have Since only two components develop the diffusion profiles in a PB couple, Equation 8 with respect to the modified compositions (6 ~) can be expressed as where and Q R is the structure factor. Taking the sum of intrinsic fluxes of both the components and then replacing + = -∑ = -! + ), we have the relation for + . Replacing this in Equation 36a, we have where In a PB couple, component 1 and 2 develop the diffusion profiles keeping components 3 and 4 constant ( < ei% b = 0). Therefore, Equation 10b reduces to Following the similar argument, the expression for the component 1 (i.e. by considering component 2 as the dependent variable) can be written as If we neglect the vacancy wind effect (i.e. by neglecting all terms related to S), Equation 36b utilizing Equation 37 can be expressed as The same can be written for the component 1 in the PB couple as Comparing Equations 30 and 38, we have Therefore, the interdiffusion and tracer diffusion coefficients are related by It should be noted here that the tracer diffusion coefficients in PB couples can be estimated from the Kirkendall marker experiments. These are difficult or almost impossible to estimate at the intersection of PB couples (similar to the PT couples), which is discussed in the results and discussion section. If we consider the vacancy wind effect, Equation 36b can be expressed as Replacing Equation • These can be rearranged considering }6 ~+ }6 ~= 0 as These can be further rearranged using the relation for S U~ n= M N ∑ = In many systems, we will have similar values of l and l and one can calculate the vacancy wind without introducing much error if the contribution from this effect is negligible The interdiffusion coefficients with respect to the vacancy wind by replacing Equation !D = 1,2) and relations given in Equations 42 and 43 reduce to the equations proposed in a binary system by Manning For utilization of the method proposed, we have considered the PT diffusion couples produced in the NiCoFeCr system which intersect at a composition close to the equiatomic composition, as shown in Figure Table For the calculation of the tracer diffusion coefficients, the thermodynamic factors at 1200°C are computed using Thermo-Calc (TCHEA2 database) at the composition of the intersection of the PT diffusion couples i.e. at NNi = 24.7, NCo = 24.9, NFe = 24.7, NCr = 25.7 at.%. These are listed in Table Figure Figure Figure The diffusion coefficients should be estimated from only ideal or near-ideal diffusion profiles in which the non-ideality or the presence of hump is not found much beyond the standard range of error of composition measurements by WDS in EPMA. Otherwise, the error in calculation could be higher. Illogical values might be calculated if these are estimated from poorly prepared diffusion couples or if the thermodynamic details are not reliable. As already mentioned, It can be seen from the relations between the intrinsic and tracer diffusion coefficients in PB (Equation 39c), PT (Equation It is evident from the above equations that the interdiffusion coefficient estimated from different types of diffusion couples will have a different value although the difference is small in this system. Therefore, the interdiffusion zone length will be different in different types of couples depending on the value and sign of the intrinsic diffusion coefficients. It also should be noted from Table Table Another important aspect should be noted here related to the estimation of the tracer diffusion coefficients from interdiffusion profiles. We cannot estimate the tracer diffusion coefficients at the cross of two PB couples in the ternary or multicomponent system since we cannot write enough independent equations. For example, in a ternary system, one PB couple might be developed by producing the diffusion profiles of components 1 and 2 keeping component 3 constant. Another PB couple might be developed by producing the diffusion profiles of components 1 and 3 keeping component 2 constant. We can write only one independent equation in a PB couple relating the interdiffusion coefficients and the tracer diffusion coefficients (see Equation Table As already discussed earlier, the estimation of intrinsic and tracer diffusion coefficients following the Kirkendall marker experiment is almost impossible in the ternary or multicomponent system because of stringent requirement which is almost impossible to meet unless found incidentally. However, we can estimate the tracer diffusion coefficients at the cross of ternary diffusion couples in a three-component system and pseudo-ternary diffusion couples in a multicomponent system. This was for the first time proposed in a ternary system by Kirkaldy and Lane without experimental analysis because of lack of reliable thermodynamic data in that era In ternary or PT diffusion couples, we can write two independent equations from one couple and, therefore, we have four independent equations at the cross of two couples to calculate the tracer diffusion coefficients of three components which produce the diffusion profiles. If we are interested in estimating all the tracer diffusion coefficients by intersecting the PT profiles in a four-component system, we need two different sets of ideal PT profiles with a different set of components producing the diffusion profiles. This is possible to achieve, which will be reported in future considering different multicomponent systems. For example, we can estimate the tracer diffusion coefficients of components 1, 2 and 3 from intersecting PT diffusion couples in which components 1-2-3 produce the diffusion profiles keeping component 4 constant (as shown in this article). We may be able to produce another set by developing the diffusion profiles of a different combination of components including the component 4 but keeping another component (1 or 2 or 3) constant. The same method of calculating the tracer diffusion coefficients can be extended to the body diagonal diffusion couples also if one is ready to compromise the strict restriction of estimating the diffusion coefficients at the intersection of diffusion couples. When the diffusion couples are produced by developing the diffusion profiles of all the components, we need three diffusion couples in a fourcomponent system and four diffusion couples in a five-component system to intersect at one composition i.e. at one point in multicomponent space which is very difficult to achieve even in small composition range since the diffusion coefficients are not expected to be constant exactly To explain this further, let us consider an n-component system. In a conventional method when all the components develop the diffusion profiles, the intrinsic flux of component i neglecting the vacancy wind effect can be expressed as (see supplementary file Replacing Equation 44b in Equation 45a, we can express (n-1) independent equations in a n component system for the interdiffusion fluxes by relating n tracer diffusion coefficients in a diffusion couple. Therefore, we can estimate these n number of tracer diffusion coefficients from only two diffusion profiles by writing 2(n-1) independent equations. Irrespective of the number of components (in a system with three or more components), we need only two diffusion couples either to intersect or, if ready to compromise, when the profiles pass close to each other (let us say within 0.5-1 at.%, which should be established based on error analysis). Following, we can estimate the intrinsic and interdiffusion coefficients utilizing the calculated tracer diffusion coefficients using the relations expressed in the supplementary file. One can follow the same even by considering the vacancy wind effect. This may make the effort relatively easier since otherwise the need for (n-1) diffusion profiles in a multicomponent system to intersect or pass through closely make the task difficult considering the fact that these should be established based on trial experiments. We have demonstrated the estimation of the tracer and intrinsic diffusion coefficients from PT diffusion couples. This is demonstrated in NiCoFeCr system by comparing with the tracer diffusion coefficients estimated by the radiotracer method. The outcome of this study can be summarized as: • The estimation of the interdiffusion coefficients by intersecting the PT diffusion couples were demonstrated earlier • Maintaining the facility for radiotracer method is not easy and, therefore, only very few groups are currently following this method for estimation of the tracer diffusion coefficients. Experiments with radioisotopes of various elements are not feasible because of various reasons such as high cost and short half-life (for example, Al, Ga and Si). On the other hand, the diffusion couple method is easier to follow and therefore common. As demonstrated in this article, the newly proposed PB and PT methods can be very useful first to estimate the tracer diffusion coefficients of the components and then estimate all types of diffusion coefficients, which are otherwise difficult to estimate following the conventional diffusion couple method i.e. by producing diffusion profile of all the components.