Electron emission can be utilised to measure the work function of the surface. However, the number of significant digits in the values obtained through thermionic-, field-and photo-emission techniques is typically just two or three. Here, we show that the number can go up to five when angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) is applied. This owes to the capability of ARPES to detect the slowest photoelectrons that are directed only along the surface normal. By using a laser-based source, we optimised our setup for the slow photoelectrons and resolved the slowest-end cutoff of Au( Among the electronic properties of a crystal surface, the work function (φ s ) is one of the fundamentals. It corresponds to the minimum energy required to take out an electron through the surface at 0 K Electrons emitted from a crystal can be utilised to measure φ s directly because the threshold of the emission is governed by φ s that acts as a potential barrier on the surface. Thus, thermionic-, field-, and photo-emission techniques have been applied to this end While the primary concern may be the surface contamination, there is also a kinematic effect that can smooth the threshold of the electron emission seen in experiments The kinematic effect upon the emission Simple though it may seem, the precise detection via ARPES was aided by the use of a fibre-laser-based light source Angle integrated Width Laser-ARPES setup for slow photoelectrons Slow photoelectrons are vulnerable to fields and their trajectories can easily be bent by the electric and magnetic fields remaining in the spectrometer The technical difficulty to perform reliable ARPES on slow photoelectrons is gradually being removed, and currently, slow photoelectrons of 1 eV kinetic energy can be passed through modern electron analysers in a controlled trajectory. This advance has partly been pro-pelled by the advent of low-hν sources of 10 eV based on lasers We set up a fibre-laser-based source of hν = 5.988 eV While fibre-laser ARPES was used to detect the slow photoelectrons, helium-lamp ARPES was also used to characterise the band dispersions and to calibrate the photoelectron energy E PE -E F referenced to the Fermi level of the sample in electrical contact to the analyser; see Methods. Preparation of Au(111) As a model system, we investigated the (111) surface of gold. Gold is a noble metal and is an exemplary metal for electrodes. Studies of the work function of gold begun partly in pursuit of a reference standard Slow end seen with fibre-laser ARPES The panels in Fig. In order to quantify the sharp-and-parabolic cutoff, we performed a fitting procedure and extracted the energy and width of the cutoff as functions of θ. In the procedure, we first set a cutoff function (CF), which was a step distribution function of a linear slope convoluted with a Gaussian; for the explicit form of CF, see Methods. Then, with the CF, we fitted the energy distribution curves (EDCs) of the data shown in Fig. With the sharp cutoff as a measure, we were able to discern the aging of the surface. After keeping Au(111) of sample 1 in the spectrometer for 10 hours, the sample surface became less clean and the cutoff shifted downwards; see, Supplementary Fig. In a separate run of the measurement (sample 2), we varied the temperature from 30 to 90 K and monitored the cutoff (Fig. Trajectory of the threshold photoelectrons The sharp-and-parabolic appearance of the cutoff can be understood by considering the trajectory of "threshold photoelectrons." Below, we first explain the photoelectron refraction, or the kinematic constraints upon the emission across the surface where V zs vac is the vacuum level just outside the surface. The threshold photoelectrons cannot reach the e-lens as long as they are traveling tangential to the surface. Here, we are reminded that, even when the sample and e-lens are electrically connected, electric fields can exist between the two; see Fig. Analytic solutions for the trajectory exist when we can regard the electric field to be directed along the surface normal (z) (Fig. Equation ( For completeness, we present the dispersion of the angle-resolved cutoff when the sample is applied with negative bias voltage -v/e with respect to the analyser: Here, E F + v becomes the Fermi level of the sample. When ∆φ + v > 0, the threshold photoelectrons are dragged towards the e-lens and the intrinsic cutoff becomes visible. With increasing v, the dispersion shifts upwards in energy and its curvature (prefactor of tan 2 θ) is increased. The increase of the curvature is in accordance to the photoelectron acceptance cone being tunable with v The demonstration of the sub-meV precision measurement under the biased condition is presented in Supplementary Fig. On the role of the monochromaticity It was shown in the previous section that the parabolic dispersion of the slow-end cutoff depends solely on how the threshold photoelectrons were dragged from the outer surface to the e-lens; it does not depend on how the threshold photoelectrons were generated. Whatever the value of hν may be, the threshold photoelectrons emerged on the outer surface line up on the identical dispersion when entering the e-lens. This point is implicit in equations ( The only but important role for the light to be monochromatic was to precisely locate the energy level of the Fermi cutoff E f , which was the requisite to refer to the absolute value of the work function In summary, we applied 6-eV fibre-laser ARPES to a model system Au(111) and investigated the trajectory of the slow photoelectrons that marginally overcame the work function. The slow end of the photoelectron distribution was successfully detected. It showed a parabolic angular distribution bottomed at normal emission. Moreover, the cutoff was a step edge and was sharper than the Fermi cutoff. A kinematic model described the sharp-and-parabolic cutoff as follows: The bottom of the dispersion is the cutoff formed by the slowest photoelectrons; the curvature of the dispersion depends on the slope of the vacuum level across the sample and e-lens; the cutoff is a step edge whose sharpness is indifferent to the bandwidth of light. Thereby, we derived the work function with one standard deviation as small as σ = 0.4 meV and demonstrated the potential of ARPES that is intrinsically free from the Fowler effect. Because the work function is sensitive to the surface quality at the atomic level The Au(111) surface of ∼1 × 1 cm 2 was prepared by repeating 1.8-keV Ar-ion sputtering and 550-K annealing on a single crystal of gold. The temperature on the surface during the annealing was monitored by a pyrometer whose emissivity was set to 0.05. The pressure during the final 10-min annealing of samples 1 and 2 were less than 7 × 10 -10 and 4 × 10 -10 Torr, respectively. After the annealing, the sample was cooled at a rate of ∼15 K/min down to 400 K and then transferred to an ARPES chamber at a pressure of 3.7 × 10 -11 Torr. A homemade light source based on optical fibres doped with ytterbium (Yb) Energy reference for extracting the work function As is well established (for example, see Park et al. Fitting procedure for the cutoffs The cutoff energy ε th s and width of the cutoff on the slow side were extracted by fitting the EDC at each emission angle with the step-edge-type cutoff function CF: Here, Θ(ε) is a step function which is unity when ε > 0 but is zero otherwise, G(ε; γ) is a Gaussian, γ is the FWHM of the Gaussian, and S(ε) is the spectrum to be cut off and is represented by a linear slope, or the Taylor expansion up to the first order about the cutoff energy ε th s . Estimation of the Schottky effect All the spectra were taken with the sample and analyser electrically connected to common ground. Therefore, the lowering of the work function due to the Schottky effect ∆φ s = -(e 3 E/4πε 0 ) 1/2 (see Fig. container. At the bottom (level 1), current suppliers and temperature controllers for laser diodes are located. At the middle (level 2), a Yb-doped fibre-laser oscillator In Supplementary Fig. None of the vapor pressure curves for the residual-gas species seen in Supplementary Fig. In order to extract the energy and width of the slowest-end cutoff, we executed the same fitting procedure to that performed on the Au(111) dataset: The energy distribution curves (EDCs) were fitted with the cutoff functions (CFs), see Methods. Supplementary Fig. c b -T + T Au (1 11 ) Ro ta tio n an gle , R En tra nc e sli t En tra nc e sli t En tra nc e sli t En tra nc e sli t En tra nc e sli t En tra nc e sli t