GeSn lasers enable monolithic integration of lasers on the Si platform using all-group-IV directbandgap materials. Although optically pumped GeSn lasers have made significant progress, the study of the electrically injected lasers has just begun only recently. In this work, we present explorative investigations of electrically injected GeSn heterostructure lasers with various layer thicknesses and material compositions. The cap layer total thickness was varied between 240 and 100 nm. At 10 K, a 240-nm-SiGeSn capped device had a threshold current density Jth = 0.6 kA/cm 2 compared to Jth = 1.4 kA/cm 2 of a device with 100-nm-SiGeSn cap due to an improved modal overlap with the GeSn gain region. Both devices had a maximum operating temperature Tmax = 100 K. Device with cap layers of Si0.03Ge0.89Sn0.08 and Ge0.95Sn0.05, respectively, were also compared. Due to less effective carrier (electron) confinement, the device with a 240-nm-GeSn cap had a higher threshold Jth = 2.4 kA/cm 2 and lower maximum operating temperature Tmax = 90 K, compared to those of the 240-nm-SiGeSn capped device with Jth = 0.6 kA/cm 2 and Tmax = 100 K. In the study of the active region material, the device with Ge0.85Sn0.15 active region had a 2.3 higher Jth and 10 K lower Tmax, compared to the device with Ge0.89Sn0.11 in its active region. This is likely due to higher defect density in Ge0.85Sn0.15 rather than an intrinsic issue. The longest lasing wavelength was measured as 2682 nm at 90 K. The investigations provide guidance to the future structure design of GeSn laser diodes to further improve the performance. SiGeSn alloys have attracted considerable attentions in recent years as a versatile material system enabling all-group-IV-based optoelectronic device integration Furthermore, an increase in the Sn composition of the GeSn active region led to lasing at elevated temperatures The electrically injected GeSn laser diode is of even greater interest as they can be fully integrated on the Si-based group-IV photonics platform. However, to achieve lasing under electrical injection involves more challenges than that under optical pumping. For example, optical confinement in an optically pumped laser can be achieved by utilizing the low index Si substrate and the top air as cladding layers, but more challenging for electrically injected lasers because a metal contact is normally placed on the top surface of the device. Therefore, it is necessary to modify laser structure designs and to add more layers, which are difficult to grow. Another challenge is the increased free carrier absorption due to increased doping for more effective carrier injection through a pn junction, which increases laser threshold in comparison with optically pumped lasers, where carrier injection is easily achieved with the optical absorption of the pump light. Such differences illustrate the need to design and evaluate the laser structures under electrical injection. Recently, an electrically pumped laser operational up to 100 K was demonstrated The devices had a minimum threshold at 0.6 kA/cm 2 and maximum peak power output of 2.7 mW/facet at 10 K. Compared to using n-type contact on the top surface, placing p-type contact on the top limited the hole leakage from the type-II band alignment between the cap layer and the active region. The thick active region and the low refractive index cap layer offered an optical confinement factor of 75%. Although this specific design leads to demonstration of electrically pumped lasers, still uncharted are the effects of layer thicknesses and alloy gain medium/barrier material selections, which offers fundamental guidance for future GeSn diode laser design. In this work, several electrically injected GeSn heterostructure laser diodes with different cap layers and active layer material were compared. Increased cap thickness improves the optical confinement factor in the gain region and reduces the optical loss from the metal contact significantly. The devices with a 240-nm thick cap layer demonstrated reduced threshold, compared to the devices with a 100-nm-thick cap. Cap layer materials with different conduction band barrier heights were also studied. Because of improved electron confinement, the Si0.03Ge0.89Sn0.08 capped devices with a 114 meV barrier exhibited a lower threshold and higher Tmax, compared to the devices with Ge0.95Sn0.05 cap with a 58 meV barrier. Devices with 11% and 15% Sn composition in the GeSn active region are compared to probe the effect of intrinsic GeSn gain within the laser diode. Beyond the observation that lasing at a longer wavelength was recorded at 2682 nm at 90 K, the increase of Sn composition did not show improvement on threshold and Tmax, implying that extrinsic strain-induced defect dislocations remain, causing the device performance to deteriorate. Layer structure of the laser diodes. A schematic of the laser structure is described in Fig. The five layers were epitaxially grown in the sequence of: (i) a 500 nm Ge buffer, n-type doped (phosphorus) at 110 19 cm -3 ; (ii) a 700 nm spontaneous-relaxation-enhanced GeSn buffer, n-type doped at 110 19 cm -3 ; (iii) a 1000 nm GeSn active region, undoped; (iv) the first GeSn or SiGeSn cap layer with p-type doping (boron) at 110 18 cm -3 ; (v) a 50 nm (Si)GeSn cap layer with p-type doping at 110 19 cm -3 . The GeSn buffer layers had a varied Sn composition: 7-11% in samples A to D and 10-15% in sample E. The GeSn active region had a composition of 11% in samples A to D, and 15% in sample E. Experimental design. Three sets of experiments were designed to study the GeSn laser structures, summarized in Fig. Samples A and C have the total cap thickness of 240 nm compared to 100 nm in samples B and D, respectively. The second variable is the material used in the cap layers that changes conductionband barrier height in the heterostructure. Si0.03Ge0.89Sn0.08 with 114 meV of barrier height is used in samples A and B, compared to Ge0.95Sn0.05 with 58 meV barrier height used in samples C and D. The last experiment evaluates the device performance affected by the Sn composition in the GeSn active region. Sample E has a nominal 15% of Sn in the active region, compared to 11% in sample A. Note that sample A which has been reported in ref. The key parameters are summarized in Table To validate the lasing operation, the devices characteristics were measured using the same method that was detailed in ref. The typical characterization results of sample E are shown in Fig. For samples A to E, the full widths at half maximum (FWHM) incorporating all lasing modes were measured as 32, 29, 18, 34, and 16 nm (under the 10 nm resolution spectrometer), respectively at 10 K. Our previous studies revealed that due to the relatively large area of cross section, all laser devices feature multi-mode operation. The high-resolution lasing spectra showing well-resolved multi-peaks of sample A was reported in ref. Thickness of cap layer (first experimental group in Fig. The change of cap layer thickness affects the laser performance by the following factors: (i) optical loss from the metal contact plays the major role, (ii) free carrier absorption within the heavily doped cap layers, and (iii) optical confinement factor in the active region. The optical loss on the metal contacts consists of two origins: absorption loss in the metal layer and scattering loss due to the surface roughness. The metal absorption loss is plotted as a function of SiGeSn cap total thickness in Fig. On the other hand, the increase of cap layer thickness decreases the modal overlap with the metal layer, and therefore the scattering loss due to the metal surface roughness is reduced. The calculated metal absorption loss is summarized in Table Overall, it can be seen that the free carrier absorption loss and optical confinement show less sensitivity to the cap layer thickness, while the metal absorption loss dramatically decreases as the cap layer thickness increases. Note that the total loss in Table Cap layer materials (second experimental group in Fig. The conduction band (CB) barrier height of each sample was calculated. For both comparisons (A vs C and B vs D: Si0.03Ge0.89Sn0.08 vs Ge0.95Sn0.05), no matter whether the cap layer thickness is 240 nm or 100 nm, the samples using Si0.03Ge0.89Sn0.08 cap have the barrier height of 114 meV, while the samples using Ge0.95Sn0.05 cap show a lower barrier height of 58 meV. The higher barrier height improves the device performance due to better electron confinement: (i) at 10 K, sample A has a much lower threshold that is 0.25× of that of sample C, while sample B has a threshold that is 0.41× of sample D. The similar threshold reduction was also reported on III-V laser devices composition has a larger lattice constant, which leads to larger lattice mismatch with the cap layer, resulting in increased defect density at the active/cap interface. These defects act as recombination centers, and thus reduce the carrier injection efficiency. Therefore, for the device with higher Sn in the active region, the cap layer needs to be selected to minimize the interface defect density. The SiGeSn with appropriate Si and Sn compositions is a suitable candidate. Current material growth shows limited availability of Si and Sn compositions, which, however, can be improved by the advance of future growth techniques; (iv) Sample A has a slightly longer cavity length of 1.7 mm compared to 1.3 mm for sample E. The longer cavity features reduced mirror loss, leading to a better performance. Note that the difference of mirror loss between samples A and E is relatively small (5.5 cm -1 vs 7.2 cm -1 ), and thus it is not a dominant factor in this experiment. Additional considerations. In addition to the loss mechanism abovementioned, other factors that affect the device performance are elaborated as follows: (i) active layer thickness. In this work, the design of sample structure is inherited from the former optically pumped lasers, in which a thicker active layer is preferred, aiming to have higher light absorption. However, such absorption enhancement with a thicker active layer does not apply to electrically injected lasers. In fact, growing a thinner active region could effectively reduce the threshold Reducing the sidewall roughness by improving the fabrication procedure is a viable solution to reduce the scattering loss. In conclusion, electrically injected GeSn laser diodes were studied with an evaluation of three factors in the structure: cap layer thickness, cap materials, and active region materials. The 240nm capped devices feature lower metal absorption loss, offering a reduction of threshold and an elevation of maximum operating temperature compared to 100-nm capped devices; The devices with a Si0.03Ge0.89Sn0.08 cap show lower threshold and higher maximum operating temperature compared to the devices using a Ge0.95Sn0.05 cap, which is due to the higher barrier height at the active/cap interface when employing the Si0.03Ge0.89Sn0.08 cap; The 15% Sn in the active region, however, does not improve the device performance in terms of lasing threshold and temperature compared to an 11% Sn device, when the same Si0.03Ge0.89Sn0.08 cap was used. The performance of high-Sn composition devices can be improved by employing a thinner active layer and a cap with less lattice mismatch, which could reduce the dislocation density. The maximum lasing peak wavelength was measured at 2682 nm for Ge0.85Sn0.15 devices at 90 K. The sample structures were grown on the 200-mm Si (100) wafer using reduced pressure chemical vapor deposition. The heterostructure was grown on the Si wafer starting with a 500-nm Ge buffer. The Ge buffer was in-situ annealed to limit the defects. The 700-nm GeSn buffer was grown with the recipe of nominal 11% Sn for samples A-D and 15% Sn for sample E. The dislocations induced by the crystalline strain relaxation is expected within the GeSn buffer layer. And the relaxation leads to a Sn gradient within the GeSn buffer. The dislocations are expected to cause a Sn gradient within the GeSn buffer and confined within some few hundreds of nanometers. The GeSn active region was then grown with the same recipe and low defect density. The standard in-situ dopant gas was introduced to form the n-type and p-type regions. The photoluminescence (PL) measurement. The PL was measured from the cap-removed sample. The heterostructure sample was chemically etched. And the top 600 nm of structure was removed, and the active region was exposed at the surface to be characterized. The PL emission was excited by using the 532-nm continuous wave laser at 500 mW. The emission was collected through the spectrometer with the InSb detector. The signal was recorded via a standard lock-in technique. Device fabrication. The structures were fabricated into ridge waveguide laser diodes. The 80μm wide ridge structure was formed by standard photolithography and wet chemical etching. The ridge height is 1.4 μm in order to reach the n-type GeSn buffer layer. The metal contacts (10 nm Cr + 350 nm Au) were deposited by using an electron beam evaporator. The Si substrate on the back side was reduced to ~140 μm thickness by lapping, followed by a cleaving to form the facets. The laser diodes were wire-bonded onto a Si carrier with isolated Au bonding pads.