We use a combination of polarized Raman spectroscopy experiment and model magnetism-phonon coupling calculations to study the rich magneto-Raman effect in the two-dimensional (2D) magnet CrI 3 . We reveal a novel layered-magnetism-assisted phonon scattering mechanism below the magnetic onset temperature, whose Raman excitation breaks time-reversal symmetry, has an antisymmetric Raman tensor, and follows the magnetic phase transitions across critical magnetic fields, on top of the presence of the conventional phonon scattering with symmetric Raman tensors in N-layer CrI 3 . We resolve in data and by calculations that the 1 st -order A g phonon of monolayer splits into a N-fold multiplet in N-layer CrI 3 due to the interlayer coupling (N ≥ 2) and that the phonons with the multiple show distinct magnetic field dependence because of their different layered-magnetism-phonon coupling. We further find that such a layered-magnetism-phonon coupled Raman scattering mechanism extends beyond 1 st -order to higher-order multi-phonon scattering processes. Our results on magneto-Raman effect of the 1 st -order phonons in the multiplet and the higherorder multi-phonons in N-layer CrI 3 demonstrate the rich and strong behavior of emergent magneto-optical effects in 2D magnets and underlines the unique opportunities of new spin-phonon physics in van der Waals layered magnets. Two-dimensional (2D) CrI 3 of few-layer form features a layered-antiferromagnetic (AFM) order where the spins align along the out-of-plane direction ferromagnetically within each layer and antiferromagnetically between adjacent layers In this work, we carefully examine the magneto-optical Raman effect for N-layer CrI 3 (N = 1 -4) by performing polarization, temperature, and magnetic field dependent micro-Raman spectroscopy measurements and unambiguously identify the layered-magnetism-assisted phonon scattering as the origin applicable for CrI 3 of any thickness. N-layer CrI 3 flakes were exfoliated from high-quality CrI 3 single crystals, sandwiched between hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) thin flakes, and then placed onto SiO 2 /Si substrates inside a high-purity (> 99.999%) nitrogen-filled glovebox. Micro-Raman spectroscopy measurements in the backscattering geometry were carried out with a 633 nm excitation laser resonant with the charge-transfer transition We start with resolving in N-layer CrI 3 the interlayer coupling-induced split of the A g mode of monolayer CrI 3 where H 0 represents the original A g mode at frequency ω 0 = k 0 /m within individual layers, u i represents the displacement field in the i th layer, and k stands for the coupling constant between adjacent layers, equivalent to a coupling frequency ω = k/m. Diagonalizing H leads to N nondegenerate eigenfrequencies Ω i (ω 0 , ω) and their corresponding eigenmodes Because N-layer CrI 3 is structurally centrosymmetric, its N calculated eigenmodes have alternating parities, with the highest-frequency mode always parity-even as a result of equal, in-phase atomic displacement between layers (i.e., In the parallel channel where only modes with even parity and symmetric Raman tensor R S can be detected, we expect to see every other mode starting with the highest frequency one (i = 1, 3, 5, • • • ). This expectation is indeed consistent with our data that U 1 for N = 1 and 2 and U 1,3 for N = 3 and 4 are observed in the linear parallel channel in Fig. We anticipate observing in the crossed channel every other mode from the lowest-frequency one , because U N always has the same parity as the layered-AFM for any N. The result in Fig. ) with +1 for spin up and -1 for spin down in a single layer. In particular, for any N > 1, the lowest-frequency mode U N features out-of-phase atomic displacement between adjacent layers and matches best the pattern of alternating spin orientations in the layered-AFM state (Fig. So far we have established the physical origin of the N-fold multiplet for N-layer CrI 3 as a combined effect of Davydov-splitting and layered-AFM-phonon coupling, leading to the conventional phonons of R S in the linear parallel channel We then proceed to explore the magnetic field dependence of the layered-magnetism-assisted phonon modes in N-layer CrI 3 . From now on, we chose circularly polarized light to perform Raman measurements for preventing any artifacts from Faraday rotation of light passing through optical components in stray magnetic field. In this work, we focus on two representative thicknesses, 2L and 4L CrI 3 , having one and two critical magnetic transitions, respectively. We note that the mechanism described below is applicable for arbitrary N-layer CrI 3 . The 2L CrI 3 undergoes a layered-AFM to FM transition at a critical magnetic field B c = ±0.6 T We refer to the layered-magnetism-phonon coupling that we have developed above to understand the magnetic field dependence of the two 1 st -order modes (U 1 and U 2 ) in 2L CrI 3 . For each mode U i , its Raman tensor R i is composed of the conventional structural (R i S ) and the novel layered-magnetism-assisted magnetic (R i AS ) contributions, i.e., R i = R i S + λ i R i AS , where R i S is magnetic field independent and is only present for parity-even modes, R i AS ∝ U i • M reflects the magnetic origin and selects the zero-momentum component, and λ i is ratio of the magnetic to structural contribution for the i th mode that depends on microscopic parameters such as spin-orbit-coupling. Here, M changes from (1,-1) to (±1, ±1) across the layered-AFM to FM transition at B c = ±0.6 T with the fully polarized FM spin moments pointing upwards/downwards. Specifically, for the parity-even high-frequency mode of  at all magnetic fields and Different from 2L CrI 3 , N-layer CrI 3 (N > 2) undergoes two spin-flip transitions with increasing B ⊥ , one at B c1 = ±0.7 T for spins in surface layers and the other at B c2 = ±1.6 T for spins in interior layers We carry out a similar analysis as we have done for 2L CrI 3 above, but add an additional intermediate magnetic phase M = (1, -1, 1, 1) between the layered-AFM of (1, -1, 1, -1) and the fully spin polarized FM of (1, 1, 1, 1). While the structural contribution (R i S ) is only present for parity-even modes, U 1 and U 3 , and remains magnetic field independent, the layered-magnetismcoupled magnetic contribution (R i AS ) varies proportionally to U i • M as M changes as a function of B ⊥ . Figure In conclusion, we have established the Davydov-splitting of A g mode of monolayer into N-fold multiplet in N-layer CrI 3 and discovered, distinct from non-magnetic few-layer atomic crystals Sample fabrication CrI 3 single crystals were grown by the chemical vapor transport method, as detailed in Ref. Micro-Raman spectroscopy Micro-Raman spectroscopy measurements were carried out using a 633 nm excitation laser. The incident beam was focused by a 40× objective down to ∼3 μm in diameter at the sample site, and the power was kept at 80 μW. The scattered light was collected by the objective in a backscattering geometry, then dispersed by a Horiba LabRAM HR Evolution Raman spectrometer, and finally detected by a thermoelectric cooled CCD camera. A closedcycle helium cryostat is interfaced with the micro-Raman system for the temperature-dependent measurements. All thermal cycles were performed at a base pressure that is lower than 7 × 10 -7 mbar. In addition, a cryogen-free magnet is integrated with the low temperature cryostat for the magnetic field-dependent measurements. In this experiment, the magnetic field was applied along the out-of-plane direction and covered a range of 0 -2.2 Tesla. We notice that 1L CrI 3 has a linewidth of ∼ 2.2cm -1 , clearly broader than those of 2L, 3L, and 4L CrI 3 (∼0.6-1.0 cm -1 ). Note that in reference Nature Nanotech. 15, 212 (2020) and Nano Letters 20, 729 (2020), a broad linewidth (∼4.0 cm -1 and ∼3.5 cm -1 , respectively) for 1L CrI 3 was observed and no explanation has been provided. We think it may result from a few factors: (a) the ultimate 2D limit of 1L CrI 3 may have stronger fluctuations than its thicker counterparts. (b) the interfacing with hBN flakes on both sides of a CrI 3 flake makes 1L CrI 3 fully in contact with hBN that could cause strong damping effect to phonons. Such an effect is weaker in thicker layers because of their lower surface-to-volume ratio. Or (c) there are simply more defects introduced to 1L CrI 3 as it is much harder to achieve 1L CrI 3 than its counterparts. The main purpose for using the 633 nm resonant excitation is to enhance the signal level and achieve a good signal to noise ratio. Meanwhile, this resonant excitation does not alter the Raman selection rule. As shown in Fig. The Davydov splitting of A g mode in N-layer CrI 3 can be accounted for by a linear chain model written as , in which u i contains both amplitude and phase of the atomic displacement within the i th layer; k 0 and k stand for the force constant of the original A g mode of monolayer CrI 3 and the coupling constant between adjacent layers, respectively. We thus obtain a kG, where I is an identify matrix, and G matrix describes interlayer coupling. Diagonalizing the matrix G gives rise to the N eigenvalues (e i with i = 1, 2, • • • , N) and eigenmodes for N-layer CrI 3 and their parity (see Table Absence of U 2 mode in the spectrum of 3L CrI 3 As shown in Table is parity odd, which is Raman silent in the parallel channel. Meanwhile, the coupling between U 2 with layered AFM order also vanishes. As a result, it cannot be observed in the crossed channel either. Therefore, U 2 mode is absent in our spectrum of 3L CrI 3 shown in Fig. ( " = 0 ( " = 0 (1 -1.63* 4 ) 2 ( (1 + 1.63* 4 ) 2 ( (1 + 1.63* 4 ) 2 ( (1 -1.63* 4 ) 2 ( ! " # $ = 0 III. Magnetic dependence of U 2 and U 1 modes in 2L CrI Table. S4. Coupling strength ( U i • M) between the phonon mode ( U i ) with the magnetic order ( M). Phonon mode * + , * ( -) * )