Plasticity in hexagonal close-packed zirconium is mainly controlled by the glide of dislocations with 1/3 1210 Burgers vectors. As these dislocations cannot accommodate deformation in the [0001] direction, twinning or glide of c + a dislocations, i.e. dislocations with 1/3 1213 Burgers vector, have to be activated. We have performed in situ straining experiments in a transmission electron microscope to study the glide of c + a dislocations in two different zirconium samples, pure zirconium and Zircaloy-4, at room temperature. These experiments show that c + a dislocations exclusively glide in first-order pyramidal planes with cross-slip being activated. A much stronger lattice friction is opposing the glide of c + a dislocations when their orientation corresponds to the a direction defined by the intersection of their glide plane with the basal plane. This results in long dislocations straightened along a which glide either viscously or jerkily. This a direction governs the motion of segments with other orientations, whose shape is merely driven by the minimization of the line tension. The friction due to solute atoms is also discussed. Zirconium alloys are used in the nuclear industry as fuel cladding tubes and structural components in light and heavy water reactors Both twinning and glide of c + a dislocations, i.e. dislocations with 1/3 1123 Burgers vectors, are active in zirconium The critical resolved shear stress (CRSS) necessary to activate glide of c+a dislocations strongly depends on the temperature but is always much higher than the CRSS of a dislocation glide Although the mobility of c + a dislocations is a key ingredient of the plastic anisotropy of zirconium, not much is known on this mobility besides the slip plane, the dislocation ability to cross-slip and their tendency to align in a specific direction as mentioned above. In situ TEM straining experiments are a valuable tool to study dislocation mobility. Such experiments in zirconium have already revealed some key features of a dislocations Two different zirconium materials have been chosen for this study: zirconium sponge, which is essentially pure zirconium, and Zircaloy-4 in the recrystallized metallurgical state, which is often considered as a model material for zirconium alloys. Their chemical compositions are given in Table Pure zirconium results from the Kroll process in the form of a 3 mm thick plate. The raw zirconium sponge has first been arc-melted and cold-rolled with intermediate recrystallization treatments during 3 hours at 580 • C. After the last cold-rolling step, the same recrystallization treatment has been applied followed by a tensile test up to a strain of 1.5%. The purpose of this straining was to reach critical strain annealing phenomenon in order to obtain large grains Recrystallized Zircaloy-4 is used for light water reactor applications as guide tubes. These tubes have a thickness smaller than 1 mm and exhibit a strong texture with the c axis of the grains close to the radial direction (RD) of the tube, in the AD-RD (AD: axial direction) plane. Such products are not suitable to study easily the activation of pyramidal c + a slip, as one has to pull the grains along directions close to the c axis which are mainly along the radial direction of the thin tube. Because of the small thickness of the tube along the radial direction, it is not possible to machine small tensile test samples in this direction. This is the reason why an intermediate product of the fabrication process, called TREX for Tube Reduced Extrusion, has been used. This is a thick tube, with diameter of the order of 55 mm and thickness of the order of 10 mm. This material exhibits equi-axed grains with mean size of 6 μm and a low initial dislocation density, only of the order of 10 11 m -2 . The c axis of the grains are mainly oriented in the RD-TD (TD: transverse direction) plane with the highest pole density along TD Pure zirconium and Zircaloy-4 samples have been mechanically polished down to 0.1 mm thick and electropolished to make a small hole, using a mixture of 90% of ethanol and 10% of perchlorate acid at -10 • C. The thin area around the hole is only few hundreds nanometer thick and is therefore suitable for TEM observations. In situ straining experiments were performed at room temperature on both materials using a GATAN cooling and straining TEM sample holder on a JEOL 2010 operating at 200 kV. The thin foils were pasted on two ceramic rings or on copper grids at each ends to be pulled by the TEM holder. For Zircaloy-4, experiments have been also conducted at room temperature on a FEI Tecnai operating at 200 kV, using the commercial room temperature GATAN straining specimen-holder and the dogbone TEM samples. On these two specimen holders, one cross-head of the sample is fixed and the other cross-head is attached to a bar which displacement is controlled by a motor. Typical displacements are 100 μm. The experimental procedure is as follows. First, the orientation of various grains is analyzed until finding a grain with an orientation that satisfies two criteria: i) the c axis must be close enough to the tensile direction (typically less than 10 • ) so that c + a slip will be activated, ii) the grain can be tilted, in the limit of the tilt range and with the restriction of single-tilt allowed by the TEM sample holder, so that a two beam diffraction condition with g = 0002 diffraction vector can be obtained. In this condition, the a dislocations disappear and only c + a dislocations are observed. The number of grains that meet these two conditions appears to be rather limited, despite the effort to select materials with adequate texture. Once the grains have been selected, the displacement of the cross-head is progressively increased until c + a dislocation motion is observed. The displacement is then maintained constant or slightly decreased and the dislocation motion is recorded using an ORIUS wide angle GATAN camera operating at ten images per second or a megaview III camera operating with 50 images per second. For some experiments, it has been possible to achieve extinction conditions for the c + a dislocations, by tilting the sample. This allows the determination of the exact Burgers vector of the dislocation. For most of experiments only the glide plane of the dislocation was deduced, without ambiguity, using two informations : i) the orientation of the slip traces and ii) the evolution of the distance between the two slip traces when tilting the thin foil. From this last measurement, the thickness of the thin foil can also be estimated. Furthermore, when cross-slip was observed, the Burgers vector of the dislocation has been deduced from the knowledge of the two gliding planes. Besides the in situ TEM straining experiments described below, some post mortem observations on the same recrystallized Zircaloy-4 have been conducted after tensile tests to check that the behavior of c + a dislocations characterized in situ in thin foils concurs with the dislocation microstructure obtained after straining macroscopic samples. These post mortem observations are described in Appendix A. During the in situ experiments, the observation of c + a dislocation motion was always associated with the observation of twinning which often occurred after c + a dislocation glide. The twinning system was [1011]{1012} as expected in tension in zirconium alloys at room temperature Gliding c + a dislocations in recrystallized Zircaloy-4 are shown in Figures In all these in situ straining experiments (Figs. In situ observations of the dislocation motion in recrystallized Zircaloy-4 show that the c + a dislocations aligned along the a direction glide slowly in a rigid manner with occasionally the formation of macro-kinks. This can be seen on Fig. Other orientations of the c + a dislocation, including the screw part, glide more rapidly with larger jumps than the viscous motion of the a orientation, as can be seen for instance on Fig. We have tried to evaluate the difference of mobility in the viscous glide regime between the part of the c + a dislocation aligned along the a direction (nearly edge) and the other mixed-screw orientations for the sequence shown in Fig. During in situ straining experiments, cross-slip of c + a dislocations has been observed. One of these cross-slip events is illustrated on Fig. Four additional slip traces emerge between t = 0 (Fig. The process detailed here points out that c + a dislocations can cross-slip when they meet an obstacle and that the cross-slipped plane is also a first-order pyramidal plane. When decreasing the stress applied on the specimen, by reducing the displacement of the crosshead from 120 to 100 μm, a dislocation has been found to move back on its track (Fig. The same in situ TEM straining experiments have been performed at room temperature on pure zirconium. Comparing these observations with the previous ones in Zircaloy-4 gives some insights on alloying effects on the mobility of c + a dislocations. Like in Zircaloy-4, the slip planes of c + a dislocations have always been found in pure zirconium to correspond to the first-order pyramidal planes (Fig. Like in Zircaloy-4, glide of the straight a orientation of c + a dislocations leads to the creation of macro-kinks (Fig. A few cross-slip events have been also observed in pure zirconium. They appear, at first glance, less numerous than in Zircaloy-4, but a detailed statistical analysis would be needed to be able to really compare the occurrence of cross-slip in both materials. Some relaxation observations have been also performed in pure zirconium. These experiments have been used to estimate the friction stress acting against the glide of the a orientation and of the other orientations, thus characterizing the mobility anisotropy. The friction stress originates from the dislocation core structure, like a possible non planar dissociation, and also from the dislocation interaction with the solute atoms present in the zirconium matrix. When the applied stress τ a is removed, one observed that the curved parts of the dislocations are gliding back and that their curvature radius increases (Fig. Only glide in first-order pyramidal planes has been observed in our experiments, both in pure zirconium and in Zircaloy-4. This agrees with previous TEM observations Cross-slip events between the two first-order pyramidal planes shared by a single c + a direction have been observed in Zircaloy-4 and in pure zirconium in our experiments, and also in Zr-2.5Nb alloy by Long et al. One key feature of the glide motion of c + a dislocations is the strong lattice friction existing for the orientation corresponding to the intersection of the pyramidal glide plane with the basal plane, leading to long straight dislocations aligned along this a direction. This important friction exists both in pure zirconium and in Zircaloy-4, thus showing that it certainly derives from an intrinsic core property of this specific orientation. As mentioned in the introduction, this behavior is not specific to zirconium, but can be found in other hcp metals. In Mg, it has been observed that c+a dislocations gliding in second-order pyramidal planes may lock themselves by a non-conservative dissociation in the basal plane when their line direction belongs to this plane 1/3 1213 → 1/6 2203 + 1/6 0223 . Elastic calculations of the energy variation induced by this dissociation predict that it is also favorable in Zr However our in situ experiments provide some clues that the lattice friction of this a orientation may have a different origin in zirconium. Locking of edge c+a dislocations in Mg by a non conservative dissociation in the basal plane has been correlated with the emission of basal prismatic loops with a I 1 stacking fault This non conservative dissociation is not the solely possible mechanism leading to a lattice friction. It has been also observed in Mg that c + a dislocation may emit an a dislocation gliding in the basal plane to leave behind a sessile c dislocation Without going to the emission of a perfect basal a dislocation, Numakura et al. One characteristic of the gliding c + a dislocations when they are aligned in the a direction is the presence of macro-kinks on these otherwise straight segments. Recent in situ TEM compression experiments performed in Mg Our line tension measurements indicate a friction stress of 160 ± 40 MPa acting against glide of the straight part of c + a dislocations in pure zirconium. This friction has both an intrinsic origin probably due to a complex core of the c + a dislocation for the a orientation as discussed before and an extrinsic one arising from interaction with solute atoms. This friction stress of the less mobile segments should correspond to the yield stress of c + a pyramidal slip at room temperature. Modeling with crystal plasticity their microcantilevers bending experiments, Gong et al. This reduced mobility of c + a dislocations in alloyed zirconium may appear at first glance in contradiction with the study of Jensen and Backofen In situ TEM straining experiments performed both in pure zirconium and in Zircaloy-4 have shown that c + a dislocations glide exclusively in first-order pyramidal planes at room temperatures, with some cross-slip events between two pyramidal planes sharing the same c+a direction. A characteristic feature of the microstructure is that c + a dislocations align in the a direction defined by the intersection of their glide plane with the basal plane, leading to long straight dislocations. Dislocations segments aligned along this orientation experience a higher lattice friction than others, with a friction stress estimated to 160 ± 40 MPa for the a orientation instead of 37 ± 13 MPa for others in pure zirconium. This a orientation exhibits two different glide motions, either viscous or jerky, and its frequent pinning in localized points leads to the creation of macro-kinks. The same dynamic behavior of c + a dislocations has been observed in pure zirconium and in Zircaloy-4, except for a highest friction acting against the motion of all characters in Zircaloy-4 because of the numerous alloying elements in solid solution. The mechanisms controlling the mobility of c+a dislocations in zirconium show strong similarities with the ones operating in other hcp metals, in particular magnesium despite a different glide plane. carried out. The purpose was to check that the dislocation behavior observed in situ in thin foils is typical of bulk plasticity. To this aim, conventional tensile tests on dog-bone Zircaloy-4 specimens taken out of the TREX tube with the tensile axis along the transverse direction have been performed at 350 • C up to a deformation of 4%. Strained samples have been then observed with a JEOL 2100 TEM operating at 200 kV. TEM observation with a g = 0002 diffraction vector allows the extinction of all a dislocations to image only dislocations with a c component. Such a post mortem observation is shown in Fig. 