The rise of flexible electronics calls for cost-effective and scalable batteries with good mechanical and electrochemical performance. In this work, we developed printable, polymerbased AgO-Zn batteries that feature flexibility, rechargeability, high areal capacity, and low impedance. Using elastomeric substrate and binders, the current collectors, electrodes, and separators can be easily screen-printed layer-by-layer and vacuum-sealed in a stacked configuration. The batteries are customizable in sizes and capacities, with the highest obtained areal capacity of 54 mAh/cm 2 for primary applications. Advanced micro-CT and EIS were used to characterize the battery, whose mechanical stability was tested with repeated twisting and bending. The batteries were used to power a flexible E-ink display system that requires a high-current drain and exhibited superior performance than commercial coin-cell batteries. The developed battery presents a practical solution for powering a wide range of electronics and holds major implications for the future development of practical and high-performance flexible batteries. Recent interest in multifunctional flexible electronics for applications in sensing, displays, and wireless communication advocates for the development of complementary flexible energy storage solutions. (Dissolution) ZZZZ (ss) + 4OOOO -(aaaa) ↔ ZZZZ(OOOO) 4 2-(aaaa) + 2ee - (Relaxation) ZZZZ(OOOO) 4 2-(aaaa) ↔ ZZZZOO (ss) + OO 2 OO + 2OOOO -(aaaa) (Overall) Cathode: (Dissolution) AAAA + OOOO -↔ AAAAOOOO(aaaa) + ee - (Relaxation) 2AAAAOOOO(aaaa) + 2OOOO -↔ AAAA 2 OO(ss) (Overall) AAAA 2 OO(ss) + OO 2 OO ↔ 2AAAA(ss) + 2OOOO -(aaaa) E o = +0.34 V vs. SHE (6) Most of these batteries rely solely on the use of the lower oxidation state of silver to obtain reversible redox reaction, while the higher oxidation state (AgO), with its redox reaction described in Equation 7, has been rarely utilized. 2AAAAOO (ss) + OO 2 OO + 2ee -↔ AAAA 2 OO (ss) + OO 2 OO (ll) E o = +0.60 V vs. SHE (7) The underutilization of AgO can be attributed to its instability, namely, its lattice phase change when transitioning into Ag2O, which may result in irreversible shape changes that impede rechargeability, and its high charging potential responsible of possible electrode gassing due to oxygen evolution reaction. Herein, we present a novel fabrication process of all-printed, flexible, and rechargeable AgO-Zn batteries with ultra-high areal capacity, low impedance, and good rechargeability as a practical energy storage solution for flexible electronics. The fabrication of the cell relies on lowcost, high-throughput, layer-by-layer printing of formulated powder-elastomer composite inks to form the current collectors, Zn anode, AgO cathode, and their corresponding separators. The battery adopts a low-footprint stacked configuration, with potassium hydroxide (KOH)poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) hydrogel as a low impedance electrolyte sandwiched between the two fully printed electrodes. Using the thermoplastic styrene-ethyl-butylene-styrene block copolymer (SEBS) elastomer-based substrate, the assembled battery can be directly heat-and vacuum-sealed to preserve the electrolyte and ensure appropriate cell pressure during operation. This fabrication and assembly process can be applied to different cell sizes with adjustable areal capacity, allowing customizable battery form factors that are tailored for specific applications. Fully utilizing the higher oxidation state of the AgO, the as-printed cells were able to reach a high areal capacity of > 54 mAh/cm 2 while maintaining a low internal resistance (~10 Ω) for primary applications. Furthermore, utilizing an optimized cycling profile, the printed cells were recharged for over 80 cycles, sustaining 0.2 C -1 C discharges without exhibiting significant capacity loss, while maintaining low impedance throughout each cycle. Moreover, the fabricated cells displayed outstanding robustness against repeated bending and twisting deformations. To demonstrate their performance in powering typical flexible electronics, the fabricated thin-film batteries were successfully implemented in a flexible E-ink display system with an integrated microcontroller unit (MCU) and Bluetooth modules that require pulsed high-current discharge. Leveraging a lowcost scalable production process, polymer-based flexible architecture, and customized ink formulations, the all-printed AgO-Zn battery, with its desirable mechanical and electrochemical performance, presents a practical solution for powering the next-generation flexible electronics, and sets a new benchmark for the further development of printable flexible batteries. The all-printed fabrication of the flexible AgO-Zn battery was designed based on the careful selection of elastomers for the substrate, sealing, and ink binders based on their mechanical properties, chemical stabilities, and processabilities. SEBS was selected as the substrate material for its good solvent processability, chemical stability under high pH, outstanding elasticity, as well as its appropriate melting point (~200 °C), allowing it to be easily cast into films that are chemically stable, flexible, and heat-sealable to support and seal the battery. Firstly, the Ag and the carbon inks were printed onto the SEBS substrate as current collectors, with a 400 nm layer of gold sputtered onto the carbon current collectors to enhance their conductivity and chemical stability. Then, the Zn and the TiO2 inks, and the AgO and the cellulose inks were printed onto their corresponding current collectors. To complete the cells, the KOH-PVA hydrogel electrolyte was cut to size and sandwiched between the two electrodes. Lastly, the sheet of batteries was heat and vacuum sealed and separated into individual cells, finalizing the scalable sheet-bysheet fabrication of multiple cells in one sitting. The flexible, vacuum-sealed AgO-Zn batteries comprised of 9 layers of composite materials, can thus be easily fabricated using layer-by-layer screen-printing (Figure Furthermore, the superior electrochemical performance of the fabricated AgO-Zn battery greatly expands the application of thin-film batteries in electronics with high power demands. This capability was demonstrated by powering a flexible display system with microcontroller and Bluetooth modules (Figure The ability of the cell design to adapt to different cell sizes and areal loadings was evaluated. Cells with the same electrode thickness but different form factors, by varying the electrode designs, as well as the cells with the same form factors and different thicknesses by varying the number of layers of active material printed, were fabricated and discharged at a constant 1 mA current. As shown in Figure Overall, the printed AgO-Zn cell was able to uphold superior performance in a wide range of sizes and areal loading, thus proven its customizability as a primary thin-film battery to power various electronics with appropriate sizes and capacity. A comparison between this and other flexible batteries is shown in Table Beyond the application as a primary battery, the electrochemical performance of the flexible AgO-Zn battery as a secondary cell was also characterized. As a cell operating with conversion-type chemistry, it is crucial to avoid over-oxidation of the anode materials or overreduction of the cathode material that would lead to irreversible particle shape change. Previous studies report that the loss of capacity in this system is due to the increased thickness of the ZnO layer that passivates the anode surface, as well as the coarsening of the AgO/Ag2O particles leading to a decrease in cathode surface area. The battery was then discharged at 0.2 C until reaching a columbic efficiency of 100% or a voltage of 1.35V. The entire charge-discharge process is accurately controlled by capacity in the initial cycles, ensuring the cell is cycled between 40% to 90% of its maximum capacity. As shown in Figure Impedance measurements of the flexible batteries showed relatively low impedances throughout cycling. The impedances of the batteries were either determined during cycling of the full-cell using direct current internal resistance (DCIR) method, or during cycling of the separated anode and cathode half-cells using a 3-electrode configuration with a Zn foil serving as the reference. The DCIR analysis offers a straightforward and simple way to gauge the change in the internal resistance of the battery. As shown in Figure As the cell is discharged, the overall impedance decreases with a second semicircle emerging near the low-frequency domain that can be attributed to the charge transfer resistance and capacitance of Ag formation from Ag2O. During charging, this second low-frequency semicircle disappears as all the Ag oxidizes to form Ag2O and eventually AgO. Overall, the 3-electrode impedance results provide a deeper insight into the reaction and possible routes in improving the battery's cycle-life and performance. These data indicate that the impedance of the AgO cathode is responsible for the majority of the cell impedance. Therefore, a beneficial next step will be to incorporate additives that can increase the cathode electrical conductivity to improve the performance in high-current applications. For the anode, the monitoring of ZnO formation via EIS can be paired with topological characterization methods to better control the conversion of Zn electrodes towards extended cycle life and is expected to be extremely useful for future analysis. More data and discussion of 3-electrode EIS can be found in the supplementary section and Figures Compared to coin-cell, cylindrical or prismatic cells, the printed flexible batteries have the unique advantage of allowing bending, flexing, and twisting without causing structural failure. To endow such mechanical resiliency, the printed AgO-Zn batteries are composed of flexible and stretchable polymer-particle composite layers endowed the highly elastic binders. This flexibility and stretchability allow the layers to deform to release the inter-layer strain, thus allowing the battery to endure large deformation without delamination between layers or build-up of fatigue, even when very thick electrodes are used. [ref] To test the performance of the batteries under severe strain, a 2-layer 1 × 5 cm 2 cell was fabricated and discharged at a current of 1 mA while undergoing repeated bending and twisting deformations. As illustrated in Figure To demonstrate the performance of the battery powering typical flexible electronics, we designed a flexible E-ink display system controlled by an Arduino-type microcontroller unit with added Bluetooth (BT) communication module, which resembles many prototypes of IoT, wearable and flexible devices (Figure A mobile device can connect and transmit data and commands to the BT module, which is processed by the microcontroller that refreshes the E-ink display. First, the energy consumption of the system under different operation modes operating at 3.6 V was measured. Figure In this work, we have demonstrated a flexible and high-performance thin-film AgO-Zn battery based on the rechargeable conversion chemistry. Using specially formulated ink with stretchable elastomeric binders and thermoplastic elastomeric substrates, the batteries can be printed layer-by-layer using low-cost, high-throughput screen-printing techniques and assembled with a heat and vacuum sealing processes. To obtain a low device footprint while maintaining easy processability, printable and flexible separators and solid-phase KOH-PVA hydrogel were developed to allow a stacked sandwich configuration. The printable battery is compatible with various cell sizes and areal loading, leading to a high areal capacity of 54 mAh/cm 2 in connection to repeated multilayer printing for primary applications. The battery is also rechargeable upon implementing the capacity-controlled cycling algorithm, with high cycle life beyond 70 cycles with varying discharge C-rates without loss in capacity and coulombic efficiency. The battery exhibited low impedance within each discharge-charge cycle, while maintaining low internal resistance throughout multiple cycles, suggesting stable and reversible electrode morphological change during electrode redox reactions. As a flexible energy storage unit for powering various flexible, wearable electronics, the performance of the battery was evaluated under rigorous mechanical testing, demonstrating that the battery offers remarkable resiliency against repeated large deformation bending and twisting cycles. The fabricated batteries were used in the powering of a customized flexible E-ink display system with BT connectivity and delivered an outstanding performance that surpassed commercial coin cells under the high-current pulsed discharge regime required by the electronics. Future work leveraging advanced electrochemical and topological characterization on this promising battery chemistry will be conducted to further improve its performance and cycle life. This will involve further optimization of the fabrication process, the ink composition, and the layer thicknesses and porosities should lead to a practical, commercially viable product with higher cycle life, lower impedance, smaller device footprint, and lower production cost. Overall, this work demonstrates the scalable fabrication of flexible thin-film AgO-Zn batteries with highly desirable electrochemical and mechanical performance and tremendous implications towards the development of novel energy storage devices for the powering of nextgeneration electronics. Further information and requests for resources and materials should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Shirley S. Meng (shmeng@ucsd.edu). This study did not generate new unique materials. The data of this study are available from the authors upon reasonable request. Bi2O3, Ca(OH)2, KOH (pellets, ≥85%), LiOH, methyl isobutyl ketone (MIBK), toluene, cellulose (microcrystalline powder, 20 μm), Triton-X 114, Poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) (MW 600,000), and PVA (MW = 89000 -98000, 99+% Hydrolyzed) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Zn, AgO, and TiO2 were obtained from Zpower LLC (Camarillo, CA, USA). The fluorocopolymer (GBR-6005, poly(vinylfluoride-co-2,3,3,3-tetrafluoropropylene)) was obtained from Daikin US Corporation (New York, NY, USA). SEBS (G1645) was obtained from Kraton (Houston, TX, USA). Graphite powder was purchased from Acros Organics (USA). Super-P carbon black was purchased from MTI Corporation (Richmond, CA, USA). All reagents were used without further purification. The electrode resin was prepared by adding 5 g of the fluorine rubber in 10 g of MIBK solvent and left on a shake table until the mixture was homogeneous. The SEBS resin was prepared by adding 40 g of the SEBS into 100 mL of toluene and left on a shake table until the mixture was homogeneous. The silver current collector ink was formulated by combining Ag flakes, SEBS resin, and toluene in 4: 2: 1 weight ratio and mixing in a planetary mixer (Flaktak Speedmixer TM DAC 150.1 FV) at 1800 rotations per minute (RPM) for 5 min. A resin with 40.8 wt% of SEBS dissolved in toluene is prepared and was left on a linear shaker (Scilogex, SK-L180-E) overnight or until the mixture became transparent and homogeneous. Wax paper was used as the temporary casting substrate, and a film caster with the clearance of 1000 um was used to cast the SEBS resin onto the wax paper. The cast resin was firstly dried in the ambient environment for 1 h, followed by curing in a conventional oven at 80 °C for 1 h to remove the excess solvent. The transparent, uniform SEBS film, which can be readily peeled off from the wax paper after curing, was used as the substrate for subsequent battery printing. Stencils for printing the current collectors, electrodes, and separators were designed using AutoCAD software (Autodesk, San Rafael, CA, USA) and produced by Metal Etch Services (San Marcos, CA), with dimensions of 12 in × 12 in. The thickness of the stencils was designed to be 100 μm for the carbon and silver current collectors, 300 μm for the TiO2 separator and the Zn anode, and 500 μm for the cellulose separator and the AgO cathode. To print the anode, the silver ink was first printed onto the SEBS substrate and cured in a conventional oven at 80 °C for 10 min. The Zn ink was then printed onto the silver current collectors and cured at 80 °C for 30 min. The TiO2 ink was lastly printed onto the anode and cured at 80 °C for 10 min. To print the cathode, the carbon ink was firstly printed onto the SEBS substrate and cured at 80 °C for 10 min. PET sheets were cut using a computercontrolled cutting machine (Cricut Maker®, Cricut, Inc., South Jordan, UT, USA) into a mask exposing the printed carbon electrodes, and the masked carbon current collector was sputtered with ~ 400 nm of Au and adhesion interlayer of Cr at a DC power of 100W and 200W respectively and an Ar gas flow rate of 16 SCCM using a Denton Discovery 635 Sputter System (Denton Discovery 635 Sputter System, Denton Vacuum, LLC, Moorestown, NJ, USA). The AgO ink was then printed onto the sputtered current collectors and cured at 50 °C for 60 min. Lastly, the cellulose ink was printed onto the cathode and cured at 50 °C for 60 min. To print multiple layers of electrodes or the separators, the stencil was offset by an additional 65 μm for each layer of AgO and 100 μm for each layer of Zn to compensate for the electrode thickness. See Figure The hydrogel is synthesized by mixing the PVA solution and the hydroxide solution into a gel precursor and dried in a desiccator until the desired weight is reached. For synthesizing the 36.5 % hydroxide gel used in this study, the following formulations were used. A hydroxide solution was prepared by dissolving 9.426 g KOH and 0.342 g LiOH into 50 mL deionized (DI) water. 0.5g Ca(OH)2 was then added into the solution and stirred in a closed container under room temperature for 1 h to saturate the solution with Ca(OH)2, and the excess Ca(OH)2 was then removed from the solution. A PVA solution was prepared by dissolving 4.033 g PVA and 0.056 g PEO into 50 mL DI water heated to 90 °C. The precursor solution was prepared by mixing the hydroxide solution and the PVA solution in the weight ratio of 13.677: 10 and poured into a flat petri dish with the weight of 0.2 g/cm Morphological analyses of the current collectors, separators, and active material electrodes were performed with SEM and micro-CT. SEM images were taken using an FEI Quanta FEG 250 instrument with an electron beam energy of 15 keV, a spot size of 3, and a dwell time of 10 μs. Micro-CT experiments were conducted using a ZEISS Xradia 510 Versa. For individual film analysis, micro-CT samples were prepared by punching 2 mm radii disks and stacking them in a PTFE cylindrical tube with alternating PTFE films to provide separation between neighboring film disks. For the Micro-CT of full and sealed cell bending, a 1 × 5 cm 2 Zn-AgO battery was bent or rolled around a polyethylene (PE) cylindrical tube with a diameter of 1cm. For the micro-CT active material electrodes, the heavier metals, such as Zn and Ag, warranted higher X-Ray energies than the printed polymer separator films. Accordingly, scans at 140 keV and a current of 71.26 μA were performed with high energy filters and a magnification of 4X on the Zn and AgO films with voxel sizes of 2.5 μm and 0.75 μm and exposure times of 2 s and 18 s respectively. For the polymer separators, 80 keV scans with an 87.63 μA current were used with low energy filters at a magnification of 4X with voxel resolutions of 0.75 μm and 1.1 μm and exposure times of 8 s and 1 s for the printed anode and cathode separators respectively. For scans of the full cell bending, a voltage of 140 keV and a current of 71.26 μA with a 4X magnification was performed with the following voxel resolutions and exposure times for the respective cases: 18.35 μm and 2 s for low resolution bending scan, 3.54 μm and 5 s for higher resolution bending scan, and 7.55 μm and 2 s for rolled cell scan. For all micro-CT scans conducted, 1801 projections were taken for a full 360 ̊ rotation with beam hardening and center shift constants implemented during the data reconstruction. Post measurement imaging and analysis were then at 2V until reaching 90% DOD or C-rate of 0.05C. The battery could be then discharged and recharged at the desired C-rates between 1.35 V and 2 V, with the DOD maintained between 40% and 90% of its maximum value. Unless specified otherwise, all cycling data were performed using cells with 1 × 1 cm 2 form factor with 2 layers of active electrode materials. More cycling data for two cells with 8-layer electrode thickness connected in series is shown in Figure The pulsed discharge protocol was designed to simulate the battery's performance in powering a typical MCU-controlled wearable device with integrated BT functionality. The battery was discharged using an Autolab PGSTAT128N potentiostat/galvanostat implementing fast chrono methods. See Figure Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed with a Biologic SP-150 in a 3-electrode configuration. The Zn-AgO three electrodes cell was fabricated with a Zn reference wire placed between an extra layer of hydrogel electrolyte and the original electrolyte layer shown in Figure The impedances of the two half cells and the full cell were monitored in-situ during charging and discharging to analyze impedance changes most closely related to practical cycling conditions with a galvanostatic-EIS (GEIS) measurement. Accordingly, the DC base current was set to the current of the charging/discharging step, while the AC amplitude was set to 300 μA, approximately one-fifth of the cycling current. The frequency sweep was between 1 MHz and 1 Hz with 10 points per decade and an average of 8 measures per frequency. The cycling script implemented with GEIS is similar to that of the capacity-limited electrochemical cycling protocol, with the exception that the voltage limits applied were 1.95 V and 1.4 V vs. the reference instead of the anode for the charging and discharging respectfully. For each charge and discharge step, 10 GEIS was measured for 15 complete cycles, resulting in a total of 870 separate Nyquist plots (29 steps × 10 measures × 3 cell configurations). For analysis simplicity, only the 5 th cycle's discharge and charge were analyzed. Both half-cell Nyquist plots for the 5 th cycle's discharge and charge steps were fitted to equivalent circuits using a slightly modified version of the Zfit function available as open-source code from Mathworks. The ionic conductivity of the gel electrolyte was measured by a customized two-electrode (Stainless Steel 316L) conductivity cell with an inner impedance at 0.54 Ω. The cell constant is frequently calibrated by using OAKTON standard conductivity solutions at 0.447, 1.5, 15, and 80 mS•cm -1 respectively. A constant thickness spacer was positioned between the two electrodes which ensure no distance changes during multiple-time measurements. The electrolytic conductivity value was obtained with a floating AC signal at a frequency determined by the phase angle minima given by Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) using the following equation: σ = KRR -QQ , where R is the tested impedance (Ω), K is the cell constant (cm -1 ) and Q is the fitting parameter. The bending deformation of the battery was conducted by bending a 1 × 5 cm 2 battery around a cylinder with the diameter of 1 cm manually. The deformation was cycled between the bent and relaxed state at the rate of 1 s/cycle for 100 cycles. See Figure To demonstrate the battery's ability to power flexible electronics, a Waveshare 2.9-inch e-Paper flexible display was powered by two Zn-AgO batteries in series. The display module was connected to an Adafruit Feather nRF52 Bluefruit Low Energy (LE) chip and programmed using Arduino and C. The picture of the assembled system is shown in Figure A model pulsed profile was then extracted to be applied to flexible batteries for further testing. 