Great enthusiasm in single-atom catalysts (SACs) for the N2 reduction reaction (NRR) has been aroused by the discovery of Metal (M)-Nx as a promising catalytic center. However, the performance of available SACs, including poor activity and selectivity, is far away from the industrial requirement because of the inappropriate adsorption behaviors of the catalytic centers. Through the first-principles high-throughput screening, we find that the rational construction of Fe-Fe dual-atom centered site distributed on graphite carbon nitride (Fe2/g-CN) compromises the ability to adsorb N2H and NH2, achieving the best NRR performance among 23 different transition metal (TM) centers. Our results show that Fe2/g-CN can achieve a Faradic efficiency of 100% for NH3 production. Impressively, the limiting-potential of Fe2/g-CN is estimated as low as -0.13 V, which is hitherto the lowest value among the reported theoretical results. Multiple-level descriptors (excess electrons on the adsorbed N2 and integrated-crystal orbital Hamilton population) shed light on the origin of NRR activity from the view of energy, electronic structure, and basic characteristics. As a ubiquitous issue during electrocatalytic NRR, ammonia contamination originating from the substrate decomposition can be surmounted. Our predictions offer a new platform for electrocatalytic synthesis of NH3, contributing to further elucidate the structure-performance correlations. Large-scale ammonia synthesis is indispensable for the mass production of fertilizers and chemicals. On the basis of this concept, we propose an active center of di-TM pair anchored on a heterogeneous substrate, g-CN, to construct TM2/g-CN DACs (Figure All the spin-polarized density functional theory (DFT) calculations were carried out by using Vienna ab initio simulation package The DFT-D2 by Grimme Gibbs free energy change (ΔG) for each elementary step was calculated based on the computational hydrogen electrode (CHE) model where ΔE, ΔEZPE and ΔS are the reaction energy from DFT calculation; the changes in zero-point energy and entropy, respectively, which are obtained from the vibrational frequency calculations; T is the temperature (T = 298.15 K). The computational details for durability, Faradic efficiency and synthesis of Fe2/g-CN are given in the Supporting Information (SI). To fully elucidate the effect of metal ceters on the NRR intrinsic activity, we screened 23 metal centers including all metals in 3d, 4d and 5d blocks as shown in Figure The N2 can be reduced through both end-on and side-on adsorption configurations, including distal, alternating, enzymatic and consecutive pathways as shown in Figures 1c. The limiting potential, defined as the lowest negative potential at which the pathway becomed exergonic, was used to evaluate the intrinsic activity of NRR catalysts. To gain deep insights into the d-π * interaction, we performed the partial density of states (PDOS) and the integrated-crystal orbital Hamilton population (ICOHP) analysis. Here, the ICOHPs (which is obtained by calculating the energy integral up to the highest occupied energy level) could be a quantitative indicator of N2 activation degree, and a more negative value of ICOHP implies a less activated N2 molecule. As shown in Figure Since the catalytic activity of NRR is governed by multiple reaction intermediates, the detailed reaction pathways and activity trends will be systematically evaluated. All of the elementary steps associated with distal and alternating pathways in Figure It is worth noting that -0.13 is well below that on the Ru(0001) surface (1.08 V) and hitherto the lowest value among the reported theoretical results, 10 indicative of the lowest energy cost for NRR electrocatalysts ever reported. Another issue that limits NRR performance in acidic condition is the Faradic efficiency (FE), closely related to the competitive HER. According to the equation of FE in the SI, the FE of Fe2/g-CN can reach up to 100%, which is much better than those for pure transition metal surfaces. For the practical implementations of electrocatalysts, Fe2/g-CN need to have good electric conductivity, durability and high synthetic accessibility. As shown in Figure In addition, the stability and durability of Fe2/g-CN are evaluated based on ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations and thermodynamics. In accordance with the results shown in Figure For the synthesis of DACs, the wet chemistry method is a suitable way to achieve highly dispersed single atoms. In summary, we conducted extensive DFT calculations to evaluate the potential of TM-DACs supported on g-CN in electrochemical NRR and revealed the reaction mechanisms for di-TM center catalysis. Upon a "five-step" screening strategy, Fe2/g-CN is singled out as the most promising candidate with low energy cost and selectivity, on which the limiting potential for NRR is as low as -0.13 V. The last hydrogenation step is identified as the PDS, depending on the degree of TM-to-N2 electron donation. Specifically, a higher tendency of electron donation can enable efficient N2 activation, whereas a low tendency contributes to the formation of * NH3, thereby reducing the energy input. In this scenario, a certain moderate degree of electron donation, tunable by different TM and ligands, would be desirable for NRR. Besides, the examination of the selectivity (FE of 100%), stability and durability as well as the synthetic accessibility support the great potential of Fe2/g-CN as electrocatalysts for NRR. This systematic work offer new insights toward the discovery of more efficient TM-DACs for NRR. 