The convective heat transfer and flow behavior of graphene-water nanofluids are studied experimentally by focusing on transitional flow. Graphene-water nanofluids with different particle mass fractions (0.025, 0.1 and 0.2%) are produced following two-step method and using PVP as a surfactant. Thermo-physical characterization is performed by measuring viscosity and thermal conductivity of the nanofluids. Convection characteristics are experimentally studied from laminar to turbulent flow regimes. It is seen that pressure drop increases dramatically in the transition region, and laminar to turbulent transition shifts to lower Reynolds numbers with increasing nanoparticle concentration. The transition initiates at a Reynolds number of 2475 for water, while it initiates at 2315 for the nanofluid with 0.2% particle mass fraction. Increase in mean heat transfer coefficient and Nusselt numbers are nearly identical at different Reynolds numbers and axial positions along the test tube in the laminar flow for nanofluids and water due to dominance of conduction enhancement mechanisms on the heat transfer increase in laminar flow. Beyond laminar flow regime, enhancement of Nusselt number is observed indicating that thermophoresis and Brownian motion are more effective heat transfer augmentation mechanisms. The maximum heat transfer enhancement is observed as 36% for a Reynolds number of 3950. There has been an increasing effort for miniaturization of systems for many different applications necessitating an increase in heat transfer performance for safe, reliable operation and sustaining or increasing efficiency. However, there exist performance limitations due to material properties. One way to tackle this problem is designing and developing advanced materials with improved thermal transport characteristics. Adding solid particles into common heat transfer fluids like water, certain glycols such as ethylene glycol (EG) and propylene glycol (PG), is known to augment heat transfer properties. Using micro or millimeter-sized particles leads to agglomeration, sedimentation, clogging problems, erosion of the pipelines, and high-pressure drop Forced convection and flow behavior of nanofluids have also been an area of interest for researchers. While many researchers observed significant heat transfer enhancement for different nanoparticles They measured entrance and developed heat transfer enhancements separately and showed that heat transfer increases up to 170% at the entrance, whereas the increase is around 140% at outlet of the pipe for 0.01% particle volume fraction. Ghozatloo et al. Many studies focus on laminar or turbulent convective heat transfer, whereas the number of studies related to internal transitional flow is very limited. This is due to the fact that thermal engineers and equipment manufacturers prefer to operate systems either in laminar or turbulent regimes. However, it is critical to reveal the transitional behavior, where sudden changes can be observed. Considering that the presence of particles has different effects on flow and heat transfer behavior, their effect on transitional flow must also be identified. Hence, there is a need for experimental investigations of transitional behavior of different heat transfer fluids. Meyer et al. Cabaleiro et al. Even though there are limited number of studies regarding the transitional flow behavior of some metallic and ceramic nanoparticles, such as Al2O3, ZnO and Cu, there exists no studies in the literature that investigated the transitional flow of graphene dispersed nanofluids. Therefore, an experimental study on the convective heat transfer and pressure drop behaviors of the graphene-water nanofluids is carried out, focusing on laminar to turbulent transition considering graphene-water nanofluids with particle mass concentrations up to 0.2%. Effect of particle concentration on the onset of transition is investigated based on heat transfer and pressure drop measurements for the first time. In this study, graphene-water nanofluids with particle mass fractions of 0.025%, 0.1% and 0.2% are prepared by using two-step method using distilled water as a base fluid. Graphene nano-platelets used in this study have 99% purity, 5-10 nm thickness, 5-10 μm lateral size according to the report of the manufacturer (Grafen Chemical Industries, Turkey). Graphene is a hydrophobic material, and it does not dissolve in the polar solvents such as water; therefore, surface-active material, PVP K30, is used to prepare stable nanofluids. PVP is weighed by precision balance (Kern PFB, ±10 mg) in a ratio of 1:1 with respect to graphene mass and added to 400 ml de-ionized (DI) water. The mixture is stirred by a mechanical mixer (Heidolph, RZR 2021) for 15 minutes at 1600 rpm. Graphene nanoparticles are then added into the solution and the mixture is stirred for 45 minutes more at the same speed. The suspension is put into a water bath and ultrasonically mixed (Hielscher UP400S, using sonotrode H40) for two hours by applying 200 W. A circulating chiller (PolyScience 9106A12E) is used to adjust the temperature of water bath to 8 o C. Although morphological, thermal and rheological characterization of the prepared nanofluids are comprehensively reported in our previous study It is observed that the manufacturer report is consistent with ESEM image for most of the particles, whereas there are some agglomerations that size up to 5μm. Following the preparation of the nanofluids, scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) imaging is carried out using the same instrument as a part of morphological characterization. STEM image of the graphene-water nanofluids is presented in Fig. The experimental test set-up is designed and assembled to investigate internal forced convection from laminar to turbulent regimes. As seen in Fig. Firstly, the entire copper pipe is covered by fiberglass sleeve to ensure electrical insulation. Heater wire is then wrapped around the last 1.5 m of the tube to establish uniform heat flux throughout the temperature measurements. After the sleeve is shaved in determined axial locations, thermocouples are attached to the outer pipe wall for measuring the local surface temperatures in the heated section. Then, heater wire is covered by zinc phosphate-based cement for obtaining a homogenous heat distribution along the pipe. Heat and electricity resistant fiberglass insulation tape and fireproof cloth tape are wrapped on the heated section respectively to prevent any ignition at high temperatures. Finally, two-layered glass wool is covered for minimizing the heat loss from the system. Heater wire is connected to AC power source at both ends and is supplied with 400 W using a potentiometer. The equations used in the analysis of pressure drop and heat transfer measurements are shown as follows. Some well-known correlations are used to validate the accuracy of the experimental set-up under laminar and turbulent flows for water, and determine the transition region. Pressure transducers are mounted on the inlet and outlet of the test section to measure the pressure drop (ΔP) along the system. For laminar flow, measured pressure drop is validated using Hagen-Poiseuille equation. where Pi and Po are the fluid pressures at the inlet and outlet of the test tube; μ, um, L and D represent dynamic viscosity (Pa), mean fluid velocity (m/s), tube length (m) and tube diameter (m), respectively. Then, friction factor is calculated by Darcy-Weisbach formula. Poiseuille correlation (Eq. 5) is used to validate the friction factor under laminar flow, whereas Blasius (Eq. 6) and Petukhov (Eq. 7) correlations are used beyond laminar region. Convective heat transfer measurements are first performed by using DI water in the test system, then for the nanofluids with the mass fractions of 0.025%, 0.1% and 0.2%. The insulation quality of the test setup is determined by comparing the power supplied to the heater (qin) with the heat transferred to system from heater (qf). While qin is set to 400 W in this study, qf is calculated as follows where ṁ is the mass flow rate (kg/s), Tm,o and Tm,i are the fluid outlet and inlet mean temperatures ( o C), respectively that are measured by submerging a thermocouple into the flow at the inlet of the test pipe as explained in the previous section. Heat loss of the experimental system is obtained by using following equation and it is found to be lower than 8%. Local convective heat transfer coefficient, hx, is calculated based on Newton's law of cooling; h x = q f πDL T w (x) -T m (x) ṁc p Local Nusselt number, Nux, can be determined after calculating the local heat transfer coefficient. where k is thermal conductivity (W/m.K). Among many empirical equations are developed to estimate the local Nusselt number under laminar flow conditions, Shah and London Mean Nusselt number calculated by Gnielinski correlation for laminar flow is used for the validation study that is carried out with DI water Uncertainties in flow rate, temperature, thermal conductivity and heat flux measurements lead to uncertainty in the measured heat transfer coefficient, Nusselt number, and friction factor. Therefore, an uncertainty analysis for local heat transfer coefficient, Nusselt number and friction factor is carried out σ In the Fig. In addition to heat transfer, the uncertainty calculations for the pressure drop and friction factor are performed by equations below. It is shown that the uncertainty of the pressure drop measurements for the range from laminar to turbulent flow is below 2%, whereas friction factor is below 5%. Measured pressure drop for a Reynolds number range of 1400 to 4000 is shown in Fig. Pressure drop raises with increasing particle fraction and flow rate, and the pressure drop increase of the nanofluids with respect to that of water is significantly higher in transitional flow when compared to laminar and turbulent regimes. Local zones referred as turbulent puffs begin to appear beyond laminar flow with increasing flow rate, and they lead to chaotic fluctuations in the pipe flow. Solid particles in the fluids lead to observable changes at the onset of the transitional flow, which is in agreement with Similarly, convective heat transfer performance of graphene-water nanofluids is also investigated for nanofluids with 0.025, 0.1 and 0.2% particle mass fractions focusing on laminar to turbulent transition. Validation studies are carried out for DI water before testing nanofluids, by comparing measurements with predictions of Shah and London Experimental measurements are in the agreement with predictions based on correlations as seen in Fig. Beyond laminar region, instabilities and random fluctuations in the flow disrupt the percolation structures, improving the dispersion of particles. While some researchers argued that mechanisms such as Brownian motion and thermophoresis do not have significant effect on heat transfer, some showed they might be responsible for the heat transfer increase by considering nanoparticle migration A scale analysis is performed considering the diffusion coefficients regarding Brownian It is observed that the scale of Brownian diffusion coefficient (DB) is two orders of magnitude smaller than that of thermophoretic diffusion coefficient (DT). Therefore, thermophoresis is the more effective mechanism of heat transfer enhancement beyond laminar flow. This observation is consistent with that of Chandrasekar and Suresh As a final note, viscosities of the nanofluid samples are measured before and after the experiments for investigating the possible effects of the experiments on graphene-water nanofluids. The measurements are performed in the temperature range of 25 to 50 o C, repeated three times, and the average values are calculated. The maximum change in the relative viscosity before and after the tests is observed are less than ±2%. Hence, the rheological behavior of prepared nanofluids is not significantly affected from the experiments. Forced convection in graphene-water nanofluids in a circular tube is experimentally investigated focusing on the transitional behavior. Experiments are carried out for a Reynolds number range of 1400 to 4000, and 0.025, 0.1 and 0.2% particle mass concentrations. The measured friction factor and heat transfer coefficient for water are compared to those calculated by correlations for validation of the test setup. Increase in the pressure drop for studied nanofluids does not exceed 10% in comparison with water in the laminar and turbulent regimes, whereas it is up to the 30% for the transitional flow. Convective heat transfer performance of the graphene-water nanofluids is also investigated considering laminar, transition and early turbulent regions to understand the effective mechanisms on the convective heat transfer in all these flow regimes. For laminar flow, local heat transfer coefficient enhancement for nanofluids at different flow rates, and x/D=120 and x/D=240 roughly does not change with Reynolds number. Besides, all nanofluids have similar Nusselt number for given Reynolds numbers and axial locations, whereas mean heat transfer coefficient increase is around 7, 17 and 22% for the nanofluids with 0.025, 0.1 and 0.2% particle mass concentration, respectively. Considering that increase is similar to that of thermal conductivity, dominant thermal enhancement mechanism is percolation that is effective for thermal conduction. Then, it is observed that onset of transition from laminar flow shifts to lower Reynolds numbers as particle concentration increases. Significant heat transfer coefficient enhancement is seen for turbulent flow of nanofluids. A scale analysis showed that thermophoresis is the dominant mechanism, compared to Brownian motion. Prepared nanofluids exhibit maximum of 36% mean heat transfer coefficient enhancement for 0.2% particle mass fraction at a Reynolds number of 3950. It is observed that graphene-water nanofluids provide a significant heat transfer enhancement by creating percolating structures, and due to thermophoresis. Pressure drop increase is relatively low in the laminar and turbulent regimes, whereas it is higher in the transitional flow. Therefore, operation under transitional flow must be avoided for graphene-water nanofluids as it would limit the performance and efficiency due to resulting high pressure drop and pumping power. factor for all concentrations by considering measurement uncertainty. The onset of transition shifts to a lower Reynolds number by ~4% for 0.1% particle mass fraction and ~7% for 0.2% particle mass fraction with transition phenomenon Corresponding author: H. Ertürk (hakan.erturk@boun.edu.tr)