Entanglement of two different quantum orders is of an interest of the modern condensed matter physics. One of the examples is the dynamical multiferroicity, where fluctuations of electric dipoles lead to magnetization. We investigate this effect at finite temperature and demonstrate an elevated magnetic response of a ferroelectric near the ferroelectric quantum critical point (FE QCP). We calculate the magnetic susceptibility of a bulk sample on the paraelectric side of the FE QCP at finite temperature and find enhanced magnetic susceptibility near the FE QCP. We propose quantum paraelectric strontium titanate (STO) as a candidate material to search for dynamic multiferroicity. We estimate the magnitude of the magnetic susceptibility for this material and find that it is detectable experimentally. Materials that can undergo phase transitions, especially those exhibiting an interplay of two or more quantum orders attract special interest. One of the examples featuring an entanglement of two different quantum orders is the dynamic multiferroicity (DMF), the concept reflecting the connection between electric and magnetic properties Ferroelectric (FE) QCPs are an important part in the discussion of FE behavior, particularly in displacive quantum paraelectrics (PE) Here a 0 is the lattice spacing, and c is the speed of light. The form of magnetization in the above equation is a consequence of the relation between the magnetic moment and the angular momentum for a rotating electric dipole, see also Eq. 4 and the discussion therein. An expression for the coupling constant λ is obtained (Eq. 4) for the model of optical long wave oscillations in the material with one cation and one anyon per unit cell, with charges ±e + and masses m ± . One can induce DMF by applying external drive-like light field to ferroelectrics. An alternative approach is to rely on inherent fluctuations present in the material near phase transition. In this work we consider a bulk material in the vicinity of a ferroelectric phase transition, and investigate the enhanced magnetic susceptibility at finite temperatures upon approaching the quantum critical point (QCP). The main result of our work is the elevated magnetic response of a ferroelectric near the FE QCP, see Eq. (3) and Fig. To understand the meaning of the result presented in Eq. ( Here, for the physically relevant low-energy phonon modes, by virtue of the general scaling arguments For the (static) magnetic susceptibility in the high-T limit, at T ω 0 (T, δ), based on simple physical arguments (see below), supported by a formal analysis [see Eq. ( Here M0 = m + m -/(m + + m -), we have assumed that (m --m + )/(m + + m -) 1, and set k B = 1 hereafter. Thus, a strong increase of the magnetic susceptibility may occur while approaching the QCP: the underlying reason for this enhancement is an increase of the density of states of phonons due to the softening of the ferroelectric mode near the QCP, which is consistent with z > 1. We now provide the estimate of the magnetic susceptibility as given in Eq. ( , where q T = T / s ⊥ is the thermal momentum of a phonon, yielding Eq.( To gain further insight into the role of the fluctuating dipoles associated with the soft phonon modes, it is instructive to derive an expression for the parameter λ in Eq. ( where e + is the effective charge of the cation. The expression for the coupling constant λ directly follows from Eq. ( Here ω + = ω + i0, [, ] is a commutator and ... is the thermal average, with the magnetization in terms of the electric polarization as given by Eq. ( where γ ij is a piezotensor, h ξ,q is a unit vector of a phonon polarization, index ξ labels different phonon polarizations, A q = a 3 0 /2 M0 ω ξ (q), ω ξ (q) is the phonon frequency, a 0 is the lattice spacing, M0 is the reduced mass of the two atoms in the unit cell, and bξ,q ( b † ξ,q ) are annihilation (creation) phonon operators. For simplicity, we consider a case when the tensor γ ij = γδ ij is diagonal which corresponds to a cubic crystal system. Using Eq. ( where q ≡ d 3 q/(2π) 3 , ω + = ω + i0, and Λ = (16/9)λ 2 γ 4 (a 3 0 / M0 ) 2 . The details of the calculations are presented in the Supplemental Material (SM) To illustrate the result in Eq. ( The denominator of the function in Eq.( while for the real part, up to corresponding higher order corrections, we obtain, Note that χ(0, k) coincides with the dc result of Dzyaloshinskii and Mills, see Eq. (12c) in Ref. Vicinity of the QCP.-We now consider the magnetic susceptibility near the FE QCP where the phonon spectrum assumes the form as in Eq. ( T . The main contribution to the integral in Eq. ( where θ(x) is the step function. This result, together with the Kramers-Kronig relations, yields the following form of the real part of the susceptibility Importantly, in the limit of the zero frequency, we then obtain with Λ μ 2 N / , see Eq. Estimates and experimental proposal.-Let us estimate the magnitude of the magnetic susceptibility, Eq. ( STO may be a suitable candidate material for the observation of magnetic signatures on tuning towards the FE QCP because of its incipient ferroelectric nature As for the method of tuning STO towards the FE QCP with the use of the oxygen isotope-exchange samples, we should mention here two beautiful experiments Conclusions. Multiferoicity as a static phenomenon is well established. On the other hand, the dynamically induced multiferroic phenonena are new and there has been no experiments that explicitly prove it. In this paper, we provide the theoretical estimates and rigorous bounds on the strength of the effect. Furthermore, we have expanded the framework of dynamic multiferroicity and predict strongly enhanced magnetic susceptibility in a paraelectric material near its FE QCP due to thermal fluctuations of the electric dipoles associated with a soft optical mode driving the transition. The predicted effect indicates an alternative way for entangled quantum orders to be induced at finite temperature. We thus further support the concept, proposed in Ref. 