The origin of spontaneous electronic nematic ordering provides important information for understanding iron-based superconductors. Here, we analyze a scenario where the dxy orbital strongly contributes to nematic ordering in FeSe. We show that the addition of dxy nematicity to a pure dxz/dyz order provides a natural explanation for the unusual Fermi surface and correctly reproduces the strongly anisotropic momentum dependence of the superconducting gap. We predict a Lifshitz transition of an electron pocket mediated by temperature and sulphur doping, whose signatures we discuss by analysing available experimental data. We present the variation of momentum dependence of the superconducting gap upon suppression of nematicity. Our quantitatively accurate model yields the transition from tetragonal to nematic FeSe and the FeSe1-xSx series, and puts strong constraints on possible nematic mechanisms. The study of the iron-based superconductors ultimately revolves around understanding the interplay of superconductivity, magnetism and electronic nematicity. While the competition between magnetism and superconductivity has been extensively studied in other classes of superconductors, most notably the cuprates and heavy fermion compounds, the ironbased superconductors offer an ideal environment to study the interactions and consequences of the rotational symmetry breaking nematic state. Currently, there is little consensus on the underlying mechanism that drives the formation of the electronic nematic state, with both charge-ordering and magnetic-ordering scenario's being proposed However, it has become increasingly apparent that nematic order derived purely from a degeneracy breaking of the d xz and d yz states is unable to account for many of the experimental properties being observed within this material. Most notably, nematic ordering of the d xz and d yz orbitals predicts a Fermi surface topology which consists of one hole pocket and two electron pockets Although nematicity is often thought of in terms of a lifting of the degeneracy of the d xz and d yz states, there is one additional form of orbital ordering, involving the relevant t 2g orbitals of the Fe atoms, which is consistent with the breaking of C 4 rotational symmetry. It is possible to have a non-local nematic ordering of the d xy states With the goal to resolve the above mentioned inconsistencies between theory and experiment, we analyse in the following the question, what would be the consequence of nematicity, arising from the strongly correlated d xy orbital on the iron-based superconductors. Focusing on the case of FeSe, we show from symmetry based arguments that if a sizeable non-local nematic ordering of the d xy orbital is the leading form of nematic instability, then many of the discrepancies between theoretical simulations and experimental measurements can be directly resolved. In particular, the missing electron pocket at the Fermi level and the highly anisotropic momentum dependence of the superconducting gap. We justify these claims by direct comparison of our theoretical simulations of the electronic structure with existing experimental measurements. As a crucial consequence of this d xy -dominated nematic scenario, we predict the existence of a Lifshitz transition of an electron pocket Black dots denote Fe atoms. Se atoms located above (filled green) and below (empty green) the iron plane divide the system into sublattices A and B. b Fermi surface cut at kz = π for the tetragonal state, where the color describes the maximum orbital content of the band. The grey solid line describes the Brillouin zone boundary of the 2-Fe unit cell. Inset: Brillouin zones of the 2-Fe (solid grey) and 1-Fe (dashed black) unit cells corresponding to the "folded" and "unfolded" Brilloin zone, respectively. c Fermi surface map measured by ARPES of the tetragonal phase of FeSe at 100 K and d of the detwinned sample in the orthorhombic phase at 10 K taken from Ref. as a function of temperature and sulphur doping, which can be verified experimentally. This result not only provides a quantitatively accurate model to study the tetragonal to nematic phase transition in FeSe, but poses strong constraints on the possible mechanism associated with the nematic instability, and ultimately, on the mechanism of superconductivity in systems where nematic order and superconducting order appear in close proximity. To understand the consequence of non-local d xy nematicity on the nematic state of FeSe we begin with a pedagogical discussion on the B 1g symmetric order parameters of the D 4h point group of the P4/nmm space group on the electronic structure of FeSe. Within the P4/nmm crystal structure, the Fe atoms lie inplane on a square grid, and are connected by staggered outof-plane pnictide or chalcogenide atoms, which gives rise to a two-Fe atom unit cell, as shown in Fig. It is, however, useful to discuss the electronic structure of the P4/nmm lattice in terms of the lattice vectors R x and R y , and the momentum k x and k y , particularly to illustrate the effect of C 4 symmetry breaking. In this case, the Brillouin zone can be "unfolded" into an 45 degree rotated effective 1-Fe Brillouin zone, where the states around the M and A point are mapped to the X point at (k x , k y , k z ) = (π, 0, k z ) and the Y point at (k x , k y , k z ) = (0, π, k z ). Here, our model will retain the physical two-atom unit cell periodicity, however we will discuss symmetry breaking in terms of the coordinates k x and k y . As a starting point, we employ the low-energy model of the d xz , d yz and d xy orbitals of the Fe atoms, following Ref. and Here the kinetic part H This model is in direct agreement with the low energy tetragonal electronic structure measured by ARPES, the Fermi surface of which, from Ref. If we focus on the d xz , d yz and d xy orbitals of the Fe atoms, within a single two atom unit cell, then we can write down four possible C 4 symmetry breaking nematic orders in the B 1g -channel, which arise either from on-site interactions on the Fe-atoms or from interactions between two neighbouring Fe-atoms on different sublattices. We list these four order nematic process real space momentum space expansion near expansion near xy yz xz TABLE I. All B 1g nematic order parameters for FeSe. All possible nematic order parameters within the B1g irreducible representation of the P4/nmm space group involving interactions between dxz, dyz and dxy orbitals within a single 2-Fe unit cell. Results presented in real and momentum space as well as Taylor-expanded in the vicinity of the high symmetry points (following the notations of Ref. parameters in Table The first term, Φ 1 , describes a degeneracy breaking of the on-site d xz and d yz states. This form, often referred to as ferro-orbital ordering The second and third terms, Φ 2 and Φ 3 , describe non-local nematic ordering between nearest neighbour atoms involving the d xz and d yz states. Φ 2 describes an anisotropic hopping potential such that hopping is favoured in the x direction, but disfavoured in the y direction for both orbitals. This has been referred to as d-wave nematic order within the literature for the hole pocket, and for the electron pocket. We then fit the parameters Φ h xz,yz , Φ e xz,yz and Φ 4 directly to experimental values In Fig. which then generates an asymmetric nematic splitting. This term has the consequence that the lower branch of the The main consequence of a sizeable non-local d xy nematic term is the generation of a Lifshitz transition at the corner of the Brillouin zone shortly after the onset of the nematic state. This Lifshitz transition is directly responsible for the evolution between a two-electron pocket Fermi surface in the tetragonal state into a one-electron pocket Fermi surface in the nematic state. Here we discuss available experimental data which can be interpreted in terms of this Lifshitz transition driven by nematic order and compare these experiments to our model calculations. In Fig. Despite the removal of an entire electron pocket within g Change in the chemical potential as a function of temperature using a mean field temperature dependence Φi(T ) = Φi(0) 1 -( T Ts ). h Corresponding change to the band positions at the A point as a function of temperature. i Experimental temperature dependence of the spectral function taken from Ref. the nematic state, we find that the Luttinger theorem is conserved within this model. In Fig. [35] for details. We find that, within our parametrization, a shift of 13 meV is required to ensure particle number conservation between the tetragonal and nematic state, which is in good agreement with the 10 meV shift extracted from ARPES measurements Finally, in Fig. at the A point, where and f (ω, T ) is the Fermi function. Here we have used an energy broadening parameter of Γ = 10 meV for all bands to simulate self energy broadening. We see that between 0 < T < 70 K the d xy band below the Fermi level resides very close in energy to the d xz band. Consequently, in the spectral function these two bands merge to a single broad peak at low temperatures, which together with the d yz excitation near E F suggests that two peaks would be observed by the spectral function, which is in good agreement with the experimental measurements reported in Ref. We note that there has been some ambiguity as to the experimental interpretation of this spectral function, particularly regarding the orbital content of the lower peak at -50 meV. With some authors claiming that the lack of a clearly observable splitting of the peak closest to E F in the spectral function at 100 K indicates that the d xz and d yz states must remain degenerate Further evidence of a Lifshitz transition of the d xy orbital can be found in Ref. Alternate evidence for a Lifshitz transition at the zone corner, which does not require uniaxial strain, can be found by studying Quantum Oscillation measurements of the sulphur doped, FeSe 1-x S x , systems. Isovalent sulphur doping is known to suppress the nematic state, which, despite slightly changing the anion height of the lattice, leaves the underlying electronic structure effectively equivalent to that of the tetragonal state of FeSe Previous interpretation of this experimental data was based on the assumption that two electron pockets are present in the nematic state. However, we find that our scenario, where there is only one electron pocket, is also qualitatively consistent with the quantum oscillation data if one assigns the Z and A pocket (labelled as 1 and 2 in Fig. As a function of sulphur doping, a Lifshitz transition associated with the d xy band should lead to a sharp sudden change in extremal areas measured by this experimental technique. We illustrate this in Fig. ), where x 0 = 18%) we find that the four unique extremal areas present in the nematic state remain relatively consistent between 0% and 13% sulphur doping, with the inner hole pocket of the Z point crossing the Fermi level at 10%. However, at the Lifshitz transition of the d xy band, we find that all extremal areas sharply increase in magnitude and two additional extremal areas are generated. Bringing the total number of unique extremal areas in the tetragonal state to seven. The reason for this sharp increase is twofold, the first is the sudden change of chemical potential as discussed in Fig. Although a Lifshitz transition of the electron band was not the interpretation of Ref. We now consider how the superconducting state will be affected by the presence of non-local d xy nematicity, and in particular how the gap structure will evolve from the nematic to tetragonal state. Superconductivity in the iron-based superconductors is believed to be driven by the interband repulsive interactions enhanced by spin fluctuations, and indeed the numerous comparisons between theory and experiment have shown that this assumption can correctly capture the symmetry of the superconducting gap We utilize our orbital projected band model which allows for an analytical treatment of the pairing problem by solving mean-field BCS gap equations self-consistently at zero temperature. Within the projected band model we adopt the interaction Hamiltonian of Ref. where μ, ν ∈ {xz, yz}. Even though our conclusions in the We define superconductivity in orbital space, perform a mean-field decoupling and solve the BCS-gap equations together with the particle number equation self-consistently for the constant orbital pairing gaps assuming U he J he = J ee . In the gap equations we focus on the large hole pocket, the peanut shaped electron pocket and the incipient electron band above the Fermi level. We further neglect contributions from inter-band Cooper-pairing and integrate within an energy cutoff of 50 meV around the Fermi level. Further details are given in Ref. The weight |a e yz/xy (k)| 2 of the d xz and d xy orbitals on the peanut shaped electron pocket is shown in Fig. as it is seen in experiment. In Fig. 2 Im Ĝ(ω, k) calculated for the gap values that correspond to Fig. Finally, in Fig. ), where x 0 = 18%, and self consistently calculate the pairing gaps as well as the chemical potential. Note, however, that at this stage we keep the interactions momentum-independent and do not alter its value as the doping increases and thus do not account for altering nesting conditions which will affect the pairing strength and gap size but not the momentum dependence. We observe that throughout the entire doping range the overall pairing symmetry exhibits a sign-change between the hole and electron pockets. At the same time, we find that within a scenario of the d xydominant non-local nematicity there is a clear impact of the d xy Lifshitz transition on the angular dependence of the gap on the electron pockets as can been seen in Fig. Throughout this manuscript we have used a minimal orbital projective model to describe the electronic dispersion around the Fermi level. To confirm the generality of our conclusions and to correctly account for d xy contribution to superconductivity we have also studied a 10-orbital tight binding model that has additionally been fit to ARPES data in the tetragonal state and for the electron pockets can be written as To account for the Hartree term introduced in Eq. ( This term ensures the asymmetric splitting of the two d xy bands around the M (A) point are captured whilst leaving the additional d xy band, located around -50 meV at the Γ (Z) point, unaffected. As with the case of the orbital projective model, Eq. ( We now study the momentum dependence of the superconducting gap predicted from this model. To do this we solve the standard linearized superconducting gap equation Here, we integrate the pairing vertex, Γ μν (k, k ) over all k states on the Fermi surface for each band, ν. The eigenvectors corresponding to the largest eigenvalue then describe the symmetry of the leading superconducting instability suggested by the pairing vertex. Importantly, within this framework we treat all orbitals, including the d xy orbital, as equally coherent We use a pairing vertex that describes spin-fluctuation mediated superconductivity utilising the random phase approximation (RPA) in the presence of spin orbit coupling One has to bear in mind, however, that the RPA approximation is only valid in the regime where ωsf EF < 1, where ω sf is the spin fluctuation frequency and E F is the Fermi energy where, a s μ (k) describe the eigenvector of orbital s and band μ at momentum k, E μ (k) is the corresponding eigenvalue and f (E) is the Fermi function calculated at T=10 K in the nematic state and 100 K in the tetragonal state. In the second form, we employ a greatly simplified phenomenological form of the spin susceptibility, such as has been used to study the cuprates and other ironbased superconductors However, in the nominally tetragonal state, with two electron pockets, we find that the form of spin susceptibility does have an effect on the leading pairing symmetry. The itinerant pairing vertex, with maximum spin fluctuations at (π, π), suggests d-wave superconductivity will be the leading instability, as shown in Fig. Additionally, we find that the only contribution of the d xy orbital in superconducting pairing is the possible generation of accidental nodes at the tips of the electron pockets, which verifies that the assumption made in Sec. C is valid. This observation emphasizes the robustness of our prediction for the impact of the Lifshitz transition of one electron band due to d xy -nematicity on the superconducting gap near the nematic to tetragonal transition. Comparison of the superconducting gap simulations with a 10-orbital tight binding model. a Spin susceptibility calculated using the itinerant spin susceptibility defined in Eq. ( The d xy orbital has been largely underestimated within theories of the nematic state for the iron-based superconductors. With most theories focusing solely on the degeneracy lifting of the d xz and d yz orbitals. Although, the possibility of anisotropic hopping between the d xy orbitals of nearest neighbour atoms have been also considered Apart from the interest on its own, the sizeable d xynematicity poses further constraints for microscopic theories of nematicity. The anisotropic hopping pathway of the d xy orbital, coupled with the experimental observation of a momentum dependent d xz /d yz rearrangement suggest that nematicity is a strongly non-local phenomena (likely of magnetic rather than purely orbital origin) and may be governed by nearest neighbour interactions The scenario of the d xy dominant nematicity has also important consequences for alternative theoretical explanations for experimental properties of FeSe, such as the need for highly anisotropic orbital-selective quasiparticle weights or spin fluctuations to describe the momentum dependence of the superconducting gap We want to point out that the addition of a Hartree shift alongside the nematic order parameters is necessary in our model to reproduce the asymmetric nematic splitting of the d xy band, suggested by experiments To conclude, we have studied a model of FeSe and FeSe 1-x S x which exhibits dominant nematic order in the d xy channel and have shown that this assumption can naturally explain a multitude of unusual experimental properties observed within this system. This finding greatly constrains the possible mechanisms that can be attributed to the phenomena of nematicity. Note added: During the submission process of our manuscript we became aware of a theoretical paper by Steffensen et. al. In this note, we discuss the parametrization of states near Γ and Z point. We model the fermionic states at the center of the Brillouin zone using the effective low energy model introduced in Ref. with momentum k measured with respect to (0, 0, 0) at Γ and (0, 0, π) at Z point,respectively The nematic order parameter, which we discuss in the main text, and spin-orbit coupling enter the parametrization via Written in coordinates of the unfolded Brilloin zone the Hamiltonian is given by where we used c = -b 2 and μ is the chemical potential that fixes the number of particles accounting for Luttinger theorem. Exact diagonalization leads the band dispersions corresponding to the larger outer and smaller inner hole pocket h in and h out , respectively. Note that the inner hole pocket sinks below the Fermi level once h xz,yz -μ < ( Within our model we define superconductivity as momentum independent mean field order parameters in orbital space. The order parameters for d yz and d xz intra-orbital onsite pairing are given by which in Nambu notation with the pairing matrix ∆h = τ0+τ3 2 ∆ h xz + τ0-τ3 2 ∆ h yz . We perform a unitary transformation that diagonalizes H Γ/Z,↑ (k) from orbital into band space and obtain the BdG-Hamiltonian band basis in which the intra-and inter-band gaps are given by respectively, and denotes the orbital content. We fit the dispersion to ARPES data at the Γ and Z point at 10 K in the orthohombic state. The fitting parameters are listed in Tab. II. In this note, we discuss the parametrization of states near the M and A point, which can be described in terms of the four component spinor . At the M/A point, in the folded Brillouin zone, X and Y pockets are folded upon each other and from now on we understand k as the deviation from (π, π, 0) and (π, π, π) at M and A point, respectively. The nematic orderparameter, the Hartree term (both discussed in the main text) and spin-orbit coupling enter the parametrization via Written in coordinates of the unfolded Brilloin zone we have where corresponds to states with and In absence of SOC, diagonalization of Eq. ( Here we neglect the contribution of d xy orbitals to the pairing problem as discussed in the main text. In the Nambu basis with the pairing matrices ∆X (k) = transforms H X/Y from orbital into band space with two eigenvalues of which ξ reg X/Y = A X/Y + B 2 X2/Y2 + B 2 X3/Y3 describe the regular bands with the corresponding eigenvectors |X reg,σ and |Y reg,σ . Following Ref. where the intra-band gaps and the orbital content are given by and ) The parameter determines the SOC induced splitting between inner and outer electron pocket. By performing another unitary transformation we bring Eq. ( The normal state band dispersion of Eq. ( where For the gap at the peanut shaped pocket we find for small SOC ∆ e out (k) ≈ ∆ reg X (k). The fitting parameters for the dispersion near the A point listed in Tab. (III). In this note, we discuss the pairing interaction. We assume superconductivity to be driven by repulsive onsite interactions involving only intra-orbital interactions that translate mostly into pure inter-band pair-hopping interaction between hole and electron pockets and between both electron pockets corresponding to (π, 0), (0, π) and (π, π) spin-fluctuation mediated pairing, respectively. Moreover, we neglect interaction within d xy orbitals. The Hamiltonian was introduced in Ref. We treat Eq. ( From now on we neglect contributions from inter-band pairing gaps (such as Eq. ( where α ∈ {h in , h out , e in , e out , e inc1 , e inc2 } labels the bands in presence of SOC and ∆ = ∆ 0 0 J he U he 0 0 U he J he J he U he 0 J ee U he J he J ee 0 Minimizing the free energy with respect to ∆ † and focusing on the larger hole pocket and the two electron bands near the Fermi surface (i.e {h in , e in , e out }) yields the BCS gap-equations Note that the system of equations ( A self-consistent treatment of the pairing problem requires solving the coupled set of equations ( In this note, we discuss the 10-orbital tight binding model used in part D of the results section in the main text. The tight binding model uses the form and notation of Ref. [? ] and the hopping parameters, in units of eV, are 2D parameters 3D parameters We additionally include spin orbit coupling in the standard form Where Li is defined as In this note, we discuss the mathematical form of the pairing vertex for the linearised superconducting gap equation of Eq. ( The pairing vertex for spin fluctuation mediated superconductivity in the presence of spin orbit coupling is defined where Here a tσ μΣ (k) is the eigenvector of the original Hamiltonian in the presence of spin orbit coupling which connects the orbital and spin basis (s, p, q, t and σ, λ) with the band and pseudospin -band basis (μ, ν and Σ, Λ). The pairing vertex in orbital space = 0.00310 = -0.19398 