Recent discovery of superconductivity in the doped infinite-layer nickelates has renewed interest in understanding the nature of high-temperature superconductivity more generally. The low-energy electronic structure of the parent compound NdNiO2, the role of electronic correlations in driving superconductivity, and the possible relationship betweeen the cuprates and the nickelates are still open questions. Here, by comparing LaNiO2 and NdNiO2 systematically within a parameter free density functional framework, all-electron first-principles framework, we reveal the role Nd 4f electrons in shaping the ground state of pristine NdNiO2. Strong similarities are found between the electronic structures of LaNiO2 and NdNiO2, except for the effects of the 4f -electrons. Hybridization between the Nd 4f and Ni 3d orbitals is shown to significantly modify the Fermi surfaces of various magnetic states. In contrast, the competition between the magnetically ordered phases depends mainly on the gaps in the Ni dx2-y2 band, so that the ground state in LaNiO2 and NdNiO2 turns out to be striking similarity to that of the cuprates. The d -p band-splitting is found to be much larger while the intralayer 3d ion-exchange coupling is smaller in the nickelates compared to the cuprates. Our estimated value of the on-site Hubbard U is similar to that in the cuprates, but the value of the Hund's coupling JH is found to be sensitive to the Nd magnetic moment. The exchange coupling J in NdNiO2 is only half as large as in the curpates, which may explain why Tc in the nickelates is half as large as the cuprates. Since the discovery of high-T c superconductivity (HTSC) in the lanthanum-based cuprates in 1986 Recently, superconductivity in the hole-doped infinitelayer nickelate NdNiO 2 at 9∼15K has been reported in thin film samples grown on SrTiO 3 In order to address these questions, a variety of theoretical studies have been performed, employing density functional theory (DFT) The bulk of these studies focus on the NiO 2 plane, finding differences in quantities such as the d -p orbital splitting as compared to the cuprates In this article, we present a systematic study of the electronic and magnetic structures of both LaNiO 2 and NdNiO 2 using the strongly-constrained-appropriatelynormed (SCAN) density functional Crystal and magnetic structures: Figure , and 1 × 1 × 2 supercell for the C-type AFM (C-AFM), G-type AFM (G-AFM), and A-type AFM (A-AFM) orders, respectively, as shown in Figs. Our results are in contrast to those found with GGA+U Table Electronic structure of NM Phase: Figures Electronic structure of FM Phase: between Ni 3d z 2 and Nd 4f orbitals at Γ point (blue) [Fig. From Figs. 6 (c) and 6 (d), the Fermi surfaces of LaNiO 2 and NdNiO 2 fall into two categories. (i) The M -A direction in both materials is similar to the corresponding FM Fermi surfaces, except for the splitting along the z-axis due to the AFM stacking of adjacent FM layers. This effect leads to the appearance of two pockets near the M point in Γ-plane. (ii) The Γ -Z direction is more reminiscent of the NM case, with a Ni 3d z 2 electron pocket at the Γ point in LaNiO 2 , while in NdNiO 2 , the goblet Fermi surface of the NM phase has split into Z-centered pockets. The blue color of these features (low Fermi velocity) suggests strong f -electron mixing. f -electron dispersions: Based on the preceding comparison of LaNiO 2 and NdNiO 2 , we find the stabilization of the various magnetic phases of NdNiO 2 to be mainly driven by Ni d-electrons, with the f -electrons playing only a minor role. In contrast, the Fermi surfaces are strongly affected by the Nd 4f -electrons, exhibiting strong mixing with Ni 3d orbitals. While the f -electrons form one large cluster in the NM phase, they split into three subbands once the Nd atoms become polarized with slight shifts depending on the magnetic order consistent with our recent work on SmB 6 Comparisons with cuprates: Table To gauge the strength of correlations on the nickel site we calculate the Hubbard U and Hund's coupling J H for LaNiO 2 and NdNiO 2 in various magnetic arrangements according to Eq.( In order to determine the strength of the exchange coupling, we map the total energies of the AFM and FM phases onto those of the nearest-neighbor spin-1/2 Heisenberg Hamiltonian in the mean-field approximation where N is the total number of magnetic moments, S is the spin on each site, and Z is the coordination number. Since the in-plane interactions within the Ni-O planes in La(Nd)NiO 2 are much stronger than the interplanar interactions, we can take Z = 4. Since we normalize to one formula unit, N = 1. Using the total energies for the FM and C-AFM states obtained from our firstprinciples computations we find J to be 62 and 65 meV for LaNiO 2 and NdNiO 2 , respectively. These exchange parameters are half as large as those in La 2 CuO 4 Hence, we find great similarity between the cuprates and nickelates, both in the dispersion of the NM d x 2 -y 2 band, and in the resulting magnetic orders, with the felectrons playing little role in the magnetic transitions despite significantly modifying the Fermi surfaces. In principle, the fact that J is only half as large in nickelates as in cuprates could tell us something about why the T c dome is only half as large in nickelates. On the other hand, so far superconductivity has been found in two rare-earth substituted nickelates Conclusion: We examine in-depth the role of felectrons and magnetic ordering effects in LaNiO 2 and NdNiO 2 within a parameter-free, all-electron firstprinciples framework. The magnetic orders in the nickelates are found to be very similar to those in the cuprates in that the transitions are driven by the gapping of the d x 2 -y 2 band. We find a reduced J value in the nickelate compared to the cuprates, however, which could explain the weaker superconductivity in the nickelates. While the 4f electrons play little role in the nickelate magnetism, they substantially modify Fermi surfaces for various mag-netic states. Our study further reveals the importance of fluctuating magnetic order in correlated materials All calculations were performed by using the pseudopotential projector-augmented wave method To facilitate comparison with the cuprates, we calculated two quantities: (1) charge-transfer energies between the Ni 3d and O 2p orbitals ∆ dp = ε d -ε p and (2) the energy splitting of the two Ni e g orbitals ∆ eg = ε x 2 -y 2 -ε z 2 . Here, ε i refers to the band centers of the corresponding orbital i. Following previous works, To estimate the on-site Hubbard potential U and the Hunds coupling J H , we follow the method developed by Lane et al. where N ↑ (N ↓ ) is the occupation of the spin-up (down) d x 2 -y 2 orbital and the integration is over the full bandwidth W .