In two-dimensional (2D) magnetic systems, large magnetic anisotropy is needed to stabilize the magnetic order according to Mermin-Wagner theorem. Based on density functional theory (DFT) calculations, we propose that the magnetic anisotropic energy (MAE) of 2D ferromagnetic (FM) semiconductors can be strongly enhanced in van der Waals heterostructures by attaching a nonmagnetic semiconductor monolayer with large spin-orbit coupling. We studied Cr2Ge2Te6/PtSe2 bilayer heterostructures, where each layer has been realized in recent experiments. The DFT calculations show that the MAE of Cr2Ge2Te6/PtSe2 is enhanced by 70%, and the Curie temperature TC is increased far beyond room temperature. A model Hamiltonian is suggested to analyze the DFT results, showing that both the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction and the single-ion anisotropy contribute to the enhancement of the MAE. Based on the superexchange picture, we find that the decreased energy difference between 3d orbitals of Cr and 5p orbitals of Te contributes partially to the increase of TC . Our present work indicates a promising way to enhance the MAE and TC by constructing van der Waals semiconductor heterostructures, which will inspire further studies on the 2D magnetic semiconductor systems. To achieve room temperature ferromagnetic semiconductors has long been an important topic in science It is known that combining two kinds of 2D materials into heterostructures could regulate the overall performance In WSe 2 /CrI 3 heterostructures, the degenerate valleys in WSe 2 are split due to the proximity effect, where a large magnetic field of 13 T can be obtained by means of the ferromagnetic layer CrI 3 By constructing 2D van der Waals semiconductor heterostructures, is it possible to enhance the MAE and T C of ferromagnetic semiconductors? To answer this question, in this work, in terms of first principles calculations, we propose an efficient way to enhance the MAE and T C of Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 , through constructing van der Waals heterostructures with nonmagnetic PtSe 2 . Both Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 and PtSe 2 are 2D van der Waals semiconductors that have already been fabricated in experiments We perform first principles calculations using Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) Bulk Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 has been synthesized in 1995 The MAE is defined by the energy difference of the inplane and the out-of-plane ferromagnetic state and can be expressed as M AE = E F Mx -E F Mz , where E F Mx and E F Mz denote the energy of the ferromagnetic state with in-plane and out-of-plane direction of the unit cell, respectively. Our results suggest that these materials possess a ferromagnetic ground state with out-of-plane magnetization. Our calculations show that Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 /PtSe 2 heterostructure Stack-1 and Stack-2 are semiconductors with finite band gaps of 0.39 and 0.45 eV, respectively. The electronic band structures and atom-projected partial density of states of Stack-1 and Stack-2 are presented in Fig. The magnetization as a function of temperature obtained by Monte Carlo simulations based on 2D Ising model is depicted in Fig. To study the effect of Hubbard parameter U on the calculated T C and MAE, we perform DFT calculations for different values of U, as shown in Fig. In Eq. ( To calculate parameter J αβ , for instance, J xy , the following four classical spin configurations are used One has Other elements of J can be obtained in a similar way. The diagonal elements of J are given in Table The magnitude of DM interaction can be estimated as We find that for monolayer Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 , J xy = J yx , J xz = J zx , J zy = J yz , and thus there is no DM interaction. This is expected, because the inversion symmetry is kept in the monolayer. For the Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 /PtSe 2 heterostructures, the difference of the off-diagonal elements are finite values, which implies the presence of DM interaction. The other contribution to the MAE is the SIA energy, i.e. the last term in Eq. ( The above DM interaction and the SIA originate from the spin-orbit coupling, which in turn contribute to the MAE. For recent magnetic semiconductor monolayers, various microscopic mechanisms of MAE are also discussed We also calculate the second nearest neighbor exchange coupling J 2 and the nearest neighbor exchange coupling J 1 by comparing different magnetic configurations In fact, the above results of J 2 /J 1 are consistent with the magnetic anisotropy in the experiments of 2D CrI 3 and Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 To describe the magnetic state of 2D Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 and the heterostructures Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 /PtSe 2 , the Heisenberg model is used, as defined in Eq. (1). To estimate some magnetic properties, such as Curie temperature T C and exchange parameters, the approximations with classical spins are used. For example, to calculate T C , we carry out the Monte Carlo simulations based on the Ising model. To calculate the exchange parameters J xx , J xy , in Eq. ( As shown in Fig. The great increase of T C in Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 by applying tensile strain through heterostructures could be understood based on the superexchange interaction As shown in Fig. The MAE increases with increasing U, as shown in Fig. , where U is the on-site Coulomb interactions within the same orbitals, U ′ is the on-site Coulomb interactions between different orbitals, and J H demotes the Hund coupling. In the atomic limit, these parameters satisfy the relation U = U ′ + 2J H When growing two materials together, two kinds of junctions can be considered. One is the incoherent junction, where each layer of the junction keeps their original lattice constants In this paper, we have proposed that the magnetic anisotropic energy (MAE) of 2D ferromagnetic semiconductor can be strongly enhanced in heterostructures with a nonmagnetic semiconductor monolayer with large spin-orbit coupling. Based on the density functional theory calculations, we have demonstrated this idea in the bilayer heterostructure Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 /PtSe 2 . The results show that the MAE of Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 is enhanced by 70%, and its Curie temperature is increased to larger than 600 K far beyond room temperature. By means of a model Hamiltonian analysis, it is shown that both the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction and the single-ion anisotropy contribute to the enhancement of the MAE. Based on the superexchange picture, the great enhancement of T C is partially attributed to the decreased energy difference between 3d orbitals of Cr and 5p orbitals of Te. Our present study gives a deeper understanding on the mechanism of enhancement of magnetism in 2D van der Waals magnetic/nonmagnetic heterostructures and will spur further experimental studies of the 2D magnetic semiconductor systems. which could be executable in experiment for 2D van der Waals materials heterostructures J J