We investigated the static and dynamic magnetic properties of the polar ferrimagnet Mn2Mo3O8 in three magnetically ordered phases via magnetization, magnetic torque, and THz absorption spectroscopy measurements. The observed magnetic field dependence of the spin-wave resonances, including Brillouin zone-center and zone-boundary excitations, magnetization, and torque, are well described by an extended two-sublattice antiferromagnetic classical mean-field model. In this orbitally quenched system, the competing weak easy-plane and easy-axis single-ion anisotropies of the two crystallographic sites are determined from the model and assigned to the tetra-and octahedral sites, respectively, by ab initio calculations. Static magneto-electric (ME) coupling, namely the potential to electrically manipulate magnetic states and magnetically control electric polarization, has opened a new path for data storage In most compounds The members of the polar hexagonal (space group P 6 3 mc) M 2 Mo 3 O 8 crystal family, where M stands for transition metal ions, are ideal candidates for strong, exchange-striction based ME effects At low temperatures, Fe 2 Mo 3 O 8 presents the largest magnetically switchable electric polarization among single-phase multiferroic crystals Mn 2 Mo 3 O 8 offers the perfect starting point to understand the magnetic properties of the M 2 Mo 3 O 8 compounds. The half-filled 3d shells of Mn 2+ ions with S = 5/2 spin and L = 0 orbital moment allow magnetic singleion anisotropies only via higher-order interactions In order to gain a deeper insight into the microscopic mechanisms governing the magnetic behaviour of Mn 2 Mo 3 O 8 , we followed the magnetic field dependence of spin-wave resonances through three magnetic phases. The field dependence of the resonance frequencies and the bulk magnetization were successfully described by a simple microscopic model, which can serve as a starting point to understand other systems of the M 2 Mo 3 O 8 crystal family. The key results of the mean-field analysis are also supported by our first principle calculations. Mn 2 Mo 3 O 8 single crystals were grown by the chemical transport reaction method using anhydrous TeC l4 as a transport agent. Plate-like crystals with the dimension of about 2-3 mm in the ab plane and 0.5-1 mm along the c axis were obtained after one month transport at 1000 • C with a temperature difference of 50 • C. The mag-netization measurements were performed using a Squid magnetometer (MPMS-5, Quantum Design) in fields up to μ 0 H = 5 T and vibrating sample magnetometer in fields up to μ 0 H = 14 T using Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design). The torque magnetometry was also performed in a PPMS with magnetic fields of up to 9 T. Optical transmission experiments between 60 and 180 GHz were carried out using quasi-optical terahertz spectroscopy Fourier-transform spectroscopy was used to study the optical absorption between 120 and 6000 GHz with 8 GHz resolution. The magnetic field dependence of the spectra in magnetic fields up to μ 0 H = 17 T was investigated using the TeslaFIR setup of the National Institute of Chemical Physics and Biophysics in Tallinn. Magnetic anisotropy was estimated by densityfunctional theory (DFT) band-structure calculations performed in the VASP package The magnetic field dependence of the magnetization of Mn 2 Mo 3 O 8 at T = 2 K is presented in Fig. To explore the magnetization dynamics in Mn 2 Mo 3 O 8 , we studied the magnetic field dependence of the magnetic resonances using THz absorption spectroscopy at low temperatures (T = 3 K). The lowest-frequency resonances (ν < 150 GHz), which are not accessible by farinfrared spectroscopy, were investigated by the use of backward-wave oscillators. Although the absorption line shapes were distorted by diffraction on the edges of the sample, and by interference effects, as seen in the inset of Fig. Typical absorption spectra, presented in Fig. In zero magnetic field, we observed three resonance branches, ν 1 , ν 2 , and ν 3 , as presented in the mode map of Fig. Considering the smooth increase of the magnetization in the H C1 < H < H C2 phase transition region (Fig. In magnetic fields perpendicular to c, see Fig. Next, we turn to the modelling of the spin system. The magnetization and the spin resonances of Mn 2 Mo 3 O 8 are consistent with a relatively simple, two-sublattice ferrimagnetic model, that we discuss in the following. The two sublattices interact antiferromagnetically and experience different weak single-ion magnetic anisotropies that can be attributed to the octahedral/tetrahedral enviroments, respectively. The g-factors at the two crystallographic sites can also be different. The corresponding Hamiltonian in the mean-field approach is where S 1 and S 2 are the three-dimensional vectors of S = 5/2 lengths representing the magnetic moments of the two sublattices. In the Hamiltonian the dominant energy scale is given by the antiferromagnetic coupling, J, while the ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 single-ion c-axis anisotropies define the zero-field spin orientation. In the Zeeman term μ B is the Bohr magneton, g 1 and g 2 are the g-factors of the two sublattices, and μ 0 denotes the permeability of vacuum. The ground state at a given external field value can be determined by minimizing the energy given in Eq. 1. The easy-axis collinear state is realized in zero field if ∆ 1 + ∆ 2 < 0. To reproduce the smooth increase of magnetization in the H c, H C1 < H < H C2 case, ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 have to have opposite signs. Within the model described by Eq. 1 the isotropic highfield (H > H C2 ) differential susceptibility is if the second-order terms in the difference of the two sublattices, ∼ (∆ 1 -∆ 2 ) 2 and ∼ (g 1 -g 2 ) 2 , are neglected. From the lowest zero-field resonance frequencies, ν 1 and ν 2 , the model parameters J, ∆ 1 , and ∆ 2 can be determined, according to (3) The slopes of ν 1 and ν 2 in H c, H < H C1 correspond to the g-factors g 1 ≈ g 2 ≈ 2. The zero-field remanent magnetization at T = 2 K after a H c field treatment, M 0 = 0.0025 μ B /f.u. as found in Ref. [39] and in our experiments shown in the inset of Fig. larger g-factor aligns along the field, while sublattice 2 turns opposite to it. From the considerations above, the field dependence of the magnetization, the torque and the magnon modes can all be well reproduced by the following parameter set: J = 3 meV, ∆ 1 = -0.015 meV, ∆ 2 = 0.006 meV, g 1 = 2.001, and g 2 = 2. Using these parameters, we numerically found the minimum of the energy in Eq. 1 at various magnetic fields. The calculated magnetization of the ground state is presented in Figs. The model parameters are independently confirmed by ab initio calculations that return J = 2.7 meV, g 1 = g 2 = 2.002, ∆ 1 = -0.0015 meV, and ∆ 2 = 0.001 meV, where easy-axis (∆ 1 < 0) and easy-plane (∆ 2 > 0) anisotropies are obtained at the octahedral and tetrahedral sites, respectively. The absolute values of ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 are underestimated, though, which may be due to the systematic error of DFT. Nevertheless, with the help of DFT one can identify the sublattice 1 and 2 with the octahedrally and tetrahedrally coordinated Mn sites. The magnetic resonances were determined by calculating the response to small perturbations in the ground state, as descibed in detail in Refs. results are shown in Figs. The electric dipole active high-frequency (1200 GHz < ν) modes, ν 3 , ν 4 and ν 5 , can be interpreted as Brillouin zone-edge magnons of the simplified model system with two spins in the unit cell. However, these resonances correspond to Γ-point excitations if we consider that the crystallographic unit cell contains four Mn sites, as shown in Fig. In conclusion, the low-temperature static magnetic properties and spin excitations of Mn 2 Mo 3 O 8 were investigated by various experimental techniques. The observed magnetic field dependences of the magnetization, torque, and spin-wave resonance frequencies are reproduced by a mean-field model. The magnetic exchange and g-factor parameters of the model were determined by fitting the rich experimental dataset, and are also supported by first principle calculations. The quantitative explanation of the various magnetic resonances of θ 0 H-H C1 relation corresponding to Fig. 