We present a method for measuring thermal expansion under tunable uniaxial stresses, and show measurements of the thermal expansion of Mn 3 Sn, a room temperature antiferromagnet that exhibits a spontaneous Hall effect, under uniaxial stresses of up to 1.51 GPa compression. Measurement of thermal expansion provides thermodynamic data about the nature of phase transitions, and uniaxial stress provides a powerful tuning method that does not introduce disorder. Mn 3 Sn exhibits an anomaly in its thermal expansion near ∼270 K, associated with a first-order change in its magnetic structure. We show this transition temperature is suppressed by 54.6 K by 1.51 GPa compression along [0001]. We find the associated entropy change at the transition to be ∼0.1 J mol -1 K -1 and to vary only weakly with applied stress. The application of uniaxial stress modifies lattice constants and can provide powerful insight into the electronic structure of materials. Its effects often differ qualitatively from those of hydrostatic stress. For example, the superconducting critical temperature of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.67 is enhanced by hydrostatic stress, but suppressed by in-plane uniaxial stress. In Mn 3 Sn, the Mn moments form a triangular spin structure below T N ≈ 420 K. The transition at T H is accompanied by an expansion along [0001], and our goal here is to suppress T H as far as possible through compressive uniaxial stress, σ , which introduces no disorder when the sample deformation is elastic, applied along [0001]. From the Clausius-Clapeyron relationship, we estimate that σ ≈ -4 GPa, where σ < 0 denotes compression, would be required to obtain T H → 0. Here, we achieve σ = -1.51 GPa, and show through thermal expansion measurements that, at this stress, T H is suppressed by 54.6 K. A piezoelectric-driven uniaxial stress apparatus which incorporates both force and displacement sensors has been presented in Ref.12. Such a device could, in principle, be used for dilatometry measurements. In that device, the sample is coupled directly (i.e. through a high-stiffness mechanical link) to piezoelectric actuators. Force is thus delivered at a high spring constant, because piezoelectric actuators are, in general, highstiffness devices that generate only small displacements. Consequently, the force applied to the sample is not automatically independent of length changes that the sample might undergo, and must instead be held constant through feedback. The approach we explore here is to place a spring of low spring constant between the piezoelectric actuators and the sample; we term this the conversion spring, as it converts displacement from the actuators into a force on the sample. The advantage is that force is delivered to the sample at a low spring constant. For materials such as Mn 3 Sn that undergo first-order transitions, this means that the force on the sample does not change drastically even if the sample length changes abruptly. The disadvantage is, to achieve high stresses, the actuators must be long and/or the sample small. Here, the actuators can generate a displacement of ∼100 μm. For the force on the sample to be well-controlled, the majority of this displacement must go into the conversion spring. If we specify that ∼90% should go into the conversion spring, there is only ∼10 μm left to compress the sample, as well as the epoxy that holds it and any other coupling elements to the sample. Therefore to reach high strains we limit the sample length to ∼300 μm. Our design is presented in Fig. Measured capacitances are converted to displacement, d, through C = ε 0 A/(d + d 0 ) + C offset , where A is the capacitor area and C offset is the stray capacitance. A is 7.7 and 7.4 mm 2 for the force and displacement capacitors, respectively. d 0 is the initial capacitor plate separation, ≈150 μm for the force and ≈10 μm for the displacement capacitors. The stray capacitance was found to be negligible for both capacitors. The spring constants of the conversion spring and carrier flexures were measured at room temperature (see Supplementary Information) and are 5. displacement sensor was subtracted from that measured by the force sensor, to obtain the displacement applied to the conversion spring. Single crystals of Mn 3 Sn were grown from Sn flux using the Bridgman method, following protocols reported in a previous study. Samples are epoxied across a gap between two 50 μm-thick titanium foils. Sample 1, shown in Fig. Therefore, to concentrate stress efficiently, we found it essential to mill Sample 2 into a bow-tie shape, using a Thermo Fisher Scientific Helios G4 PFIB UXe Xe 2+ plasma focused ion beam instrument, as shown in Fig. shows the hysteretic behavior vs. temperature. The first-order nature of the transition is shown by the step-like change in sample length, and hysteresis in T H between increasing-and decreasing-temperature ramps. Fig. which is valid for first order transitions. The negative sign on the left hand side of the equation is due to our convention that compression is negative. With this and our zero-pressure dilatometry and heat capacity data, we estimate the zero pressure dT H /dσ c slope to be 40.1 K GPa -1 . dT H /dσ of Sample 2 is found to be 33.3 K GPa -1 at low |σ |, in reasonable agreement with this estimate. The difference may reflect sample-tosample variation. As |σ | is increased to large values, T H deviates below this slope, see Fig. From the estimated Young's modulus of Mn 3 Sn along the [0001] axis (∼ 63 GPa, Supplementary Information), the sample strain at σ = -1.51 GPa is ≈2.4%. As a comparison, it was found that 8% substitution of the Sn site with Mn can suppress the spin spiral transition completely while changing the c and a lattice constants by only ∼ -0.3%, The authors thank Alexander Steppke and Hilary Noad for their technical expertise and fruitful scientific discus-