This paper aims to investigate electric dynamics and improve electric power generation of an isolated wave energy converter that uses a linear permanent magnet generator as the power take-off system, excited by regular or irregular waves. This is of significant concern when considering actual operating conditions of an offshore wave energy converter, where the device will encounter different sea states and its electric load needs to be tuned on a sea-state-to-sea-state basis. To that end, a fully coupled fluid-mechanicalelectric-magnetic-electronic mathematical model and an optimization routine are developed. This proposed time-domain wave-to-wire model is used to simulate the hydrodynamic and electric response of a wave energy converter connected to specific electric loads and also used in an optimization routine that searches optimal resistive load value for a wave energy converter under specific sea states. Sample results are presented for a point-absorber type wave energy converter, showing that the electric power generation of a device under irregular waves can be significantly improved. Ocean wave energy is a promising renewable source to contribute to supply the world's energy demand, with an estimated world-wide potential of 2 -3T W A key performance indicator for an isolated fullscale WEC operated in open sea is the system efficiency, as it determines the power performance and dominates the economic performance of a device. Considerable work has been conducted to improve system efficiency, by employing control strategies Several wave-to-wire models have been proposed for different types of WECs (a classification of WECs is presented in Fig. The structure of this paper is as follows. Section 2 presents the optimization methodology used for finding the optimal electric load for a PAWEC that employs a linear permanent magnet generator as the PTO system. Section 3 explains the wave-towire model in detail, including the fluid-structure interaction theory, the linear generator model, the power electronic converter model, and electric load model. In Section 4, the developed wave-to-wire model and optimization routine is applied to a floating PAWEC, originally from a full-scale WEC developed by Uppsala University, and its electric performance is simulated and the optimal electric load is identified. Section 5 presents a discussion based on simulation results from case studies. Summative conclusions are drawn in Section 6. As illustrated in Fig. This study aims to improve electric power generation, rather than power absorption, of an isolated PAWEC via electric load control. To identify the optimal electric load of a PAWEC in irregular waves, a wave-to-wire time-domain model and an optimization procedure are required. The problem of identifying the optimal electric load is formulated as a standard optimization problem, where the objective function is the time-averaged electric power that is computed by the developed wave-towire time-domain model, as indicated in Fig. Note that, wave-to-wire models depend, to a large extent, on the technologies used by a PAWEC, including the choice of converter topology, load, controllers and control schemes. Moreover, a specific controller can employ numerous control strategies. A mandatory associated process for a directdriven LPMG is the power rectification, which is usually used to partially smoothen the variation of electric output of a LPMG due to the irregular nature of incident waves. Passive rectification and synchronous rectification are two widely used techniques. Passive rectification only supports unidirectional power flow and synchronization rectification allows for the bidirectional power flow. Fig. For an isolated PAWEC connected to a DC load, the passive rectification shown in Fig. The PAWEC has a diameter small compared to the wavelength, and is insensitive to wave direc- tion, thereby only unidirectional incident waves are considered in the modeling and simulation. Additionally, as the LPMG works in heave direction, for simplicity, the equation of motion only considers the heave DOF. WEC with a linear permanent magnet generator Ocean waves can be generated by different mechanisms, e.g. by wind, earthquakes, or planetary forces. The majority are wind waves, driven by wind blowing over a surface area of the ocean. This study focuses on linear plane progressive waves, in regular form or irregular form. For a regular plane-parallel wave, the variation of a surface wave at a space point is mathematically expressed as a cosine function: where A wv is wave amplitude, ω is angular frequency of incident waves, t is time, x is the space position in the direction of wave propagation, k = 2π/λ is the wave number with λ representing the wavelength, and θ is the initial phase. However, most ocean waves are not regular, and the surface elevation varies irregularly over time and space. It is possible to describe the irregular waves by a combination of harmonic components. At one point in space, the time-continuous irregular wave elevation is defined as: where α i , ω i and θ i are the amplitude, angular frequency, and phase of the i th harmonic component, respectively. The amplitude of harmonic wave α i is obtained from the wave power spectrum, defined as: To describe the ocean waves driven by wind in certain situations, several well-established spectrum can be used, e.g., the JONSWAP spectrum, the Pierson-Moskowitz spectrum, and the Bretschneider spectrum. For a fully developed sea, where a constant speed wind blows over a sufficiently long fetch of the ocean surface for a sufficiently long time, the Pierson-Moskowitz is commonly used. For a limited fetch, the JONSWAP spectrum is suggested. When a specific appropriate form of wave spectrum is well defined for average sea conditions, the Bretschneider spectrum can be used. In this study, assuming the sea is fully developed, the Pierson-Moskowitz is employed. The Pierson-Moskowitz spectrum is defined by a peak wave period T p and a significant wave height H s , formulated as: ). (4) Assuming that the fluid is homogeneous, incompressible, irrotational and inviscid, linear potential flow theory can be used to describe the interaction of a floating buoy with plane progressive waves in water of finite depth, with the free-surface and body-boundary conditions linearised. The assumption of linear potential flow permits the definition of a velocity potential Φ = Re(φe iωwvt ), yielding the Laplace equation in the fluid domain, i.e., ∆Φ = 0. The linearised fluid-structure problem allows for the decomposition of velocity potential into incident, scatter and radiation components, i.e.: The complex velocity potential of the incident wave, φ I , is defined as: where β is the angle of incident wave relative to the positive direction of x axis, A wv is the amplitude of the incident wave, ω wv is the frequency of the incident wave, H dep is the water depth, g is the gravitational acceleration, and k is the real positive root of the dispersion relation ω 2 wv = gk tanh(kH dep ). The excitation force due to incident waves is computed by integrating the hydrodynamic pressure over the wet surface S w : where the unit vector n = (n 1 , n 2 , n 3 ) is normal to the body boundary and points out of the fluid domain. For irregular waves, the excitation force in the heave direction can be represented as a summation of individual force component as: where σ i and φ i are the coefficient and phase of the excitation force under the i th harmonic wave, and can be calculated using, e.g., the commercial boundary element method solver WAMIT The oscillation of a buoy in ocean water results in a radiation force, defined as: where m ∞ is the infinite-frequency limit of added mass, and K is the impulse response function, representing a memory of the oscillator velocity, and K has a relationship with the added mass A add and the radiation resistance B add as follows: The PAWEC being developed at Uppsala University uses a linear permanent magnet synchronous generator. The natural wave motion is transferred to the generator's translator by rigid coupling. The translator moves up and down to generate electric power. For simplification, only the heave motion is considered in the mathematical modelling and simulation. For small wave heights, linear wave theory is used for the wave-absorber interaction, and it is assumed that the coupling between the absorber and translator is rigid without rope slacking. The motion of the WEC is described by Newtons law as: where D is absorber's diameter. The power take-off system converts captured wave power into electric power. A LPMG is used as the PTO system of the PAWEC being developed at Uppsala University. As shown in Fig. The magnetic and electric phenomena in a LPMG can be described by field theory. The fundamental laws of electromagnetism are Maxwell's equation. The voltage induced in a closed circuit is proportional to the time rate of change of magnetic flux it encloses, which is a vector form of the Faraday's law of induction, i.e.: where E is induced no-load voltage, also called electromotive force (EMF), ψ is permanent magnetic flux, and N c is coil turns. For the 1-DOF PAWEC, the translator of a LPMG moves vertically, and the electromotive force can be written as follows, To mathematically couple components' model in the integrated wave-to-wire simulation model, three assumptions are made for simplicity. The permanent magnetic flux ψ is assumed to vary over the translator position, and is formulated as follows where x pm is translator's position and varies over time, θ pm is its initial phase, and λ pm is magnetic wavelength that is a function of pole width. The variable ψ pm is the magnitude of magnetic flux, and it is determined by specific characteristics of a detailed LPMG. When the translator is fully exposed to the stator, in the case where translator's length is smaller than stator's length, the magnetic flux magnitude reaches a maximum value of ψ pm,max ; when the translator is completely out of the stator, the magnetic flux reaches it minimum values of zero; for other cases, a ratio factor A act , corresponding to the active length of the translator, is defined to describe the ratio of λ pm and λ pm,max , defined as follows: where l st is length of the stator and l tr is length of the translator. Another assumption is that, the total PTO force equals the electromagnetic force F emf , written as where i q , i d , L q and L d are the quadrature-axes current, direct-axes current, quadrature-axes inductance and direct-axes inductance, respectively, and τ p is the pole width of the permanent magnets. In the following simulations, considering that the quadrature-axes and direct-axes have the same inductance, only the quadrature-axes current i q contributes to the thrust. The third assumption is that the coupling between the translator and the absorber is rigid in heave mode. In that way, velocity of the absorber exactly equals speed of the translator in heave mode. A full-scale PAWEC concept, being developed at Uppsala University, is used in the numerical case studies of Section 4.1 and Section 4.2. The absorber has a diameter of 4m, a height of 1m and a draft of 0.5m. The water depth is 20m. The pole width of permanent magnets is a value of 50mm, coil number is 10 and magnetic flux magnitude ψ pm is 0.4W b. The resistance and inductance of the generator are 0.5Ω and 11mH, respectively. The sea cable resistance is 0.5Ω and inductance is 1mH. The proposed wave-to-wire model is implemented in M AT LAB/Simulink environment, with a computation time step of 1ms. Hydrodynamic coefficients, e.g., added mass, radiation damping coefficients and excitation force coefficients, are computed using WAMIT, a boundary element code that uses the linear potential flow theory. Excitation force is estimated based on the predicted or preknown incident wave information, while other approaches can be employed to approximate that, e.g. three approaches presented in The simulation model of the LPMG is verified by results from physical experiments, as presented in Fig. This section examines the electric performance of a PAWEC under different DC loads, in regular and irregular waves. The LPMG is connected to a passive rectifier that uses six diodes to achieve the power conversion from AC to DC, as shown in Fig. This section aims to find the optimal electric load for the PAWEC under specific wave conditions. This is an maximization problem where the variable to be optimized is the electric load, i.e. resistor value is this case, and the objective function is the time-averaged electric power consumed by the electric load, defined as: where V dc and V dc are the voltage and current measured at the electric load, respectively, and T mn is the total time used in the simulation. The optimization procedure is depicted in Fig. Sections 4 demonstrates the application of a time-domain wave-to-wire model to a PAWEC with a LPMG. Through numerical investigations, the influence of the electric load on electric power generation is demonstrated. Additionally, the developed optimization procedure that employs the proposed wave-to-wire model can efficiently search for the optimal electric load for a PAWEC under specific wave conditions. This has strong implications for design of load controllers, as variable speed generators are used more and more frequently during the conversion from ocean wave source into electric power, where generator output voltage varies both in amplitude and frequency and the electric load connected to a LPMG should be actively tuned according to the change of sea states. If the computation time of the optimization procedure is faster than the change of sea states, the proposed optimalload searching method can be used for load control of full-scale WECs in physical experiments and during operation. The objective of this study is to increase the electric power measured at the load side, rather than the absorber power that is used as the objective function in most control strategy studies. Indeed, the difference between them is huge, for example, the time-averaged mechanical power of the LPMG is 11kW in the specific case of Section 4.2 while the time-averaged load power is 6.1kW . This is due to the losses of electric power cable, as well as characteristics of a specific LPMG. The influence of non-ideal PTO on the energy conversion was also investigated in other studies, e.g., in Additionally, the wave-to-wire model based optimization procedure that only optimize the resistor load value in the case study can be applied to other load types with more variables to be optimized. In a case with more variables, the golden-section search algorithm can be easily replaced by other multiplevariable optimization algorithms, e.g., a genetic algorithm. This paper presents a generic methodology for optimizing electric load of a wave energy converter with a linear permanent magnet genera-tor. The demonstrated wave-to-wire mathematical model helps in understanding fundamental electric dynamics of the one-degree-of-freedom device, and the developed optimization routine can efficiently find the optimal resistor load value for a device under regular waves or irregular waves. The optimization procedure is applied to a full-scale pointabsorber type wave energy converter that is being developed at Uppsala University. Numerical results indicate that the performance of the device can be significantly improved, in terms of energy generation. The output voltage from a point-absorber type wave energy converter varies in frequency and amplitude. For an off-grid case, passive rectification is required for a DC load. It is concluded that the electric load of a standalone wave energy converter should be actively tuned according to the change of sea states, which can significantly increase the electric power generated. The passive-control based optimization routine can be applied to real-time operation of a full-scale wave energy in random waves.