The ideal diode is a theoretical concept that completely conducts the electric current under forward bias without any loss and that behaves like a perfect insulator under reverse bias. However, real diodes have a junction barrier that electrons have to overcome and thus they have a threshold voltage VT , which must be supplied to the diode to turn it on. This threshold voltage gives rise to power dissipation in the form of heat and hence is an undesirable feature. In this work, based on half-metallic magnets (HMMs) and spin-gapless semiconductors (SGSs) we propose a diode concept that does not have a junction barrier and the operation principle of which relies on the spin-dependent transport properties of the HMM and SGS materials. We show that the HMM and SGS materials form an Ohmic contact under any finite forward bias, while for a reverse bias the current is blocked due to spin-dependent filtering of the electrons. Thus, the HMM-SGS junctions act as a diode with zero threshold voltage VT , and linear current-voltage (I-V ) characteristics as well as an infinite on:off ratio at zero temperature. However, at finite temperatures, non-spin-flip thermally excited high-energy electrons as well as low-energy spin-flip excitations can give rise to a leakage current and thus reduce the on:off ratio under a reverse bias. Furthermore, a zero threshold voltage allows one to detect extremely weak signals and due to the Ohmic HMM-SGS contact, the proposed diode has a much higher current drive capability and low resistance, which is advantageous compared to conventional semiconductor diodes. We employ the nonequilibrium Greens function method combined with density-functional theory to demonstrate the linear I-V characteristics of the proposed diode based on two-dimensional half-metallic Fe/MoS2 and spin-gapless semiconducting VS2 planar heterojunctions. A diode is a two-terminal device that conducts electric current in only one direction but restricts current from flowing in the opposite direction, i.e., it acts as a one-way switch for current. Diodes are also known as rectifiers because they change alternating current into direct current. Diodes are of several types, with different properties depending on the materials that they consist of Diodes are used for various applications, ranging from power conversion to overvoltage protection and from sig-nal detection and mixing to switches. Due to the junction barrier, diodes have a threshold (or turn on) voltage V T , which must be supplied to the diode for it to conduct any considerable forward current. In Fig. For device applications, a special class of materials, the so-called spin-gapless semiconductors (SGSs), are receiving substantial attention. The concept of SGSs was proposed by Wang in 2008 In this paper, we propose a diode concept, based on a HMM and a SGS electrode, that we call Ohmic spin diode (OSD) and demonstrate proof of the principle by ab-initio quantum transport calculations. Analogous to the metal-semiconductor junction diode (the Schottkybarrier diode), HMM-SGS junctions act as a diode, the operation principle of which relies on the spin-dependent transport properties of the HMM and SGS materials. We show that HMM and SGS materials form an Ohmic contact under any finite forward bias, giving rise to linear current-voltage (I-V ) characteristics, while for a reverse bias the current is blocked due to the filtering of the electrons. In contrast to the Schottky diode, the proposed diode does not require the doping of the SGS and also does not have a junction barrier and thus it has a zero threshold voltage V T and an infinite on:off current ratio at zero temperature. However, at finite temperatures non-spin-flip thermally excited high-energy electrons as well as low-energy spin-flip excitations can give rise to leakage current and thus reduce the on:off ratio under a reverse bias. Moreover, due to the Ohmic HMM-SGS contact, the proposed diode has a much higher current drive capability and low resistance, which is advantageous compared to conventional semiconductor diodes. To demonstrate the linear I-V characteristics of the concept we construct a planar HMM-SGS junction based on 2D half-metallic Fe/MoS 2 and spin-gapless semiconducting VS 2 and employ the nonequilibrium Greens function method combined with density-functional theory (DFT). We find that at zero bias the VS 2 and Fe/MoS 2 electrodes couple ferromagnetically; however. this coupling changes sign from ferro-to antiferromagnetic for a critical forward bias voltage of V = 180 mV. The VS 2 -Fe/MoS 2 junction diode possesses linear I-V characteristics for forward bias voltages up to V = 180 mV and a very small threshold voltage of V T = 30 meV, which can be attributed to the minority-electron conduction-band minimum of the spin-gapless semiconducting VS 2 material. Moreover, we obtain a very high current density (J = 2350 μA/μm for V = 180 mV), which makes the VS 2 -Fe/MoS 2 OSD highly promising for low-temperature nanoelectronic applications. The structure of the proposed OSD and its I-V characteristics are shown schematically in Fig. The linear I-V characteristics of the OSD presented in Fig. Up to now, the discussion of the I-V characteristics of the OSD is based on the schematic band diagram at zero temperature and thus an infinite on:off current ratio can be achieved. However, at finite temperatures, thermally excited electrons and holes can significantly reduce the on:off ratio. At this point, it is important to note that in conventional metal-semiconductor Schottky diodes electrons flow from semiconductor to the metal electrode under a forward bias, whereas in the OSD shown in Fig. In contrast to the Schottky diode, the spin degree of freedom provides a rich configuration space for the I-V curves of the OSD, which are determined by two parameters: (i) the magnetic coupling between electrodes, which allows the dynamical configuration of the diode in the case of antiferromagnetic interelectrode coupling via an external magnetic field; and (ii) the spin character of the gap in HMMs and SGSs. Depending on the magnetic coupling between electrodes, the OSD is in the on state either under forward bias (ferromagnetic interelectrode coupling or parallel orientation) or under reverse bias (antiferromagnetic interelectrode coupling or antiparallel orientation), as shown in Fig. As the OSD is comprised of magnetic materials, its operation temperature is limited by the Curie temperature T C of the constituent materials and thus for realization of the OSD, HMMs and SGSs with high T C values are required. Two-dimensional transition-metal dichalcogenides Among the 2D transition-metal dichalcogenides, Vbased compounds (VS 2 , VSe 2 , VTe 2 ) have attracted particular interest due to their intrinsic ferromagnetism. These compounds can crystallize in two different structures: the 1H phase and the 1T phase. The former phase is energetically more stable and possesses a SGS ground state Ground state electronic structure calculations are carried out using density functional theory (DFT), implemented in the QuantumATK P-2019.03 package The transport calculations are performed using DFT combined with the nonequilibrium Green's function method (NEGF). We use a 24 × 1 × 172 k-point grid in self-consistent DFT-NEGF calculations. The I-V characteristics were calculated within a Landauer approach Here, V denotes the bias voltage, T σ (E, V ) is the spin-dependent transmission coefficient for an electron with spin σ, and f L (E, V ) and f R (E, V ) are the Fermi-Dirac distributions of the left and right electrodes, respectively. The transmission coefficient T σ (E, V ) is calculated using a 300 × 1 k-point grid. The OSD concept introduced in Sec. II can be realized either by using 3D Heusler compounds or 2D transitionmetal dichalcogenides. In the following, due to their structural simplicity we focus on the 2D materials and demonstrate the proof of principle by ab-initio quantum transport calculations. As the electrode materials of the OSD, we choose VS 2 and Fe/MoS 2 . The former is an intrinsic ferromagnet with spin-gapless semiconducting behavior in the monolayer 1H phase, while the halfmetallic ferromagnetism in the latter Fe/MoS 2 material is achieved by functionalization of the 1H semiconducting MoS 2 . Based on first-principles calculations, Jiang et al. Since the electronic and magnetic as well as structural properties of both electrode materials have been extensively discussed in the literature, in the following we will briefly overview their basic properties, which will be necessary in order to understand the transport characteristics of the OSD. In Table When the half metallic Fe/MoS 2 makes contact with VS 2 , free electrons will flow from the half-metallic Fe/MoS 2 side to the spin-gapless semiconducting VS 2 side, because the work function of the Fe/MoS 2 is smaller than that of VS 2 (see Table Long-range magnetic order is prohibited in the 2D magnets at finite temperatures due to the Mermin-Wagner theorem Besides the magnetic anisotropy energy K and the interelectrode coupling, another important parameter for the realization of the OSD is the Curie temperature T C of the constituent materials. The T C values for both materials have been estimated from first principles in Refs 49 and 58 (see Table Next, we discuss the electronic and transport properties of the OSD under a finite bias voltage. As mentioned above, although at zero bias the coupling between the SGS and HMM electrodes is ferromagnetic, we find that this coupling changes sign from ferromagnetic to antiferromagnetic under a forward bias of about 180 mV. Note that electric field or voltage control of magnetism on the nanoscale is highly appealing for the development of nanoelectronic devices with low power consumption On the other hand, for a reverse bias the coupling between electrodes remains ferromagnetic and thus the electronic and magnetic structure near the interface is similar to the zero-bias case with the exception of the band bending in the VS 2 electrode, which take places near the interface region, within the 40 Å. Note that the band bending is not linear due to charge transfer as well as the complex metallic screening of the Fe/MoS 2 electrode. Indeed, we observe a flat region of about 15 Å on the projected DDOS [see Fig. voltages larger than the 180 mV, the I-V curve of the OSD takes a plateau shape, i.e., the current first monotonically increases up to 250 mV and then it starts to decrease. Such behavior can be attributed to the antiferromagnetic coupling of a single V atom at the interface, which now has a gap in the spin-down channel above the Fermi energy, in contrast to the rest of the atoms in the junction. This energy gap acts as a small potential barrier, giving rise to more reflection of the electrons, and thus it reduces the transmission. Furthermore, in the bias-voltage range from 180 mV to 300 mV, the magnetic moment of the V atom at the interface increases from -0.2 μ B to -0.55 μ B , which also explains the plateaulike shape of the I-V curve at higher voltages. A feature of the proposed VS 2 -Fe/MoS 2 OSD is that it has much higher current-drive capability, i.e., in the on state, for a bias voltage of V = 180 mV the calculated current density turns out to be around I = 2350 μA/μm. This value is much higher than the on-state current density of devices based on 2D semiconducting materials As mentioned in Sec. II, the spin degree of freedom brings a certain functionality to the OSD, which can be dynamically configured by an external magnetic field; thus the OSD can be used as a switch. However, this is possible only for the OSDs having electrodes that cou- ple antiferromagnetically (the AP orientation). So in this case, in reversing the magnetization direction of one electrode from the antiparallel to the parallel orientation, the OSD switches from the on state to the off state like a transistor. This switching can be easily understood with the help of the schematic band diagram shown in Fig. Moreover, the on:off current ratio will be further reduced. On the other hand, in half-metallic Fe/MoS 2 , Stoner excitations are not allowed due to the existence of the spin gap; however, at finite temperatures, electron-magnon interaction can give rise to the appearance of nonquasiparticle states within the half-metallic gap just above the Fermi energy In conclusion, we proposed a diode concept, which we call the OSD, based on SGS and HMM materials. Analogous to the metal-semiconductor junction diode (the Schottky-barrier diode), HMM-SGS junctions act as a diode the operation principle of which relies on the spindependent transport properties of the constituent HMM and SGS materials. We show that the HMM and SGS materials form an Ohmic contact under any finite forward bias voltage, giving rise to linear I-V characteristics, while for a reverse bias the current is blocked due to spin-dependent filtering of the electrons. In contrast to the Schottky diode, the proposed OSD does not require doping of the SGS electrode and it also does not have a junction barrier; thus it has a zero threshold voltage V T and an infinite on:off current ratio at zero temperature. However, at finite temperatures, non-spin-flip thermally excited high-energy electrons as well as low-energy spinflip excitations can give rise to a leakage current and thus reduce the on:off ratio under a reverse bias. As the leakage current is mainly determined by the size of the band gaps in SGS and HMM electrodes and by a proper choice of large band-gap materials, the on:off current ratio can be significantly increased in OSDs. Moreover, the spin degree of freedom provides a rich configuration space for the I-V characteristics of the OSD, which are determined by two parameters: (i) the spin character of the gap in HMM and SGS; and (ii) the magnetic coupling between electrodes, which allows the dynamical configuration of the diode in the case of antiferromagnetic coupling (antiparallel orientation) via an external magnetic field. We show that depending on the magnetic coupling between electrodes, the OSD is in the on state either under forward bias (parallel orientation) or under reverse bias (antiparallel orientation). By employing the NEGF method combined with DFT, we demonstrate the rectification characteristics of the proposed OSD based on 2D half metallic Fe/MoS 2 and spin-gapless semiconducting VS 2 planar heterojunctions. We find that the VS 2 Fe/MoS 2 junction diode possesses linear I-V characteristics for forward bias voltages up to 180 mV and that a bias voltage-induced ferromagnetic to antiferromagnetic interelectrode coupling then takes place. Such a sign change in magnetic coupling with bias voltage allows the realization of devices with unique functionalities, which will be considered in a separate paper. Moreover, the VS 2 Fe/MoS 2 OSD has a much higher current-drive capability (I = 2350 μA/μm) and a very small threshold voltage of V T = 30 mV, which allows us to detect extremely weak signals; thus it might find potential applications in antenna-coupled diode solar cells. We expect that our results will pave the way for experimentalists to fabricate the OSD based on 2D materials.