The optical contrast in a phase change material is concomitant with its structural transition. We connect these two by first recognizing that Friedel oscillations couple electrons propagating in opposite directions and supply an additional Coulomb energy. As the crystal switches phase, this energy acquires time dependence and the Landau-Zener mechanism operates, steering population transfer from the valence to the conduction band and vice versa. Spectroscopy suggests that the oscillator energy E ! dominates the optical properties and a calculation involving the crystalline field and spin-orbit interaction yields good estimates for E ! of both structural phases. Further analysis relates the optical gap with the crystalline-field energy as well as activation energy for electrical conduction. This last property characterizes the amorphous phase, thereby furnishing a link between the crystalline field and the activation energy and ultimately with the resistance drift exponent. Providing optical means to quantify resistance drift in PCMs could circumvent the need for fabricating expensive devices and performing time consuming measurements. Crystals are remarkably robust and stable. By contrast crucial properties of materials in their amorphous phase undergo change. For instance, phase-change materials (PCMs) suffer resistance drift by which their resistance grows temporally, in some cases, doubling in hours. [1, 2] At constant temperature, the PCM resistance exhibits a temporal behavior typified by R(t ! ) being resistance at time t0 and ν # the drift exponent. Resistance drift is hardly trivial since it undermines the stability of stored data in PCMs, challenging their potential for multibit data storage applications. Resistance drift is known to exist in spin glasses, disordered superconductors, granular materials, colloids and similar systems and even, analogically, plant roots. We focus on PCMs GeTe, Sb2Te3 and Bi2Te3 whose ground state configurations are Ge: [Ar] 3d 10 4s 2 4p 2 ; Te: [Kr] 4d 10 5s 2 5p 4 , Sb: [Kr] 4d 10 5s 2 5p 3 ; Bi: [Xe] 4f 14 5d 10 6s 2 6p 3 . Their valence bands (vb) are dominantly Te 5p 4 orbitals and their conduction bands (cb) primarily Ge 4p 2 , Sb 5p 3 and Bi 6p 3 orbitals. Following studies of polymer films, there is consensus that amorphous materials, including PCMs, relax toward an energetically favorable ideal glass state, proceeding through transitions across more stable intermediate states. In this paper, we consider first the formation of the energy dispersion close to the Fermi point. Then we show how this picture changes when parameters of the original system undergo adiabatic change because of amorphization. We take the view that amorphization is a process in time by which a PCM crystal takes up its amorphous phase (or vice versa). Although this process necessarily involves structural changes, our treatment focusses on the optical contrast problem and its link to resistance drift. After linking with the dielectric function, we establish a connection with the optical band gap and finally with resistance drift. Friedel oscillations: Defects play a crucial role in PCMs. To describe this quantitatively, we assume low electron density, each crystal lattice site being occupied by n = n ↑ + n ↓ ≪ 1 electrons (↑, ↓ indicating spin). An itinerant electron contributes an amount δn ≪ n to the lattice-site charge. In the narrow-energy-band picture, the Coulomb energy originating from a pair of electrons of opposite spins, occupying the same site, contributes Unδn, U= Hubbard energy. Uρ + and the perturbation matrix Hence a gap opens at E(Q/2). At equilibrium, Q = 2k * , and the gap is at EF. It arises from electron-electron interaction and is not an artifact of the Peierls distortion. Landau-Zener crossover: Consider next amorphous PCMs which undergo temporal change. This property can be accommodated within the above considerations by allowing some parameters of the system to undergo adiabatic change over time as the material transitions from its crystalline phase to the amorphous. By adiabatic we mean it is slow change of a material relative to other atomic transitions. It is at the periphery between statics and dynamics. Anderson had advocated the concept of negative-'U' (negative Hubbard) energy by which two electrons situated at the same center attract in spite of their Coulomb repulsion. where energy is referred to EF, α ≪ 1 is the Hubbard-energy rate of change and γ = ħcq. Note that while the material is crystalline, as in the case of Eq. ( ). The LZ probability can be derived without solving Schrodinger's equation by using Dykhne's formula. . To return to PCMs, first regard the energies (3) as corresponding to the top (bottom) of the vb (cb) in the crystalline phase, the quantity cq>0 parametrizing the energies (Figure We extract experimental input from the dielectric function ε(ω). It is related to the zeroth and second order Feynman diagrams (Figure This relates with the Wemple-DiDomenico (WDD) parametrization, ε(ω) = ε & + iε ' = 1 + 7 ' 7 ( 7 ( " .(ħ9) " .(ħ9ħ0 , E ! being the oscillator energy; E ; , the dispersion energy and ħγ, the damping energy (which we included by hand). Compared with its crystalline counterpart, the amorphous absorption ε ' is blue shifted, diminished and broadened (Figures Next consider the formula above for Ed. The overlap eIdx Model for the oscillator energy: Our model for E ! was described elsewhere but we summarize it for completeness. For the vb (cb) the crystal field E D* takes negative (positive) values (assumed constant). Results for the crystalline phase are displayed in Figure Solution E2 is close by as Fig. Resistance Drift: Finally, we connect the optical gap with resistance drift. A defect D may be occupied by two electrons. It is usually neutral (D 0 ) when singly occupied; charged +e (D + ) when unoccupied; and charged -e when doubly occupied (D -). Under charge neutrality, the Fermi energy is midway between the singly and doubly occupied states. For U < 0, the D 0 state is energetically higher than both D + and D -states so equilibrium favors equal concentrations of D +(-) with almost none of D 0 . As defect occupancy n grows (0 ≤ n ≤ 2), the Fermi energy E * departs little from its position: it is pinned. Pinning is encapsulated in the solution derived by Adler and Yoffa: During the review process we have become aware of other recent publications that link resistance drift as having electronic rather than structural origin through lone pairs. ħ. / A * & 4 a & 4 (2E LM + ζ +