As superconducting quantum circuits scale to larger sizes, the problem of frequency crowding proves a formidable task. Here we present a solution for this problem in fixed-frequency qubit architectures. By systematically adjusting qubit frequencies post-fabrication, we show a nearly ten-fold improvement in the precision of setting qubit frequencies. To assess scalability, we identify the types of 'frequency collisions' that will impair a transmon qubit and cross-resonance gate architecture. Using statistical modeling, we compute the probability of evading all such conditions, as a function of qubit frequency precision. We find that without post-fabrication tuning, the probability of finding a workable lattice quickly approaches 0. However with the demonstrated precisions it is possible to find collision-free lattices with favorable yield. These techniques and models are currently employed in available quantum systems and will be indispensable as systems continue to scale to larger sizes. Realizing robust large-scale quantum information processors is one of the foremost challenges in quantum science. Many practical applications have been proposed for robust quantum computers, including estimating the ground state energy of chemical compounds and implementing machine learning algorithms Maintaining high gate fidelities for all pairs in a lattice will require solving this 'frequency crowding' problem by precise setting of qubit frequencies to specified values, as characterized by a standard deviation σ f . To achieve low σ f , the tunnel-junction conductance must be controlled with high precision. Transmon frequency f 01 follows hf 01 √ 8E J E C -E C , where Josephson energy E J = Ic 2e is many times greater than charging energy 2C Careful design of lattices can enable error correction codes while at the same time minimizing the likelihood of 'frequency collisions' and therefore the required σ f for fabrication yield In this paper, we introduce an adaptive post-fabrication trimming technique that we use to incrementally adjust R n on a qubit-by-qubit basis, thereby overcoming inherent variability in both initial qubit fabrication and the laser anneal. For the first time, an improvement in qubit frequency precision is demonstrated in terms of narrowed frequency distributions. Crucially, we demonstrate qubit frequency imprecision σ f of the same magnitude as the imprecision of predicting f 01 from R n . To estimate the scalability of this technique for the fabrication of error-corrected lattices, we employ a statistical yield model based on σ f relative to specific collision bounds. This model predicts the severity of the frequency crowding problem for different topologies and scales of error corrected multi-qubit lattices as a function of code distance. The model demonstrates that using conventional transmon fabrication, scaled-up qubit lattices will fail to evade 'frequency collisions'. However, our novel trimming technique achieves adequate σ f for scalable fabrication of distance-3 through distance-7 heavy-square and heavyhexagon codes. In particular, this technique enables the high yield fabrication of the distance-3 and distance-5 heavy-hexagon lattices currently deployed as IBM cloud connected systems To assess the σ f resulting from qubit fabrication, we developed a test vehicle containing a large number of identically-fabricated qubits (fig. In fig. For a population of transmon qubits whose frequency scatter is dominated by scatter in R n , we expect the fractional standard deviation in R n to be twice that of σ f . This is consistent with the standard deviation in junction resistances which is found to be σ R of 365 Ω, or 4.6% of the median R n . We also assess the fidelity of the frequencies to the f -vs-R n correlation in terms of the residual scatter after subtracting the fit line from the frequency values. This appears in the inset in fig. To reduce σ f , we developed a technique for selective laser anneal to shift tunnel resistance R n by pre-calibrated increments. (See section IV and fig. Our post-fabrication trimming reduced σ f by 9.5× compared to initial fabrication. To assess whether this level of precision is sufficient to reliably prepare lattices of fixed-frequency transmons capable of error-correcting codes, we must quantify the frequency-crowding problem. Transmon qubits are weakly anharmonic and have decreasing transition energies at higher levels. A useful lattice of qubits should enable high quantum volume and fault-tolerant operation while avoiding all of the 'frequency collisions' and forbidden regions presented in table Recent literature describes hybrids of the surface code with Bacon-Shor type codes, which can be employed in 'heavy hexagon' and 'heavy square' lattices to achieve fault-tolerance, albeit with lower error thresholds than the surface code In the square lattice, every qubit in the bulk of the lattice lies on a degree-four vertex, while some at edges have degree two or degree three. If we populate the Type Definition Participants Bounds 1 square lattice with 5 distinct frequencies of qubits, In contrast to the square lattice, the 'heavy square' lattice includes both degree-two and degree-four vertices in the bulk. Degree-one, -two or -three vertices appear at the edges. We take advantage of this pattern to make all the degree-two vertices control qubits, using a three-frequency pattern f 3 > f 2 > f 1 . Since every control qubit (frequency f 3 ) is linked to at most two target qubits, we need only two properly-chosen target-qubit frequencies (f 1 and f 2 ) to satisfy conditions 5, 6 and 7 of table I, as shown in fig. We use a Monte Carlo model to quantify the frequencycrowding in each lattice type. We sample the qubits at random frequencies drawn from normal distributions characterized by σ f , and count the collisions defined in table I. (See section IV.) In fig. The yield and mean collision number are a function of the several different collision types and bounds, so they are not readily susceptible to an analytic formulation. However, we can propose a simplified model for yield: in order for a lattice to be collision-free, every qubit in the lattice must fall within some frequency 'window' ±∆f relative to its setpoint. Presuming the qubit frequencies are normally distributed, the probablity of this occurring goes as the cumulative distribution function, raised to the power N , where N is the number of qubits: In the yield plot in fig. These model results allow us to predict how different lattice types and frequency patterns will respond to fabrication imprecision. As shown in fig. The as-fabricated σ f seen in fig. As seen from the Monte Carlo analysis, the laser-anneal rework method can scale to the > 100 qubit size, enabling a well-chosen lattice and frequency pattern to implement d = 7 error-correction codes free of frequency-crowding. To examine needs for the next generation of chips up to the 1000-qubit level, we can coarsely estimate requirements by extrapolating the fixed window model for the N , where N is the number of qubits and ±∆f defines an allowable 'window' around frequency set-points. (See table II.) Using this expression, two solid red lines predict yield for the heavyhexagon lattice type at 300 and 1000 qubits, using ∆f = 27.99 and 26.32 MHz, respectively. See fig. heavy-hexagon lattice as shown in fig. A chip of the kind used to determine σ f and to test our laser-anneal rework process appears in fig. We have built an integrated junction rework system that can measure and modify the junction resistance. Fig. used to control the anneal duration, and beam alignment is performed using a mechanical mirror mount which directs the beam via pattern recognition to the transmon junction center. The beam is shaped as needed to avoid illuminating the junction directly By careful control of laser power and pulse duration, we use this system to adjust R n . This process overcomes the imprecision due to transmon fabrication, with a residual imprecision σ f due to the rework process. To develop the process, we prepared a set of more than 150 junctions identically to qubit junctions, and measured their response to a range of laser powers and exposure times. We recorded R n shifts up to 15% relative to initial R n , for anneal durations varying by an order of magnitude and laser powers varying by 20%. Response to laser power in particular was highly nonlinear. Based on these empirical calibrations of R n shift to power and exposure, we established a qubit tuning process: We first measure the transmon junction's R n using four-point probing of the transmon capacitor pads at 25 • C. Using a f (R n ) prediction based on a previously determined correlation curve (fig. Using a Monte Carlo model, we can estimate the incidence of 'frequency collisions' in a lattice as a function of σ f . We assume that imperfect frequency-setting will distribute qubit frequencies normally around their design frequencies with standard deviation σ f . For lattices of the type shown in fig. Therefore, degeneracies among the |0 → |1 , |1 → |2 and |0 → |2 transitions of nearby qubits can all contribute to 'frequency collisions.' We must consider the relative frequencies of both nearest-neighbors and next-nearest-neighbors in the lattice most likely types of 'frequency collision'. For bus-coupled transmon qubits employing cross-resonance gates and having anharmonicity ∼ -330 MHz. Relative qubit positions illustrated in inset of fig.