Recent miniaturization of electronics in very small, low-cost and low-power configurations suitable for use in spacecraft have inspired innovative small-scale satellite concepts, such as ChipSats, centimeter-scale satellites with a mass of a few grams. These extremely small spacecraft have the potential to usher in a new age of space science accessibility. Due to their low ballistic coefficient, ChipSats can potentially be used in a swarm constellation for extended surveys of planetary atmospheres, providing large amounts of data with high reliability and redundancy. We present a preliminary feasibility analysis of a ChipSat planetary atmospheric entry mission with the purpose of searching for traces of microscopic lifeforms in the atmosphere of Venus. Indeed, the lower cloud layer of the Venusian atmosphere could be a good target for searching for microbial lifeforms, due to the favourable atmospheric conditions and the presence of micron-sized sulfuric acid aerosols. A numerical model simulating the planetary entry of a spacecraft of specified geometry, applicable to any atmosphere for which sufficient atmospheric data are available, is implemented and verified. The results are used to create a high-level design of a ChipSat mission cruising in the Venusian atmosphere at altitudes favorable for the existence of life. The paper discusses the ChipSat mission concept and considerations about the spacecraft preliminary design at system level, including the selection of a potential payload. This paper proposes the use of the ChipSat technology for extended surveys of planetary atmospheres. ChipSats are centimeter-scale satellites with a mass of a few grams that, thanks to their low cost and low time for development (from years to months), reduce the entry barriers for spacecraft development, making space exploration affordable for education institutions and for a large range of space amateurs. The current state of the art for ChipSats is well represented by the "Sprites" spacecraft, the smallest space probes built on a single circuit board. More than a hundred Sprite 3.5-by-3.5 centimeter ChipSats, developed by Zack Manchester (Stanford University) in collaboration with the NASA Ames Research Center Therefore, ChipSats are proposed for a mission to perform in-situ investigation of Venus' atmosphere. The interest in such a challenging missions derives from the results of several astrobiology studies suggesting the potential presence of microbial life in the Venusian atmosphere. It is well known that the atmospheric conditions on Venus surface are very harsh. The temperature values are around 460 °C and the atmospheric pressure is 92 times the Earth's surface pressure. Nevertheless, according to a recent study published in the journal Astrobiology in 2018 by Limaye et al. This paper assesses the feasibility of a mission to investigate the Venusian atmosphere using ChipSats, by developing an Atmospheric Entry Model (AEM) able to compute and simulate the planetary entry conditions of a spacecraft of specified geometry in the atmosphere of any planet for which sufficient atmospheric data are available. After validating the model, the results of the simulation of a ChipSat re-entry in Venus' atmosphere are used to estimate the useful time such a small spacecraft could have to perform its scientific analysis at a selected range of altitudes, where recent astrobiology studies assess it is more likely to find microbial life. Section 2 presents an overview of the developed AEM, describing the models used for the computation of the planetary atmospheric parameters and the aerodynamic coefficients, as well as the mathematical models implemented for the spacecraft translational dynamics. Section 3 deals with the verification of the results obtained from the AEM for an Earth atmospheric entry, considering both a traditional-sized spacecraft and a ChipSat spacecraft configuration. Section 4 presents and discusses the results concerning a Venus atmospheric entry of a ChipSat in face-on configuration, obtained using the AEM. Furthermore, a parametric analysis is presented to maximize the useful time of a ChipSat entry in Venus' atmosphere. In Section 5, the mission concept proposed to perform in-situ investigation of the lower cloud layer of Venus' atmosphere is described at high level, together with a discussion of the potential design of the spacecraft. The Atmospheric Entry Model is a numerical model used to simulate the planetary entry conditions of a spacecraft of specified geometry in the atmosphere of any planet for which sufficient atmospheric data are available. The AEM computes all the main characteristic parameters (including the altitude-dependent profiles of velocity, flight path angle, and acceleration load) of an atmospheric entry mission, according to the manual input selected by the user. In order to perform the planetary atmospheric entry simulation, the AEM uses Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs) for the spacecraft translational dynamics, which are integrated using the MATLAB ODE solver ode15s. The mathematical model is described in Section 2.3. The manual inputs required for running a simulation are listed below: -Planet: according to the planet selected, the AEM reads a specific datasheet containing the atmospheric data for the planet's atmosphere. More details about the atmospheric models implemented in the AEM are presented in Section 2.1. -Spacecraft Configuration: the AEM has a set of predefined spacecraft configurations, including regular Apollo-style and micro-scale spacecraft (ChipSats). The versatility of the model enables the user to add a new configuration if needed. -Angle of Attack (α): the AEM takes into account a constant attitude angle which has to be specified by the user. -Altitude Range: the range of altitudes at which the AEM solves the ODEs to perform the simulation. It is important to mention that the AEM has the following intrinsic limitations: -It does not include an aerothermodynamics model. Nevertheless, results available in literature are used to complement the translational dynamics simulations presented in this paper. -The rotational motion is neglected. -A model for the lift coefficient is implemented for the free molecular flow regime only. Nevertheless, the simulations presented regard spacecraft configurations for which the lift is negligible. The Atmospheric Entry Model is able to use different atmospheric models, according to the planet selected by the user. Currently, it includes the U.S. Standard Atmosphere 1976 model for Earth, presented in The U.S. Standard Atmosphere 1976 is an idealized, steady-state representation from the Earth's surface up to 1000 km, assuming a moderate solar activity. The AEM uses this model to calculate the density and temperature profiles varying with the altitude. The Venus International Reference Atmosphere (VIRA) model was developed from data observed by Magellan and other Venus orbiters and entry probes. The model includes the density and temperature profile up to 150 km. In particular, the deep and medium atmosphere data (up to 33 km and 100 km respectively) are extracted from Furthermore, in order to define the flow regime experienced by the spacecraft during entry, the main free molecular path reported respectively in U.S. Standard Atmosphere 1976 and VIRA models are used to compute the Knudsen number profile for Earth and Venus. The Knudsen number is defined as Kn = λ/L, where λ is the mean free molecular path, and L is the characteristic length of the spacecraft. Table Free Molecular Flow Figure The mathematical models for the drag and the lift coefficients are chosen with the main purpose of this work in mind, which is to simulate a planetary atmospheric entry for a ChipSat. In a simplified manner, this very small spacecraft can be thought of as a flat plate with side-lengths and a thickness, respectively, on the order of centimeters and milli-to micrometers. The aerodynamic coefficients strongly depend on the flow regime the spacecraft experiences during the entry, determined by the Knudsen number, as mentioned in Section 2.1. This is a fundamental aspect to be considered when simulating the flight of such a small spacecraft. The models for both C D and C L in free molecular flow are given by Storch is the normal component of the thermal velocity (T is the local atmospheric temperature, Γ is the local specific gas constant), whilst η n and η t are dimensionless coefficients modelling the molecular accommodation in the plate's normal and tangential directions. In the continuum flow regime the AEM considers a constant C D = 1.28, which is an empirical result obtained for flat plates in subsonic regime, reported by In the transitional flow regime, the C D is computed by interpolating between the value used for continuum flow and the value calculated at an altitude corresponding to Kn = 10. The latter being considered the boundary value between free molecular flow and transitional flow regimes. Figure The mathematical model for the translational dynamics consists of two Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs), which describe the spacecraft motion along the two directions tangential and normal to the curving trajectory in the point P, as represented in Figure The two equations, which are reported by Monti and Zuppardi -The spacecraft velocity V(t). -The flight path angle γ(t) (angle between the direction tangential to the trajectory and the local horizontal direction). The two ODEs are reported below, respectively for the tangential (2.3.a) and the normal (2.3.b) directions: Once defined A c , M, W, and R as the spacecraft cross sectional area, mass, weight and position vector, the forces acting on the body are described in Table Moreover, as described in Section 2.2, it is possible to express the drag coefficient C D and the lift coefficient C L as a function of V and α, using different models according to the flow regime the spacecraft experiences during the entry. According to the planet selected by the user, the AEM reads the atmospheric datasheet coming from one of the models described in Section 2.1, to obtain the density and the temperature profiles ρ = ρ(h) and T = T(h), and the Knudsen number profile Kn = Kn(h) (to determine the actual flow regime). Then, assuming a constant angle of attack α defined by the user, the AEM is able to solve the ODEs and obtain the spacecraft's entry trajectory parameters. The translational dynamics model of the Atmospheric Entry Model presented in Section 2.3 is verified considering the case of an Earth atmospheric entry performed with two different spacecraft configurations: -A traditional-sized spacecraft, the Atmospheric Reentry Demonstrator (ARD) vehicle. The data used as a benchmark for the verification are reported by Monti and Zuppardi The Atmospheric Reentry Demonstrator (ARD) vehicle is characterized by a 2,800 kg mass and a main section with a 2.8 m diameter. The initial values used for the simulation are the same as those reported by The verification presented in this section considers constant values for the drag coefficient and the lift coefficient, to match the assumptions made by Figure -The black-solid curve represents the benchmark for the verification. The data are reported in -The yellow-dashed curve represents the results obtained using the AEM for the face-on configuration (α = 90°), using the assumptions in Table It is evident from the plots reported below that for each parameter evaluated, the AEM results match perfectly those of The test case for this verification is an Earth atmospheric entry mission performed by a generic ChipSat spacecraft, thought as a silicon flat plate, whose structural specifications are listed in Table Material Density 2330kg/m 3 The initial values used for the simulation are the ones reported by Figure The AEM's trajectory implies that the ChipSat would dive into the atmosphere slightly faster than the benchmark case. These small differences in the results were expected since the drag coefficient model used in the AEM are slightly different from those reported by Entry in the Venusian Atmosphere The objective is to demonstrate the ability of the developed tool to compute the fundamental parameters of the spacecraft trajectory for a Venus atmospheric entry and to provide results supporting the parametric analysis performed in Section 4.2. The specifications of the ChipSat selected for the Venus atmospheric entry mission are listed in Section 3.2, Table The altitude time history in Figure This result is reflected in the velocity trend in Figure The velocity trend is due to much higher values of the drag coefficient at higher altitudes, implying lower values of the ballistic coefficient in the upper layers of Venus' atmosphere, as shown in Figure Figure Moreover, Figure Finally, Figure The innovative nature of this study implies that little benchmark results exist in literature. Therefore, the reliability of the results discussed in this section can be justified only from a qualitative perspective, by comparing the trends of the parameters profiles for a Venus atmospheric entry, with the corresponding profiles for an Earth atmospheric entry performed with the same ChipSat, which have been presented in Section 3.2. The main difference is that the entry duration is much longer for a mission on Venus, and this is probably due to the different atmospheric conditions at low altitudes. Indeed, the surface density and pressure values on Venus are respectively about 53 times and 92 times the Earth's surface density and pressure values. A recent study published in the journal Astrobiology by Limaye et al. In order to assess the feasibility of a Venus atmospheric entry mission performed with a ChipSat, aiming at providing in-situ scientific studies to search for life in the Venusian atmosphere, a parametric analysis has been performed using the AEM. Based on this recent astrobiology study and on the potential presence of "unknown ultraviolet absorbers" at the same altitudes already proposed by Grinspoon et al. The parametric analysis investigates the optimal thickness of the ChipSat for the proposed mission objectives. This dimension affects the mission profile strongly, especially the useful time the ChipSat would spend at the selected altitude range (47 -51 km), to provide data for the scientific studies. The ChipSat configuration chosen for the simulations is the same used for the analyses presented in Sections 3.2 and 4.1 (see Table Another important aspect to be evaluated to assess the feasibility of such a mission is the total heat load the ChipSat experiences during entry. The AEM does not include yet a validated aerothermodynamics model, nevertheless Atchison, Manchester and Peck Furthermore, the simulation is performed considering a face-on configuration(α = 90°). A randomly tumbling shaped object would probably experiences a faster descent, due to lower values of the drag coefficient and higher values of the ballistic coefficient in continuum regime. This might motivate the development of an attitude control system or aerodynamic shapes for such a small spacecraft to improve their performance. Finally, it is important to mention that the AEM does not include a model for the hyper-velocity winds that speed up in Venus' atmosphere faster than the rotation of the planet itself. There is no evidence of how the winds could affect a ChipSat entry, but from a purely theoretical perspective, they could have a beneficial effect for an edge-on configuration (if we do not consider tumbling), making the ChipSat float in Venus' clouds longer than expected, further increasing the useful time for scientific studies. On the other hand, the winds could reduce the entry duration for a face-on configuration. The mission concept proposed to perform in-situ investigation of the lower cloud layer of Venus' atmosphere is described at high level in this section, together with a discussion on the potential design of the spacecraft. The proposed idea for the mission concept consists in launching a swarm of ChipSats on-board a mother-spacecraft that would transport them towards Venus, and then deploy them in the planet's atmosphere, similarly to the deployment of the Sprites ChipSats by the Kicksat-2 CubeSat carrier. The mother-spacecraft would be injected into an elliptical orbit around Venus with a periapsis between 250 and 150 km, similar to the orbit that two past missions followed for their coasts to Venus, such as the NASA Pioneer Venus Orbiter and the ESA Venus Express. Thus, in proximity of periapsis the mother-spacecraft would deploy the ChipSats. The small satellites would then descend towards Venus' surface, spending around 97 minutes of useful time at the selected altitudes (47-51 km) to perform their scientific measurements and send back data to the mother-spacecraft, before diving into the lower layers of Venus' atmosphere. Based on the results discussed in Section 4, the target ChipSat for the mission has the following specifications, listed in Table Material Density 2330kg/m 3 The ChipSat structure would be based on a Printed Circuit Board (PCB), which provide structural integrity and include circuits transmitting signals/current, and Surface Mounted Devices (SMD), components soldered on it. Both these technologies can be downscaled to a 1 cm size ChipSat One of the biggest challenge of designing a ChipSat mission is performing communications with these small satellites. Indeed, without the ability to accommodate a high-gain antenna, the data rate from is substantially lower than larger spacecraft with more power availability and directed, high-gain antennas In the context of the mission concept proposed, the communications subsystem shall allow the ChipSat to send back data to the mother-spacecraft while the scientific measurements at the selected altitude range are performed. The initial baseline for the communications subsystem would be the 25 mW ISM-band radio and embedded PCB antenna, used on-board the Monarch ChipSats. According to Although Landis and Haag Compared to Li-ion batteries, supercapacitors are characterized by a higher specific power (~10 5 W kg ⁄ versus ~10 3 W kg ⁄ ), and a lower specific energy (~10 -2 Wh kg ⁄ versus ~10 Wh kg ⁄ ) The miniature graphene-based supercapacitors described by Djuric et al. No active thermal protection system is needed to withstand the thermal loads the ChipSat experiences during entry. As per To gain insights into the potential existence of lifeforms in Venus' clouds, several different instruments could be used. For in-situ atmospheric measurements, -Compact Raman Lidar to measure organic/inorganic composition, described in -Fluorescence Lidar to measure organic/biomolecular fluorescence. -Life detection microscope, described in A miniaturized version of these instruments, so that they could be integrated together in a micro-scale spacecraft such as the ChipSat proposed, is not currently available. An alternative approach is provided by the Miniaturized Multi-Spectral Instrument, proposed by the NASA Langley Research Center team in collaboration with the University of Hawaii for the characterization of planetary surfaces and atmospheres Finally, the integration of miniaturized versions of cameras (Visible, IR, UV) and magnetometers could lead to unexpected discoveries by providing additional data, such as images of the interior of Venus' atmosphere, as well as measurements that could help to understand better the induced magnetosphere of the planet. An Atmospheric Entry Model (AEM) has been developed. It is able to compute the planetary entry conditions of a spacecraft of specified geometry in the atmosphere of any planet for which sufficient atmospheric data are available. An overview of the mathematical models implemented in the AEM are described in detail in this paper. The model's results have been verified for spacecraft translational dynamics in the case of an atmospheric entry at Earth, considering both a traditional-sized spacecraft and a ChipSat spacecraft configuration. Relying on the positive outcome of the results verification, a simulation for a ChipSat entry in Venus' atmosphere has been performed. The reliability of the results is stressed by the similarity between the trends of the parameters profiles for a Venus atmospheric entry, with the corresponding profiles for an Earth atmospheric entry performed with the same ChipSat. Furthermore, following the selection of the 47 -51 km altitude range for Venus' atmosphere parametric analysis has been performed using the AEM. The results highlight that a thinner ChipSat would have a significantly longer useful time. Indeed, considering a ChipSat with a 25μm thickness and a 1cm sidelength, the useful time for the scientific investigation would be 97 minutes. No thermal analysis has been performed, but results in literature suggest that a ChipSat with similar characteristics would survive a descent into the atmosphere of Venus with only minor heat shielding. Moreover, a mission concept to perform in-situ investigation of the lower cloud layer of Venus' atmosphere has been proposed, and preliminary design considerations regarding the structures, communications, and power have been discussed. Different kinds of payload have been explored for integration on the ChipSat: -The Miniaturized Multi-Spectral Instrument proposed by Finally, some recommendations for future potential developments are discussed below: a. Consideration of the rotational motion of the ChipSat during entry through an additional ODE. b. Implementation in the Atmospheric Entry Model of a proper aerothermodynamics model to compute the thermal loads the ChipSat experiences during entry. c. Implementation of a proper model for the highspeed winds of Venus' atmosphere.