Classical dynamical density functional theory (DDFT) is one of the cornerstones of modern statistical mechanics. It is an extension of the highly successful method of classical density functional theory (DFT) to nonequilibrium systems. Originally developed for the treatment of simple and complex fluids, DDFT is now applied in fields as diverse as hydrodynamics, materials science, chemistry, biology, and plasma physics. In this review, we give a broad overview over classical DDFT. We explain its theoretical foundations and the ways in which it can be derived. The relations between the different forms of deterministic and stochastic DDFT as well as between DDFT and related theories, such as quantum-mechanical time-dependent DFT, mode coupling theory, and phase field crystal models, are clarified. Moreover, we discuss the wide spectrum of extensions of DDFT, which covers methods with additional order parameters (like extended DDFT), exact approaches (like power functional theory), and systems with more complex dynamics (like active matter). Finally, the large variety of applications, ranging from fluid mechanics and polymer physics to solidification, pattern formation, biophysics, and electrochemistry, is presented. Variational methods have been used in statistical physics for a long time and with tremendous success. Density functional theory (DFT) for quantum systems Unlike its static counterpart DFT, DDFT (as presented in Ref. The early forms of DDFT were extended in a vast number of directions, making the theory applicable to systems with nonuniform temperature Our review has the form of a reference work, such that even if it is not read from the beginning to the end, all important information can be found quickly by consulting the section one is interested in. Thus, some references are discussed more than once (e.g., a DDFT for active particles with hydrodynamic interactions This review is structured as follows: In Section 2, we give a historical overview and a brief introduction to static DFT. We explain the standard forms of DDFT, including their derivation, in Section 3. Extensions of DDFT are presented in Section 4. In Section 5, formally exact approaches that generalize DDFT are discussed. We explain theories related to DDFT in Section 6. Analytical and numerical methods used to analyze a DDFT are the topic of Section 7. Applications are reviewed in Section 8. An outlook to possible future work is given in Section 9. We conclude in Section 10. In this section, we first give an overview over the historical development of DDFT in Section 2.1. Afterwards, we provide an introduction to static DFT in Section 2.2, which includes several concepts that are important also for the dynamical case, such as the free energy functional and the direct correlation function. In Section 2.3, we explain how DFT can be extended to dynamical situations. Pioneering work on the theory of Brownian motion (discovered by Brown Important foundational work on the statistical mechanics of classical systems, in particular the theory of ensembles, was done by Gibbs The results from Hohenberg and Kohn were applied to classical fluids by Ebner, Saam, and Stroud Dynamical theories in statistical mechanics that provide a connection between microscopic particle dynamics and macroscopic physics date back to the famous Boltzmann equation Early approaches to DDFT had in mind a variety of specific applications. They included solvation dynamics and dipolar molecules. A Smoluchowski-Vlasov equation for orientable particles was obtained by Calef and Wolynes Deterministic DDFT was first microscopically derived by Marini Bettolo Marconi and Tarazona Standard DDFT has since then been developed in various directions. An existence proof was given by Chan and Finken A closely related approach are phase field crystal models An overview over the historical development of DDFT is given in Fig. Classical static density functional theory (DFT) is a statistical-mechanical theory for the equilibrium state of a classical many-body system. We present it following Ref. where h is the Planck constant. Denoting the N -particle Hamiltonian by H N , the grand-canonical free energy functional is given by Ω(T, μ, [ Ψ]) = Tr( Ψ(H N -μN + k B T ln( Ψ))), with the thermodynamic beta β = 1/(k B T ) and the grand-canonical partition function the functional ( Since it is defined on a 6N -dimensional phase space, the function Ψ can be very complicated. DFT makes it possible to work with the one-body density instead, where • denotes an ensemble average and δ( r) is the Dirac delta distribution. The one-body density gives the probability of finding a particle at position r. We denote the one-body distribution at equilibrium by ρ eq ( r). Mermin F in (T, [ρ]) = Tr( Ψ eq This functional is minimal and equal to the equilibrium grand-canonical free energy if evaluated at the equilibrium density ρ eq . These considerations lead to the central variational principle of DFT δΩ(T, μ, [ρ]) δρ( r) Ω(T, μ, [ρ eq ]) then gives the actual grand-canonical free energy of the system For finding the equilibrium configuration, one needs to determine the functional Ω(T, μ, [ρ]), which in most cases cannot be done exactly. Through a Legendre transformation it can be related to a Helmholtz free energy functional F (T, ( We can split the free energy into three parts: The first term with the thermal de Broglie wavelength Λ, is the exact expression for the free energy of an ideal gas. An external potential U 1 ( r) is taken into account through the last term Finally, the term F exc (T, [ρ]), known as excess free energy, gives the contribution from the particle interactions. In general, it cannot be calculated exactly and needs to be approximated. Approximation methods (which are also required in DDFT) are discussed in Section 2.2.2. Note that many authors refer to the intrinsic free energy functional F in given by Eq. For practical applications of DFT, one requires an expression for the free energy A useful starting point are functional Taylor expansions of the free energy around a homogeneous reference density ρ 0 , which we present following Ref. with an irrelevant constant F exc (ρ 0 ), the n-th-order direct correlation function and the reduced density ∆ρ( r) = ρ( r)ρ 0 . Truncating the expansion or the virial expression Which approximation gives good results depends on the system under consideration. A very simple form of F exc that is particularly useful in the case of soft interactions and high densities is the mean-field approximation Since the second functional derivative of F exc gives the direct pair-correlation function, the mean-field approximation generates the random phase approximation For particles with hard-core interactions, such as hard spheres, fundamental measure theory (FMT), which has been introduced by Rosenfeld The starting point is the fact that the excess free energy for a dilute hard-sphere mixture (with N s species) can be written as with the weighted densities and the weight functions where Θ(•) denotes the Heaviside step function, R i is the radius of the spheres of the i-th species, and • is the Euclidean norm. The form with the function g fmt that has to recover the low-density limit. Various forms of g fmt are used in the literature. Rosenfeld Numerical aspects of this expression are discussed in Ref. An alternative proposed by Tarazona with the dyadic product ⊗ and the 3D identity matrix 1. From w i m2 one obtains a tensorial weighted density n m2 , which allows to rewrite the third term on the righthand side of Eq. ( where Tr denotes the trace of a matrix (and not the trace on phase space as in the rest of this article). Using the q 3 correction or the tensorial modification, a description of hard-sphere crystals in FMT is possible with the functionals When combined with a tensorial modification, White Bear mark II gives accurate results in the description of hard-sphere crystals Up to now, we have only considered equilibrium situations, in which the density ρ( r) is constant with respect to time and minimizes the grand-canonical free energy. In this case, the density distribution can be determined from the variational principle The central idea of DDFT is to extend this principle to nonequilibrium situations. If the equilibrium state is the one in which the free energy is minimized, the dynamic equation will have a form which ensures that the free energy decreases over time. This allows to relate the rate of change ∂ t ρ( r, t) of the particle number density to the variation of the free energy. Moreover, since ρ( r, t) is a conserved quantity, its time evolution will have the form of a continuity equation, i.e., ∂ t ρ( r, t) is proportional to the gradient of a flux. These considerations lead to the central equation of deterministic dynamical density functional theory with the mobility Γ. Note that the theory is formally based on the free energy F , in contrast to DFT which uses the grand-canonical free energy Ω. However, this makes no significant difference in most practical applications, and one typically uses free energy functionals from DFT, which are grand-canonical (see Section 4.9 for exceptions). If F denotes the intrinsic free energy (see Section 2.2 for a discussion of this convention), a term Γ ∇•(ρ ∇U 1 ) has to be added to the right-hand side of Eq. δρ( r, t) + ∇ • ( 2Γk B T ρ( r, t) η( r, t)), The dynamical principle of DDFT can be expressed in four ways: (1) As a (deterministic or stochastic) differential equation for the one-body density ρ( r, t) in the form (3) As a stochastic Fokker-Planck equation for the probability distribution P [ρ] (see Section 3.2.2). ( The formulation as a differential equation is by far the most common one, although others can have advantages in specific contexts (such as the dissipation functional for calculating entropy production Introductions to DDFT can be found in Refs. In the standard form of DDFT, the equation of motion takes the form The main difference of Eq. ( with the diffusion constant D = Γk B T , to which Eq. ( The deterministic form of DDFT was derived microscopically for colloidal fluids by Marini Bettolo Marconi and Tarazona Stochastic DDFT was developed by Kawasaki Kawasaki's DDFT, first derived in Ref. for the many-particle distribution function Ψ with the Smoluchowski operator with the total potential energy U N ({ r i }). The system is then coarse-grained by splitting it into cells of volume v ρ . To overcome the problem that the interaction U N depends on distances smaller than the coarse-graining size, one first makes v ρ infinitesimal, which allows to rewrite the interaction term in Eq. ( with the Fokker-Planck operator and the coarse-grained free energy Note that Eq. ( with the Gaussian noise η( r, t) satisfying Since Eq. ( A coarse-grained description can also be derived for an atomic fluid. Here, the microscopic description is given by the Liouville rather than by the Smoluchowski equation. As a starting point, the method of fluctuating hydrodynamics is used, which provides a coarse-grained Fokker-Planck equation for a functional P ([ρ, g], t) that also depends on the momentum density g( r, t). Using the projection operator method A closely related approach is the (generalized) stochastic Smoluchowski equation with the function g(ρ). This approach (which also exists in a deterministic form) is based on the idea of modeling the dynamics of the density using, instead of Γρ and D, the more general expressions Γg(ρ) and D g(ρ) with functions g(ρ) and g(ρ) that take into account microscopic constraints (the standard case is recovered by setting g(ρ) = ρ and g(ρ) = 1). For the same purpose, the standard Boltzmann entropy is replaced by a generalized entropy, which also leads to a modified free energy. A generalized Einstein relation, derived from the requirement that an equilibrium state of the generalized Smoluchowski equation is a thermodynamic equilibrium state as described by the generalized free energy, shows that the second derivative of the local density of the generalized entropy is proportional to the ratio g(ρ)/g(ρ). This allows to eliminate g(ρ) and to write the dynamics in the form Another form of stochastic DDFT was developed by Dean with the positions { r i } of the individual particles obeys the Langevin equation With the free energy Eq. ( making the relation to DDFT more obvious. (In Dean's original article For mathematical discussions of the well-posedness of stochastic differential equations of this type, see Refs. DDFT also plays an important role in the study of polymers. The theory was first presented by Fraaije Consider a mixture of N chains of length n c , which consist of N pt particle types indexed by an integer i. For each particle type, one introduces a density field ρ i ( r, t). The general evolution equation, obtained by Kawasaki and Sekimoto with the kinetic coefficient matrix M ij , the chemical potential and the noise η i (which we will drop from now on). The microscopic construction of polymer DDFT is discussed in Ref. with the diffusion constant D lo . Here, the close relation to the standard DDFT equation ( with the bead mobility parameter M b and the constant molecular volume ν m . More complex approaches are the Rouse dynamics with the diffusion constant D ro and the reptation dynamics for continuous chains parametrized by a real index s [265] with the diffusion constant D c . The two-body correlators are defined as where r s is the position of bead s and δ K ij is a Kronecker function that is 1 if bead j is of type i and 0 otherwise. (This means that δ K ij is not a standard Kronecker delta. For example, if we have two particle types which we call 1 and 2, δ K 11 would be zero if the first bead is not of type 1.) Note that in the literature, time-dependence is sometimes dropped, i.e., one writes, e.g., ∂ t ρ( r) instead of ∂ t ρ( r, t) even though ρ is time-dependent. The statistical theory is introduced following Ref. where the trace denotes an integral over R N nc . For an observed density ρ i ( r), the requirement ρ i ( r) = ρ i [ Ψ]( r) gives an equivalence class of microscopic distribution functions on which a free energy functional is defined. It is now assumed that (a) correlations between chains can be accounted for in the free energy by a mean-field approximation (while the chains are treated exactly) and that (b) the distribution function Ψ is chosen in such a way that the free energy is minimized. Ψ is thus independent of the history of the system and only constrained by the density. This allows to obtain a bijective relation between density fields and external potentials. Denoting the external potential for species i by U i ( r), the constrained minimization based on DFT gives the intrinsic free energy functional with the partition function of a single Gaussian chain Z gc and the nonideal free energy DDFT for polymer melts is reviewed in Refs. In this subsection, we discuss how DDFT can be derived from the microscopic particle dynamics or from phenomenological considerations. While we focus on the deterministic form of DDFT, we also include the result by Munakata A detailed conceptual understanding of the different types of derivations is of high importance especially for the development of further extensions of DDFT. These are often derived along the same lines as standard DDFT. For example, Rex and Löwen The fastest way of deriving the DDFT equation is to use phenomenological considerations. Among the first to derive DDFT was Munakata with the particle mass m, momentum density g, dissipative matrix M, and random force f. When one assumes that with a constant M 0 , Eq. ( An adiabatic approximation, here corresponding to the assumption that ρ is the only slow variable (such that g relaxes quickly and we can set ∂ t g = 0), gives from Eq. ( In this case, since we have started from the underdamped equations ( which can also be written as a Fokker-Planck equation (see Section 3.2.2). A different type of phenomenological derivation was presented by Evans with the current J, where the gradient of the chemical potential μ is used as the thermodynamic driving force. As long as μ is not specified, the form (68) does not exclude, e.g., advection by a flow field, since μ may contain a velocity potential (this possibility is discussed in Section 4.4.1). To obtain DDFT, we need to assume that the function μ is a chemical potential that is constructed on the basis of equilibrium theory. In static DFT, μ is given by Together with the continuity equation for conserved ρ we obtain the DDFT equation This is a nonlinear diffusion equation that reduces to the ordinary diffusion equation ( The original microscopic derivation of the deterministic DDFT for colloidal fluids by Marini Bettolo Marconi and Tarazona where r i (t) is the position of the i-th particle at time t, U 2 the pair-interaction potential, U 1 an external potential, and χ i (t) a noise term with the properties After some manipulation using stochastic calculus, one finds the dynamic equation with the microscopic density ρ given by Eq. ( In the case of interacting particles, this is not a closed equation due to the presence of the two-point correlation function ρ( r, t)ρ( r , t) . A dynamic equation for this quantity would depend on the three-point correlation function. An infinite hierarchy of correlation functions can be avoided by using approximations. It is at this point that we make the central adiabatic approximation, which is used here to close the governing equation ( with the two-point density-density correlation (two-particle density) ρ (2) ( r, r ), the direct pair-correlation function c (2) ( r, r ), and the equilibrium excess free energy functional F exc with the free energy (10). An alternative way for the derivation of DDFT is to start from a Smoluchowski equation, as done by Archer and Evans The one-particle number density ρ( r, t) is introduced as We integrate in Eq. ( where, in contrast to Eq. ( where ρ (3) is the three-particle density, and c (1) to the excess free energy F exc as Making the approximation that these relations also hold out of equilibrium, which corresponds to replacing the nonequilibrium correlations in Eq. ( A third option for the derivation of DDFT is to use the Mori-Zwanzig projection operator formalism. This is a very general method for deriving theories for mean values and fluctuations of an arbitrary set of κ observables {A i ( z)} ("relevant variables") that depend on the phase-space coordinates z. (The formalism is also applicable to quantum systems, but we only require the classical case here.) The key idea is to project the complete microscopic dynamics of a system onto a subset of relevant variables {A i ( z)}. From the statistical point of view, this corresponds to replacing the microscopic probability density Ψ by a relevant probability density ρ. The projection operator method exists in two forms. In the microcanonical framework or nonlinear Langevin theory where the relevant density has the grand-canonical form with the normalization time-dependent N -particle Hamiltonian H N (t), and thermodynamic conjugates {a i (t)} (the superscript denotes a thermodynamic conjugation), which ensure that the macroequivalence condition a i (t) = Tr(ρ(t)A i ) is satisfied, where a i (t) is the mean value of the variable A i . Defining the coarse-grained free energy as allows to express the thermodynamic conjugates as If the relevant variable A i is a field (as in DDFT), the partial derivative in Eq. ( with an overdot denoting a derivative with respect to time, the organized drift the (classical) retardation matrix the orthogonal dynamics propagator the mean random force the imaginary unit i, the Schrödinger picture Liouvillian L Sp (t), and the right-timeordered exponential exp R (•). Although it is less well known, a difference between Heisenberg picture and Schrödinger picture also exists for classical systems. A corresponding discussion can be found in Refs. where δ Ψ(t) = Ψ(t)ρ(t) From now on, we also assume time-independent Hamiltonians (see Refs. with the diffusion tensor This general theory allows to derive DDFT if the relevant variable is the one-particle density (The fact that ρ( r, t) is a field merely requires us to replace the sums in Eqs. ( We here present the derivation by Español and Löwen with the thermodynamic conjugate ρ . The partition function allows to introduce the grand-canonical potential Based on the density functional Ω, introduced through the Legendre transformation we can express the thermodynamic conjugate as The organized drift v i (t) in Eq. ( with the particle velocities { v i } as where : is the double tensor contraction and D( r, r , t) is the tensor Using Eqs. ( To obtain the standard local equation where the diffusion constant D can be expressed in terms of the velocity autocorrelation function by the usual Green-Kubo expression. Inserting Eq. ( For higher colloidal densities, more sophisticated approximations for the diffusion tensor can be developed that include hydrodynamic interactions. This includes, as discussed by Español and Löwen Although DDFT is, in general, a very successful theory, it has certain limitations. These result from the approximations and assumptions involved in its derivation. Some of them can be avoided by using extensions of DDFT, which will be discussed in Section 4. We mostly confine ourselves to deterministic DDFT in this section, since stochastic DDFT is exact for Brownian particles if it is formulated as a theory for the density operator In general, DDFT calculations involve three approximations Approximation (i) arises from the problem that DDFT is a dynamical theory that has the form of a continuity equation which conserves the total number of particles. Hence, the canonical free energy functional F should be used. However, this is not known, such that DDFT uses the grand-canonical functionals from DFT instead. This can lead to wrong predictions for systems that only have a few particles or large density gradients Approximation (ii) arises from the fact that DDFT is a closed equation of motion for the one-body density. In the microscopic derivation of DDFT (see Section 3.3.2), one arrives at Eq. ( The fact that in simple forms of DDFT the density is the only variable has a number of consequences. A rather obvious one is that properties of the system that are not captured by the density profile alone, such as temperature gradients, cannot be described. A less obvious consequence, discussed in Section 4, is that by only using the density as a relevant variable, one effectively assumes that the other variables characterizing the system relax very quickly compared to the density, which is a strong approximation A related point is the fact that DDFT, being a dynamical theory for the one-body density only, cannot distinguish between two states that have the same one-body density but different pair-correlations. In equilibrium DFT, the one-body density gives, as discussed in Section 2.2, all relevant information about the system. For a system initially out of equilibrium, however, this is not the case due to an additional dependence on the initial condition Approximation (iii) is also related to the glass transition, since approximations for the free energy can lead to the existence of local minima The success of DDFT results, of course, also from the fact that it has proven to be reliable. Usually, DDFT is tested by comparing its predictions to simulations of the underlying (Brownian) dynamics for which it is an approximation. In Brownian dynamics (BD) simulations, the microscopic equations of motion for the individual particles are solved numerically. This allows to check whether the DDFT results for the same system are correct. The outcomes of BD simulations can also be used to analyze where shortcomings of DDFT, if existing, come from, e.g., whether they arise from a bad choice of the free energy functional or from a breakdown of the adiabatic approximation Comparisons between DDFT and BD simulations are made frequently. Examples of studies combining DDFT and microscopic simulations consider active particles Moreover, DDFT can be tested by comparing its predictions to experiments. This was done for, e.g., active particles A third option for testing DDFT is to compare it to exact results Terminological difficulties can arise since the name "DDFT" is not always used with the same meaning in the literature, and since DDFT also has other names. Very often, "DDFT" is used to refer to the theory derived by Marini Bettolo Marconi and Tarazona On the other hand, various names are used for DDFT in the literature. The most common ones are "dynamical density functional theory", "dynamic density functional theory", and "time-dependent density functional theory". Note that the name "timedependent density functional theory" is not only used for the classical DDFT, but also for the quantum-mechanical method An occasional source of confusion and controversy is the question whether DDFT should contain a noise term, i.e., whether Eq. There is, however, a second aspect that has to be taken into account: The exact description always gives a convex thermodynamic potential, such that through the dynamics the free energy approaches its unique (local and global) minimum. In practice, one will use approximate free energy functionals, which might have more than one local minimum. In this case, it is possible that through the time evolution the system gets trapped in a metastable state corresponding to a local minimum, such that phenomenological noise terms have to be added to push the system out of the metastable states towards its true equilibrium One can, however, also define ρ( r, t) as a spatially or temporally coarse-grained density (on the right in Fig. A further possibility for averaging in addition to noise, space, and time is an average over initial conditions. This possibility is discussed in Refs. Finally, a DDFT can be formulated as a theory for the density operator ρ( r, t) given by Eq. ( A detailed discussion of the relation between deterministic and stochastic DDFT was given by Archer and Rauscher Another way to understand the differences between deterministic and stochastic DDFT is to compare their microscopic foundations in the projection operator formalism (see Section 5.3.1). This method allows for a systematic derivation of field theories, such as DDFT, by projecting the microscopic dynamics onto the subdynamics of relevant variables. For the projection operator method, two forms can be distinguished, called "microcanonical" and "canonical" form On the other hand, in a canonical theory, such as the "Robertson projection operator method" Similar considerations as for DDFT apply to phase field crystal models In the context of versions and applications of DDFT, it is important to pay attention to the difference between "atomic/molecular" and "colloidal" fluids. A (one-component) atomic/molecular fluid (henceforth called a "simple" fluid) consists of a large number of identical particles (atoms or molecules) that interact through a certain two-body interaction potential. These interactions are governed by the deterministic laws of Newtonian mechanics. Coarse graining the microscopic description of fluids leads to the well-known equations of hydrodynamics. A colloidal fluid, on the other hand, consists of small "solvent particles" in which much larger "colloidal particles" are immersed. The exact microscopic description of colloidal fluids is challenging because, due to the huge difference in mass and size between the two particle types, very different time scales have to be considered. Typically, one models only the colloidal particles and describes their interaction using an effective theory. The solvent particles enter the dynamics through the noise term and the friction force. This gives a description in terms of Langevin equations or, equivalently, a Smoluchowski equation. Since not all microscopic degrees of freedom are considered on the colloid level of description, these equations are stochastic. The Smoluchowski equation can be derived by coarse graining from the exact microscopic Liouville equation that describes both solvent and colloidal particles The original microscopic derivations of deterministic DDFT, based on Langevin equations A further interesting topic is the dynamics of the solvent itself. Often, it is assumed that the solvent relaxes very rapidly compared to the colloids. On the other hand, nonequilibrium effects arise if the relaxation time scales are comparable, in particular if confinement prohibits easy relaxation of the solvent Among the central topics of nonequilibrium statistical mechanics is the question how and why systems approach a state of thermodynamic equilibrium In deterministic DDFT, one can prove that the free energy is monotonously decreasing. This was done for the standard DDFT It can be shown from microscopic calculations that the mobility Γ is positive, which completes the proof of this "H-theorem" of DDFT The precise speed of this relaxation is slightly overestimated due to the approximations made in the derivation of deterministic DDFT Having discussed how systems approach equilibrium in DDFT, we can also address why this is the case. A derivation of irreversible macrodynamics from reversible microdynamics requires a coarse-graining procedure In this section, we discuss extensions of standard DDFT. By an "extension of standard DDFT", we denote any form of DDFT that allows to model aspects not covered by the theories presented in Section 3 (deterministic and stochastic DDFT for simple and colloidal fluids and polymer DDFT). Such extensions exist in a large variety of forms. An overview is given in Table Finally, one can use an extended set of order parameters rather than just the density field ρ( r, t). Some examples which we present in Section 5 are extended dynamical density functional theory (EDDFT) involving also the energy or entropy density, functional thermodynamics (FTD) involving also the energy density, and PFT involving also density currents or velocity gradients. Such extensions have two advantages. The first and obvious one is that by considering an additional field (e.g., the energy density) one has more detailed information about the system. A second and less obvious point is the range of applicability of the resulting theories. As an example, we take a derivation in the projection operator formalism (see Section 3.3.4): For a given set of relevant variables, one first rewrites the microscopic equations in an exact form, which is possible regardless of how they are chosen. In the second step, which is crucial for the dynamic equations to be useful, one makes a Markovian approximation corresponding to the assumption that the relevant variables are slow compared to the degrees of freedom that are projected out. If we now compare a DDFT with and without energy density as a relevant variable, the second one requires for a Markovian approximation that all irrelevant variables -including the energy density -relax quickly on relevant time scales, which for the energy means that the conjugate variable, which is the temperature, has equilibrated. In summary: A DDFT in which the number density is the only variable effectively needs to assume that the temperature is constant, while a DDFT with energy density does not. A slightly different form of this extension is to extend the configuration space on which the density is defined, such as by using a density ( r, u, t) rather than ρ( r, t) to incorporate orientational degrees of freedom u (see Section 4.6.1) or by including a momentum-dependence (see Section 4.7.3). Many extensions combine a variety of these aspects. In the following, we present a variety of extensions in (very roughly) increasing order of complexity. A simple modification of the standard DDFT equation ( Other or more general microscopic dynamics: • Nonspherical particles ( ( r, u, t)) While in standard DDFT, the diffusion coefficient D is assumed to be a constant (and used as an input parameter), extended approaches allow it to vary. The most important case is the one of hydrodynamic interactions presented in Section 4.2. More generally, derivations in the projection operator formalism (see Sections 3.3.4 and 5.3.1) give precise microscopic expressions for the diffusion coefficient that can, in certain cases, be approximated by a constant. Liu Hydrodynamic interactions are the most important reason for modifying the diffusion coefficient. A DDFT with hydrodynamics is a theory in which the mobility includes hydrodynamic interactions between the particles. In this case, solvent-mediated interactions lead to additional terms in the DDFT current. This results in a configurationdependent diffusion tensor. Royall et al. with the single-particle diffusion constant D. The tensors ω 11 (self term) and ω 12 (distinct hydrodynamic tensor) are given by with the self-mobility functions A s and B s and the cross-mobility functions A c and B c . On the Rotne-Prager level of approximation where R is the radius of the particles (which are assumed to be spherical). If the hydrodynamic radius of the particles differs from the interaction radius, one has to use the hydrodynamic radius (see Ref. which, in addition to the standard current of DDFT (first term on the right-hand side), also involves a current from the reflection of solvent flow by the thermodynamic force at position r (second term on the right-hand side) and from the solvent flow induced by the thermodynamic force at position r (last term). The equation can be closed by using an Ornstein-Zernike relation for the two-particle density ρ (2) ( r, r , t) In this way, hydrodynamic interactions with walls can be described Regarding applications, the original hydrodynamic DDFTs were used to study sedimentation A further possibility for modifying the standard DDFT equation ( In general, it cannot be assumed that the solvent in which the colloids are immersed is at rest. Thus, a natural generalization of DDFT is to allow for solvent flow with a velocity v( r, t). An additional modification of DDFT is the incorporation of shear flow, which will be discussed separately (see Section 4.4.2). Early models studied effects, such as colloids being dragged through a polymer solution, by shifts to a frame that is co-moving with a velocity v cm with r = r . Only for r → ∞, Eq. ( For these Langevin equations, one can obtain a corresponding Fokker-Planck equation from which the evolution of the averaged density ρ is computed. If we have a potential flow, which is always the case when detailed balance holds, we can write and define a modified external potential U ( r) = U 1 ( r) + U vel ( r) with the velocity potential U vel . This allows to approximate the interaction term in the usual way. The resulting advected DDFT reads As can be seen, this corresponds to a standard DDFT equation with U 1 replaced by U . In Ref. Investigating the properties of sheared simple and complex fluids is a central topic in soft matter physics. Therefore, effects of shear were considered already at early stages in the development of DDFT. The shear viscosity was calculated based on shear-induced deviations from the equilibrium profile As discussed in Ref. such that Eq. ( A solution to this problem has been suggested by Brader and Krüger where K s ( rr ) is the flow kernel accounting for the effects of shear flow. While this is a phenomenological correction, systematic derivations are possible in certain cases An application of DDFT with shear-flow corrections is the study of the influence of time-dependent shear on sedimentation DDFT has, very frequently, been applied to systems consisting of different particle types. The general idea, already employed by Munakata Here, Γ i is the mobility of particle type i. Equation ( Moreover, DDFT for binary mixtures has been applied to model anisotropic pair correlations A more general case is a multicomponent suspension, as discussed by Wittkowski et al. An application of DDFT for mixtures is the description of cell membranes Up to now, we have focused on passive spherical particles that (in the overdamped case) are fully described by their center-of-mass positions. However, real particles often have additional (e.g., orientational) degrees of freedom, which can be incorporated in extensions of DDFT. Orientation can be taken into account by using an extended configuration space, i.e., using a density ( r, u, t) that also depends on the orientation u, or by additional order parameter fields such as a polarization field. Sources of orientational degrees of freedom are geometrical anisotropy (Section 4.6.1), magnetic moments (Section 4.6.2), and self-propulsion (Section 4.6.3). The standard DDFT formalism describes the dynamics of particles with (effective) spherical symmetry, since it is assumed in the microscopic derivations that the state of a Brownian particle is (in the overdamped limit) characterized by its position. However, standard DDFT can also be extended to nonspherical particles. For this purpose, we additionally need to specify the orientation of a particle. If the particle has an axis of continuous rotational symmetry ("uniaxial particle"), this can be done by a vector u which points in the direction of this axis, or, for a spherical active particle, in the direction of self-propulsion. The orientation vector u is parametrized by one angle φ in 2D and by two angles φ and θ in 3D Orientational degrees of freedom were considered already at early stages of the development of DDFT. A Smoluchowski equation for orientational dynamics was obtained by Calef and Wolynes for the one-body density that measures the probability of finding a particle with position r and orientation u at time t was used. Here, D and D R are the translational and rotational diffusion coefficients of a free particle, respectively, and ∇ u denotes the rotation operator. We here adapt the notation of Refs. From a microscopic point of view, uniaxial particles were considered by Rex et al. Compared to Eq. ( with parallel and perpendicular translational diffusion coefficients D and D ⊥ , respectively, and identity matrix 1, and we have added a term for the rotation with the coefficient of rotational diffusion D R . The generalized force balance of thermodynamic equilibrium used analogously in the standard derivations is now supplemented by a generalized torque balance Making an adiabatic approximation in the usual way, this gives the DDFT for uniaxial particles where the free energy F still has the form (10) (the ideal contribution is now that of an ideal rotor gas). For a further analysis of the field ( r, u, t), it is typically helpful to perform an expansion of the orientational dependence in symmetric traceless tensors. The general expansion for a function f ( u) in 3D reads with the coefficients the normalization A (3D) l = (2l + 1)/(4π), the integration over the unit sphere S2 dΩ, and the tensor polynomials where ∂ i denotes the spatial derivative with respect to the i-th element of r. Note that different expansions have to be used in 2D or for asymmetric particles whose onebody distribution depends on three angles. (A detailed overview over various types of orientational expansions is given in Ref. with where P ( r, t) is the local polarization and Q( r, t) the local nematic tensor. By inserting this expansion into Eq. ( The DDFT for nonspherical particles can be generalized further in two ways. First, we have assumed that the particles have an axis of continuous rotational symmetry. This includes apolar and polar particles, which both can be described using an orientation vector u (apolarity is reflected by a symmetry ( u) = (-u) Bier and van Roij The application of FMT (see Section 2.2.2) to hard spherocylinders in DDFT is discussed in Refs. DDFTs for nonspherical particles can also be used to obtain PFC equations that include orientational dynamics In order to describe continuum systems with magnetic order, DDFT has also been extended to systems of particles with a (classical) spin σ s . These theories have been used to study phase separation in fluids containing magnetic particles where the sign of the coupling J determines whether ferromagnetic or antiferromagnetic ordering is preferred. The stochastic dynamics of magnetic dipoles is considered in Ref. DDFT can also be applied to study systems of active particles. Field theories for active matter can, in general, be classified into dry models, which model active particles without explicitly considering the solvent, and wet models, where hydrodynamics is also considered. General reviews on active matter can be found in Refs. We start by discussing the DDFT for active particles with general shape by Wittkowski and Löwen with the angular gradient operator for particles with arbitrary shape and the derivative operators ∂ φ = ∂/∂φ, ∂ θ = ∂/∂θ, and ∂ ς = ∂/∂ς. In the Smoluchowski equation, we have used a very general diffusion matrix with elements , and D RR i ( i ) that involves couplings between translation and rotation, in addition to the purely translational and rotational diffusion, but no hydrodynamic interactions. The precise form of the elements depends on the particle shape. (Various shapes are discussed in Ref. where we have omitted the index 1 for the quantities r, , D TT ( ), D TR ( ), D RT ( ), D RR ( ), F A , and T A . (In principle, the elements D TT ( ), D TR ( ), D RT ( ), and D RR ( ) of the short-time diffusion tensor could also be space-dependent with the shear viscosity η s , pressure p( r, t), and force density f i ( r i , u i , t) exerted by the i-th swimmer. Since the swimmers influence the fluid flow by the force they apply, but at the same time are dragged along by the fluid, they self-propel and interact hydrodynamically. The derivation of the DDFT then proceeds in a similar way as in the treatment of nonspherical particles discussed in Section 4.6.1, since the one-body density for active particles also needs to take into account the orientation. With the translational velocity v i and angular velocity ω i of the i-th particle resulting from the flow field, the continuity equation for the N -body density Ψ({ r k }, { u k }, t) is given by The hydrodynamics is contained in the expressions for the velocities v i and ω i , which can be expressed in terms of the hydrodynamic force and torque, respectively. By integrating over the coordinates of N -1 particles and applying the usual adiabatic approximation, one can then derive a DDFT for the microswimmer system. (The exact equations are rather lengthy and can be found in Ref. Another DDFT for active particles was obtained, based on effective free energies for active steady states rather than passive free energies, by Enculescu and Stark with the translational diffusion coefficient D. Note that this type of active DDFT differs in an interesting way from the type for which Eq. ( Pototsky and Stark A further microscopic degree of freedom is the momentum, which is of importance if the particles are not overdamped. Just like the description of particles with orientational degrees of freedom requires a density ( r, u, t) rather than ρ( r, t) in the microscopic description, momentum degrees of freedom require an extension to a phase-space distribution function Ψ( r, v, t) depending on the velocity v of the particles. Moreover, as in the case of orientation, an expansion of this extended density is possible that leads to an infinite hierarchy of order parameter fields. At lowest orders, this gives rise to the one-body density ρ( r, t) and the momentum density g( r, t). The effects of inertia in the DDFT of (one-dimensional) colloidal fluids were studied by Marini Bettolo Marconi and Tarazona where C is a collision operator depending on the two-body distribution Ψ 2 that can be approximated by the assumption of molecular chaos. The dynamic equation is then rewritten in terms of nondimensionalized parameters. This allows for a time-scale separation in terms of a dimensionless parameter γ nd (proportional to γ) measuring the relaxation (see also Section 7.2.2). At lowest nontrivial order, one recovers the usual overdamped DDFT. These results were generalized to arbitrarily many dimensions in Ref. A DDFT for atomic fluids, where, unlike in colloidal fluids, inertia always plays a role, has been derived by Archer with the term where m is the mass of the particles, r i is the position of the i-th particle, and α i (t) is the deviation of ( ̇ r i (t) • k) 2 /k 2 with the wavevector k from its equilibrium mean value. Equation ( DDFTs with inertia can also be shown to possess a H-theorem An important extension of DDFT are more general theories that describe not only the density ρ( r, t), but also the momentum density g( r, t). These theories typically relate ρ( r, t) to the flux of g( r, t) by the continuity equation Furthermore, they give a separate equation governing the momentum density, which has the form of a (generalization of the) Navier-Stokes equation with a dissipative contribution D. These theories then contain standard DDFT as a limiting case and can thus be seen as generalizations of DDFT towards hydrodynamics. (Historically, however, they also formed a basis for the derivation of overdamped DDFT Frequently, such theories are derived from kinetic theories that model the phasespace distribution Ψ( r, v, t) rather than just the one-particle density ρ( r, t) One can further generalize DDFT with momentum density, e.g., by using additional order parameter fields. Dynamic equations that include, in addition to mass and momentum density, also the energy density, are derived in Refs. Archer For the description of inertia and momentum transport, it is important to include not only the positions, but also the momenta or velocities of the particles in a dynamical theory. Hence, a natural extension of DDFT is to consider the phase-space distribution Ψ( r, v, t) rather than the spatial distribution ρ( r, t). A first theory of this type, which is only applicable to dilute gases, has already been developed by Boltzmann Starting from a phase-space theory, it is possible to derive DDFT as an overdamped limit, based on the assumption that the velocity very quickly reaches its steady state While standard DDFT assumes the system to have a fixed temperature, extensions to nonisothermal systems have also been derived. This topic has a clear connection to the case of momentum discussed in Section 4.7, since a natural dynamical variable for nonisothermal systems is the energy density. In many hydrodynamic theories, it is used as an order parameter field in addition to mass and momentum density, which allows to describe nonisothermal systems. The reason why the energy density is important is that energy -like mass and momentum -is a conserved quantity, such that the energy density can often be assumed to be a slow variable. As can be shown using projection operator methods Treatments of nonisothermal systems can either consider externally fixed temperature gradients (this is the simpler case) or couple DDFT to an additional dynamic equation for the local temperature. López and Marini Bettolo Marconi with D(x) = k B T (x)/γ. The derivation is sketched in Section 7.2.2. This result is also given by Marini Bettolo Marconi et al. A description in terms of a single order parameter field (such as the one-body density in DDFT) implies that all other degrees of freedom (such as the local temperature) relax very quickly. Hence, in order to extend DDFT to nonisothermal systems, one requires an additional order parameter field. Natural candidates are the local energy density The entropy density was considered by Schmidt with the equilibrium number density ρ eq ( r), equilibrium entropy density s eq ( r), chemical potential μ, and temperature T . Assuming the Gibbs-Duhem relation (solved for ds) to be valid, one can calculate the rate of change of the entropy as where e is the energy density. One then identifies temperature T and chemical potential μ as the driving forces for changes of energy density e and number density ρ, respectively. Inserting these driving forces into a general continuity equation and expressing temperature and chemical potential as functional derivatives of E with respect to entropy and number density, respectively, then gives a dynamic equation for the entropy density. A similar approach is used by Wittkowski et al. The projection operator formalism allows to obtain the transport equations for these variables in terms of their thermodynamic conjugates. Since the entropy is a nonconserved variable, its dynamics can be expressed in the general form with the entropy current J s ( r, t) and the entropy production where r( r, t) is the dissipation function (see Section 6.2). Note that all these approaches are based on the local validity of the laws of thermodynamics, which do not hold for systems far from equilibrium. Finally, Hütter and Brader We now turn to a different type of extension, which does not aim to incorporate additional order parameter fields. Instead, it corrects an inaccuracy arising from one of the approximations involved in DDFT (see Section 3.4.1): Although the canonical and the grand-canonical ensemble are equivalent in the thermodynamic limit, inaccuracies can arise when treating systems with a finite -and, in particular, small -fixed number of particles in the grand-canonical ensemble To overcome problems of the grand-canonical ensemble, the method of particleconserving dynamics (PCD) Moreover, the grand-canonical density ρ μ ( r) corresponding to the chemical potential μ is related to the canonical density ρ N ( r) for a system with N particles by where is the probability of finding N particles for a given chemical potential μ. Starting from these relations and the grand-canonical Euler-Lagrange equation, an iterative scheme can be developed that gives the external potential U pcd ( r) creating a density ρ( r) in canonical equilibrium. This leads to the canonical intrinsic free energy The dynamic equation of the canonical density ρ N is given by where f N is the internal force density arising from interactions, which in DDFT is approximated by the adiabatic force f ad N , and X is a nonconservative force acting on the particles. Obtaining the dynamics within the DDFT approximation then requires to find an expression for f ad N . Various options are discussed in Ref. with the one-body density ρ ad N ( r, t) = ρ N ( r, t) of the adiabatic reference system and the canonical excess free energy F exc N . Extensions of PCD have also been derived. In Ref. Extensions have also been developed for the polymer DDFT discussed in Section 3.2.3. We present these extensions here in a separate section, since, historically, this form of DDFT has had a separate development. A useful approximation is provided by the method of "external potential dynamics" (EPD), which was introduced by Maurits and Fraaije This allows to write The relation gives by applying the chain rule Combining Eqs. ( such that the nonlocal equation ( An extension towards compressible copolymer melts was developed in Ref. where the velocity field v can be approximated using Darcy's law. Moreover, polymer DDFT was extended to include viscoelastic effects in Ref. As discussed in Section 5.4.1, density functional methods can also be applied to quantum systems in the form of TDDFT. This is an area on its own, which is beyond the scope of this review. Nevertheless, there are certain theories that relate quantum and classical DDFT methods. Examples of such methods are presented here. A further method of this type is quantum PFT, which is presented in Section 5.2.4. One way to obtain a relation between classical and quantum many-particle systems is the use of Wigner functions with the reduced Planck constant , replaces the classical distribution function. Similar transformations exist for orientational degrees of freedom For the description of mixed quantum-classical dynamics, one performs the transformation This method can be used to obtain a mixed quantum-classical (T)DDFT that includes the momentum density (and the polarization field, if orientational relaxation is of interest) as dynamical variables Moreover, classical DDFT has been applied to quantum hydrodynamics Although DDFT is a highly successful theory, it is nevertheless only approximately valid. Various limitations are presented in Section 3.4.1. Often, these arise from the adiabatic approximation (see Section 3.3), which is a central step in the derivation of DDFT. As discussed Section 4, one can derive extended forms of DDFT to obtain a larger domain of applicability. For going beyond standard DDFT, it is often helpful to use formalisms that provide an exact description of the underlying many-body dynamics. While the resulting equations of motion can typically not be solved exactly, they are important for at least two reasons: First, studying how DDFT can be obtained from them as a limiting case gives conceptual insights into the approximations involved in the derivation of DDFT and the corresponding limitations. Second, the exact equations of motion can serve as a starting point for the development of new approximate transport equations that improve on the limitations of DDFT. An overview over the literature on this topic is given in Table Forces that are not incorporated in deterministic DDFT are known as superadiabatic forces. (Stochastic DDFT is not necessarily based on the same type of approximation as deterministic DDFT and can therefore include, e.g., memory effects not present in the deterministic formalism. An obvious example is Dean's DDFT, which is formally exact and therefore contains all superadiabatic forces.) The importance of superadiabatic forces was discussed by Fortini et al. A particularly important superadiabatic effect is memory. While it is typically not present on the level of single-particle dynamics (Langevin or Hamiltonian equations), reduced descriptions generally lead to a history dependence. This can be shown using the projection operator formalism Superadiabatic effects are also relevant for the calculation of correlation functions, as discussed in Ref. The second one is the projection operator formalism (Section 5.3), developed by Nakajima A third approach starts from the Runge-Gross theorem (Section 5.4). This result, derived by Runge and Gross Power functional theory (PFT) is an important exact generalization of DDFT. Unlike standard DDFT, it is based on the one-body current J( r, t). A power functional that depends on both ρ( r, t) and J( r, t) is introduced. The equations of motion are then obtained by a variation of the power functional. We start by outlining the derivation of the standard form of PFT following Ref. with the friction constant γ, the single-particle velocities { v L i } that depend on the particle positions { r i } and time t, the forces { F i }, and the noises { χ i } described by Eqs. ( with the current of particle i where we have identified the total force F tot i = F ik B T ∇ ri ln( Ψ) on and the deterministic velocity v i = γ -1 F tot i of the i-th particle. The deterministic velocity v i is equivalent to the stochastic velocity v L i appearing in the Langevin equation ( We now have the necessary ingredients to set up PFT. The starting point is the generating functional with the time derivative of the external potential U1 = ∂U 1 /∂t and the trial velocity functions { ̃ v i }. (We follow the convention of Ref. performed at fixed Ψ and t. Based on the generating functional (176), the free power functional is defined as which denotes a minimization with respect to the trial velocities { ̃ v i } with the constraint that a certain one-body density and current are realized (Levy method After removing the dependence on the distribution function Ψ by using the many-body continuity equation The power functional depends on density and current and also on the system's history, i.e., it contains memory effects. In the variation, ρ( r, t ) for t ≤ t and J( r, t ) for t < t are held constant. By separating external contributions from the complete functional, one can obtain the intrinsic free power where X( r, t) contains all nonconservative forces. The intrinsic free power is further split up as with the power dissipation functional P t describing irreversible loss of energy and a term for reversible contributions. The power dissipation can, moreover, be split into two contributions as with the ideal gas contribution and the excess dissipation P exc t [ρ, J] resulting from particle interactions. If evaluated at the DDFT current J = -Γρ ∇δF/δρ, Eq. ( If one sets the excess dissipation to zero, one recovers DDFT as a special case. Theories that include nonadiabatic contributions can be obtained by including effects of particle interactions on the power dissipation. In practice, the application of PFT requires an approximation for P exc t In Ref. with the fourth-rank tensor M 4 the velocity gradients are contracted with. With an additional Markovian approximation and the assumption of spatial locality, this allows to find, for the superadiabatic forces, the form familiar from the Stokes equation in hydrodynamics. PFT has been generalized towards mixtures A PFT for ABPs, which also takes orientational degrees of freedom into account, was derived by Krinninger and Schmidt Compared to Eq. ( contains two currents J and J ω for translational and rotational motion, respectively. Then, the variational equation The phase diagram of active particles is moreover calculated using PFT in Refs. Inertia can also be incorporated in PFT with the force F i exerted on particle i, the phase-space distribution function Ψ, the many-body density ρ given by Eq. ( Assuming physical values of ρ and J, the functional is minimized by the true value of ̇ J, i.e., As in usual PFT, the functional G t can be split into an ideal, external, and excess part. Contributions that go beyond the Brownian case are contained in a "superpower functional". PFT has also been extended to quantum systems Projection operator methods are another central tool in the context of DDFT. These allow, in general, to derive coarse-grained equations of motion As discussed in Section 3.3.4, projection operators can be used to derive DDFT by projecting onto the one-body density as a relevant variable By choosing additional relevant variables, extensions of DDFT to further order parameter fields can be (and have been) derived (right of Fig. In addition, projection operator methods allow for important conceptual insights into DDFT. For example, they allow to connect deterministic and stochastic forms of DDFT, thereby clarifying the origin and necessity of noise terms As discussed in Section 5.3.1, the Mori-Zwanzig projection operator formalism allows to derive equations of motion for arbitrary dynamical variables, which for slow variables can, in most cases, be approximated by memoryless dissipative transport equations. Since standard DDFT can be derived by projecting the microscopic dynamics onto the number density as a relevant variable (see Section 3.3.4), an extended dynamical density functional theory (EDDFT) can be derived by projecting onto a larger number of variables. The projection operator method allows, for a set of relevant variables with mean values {a i ( r, t)}, to introduce a free energy F [{a i }] such that the dynamics is governed by the thermodynamic conjugates δF/δa i ( r, t). This allows to derive the general transport equations Wittkowski et al. For a general set of κ conserved relevant variables {A i ( r, t)} that are fields on spacetime, the extended DDFT equations for the corresponding mean values {a i ( r, t)} read with the microscopic current ˆ J i for the relevant variable A i defined by the relation where in classical mechanics the Liouvillian L is defined with the Poisson bracket {•, •}, and the diffusion tensor where ρ(t) is the relevant probability density, Q = 1 -P is the complementary projection operator (see Section 3.3.4), and Ĵi,j = ( ˆ J i ) j . For real-valued relevant variables with definite time-reversal signature, Onsager's principle demands that D A notable aspect of the general EDDFT equation A notable feature of the EDDFT approach is that it, being based on the projection operator formalism, also provides dynamic equations for the correlation functions. For this reason, it is a natural framework for analyzing the relation of DDFT to MCT (see Ref. Functional thermodynamics (FTD), derived by Anero et al. Besides its importance in classical statistical physics, DFT is also an important tool of many-body quantum mechanics. Quantum DFT also has a dynamical extension, which in contrast to its classical counterpart is usually referred to as "time-dependent density functional theory" (TDDFT). (In this review, we use "DDFT" to refer to the classical and "TDDFT" to refer to the quantum-mechanical method. Note that "TDDFT" is sometimes also used in the literature to refer to classical DDFT.) Reviews of TDDFT can be found in Refs. We follow Refs. for a system of N electrons with mass m e and charge Q e . Here, = h/(2π) is the reduced Planck constant and 0 is the vacuum permittivity. The ground state of the system is the state Ψ with the lowest energy E. In practice, Eq. ( instead of the full N -body wavefunction. Since n( r) is a function of 3 rather than 3N variables, this leads to a significant computational simplification. The reason why this is possible is that, as shown by Hohenberg and Kohn which is valid for any external potential. Here, • denotes a quantum-mechanical expectation value. Hohenberg and Kohn The minimization is over all nondegenerate densities that are v-representable, i.e., that are ground-state densities of an external potential A generalization was derived by Levy where the single-particle orbitals satisfy the Kohn-Sham equation with the single-particle energies {E i }. The potential u( r) is the potential which produces the ground-state density n gs ( r) in the noninteracting system and thus has a functional dependence on n. Once the potential u( r) is known, the ground-state energy E gs can be calculated immediately. To determine this potential, we write it as with the Hartree potential and the exchange correlation potential u xc ( r), which is not known exactly and has to be approximated. TDDFT extends quantum DFT by using a generalization of the Hohenberg-Kohn theorem which is known as the Runge-Gross theorem Again, the potential u( r, t) is decomposed in the form A TDDFT has been derived for classical systems by Chan and Finken In this section, we discuss the relation of DDFT to various other theories used in the theoretical description of soft matter systems. This is important for understanding the precise location of DDFT in the landscape of soft matter theory. On the one hand, the development of DDFT has historically been influenced by work on related methods, such as mode coupling theory (MCT) We start with a discussion of MCT (Section 6.1), which has been important at early stages of the historical development of DDFT and continues to be important for the study of the glass transition. Then, we continue with theories of the gradient dynamics type, beginning with a general discussion of nonequilibrium thermodynamics (Section 6.2), which has also (in particular in the form of the Cahn-Hilliard equation) influenced DDFT. We subsequently turn to two younger theories (Sections 6.3 and 6.4) that have been influenced by DDFT. Here, PFC models (Section 6.3), which also have a gradient dynamics form, are of particular interest. Afterwards, we discuss nonequilibrium self-consistent generalized Langevin equations (Section 6.4), which are based on nonequilibrium thermodynamics. Finally, we present dynamic mean-field theory (Section 6.5), which is a discrete model. The latter two approaches are not frequently discussed in the literature on DDFT, but are nevertheless of conceptual interest and therefore presented here for completeness. Mode coupling theory (MCT), reviewed in Refs. The object of interest in MCT is the normalized density correlator φ( k, t), which is defined as with the ensemble average • and the Fourier-transformed reduced density The correlation approximately follows the closed equation of motion with the friction coefficient ν, squared frequency Ω 2 ( k) = k B T k 2 /(mS( k)), and memory kernel where S( k) is the static structure factor and c( k) is the Fourier-transformed direct pair-correlation function. Note that the explicit form of the MCT equation can be different and depends on the system (e.g., on whether we consider simple or colloidal fluids) Using certain approximations, this result can be derived using the projection operator formalism (see Section 5.3.1). The derivation can be found in Ref. The success of MCT thus shows that, if the density is a slow variable, the same can be assumed about its products (which appear in the random force and therefore in the memory kernel). This suggests that, in a system with the density as a slow variable, a more general theory can be derived by projecting the microscopic dynamics of the system onto the set of all nonlinear functions of the density Physically, MCT has the interesting feature that it predicts a transition from an ergodic to a nonergodic state. This is related to its role as a theory of the glass transition: Glasses form when a liquid is cooled below its freezing temperature, but does not freeze into a crystal, which would be the thermodynamic equilibrium state ("equilibration"), but into some other state However, the actual physics of the glass transition is more complicated. Real materials are always subject to thermal fluctuations and these fluctuations have the consequence that there is no ideal ergodic-to-nonergodic transition. To overcome this problem, extensions of MCT have been developed (see Ref. A somewhat different view on the relation of DDFT and MCT can be found in the literature on deterministic DDFT, where DDFT and MCT are viewed as different limiting cases of a general exact description. For example, Wittkowski et al. While this is certainly a topic that deserves further investigation, it should be noted here that the views "stochastic DDFT allows to derive MCT" and "deterministic DDFT and MCT are complementary" do not necessarily have to be in conflict. To see this, consider the DDFT equation ( The problems regarding the relation to MCT discussed in the literature on deterministic DDFT do not necessarily apply to derivations from stochastic DDFT. As discussed by Wittkowski et al. One of the problems in combining DDFT and MCT, arising in the microscopic derivation via the projection operator formalism, is that DDFT neglects memory effects while MCT does not Regarding the PFT-based argument, it is important to note that not all forms of stochastic DDFT employ the adiabatic approximation of deterministic DDFT. Since, by the terminology of PFT, everything that is not included in the adiabatic dynamics of deterministic DDFT is a "superadiabatic force", it is thus possible that stochastic DDFT allows to model phenomena that would be classified as "superadiabatic" in PFT. Consequently, the positions of Kawasaki In addition, DDFT and MCT can be combined in the microscopic calculation of certain properties of complex fluids. This has been done, e.g., for ionic systems The aforementioned derivation of MCT from stochastic DDFT can be done in at least three ways. First, it was, with certain approximations, derived by Kawasaki One starts from the exact microscopic dynamics and then performs a temporal rather than a spatial coarse graining. The temporally coarse-grained density is where K t (t) is a normalized function that has finite width. After temporal coarse graining, one obtains an equation of the form where ρ k (t) is the Fourier transformation of ∆ρ( r, t), with the static structure factor S( k) = 1/(1ρ 0 c( k)), c( k) is the Fourier transformation of the direct correlation function, and This is compared to the general form (210) that can be obtained from the projection operator formalism. The memory kernel M( k, t) depends on the time correlation of the random force. Assuming that one can use R, given by Eq. ( which is the MCT expression (211) (although derived here for the correlator of the coarse-grained density). Another discussion of the relation between DDFT and MCT can be found in Ref. The general structure of DDFT is shared by a larger class of close-to-equilibrium dynamical theories known as "gradient dynamics". Here, the time evolution of (a set of) conserved or nonconserved variables is driven by a thermodynamic potential. A general form of gradient dynamics for a conserved variable a c is with the positive mobility function M g A very simple example is the Cahn-Hilliard equation describing the dynamics of a conserved order parameter field φ ch ( r, t), which is obtained from Eq. ( where κ ch > 0 is a constant. The free energy (217) consists of a term penalizing gradients and the free energy density f ch of a homogeneous solution, which is often approximated as a fourth-order polynomial Equation ( Within linear irreversible thermodynamics, equations of motion can be derived from a dissipation functional. This was discussed by Wittkowski et al. Here, the superscript , not to be confused with the related symbol introduced in Section 3.3.4, denotes a thermodynamic force, which has a different form for conserved and nonconserved variables. The equations of motion for the relevant variables are given by with the currents J i and quasi-currents Φ i that have a reversible and a dissipative contribution, denoted by subscripts R and D, respectively. From the dissipation functional giving the energy dissipated per unit time and defined by the integral over the dissipation function r( r, t), one can obtain the dissipative currents and quasi-currents as General expressions for the dissipation function are derived in Ref. which, together with Eqs. ( Phase field crystal (PFC) models are another example of theories with a gradient dynamics structure. They arise as a limiting case of DDFT upon assuming a constant mobility and making certain approximations for the free energy PFC models were first proposed phenomenologically Perturbative DDFT PFC models functional Taylor expansion gradient expansion The derivation of PFC models is visualized in Fig. ( This parametrization is inserted into the free energy (1) Assuming small deviations from the reference density, a functional Taylor expansion of F in ψ is performed. (2) A Ramakrishnan-Yussouff or random phase approximation is made for the free energy functional. (3) The functional is made local using a gradient expansion. The Taylor expansion of the ideal gas free energy gives (dropping irrelevant constants) where the expansion is performed up to fourth order to allow for the formation of stable crystals. The excess free energy has, after performing the Ramakrishnan-Yussouff approximation, the form of an integral over a convolution. To make this functional local, we assume translational and rotational invariance to write the direct pair-correlation function as and then, exploiting the symmetries, perform a Taylor expansion of the Fourier transformed direct pair-correlation function c( k) around the wavevector k = 0 in the form with expansion coefficients c 0 , c 2 , and c 4 . Again, we have stopped the expansion at fourth order. After an inverse Fourier transformation, the expansion in wavevectors k becomes an expansion in gradients. Omitting irrelevant constants, the excess free energy becomes where the expansion coefficients {A i } are moments of the direct pair-correlation function. Combining Eqs. ( with the rescaled expansion coefficients {A i }. Making the further approximation that the mobility is constant and equal to Dρ 0 gives the equation of motion for the PFC model. The approximations made in the derivation of PFC models from DDFT have some consequences for the structure and predictions of the models. These were discussed in detail by Archer et al. with the nonlocal operator L defined by Lψ( r, t) = -ψ( r, t)+ρ 0 d 3 r c (2) ( r, r )ψ( r , t), along with the assumption of constant mobility and an expansion of the logarithm in the ideal gas free energy, as the central approximation that sets the border between DDFT and PFC models. The reason is that, after making the substitution ρ = ρ 0 (1 + ψ), performing a functional Taylor expansion of the free energy, truncating at fourth order, and taking zero-wavelength components of third-and fourth-order correlation functions (following the derivation of PFC models by Huang et al. where C a , C b , and C c are constants. Dropping the term with some functional F [ψ]. Deriving an equation of the form (237) from DDFT requires the assumption of a constant mobility. However, this assumption is incompatible with an ideal gas free energy of the form instead of the usual diffusion equation In Refs. Finally, PFC models can also be developed for active particles. The first theory of this type, proposed by Menzel and Löwen with the self-propulsion velocity v 0 , polarization P ( r, t) arising from an orientational expansion (see Section 4.6.1), and rotational diffusion constant D R . Microscopically, the system of active particles is described by a DDFT for the orientation-dependent density ( r, u, t) (see Sections 4.6.1 and 4.6.3). The derivation of Eqs. ( The theory of nonequilibrium self-consistent generalized Langevin equations (NE-SCGLE), derived by Ramírez-González and Medina-Noyola for the local concentration ρ with the local reduced mobility b( r, t) describing local frictional effects. The standard DDFT equation ( for the covariance σ c ( r, r , t) with the thermodynamic matrix NE-SCGLE theory has also been extended to multicomponent systems A discrete theory that has a close relationship to DDFT is dynamic mean field theory (DMFT) or mean-field kinetic theory (not to be confused with the mean-field dynamical density functional theory with J ij being the net flux from site i to site j. In the mean-field approximation, the flux is given by with the transition probability w ij . Defining the (symmetric) mobility as with the chemical potential μ i corresponding to ρ i , the flux can be written as Inserting Eq. ( where we have assumed the lattice to have a center of symmetry. With the forwards/backwards-difference operators Z ±a , defined as Eq. ( which has the form of a DDFT equation (the free energy F is defined in discretized form). After having presented the construction of DDFT (Section 3), its extensions (Sections 4 and 5), and its relation to other theories (Section 6), we now proceed to the more practical problems of solving the dynamic equation(s) of DDFT. This will be (roughly) done in order of increasing generality: First, steady solutions are discussed in Section 7.1. Second, we introduce dynamics in Section 7.2 by explaining systematic perturbative expansions. Third, numerical methods are presented in Section 7.3, which allow to study the full dynamics of DDFT. In many cases, the simplest way to study a dynamic equation is to consider its steady (in the simplest case stationary) solutions. In the case of the deterministic DDFT equation where x0 is the (arbitrary) integration boundary, μ an integration constant related to this boundary, and J int an integration constant with the dimension of a current. For v = 0, J int has to vanish and Eq. ( 7.2. Perturbative approaches 7.2.1. Linearization 7.2.1.1. Linear stability analysis. A useful analytical method for the analysis of phase separation in DDFT is the linear stability analysis. Its application to spinodal decomposition in DDFT was first suggested by Evans where ρ 0 is the density of the homogeneous reference state and ∆ρ( r, t) is the deviation. If the homogeneous state is unstable, then a deviation will grow in time. This can be determined by inserting the parametrization (252) into Eq. ( where the direct pair-correlation function c (2) ( r, r ) takes the form c (2) ( rr ; ρ 0 ) = c (2) (r, ρ 0 ) for a homogeneous fluid of spherical particles. We introduce the Fourier transformed density deviation as with the wavevector k, where the notation ρ k (t) with k as a subscript (which we use only for the density) is adapted from the MCT literature. A Fourier transformation of Eq. ( with the wavenumber k = k and Fourier-transformed direct pair-correlation function . This is a linear differential equation for ρ k (t) that has the solution with the initial deviation ρ k (0) and the dispersion relation If λ(k) > 0 for some value of k, the corresponding Fourier component will grow exponentially in time, such that the homogeneous state is unstable. For λ(k) < 0, small perturbations decay exponentially and the homogeneous state is linearly stable. (The applicability of deterministic DDFT, which assumes local stability, to spinodal decomposition, which involves local instability, has been doubted by Kawasaki Linear stability analysis has found a large number of applications in DDFT. Examples include the determination of the dispersion relation for front-speed calculation 7.2.1.2. Front propagation. If a fluid reference state has been found to be unstable against perturbations, it remains to be discussed how the occurring solidification front propagates. This can be calculated based on the "marginal stability hypothesis" They can be solved for the unknown complex wavenumber k and the unknown velocity v. The selected wavelength is not necessarily that of the resulting equilibrium lattice, which can lead to disorder Front propagation is also studied in PFC models (see Section 6.3) Since standard DDFT is the overdamped limit of more general kinetic theories involving inertia, systematic expansions of such theories in the friction coefficient can be used to obtain DDFT as a limiting case, but also to find inertial corrections. This is possible using the multiple-time-scale method. The general procedure of deriving over-damped dynamics and corrections from phase-space theories was pioneered by Titulaer Following Ref. with the friction parameter γ nd , velocity v, force F , and Fokker-Planck operator Equation ( We now expand the auxiliary function in powers of γ -1 nd and then each term in eigenfunctions of L K . By inserting all results into Eq. ( Renormalized perturbation theory has also been applied to DDFT. We discuss it here following Ref. In particular, a path-integral formalism can be developed for stochastic DDFT. This was done by Kawasaki and Miyazima Here, ρ denotes a real auxiliary field and the last term arises from the noise. The action ( A loop-expansion of the action ( An introduction to this topic is given in Ref. Since the DDFT equation ( A significant amount of work has been done in numerical mathematics on the solution of partial differential equations of the gradient-dynamics type (see Section 6.2), which DDFT belongs to. However, only a few of these methods are specifically designed for DDFT. Many of them address PFC models Moreover, DDFT can benefit from methods developed for static DFT. Some of these methods have already been applied to DDFT (such as numerical continuation), whereas others have potential for future applications (such as machine learning). A variety of numerical strategies for DFT are discussed in Ref. A variety of authors have discussed the discretization and integration of DDFT, focusing on a variety of specific problems. For stochastic DDFT, a finite-volume method was developed by Russo et al. Nonlocal terms resulting from the excess free energy are particularly difficult to treat numerically. Convolution terms on Cartesian grids can be evaluated efficiently using fast-Fourier-transformation methods. However, these are difficult to apply on general meshes For DDFT calculations in higher dimensions, which can become rather slow due to the large number of lattice points required, parallelization is important. The parallelization of DFT calculations is discussed in Refs. Another useful method in DDFT is numerical continuation DDFT (in the form discussed in Section 3.2.3) also forms the basis of the MesoDyn software For kinetic extensions of DDFT (see Section 4.7.3), the use of lattice Boltzmann methods A numerical iterative scheme allowing to determine the external force field that generates a certain density and velocity profile can be found in Ref. Finally, Monte Carlo (MC) simulations are often combined with DDFT. We only discuss a few examples here. The stochastic DDFT Having discussed how to analyze a DDFT equation, we finally turn to applications of DDFT. This is a very broad and diverse field, which we present here ordered by systems DDFT is applied to (Section 8.1) and by phenomena that are described by DDFT (Section 8.2). In Section 8.1, we start with the systems introduced in Section 3, namely colloidal fluids (Section 8.1.1), atomic and molecular fluids (Section 8.1.2), and polymers (Section 8.1.3), for which standard DDFT has been developed. We then address thin films (Section 8.1.4) and glassy systems (Section 8.1.5), which are composed of the same materials, but have special properties that affect their description in DDFT. Different materials come into play when considering granular media (Section 8.1.6) and plasmas (Section 8.1.7). Driven (Section 8.1.8) and active (Section 8.1.9) soft matter are also nonstandard cases, since in these systems typical close-to-equilibrium approximations of DDFT tend to break down. Finally, we present electrochemical (Section 8.1.10) and biological (Section 8.1.11) systems, which are particularly complex. For phenomena (Section 8.2), we again start with the most basic aspects, which are relaxation (Section 8.2.1) and phase separation (Section 8.2.2). This naturally leads to pattern formation (Section 8.2.3), which can be a consequence of phase separation, and nucleation and solidification (Section 8.2.4), which is a form of relaxation (to a particular thermodynamic equilibrium state) and can also lead to pattern formation. We then turn to specific applications where pattern formation is one (though not the only one) relevant effect, namely chemical reactions (Section 8.2.5), disease spreading (Section 8.2.6), and feedback control (Section 8.2.7). Finally, we discuss sound waves (Section 8.2.8). A further important aspect are "theoretical applications", which involve the derivation of new dynamic equations from DDFT. Important examples include MCT and PFC models, which have both been explained in previous sections (Sections 6.1 and 6.3, respectively), and the dynamics of the van Hove function, which is discussed in Section 8.3. Colloidal fluids are a standard system of application for DDFT. This case is discussed extensively in Section 3, in particular in Section 3.5.3. An example is presented in Fig. Atomic and molecular fluids are another standard system of application for DDFT and discussed in Sections 3 and 4.7.1. Polymers are the third standard system of application introduced in Section 3. They were among the first systems studied using DDFT and the theory presented in Section 3.2.3 is now one of the most widely used methods in the simulation of polymer systems. Applications include phase behavior DDFT has gained importance in industrial applications due to its applicability as a simulation technique. In particular, the MesoDyn method Since polymer DDFT is a large topic on its own that has been reviewed elsewhere processes are more complex in such systems, since various transport and evaporation processes are involved where the mobility M n of the nanoparticles depends on the local densities, whereas the mobilities M c l and M n l for the conserved and nonconserved part of the liquid motion, respectively, are constant. DDFT models allow to analyze a variety of effects in the context of dewetting and evaporation, such as spinodal decomposition, nucleation, and fingering Standard DDFT is also applied to study drying mixtures of colloids and polymers. In particular, one is here interested in stratification. It is found, in agreement with molecular dynamics simulations, that initially mixed fluids stratify with smaller colloids on top When entering a glassy state, soft matter systems exhibit a variety of interesting nonstandard properties. Like thin films (see Section 8.1.4), glasses are therefore discussed separately. However, the application of DDFT to glasses is more controversial and therefore requires a particularly careful treatment. The dynamics of supercooled liquids and glasses is often modeled using MCT, whose formalism and relation to DDFT are discussed in detail in Section 6.1. It models glassy behavior as an ergodic-to-nonergodic (ENE) transition. The applicability of DDFT in this field is a question that is discussed very controversially. On the one hand, stochastic DDFT was specifically designed as a generalization of MCT for the treatment of supercooled liquids To resolve these issues, it is important to distinguish between three different questions: (1) Can DDFT reproduce MCT? (2) Can DDFT describe the physics of (real) glasses? (3) Can DDFT describe nonergodic systems? The subtle relation of DDFT and MCT is discussed in Section 6.1. Stochastic DDFT was developed in the context of MCT by Kirkpatrick and Wolynes The second issue was the original motivation for stochastic DDFT: The standard description of cage effects in simple MCT as an ENE transition does not apply to real materials due to hopping effects resulting from thermal fluctuations (although the deviations from MCT due to thermal fluctuations are comparatively small in dense colloidal liquids, since colloids are very large). These fluctuations are included in stochastic DDFT With deterministic DDFT, a description of dense atomic liquids is also possible DDFT has been applied to glassy behavior in a variety of contexts: DDFT can be used to calculate friction forces in supercooled liquids The main problem, however, arises from the third question: As shown by Reinhardt and Brader For stochastic DDFT, in particular in the formalism by Dean What is in need of explanation is then the fact that DDFT nevertheless sometimes gives useful results when applied to glasses and MCT. Two aspects play a role here. First, approximations can make an important difference. As already pointed out by Marini Bettolo Marconi and Tarazona Ideas from DDFT have also been employed in the study of activated hopping in glassy liquids. This is done in the theory by Schweizer with the short-time friction constant ξ s , the effective free energy where ρ is a constant number density, c(k) is the Fourier-transformed direct paircorrelation function, and S(k) is the dimensionless collective structure factor, and the zero-mean delta-correlated noise χ. This method can be used to describe hopping, diffusion, and relaxation in glassy fluids We now turn to systems composed of different materials, starting with granular media (such as sand or powder). Granular gases consist of particles exhibiting inelastic collisions. A dynamical theory for a thermostatted one-dimensional granular fluid is derived in Ref. Plasmas are, despite having physical properties very different from those of colloidal fluids, also studied using methods from the field of DDFT. The hydrodynamics of plasmas can be described using the one-particle density defined on phase space, which is governed by a dynamic equation that depends on the two-particle density (which, in turn, depends on the three-particle density and so on). A partial closure of this Bogoliubov-Born-Green-Kirkwood-Yvon (BBGKY) hierarchy can be obtained from DDFT, which relates the two-particle density to the free energy functional. Combined with relaxation closures for stress tensor and heat flow, this allows to derive closed hydrodynamic equations for plasmas Systems can deviate from those considered in "standard" applications of DDFT not only because they are composed of different materials, but also because they are driven away from equilibrium. This can be a consequence of external drives or of activity (the latter case is discussed in Section 8.1.9). Here, we consider driven soft matter, which is a field of application for both DDFT and extensions such as PFT Early studies were interested in potentials of the form U 1 (x-vt) that move at a constant rate, a scenario that has been studied for flow in narrow channels DDFT has also been used to model pattern formation in driven soft matter. An example is nonequilibrium lane formation A further application of DDFT is the study of depletion forces in driven systems There are, however, certain difficulties in applying DDFT to driven systems, since the presence of external drives can distort the correlation functions from their equilibrium form 8.1.9. Active soft matter DDFT for active particles (see Section 4.6.3) is used to describe a variety of effects in active soft matter. Many studies are interested in confined systems, such as selfpropelled rods in a confining channel DDFT has also become an important method in electrochemistry, e.g., in the description of electrolyte conductivity with the density of the tagged ion ρ s , number of ion species N s , direct pair-correlation function c (2) si corresponding to the correlation between species i and the tagged ion, and density fluctuations ∆ρ i of ion species i. The friction δξ s is then obtained from the Kirkwood formula DDFT is also used here to calculate van Hove functions The second line of work concerns the Poisson-Nernst-Planck (PNP) equations, which are a very popular model for ion transport. They are given by and describe the density ρ i of ion species i as well as the electrostatic potential ψ, where Q i is the charge of an ion of species i and r is the dielectric constant of the solvent. These equations describe diffusion of ions in the presence of an electrostatic potential ψ, which is determined by the configuration of the ions via the Poisson equation. A microscopic derivation can be found in Ref. A phenomenological solution to this problem was proposed by Bazant et al. To give a more accurate description, DDFT is used to model the ions as charged hard spheres The PNP equations are also used in biology to model ion channels (see Refs. Biological systems, which are particularly complex, combine many of the topics presented so far: Biological microswimmers are a prototypical example of active matter With DDFT, it is possible to obtain construction guidelines for the prevention of adsorption A further biological application is the study of cancer growth. A DDFT model for cancer has been developed by Chauviere et al. Another biophysical application of DDFT is protein diffusion in cell membranes. The membrane is a mixture of various types of lipids, which rearrange if a charged macromolecule adsorbs. This dynamics can be modeled in DDFT As discussed in Section 3.5.4, DDFT is a theory that describes the diffusive relaxation of colloidal systems towards an equilibrium state corresponding to the minimum of the free energy. Hence, a natural application of DDFT is to model relaxation dynamics, i.e., the way in which a system moves to an equilibrium state after initially being out of equilibrium. For nonspherical particles, DDFT can be used to describe orientational relaxation, which was one of the main applications of early forms of DDFT Relaxation dynamics was studied by Bier and van Roij Studying relaxation dynamics is also interesting for relating DDFT to glassy dynamics as described by MCT. In general, the van Hove function provides a good measure for relaxation to equilibrium Phase separation in colloidal fluids can occur through nucleation (if they are quenched near the binodal) or spinodal decomposition (if they are quenched inside the binodal). The investigation of spinodal decomposition was important for the early stages in the development of DDFT and its predecessors In Ref. Local phase transitions are considered in Refs. Phase separation is also modeled using DDFT in more complex fluids. A mixture of particles with opposing adsorption preferences can show a colloidal-liquidcolloidal-liquid demixing transition driven by critical fluctuations [299] using a chemical-potential-like function. Actively switching colloids were studied in Ref. Polymer DDFT (see Section 3.2.3) is a very frequently used method in the description of phase separation in polymer systems, in particular copolymer melts When studying phase separation in DDFT, the problem of averaging explained in Section 3.5.2 is of potential importance. This was discussed in detail by Bleibel et al. Pattern formation, which can be a consequence of phase separation, is one of the central effects studied in soft matter theory. As a dynamical theory for the spatial distribution of the particles, DDFT is also well suited to describe pattern formation. A good example is lane formation, which is a nonequilibrium phase transition Pattern formation can also occur in evaporation/dewetting processes in thin films (see also Recently, DDFT has been applied to quasicrystal formation in soft matter In colloidal systems, DDFT is used to study, e.g., the design of spatiotemporal patterns by means of time-dependent external potentials A topic that is related to both relaxation and phase separation is the study of nucleation and solidification. Static DFT is a central tool for the study of nucleation and crystallization [1024] (see Ref. An example is shown in Fig. Note that, however, many studies of nucleation processes are performed using PFC models rather than DDFT (see Refs. For solidification, DDFT allows, in contrast to DFT, to find not only the equilibrium profile, but also effects of the dynamical evolution on the structure. For example, DDFT has been applied to solidification fronts (see Paragraph 7.2.1.2). The wavelengths selected by front propagation can differ from that of equilibrium crystals, leading to disorder In general, nucleation involves that an energy barrier is crossed which has its maximum at the critical nucleus size. A method for the calculation of nucleation pathways is to find the "minimal free energy path", with is the most likely route for nucleation Reaction-diffusion equations, which are obtained by adding reaction terms to the diffusion equation Closely related to RDDFT is the DDFT model for disease spreading proposed by te Vrugt et al. and describes persons as interacting particles, where repulsive interactions contained in the functional F incorporate effects of social distancing and quarantine. The mobilities Γ S , Γ I , and Γ R of susceptible, infected, and recovered persons, respectively, can be different. Numerically, it can be shown that at certain interaction strengths the model undergoes a transition to a phase in which the number of infected persons is significantly reduced as a consequence of isolation and social distancing. The interactions lead to a pattern formation effect in which infected and healthy persons separate. An extension of the SIR-DDFT model incorporating adaptive political interventions was developed in Ref. Another possible reason for pattern formation is time-delayed feedback, as shown by Tarama et al. In Ref. (276) Making the plane-wave ansatz ∆ρ( r, t) = ee i( k• r-ωt) and the attenuation length In the long-wavelength limit, we obtain the speed of sound with the isothermal compressibility χ T , when using that S(0) ≈ ρ 0 k B T χ T While these approaches consider fluids, DFT is also useful for the description of waves in crystals. It allows to calculate the free energy change associated with a small deformation of a crystal, which then gives the phonon dispersion relation Finally, we present a "theoretical application" of DDFT, namely the investigation of the van Hove function. This is connected to aspects discussed in previous sections, since the van Hove function is important, e.g., for relaxation dynamics (Section 8.2.1) and electrochemistry (Section 8.1.10). Two further theoretical applications of DDFT, namely the derivation of MCT and PFC models, are discussed in Sections 6.1 and 6.3, respectively. The van Hove function δ( r + r j (0)r i (t)) A method for studying the dynamics of the van Hove function in DDFT via a generalization of Percus' test particle limit After having reviewed the existing literature on DDFT, we here give an outlook over important directions of future work. An interesting idea would be the application of machine learning methods to DDFT, as it is already successfully done in quantum DFT. Machine learning methods can be used to find approximate free energy functionals On top of that, the various lines of DDFT presented in Section 3 have had a relatively independent development. In particular, articles using or extending the DDFT by Marini Bettolo Marconi and Tarazona Moreover, applications of DDFT have, up to now, been focused on various types of liquids. While this is not surprising given that this is what the theory is constructed for, applications to quantum and astrophysical systems In soft matter physics, applications in biological contexts have a lot of unexplored potential. DDFT, as a microscopic theory of complex fluids that is applicable to nonspherical particles, confinement, and crowded environments, is well suited to describe intracellular diffusion as well as transport with blood flow. On larger scales, DDFT models for active matter have, of course, a natural application for studying biological microswimmers and active liquid crystals. Applications of classical DFT to crowds Moreover, applications of DDFT to driven and active systems tend to face the problem that DDFT is based on an adiabatic approximation which is not generally possible for such systems. This requires the construction and development of more general methods (such as PFT) as well as the extension of DDFT. A combination of analytical and numerical work can be applied here. For example, in active systems pair-correlation functions [1067,1068] obtained from simulation results can be used as an input for active DDFTs to replace the equilibrium approximation. Similarly, numerical simulations allow to obtain flow fields Furthermore, given that DDFT is a paradigmatic example of a theory describing the collective dynamics of nonequilibrium systems, studying the foundations of DDFT provides interesting insights into general problems of nonequilibrium statistical mechanics. One such problem is the importance of memory effects. As discussed in Section 5, these are naturally incorporated in theories derived using power functional theory or the projection operator formalism. Standard deterministic DDFT arises as a limiting case after certain simplifications that include neglecting memory effects. Additional topics for which basic research on DDFT can be expected to be fruitful are the description of nonergodic systems Finally, a lot of unexplored potential can be found in the applications of generalizations of DDFT. Although very general methods have been developed, allowing to include, e.g., nonspherical particles or nonisothermal systems, most applications of DDFT use its simple standard form. Considering more general forms would allow for much more general insights, e.g., into the relaxation and transport dynamics of systems consisting of anisotropic particles, which are a very promising field of research in soft matter physics. This also opens further room for industrial applications of DDFT We have presented a thorough review of classical DDFT, including its relation to other theories and methods as well as its extensions and applications. DDFT is, as should be clear from our presentation, a useful and versatile method as well as an active field of research. It will continue to shape work in statistical mechanics and soft matter physics in the years to come. ,(112)