We report on the creation and characterization of the luminescence properties of high-purity diamond substrates upon F ion implantation and subsequent thermal annealing. Their room-temperature photoluminescence emission consists of a weak emission line at 558 nm and of intense bands in the 600 -750 nm spectral range. Characterization at liquid He temperature reveals the presence of a structured set of lines in the 600 -670 nm spectral range. We discuss the dependence of the emission properties of F-related optical centers on different experimental parameters such as the operating temperature and the excitation wavelength. The correlation of the emission intensity with F implantation fluence, and the exclusive observation of the afore-mentioned spectral features in F-implanted and annealed samples provides a strong indication that the observed emission features are related to a stable F-containing defective complex in the diamond lattice. Diamond has been widely investigated as an appealing material for quantum optics and quantum information processing applications, due to the availability of several classes of optically active defects (usually referred to as "color centers") that can be suitably engineered in its crystal structure The experiments were performed on a type-IIa single-crystal diamond sample produced by ElementSix with Chemical Vapor Deposition technique, namely a 2×2×0.5 mm 3 "electronic grade" substrate having nominal concentrations of both substitutional nitrogen and boron impurities below the 5 ppb level. The sample was implanted with 50 keV F -ions at the low-energy accelerator of the University of Leipzig. Several circular regions of ~175 μm diameter were irradiated at varying fluences in the 5 ́10 10 -5 ́10 15 cm -2 range by the use of a custom beam collimator. An additional region was implanted with 1.47 MeV F 2+ ions (1 ́10 13 cm -2 fluence) at the Laboratory for Ion Beam Interactions of the Ruđer Bošković Institute. The sample was then processed with a high-temperature thermal annealing (1200 °C, 4 hours in vacuum at ~10 -6 mbar pressure) and a subsequent oxygen plasma treatment, with the purpose of minimizing the background fluorescence from surface contaminations. A preliminary PL characterization was performed using a Horiba Jobin-Yvon HR800 micro-Raman spectrometer equipped with a CW excitation laser at 532 nm wavelength. Temperature-dependent PL measurements were performed using a custom-made cryogenic single-photon confocal microscope exploiting a closed-cycle optical cryostat operating in the 4 -300 K temperature range. Optical excitation was provided through a 100× air objective (0.85 NA) by a set of CW laser diodes with emission wavelengths of 405 nm, 488 nm and 520 nm. A suitable set of optical filters enabled the detection of PL emission at wavelengths larger than 550 nm. The PL spectra were acquired using a single-grating monochromator (1200 grooves mm -1 , 600 nm blaze) fiber-coupled to a Si-single-photon-avalanche photo-diode operating in Geiger mode. The emission spectra reported in Fig. In order to gain a deeper insight into the spectral features of F-related color centers with respect to the aforementioned results and the previous report in Ref. In this work we reported on the fabrication by means of ion beam implantation and thermal annealing of a new class of color center based on F impurities. The ensemble PL characterization showed several peculiar spectral features that, to the best of the authors' knowledge, were not reported so far at the state of the art, namely: a weak emission peak at 558 nm, two bands centered at ~670 nm (FB1) and ~710 nm (FB2), the latter being visible under 488 nm excitation but not under 520 nm. At cryogenic temperatures, the FB1 band exhibited an articulated structure of separate emission lines, whose arrangement is compatible with the attribution of the 600 nm spectral features to the ZPL emission of the center, coupled to a set of six phonon replica spaced by a (36 ± 5) meV vibrational energy attributed to quasi-local vibration. The weak 588 nm emission could not be related to the FB1, nonetheless it is not implausible that it originates from a different F-containing lattice defect. The results discussed in this work offer the first extensive characterization of F-related defects, thus confirming the claim on their optical activity presented in Ref. While the wide emission band of F-implanted diamond is not suitable for the development of monochromatic sources of non-classical light, a full understanding of the centers' properties might open the path towards novel applications in quantum sensing and quantum information processing. Indeed, preliminary ab initio simulations, while not aimed at the identification of the defect optical transitions, suggest a ground state electronic spin configuration similar to that of the NV center (S=1/2, and S=1 for neutrally-and negatively-charged impurity-vacancy defects). If confirmed by EPR experiments, such property could pave the way to the utilization of F-related centers in diamond for quantum information processing applications, taking advantage of the non-zero nuclear spin of the naturally occurring 19 F for hyperfine interactions for defects control and coupling 