In this work, using the state-of-the-art first principles calculations based on density functional theory, we found that the concentration as well as coordination of surface oxygen vacancies with respect to each other were critical for direct water-splitting reaction on the (001) surfaces of PbTiO3 and TiO2. For the water-splitting reaction to happen on TiO2-terminated surfaces, it is necessary to have two neighboring O-vacancies acting as active sites that host two adsorbing water molecules. However, eventual dissociation of O-H bonds is possible only in the presence of an additional nearest-neighbor O-vacancy. Unfortunately, this necessary third vacancy inhibits the formation of molecular hydrogen by trapping the dissociated H atoms over TiO2-teminated surfaces. Formation of up to 3 Ovacancies, is energetically less costly on both terminations of PbTiO3 (001) surfaces compared with that of TiO2, the presence of Pb leads to weaker O bonds over these surfaces. Molecular hydrogen formation is more favorable over the PbO-terminated surface of PbTiO3, requiring only two neighboring oxygen vacancies. However, hydrogen molecule is retained near the surface by weak van der Waals forces. Our study indicates two barriers leading to low productivity of direct water splitting processes. First and foremost, there is an entropic barrier imposed by the requirement of at least two nearestneighbor O-vacancies, sterically hindering the process. Furthermore, there are also enthalpic barriers of formation over TiO2-terminated surfaces, or removal of H2 molecules from the PbO-terminated surface. Understanding and finding a route towards efficient water splitting reaction is not only important for energy and technological applications 1 but it is essential from fundamental point of view. Several different model systems like titania or perovskite surfaces have been proposed and have been investigated for this purpose. On the contrary, photocatalytic hydrogen production is carried out in slurry type of suspended solid catalysts in solvents. Well-mixed conditions, needed for an efficient reaction, also provides the environment for the immediate back oxidation of hydrogen to water. These processes can be inhibited by a careful design of the photo-reactor; or designing catalysts where the oxygen evolution and hydrogen evolution are delegated to different facets of the same crystallite. One final barrier in the efficient production of hydrogen is to remove hydrogen formed by water splitting that is accommodated on the solid. Hydrogen can be accommodated in the form of spilled over hydrogen, that can be held around the surface or in the bulk. The objective of this study is to search the limits of water-splitting reaction over TiO2 and PbTiO3 through first principles methods. We determined the barriers on the formation and removal of molecular hydrogen on titania and lead titanate. We started our analysis by assuming that oxygen vacancies are available, acting as two neighboring active sites hosting two water molecules. We examined the possibility of water dissociation depending on the coordination and clustering of surface O-vacancies by using ab initio methods. Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations were performed using the VASP Both PbO-and TiO2-terminations of PbTiO3(001)-(3×2) and TiO2(001)-(3×2) surfaces were modeled as slabs which were constructed from their bulk phases including 11 atomic layers along [001] direction to ensure the convergence of surface energies as suggested previously. There are basically two possible terminations for the lowest index (001) plane of PbTiO3. These are the PbO and TiO2 surface layers. The latter has the lowest surface energy among all possible cleavages including higher-index planes. The energy required to remove an oxygen atom from the surface is 3.86 eV on the PbOtermination and 3.96 eV on the TiO2-termination. It is energetically 0.1 eV more favorable on the PbO-terminated surface. The formation energy of an oxygen vacancy on the surface of titania is 4.39 eV (Table On the surface of titania, both of the H atoms were trapped at the vacancy site reflecting a Ti-H bonding character as shown in Figure Energy bands and electronic densities of states were calculated using SCAN functional with supplementary Hubbard-U term to better describe the repulsion between strongly correlated Ti 3d and, to a lesser degree, O 2p electrons. This is one of the methods necessary to overcome the band gap underestimation of the standard XC functionals within the framework of DFT. In addition, the nature of defect related states must be reasonably defined in the gap. The use of SCAN functional instead of standard GGA functionals was not enough to get the band gaps of TiO2 and PbTiO3 properly. Similar findings were reported previously by a theoretical study. The valence band (VB) dominantly reflects Ti-O bonding character with a contribution from Pb-O bonds in the case of PbTiO3. The upper part of VB is characterized by O 2p-electrons, which is common and well known for transition metal oxides. The conduction band (CB), on the other hand, dominantly contributed by anti-bonding Ti 3d states. In the cases of TiO 2 -terminated surfaces shown in Figure In addition, trapping of dissociated H atoms at the third oxygen vacancy brings a flat going occupied state 0.73 eV and 0.55 eV below the conduction band minimum (CBM) of TiO2 and of PbTiO 3 , respectively. Well localization of these defect related states indicates a weak binding of dissociated H atoms to the vacancy site on the substrate. In the case of PbO-termination of PbTiO3 shown in Figure The number and clustering of surface oxygen vacancies becomes critically important for direct water splitting on the (001) surfaces of TiO2 and PbTiO3. Presence of Pb weakens binding of lattice oxygens. Therefore, the energy cost of oxygen vacancy formation on TiO 2 is higher than that on PbTiO 3 . The minimum requirement appears to be the adsorption of two water molecules on two nearest-neighbor oxygen vacancy sites separately, for the possibility of a subsequent dissociation of their H atoms which face each other. TiO2-terminated surfaces need a cluster of three oxygen vacancies for which two of them act as water capturing active sites and the remaining one must be adjacent to both of them and must remain unoccupied. The existence of this third vacancy is necessary for dissociation of the H atoms from their parent water molecules yet is detrimental for the formation of H2 since it acts as a trap for dissociated H atoms. Revelation of this bottleneck is useful in explaining the production of very low quantities of H2 by direct water splitting on TiO2-terminations which are otherwise known for their excellent catalytic properties. On the PbO-termination of PbTiO3, two adjacent oxygen vacancies can capture two water molecules which lean toward each other. Based on the DFT calculations vacancy-mediated water splitting seems to be possible on PbO-termination. However, hydrogen molecule must overcome the van der Waals attraction towards the surface.