Recent interest in topological nature in condensed matter physics has revealed the essential role of Berry curvature in anomalous Hall effect (AHE). However, since large Hall response originating from Berry curvature has been reported in quite limited materials, the detailed mechanism remains unclear at present. Here, we report the discovery of a large AHE triggered by a pressure-induced magnetic phase transition in elemental α-Mn. The AHE is absent in the non-collinear antiferromagnetic phase at ambient pressure, whereas a large AHE is observed in the weak ferromagnetic phase under high pressure despite the small magnetization of ∼ 0.02μB /Mn. Our results indicate that the emergence of the AHE in α-Mn is governed by the symmetry of the underlying magnetic structure, providing a direct evidence of a switch between a zero and non-zero contribution of the Berry curvature across the phase boundary. α-Mn can be an elemental and tunable platform to reveal the role of Berry curvature in AHE. Anomalous Hall effect (AHE) in systems with broken time-reversal symmetry is one of the fundamental transport phenomena in condensed matter physics where e, , n, k, ǫ n (k), and f represent the elemental charge, reduced Planck constant, band index, wavevector, eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian, and Fermi-Dirac distribution function, respectively. b z n (k) represents the z-component of the Berry curvature Here, we report the discovery of a large AHE in α-Mn, a stable form of elemental Mn at room temperature and ambient pressure. α-Mn forms a body centered cubic (bcc) structure that consists of 58 atoms in the bcc unit cell with 4 non-equivalent Mn sites referred to as sites I, II, III, and IV [Figs. Here, μ B represents a Bohr magneton. T N is rapidly suppressed by the application of pressure, and another pressure-induced phase characterized by the transition temperature T A appears above 1.4 GPa, which results in a double-stage structure in the pressure-temperature (P -T ) phase diagram as shown in Fig. Single crystals of α-Mn were synthesized by the Pbflux method. Mn (99.999%) and Pb (99.9999%) with a molar ratio of 2:98 were placed in an alumina crucible and sealed in a quartz ampoule with argon gas. After the mixture were initially heated to 800 • C, the melt was cooled to 320 • C for over 300 h. Then, the flux was removed using a centrifuge separator. A picture of the as-grown crystal is shown in the inset of Fig. The electrical transport measurements under high pressure were performed by indenter-type pressure cell (P < 4 GPa) In all high-pressure measurements mentioned above, Daphne oil 7474 In Fig. Next, we present the magnetic properties in the pressure-induced phase. As shown in Fig. !"#$%& ' Subsequently, the Hall resistivity (ρ yx ) in magnetic fields along [101] direction is focused. Figure We further focus on the anomalous Hall part ρ A yx and the detailed temperature dependence. Figure Here, a possible magnetic structure realized in the WFM phase is discussed. In the AFM phase, the moments at sites I and II are relatively larger than those at the other sites, and thus, these two major sites are focused for simplicity. As shown in Fig. Subsequently, the AHE observed in the WFM phase is discussed. As mentioned above, the AHE can be caused by both extrinsic and intrinsic origins. In the present case, it is unlikely to occur such a drastic enhancement of impurity scattering effect by pressure only in the WFM phase. Thus, our results strongly indicate that the WFM phase possesses a large non-trivial contribution of the Berry curvature that do not cancel out by the integration in Eq. ( To obtain further insight, we discuss the anomalous Hall conductivity σ A xy , which is connected with the Berry curvature by Eq. (1). As described above, the intrinsic σ A xy should be independent of τ as it depends only on the Bloch state. Figure σ xx varies nearly an order of magnitude, σ A xy remains almost constant except at 3.8 GPa, indicating that the AHE is irrelevant to τ . In the present understanding of AHE, the dominant mechanism varies depending on the relationship between Fermi energy E F , spin-orbit interaction energy ǫ SO , and relaxation time τ of the system In conclusion, a large anomalous Hall effect accompanied by the pressure-induced magnetic phase transition in α-Mn was discovered, which is the direct experimental evidence of Berry-curvature-associated anomalous Hall effect. Despite the small spontaneous magnetization of ∼ 0.02 μ B /Mn, the anomalous Hall conductivity reaches 400-600 Ω -1 cm -1 in the weak ferromagnetic phase under pressure, which is comparable to non-collinear antiferromagnets Mn 3 Sn and Mn 3 Ge. The anomalous Hall resistivity can be inverted by a miniscule switching magnetic field less than 10 mT, and its magnitude can be widely controlled by external parameters. The anomalous Hall conductivity is nearly independent of the relaxation time of impurity scattering, which supports the dominant contribution of the Berry curvature in the weak ferromagnetic phase. α-Mn provides an elemental and tunable platform to unravel the large intrinsic Hall response by Berry curvature. The present situation appears to be quite similar to that in Mn 3 Sn and Mn 3 Ge, in which a large intrinsic AHE emerges under a small but finite M . In recent studies related to Mn 3 Sn, the existence of the Weyl point in the momentum space 