Synthetic opals, based on self-assembly of polymeric nanoparticles generally produces fainted/pale structural colors due to too many lattice flaws in the structures. Here we produces carbon nanotubes (CNTs) incorporated high quality 3D photonic opals (PC-CNT) by evaporative self-assembly. Although the CNTs make up only 0.01% of the fabricated photonic opal, their controlled incorporation has dramatic effect to change the color of the photonic crystals from milky white to intense red. Microscopic study suggest that CNT incorporation did not affect the lattice ordering of the photonic crystals. The tunability of structural colors, as a function of incident angle, were tested and varied against Bragg-Snell law. Furthermore, we tested mechanochromic sensing of the photonic opals, demonstrating their potential as visual indicators. This tunable PC-CNT brings many possibilities including strain sensing or structural health care monitoring, as well as being of fundamental interest. Developing materials based inspiration from those found in Nature opens the way to innovations that are often unattainable using conventional approaches. One such exciting topic is structural coloration (SC) arising from interaction of light with submicron-scale periodic structures. The analogous to natural opals are synthetic photonic opals fabricated by using polymeric microspheres Building upon our group's previous research on fabricating ordered colloidal assemblies containing graphene as filler In the present work used latex polymer synthesized by emulsion polymerization (see experimental section for details) with the solids content is 55 wt %. When latex is subject to evaporation based self-assembly, solvent evaporation brings the particles close and form highly close packed structure. There are two different competing forces, that are present during sedimentation; thermodynamic (i.e. Brownian motion) and gravitational. For smaller particles (< 500nm), thermodynamics plays an important role, whereas gravity is the dominant force for larger particles. Isolated SWNT were used in this study which were prepare with wet chemical methods involving ultrasound and non-ionic surfactant Tritonx-100. Figure Next we study optical properties of pristine opal and CNT infiltrated photonic opal. We investigate the optical properties of the photonic opal by reflection and normal angle transmission and angle resolved transmission spectroscopy method to determine the photonic bandgap. These optical spectroscopic techniques reveal the diffraction or resonance condition at same frequency as a either dip or peak. Photonic bandgap position can be described by the Bragg-Snell law: 38 where m is the diffraction order, λmax is the diffracted wavelength, filling fraction f and refractive index n of the two media, θ is the incidence angle with respect to the normal, dhkl is the interplanar particle separation. The effective refractive index was estimated to 1.34. Based on the effective refractive index and equation (1), we built the diagram of the reflected wavelength from latex polymer size and angle of incident light (Figure Importantly, highly ordered PC-CNT crystal led to interesting optical properties reflecting optical signatures of both components. CNT led to selective absorption of light in green-blue part of the spectrum, led to highly saturated and vivid red structural colors compared with pristine crystal. To illustrate that colors form PC-CNT are saturated, reflection spectrum were converted to plotted in the Commission Internationale de l'Eclairage (CIE) chromaticity value as shown in Figure Role of determining the photonic bandgap position is strongly depend upon the propagation of incident wave and axes of the crystals. An incident wave can couple only those Eigen modes of the photonic crystals which possess the same vector k in this situation, changes in the photonic bandgap position with the angle of incidence are equivalent to probing different direction in the FCC Brillouin zone (BZ) or scanning the BZ from L point towards different symmetry points such as W, U, K and edge of the Brillouin zone. Generally colloidal photonic crystals contains substantial amount of the water in the voids which makes them opalescent. Normally one would expect large Bragg peak shift with decreasing water content therefore water should be quite low. To estimate Bragg peak shift related to residual water content in opal we used Bragg's law (Section 1) solving for volume fraction of water with approximation of neff is related to fwater: Δλ = 3.26r(n water -1)Δfn water Thus for maximum shift of 1nm within first hour of drying, the maximum water variation is 0.0064 (i.e. 0.64% of the photonic crystal volume). Since this decrease is 50% of the total fwater so total amount of water in photonic crystal is 0.96%. It appears there is two stag drying process here. As it is also evident from figure The ability to tune the optical properties makes PC-CNT attractive candidates for colorimetric sensing. This tuning of the photonic bandgap can be achieved by either changing lattice parameter or effective refractive index. In summary, we have demonstrate mechanochromic photonic opal with strong structural coloration. The incorporation of CNT at very low concentration into the interstitial spacing radically enhances the structural colors offering improved visual contrast due to emerging refractive index contrast. These photonic opal offers attractive functional features such as strong iridescence, stretch-tunability, excellent durability and mechanical robustness. Hence these photonic opals are potential candidates for visual calorimetric sensor, photonic paints, photonic display etc.