In an easy-plane antiferromagnet with the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI), magnons are subject to an effective spin-momentum locking. An in-plane temperature gradient can generate interfacial accumulation of magnons with a specified polarization, realizing the magnon thermal Edelstein effect. We theoretically investigate the injection and detection of this thermally-driven spin polarization in an adjacent heavy metal with strong spin Hall effect. We find that the inverse spin Hall voltage depends monotonically on both temperature and the DMI but non-monotonically on the hard-axis anisotropy. Counterintuitively, the magnon thermal Edelstein effect is an even function of a magnetic field applied along the Néel vector. Efficient generation of spin angular momenta is key to modern electronics because information encoded in the spin degree of freedom can be transported and read with relatively low dissipation 1,2 . In electronic systems, there are two common scenarios to produce spins. One is the spin Hall effect (SHE), in which a charge current induces a pure spin current flowing transversely; as spin current diffuses, surviving spins will accumulate on the boundaries Nevertheless, both the SHE and the Edelstein effect inevitably incur Joule heating because a driving charge current is needed. It has been established that magnons, which are charge neutral quasiparticles in magnet materials, can conduct spins without physical movement of charges, eliminating Joule heating completely A magnon spin current can be either coherent or incoherent depending on the preservation of transverse spin polarization. In AFMs, driving coherent magnons calls for extremely high frequency sources Recently, it has been pointed out that the magnon TEE can indeed be enabled by breaking certain symmetries in a collinear AFM In this Letter, we consider an ultrathin AFM nanostrip in contact with a normal metal (NM) with a sizable SHE, as schematically illustrated in Fig. The AFM nanostrip under consideration is modeled as an infinitely long 1D spin chain along y direction with atomic spacing a 0 (so magnetic unit cell repeats for 2a 0 ). As illustrated in Fig. where J is the antiferromagnetic exchange coupling, D is the DM interaction, and K x and K z are the hard-axis and the easyaxis anisotropy, respectively. In the DM term, ξ i,i±1 = ±1 represents the relative positions of neighboring spins (bond chirality). For simplicity, we have absorbed the Landé g factor and the Bohr magneton μ B into B so that all parameters appearing in Eq. (1) are scaled into the energy dimension. To solve the magnon excitations, we perform the linearized Holstein-Primakoff transformation on the spin operators , where a † i (b † i ) creates a quanta of magnon on the A (B) sublattice located on site i. The magnon operators satisfy the bosonic commutation relations: [a i , a † j ] = δ i j ; and all other combinations vanish. To diagonalize Eq. (1), we perform the Fourier transformation where N is the total number of magnetic unit cells, y i labels the position of the ith atom, and the summation over k is restricted to the first Brillouin zone. The Hamiltonian in Eq. (1) can be expressed in a quadratic form where cos ka 0 + 4DS sin ka 0 and D k = 4JS cos ka 0 -4DS sin ka 0 . Because of the commutation relations, the vector of the Nambu basis must satisfy where the Diagonalizing the quadratic form in Eq. ( where ω α/β ±k are the eigenfrequencies (dispersion relations) and Q k is a generalized unitary matrix with respect to g c : Under the same Fourier transform, the z component of the total spin operator becomes where Figure In an AFM/NM heterostructure, coherently precessing magnetic moments inject a pure spin current density in the NM where n n n = (S S S A -S S S B )/2 and m m m = (S S S A + S S S B )/2 are the Néel vector and the small magnetization, g s is the real part of the spin-mixing conductance (factors like h, e have been absorbed by g s ). Even though Eq. ( with where ) are the thermal occupations of magnons in the presence of ∇T . To characterize the efficiency of spin injection into the NM, we define the spin convertance as which directly converts the spin accumulation generated by ∇T into an electronic spin current ready for detection. This quantity plays a central role in quantifying the detection of the magnon TEE. In the linear response regime, we can decompose the distribution as n = n 0 + δ n with the equilibrium distribution n 0 = 1/ e hω/k B T -1 . Under the relaxation time approximation, the non-equilibrium part is where λ = α or β label the magnon modes, T is the equilibrium temperature at the system center, v λ ,k = ∂ ω λ /∂ k is the group velocity of mode λ , and τ 0 is the phenomenological magnon relaxation time assumed to be an independent constant. Based on Eq. ( The spin accumulation S z due to the magnon TEE converts into a spin current into the NM according to Eq. ( where θ SH is the spin Hall angle, d is the thickness of the NM, λ is the spin diffusion length, σ is the conductivity, and L is the length in the y direction. We stress that Eq. ( As shown in Fig. Figure In summary, we have studied the magnon TEE in a simple model system. An in-plane temperature gradient can drive magnon spin accumulation without inducing a magnon spin current. The spin accumulation converts into an electronic spin current in an adjacent NM for detection by the inverse SHE. The magnonic TEE depends monotonically on temperature and the DM interaction but non-monotonically on the hard-axis anisotropy. The effect is even in a magnetic field along the Néel order, which bears a symmetry justification. Our prediction opens the exciting possibility to generate magnonic spin angular momenta without inducing magnonic spin currents. This work is supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under grant FA9550-19-1-0307, and in part by the University of California, Riverside. Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analyzed in this study. I. Žutić, J. Fabian, and S. D. Sarma, "Spintronics: Fundamentals and applications," Rev. Mod. Phys. 76, 323 (2004).