Distributed Bragg reflectors (DBRs) composed of an AlN/GaN superlattice were demonstrated for the first time on Si (100) substrates. Single-crystal wurtzite superlattice structures were achieved on this cubic substrate by employing offcut Si (100) wafers with the surface normal pointing 4° towards the [110] direction. This misorientation introduced an additional epitaxial constraint that prevented the growth of a two-domain GaN surface as well as cubic GaN inclusions. A crack-free 600 nm GaN cap / 5x AlN / GaN DBR structure on Si (100) was demonstrated. This accomplishment of a wurtzite III-nitride DBRs on Si (100) opens the possibility to integrate novel optical and optoelectronic devices with established Si microelectronics technology. Monolithic integration of compound semiconductor films with Si microelectronics has been perpetually hampered by the inherent dissimilarity in crystal structures. Recently, there has been encouraging success in incorporating selective epitaxy of SiGe in the source/drain regions to create longitudinal uniaxial compressive strain to enhance the mobility of ptype MOSEFTs, Recent work has shown that employing a Si (100) substrate that is offcut by 4 to 5 degrees will introduce an asymmetric constraint that allows for deposition of singlecrystal wurtzite GaN. This letter reports on metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) of an AlN/GaN SL directly on Si (100) substrates offcut by 4° towards the [110] direction. The alternating sequence functions optically as a highreflectance DBR and structurally as a strain compensating SL. Growth was carried out in a modified vertical impinging flow chemical vapor deposition reactor. Two-inch Si wafers were cleaned via a modified Radio Corporation of America process followed by an in situ H2 bake. An Al seed layer was deposited prior to the onset of NH3 flow to protect the Si surface from nitridation. The AlN/GaN SL was deposited at 1050 °C and 50 Torr. In situ spectroscopic interferometry monitored the layer thickness and reflectance in real time. The stop band for the DBR structure can be tuned to any point in the near-ultraviolet or visible by adjusted the thicknesses of the AlN and GaN layers in the DBR. For example, a DBR with a stop band centered at 495 nm (blue-green) would require alternating 60-nm AlN and 51-nm GaN layers. The GaN cap layer was deposited at 1020 °C at 250 Torr directly on the SL. The higher deposition pressure resulted in GaN layers with larger grains and lower defect densities. Details of this procedure and apparatus have been reported elsewhere. In this work, sharp interfaces were found in the SL as displayed in Fig. A similar dislocation annihilation mechanism was reported by the authors for DBR structures grown on Si (111). In summary, a novel MOCVD grown IIInitride DBR structure on Si (100) was demonstrated. The reflectance of the III-nitride DBR was enhanced by growing the superlattice directly on a Si substrate to augment the overall reflectance due to the high index of refraction contrast at the Si/AlN interface. The DBR structure consisted of alternating layers of AlN and GaN that introduced a compressive stress to balance the large tensile stress generated during cool down from growth temperature. This report demonstrates that III-nitride DBR structures can be fabricated on Si (100) substrates and conceivably within Si integrated circuits. 