A potassium-ion electret, which is a key element of vibration-powered microelectromechanical generators, can store negative charge almost permanently. However, the mechanism by which this negative charge is stored is still unclear. We theoretically study the atomic and electronic structures of amorphous silica (a-SiO2) with and without potassium atoms using first-principles molecular-dynamics calculations. Our calculations show that a fivefold-coordinated Si atom with five Si-O bonds (an SiO5 structure) is the characteristic local structure of a-SiO2 with potassium atoms, which becomes negatively charged and remains so even after removal of the potassium atoms. These results indicate that this SiO5 structure is the physical origin of the robust negative charge observed in potassium-ion electrets. We also find that the SiO5 structure has a Raman peak at 1000 cm -1 . Energy-harvesting technology, which converts energy in the environment from sources such as light, heat, and vibration into electrical power, is a key element in meeting energy demands. Among the many energy-harvesting technologies, vibration-powered generation is expected to provide a stable supply of electricity because its output does not depend on specific energy sources in the natural environment such as sunlight. Accordingly, vibration-powered generators can be widely used as stand-alone power sources for sensors in environments with vibration, such as transportation machinery, roads, and wearable devices. In this study, we simulated the manufacturing processes of potassium-ion electrets using first-principles calculations and created a-SiO2 structures containing potassium atoms. We were then able to reveal the characteristic local structures formed by the presence of potassium atoms, and we examined the charge state in a local structure to clarify the origin of the negative charges. We were able to confirm that the local structures, which are the origin of the negative charges, are retained even after the removal of the potassium atoms. Finally, we propose guidelines for identifying the characteristic local structure. The calculations were performed using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP), which is based on density functional theory. The VESTA system was used to draw the atomic configurations. We begin with examinations of the structures obtained after the first MD calculations. The structure of a-SiO2 with a potassium atom is shown in Fig. Figure We now discuss the atomic and electronic structures of a-SiO2 after potassium-atom removal. Experimentally, it has been reported that potassium-ion electrets are negatively charged after removal of their potassium atoms. However, it is well known that a stable charged state sensitively depends on the position of the Fermi level. To consider the relative stability of the neutral state and the negatively and positively charged states, we calculated the formation energy of the charged system (Eform) using where Edefect is the energy of a crystal with a defect, Equartz is the energy of quartz SiO2, Egap is the bandgap, ε is the dielectric constant, r0 is the radius of a sphere with the same volume as a unit cell, q is the charge state, and EF is the Fermi level of the system measured from the top of the valence band. Figure More importantly, it was found that the intersection between the positively and negatively charged states is located at 3.7 eV. This result means that the stable charge state of a-SiO2 completely reverses between positively and negatively charged states at a threshold of 3.7 eV. To obtain stable negatively charged potassium-ion electrets, the system Fermi level should be greater than 3.7 eV in the process conditions. In other words, lowering the Fermi level induces the appearance of positively charged Si-dangling-bond structures. We now discuss the Fermi level condition during the experimental conditions. In the fabrication process of an electret, Finally, we consider guidelines for identifying the fivefold-coordinated SiO5 structure. Raman spectroscopy is effective for observing local structures In summary, we have proposed a mechanism for the storage of negative charge by potassium-ion electrets based on first-principles calculations. In this study, we modeled the manufacturing of potassium-ion electrets by first-principles MD calculations and investigated the structures and the charged states of a-SiO2 with and without a potassium atom. We found that characteristic local structures, such as the fivefold-coordinated SiO5 structure, appear in a-SiO2 with a potassium atom. These local structures were produced by inserting a potassium atom. The potassium atom is positively charged, whereas the fivefold-coordinated SiO5 structure is negatively charged. Next, we estimated the stability of the charge state after removal of the potassium atom by comparing the formation energies of each charged state as functions of the Fermi level. The negatively charged state was found to be the most stable in the experimental conditions, and the negatively charged SiO5 structure is retained. Therefore, we conclude that the fivefold-coordinated SiO5 structure is the physical origin of the robust storage of negative charge in potassium-ion electrets. Since the Si-O bond is extraordinarily strong, it is expected that the negative charge will be almost permanently retained. Therefore, potassium-ion electrets can be used to fabricate highreliability vibration-powered generators. This result is in good agreement with the experimental results for a negatively charged electret. Finally, we propose that fivefoldcoordinated SiO5 structures can be identified experimentally because they will have a Raman peak at 1000 cm -1 . This work was supported by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology, Japan, under the research project "Promoting Research on the Supercomputer Fugaku" and by the Japan Science and Technology Agency for Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (Grant Nos. JPMJCR15Q4 and JPMJCR19Q2). The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. Formation energy diagram after removal of the K + ion. The negatively charged state becomes stable when the Fermi level is higher than 3.7 eV. We set the energy of the neutral charged state to 0. 