We have measured R(T, B) of a TiN thin-film very close to the disorder-driven superconductorinsulator transition but still superconducting at zero field and low temperatures. In a magnetic field we find three distinct crossing point of the magnetoresistance isotherms occur at magnetic fields BcX in three different temperature regions. Each crossing point in R(T, B) corresponds to a plateau in R(T, BcX ). We systematically study the evolution of these crossing point near the disorder-induced superconductor/insulator transition, identify the most promising candidate for a quantum phase transition, and provide estimates for the two critical exponents z and ν. Quantum phase transitions (QPTs) occur between competing ground states of many-body systems and result from quantum fluctuations near quantum critical points According to the theory of phase transitions, in a given universality class and near the critical point all properties depend in an universal way on a characteristic length ξ ∝ |∆-∆ c | ν with the critical exponent ν, and a characteristic frequency ω ∝ ξ -z ; z being the dynamical critical exponent. If R(T, B) is controlled by the two critical exponents, the scaling relation R(T, B) ∝ |B -B c |/T 1/zν is expected to hold in the vicinity of the crossing point The existence of a crossing point in R(T = const., B) implies that R(T, B c ) = const, i.e., a plateau in R(T, B c ). Experimentally, the latter condition is obeyed over finite T -intervals only. In addition, more than one plateau was observed and interpreted als multistage criticality Here, we demonstrate that the scaling property is insufficient, as at least two control parameters are needed to establish a crossing point as a candidate quantum critical point for the magnetic field induced superconductor/insulator transition. In Fig. The approximately square shaped samples are patterned from the same d ≈ 3.6 nm thin TiN film (wafer D03 in The three extrema in B * (T ) correspond to plateaus labeled LT, MT and HT in the R(T ) dependence shown in Fig. Each of the crossing point allows for a scaling analysis In order to identify crossing points as candidates for quantum criticality, we follow the evolution of the critical parameters R c , B c and zν as a function of the second non-thermal control parameter, i.e., the level of disorder, quantified by the normal-state resistance R 300 K . We measured the R(B)-isotherms of TiN films with different oxidation states and perform the scaling analysis for each of them. The evolution of the critical parameters vs. R 300 K is depicted in Fig. BKT In the inset we plot B cM vs. T BKT (inset in Fig. Unlike the MT-regime, we observe disorder-dependent and thus non-universal values for R c , and zν in the LTand HT-regimes. In particular, both R cL and R cH increase with increasing level of disorder (see Fig. We now compare the properties of our TiN-films in the MT-regime to earlier observations in amorphous indium oxide films Our study provides first experimental evidence that the scaling exponent zν 1.2 for the magnetic fieldinduced SIT remains independent of the level of disorder up to the disorder-induced SIT at B=0. Since quantum phase transitions fall into certain universality classes, such a disorder-independent zν substantiates the conclusion that the crossing point in the MT-regime can be associated with a quantum phase transition. On the other hand, the disorder-dependence of R cL , R cH and zν in the LT-and HT-crossing points reveals a lack of universality and thus discourages their interpretation as QCPs. We now analyze the magnetoresistance in the HTregime. For B 2 the set of R(B)-curves in Fig. The above analysis strongly suggests that the HT plateau in Fig. The crossing point in the LT-regime also features nonuniversal zν and R cL > h/4e 2 . In order to elucidate its origin, we measured the highly non-linear I(V )characteristics at low temperatures (Fig. Between 0.25 T ≤ B ≤ 0.35 T the resistance dip coexists with the current steps occuring at the same T and B. This supports the coexistence of insulating and superconducting regions in the device. For B > B cL their characteristics becomes insulating, i.e., dV /dI develops a peak. At higher bias voltage, additional initially blocked current paths break through within the percolative network, leading to the observed steps in I(V ). Hence, our observations near the LT crossing point can be explained by an inhomogenous supercurrent distribution in which narrow conductive channels dominate the conductance at the lowest temperatures. Our finding implies that the behavior in the low-temperature limit can be misleading in the quest for quantum critical behavior. In conclusion, we have shown that the mere possibility of scaling is insufficient to evidence quantum critical behavior in the vicinity of the SIT. The variation of a second control parameter is mandatory to demonstrate the universality of the parameters controlling a presumed quantum critical point. We provide evidence the universality of a critical point in the magnetoresistance isotherms of thin TiN films with critical exponents ν = 1.2 and z = 1. Non-universal crossing behavior can be induced by inhomogeneity or the compensation of competing contributions to the conductance. Supplemental Material for "Crossing points and quantum criticality points in the magnetoresistance of thin TiN-films" K. Kronfeldner, 1 T. I. Baturina, At room temperature the TiN-films are stable in air over years. However, when heated abover 200 • C in oxygen atmosphere or in air the sheet resistance gradually increases with a constant rate. This allowed us to study the same films at different levels of oxidation. It is not clear, whether the oxygen remains mainly at the surface, or is distributed more homogeneously within the film. The room temperature sheet resistance R 300K constitutes a very reliable measure of the disorder strength. In Figure The investigation of the low-temperature regime has revealed strongly nonlinear I-V -characteristics (see Fig. In the following, we present phenomenological expressions that describe the measured R(T, B) curves in a wide range of magnetic field, i.e., also away from the crossing points. In a wide range of magnetic field the behavior is no longer expected to be critical and universal -nevertheless at the lowest T a description of the R(T, B)-curves with very few parameters is still possible, while the range of collapse shrinks for higher T . For B cL ≤ B 0.8 T the scaling behavior of experimental data can be parametrized by the expression: where B cL = 0.36 T, R cL = 38 kΩ, and the dimensionless constant A ≈ 2.4 are kept fixed. The only adjustable parameter is the exponent a L (T ) that controls the temperature dependence of R (T, B). Note that the form of Eq. S1 is doubly exponential in a L (T ). For B < B cL , the scaled x-axis produces an excellent collapse of the R(B)-isotherms down to R 1 kΩ. For B > B cL the range of collapse increases with decreasing T : Eq. S1 overestimates the resistance with increasing B as the magnetoresistance maximum is approached. The exponent a L (T ) increases from 1 at T = 100 mK up to almost ≈ 2 at T = 0.37 mK (inset in Fig. (ii) MT-regime: In the MT-regime, the scaling behavior of the R(T, B)-curves on both sides of the crossing point within 1 kΩ R 100 kΩ can be described with the expression: where B cM = 0.148 T and R cM = 7 kΩ, with a M (T ) as the only adjustable parameter. We find that the temperature dependence in the MT-regime is thermally activated, i.e., a M (T ) = T 0M /T (inset of Fig. (iii) HT-regime: Around B cH the magnetoresistance is much weaker, and B(T, B) varies linearly with magnetic field (see Fig. with B cH = 0.65 T and R cH = 15 kΩ. The temperature dependence of the R(T, B) is again controlled by only one adjustable parameter, a H (T ) = (T 0H -T )/2T , where T 0H = 0.96 K (see upper inset Fig. Galitski and Larkin computed the fluctuation corrections to conductivity ∆G SF above the upper critical field B c2 in the low temperature limit where r = (1/2γ)h/t, γ = 1.781 (Euler's constant), h = (B -B c2 (T ))/B c2 (0) and t = T /T c0 . Tikhonov et al. (S5) The measured R(B)-isotherms (see Fig. It was observed in earlier works In Fig. Furthermore, we can compare the crossing field B cH of the magnetoresistance isotherms at the HT-crossing points and the crossing points B GaL of the corresponding fits. In Fig. We conclude that the HT-crossing point very near the SIT occurs at B cH < B c2 and below the Galitski-Larkin crossing at B GaL . The Galitski-Larkin theory does not include the flux-flow resistance R FF (T, B) = Φ 0 Bμ V (T ) that is expected for B < B cH in the absence of pinning. According to standard Bardeen-Stephen theory, the vortex mobility μ V (T ) is given by μ V (T ) = R N /(Φ 0 B c2 (T )), which decreases with decreasing T . Pinning is expected to further reduce R FF (T, B) with respect to the Bardeen-Stephen value. In stark contrast, the experimental data in Fig. The flux-flow resistance below B c2 must continuously cross over into the fluctuation resistance above B c2 . It is thus not surprising that the position of the HT-crossing point is affected by the vortex contribution to the resistivity, and deviates from the Galitski-Larkin prediction with increasing disorder as the d-SIT is approached. Nevertheless, the similarities are striking. Together with the similarity of exponents and crossing fields (see Figs. Berezhinski-Kosterlitz-Thouless transition near the SIT Mooij, Orlando and Beasley estimated in 1991 that with increasing disorder T BKT is suppressed faster than the meanfield T c0 T /T BKT -1 (Fig. The measured resistances R(T, B = 0) are shown in Fig. BKT between B cM and T BKT allows for a determination of the dynamical critical exponent z (see main text and the inset to Fig. 