Taking the spin-fermion model as the starting point for describing the cuprate superconductors, we obtain an effective nonlinear sigma-field hamiltonian, which takes into account the effect of doping in the system. We obtain an expression for the spin-wave velocity as a function of the chemical potential. For appropriate values of the parameters we determine the antiferromagnetic phase diagram for the YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+x compound as a function of the dopant concentration in good agreement with the experimental data. Furthermore, our approach provides a unified description for the phase diagrams of the hole-doped and the electron doped compounds, which is consistent with the remarkable similarity between the phase diagrams of these compounds, since we have obtained the suppression of the antiferromagnetic phase as the modulus of the chemical potential increases. The aforementioned result then follows by considering positive values of the chemical potential related to the addition of holes to the system, while negative values correspond to the addition of electrons. Cuprates are puzzling materials; the undoped parent compounds are Mott insulators presenting an antiferromagnetic (AF) arrangement at a finite Néel temperature. As the system is doped, either with electron acceptors or donors, which, in any case would simply mean an increase of the amount of charge carriers to the system, it develops high-temperature superconductivity. The superconducting (SC) critical temperature presents a characteristic dome-shaped dependence on dopant concentration, reaching a maximum value at an optimal doping and vanishing as the system is doped even further, becoming a normal metal. So far, there is no consensus regarding the microscopic mechanism which is responsible for the appearance of superconductivity in those systems. However, it is widely accepted that some sort of AF spin fluctuations are the interaction responsible for the Cooper pairs formation. Recently, starting from a spin-fermion model, which has been employed previously to describe the cuprate superconductors Our approach provides a unified description for the phase diagrams of the hole-doped and the electron doped compounds, which is consistent with the experimental results So far, there is no consensus regarding the minimal model which entails the vast phenomenology presented by the high-T c superconductors, however, since it is well established that superconductivity emerges from the CuO 2 planes of the cuprates, the paradigmatic threeband Hubbard model proposed by Emery iα σ αβ c iβ denotes the spin operator of an itinerant charge carrier, which is written in terms of the Pauli matrices σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) and c † iα denotes the creation operator for a charge carrier at site i with spin α =↑, ↓. Combining the Heisenberg model, the Kondo coupling and the kinetic term associated to the itinerant charge carries, one obtain the spinfermion model. We formulate this model in the continuum limit, by employing the spin coherent states. This amounts to replacing the localized spin operators by S N(x), where S is the spin quantum number and N(x) is a classical vector such that |N(x)| 2 = 1. N is then decomposed into two perpendicular components, L and n (L • n = 0), associated respectively with ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic fluctuations The continuum limit of the AF Heisenberg model in the square lattice is the well-known nonlinear sigma model (NLSM) where ρ s = JS 2 is the spin stiffness, χ ⊥ = 4Ja 2 is the transverse susceptibility and the last term in the rhs of the above expression describes the Berry phase. On the same token, the hamiltonian density of the Kondo interaction becomes where the continuum fermion field ψ α (x) corresponds to c iα . Also notice that the oscillating contribution from the antiferromagnetic fluctuations cancels out as we integrate it over space For the cuprates, it is well known that Dirac points appear in the intersection of the nodes of the d-wave superconducting gap and the two-dimensional (2D) Fermi surface. In that case, the quasiparticles dispersion exhibit a Dirac-like linear energy dispersion where ) and v F is the Fermi velocity. The indices 1 and 2 denote odd and even lattice sites respectively. Notice that the chemical potential μ controls the total number of charge carriers that are added to the itinerant band as the system is doped. Hence, in the continuum limit we may express the partition function of the spin-fermion model as the following functional integral in the complex time represen-tation where β = 1/k B T , with k B denoting the Boltzmann's constant and T the system temperature, and H = H H + H K + H 0 , is given by ( We start by Fourier transforming our model Hamiltonian assuming that the ferromagnetic component of the vector spin L is small and approximately constant in space, since we investigate the system in the long range AF state ordering. Therefore, the Kondo interaction from ( In this approximation, we may introduce the Nambu field in order to express the fermionic part of our model Hamiltonian H ψ ≡ H K + H 0 -ψ † i∂ τ ψ in momentum space, p = k, as H ψ = Φ † (k) A Φ(k), where the matrix A above is given by with the following definitions in the above expression, We may now integrate exactly the fermionic contribution of the partition function in where μ ± = μ±|J K L| and ω n = (2n+1)πβ -1 are the Matsubara frequencies for fermions. Performing the sum over ω n and after some algebra we get which is the same result obtained for a noninteracting relativistic system with a Zeeman term applied to it (e.g. where we have introduced the dimensionless parameters γ = β v F π/a D and z s = e -βμ s , with s = ±1. Moreover, since we have assumed that |L| is small, we can expand Z ψ as a Taylor series, where the first factor in the rhs of the above expression, exp A (T, μ, γ) , does not contribute to the effective NLSM that will be obtained at the end of this section or to the calculation of the Néel temperature in the next section and hence shall be neglected. On the other hand, B(T, μ) seen in ( Combining ( where the above new transverse susceptibility χ⊥ (T, μ) = χ ⊥ S 2 -2 β B (μ, T ) includes the effect of doping, since it depends on the chemical potential. Inserting the expression for χ⊥ in (4) and integrating over L we finally get the partition function, except for a multiplicative factor, where the effective NLSM is with the new spin wave velocity given by Notice that c in the above expression reduces to c = √ ρ s χ ⊥ in the absence of the Kondo coupling, as should be expected. In the present approach the spin wave velocity is finite for μ = 0, which is related to the parent compounds of the cuprates and it is an even function with respect to the chemical potential. Indeed, positive values of μ are related to hole-doped cuprate superconductors, while μ < 0 corresponds to the electron-doped compounds. Notice that doped electrons enter the Cu sites for the electron-doped compounds, which is not the case for the hole-doped cuprates, where doping introduces carriers at the oxygen sites. However, in a continuum limit description there is no difference between holes moving on an otherwise inert O-lattice, in the presence of an AF background on the Cu sites and electrons moving on the Cu sites in the presence of the same AF background and an inert O-lattice. The only difference perhaps would be on the value of the exchange coupling. We start our analysis pointing out that the Coleman-Mermin-Wagner-Hohenberg theorem prevents the appearance of a long-range magnetic order at finite temperatures for any 2D system where we have introduced the parameter α = 1/a 2 J ⊥ /J. Assuming that there is an external magnetic field applied to the system, one may calculate T N with several approaches, among them spin-wave theories (SWT) and field-theoretical calculations, which takes into account the contribution of the spin-fluctuation excitations (neglected in the SWT). Both the standard and selfconsistent SWT are shown to be insufficient to quantitatively describe the experimental data for the parent compounds of the cuprates superconductors, while the results calculated for a large N expansion are in good agreement with the experiments where c ′ = (a/ ) c. Moreover, we have set k B = 1 for the sake of simplicity. Notice that the above expression provides a self-consistent equation for the calculation of the Néel temperature as a function of the chemical potential, since the spin wave velocity c in ( In the remaining of this section we compare the results of the Néel temperature as a function of doping with the available experimental data for YBCO. Indeed, this compound has an almost circular shape for the Fermi surface centered at (π, π) in the reciprocal space In terms of the three-band Hubbard model parameters, the exchange coupling between the Cu magnetic moments is given by and the Kondo coupling of an itinerant oxygen hole spin and the nearest local Cu spin is Estimates for the microscopic parameters of the threeband model Hamiltonian have been obtained from localdensity functional techniques We can also calculate T N as a function of the chemical potential from Starting from the spin-fermion model we have obtained an effective nonlinear sigma model which takes into account the effects of doping in the system. Taking the appropriate values of the parameters for YBCO, we have calculated the AF phase diagram as a function of the dopant concentration and the results presented here are in good agreement with the experimental data Recently, also starting from the spin-fermion model, we have obtained an effective interaction among the charge carriers of the system, which produces a domeshaped SC high critical temperature versus doping Furthermore, our results for positive values of the chemical potential are related to the addition of holes, while negative values correspond to the addition of electrons. Therefore, our results provide a unified description for the phase diagrams of the hole-doped and the electron doped compounds, which is consistent with the data provided for the p-type and n-type cuprate superconductors Also, it is worthy to mention that the approach employed here is not just restrained to the cuprates, but might be applied to several other compounds, since we have only assumed 2D spatial dimensionality and the presence of a relativistic dispersion relation for the itinerant fermionic fields. Remarkably, the presence of Dirac electrons have also been observed for the cuprates and other d-wave superconductors 