Magnetic skyrmions are well-suited for encoding information because they are nano-sized, topologically stable, and only require ultra-low critical current densities j c to depin from the underlying atomic lattice. Above j c skyrmions exhibit well-controlled motion, making them prime candidates for race-track memories. In thin films thermally-activated creep motion of isolated skyrmions was observed below j c as predicted by theory. Uncontrolled skyrmion motion is detrimental for race-track memories and is not fully understood. Notably, the creep of skyrmion lattices in bulk materials remains to be explored. Here we show using resonant ultrasound spectroscopy-a probe highly sensitive to the coupling between skyrmion and atomic lattices-that in the prototypical skyrmion lattice material MnSi depinning occurs at j * c that is only 4 percent of j c . Our experiments are in excellent agreement with Anderson-Kim theory for creep and allow us to reveal a new dynamic regime at ultra-low current densities characterized by thermally-activated skyrmion-lattice-creep with important consequences for applications. In materials that exhibit dynamics under the application of external forces, the onset of motion is determined by the underlying pinning landscape. At zero temperature, a welldefined depinning threshold j c exists below which no motion arises, whereas far above j c linear dynamics occur [blue curve in Fig. Early on theory suggested that creep may also be important for magnetic skyrmions Skyrmions are topologically-stabilized objects with a whirl-like spin-texture that emerge from competing magnetic interactions Uncontrolled creep motion would be detrimental for devices making the understanding of skyrmion pinning crucial. Indeed, creep motion of solitary skyrmions in thin films has been already observed However, in bulk materials, where skyrmions typically form a hexagonal skyrmion lattice (SKX) oriented in a plane perpendicular to an external magnetic field (H) [see Fig. The application of a driving current tilts the pinning potential. At zero temperature, skyrmions escape only when ∆U ≤0 [Fig. In contrast, for finite temperature, the escape rate from pinning sites due to thermal fluctuations is given by Γ ∝ exp (-∆U/k B T ), where k B is Boltzmann constant. When the external drive is small, a thermally-activated skyrmion follows an orbital trajectory around the pinning site due to the Magnus force [see Fig. The observation of creep motion of solitary skyrmions in thin films was achieved via polar magneto-optical Kerr effect (MOKE) microscopy using current pulses Instead, in bulk materials, microscopic skyrmion movement under current has been investigated by Lorentz Transmission Electron Microscopy (LTEM) To reveal previously elusive SKX creep in bulk materials we exploit the extreme sensitivity of Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy (RUS) to the coupling between the SKX and the atomic lattice First, we briefly discuss RUS experiments at j=0, which establish the magnetic phase diagram [Fig. The SKX phase appears in a narrow range of temperatures and field within the conically (CO) ordered magnetic phase. A fluctuation-disordered (FD) region We note that when tracking changes and discontinuities, it is more reliable to plot the raw frequencies Now that we have established the elastic response to the presence of the SKX, we demonstrate the influence of applied electrical current. Figures c does not increase monotonically with decreasing temperature; (iii) the phase boundaries in H depend strongly on temperature as revealed in Fig. The drastic changes in the elastic properties above j * c suggest that skyrmion depinning occurs at critical current densities that are a factor of 25 smaller than j c ∼1.5 MA/m 2 derived from previous measurements as notably demonstrated by a large residual resistivity ratio (RRR=87). As we discuss in the following, a consistent view on the difference between j c and j * c may be established by considering the different sensitivity in detecting the onset of skyrmion motion with distinct techniques. As explained in the introduction, THE is unable to measure incoherent skyrmion motion resulting from creep. Similarly, SANS is only sensitive to coherent rotation of the entire SKX due to spin-transfer torque That j * c marks the presence of a creep regime is also evidenced by the fits of our data to Anderson-Kim theory for creep for which the local pinning potential vanishes linearly with current ∆U =β(j-j * c ), where β is a pre-factor As T continues to decrease, j * c and ∆F (j=0) keep displaying an inverse relation consistent with weak collective pinning down to T =27.7 K where j * c (T ) shows a maximum but ∆F (T ) is featureless. To understand the behavior below T =27.7 K, it is important to consider that for bulk materials such as MnSi, the size and shape of the SKX phase is sensitive to the sample geometry due to demagnetization effects In conclusion, our RUS measurements on the prototypical SKX material MnSi under applied electrical currents provide evidence for the existence of a novel regime of skyrmion lattice dynamics in bulk materials at substantially lower depinning current densities j * c than previously reported for thin films. The temperature dependence of this new intermediate regime is consistent with thermally induced creep of a skyrmion lattice. Our results directly connect the creep motion of skyrmion lattices in bulk materials with the known creep dynamics in thin films, showing that the underlying assumptions for a tilted local weak pinning potential The MnSi single crystal was grown by the Bridgman-Stockbarger method followed by a Further, the SKX in a different piece of this sample was directly observed using SANS A schematic diagram of the RUS setup is shown in Fig. Finally, we note that by measuring all the elastic moduli C ij simultaneously with a fixed magnetic field orientation, accounting for anisotropic demagnetization factors is unnecessary and direct comparisons among C ij can be made. To study the effect of current on moduli, we attached gold wires (13 μm) at opposite sides of the specimen allowing a DC current to be applied along [100], I⊥H with a cross-section of 0.485×0.767 mm 2 . To minimize Joule heating at the contacts, the Au wires were spot-welded to the sample and covered with silver paint to improve current homogeneity and reduce contact resistance. The resulting Ohmic electrical contacts were less than 0.5 Ω. Whenever the current was changed, we waited for steady state before recording. A small temperature increase (<30 mK) was observed at the thermometer right after applying relatively larger currents. We compensated for this by adjusting the set-point of the temperature controller. the skyrmion spends most of the time orbiting the pinning potential. Further, when the skyrmion escapes from one pinning center due to thermal fluctuations, it will immediately be trapped by a nearby pinning center, resulting in creep motion. (f) For large current densities j>j c , the skyrmion lattice flows freely through the pinning centers and the lattice order is improved as has been previously observed This is corroborated by all other measured properties that are consistent with reports in literature where even fine details are reproduced. Notably, we emphasize that even slight Mn deficiency of 2.2% has been reported to decrease T c by 1.5 K C o u n t s ( a . u . ) 0 . 0 0 3 . 0 0 6 . 0 0 9 . 0 0 1 . 0 0 1 . 0 5 1 . 1 0 0 . 9 5 0 . 9 0 0 . 8 5 1 . 1 5 0 . 8 5 0 . 9 0 0 . 9 5 1 . 0 0 1 . 0 5 1 . 1 0 1 . 1 5 See text for details. For a 3D crystal, we write Hooke's law as where σ is the stress tensor (6×1), ε is the strain tensor (6×1), and C is the elastic moduli matrix (6×6). Expanding Eq. (S1), Because C ij =C ji , there are 21 different elastic moduli for an arbitrary system. The higher symmetry of the system, the fewer independent elastic moduli in C. For cubic symmetry, i.e., there are only three independent elastic moduli, C 11 , C 12 and C 44 . This is the case for MnSi in its paramagnetic state when H=0. The ground state of MnSi becomes a helimagnetic order below T c , which in principle breaks the cubic symmetry. Treating MnSi as tetragonal for H = 0 and T < T c is beyond the scope of this work and will be part of future efforts. If we apply an external magnetic field H [001], the principal z-axis is no longer equivalent to xand y-axes, the system can be regarded as tetragonal symmetry, and therefore, we have three extra elastic moduli, C 33 , C 23 (=C 31 ) and C 66 . This situation is applicable to MnSi in the polarized paramagnetic state when a magnetic field is applied. The skyrmion lines typically form a hexagonal lattice. An additional constraint C * ≡(C 11 -C 12 )/2=C 66 is imposed to a hexagonal symmetry, requiring now only five independent elastic moduli. This is not what we observe experimentally in Fig. Furthermore, as the SKX is coupled to the crystalline lattice, this enables the observation of changes measured in the elastic moduli as shown in Fig. The situation becomes more complicated when a DC current is applied along [100]. The current is expected to break the tetragonal symmetry into an orthorhombic one. In principle, there should be nine independent elastic moduli, C C 55 and C 66 . This level of difficulty is not granted as the experimental results show that the applied current does not change the resonance frequencies or their field or temperature dependence, indicating that the symmetry of the system is not broken by low applied currents. In our RUS measurement, we swept frequency from 1250 to 5300 kHz. When frequency is approaching a vibrating mode of the sample, a resonance is detected. We show a representative RUS spectrum of MnSi in Fig. For each resonance peak, the real part (in-phase, red) and imaginary part (out-of-phase, blue) of the signal have a Lorentzian shape V (ω)=z 0 +Ae iφ /(ω-ω 0 +iΓ /2), where Γ is the resonance width and z 0 is the background in the vicinity of the resonance. Plotting the real versus imaginary components of the resonance should form a circle in the complex plane (inset to Fig. For this study, we have predominately tracked the two resonances F 2419 and F 1654 that are predominantly related to C 11 . Although both resonances are suitable to track changes in the change of C 11 due to the presence of the skyrmion lattice, our measurements showed that the quality of F 1654 resonance peaks is better. In particular, the amplitude of F 2419 is very large (see Fig. In the low temperature limit, all C ij tend to saturate, as expected. It should be mentioned that T * is about 1 K above T c , corresponding to a so-called Vollhardt invariance previously determined via specific heat and neutron scattering measurements 0.49 0.07 0.58 -0.05 -0.17 -0.03 0.00 0.11 0.00