Biominerals such as seashells, corals skeletons, bone, and enamel are optically anisotropic crystalline materials with unique nano-and micro-scale organization that translates into exceptional macroscopic mechanical properties, providing inspiration for engineering new and superior biomimetic structures. Here we use particles of Seriatopora aculeata coral skeleton as a model and demonstrate, for the first time, x-ray linear dichroic ptychography. We map the aragonite (CaCO3) crystal c-axis orientations in coral skeleton with 35 nm spatial resolution. Linear dichroic phase imaging at the O K-edge energy shows strong polarization-dependent contrast and reveals the presence of both narrow (< 35°) and wide (> 35°) c-axis angular spread in sub-micrometer coral particles. These x-ray ptychography results were corroborated using 4D scanning transmission electron nano-diffraction on the same particles. Evidence of co-oriented but disconnected corallite sub-domains indicates jagged crystal boundaries consistent with formation by amorphous nanoparticle attachment. Looking forward, we anticipate that x-ray linear dichroic ptychography can be applied to study nano-crystallites, interfaces, nucleation and mineral growth of optically anisotropic materials with sub-ten nanometers spatial resolution in three dimensions. Humans have been using biogenic materials as tools since the dawn of humanity. Biominerals such as bone, teeth, seashells, and coral skeletons exhibit remarkable mechanical properties and complex hierarchical organization One of the most common natural biominerals exists in the form of calcium carbonate (CaCO3), which occurs in bacteria, algae, marine organisms and humans The optical anisotropy in CaCO3 has been leveraged in polarized visible light microscopy to study macroscopic biomineral structure and formation mechanisms Although macroscopic morphologies in biominerals have been studied extensively, their nanoscopic structures are still not studied routinely in a quantitative fashion, mostly due to the lack of a proper transmission microscope that offers bulk-sensitive information beyond 5 nm of depth, with spatial resolution better than a few tens of nm. But with the development of high brilliance synchrotron radiation facilities worldwide, advancements in high-resolution imaging techniques, and the increasing availability of insertion device x-ray sources providing polarization control, such as elliptically polarizing undulators (EPU), new synchrotron-based tools are now becoming available for probing nanoscale crystal orientation in CaCO3 minerals and biominerals. Coherent diffractive imaging (CDI) is such a promising tool for high resolution studies of biominerals In this work, we present the first x-ray linear dichroic ptychography of biominerals using the aragonite (CaCO3) coral skeleton of Seriatopora aculeata as a test sample. We imaged several coral skeleton particles on and off the O K-edge π* peak and observed significant contrast differences between absorption and phase images. We then performed PIC mapping using three linear dichroic ptychography absorption images to quantitatively determine crystal c-axis orientations in the coral with 35 nm spatial resolution. We also qualitatively validated our ptychography results by correlating the ptychography PIC maps with 4D scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) The use of such phase contrast may lead to new dose-efficient dichroic imaging techniques for studying anisotropic biominerals, and has important implications for understanding the nanoscale organization of crystallites in biominerals. The S. aculeata coral skeleton used in this study was a pencil-thick, short and tapered branch, termed a nubbin (fig. After 7 days of bleaching, the skeleton was washed twice in DD-H2O for 5 minutes and twice in ethanol for 5 minutes. A ~1 cm long nubbin, was broken off from the rest of the coral skeleton, placed in an agate mortar and immersed in 100% ethanol, then gently fractured by an agate pestle into micrometer-sized grains. The resulting ethanol suspension was sonicated for 2 minutes for further dispersion, and the supernatant solution was transferred by pipette onto a 200 mesh copper transmission electron microscopy (TEM) grid coated with carbon film and air-dried for 24 hours before data acquisition. Soft X-ray ptychographic microscopy measurements were performed at the imaging branch of the undulator beamline (7.0.1) -COherent Scattering and MICroscopy (COSMIC) -at the Advanced Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) Ptychographic measurements consisted of single diffraction patterns recorded at each scan point with 200 or 300 ms dwell time and scanned in a square grid with 40 nm steps to cover an approximately 1.5×1.5 μm field of view, with a reconstruction pixel size of 10.1 nm/pixel. Linear dichroic ptychography data were collected at 0o, 45o, 90o and 135o linear polarizations. The 0o and 90o data were collected with the EPU tuned to horizontal and vertical polarizations, respectively. Since, at the time of these measurements, only linear horizontal and vertical polarizations were under remote computer control, the TEM grid was physically rotated clockwise in-plane by ~135o with respect to the upstream beam, and then the 45o and 135o data were collected using the horizontal and vertical polarizations again. The same linear dichroic data with 4 polarization angles were collected at two x-ray energies around the O K-edge π* peak: one at pre-edge (534.5 eV, or 1.5 eV before the π* peak) and another at on-peak (536.5 eV, or 0.5 eV after the π* peak maximum). The pre-edge energy used was estimated to be near the negative phase peak and thus had the most negative phase shift relative to vacuum, to achieve optimal phase contrast. The on-peak energy was chosen to be slightly off the maximum absorption peak at 536 eV to reduce beam absorption and attenuation caused by specimen thickness. The resonant energy at the O edge rather than the C edge was chosen in this study because the 3:1 ratio of O to C in CaCO3 means imaging at O resonance gives 3x greater signal-to-noise ratio and contrast. After all data were acquired, ptychography reconstructions were performed using regularized ptychographic iterative engine (rPIE) Scanning transmission x-ray microscopy with x-ray absorption spectroscopy (STXM-XAS) was measured at ALS beamline 7.0.1.2. The spectromicroscopy data were recorded with 5 ms dwell time and proceeded with 60 nm steps in a square grid scan, with energies spanning the entire O K-edge from 525 to 555 eV. Energy scan steps proceeded with 0.5 eV steps from 525 to 530 eV, then 0.2 eV from 530 to 542 eV, and finally with 0.5 eV steps from 542 to 555 eV. The same energy scan parameters were repeated for x-ray linear polarizations at 0o, 45o, 90o, and 135o. All spectra are normalized via subtraction of the average image from non-resonant energies from 525 to 530 eV. X-ray absorption spectra were generated using the MANTiS software Crystallographic c-axis orientations in coral particles were calculated using PIC mapping ( (1) Solving for γ and χ in the above equations gives the in-plane and out-of-plane c-axis angles, respectively. The range of χ contracts and expands as I -varies, but the relative difference in χ between particles remains consistent. In this work, I -was arbitrarily set to 2. Since ptychography data at four EPU linear polarizations were collected, two sets of polarizations were used to calculate two PIC maps for each coral particle: the first set used 0o, 45o, and 90o, the second set used 0o, 135o, and 90o. The PIC maps were acquired using the PEEM-3 instrument on beamline 11.0.1.1 at ALS. Nine partly overlapping 60 μm x 60 μm PIC map data were acquired and then tiled and blended in Photoshop ® . For each PIC map, a stack of 19 PEEM images were acquired on-peak at the O Kedge π* energy as the linear polarization from the undulator was rotated from 0° to 90° in 5° increments. The 19 images were mounted as a stack and analyzed for fully quantitative crystal orientation information in each 60-nm pixel using the GG Macros in Igor Pro Carbon ® . As coral skeletons are made of <99.9% aragonite (CaCO3) and <0.1% organic matrix Scanning nano-diffraction (4D-STEM) data and electron tomography data were collected at the National Center for Electron Microscopy, Molecular Foundry, LBNL. Both methods were used on precisely the same three particles already analyzed with ptychography. A Titan 60-300 equipped with an Orius 830 detector (Gatan, Pleasanton, CA) and four windowless silicon drift EDS detectors (FEI super-X) were used with a solid angle of 0.7 srad. The microscope operated in STEM mode at 200 kV with an electron beam current of ~16 pA for 4D-STEM datasets and ~40 pA for STEM imaging. The 4D-STEM diffraction data were taken on Orius CCD with a camera length of 300 mm using a convergence angle ~0.51mrad, with 64 × 64 square grid scan positions. Before clustering of 4D-STEM data, individual diffraction patterns were preprocessed by aligning the center of mass of the main beam to the image center to correct for horizontal and vertical shifts introduced by beam tilt. A diffraction similarity map was generated using agglomerative hierarchical clustering Electron tomography was performed using the GENeralized Fourier Iterative REconstruction (GENFIRE) Figure Fig. showing the expected dependence of x-ray absorption on the relative angle between crystal caxis and x-ray polarization To study the effects of linear dichroism on the absorptive component of the coral's complex exit wave, we imaged 3 coral particles at two energies, pre-and on-peak. Figure P1 displayed overall smooth features with little internal structures, whereas P2 and P3 contained multiple nano-domains and striations. While resonant imaging revealed rich polarizationdependent absorption contrast due to the linear dichroism, imaging off resonance produced no absorption contrast when varying polarizations (fig. To examine the effects of linear dichroism on the phase component of the coral skeleton particles' complex exit wave, we also collected ptychography images at 534.5 eV (Fig. But as we observe in ptychography maps, while the effect on absorption is significant on resonance (Fig. on O K-edge and a ~50% overlap, each recorded projection absorbed an estimated dose of 1.44 × 10 8 Gy. At this dose and estimated resolution no noticeable deterioration was observed in the sample Ptychographic PIC mapping revealed that the orientations of crystals are much more diverse at the nanoscale than previously appreciated. As is clear from Fig. To better understand the co-oriented smaller domains, we performed PIC mapping on the on-edge linear dichroic ptychography absorption images to quantitatively map c-axis angles in the coral particles and analyzed the in-plane (γ) and out-of-plane (χ) c-axis orientation angles. Since Eq. 1 and Eq. 2 only require 3 polarizations to compute the γ and χ, PIC maps in Fig. Histograms of γ (top) and χ (bottom) in Fig. To further validate the localization and orientation of crystallites observed in ptychography PIC maps, we collected scanning electron nano-diffraction 4D-STEM data on particle P3 and assessed its nanoscale lattice changes over the entire particle. The converging beam electron diffraction (CBED) patterns were analyzed using unsupervised agglomerative hierarchical clustering The CBED patterns reveal variations and similarity in diffraction -hence crystal orientations -across the particle. For instance, pattern #1 is similar to pattern #9, and both are in close proximity to one another. In contrast, patterns #4 and #6, although within the same region, have dissimilar diffraction patterns. Moreover, the similarity ranking map divides the particle P3 into sub-regions closely resembling those shown in the ptychography PIC map in Fig. X-ray linear dichroic ptychography of coral particles shown in Fig. The orientations observed in the main domains of each particle are <35°, as previously observed by Benzerara et al., Similarly, the main crystalline domains in all three particles P1, P2, and P3 are co-oriented within 35°, as expected from spherulitic crystals. Unexpectedly, all three particles exhibit several smaller (~100 nm) domains differently oriented with respect to the main domain (Fig. Since the orientations of these smaller domains are not random, but co-oriented with one another, these crystallites cannot be the randomly oriented nanocrystals observed in the CoCs in Fig. Note that these smaller domains in corals have not been observed with such detail before, presumably because previous studies did not have the capability to detect bulk subdomain morphology. Are these co-oriented but disconnected corallites consistent with either of the current models proposed for coral skeleton formation? In one model corals form their skeletons by either ion-by-ion precipitation from solution The latter are unlikely to result from extraneous contaminants during coral skeleton growth, or depositions after the death of the animal, or aggregation of particles after fracturing, as all three scenarios would not generate either the co-oriented or the equally sized crystallites consistently observed in all three particles. Although additional evidence is needed to fully understand the source and formation mechanism of the observed co-oriented, disconnected crystallites, any model for coral skeleton formation must be consistent with their formation. One parsimonious explanation is that the three particles analyzed were fractured from interfacial regions, at the boundary of two main crystal orientation domains, for instance two adjacent fibers. Assuming a non-straight, jagged boundary between two crystal fibers, what appears as smaller separate crystallites may be portions of the same larger crystal. This parsimonious interpretation does not require a new understanding of coral formation; it is consistent with coral formation by attachment of amorphous nanoparticles To put ptychographic PIC map's fine-grain, nanoscale results into the larger perspective, we also used X-PEEM to acquire a wide-field of view, lower spatial resolution (60 nm) PIC map from another region of the same S. aculeata skeleton (Fig. The co-oriented, disconnected crystallites, however, are not detected by PEEM-PIC mapping, because its maximum probing depth is 5 nm at the O K-edge Ptychographic PIC mapping is qualitatively validated with 4D-STEM (Fig. Nonetheless, this work demonstrates a new attempt to correlate x-ray ptychography with 4D-STEM to understand nanoscale crystal orientations in biomaterials. There are a few limitations in this work. First, since the aragonite particles studied here are randomly oriented polycrystals, x-ray linearly dichroic ptychography images actually measured the integrated sum of all c-axes along the beam direction, with contributions to the contrast from different nano-crystals. Therefore, PIC maps presented here represent only the average orientations in the coral particles. One strategy to overcome this limitation may be to use a ptychographic vector nanotomography approach similar to the ones used to study 3D magnetic vector field By doing such vector tomography reconstruction, one should be able to obtain true c-axis orientations of voxels in three dimensions. Second, since the coral specimens imaged here were ground by a pestle and thus produced uneven surface, the uncontrolled sample morphology makes quantitative interpretation of ptychographic phase images more complicated, as linear dichroic phase contrast then becomes a function of both specimen thickness and crystal orientation. Also, the process of physically grinding the coral skeleton fractured the skeleton into particles and may have introduced structural artifacts. This can be alleviated by first embedding the specimen in epoxy resin then using focused ion beam (FIB) to make it suitably thin for ptychography. Another limitation of the current work is that for simplicity we considered the refractive index of aragonite to be a scalar, not a tensor. For fully quantitative x-ray ptychography all calculations will have to be re-done considering the tensor refractive index of aragonite Although the observation of linear ptychographic phase dichroism is interesting, more careful sample preparation and measurements are needed in future studies to extract quantitative c-axis orientation information from phase. The x-ray linear dichroic ptychography results presented in this work imply an important possibility. Conventionally, enhanced polarization-dependent contrast is derived from absorption contrast when imaged on elemental absorption edges, with the trade-off that more energy is deposited into the sample per unit area and unit time, which inevitably exacerbates sample radiation damage. However, as this work has demonstrated, one major benefit of x-ray linear dichroic ptychography is that strong polarization-dependent phase contrast is also available when imaged off of resonant energy. This suggests that linear dichroic phase contrast imaging offers an alternative path to obtaining quantitative crystal orientation insights without having to subject the sample to the same radiation dose as absorption edge imaging. This potentially important finding can enable more sophisticated and data-intensive studies. Such dose-efficient technique will be especially advantageous when acquiring vector tomography datasets, since many tilt projections are needed to achieve high quality 3D reconstruction. So far most linear dichroism studies focused on absorption as linear phase dichroism is difficult to obtain experimentally. Therefore, the x-ray linear dichroic phase ptychography technique presented here has the potential to become an important tool for studying dose-sensitive materials. In the future, x-ray linear dichroic ptychography can be applied to image other materials such as tooth enamel, bone, seashells, sea urchin spines, polymers, and other classes of optically anisotropic materials with sophisticated nanoscale morphologies and crystallinity. It can also be used to study intricate mechanisms such as crystal nucleation, self-assembly, phase transitions and space-filling growth. In addition, given the ease with which x-ray linear polarization can be tuned at synchrotrons, such technique can be readily implemented in existing coherent diffractive imaging beamlines, and can be combined with x-ray absorption spectroscopy and x-ray fluorescence imaging to produce multidimensional images of heterogeneous samples. As coherent flux, data acquisition, and big data technologies continue to advance at synchrotron radiation facilities, we envision this linear dichroic ptychography imaging technique becoming part of a powerful suite of tools that offer both compositional and orientational information in real time. In this work we present the first demonstration of x-ray linear dichroic ptychography. By imaging three S. aculeata coral skeleton particles at pre-and on-peak at the O K-edge, we observed strong polarization-dependent phase and absorption contrasts. Then we performed PIC mapping on the dichroic ptychography absorption images to quantitatively estimated c-axis orientations in the corals and observed the presence of two types of previously known crystallites: the main domain in each particle with the narrow angular spread < 35° consistent with spherulitic crystals, and with the randomly oriented sub-micrometer nanocrystal domains observed in the centers of calcification in Acropora skeletons. Finally, we observed ~100 nm crystallites mis-oriented with respect to the main domains in each particle but co-oriented with one another, disconnected, interspersed with and within larger crystals which are consistent with coral skeleton formation by attachment of amorphous particles, which crystallize with jagged edges in both coral fibers and CoCs. We also validated the x-ray results with 4D-STEM and confirmed that regions of orientational diversity are largely consistent. The observation of strong linear phase dichroism off of absorption edge offers the potentially interesting possibility of using phase imaging rather than absorption imaging in future linear dichroism studies as a way to alleviate sample radiation damage. With further development, we expect x-ray linear dichroic ptychography to become a powerful non-destructive tool for probing general classes of optically anisotropic materials such as biominerals with sub-ten nanometer resolution in two and three dimensions. 