We present the results of first-principles calculations of selected structural and thermodynamic properties of a set of grain boundaries (GBs) in zirconium, spanning a range of misorientation angles and boundary planes. We performed plane-wave density functional theory calculations on low-Σ grain boundaries -five symmetric tilt GBs (STGBs) and three twist GBs; all with misorientation axes about [0 0 0 1] and in optimised microscopic configurations -to gain insight into the associated atomistic structures. From studying the interface energetics, we found that higher GB excess volumes tended to be associated with higher GB energies. Furthermore, we examined how the interplanar spacing, volume per atom, v, and local atomic coordination at the GB deviated from equivalent quantities in bulk. We also defined a grain boundary width according to a threshold value of v, allowing us to rank the GBs by their relative thickness. We found the twist GBs to exhibit similar energetic and structural properties, whereas the STGBs demonstrated more variation. Our comprehensive analysis demonstrates how all five dimensions of GB space are crucial in determining properties such as the work of ideal separation and the length scale over which atoms are perturbed by the presence of the GB. So that our results can be useful for further investigations, we have published our data to a public repository (Zenodo). This data includes the optimised and initial structures, in addition to the computed interface energetics and structural properties. Grain boundaries are paramount in determining macroscopic materials properties in polycrystalline materials. For instance, in polycrystalline metals, grain refinement, in which grain size is controlled, can be used to improve the strength of a material Despite the importance of Zr alloys in nuclear reactor applications, there has not been a great deal of research into understanding Zr GB properties, especially not with the accuracy provided by first principles methods. This is partly due to the difficulties associated with constructing a representative set of GB models in Zr, which in the α phase, adopts a hexagonal close-packed structure. As part of their work studying defect segregation, Christensen et al. Existing work in which multiple GB planes have been probed included that of Uesugi and Higashi For the first time, we have probed from first-principles, a set of multiple GBs in Zr that includes multiple GB planes. We have studied the first four low-Σ GBs (Σ7, Σ13, Σ19, and Σ31) in Zr with misorientation axes about Grain boundary simulation cells (supercells) were constructed using the coincident site lattice (CSL). At particular misorientation angles between two superimposed identical lattices, say, lattice I and lattice II, some proportion (conventionally denoted 1/Σ) of lattice sites precisely coincide, enabling the construction of a CSL unit cell. Periodic GB supercells may be formed by adjoining two CSL unit cells, where one is populated with lattice I sites and the other with lattice II sites. A valid CSL unit cell may be formed by choosing as its edge vectors any linear combination of CSL primitive unit cell edge vectors. In this way, supercells containing various GB planes may be constructed. A GB model constructed via the CSL Owing to the computational expense of first-principles simulation techniques, we may submit only relatively small systems for examination. Consequently, in this study, as in those in the literature In Table In Table For each GB supercell, complementary bulk and free surface (FS) supercells were constructed. To generate a FS model, atoms belonging to one micro-grain in the GB model were removed. To then generate a bulk model, the remaining atoms in the FS model were copied into the vacuum region. Plane-wave DFT codes simulate supercells with implicit periodic boundary conditions. Although well-suited to studying crystalline matter in general, the periodicity of the plane-wave basis set can be problematic when studying defects such as grain boundaries. GB supercells are typically constructed either without vacuum, where the supercell contains two (potentially distinct) GBs, or with vacuum, where the supercell contains one GB and two free surfaces. The advantage of including vacuum is the isolation of the GB of interest; in particular, energetic quantities such as the grain boundary energy can be computed for that precise GB. On the other hand, in the fully-periodic model, if the two GBs are not identical, only an average quantity could be determined. However, it is preferable to avoid the introduction of free surfaces into the GB supercell, since they may have a significant effect on the atomic relaxation of the GB. Following the ideas of Guhl et al. All GBs were formed by rotations about [0 0 0 1]. periodic GB supercells such that the two GBs present in each supercell are identical. Crucially, by manipulating the skewness of the supercell, we could ensure this equivalence was maintained whilst exploring the microscopic degrees of freedom of each macroscopically defined GB. Such an exploration is necessary to ensure a thermodynamically reasonable system is simulated. For instance, the macroscopic specification of a GB, which comprises the misorientation axis and angle (via the Σ-value, in our case), and the GB plane, does not describe the relative positions of atoms across neighbouring grains. Thus, atoms may be in unphysical proximity according to the initial construction of the supercell. A more realistic microscopic configuration can be determined by exploring the energy landscape that results from performing total energy calculations after sequential rigid translations of one micro-grain relative to the other. For each point on this energy landscape, known as a γ-surface, we also explored changes in energy resulting from introducing small amounts of vacuum at the GBs. Thus, for each GB studied, we identified i) the minimum-energy configuration in terms of a translation of one micro-grain relative to the other, t min , and ii) the GB expansion, written as: where A sup is the area of the GB (for a parallelepiped supercell defined by edge vectors a, b and c, where edge vectors a and b lie in the GB plane, A sup = |a × b|), V sup is the total volume of the GB supercell (V sup = |a•(b×c)|) in the identified minimum-energy configuration, n GB is the number of atoms in the GB supercell, and v Zr is the volume associated with a single bulk α-Zr atom. ∆L is also known as the GB excess volume (e.g. in Ref. ( Due to the computational expense of sampling a threedimensional space with DFT calculations, we did not compute the full γ-surface for every GB. Instead, we first compared the full γ-surface of the Σ7 type I STGB as computed by DFT with that computed by a Zr empirical potential (the embedded-atom method (EAM) potential proposed by Mendelev and Ackland as number 3 in Ref. To further reduce the computational expense of explor-ing the microscopic degrees of freedom of each GB, we imposed constraints on the atoms during γ-surface and GB expansion calculations; atoms were free to relax only in the GB-normal direction. Once the preferred microscopic configuration was identified for each GB, the supercell was reconstructed in this configuration and atoms were fully relaxed. In all geometry optimisations, the supercell dimensions were fixed. Upon inspection of the twist GB γ-surfaces as predicted by the EAM potential, the symmetrically irreducible region was found to have a fractional extent of 1/Σ in each γ-surface direction. For example, the symmetrically irreducible region on the Σ7 twist GB γ-surface had the same shape as the full γ-surface, but spanned only 1/49 of its area. This result can be deduced using geometrical arguments, where it can be seen that translating one micro-grain to points on a Σ-by-Σ grid results in the same relative configuration of atoms across the GB; the only difference is the position of atoms from both micrograins relative to the boundaries of the supercell, which is immaterial (as long as, in the case of a DFT simulation, k-point sampling is sufficiently dense). Energy differences resulting from relative translations within the symmetrically irreducible regions of the twist γ-surfaces were found to be small, as reported by Christensen et al. Schematics of the GB systems investigated in this work, after the application of the minimum-energy expansion, (∆L) min , and the minimum-energy relative micro-grain translation, t min , but before relaxation of the atomic coordinates, are shown for the STGBs in Fig. Grain boundary and free surface energies per unit interface area can be computed according to: where E tot GB/FS and E tot B are the total supercell energies of GB or FS and bulk system supercells, after relaxation of atomic coordinates, and n GB/FS and n B are the number of atoms in the GB or FS and bulk system supercells, respectively. An estimation of the relative strength of a GB (or a bulk system, at a specified interface plane) can be made by computing the work of ideal separation, W GB/B , as follows: which is defined so that a positive W implies work must be done to cleave the system. In this work, we compute W GB for all GB systems, and W B for separation of the corresponding bulk systems -i.e. for cleavage at the same plane as in the GB system. We employed two classes of atomistic simulation methods to explore Zr GB properties. Primarily, we used the density functional theory (DFT) method, which, through modelling a material's electronic state at the quantum mechanical level (via the electron density) For DFT simulations, we used the CASTEP code In CASTEP, the electronic wave functions are represented using a periodic plane-wave basis, whose size is determined via the cut-off energy parameter, E cut . Initial cut-off energy convergence tests were performed on bulk α-Zr; we selected E cut = 360 eV for all subsequent simulations, since total energies were found to be converged to within 0.01 eV atom -1 . To represent the quantum-mechanical effects of electron exchange and correlation (XC), we selected the functional due to Perdew, Burke and Ernzerhof (PBE) To avoid instabilities associated with charge sloshing, a density mixing (DM) scheme In opting for GB supercells that contain two identical GBs, rather than one GB and two free surfaces, we were constrained to use an integer number of CSL unit cells in the out-of-boundary direction. We performed convergence tests, in which we computed E GB for increasing supercell sizes, to determine how many CSL unit cells, n CSL [20], should be used for each GB system. For each GB system, n CSL , which is listed in Table Values of E tot (like those required in Eq. 2 for computing the interface energies) were taken from the estimated 0 K energies reported by CASTEP. Where applicable, we have converted the units of interfacial energies (such as E GB ) from eV A -2 to SI units of J m -2 , using the physical constants in Ref. By measuring the interplanar spacing, we examined the extent to which each GB can perturb atoms from their bulk-like coordinates, as we move further from the interface. This produces some measure of the relative thickness of each GB. In particular, we considered the deviation of interplanar spacing (relative to that in bulk) in the vicinity of each GB by computing, as a function of distance from the GB, the coordinates of crystallographic planes that are parallel to the GB. Where multiple atoms lay in this plane, we took an arithmetic average. We label the resulting distances as d ij , where i and j refer to adjacent plane indices, increasing with distance from the interface (where j = i + 1). For all systems, except the Σ7 type II STGB, the i = 0 plane refers to the plane in the opposing micro-grain such that d 01 is the distance between planes from different micro-grains. For the Σ7 type II STGB supercell, which includes atoms precisely on the nominal GB plane, the i = 0 plane is the nominal GB plane. To further examine the atomistic structures associated with the studied GBs, we performed a Voronoi tessellation on all GB supercells, both before and after atomic relaxation. To this end, the supercell was partitioned into convex polyhedra that bound the regions of space associated with each individual atom. The tessellation is defined such that all points in the Voronoi region associated with a given atom are closer to that atom than any other atom. This is a useful analysis method for a number of reasons. The Voronoi tessellation results in an association of each atom with its nearest neighbours (by considering to which pair of atoms each Voronoi facet corresponds). Hence, we can obtain a coordination number for each atom. In doing this, we found it necessary to filter out facets below a certain threshold area, some of which are numerical artefacts due to the degenerate nature of Voronoi vertices in periodic systems. Additionally, we assigned a scalar to each atom: the volume of the Voronoi region, which is helpful when comparing any given atom with the bulk-like environment. Furthermore, we derived a simple measure of the effective GB width, w, by considering how the volume per atom (relative to that of bulk) changes with distance from the GB plane. We began by performing a geometry optimisation of the two-atom bulk α-Zr primitive unit cell, in order to ascertain the Zr lattice parameters according to the PBE exchange correlation functional. We applied symmetry constraints on the unit cell, such that the hexagonal close-packed structure was maintained during relaxation. Consequently, the optimised lattice parameters were found to be: a = 3.2301 A and c = 5.1641 A, which agree well with the experimentally determined values of a exp = 3.2316 A and c exp = 5.1475 A Grain boundary energy, E GB , free surface energy, E FS , and work of ideal separation, W, for each studied interface are listed in Table Generally, there is an inverse correlation between E GB (Fig. In 2010, Janisch et al. In Fig. For each GB system, the spacing between adjacent crystallographic planes parallel to the GB plane is plotted as a function of plane number from the GB in Fig. For the STGBs, there is large variation in the magnitude of the changes in interplanar spacing. For ex-ample, the increase in interplanar spacing at the initial layer of the type I STGBs is found to increase with Σvalue (the bulk interplanar spacings are shown as horizontal lines in Fig. For all the twist GBs, the interplanar spacings are very similar, and the maximum change is an expansion of approximately 0.15 A. In general, a change in interplanar spacing arises due to a lack of translational symmetry, resulting in interatomic bonding that is energetically less favourable than in bulk. The observed oscillatory response of the interplanar spacing illustrates how the initial expansion is accommodated by the remaining layers. By partitioning the supercell into regions associated with each atom, we elicit some measure of how the local atomic environment is modified due to the GB. We used a Voronoi tessellation to assign a convex polyhedron to each atom, and computed the volume of each region in the GB supercell after atomic relaxation. Fig. The change in local atomic volume is largely similar across all of the twist GBs. Atomic regions in the plane nearest to the nominal GB plane experience an expansion, and those in the next-nearest plane experience a contraction of a smaller magnitude. Using the local atomic volume data portrayed in Fig. It should be noted that the precise position of the vertical lines in Fig. The GB widths, w, are plotted in Fig. The twist GBs have the smallest effective widths, of around 5 A. The largest effective width, of around 16 A, is observed for the type II STGB. The response of the local atomic volume in the Σ7 type II STGB is more similar to that in the Σ31 STGB than the Σ7 type I STGB. For instance, the effective widths are relatively large and there are significant contractions in the local atomic volumes of similar magnitudes in both the Σ7 type II STGB and the Σ31 STGB, whereas the Σ7 type I STGB exhibits a smaller effective width and relatively small contractions in the local atomic volumes. This demonstrates how the Σ-value is not a good indicator of the local atomic environment, nor, by extension, the GB properties. In Fig. Considering both GB width and maximum local volume change together as measures of the effect of a GB on the local atomic environment, we see the Σ13 twist GB to have the smallest effect, with both a small width and a small maximum local atomic volume change. The Σ19, Σ31 and Σ7 type II STGBs can be seen to have the largest effect, with the largest effective widths and largest maximum changes in local atomic volume. Furthermore, we also used our results to investigate the correlation between GB expansion, (∆L) min , and GB energy, E GB , as shown in Fig. In Fig. Our results show that, generally, due to the presence of a GB, atomic sites experience both increases and decreases in their coordination, which for bulk α-Zr is n c = 12. For all STGBs, except the Σ7 type I STGB, several sites adopt high coordination numbers of up to n c = 15, whereas only a few sites adopt lower-than-bulk coordination of n c = 11. The Σ7 type I STGB demonstrates with approximately equal frequency increases and decreases in coordination due to the GB. The Σ19 twist GB is notable in that some atomic sites have coordination numbers of 10, two below the bulk value. During the course of this work, we developed a Python package named 'atomistic' to assist with generating input structures and analysing simulation outputs Calculation of grain boundary structures can be timeconsuming and computationally expensive, but is a necessary step in exploring the range of phenomena that occur at grain boundaries. To enable other researchers to make use of and build upon the results of our calculations, we released our data on the public data repository Zenodo We conducted a first principles analysis on five symmetric tilt GBs and three twist GBs in Zr, generated using the first four low-Σ CSLs that have rotation axes parallel to the hexagonal c-axis of α-Zr; STGBs and twist GBs were formed from Σ7, Σ13 and Σ19 CSLs, and the Σ31 CSL was used to construct a further STGB. Using a plane-wave DFT code (CASTEP) we firstly explored the microscopic degrees of freedom of each boundary, in order to generate atomistic structures that were thermodynamically favourable. Generally, we found good agreement between DFT and an EAM empirical potential in predicting the energy landscape derived from sequential relative translations between the two micro-grains of each GB. Using GB, free surface and bulk models, we computed the interfacial energetics, such as grain boundary energy, E GB , and work of ideal separation, W, which provides an indicative measure of the resistance to decohesion. We found all three twist GBs to exhibit very similar interfacial energetics, whereas the STGBs demonstrated a larger variation. The choice of boundary plane (symmetric tilt or twist) was found to have a dramatic effect on the GB properties; for instance, the Σ7 type I STGB has E GB = 0.94 J m -2 , whereas the Σ7 twist GB has E GB = 0.28 J m -2 . The GB with the largest work of separation was the Σ13 STGB, for which W GB = 3.08 J m -2 ; whereas the smallest work of separation was found for the Σ7 type I STGB, for which W GB = 2.46 J m -2 . In common with studies on other (cubic) metals We additionally focussed on analysing the geometric properties of the GBs. For instance, we measured the effect of the GB on the interplanar spacing, between crystallographic planes that are parallel to the interface. A damped oscillatory response was observed. For most GBs, we saw an initial expansion of the interplanar spacing at the GB, followed by a contraction between the next-nearest planes. All twist GBs demonstrated an identical interplanar spacing response. By computing the local volume per atom using a Voronoi tessellation, we were able to further examine the atomistic structures of the GBs. In particular, we considered how the volume of each atom changes due to the GB, and by setting a threshold volume change of ±2 %, were able to define an effective GB width, which ranged in length from 5.28 A for the Σ13 twist GB, to 16.22 A for the Σ7 type II STGB. Generally, we found the GB widths to correlate with the GB expansions associated with the minimum-energy structure. Furthermore, we used the Voronoi tessellation to measure how the local atomic coordination changed with distance from the GB. Coordination was found to vary from the bulk value of n c = 12 to between n c = 10 and n c = 15 for atom site near the GBs. However, typically, an increase in coordination was more prominent near the GBs. Finally, we also found a positive correlation between the minimum-energy GB expansion, and the GB energy: GBs that adopt a larger GB expansion tend to have a higher GB energy. First principles analysis of GBs is valuable since it provides accurate information about the atomistic structures associated with GBs in real materials. Such information can assist in understanding, for instance, intergranular fracture mechanisms, such as those associated with the problem of the pellet-cladding interaction that we previously mentioned, since properties like the work of separation provide simple measures of resistance to decohesion. We will explore the segregation of impurities to these grain boundaries and the consequent embrittlement in a future publication 