There is a growing interest in obtaining high quality monolayer transition metal disulfides (TMDSs) for optoelectronic device applications. Surface chemical treatments using a range of chemicals on monolayer TMDSs have proven effective to improve their photoluminescence (PL) yield. However, the underlying mechanism for PL enhancement by these treatments is not clear, which prevents a rational design of passivation strategies. In this work, a simple and effective approach to significantly enhance PL of TMDSs is demonstrated by using a family of cation donors, which we show to be much more effective than commonly used p-dopants which achieve PL enhancement through electron transfer. We develop a detailed mechanistic picture for the action of these cation donors and demonstrate that one of them, Li-TFSI (bistriflimide), enhances the PL of both MoS2 and WS2 to a level double that compared to the widely discussed and currently best performing "super acid" H-TFSI treatment. In addition, the ionic salts used in chemical treatments are compatible with a range of greener solvents and are easier to handle than super-acids, which provides the possibility of directly treating TMDSs during device fabrication. This work sets up rational selection rules for ionic chemicals to passivate TMDSs and increases the potential of TMDSs in practical optoelectronic applications. The discovery of 2D materials based on semiconducting transition metal disulfides (TMDSs), with the chemical structure MS2 (M=Mo, W), has opened up new interesting possibilities in optoelectronic devices, as monolayer TMDSs possess direct bandgaps with absorption in the visible spectral region, as well as other excellent properties well suited for optoelectronic applications, like high extinction coefficients due to the strong excitonic effects, exceptional mechanical properties, and chemical and thermal stability. The structures of all the chemical treatment agents used in this study are illustrated in Fig. We start by comparing the improvement in PL intensity via treatment with H-TFSI and Li-TFSI. Representative PL spectra for pristine, H-TFSI and Li-TFSI treated monolayers MoS2 and WS2 are shown in Fig. Surface-sensitive X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were also carried out on pristine, H-TFSI-treated, and Li-TFSI-treated MoS2 samples to investigate the chemical treatment mechanism. As depicted in Fig. To further test the above hypothesis, we investigate the stability of H and Li atom adsorbed at various types of adsorption sites in monolayer MoS2 and WS2 via density functional theory (DFT) simulations of the formation energy. The pump-probe spectra of pristine, H-TFSI-treated, and Li-TFSI-treated MoS2 are depicted in Fig. samples have been discussed in detail in our previous study. In contrast, no sub-gap defect state emerges in the pump-probe spectra of the Li-TFSI-treated MoS2 sample (no photo-induced features seen at 730 nm), indicating the lack of sub-gap trap sites which then leads to a shorter exciton lifetime. The pump-probe results agree well with TRPL data where Li-TFSI-treated MoS2 sample presents a shorter lifetime due to a lack of exciton trapping and suggests that excitons in Li-TFSI-treated MoS2 recombine more efficiently bypassing trap states or that the subgap state formed due to sulphur vacancies is passivated. Exciton transport is an important criteria in many optoelectronic device and one that can be strongly affected by semiconductor properties such as doping and traps. Here, we directly monitor the spatial propagation of photogenerated excitons in H-TFSI-treated and Li-TFSI-treated MoS2 monolayers on quartz substrates under ambient conditions with a confocal PL set up, as shown in Fig. With a variance of σ 0 2 . In the following, the exciton density at any delay time (t) will be approximated with another Gaussian function: With a variance of σ t 2 . The normalized PL intensity profile (IPL) at each time snapshot (t) for H-TFSItreated and Li-TFSI-treated monolayer MoS2 are shown in Fig. At early time, (t<1 ns), σ t 2 grows linearly with time, which is indicative of a diffusive motion of excitons. The higher DLi-TFSI value of 0. whereas there is no interaction between TFSI anions and the MoS2 surface (Fig. Based on the results presented here, we speculate there are two reasons why TFSI based ionic salts work so well to enhance the PL of TMDSs. The presence of two strong electron-withdrawing groups (-CF3SO2) on the same nitrogen atom leads to a significantly lower surface charge density of the TFSI anion compared to the Tf anion. As illustrated in Fig. We have systematically investigated surface chemical treatments that enhance the PL yield of TMDSs by comparing a series of ionic chemicals and small molecule p-dopants, and studying their effect via a range of steady-state and time-resolved spectroscopy and microscopy techniques combined with DFT simulations. Our results provide a detailed mechanistic picture for how these chemical treatments work and allow us to set up selection rules for ionic chemicals to improve PL of TMDSs, where cations and counter anions both play important roles during chemical treatments. The cation must be stably adsorbed on the surface of TMDSs rather than underdo electron transfer, allowing for suppression of trion formation, thereby improving PL yield. The counter anion should be non-coordinating with strong electron-withdrawing groups. The strongest enhancement is observed for Li-TFSI, which gives a PL enhancement twice that of the widely discussed "super acid" H-TFSI. More importantly, Li-TFSI is stable and functions in benign solvents, which possesses the potential to be employed directly during device fabrication of TMDSs. Overall, we demonstrate a simple and effective route to enhance PL of TMDSs which opens a route to building high performance chemically treated optoelectronic devices. were prepared according to reported gold-mediated exfoliation method to ensure relatively large monolayers. The chemical treatments with H-TFSI (0.02 M in 1, 2-dichloroethane), F4TCNQ (0.02 M in dichloromethane) and Magic Blue (0.02 M in dichloromethane) are carried out inside a nitrogen glovebox, and other treatments are carried out in ambient atmosphere. Methanol is used as solvent for all ionic salts for comparison. The chemical treatments were achieved by immersing the samples into concentrated solutions of the investigated chemicals (0.02 M) for 40 mins. The microscope steady-state PL measurement was carried out using a WITec alpha 300 s setup and has been described previously. The PL maps were measured at 405 nm excitation with a fluence of 15 W cm -2 . The Raman measurements were carried out using Renishaw inVia Raman confocal microscope with a 532 nm excitation source. The XPS measurements were performed using a Thermo Escalab 250Xi system and monochromated aluminium Kα x-ray source. The software package "Thermo Avantage" (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, USA) was used for data analysis. The ultrafast pump-probe setup has been described previously. Supporting Information is available online with additional experimental and calculation details as well as additional data for optical and photophysical characterizations of different chemical treatments on MoS2 and WS2. Data available in University of Cambridge data repository at: link to be added during proof. No custom computer code is used in this work. 1. Si-SiO2 substrates with 90 nm oxide layer were used for steady-state photoluminescence (PL), Raman spectroscopy and X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS). Quartz substrates were used for time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL), ultrafast pump-probe measurement, and PL diffusion measurements. The samples were encapsulated for ultrafast pump-probe measurements, and other measurements are carried out on samples without encapsulation. First-principle calculations of formation energies were carried out based on the density functional theory (DFT) with the Perdew-Burke-Ernerhof (PBE) exchange-correlation functional as implemented in the VASP code. The all-electron projector-augmented wave (PAW) method was adopted, where 4d 5 5s 1 , 5d 4 6s 2 , 3s 2 3p 4 , 1s 1 , 2s 1 , and 3s 1 are treated as valence electrons for Mo, W, S, H, Li and Na atoms, respectively. The plane-wave energy cutoff is set to 600 eV. A Monkhorst-Pack Brillouin zone sampling grid with a resolution of 2π × 0.03 Å -1 is adopted to ensure that all the enthalpy calculations are well converged with an error less than 1 meV/atom. Structural relaxations were performed with forces converged to less than 0.01 eV Å -1 . The 3×3 hexagonal supercell of monolayer MoS2 and WS2 were utilized to display various available adsorption sites in MoS2/ WS2 for M1 (H, Li, Na) adsorption. A vacuum spacing of 20 Å was provided along a perpendicular direction to the plane of MoS2/ WS2 between two adjacent periodic layers in order to avoid any spurious interactions. Detailed structure information is listed below. Taking MoS2 as the example, the stability of various adsorption sites is calculated from their formation energy, which is defined as: where E M1+MoS 2 is the total energy of M1 (H, Li and Na) adsorbed MoS2, E MoS 2 is the energy of MoS2 before the adsorption and E M1 is the energy of an isolated M1 atom. According to the definition, the structure with a more negative formation energy is more stable. Additional PL data for chemical treated MoS 2 and WS 2 The PL of pristine MoS2 is usually undetectable due to the low PL intensity, and the corresponding statistic scatter plots of pristine MoS2 are not presented. As the PL of pristine WS2 is detectable, the corresponding pristine monolayer scatter plots are also shown in Fig. For chemically treated WS2 samples, we performed PL mapping on the same monolayer as on the pristine sample to obtain more direct observation of the PL enhancing strength of different chemical treatments. The PL of pristine WS2 is inhomogeneous, and the position of PL maxima varies between 615 nm and 630 nm, which may be due to randomly-distributed disorder potentials, trions, dielectric disorder as well as interactions with optical phonons. Additional DFT simulation data for WS 2 atoms. Even though that the adsorptions of M1 adatoms are energetically more favourable compare to M2 atoms, each M2 adatom contributes two positive charges, which explains the effectiveness of M2TFSI treatments on improving the PL. On the other hands, the effectiveness of M1-TFSI and M2TFSI treatments on enhancing PL of TMDSs may also be related to how strongly the cations interact with TFSI anion. This determines the amount of cations interacting with the surfaces of monolayer TMDSs, therefore, the bond energy between cation and TFSI anion is simulated. As shown in Table Pump-probe data for pristine, H-TFSI and Li-TFSI treated MoS 2 simulation of Na, K, Ca and Mg adsorption energies and the configurations on different positions of monolayer WS2 surfaces. E Sv (eV) E sf (S) (eV) E sf (W) (eV)