We introduce a double quantum (DQ) 4-Ramsey measurement protocol that enables wide-field magnetic imaging using nitrogen vacancy (NV) centers in diamond, with enhanced homogeneity of the magnetic sensitivity relative to conventional single quantum (SQ) techniques. The DQ 4-Ramsey protocol employs microwave-phase alternation across four consecutive Ramsey (4-Ramsey) measurements to isolate the desired DQ magnetic signal from any residual SQ signal induced by microwave pulse errors. In a demonstration experiment employing a 1-μm-thick NV layer in a macroscopic diamond chip, the DQ 4-Ramsey protocol provides volume-normalized DC magnetic sensitivity of η V = 34 nT Hz -1/2 μm 3/2 across a 125 μm×125 μm field of view, with about 5× less spatial variation in sensitivity across the field of view compared to a SQ measurement. The improved robustness and magnetic sensitivity homogeneity of the DQ 4-Ramsey protocol enable imaging of dynamic, broadband magnetic sources such as integrated circuits and electrically-active cells. Nitrogen-vacancy (NV) color centers in diamond constitute a leading quantum sensing platform, with particularly diverse applications in magnetometry Despite this progress, QDM magnetic imaging applications have been largely restricted to mapping of static magnetic fields exceeding several microtesla due to shortcomings of conventional single quantum (SQ) magnetometry. SQ schemes sense changes in the frequency or phase accumulation between two sublevels with difference in spin projection quantum number * These authors contributed equally to this work † walsworth@umd.edu ∆m = 1. In particular, the sensitivity of QDMs using continuous-wave optically detected magnetic resonance (CW-ODMR) is impaired by competing effects of the optical and microwave (MW) control fields applied during the sensing interval Here, we demonstrate a double quantum (DQ) 4-Ramsey protocol that overcomes the shortcomings of SQ CW-and pulsed-ODMR measurement techniques. This protocol expands upon the advantageous pulsed Ramsey scheme, which temporally separates the spin state control, optical readout, and sensing intervals. The scheme thus enables use of increased laser and MW intensity compared to CW-ODMR, allowing for improved mea- surement contrast and higher fluorescence count rates without broadening the NV -spin resonances. Furthermore, the protocol exploits the benefits of DQ coherence magnetometry, which leverages a double quantum superposition of the m s = |±1 ground-state sublevels, to cancel common-mode resonance shifts and broadening from stress, electric fields, and temperature variations Previously, DQ Ramsey magnetic imaging has been hindered by the technical challenge of producing sufficiently uniform and strong MW fields to avoid spatially-varying errors in the optimal MW pulses and hence the NV -measurement protocol. Such pulse errors result in residual SQ coherence that remains sensitive to commonmode shifts of the |±1 sublevels, degrading the robustness of DQ magnetometry to stress-induced shifts and temperature drifts. The present work circumvents this challenge with a DQ 4-Ramsey protocol specifically designed to suppress the contribution of residual SQ coherence. By properly selecting the spin-1 rotations applied in four consecutive Ramsey measurements (4-Ramsey), the DQ signal from each Ramsey measurement is preserved while the residual SQ signals cancel. This scheme is broadly applicable to both NV -ensemble imaging and bulk sensing modalities, simultaneously mitigating the pernicious effects of stress-gradients and temperature-induced drifts. Since the 4-Ramsey protocol is a straightforward extension of established phase-alternation schemes, implementation in an existing system does not typically require additional MW components. After describing the NV -center and experimental apparatus in Sec. II, we outline and experimentally demonstrate the DQ 4-Ramsey protocol (Sec. III). In Sec. IV, we use SQ and DQ Ramsey fringe imaging to characterize, pixel by pixel, the reduced spatial variation in T * 2 and NV -resonance frequency when using the DQ sensing basis. Using the same field of view as in Sec. IV, we then measure a 1.5× improved median per-pixel sensitivity and a 4.7× narrower spatial distribution of per-pixel sensitivity using the DQ sensing basis compared to the SQ basis (Sec. V). In Sec. VI we highlight next steps to further improve DC magnetic sensitivity and temporal resolution, and we provide an outlook describing envisioned applications for high-sensitivity, broadband magnetic microscopy using the DQ 4-Ramsey protocol. The NV center is a C 3v symmetric color center in diamond formed by substitution of a nitrogen atom adjacent to a vacancy in the carbon lattice. We restrict attention to the negatively charged NV -center, which has an electronic spin-triplet (S = 1) ground state with a zero-field-splitting at room temperature D ≈ 2.87 GHz between the |m s = 0 and |m s = ±1 magnetic sublevels as shown in Fig. where S z is the dimensionless spin-1 operator, M z is the axial spin-stress coupling parameter, D(T ) is the temperature-dependent zero-field-splitting, B z is the projection of the external magnetic field B along the NV -symmetry axis, and γ/(2π) = 28.03 GHz T -1 is the NV -gyromagnetic ratio. Transverse magnetic, electric, and crystal stress terms are neglected as motivated in Refs. The present study employs a QDM to image spinstate-dependent fluorescence from a 1-μ-thick nitrogendoped CVD diamond layer ([N total ] ≈ 20 ppm, 12 C = 99.995%, natural abundance nitrogen) grown by Element Six Ltd. on a (2 × 2 × 0.5) mm 3 high purity diamond substrate. Post-growth treatment via electron irradiation and annealing increased the NV -concentration in the nitrogen-doped layer to ≈ 2 ppm. The magnitude and distribution of stress inhomogeneity in the selected sample is representative of typical diamonds fabricated for NV-based magnetic imaging (see Refs. An approximately 150 μm by 300 μm region of the NV layer is illuminated with 1 W of 532 nm laser light in a total internal reflection (TIR) geometry [see Fig. We introduce a measurement protocol consisting of four consecutive Ramsey sequences that, when combined, isolate the desired DQ magnetometry signal from residual SQ signal by modulating the MW pulse phases. SQ protocols commonly employ sets of two Ramsey sequences (2-Ramsey), alternating the phase of the final π/2 pulse in successive sequences by 180 • , to modulate the NV -fluorescence and cancel low-frequency noise, such as 1/f noise Analogous DQ 2-Ramsey protocols exist: two-tone MW pulses couple the |0 state to equal-amplitude superpositions of the |±1 states, with a phase relationship (|+1 + e i∆φ |-1 )/2 determined by the relative phase ∆φ between the two MW tones Although DQ 2-Ramsey protocols effectively cancel noise at frequencies below the phase modulation frequency, this does not disentangle the desired DQ signal from unwanted SQ signal arising from MW pulse errors. In NV -ensemble measurements, MW pulse errors commonly arise from spatial gradients in the Rabi frequency across an interrogated ensemble or field of view, see Fig. We now describe the phase alternation pattern used in the DQ 4-Ramsey protocol to isolate DQ magnetic signals and present an experimental demonstration using photodiode-based measurements. signal S 4R is given by where, as shown in Fig. Figure As depicted in Fig. We employ SQ 2-Ramsey and DQ 4-Ramsey measurements to image the NV -ensemble spin properties relevant for DC magnetic field sensitivity across a 125 μm by 125 μm field of view. The photon-shot-noise-limited sensitivity of a Ramsey-based measurement η ramsey de-pends upon the NV -ensemble dephasing time T * 2 , the contrast C, and the average number of photons collected per measurement N where ∆m accounts for the difference between the m s states used for the sensing basis (∆m = 1, 2 for the SQ, DQ bases), τ is the free precession interval per measurement, p describes the decay shape, and t r,i indicates the duration of time dedicated to readout and initialization per measurement. The optimal free precession interval is determined by the NV -ensemble dephasing time T * 2 , which is proportional to the inverse of the inhomogeneous linewidth Γ (T * 2 = 1/πΓ assuming a Lorentzian lineshape). Axial stress gradients within a pixel degrade η ramsey by decreasing T * 2 ; stress-induced resonance shifts across an image both worsen η ramsey by ensuring that the chosen MW frequency is sub-optimal for all but a subset of pixels and introduce spatially-varying, non-magnetic offsets in the Ramsey signal that can complicate data analysis We image the NV -ensemble spin properties by sweeping the free precession time in the SQ and DQ Ramsey sequences and fitting the fringes to a sum of oscillations with a common decay envelope: where each oscillatory term, indexed by m I = {-1, 0, 1} (for an 14 N ensemble), has an amplitude A i , frequency f i , phase shift δ i , and decay shape fixed to p = 1 The typical 95% confidence intervals (C.I.) for the extracted dephasing times T * 2 and amplitudes A i discussed below are less than 5%, while the typical C.I. for f i are about 0.5%. Dephasing times -The extracted T * 2 values for the SQ and DQ sensing bases are shown as images in Fig. Invulnerable to within-pixel stress gradients, the measured T * 2 {DQ} values are 5.6× more uniform than the T * 2 {SQ} values with a median of 0.621 (0.605, 0.643) μs and an RIDR of 6.0%. Additionally, the median T * 2 {DQ} is approximately one half the longest measured T * 2 {SQ}, 1.15(3) μs, as expected when stress-induced dephasing is negligible and the dominant contribution to T * 2 is dipo-lar coupling to an electronic spin bath (in this case of predominantly neutral substitutional nitrogen) Fringe frequencies -Figures Contrast -In the present work, inhomogeneity in the measurement contrast C is largely independent of the choice of sensing basis (SQ or DQ) and is attributed to the Gaussian intensity profile of the excitation beam and fixed exposure duration. The extracted amplitudes A i for the measured Ramsey fringes, which are proportional to C, are reported in digital units (D.U.) of accumulated difference as measured by the heliCam C3. The median amplitudes A 0 {SQ} and A 0 {DQ} [72.1 (61.8, 76.6) D.U. and 73.5 (66.5, 77.0) D.U.] as well as the RIDR (21% and 14%) are comparable and included in Table We now compare the magnetic sensitivity of the SQ 2-Ramsey and DQ 4-Ramsey protocols across the same field of view described in Sec. IV. The narrower distribution of T * 2 {DQ} and resonance shifts δ rel {DQ} translate into improved, more homogeneous magnetic sensitivity. For both sensing bases, we select an optimal free precession interval τ and applied MW frequency (or frequencies) f mw to maximize the median NV -response to a change in magnetic field, dS/dB (see Appendix B). Under these conditions, a series of measurements is collected and used to determine the magnetic sensitivity pixel-by-pixel. The magnetic-field sensitivity is defined as δB √ T m , where T m is the measurement duration and δB is the minimum detectable magnetic field, i.e., the field giving a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 1 In the present work, F s ≈ 1.5 kHz, set by the camera's external frame rate. Each external frame contains The median (D 10 , D 90 ) volume-normalized sensitivities are therefore η V DQ = 34 As illustrated in Fig. The median volume-normalized magnetic sensitivity η V DQ = 34 The demonstrated magnetic imaging method using the DQ 4-Ramsey protocol enables uniform magnetic sensitivity across a field of view independent of inhomogeneity in the host diamond material and applied microwave control fields. In particular, the MW phase alternation scheme of the 4-Ramsey protocol [Fig. These methods provide a path toward imaging a range of dynamic magnetic phenomena, including nanoteslascale fields from single mammalian neurons or cardiomyocytes, as well as fields from integrated circuits and condensed matter systems. Increased optical excitation intensity and further diamond material development could yield additional improvements in volumenormalized magnetic sensitivity. Although pulsed magnetometry protocols favor operating near the NV -center's saturation intensity (1-3 mW μm -2 The high-sensitivity, pulsed imaging method demonstrated here also enables applications beyond broadband magnetic microscopy such as parallelized, highresolution NV -ensemble NMR using AC magnetic field detection protocols. Additionally, the MW phase control utilized for the DQ 4-Ramsey protocol is sufficient to implement magnetically-insensitive measurement protocols mined by sweeping the applied MW frequency to emulate a change in magnetic field, producing a DC magnetometry curve from which f mw is chosen to maximize the slope dS dB . To determine the optimal MW frequencies for DQ Ramsey measurements, f mw , the two applied MW tones are swept differentially (one tone with positive detuning +δ and the second tone with an equal but opposite de-tuning -δ). As with the SQ calibration, the values of f mw are chosen to maximize the NV -response dS dB . For all measurements using the heliCam, the free precession interval and MW frequency (or frequencies) are chosen to minimize the median per-pixel sensitivity across the field of view. field is given by [S1-S3]: + N y (S y S z + S z S y ) . Here the z axis is defined along the NV -symmetry axis, D ≈ 2870 MHz is the zero-field splitting, S i are the dimensionless spin-1 projection operators, γ/2π = g N V μ B /h ≈ 28.03 GHz/T is the NV -gyromagnetic ratio, B is the magnetic field, and M i and N i are terms related to crystal stress. In the following analysis, we do not include the N i terms or contributions due to transverse magnetic fields, which are suppressed by the zero-field splitting The projection of the magnetic field along the NV -symmetry axis is indicated by B z . We refer to M z as the axial crystal stress and define the transverse crystal stress, M ⊥ , as -(M x + iM y ). Using these definitions, Eq. S1 can be rewritten, in matrix form, as: For non-zero M z and M ⊥ , the energy eigenvalues of the NV -Hamiltonian (Eq. S2) for the | ± 1 states become To first order, crystal stress shifts the energies of the |±1 states in common mode via the axial-stress term M z . Single quantum (SQ) measurements, which probe the difference between E |0 and either E |±1 , are vulnerable to using the visibility S 2R = (S 1 -S 2 )/(S 1 + S 2 ) where S i indicates the signal produced by measurement i = 1, 2. As defined above, S 2R suppresses noise sources that vary slowly compared to the time over which S 1 and S 2 are acquired As with the SQ results, the single-channel (photodiode) DQ 2-Ramsey data presented in Fig. The heliCam C3 operates by subtracting alternating exposures in analog detection; and then digitizing the background-subtracted signal, enabling the detected magnetic field information to fill each pixel's 10-bit dynamic range. Each frame from the camera contains the accumulated difference signal for multiple exposure pairs. The device is capable of operating at internal demodulation frequencies of up to 250 kHz (exposure rates of up to 1 MHz). The demodulation frequency can be defined by a user-input demodulation signal (square wave) with each demodulation cycle broken into four quarters. The exposures from the first and third quarters subtract to produce an in-phase image on the camera's I channel. Similarly, the exposures from the second and fourth quarters subtract to produce a quadrature image on the camera's Q channel. The output from the camera consists of these two images per frame. Since each demodulation cycle includes four exposures, the internal exposure rate is 4 × F demod where F demod indicates the inverse of one demodulation cycle period. - Init/Read I channel The I and Q images produced during each frame contain the accumulated difference signal from N demod repetitions of the demodulation cycle described above. In the present work, the typical number of demodulation cycles (N demod = 24) and demodulation rates (F demod ≈ 35 kHz) result in external frame rates (F S ) of approximately 1.5 kHz. The maximum external frame rate of the camera is 3.8 kHz. Note that in the main text, the exposure rate of (4 × F demod ≈ 140 kHz) is referenced instead of F demod . For the magnetic sensitivity discussion in Sec. V, the SQ and DQ external frame rates differ slightly (F S {SQ} = 1.45 kHz versus F S {DQ} = 1.5 kHz) because the optimal sensing duration is approximately given by the median T * 2 and therefore depends upon the sensing basis (τ {SQ} = 910 ns and τ {DQ} = 662 ns). Additionally, accounting for the four optical pulses (t init/read = 4 μs each), four pairs of microwave pulses (< 1 μs per cycle), and delays between control pulses (8 μs per cycle), the duration of each demodulation cycle, t demod , is 28.7 μs (27.8 μs) for the SQ (DQ) measurements. Figure While a full 2-Ramsey protocol requires only one demodulation cycle, compared to two cycles for the 4-Ramsey protocol, the total number of demodulation cycles per frame is fixed to N demod = 24 for both the 2-Ramsey and 4-Ramsey protocols. As a consequence, the SQ and DQ frame rates are the same (neglecting the few percent change due to the basis-dependent sensing interval). Additionally, the difference signals between exposure pairs add constructively for the duration of the frame. Thus, the choice of protocol does not impact bandwidth or sensitivity when using the heliCam C3. The comparable median amplitudes of A 0 {SQ} and A 0 {DQ} (72.1 and 73.5 in digital units as reported by the camera) and relative inter-decile ranges (21 % and 14 %) are largely due to the Gaussian intensity profile of the excitation beam and fixed exposure duration. Shorter length-scale spatial variations (< 50 μm) in the extracted SQ amplitude exhibit a strong correlation with images of the T * 2 {SQ} and relative resonance shifts δ rel {SQ} due to stress gradients decreasing the ODMR contrast and inducing variations in the effective Rabi frequency. For the magnetic sensitivities reported in the main text and depicted in Fig. 