Transition-metal dichalcogenides containing tellurium anions show remarkable charge-lattice modulated structures and prominent interlayer character. Using cryogenic scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), we map the atomic-scale structures of the high temperature (HT) and low temperature (LT) modulated phases in 1T'-TaTe2. At HT, we directly show in-plane metal distortions which form trimerized clusters and staggered, three-layer stacking. In the LT phase at 93 K, we visualize an additional trimerization of Ta sites and subtle distortions of Te sites by extracting structural information from contrast modulations in plan-view STEM data. Coupled with density functional theory calculations and image simulations, this approach opens the door for atomic-scale visualizations of low temperature phase transitions and complex displacements in a variety of layered systems. Many layered transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMD) undergo symmetry-breaking phase transitions by spatially modulating their electronic and structural degrees of freedom. The modulations may take the form of charge density waves (CDW) and concomitant periodic lattice displacements (PLD) or polymerization of metal sites into one-dimensional (1D) chain structures Compared to sulfides or selenides, tellurium-based compounds (MTe 2 , M = V, Nb, Ta, Ir) exhibit distinct electronic and structural features including covalent Te-Te bonds between the layers, enhanced charge transfer to the metal sites and significant in-plane electronic and structural anisotropy The related 1T'-TaTe 2 has a distorted, monoclinic structure with space group C2/m at high temperatures In high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), 2D projection images of atomic column positions can be obtained at sub-Ångstrom resolution, even under cryogenic conditions Here we perform cryogenic HAADF-STEM measurements to visualize the atomic-scale structure of the HT and LT phases in 1T'-TaTe 2 . We first confirm that the HT phase involves trimer distortions of Ta sites in agreement with earlier refinements of the bulk structure The room temperature 1T' structure appears highly distorted compared to the 1T phase (space group P 3m1) with one TaTe 2 formula unit in the unit cell. The distortion involves displacements of two Ta columns towards a third stationary Ta column, forming trimerized clusters (white bracket). The Ta-Ta column distance within a trimer is shortened while the inter-trimer Ta-Ta bond distance is elongated. By measuring atomic column positions along this viewing direction, we find that the short/long Ta-Ta column distance in projection is 2.76(5) Å/3.97(4) Å, which corresponds to Ta-Ta bond lengths of 3.30(6) Å/4.37(5) Å In STM visualizations of surface layers in tellurides, distorted chain structures appear as periodic striped contrast reflecting both electronic and lattice contributions. While the stripes were interpreted as Ta dimer chains by Feng et al. In plan-view, the Ta atoms are misaligned (Fig. Figures Ideally, we would like to directly measure the displacements on individual columns, however, the projection nature of STEM requires coherent stacking of both the atoms and their displacements. For the more complex atomic arrangement in 1T'-TaTe 2 , atom tracking approaches will therefore fail. To overcome this limitation, we instead analyze HAADF contrast variations which arise from the sensitivity of electron beam channeling to distortions in the lattice. The intensity modulations in the image can be extracted by comparing the LT image, I(R), to a reference, un-modulated lattice image, I ref (R). We generate such reference image by damping the amplitude of the superlattice peaks in the FT to the background level and applying an inverse FT The resulting I ref (R) has no periodic component associated with q = 1/3 r.l.u.. We note that I ref (R) does not exactly correspond to the HT phase since other distortion modes with different periodicity that may be present remain in the image By subtracting the reference lattice image (Fig. Focusing on Ta columns (black dots), we observe three kinds of intensity modifications. The first appears as a dumbbell and involves a decrease of the intensity on the left side of the Ta column and an increase on the right (Fig. The superstructure also contains periodic intensity modulations on the Te sites. In particular, the Te columns which flank Ta-2 columns have lower intensity, which indicates that the stacking of Te atoms is more distorted in the LT phase. Such tellurium distortions can dramatically affect the electronic behavior of MTe 2 systems by modulating the interlayer bonding network The Te sites surrounding Ta-1 and Ta-3 columns show negligible changes in STEM intensity. We next confirm the real space displacement pattern by comparing to DFT structural optimization. We use the Vienna ab-initio simulation package (VASP) To firmly establish the link between these lattice distortions and STEM contrast modulations at low temperature, we perform multislice simulations on the DFToptimized structures. In addition to simulating fully relaxed structures, we simulated images with only Ta or Te displacements, to assign displacement patterns to specific contrast features in the data The Ta-2 columns exhibit negligible changes in the contrast whereas the experimental data shows a small change in intensity. The minor discrepancy might reflect the fact that I ref (R) does not exactly correspond to the HT phase since other modes present in the structural transition are not captured by the q = 1/3 r.l.u. Fourier components Probing the bulk structure in layered systems is important for understanding the electronic properties of nominally quasi-2D TMD systems. While interlayer interactions are prominent in MTe 2 compounds, recent studies on 1T-TaS 2 , a prototypical 2D CDW system, also suggest that the out-of-plane ordering of CDW clusters may be responsible for its insulating ground state and its exotic, metastable phases 