Starting with a minimal model for the CuO2 planes with the on-site Hilbert space reduced to only three effective valence centers [CuO4] 7-,6-,5-(nominally Cu 1+,2+,3+ ) with different conventional spin and different orbital symmetry we propose a unified non-BCS model that allows one to describe the main features of the phase diagrams of doped cuprates within the framework of a simple effective field theory. Introduction Today there is no consensus on a theoretical model that allows, within the framework of a single scenario, to describe the phase diagram of the high-T c cuprates, including HTSC mechanism itself, pseudogap phase, strange metal phase, a variety of static and dynamic fluctuations, etc. In our opinion we miss several fundamental points: inapplicability of the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) paradigm with a search for a "superconducting glue" , inapplicability of traditional k-momentum (quasi)particle approach, strong but specific electron-lattice effects, and inherent intrinsic electronic inhomogeneity in cuprates. Recent precision measurements of various physical characteristics on thousands of cuprate samples Earlier we started to develop a minimal "unparticle" model for the CuO 2 planes with the "on-site" Hilbert space of the CuO 4 plaquettes to be a main element of crystal and electron structure of high-T c cuprates, reduced to states formed by only three effective valence centers [CuO 4 ] 7-,6-,5-(nominally Cu 1+,2+,3+ , respectively), forming a "well isolated" charge triplet To describe the diagonal and off-diagonal, or quantum local charge order we start with a simplified charge triplet model that implies a full neglect of spin and orbital degrees of freedom The S = 1 spin algebra includes the eight independent nontrivial pseudospin operators, the three dipole and five quadrupole operators: The two Fermi-like pseudospin raising/lowering operators Ŝ± and T± change the pseudospin projection by ±1, with slightly different properties. In lieu of Ŝ± and T± operators one may use two novel operators: which do realize transformations Cu 2+ ↔ Cu 3+ and Cu 1+ ↔ Cu 2+ , respectively. The Ŝ2 + ( Ŝ2 -) operators create an on-site hole (electron) pair, or composite local boson, with a kinematic constraint ( Ŝ2 ± ) 2 = 0, that underlines its "hard-core" nature. It should be noted that the effective "quasiparticle" wave function of the composite boson has the tetragonal A 1g -, more precisely, d 2 x 2 -y 2 -symmetry: The "on-site" , or local S=1 pseudospin state can be written as a superposition with coefficients that can be represented as follows c -1 = cos θ sin φe -iα ; c 0 = sin θe iβ ; c +1 = cos θ cos φe iα . The boson-like pseudospin raising/lowering operators Ŝ2 ± define a local "nematic" order parameter Obviously, this mean value Ŝ2 ± can be addressed to be a complex superconducting local order parameter One basic problem with the local P ν ± and N ν ± operators and their handling within on-site real-space formalism is their fermionic character. For the first time the local mean values of fermionic operators similar P ν ± and N ν ± have been introduced by Caron and Pratt Effective spin-pseudospin Hamiltonian Effective S=1 pseudospin Hamiltonian which does commute with the z-component of the total pseudospin i S iz thus conserving the total charge of the system can be written to be a sum of potential and kinetic energies: where with a charge density constraint: where n is the deviation from a half-filling. The first on-site term in Ĥpot describes the effects of a bare pseudospin splitting, or the local energy of M 0,± centers and relates with the on-site density-density interactions, ∆ = U /2, U being the local correlation parameter, or pair binding energy for composite boson. The second term may be related to a pseudo-magnetic field Z with μ being the hole chemical potential. The third term in Ĥpot describes the inter-site density-density interactions, or nonlocal correlations. Kinetic energy kin is a sum of one-particle and twoparticle transfer contributions. In terms of P ν ± and N ν ± operators the Hamiltonian Ĥ(1) kin reads as follows: All the three terms here suppose a clear physical interpretation. The first P P -type term describes oneparticle transfer processes: Cu 3+ +Cu 2+ ↔ Cu 2+ +Cu 3+ , that is a rather conventional motion of the hole M + -centers in the lattice formed by parent M 0 (Cu 2+ )-centers (p-type carriers, respectively) or the motion of the M 0 -centers in the lattice formed by hole M + -centers (n-type carriers, respectively). The second N N -type term describes one-particle transfer processes: Cu 1+ +Cu 2+ ↔ Cu 2+ +Cu 1+ , that is a rather conventional motion of the electron M --centers in the lattice formed by M 0 -centers (n-type carriers) or the motion of the M 0 -centers in the lattice formed by electron M --centers (ptype carriers). The third P N (N P ) term in Ĥ kin defines a very different one-particle transfer process: , that is the local disproportionation/recombination, or the electron-hole pair creation/annihilation. It is this interaction that is responsible for the appearance of carrier sign uncertainty and violation of the "classical" Fermi-particle behavior. Interestingly, the term can be related with a local pairing as the electron M --center can be addressed to be an electron pair (= composite electron boson) localized on the hole M + -center or vice versa the hole M + -center can be addressed to be a hole pair (= composite hole boson) localized on the electron M --center. Hamiltonian Ĥ(2) kin : describes the two-particle (local composite boson) intersite transfer, that is the motion of the electron (hole) center in the lattice formed by the hole (electron) centers, or the exchange reaction: Cu 3+ +Cu 1+ ↔ Cu 1+ +Cu 3+ . In other words, t b ij is the transfer integral for the local composite boson. Depending on the sign of t b , this interaction will stabilize the superconducting Conventional Heisenberg spin exchange Cu 2+ -Cu 2+ coupling should be transformed as follows with hermitian operators B1,2 , P ν 1,2 , N ν 1,2 one can rewrite the spin-pseudospin Hamiltonian in symbolic "vector" form as follows where we limited ourselves to the interaction of the nearest neighbors, σ = (σ x , σy , σz ), B = ( B1 , B2 ), . Effective-field approximation Simple effectivefield or mean-field theory is as always a good starting point to provide physically clear semi-quantitative description of strongly correlated systems. Making use of local order parameters without switching to the momentum k-representation is a typical way to describe "classical" phases for spin magnetic systems such as simple Néel order. Hereafter, we perform the analysis of the ground state and Tn phase diagrams of the model Hamiltonian ( We start with assuming the existence of two interpenetrating lattices (A and B), restricting the analysis to the two-sublattice solutions for the single nonzero local order parameter phases. In such a case we introduce 14 parameters of an uniform and 14 parameters of a non-uniform, or staggered order, as follows: where O A,B are local order parameters Ŝz , σ , B , Pν , Nν for A, B sublattice. The corresponding parameters of uniform and staggered order will be denoted below as n, m, B 0 , P ν , N ν and L z , l, B π , P ν L , N ν L , respectively (n is a doping level). The resulting Hamiltonian can be rewritten as a sum of one-site Hamiltonians as follows where α = A, B, the upper (lower) sign corresponds to A (B) sublattice, The variational approach that will be employed is based on the Bogolyubov inequality for the grand potential Ω(H): where H is the Hamiltonian under study By minimizing the free energy, we get a system of site-dependent self-consistent VA equations to determine the values of the order parameters: EF phase diagrams Let assume that the model cuprate described by Hamiltonian (10) can be found only in homogeneous phase states with long-range order determined by a single nonzero (vector) local order parameter: CO (L z = 0), AFMI (l = 0), BS (B 0 = 0), and two types of metallic FL (P ν = 0, N ν = 0) phases. It is worth noting the specificity of the two metallic FL phases, which in our model represent a mixture of P -and N -phases due to the P N (N P ) contribution to the single-particle transport Hamiltonian H (1) kin , which leads to "strange" properties of the Fermi-type metal phases of cuprates with a specific coexistence of hole and electron carriers, characteristic of both hole and electron doped systems. It is interesting that in this somewhat naive model it is possible to obtain relatively simple transcendental equations for the "critical" temperatures T CO , T AF MI , T BS , T F L that determine the stability boundaries of certain homogeneous phases with one or another long-range order or corresponding second order phase transition lines Making use of Exp. First and second order transitions in Fig. As we see the inclusion of the PS states into consideration substantially modifies the phase diagrams of the models assuming only homogeneous phases. In the PS states the system breaks into coexisting static or dynamic domains/grains of two different phases with varying volume fraction and shape. Hole carrier density in metallic FL phase and in metallic domains in PS phase is (1 + p), however, taking into account diminishing volume fraction of metallic phase with decreasing doping we arrive at effective carrier density demonstrating the smooth crossover from 1 + p to p across optimal doping There is now considerable evidence that the tendency toward phase separation or intrinsic electronic inhomogeneity is an universal feature of doped cuprates(see, e.g., Ref. It should be noted that the PS model does predict several temperatures of the "third order" PS transitions limiting the PS phases, that is delineating areas with 100% volume fraction, and the temperatures of the percolation transitions, which can manifest itself in the peculiarities of the temperature behavior for different physical quantities As we see the EF approach, realized under extremely simplifying assumptions, is able to reproduce essential features of the phase diagram for doped cuprates, however, for an adequate description of real phase diagrams in the framework of the EF theory, it is necessary to take into account a number of additional vital effects. First of all, this concerns the real inclusion of electron-lattice polarization effects, long-range inter-site (nonlocal) correlations, and inhomogeneous potential in cuprates with nonisovalent substitution. As a result, we must increase the number of possible phase states, first of all, by introducing new commensurate or incommensurate spin-charge modes, or spin-charge density waves like stripes, and also take into account the screening effect of local and nonlocal correlations. The latter effect can be accurately described only with a rigorous consideration of the electron-lattice polarization effects. Experimental data point to a dramatically enhanced screening of Coulomb interactions in cuprates under doping In summary, we have presented an unified non-BCS approach to the description of the variety of the local order parameters and the single local order parameter phases in high-T c cuprates. Instead of conventional quasiparticle k-momentum description we made use of a real space on-site "unparticle" S=1 pseudospin formalism to describe the charge triplets and introduce an effective spin-pseudospin Hamiltonian which takes into account main on-site and inter-site interactions. We performed the analysis of the ground state and Tn phase diagrams of the model Hamiltonian by means of a site-dependent variational approach in the grand canonical ensemble within effective field approximation typical for spin-magnetic systems. Within two-sublattice approximation and nn-couplings we arrived at several MFA, or Néel-like phases in CuO 2 planes with a single nonzero local order parameter: antiferromagnetic insulator, charge order, glueless d-wave Bose superfluid phase, and unusual metallic phase. However, the global minimum of free energy is realized for inhomogeneous phase separated states which emerge below temperature T ⋆ (p), which is believed to be responsible for the onset of the pseudogap phenomenon. With a certain choice of the Hamiltonian parameters the model EF phase diagram can quite reasonably reproduce the experimental phase diagrams. Our thanks to V.Yu. Irkhin for fruitful discussions. This research was funded by Act 211 Government of the Russian Federation, agreement No 02.A03.21.0006 and by the Ministry of Education and Science, project No FEUZ-2020-0054. Письма в ЖЭТФ