Isotopic effects are relevant to understand several properties of solids, and have been thoroughly analyzed along the years. These effects may depend on the dimensionality of the considered solid. Here we assess their magnitude for structural properties of graphene, a paradigmatic two-dimensional material. We use path-integral molecular dynamics simulations, a well-suited technique to quantify the influence of nuclear quantum effects on equilibrium variables, especially in cases where anharmonic effects are important. Emphasis is put on interatomic distances and mean-square displacements, as well as on the in-plane area of the graphene layer. At low temperature, the relative difference in C-C distance for 13 C and 14 C, with respect to 12 C, is found to be -2.5 and -4.6×10 -4 , respectively, larger than in three-dimensional carbon-based materials such as diamond. For the inplane area, the relative changes amount to -3.9 and -6.9 × 10 -4 . The magnitude of anharmonicity in the lattice vibrations is estimated by comparing the internal energy and atomic vibrational amplitudes with those derived from a harmonic approximation. In the last years there has been a surge of interest in carbon-based materials, especially in those composed of C atoms with sp 2 hybridization, such as fullerenes, carbon nanotubes, and graphene, a two-dimensional (2D) crystal with extraordinary electronic Anharmonic effects in condensed matter have been studied since many years, because they are responsible for important effects such as thermal expansion, pressure dependence of the compressibility, and phonon couplings, along with the isotope dependence of structural properties and melting temperature Different types of isotopic effects have been analyzed in materials, mainly those caused by the change of phonon frequencies with the atomic mass Atomistic simulations (molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo) have been used to study structural and thermodynamic properties of graphene. These simulations were performed using several types of ab-initio The anharmonicity of the vibrational modes is assessed by comparing the atomic mean-square displacements derived from PIMD simulations with those obtained from a harmonic approximation. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we present the general background to study isotopic effects in structural properties of condensed matter. In Sec. III we describe the computational method used in our calculations. In Sec. IV we present our results for the internal energy, and in Sec. V we discuss the atomic meansquare displacements of the C atoms. Isotopic effects in the interatomic distances and in the in-plane area of the graphene sheet are displayed in Secs. VI and VII, respectively. The paper closed with a summary in Sec. VIII. For a one-dimensional harmonic oscillator of frequency ω and mass M , the classical mean-square displacement (MSD) at temperature T is given by (∆x Since the vibrational frequency scales with the mass as M -1/2 , then (∆x) 2 is independent of M . In a quantum formulation, (∆x) 2 depends on M , and in the ground state one has (∆x) 2 = /2M ω, so (∆x) 2 ∝ M -1/2 , and the MSD grows for decreasing mass. In both harmonic cases (classical and quantum), the mean position x does not change with temperature Here we are interested in the dependence of structural properties of graphene on isotopic mass. Such a dependence does not appear in classical calculations, even in the presence of anharmonicity. This is known for 3D solids, and can be straightforwardly seen from arguments of statistical mechanics. The canonical partition function (N V T ) for N particles of mass M arranged in a crystalline 3D solid with volume V at temperature T is given by where β = 1/k B T , r N = (r 1 , ..., r N ) and p N = (p 1 , ..., p N ) are the coordinates and momenta of the particles, and R is the real axis. The Hamiltonian is where the first and second term on the r.h.s. are the kinetic and potential energy. In a classical model, the kinetic energy can be integrated out to yield: This means that equilibrium properties that depend only on the coordinates r N are independent of the mass M , as this variable appears only in the prefactor of the integral and disappears when taking average values of functions of the coordinates. Thus, for example, the mean-square displacement of particle i is given by (∆r i ) 2 = r 2 ir i 2 , and does not change with the mass M . In quantum statistical physics, however, positions and momenta do not commute, so the kinetic energy part in the Hamiltonian cannot be integrated out and the mass M affects the average values of position-dependent variables, as for example (∆r i ) 2 . The same arguments are valid for 2D materials such as graphene. Note that in this case the integration for the space coordinates r N is restricted to a limited area in the graphene plane, and is unrestricted in the out-of-plane direction (see below), but this fact does not alter our conclusion. In summary, isotopic effects in equilibrium structural properties of 2D and 3D materials are pure quantum effects, as they do not appear in classical-like calculations. Moreover, they are typical anharmonic effects, like thermal expansion, and do not show up in the absence of anharmonicity in the interatomic potentials. As mentioned in the Introduction, several studies based on classical atomistic simulations have been devoted to study structural, dynamic, and elastic properties of graphene in equilibrium conditions at finite temperatures In this paper we use the PIMD method to obtain equilibrium properties of graphene at several temperatures for different isotopic masses. This procedure relies on the path-integral formulation of statistical mechanics, a nonperturbative method to study many-body quantum systems at finite temperatures We employ the molecular dynamics method to sample the configuration space of the classical isomorph of our quantum system (N carbon atoms). The dynamics in this computational procedure is artificial, as it does not coincide with the quantum dynamics of the actual particles under consideration. This procedure is, however, well suited for adequately sampling the many-body configuration space, yielding accurate results for time-independent equilibrium properties of the quantum system. The Born-Oppenheimer surface for the nuclear dynamics is obtained from a long-range carbon bond-order potential, LCBOPII The calculations presented here were performed in the isothermal-isobaric ensemble, where one fixes the number of carbon atoms (N ), the applied in-plane stress (here P = 0), and the temperature (T ). We used effective algorithms for carrying out PIMD simulations in this statistical ensemble, as those described in the literature The equations of motion have been integrated by using the reversible reference system propagator algorithm (RESPA), which permits to define different time steps for the integration of fast and slow degrees of freedom The configuration space was sampled at temperatures between 50 K and 1500 K for the carbon isotopes 12 C, 13 C, and 14 C. In each case, we have considered isotopically pure graphene. We have checked that isotopic effects corresponding to mixtures of carbon isotopes coincide within error bars with the values obtained from linear interpolation of the results for isotopically pure samples. To analyze the dependence of several variables on the isotopic mass M , we carried out additional PIMD simulations for several values of M which do not correspond to actual carbon isotopes. Moreover, for comparison with the results of our quantum simulations, some classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were also carried out (this corresponds in our context to setting N Tr = 1). We note that the classical limit for equilib-rium properties can be also reached in the high-mass limit (M → ∞), as the force constant k har between beads diverges and all the beads corresponding to a particle (here atomic nucleus) collapse into a point, therefore the spatial quantum delocalization vanishes. In our PIMD simulations the Trotter number was taken proportional to the inverse temperature, so that N Tr T = 6000 K, which roughly keeps a constant precision for the PIMD results at different temperatures We have considered rectangular simulation cells with N = 960 and similar side length in the x and y directions of the (x, y) reference plane, and periodic boundary conditions were assumed. For a given temperature, a simulation run consisted of 2 × 10 5 PIMD steps for system equilibration, followed by 4×10 6 steps for the calculation of ensemble average properties. Some simulations were carried out for N = 240 and 448, and the results for the isotopic effects agreed within error bars with those found for N = 960. PIMD simulations may be used to analyze the atomic spatial delocalization at finite temperatures. This includes thermal (classical) motion, and a delocalization due to the quantum nature of the atomic nuclei, which can be measured by the spreading of the quantum paths. For a given path, one can define the center-of-gravity (centroid) as where r ij ≡ (x ij , y ij , z ij ) is the 3D position of bead j in the ring polymer associated to nucleus i. Hence, the mean-square displacement (∆r i ) 2 in a PIMD run is given by where ... means an ensemble average. The quantum delocalization of a particle is related in our context to the spread of the paths associated to it, which can be measured by the mean-square radius-ofgyration Q 2 i of the ring polymers: The total MSD of nucleus i at temperature T > 0 includes, apart from Q 2 i , another term corresponding to motion of the centroid r i , i.e. with This term C 2 i is a semiclassical thermal contribution to (∆r i ) 2 , as it converges at high temperature to the MSD given by a classical model (Q 2 i → 0). For graphene, we call (x, y) the coordinates on the plane defined by the simulation cell, and z the out-ofplane direction. Then, we have expressions like those given above for each direction x, y, and z. For example, In the results presented below, we will show data for the in-plane MSD, defined as an average for the N atoms in the simulation cell: Similarly, one can define an average MSD (∆z) 2 in the out-of-plane direction Here we present and discuss the internal energy for graphene made up of different carbon isotopes, as derived from our isothermal-isobaric ensemble for external stress P = 0 and several temperatures. In a classical calculation, one finds for the zero-temperature limit a planar graphene surface with an interatomic distance of 1.4199 Å. This corresponds to the minimum-energy configuration with the atomic nuclei fixed on their equilibrium sites without spatial delocalization, and defines the energy E 0 , which is taken as a reference for our calculations at finite temperatures. In a quantum formulation, zeropoint motion induces out-of-plane atomic fluctuations in the low-temperature limit, and the graphene layer is not strictly planar. Moreover, anharmonicity of in-plane vibrations gives rise to a zero-point bond dilation, causing an expansion of the graphene lattice, which will be discussed below. In Fig. Note that most of the internal energy corresponds to the vibrational energy associated to in-plane and out-of-plane modes of graphene. A small part of the potential energy corresponds to the elastic energy, which appears for changes in the in-plane area of graphene, mainly at high temperatures (an anharmonic effect) The internal energy for 12 C is found to converge at low T to 171 meV/atom, which gives the zero-point energy of the system. For heavier isotopes we find at low temperature an energy shift of -7 and -13 meV/atom for 13 C and 14 C, respectively. For comparison, we also show in Fig. To make contact of our simulation results with a microscopic view based on the atomic vibrations, we consider a harmonic approximation (HA) for the vibrational modes of graphene. For a pure HA, the vibrational energy per atom of graphene is given by where the index r (= 1, ..., 6) refers to the phonon bands: two branches with atomic displacements along the z direction (ZA and ZO), and four bands with inplane displacements (LA, TA, LO, and TO) In the limit T → 0, one has the zero-point energy: Taking into account that the frequencies ω r (k) scale with isotopic mass as M -1/2 , at low T the ratio between internal energies for masses M 1 and M 2 converges to (M 2 /M 1 ) 1/2 in the HA. On the other side, in the hightemperature limit, i.e., ω r (k)/k B T ≪ 1 for all ω r (k), we have E int → 3k B T and the internal energy converges to the classical value, which is independent of the isotopic mass. The behavior predicted by the HA for the energy ratio between different isotopes is basically what we find from PIMD simulations of graphene. In Fig. In this section we present results for the mean-square displacements of C atoms in graphene, yielded by PIMD simulations. These MSDs depend on the isotopic mass, In-plane MSD T = 500 K 300 K 100 K FIG. since the vibrational amplitudes are larger for smaller mass. In Fig. For a given isotopic mass M , (∆r) 2 p increases for rising temperature, as expected from the increase in vibrational amplitudes. Moreover, given a temperature T , the in-plane MSD rises from the classical limit as the atomic mass is lowered (1/M rises). This increase is more important for lower temperature, as shown in Fig. The in-plane MSD at temperature T can be written in a HA as Here the index r (= 1, ..., 4) runs over the phonon bands with in-plane atomic displacements (LA, TA, LO, and TO) and corresponds to the limit of (∆r) 2 p on the left part of Fig. For the out-of-plane displacements (z direction), it has been shown earlier that the character of the motion is predominantly classical above a crossover temperature T c , which depends on the system size and decreases as N is raised For N = 960, the crossover for the out-of-plane motion occurs at T c ≈ 10 K In this section we study changes of interatomic distances in graphene with temperature and isotopic mass. The temperature dependence of the equilibrium C-C distance, d C-C , derived from PIMD simulations is shown in Fig. The dashed line in Fig. For graphene, the C-C distance derived from PIMD simulations is found to decrease for increasing isotopic mass (see Fig. For diamond, it was found at low T a ratio χ 13 = -1.8 × 10 -4 for 13 C, somewhat smaller than our result for graphene. This is most probably due to the different anharmonicity associated to the hybridization of carbon atoms in both materials: sp 3 in diamond vs sp 2 in 0 500 1000 1500 Temperature (K) graphene. In fact, the thermal expansion of the interatomic distance (or lattice parameter) for diamond from T = 0 to 1000 K amounts to a 0.2%, vs a 0.4% for the expansion of d C-C in graphene The isotopic effect in the C-C distance studied here is clearly larger than the present sensitivity of diffraction techniques. Thus, for example, isotopic effects in lattice parameters and interatomic distances of crystalline materials can be measured with high precision using x-ray standing waves The zero-point dilation (∆d) 0 and the thermal bond expansion at T > 0 presented here are a consequence of anharmonicity in the interatomic potential, similar to 3D crystalline solids, e.g., diamond (see above). For graphene, this is mainly caused by anharmonicity in the stretching vibrations of the sp 2 C-C bond. A more complex anharmonic effect is the thermal variation of the graphene in-plane area, for the coupling between inplane and out-of-plane vibrational modes, as discussed in Sec. VII. In this section, we have analyzed the interatomic distances in isotopically pure graphene. As mentioned in Sec. III.A, one expects that structural variables for mixtures of carbon isotopes can be obtained from linear interpolation between those corresponding to isotopically pure samples. To check this point we have carried out some PIMD simulations for carbon mean mass of 12.25, 12.5, and 12.75 amu, and found that the results for the C-C distance coincide within error bars with those given from interpolation between the data obtained for M = 12 and 13 amu. Something similar happens for the in-plane area A p discussed in the following section. In connection with this, we note that to calculate several properties of 3D crystals with isotopically mixed composition, it has been usually assumed that each atomic nucleus in the material has a mass equal to the average mass. This was called virtual-crystal approximation The simulations presented here have been performed in the isothermal-isobaric ensemble, as indicated in Sec. III.A. Thus, for a given isotopic mass M , in a simulation run we fix the number of carbon atoms N , the temperature T , and the applied stress in the (x, y) plane (here P = 0), allowing for variations in the area of the simulation cell. In the following we will call A p the inplane area per C atom. In the simulations, carbon atoms are allowed to freely move in the z coordinate (out-of-plane direction), so that the real surface of a graphene layer is not strictly planar, and has an area (in 3D space) larger than the in-plane area In Fig. In the three cases, A p decreases for rising T , reaches a minimum at a temperature T m ∼ 1000 K, and increases at higher temperature. This behavior was found and discussed earlier for 12 C Changes in interatomic distances and in the graphene area (both A and A p ) are important anharmonic effects. On one side, changes in the distance d C-C and in the real area A are mainly due to anharmonicity of the C-C stretching vibration. Moreover, out-of-plane vibrations cause fluctuations of the in-plane area and a decrease in its mean value. In Fig. It is interesting to analyze the dependence of A p on isotopic mass, from the actual carbon isotopes to the classical limit (M → ∞), which is in fact obtained by carrying out classical MD simulations. This crossover can be actually visualized by plotting the in-plane area vs the inverse isotopic mass, 1/M , at different temperatures, as displayed in Fig. The results of our PIMD simulations can be rationalized by analyzing the trends expected from a QHA for the vibrational modes in graphene. This method has been used earlier to study isotopic effects in structural properties of 3D solids One can also find an expression for the isotopic effect on A p at high temperature (T Θ D , see the Appendix): This formula corresponding to high temperature is analogous to that given above for T = 0 [see Eq. ( PIMD simulations are a powerful tool to study isotopic effects in condensed matter. This method allows one to study phonon-related properties, further than harmonic approximations for the vibrational modes, and explore their dependence on the mass of the constituent atoms, which appears as an input parameter in the calculations. Here we have demonstrated the applicability of the PIMD method to analyze the dependence of structural properties of 2D materials on the atomic mass. In particular, we have studied the change of interatomic distances and in-plane area for different carbon isotopes in a wide range of temperatures, from T = 50 to 1500 K. At low temperature, we find a relative change of the C-C distance in 13 C and 14 C graphene of -2.5 and -4.6 × 10 -4 with respect to 12 C, respectively. For the in-plane area A p , the corresponding relative changes amount to -3.9 and -6.9 × 10 -4 . The magnitude of these isotopic effects decreases as temperature rises. Thus, for A p in 13 C graphene we find a relative variation of -3.4 and -2.1 × 10 -4 at 300 and 1000 K, respectively, An interesting application of path-integral simulations is to study the evolution of structural properties of 2D materials by changing the atomic mass from the actual isotopic masses to the classical limit (M → ∞), which is usually considered in atomistic simulations of this type of materials. This has been presented here for the in-plane MSD and in-plane area A p of graphene at several temperatures in Figs. The classical limit is indeed useful to study mechanical and vibrational properties of graphene, but nuclear quantum effects have to be taken into account for a proper quantification of structural and thermodynamic variables. Classical simulations are, in fact, insensitive to the atomic mass and thereby to the isotopic effects discussed here. Apart from isotopic effects in structural properties, the extent of anharmonicity has been quantified by comparing the internal energy and in-plane vibrational amplitudes with those obtained from a harmonic approximation. This is particularly observable in the in-plane MSD, (∆r) 2 p , shown in Fig. 