We study the intrinsic superconductivity in a dissipative Floquet electronic system in the presence of attractive interactions. Based on the functional Keldysh theory beyond the mean-field treatment, we find that the system shows a time-periodic bosonic condensation and reaches an intrinsic dissipative Floquet superconducting (SC) phase. Due to the interplay between dissipations and periodic modulations, the Floquet SC gap becomes "soft" and contains the diffusive fermionic modes with finite lifetimes. However, bosonic modes of the bosonic condensation are still propagating even in the presence of dissipations. Periodic driving schemes provide a simple way to study systems out of equilibrium [1-3], also known as Floquet engineering . An interesting example is the Floquet topological superconductor In this paper, we study Cooper instability for a realistic periodically driven electronic system with interactions and dissipations. Based on the functional Keldysh field theory In order to avoid bringing confusions to readers and make our manuscript easy to read, we summarize the treatment we used in this manuscript. Our treatment is a generalization of the method used in the equilibrium superconducting case, to the dissipative Floquet system. The first step is to write down the Hamiltonian Eq.(1) of the composite system(electronic system with periodic driving + normal metal bath) under consideration. We then apply a time-dependent unitary transformation shown in Eq.(2) to obtain an equivalent timeindependent electronic system (then we can directly use the knowledge of the static electronic system). We focus on the possibility of dissipative Floquet superconductivity in the presence of the bath. We further apply the functional Keldysh field theory We consider a single-band electronic system with a time-periodic chemical potential and attractive interactions, coupling to a normal fermionic bath. The Hamiltonian of the whole system can be written as where kσ describes the non-interacting electronic system with the timeperiodic chemical potential μ 0 + μ(t), where μ(t) = -K cos(Ωt) with Ω the driving frequency, and c † (c) is the fermionic creation(annihilation) operator. H int = -g qk1k2 c † k1+q↑ c † k2-q↓ c k2↓ c k1↑ with g > 0 describes the attractive interaction. Here, H B = qσ q a † qσ a qσ is the fermionic bath Hamiltonian, which provides dissipations; and a † (a) is the creation(annihilation) operator of the bath. Such a bath is necessary for a driving interacting system to avoid the featureless infinite-temperature state For a periodically driven system, it is convenient to consider a rotating frame (2) In the absence of the bath, that is W → 0, we reach a time-independent system with equilibrium superconductivity, because the interaction term fully commutes with our periodic driven chemical potential term (thus commutes with U F ). Note that the original electron-phonon interaction also commutes with the periodic driven term, thus the phonon-induced attractive interaction is unchanged under the periodic driving. In those cases, without coupling to a bath, the periodic driving is trivial, and can be removed using a time-dependent unitary transformation. It is also our purpose to consider such a simple model that the periodical driving potential cannot simply spoil the formation of the SC correlation for the analysis of Floquet SC. In the presence of the bath with finite W , the superconductivity can be modified by the timedependent system-bath coupling as shown in Eq.(2). Then, the standard procedure leads to the total action of the system in the closed time contour where Ψ sk = [ψ k↑ , ψ-k↓ ] t , Ψ bq = [φ q↑ , φ-q↓ ] t , Qs0k and Qb0q are free-fermion Green's functions in Nambu space, and in S int = g c dt kk ψk↑ ψ-k↓ ψ -k ↓ ψ k ↑ , we only count in terms describing the interaction between electrons with opposite momenta and spins. In order to study the non-equilibrium steady state in such a system, one can first integrate out the bath's degrees of freedom with a Keldysh functional integral formalism where Qk (t, t ) is the dressed Green's function giving by the Dyson's equation with the self-energy from the bath being Σk (t 1 , t 2 ) = q M (t 1 ) Qb0q (t 1 -t 2 ) M † (t 2 ). These Green's functions can be derived analytically through perturbative expansions in the small parameter κ = K/Ω(the driving potential reads as μ(t) = -K cos(Ωt))(see Appendix A for details). For the four-fermion interaction, it is common to decouple them through the Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation where we have restricted the pairing between electrons with opposite momenta, thus ∆ α here denotes the zeromomentum bosonic field; ∆α = 1/ √ 2 ∆ α τ+ + ∆α τwith α ∈ {cl, q} introduced by the Keldysh rotation; γ ᾱ = γα σ1 , γcl = σ0 , γq = σ1 , and τ± = σ1 ± iσ 2 , with σμ (μ = 0, 1, 2, 3) being the four Pauli matrices. One should not confuse the dissipation strength γ with matrices γα in the Keldysh space and we use the hat symbol for 2 × 2 matrices acting in either Nambu or Keldysh spaces and the check symbol to denote 4 × 4 matrices acting in the Keldysh⊗Nambu space. In the non-equilibrium case, one will often encounter two-time functions, like Qk (t, t ). Here, we show how to transform them into the Floquet representation Due to the periodic driving, those two-time functions will possess the discrete time-translational symmetry Q(t, t ) = Q(t + τ, t + τ ), where τ is the period. One can introduce two new variables s ≡ t and u ≡ t -t and define the new function ) for all u. Thus, one can perform the Fourier transformation for u and the Fourier series expansion for s: Turning Q(n, ω) into a matrix form, known as the Floquet structure, one has In equilibrium, the stationary point analysis of the effective bosonic action is just the mean-field theory and provides the gap equation. Out of equilibrium, we don't know what exactly the mean field is. However, we can always consider the stationary point, around which the action can be expanded perturbatively. A variation of γ (c) Here ω, ∆0, γ, and the amplitude of ∆ q (t) are all rescaled by being divided by Ω. (a) The tendency of ∆0, i.e. the soft gap with the effective temperature γ. It scales as ∝ γc(γc -γ), where γc is the transition temperature. This scaling suggests that the critical value is 1/2 ;(b) The DOS of quasiparticles in our intrinsic dissipative Floquet superconductors; (c) The amplitude of the order parameter ∆ q (t) for different γ's. Note that the amplitude of ∆ q (t) is non-monotonic, as the amplitude is proportional to γ∆0 and ∆0 changes in the opposite direction with the changing of γ. the bosonic action Eq.( where in the time domain, and Qk (t, t ) is the non-interacting fermionic Green's function dressed by the self-energy of the bath in the Keldysh⊗Nambu space as mentioned before. We want to ask: 1) if we have a stationary point solution for ∆ q (t); 2) if the solution describes the SC order parameter or "gap" of the dissipative Floquet superconductor. We will address the two questions below. As the system is periodic in the time domain, it is natural to assume that Qk,∆ (t, t ) = Qk,∆ (t + τ, t + τ ), where τ is the period. Indeed, the validity of this ansatz will be confirmed later. Then, in the stationary point, the dominated field ∆ q (t) is also periodic in time. The Fourier transformation and the Fourier series expansion shown in Eq.( where Qk,∆ (n, ω) is one matrix element of the Floquet matrix-Qk,∆ which has an infinite-dimension structure, and can be expressed as where the repeated index α denotes the summation over α ∈ {cl, q}, a general object X has the so-called Floquet structure shown in Eq.( where ∆ α n comes from the Fourier series expansion of ∆ α (t). Now, let's solve the stationary point equation Eq.( For the zero harmonic-∆ q 0 , the stationary equation is exactly the gap equation in the equilibrium superconducting case when γ → 0 + , where γ = πρ F W 2 is the dissipation strength provided by the self-energy from the bath, with ρ F being the density of states(DOS) in the vicinity of Fermi surface of the fermionic bath. For finite γ, we reach the following equation: where we define ∆ 0 ≡ (1/ √ 2)∆ q 0 and tan θ = 2ωγ/(ω 2γ 2 -∆ 2 0 ), and ω D is the Debye frequency. The numerical result for ∆ 0 is shown in Fig. based on the n = 0 component-QR ∆ (0, ω) of the quasiclassical Green's function For our Floquet system, we should regard the timeresolved field ∆ q (t) obtained from the full stationary equation as the SC order parameter, which includes higher harmonics. Up to leading orders of κ, only lowest two harmonic components ∆ q 0 and ∆ q ±1 are relevant. In Fig. In fact, this stationary point analysis can be regarded as a Floquet BCS mean-field treatment in our selfconsistent functional formalism. To obtain a more comprehensive understanding, let's go beyond this mean-field treatment. From the previous discussion, we find that the bosonic field in the stationary point has a non-zero value when γ is below a critical value γ c . One can think that the non-zero bosonic field results from the condensation of Cooper pairs, just as the equilibrium SC case. The fact that some bosonic condensation exists in a pure fermionic system implies a fermion-to-boson phase transition In the vicinity of γ c , ∆ cl(q) (t) is small, which means one can expand S eff around the critical point. Thus, we expand the Tr ln-term in S eff in powers of ∆ cl(q) , and simply keep terms up to the second order in ∆ cl(q) . This can be easily achieved by using of the series expansion ln(1 + x) = -∞ n=1 1 n (-x) n . Then applying transformations shown in Eq.( where to avoid redundancy, we have restricted the integration range in [0, Ω], known as the first Floquet-Brillouin zone(FBZ) with subscript p and h denoting particle and hole, respectively. Then, the Green's function of the bosonic field in the Floquet space can be defined as where • describes the average with respect to the weight exp(iS (2) ). The function is defined in the Floquet basis In the second equality, we keep terms up to the second order in κ, and then truncate D to a 3 × 3 Floquet matrix(note that each matrix element of a Floquet matrix here is also a 4 × 4 matrix in the Keldysh⊗Nambu space). As will see in the following content, the transition temperature will be modified in this case, but not in the O(κ) case discussed in Sec.III. The retarded part of one matrix element of the Floquet matrix D, defined as Dcl,q (n, ω) = -i ∆ cl (ω + nΩ) ∆q (ω) We first consider the n = 0 component-Dcl,q (0, 0), which will result in zero-energy modes as the equilibrium case. The pole equation for the bosonic Green's function(see Appendix C) can be written as one will find the solution at zero temperature which holds for γ Ω ω D and terms are kept up to O(κ 2 ) for deriving this. This result reduces to the SC transition temperature in equilibrium case for κ → 0. For finite temperature, we numerically plot the phase diagram in Fig. We now analyze Green's functions Dcl,q (±n, 0) for n > 0, which involves at most n order transition processes between different Floquet bands. For example, after absorbing m parts of energies(mΩ), the bosonic mode will transist from aΩ to (a + m)Ω with |m| ≤ n. In that sense, we require perturbation calculations to keep terms up to O(κ n ). Here, we develop diagram rules to facilitate this analysis. For simplicity, we will introduce diagram rules through an example. When we study Cooper instability in the equilibrium case, the most important factor is the vertex of the two-electron correlation function, and under the random phase approximation(RPA), there is just one kind of vertices Comparing to the equilibrium case, one can observe that -Dcl,q (n, ω) is the so-called vertex. As for -Dcl,q (0, 0) shown in Appendix C, it has three terms and they represent different kinds of vertices. Briefly, all vertices can be classified into two classes. One represents the direct process without emitting or absorbing energies, known as the direct vertex, and the other describes the indirect process containing energy exchanges, known as the indirect vertex. For example, in -Dcl,q (0, 0), the first term represents the direct vertex, and the last two terms give indirect vertices. As for direct vertices, they are just the same with those in the equilibrium case Following above descriptions, we now write down diagram rules for different vertices, which will significantly facilitate the calculation of Dcl,q (n, ω): 1. Attach g/[1 -g Γcl,q (0, ω)] to a direct vertex shown in Fig. )) to an energy exchange vertex shown in Fig. to an indirect vertex. Read from the left to the right. 4. As for the diagram of one complete process, we just need to sum up those relative direct vertices and indirect vertices. As an example, -Dcl,q (0, 0) can be expressed as Fig. Having shown the diagram rules for Floquet vertices or the bosonic Green's functions(In Appendix C, we also summarize the diagram rules and show more examples for clarity.), one can now turn to analyze Dcl,q (n, 0) used for demonstrating the periodicity of the bosonic condensation. As we now want to study the general case, that is n can be arbitrary non-zero integers, terms should be kept up to O(κ n ). Therefore, suppose that we keep terms up to O(g 2 κ n ) for simplicity. According to diagram rules discussed previously, we can observe that the number of direct vertices are no morn than 2, as one direct vertex will contribute a factor g. Thus, there is one energy exchange vertex at most. For Dcl,q (±n, 0) with n = 0, there must be energy exchange vertices. Therefore, there is one energy exchange vertex and two direct vertices for the diagram of -Dcl,q (±n, 0) in O(g 2 κ n ) case. Thus, it is easy to obtain Dcl,q (±n, 0) = -g 2 Γcl,q (±n, 0) 1 -g Γcl,q (0, ±nΩ) 1 -g Γcl,q (0, 0) , where we have Γcl,q (±n, ω) ≡ k Γcl,q k (±n, ω). Since Γcl,q (±n, ω) ∼ κ n + O(κ n+2 ), Dcl,q (±n, 0) ∼ g 2 κ n . In the O(κ n ) case, terms that is proportional to κ |m| with |m| < n are still under our consideration, and one can derive similar expressions for Dcl,q (m, 0) from the same procedure. Note that the pole of Dcl,q (±n, 0) is the same as that of Dcl,q (0, 0) shown in Eq. The DOS of quasiparticles in Fig. In summary, based on the functional Keldysh field theory with a self-consistent treatment of all building blocks of our system, we demonstrate that the BCS meanfield treatment in the dissipative Floquet case is equivalent to the stationary point analysis in the functional or path integral formalism, where one can always implement the stationary point analysis. Moreover, based on the Gaussian fluctuation approximation, which is beyond the mean-field theory, we also consolidate the validity of the BCS mean-field theory in the dissipative Floquet scenario. Note that this system possesses a more structured gauge U (1) symmetry, which could be an interesting point to be discussed in the future. where , where the plus(minus) sign refers to the forward(backward) part of the contour, Fig. Eq.(A2) implies that calculating the generating function is the key for deal with a many-body problem. The functional formalism(path integral formalism) is a useful method to rewrite the generating function. The standard procedure, which can be found in any quantum field theory textbook, is: • Divide the closed time contour into (2N -2) intervals with δ t , Fig. • Take the limit δ t → 0, and then one will get the generating function Z = D[ Ψ, Ψ] exp(iS) in the continuum limit. For our system, we have The definition of those quantities can be found in the main text. Here, we do not include V (t), as we will not use it. Integrating out the degrees of freedom of the bath using Gaussian integrals, one can obtain the equivalent fermionic action: where with the self-energy from the bath being Σk (t 1 , t 2 ) = q M (t 1 ) Qb0q (t 1 -t 2 ) M † (t 2 ), and where f (t) = (K/Ω) sin(Ωt). We now turn to discuss how to calculate the dressed Green's function Qk (t, t ) through the perturbative expansion with respect to κ = K/Ω. where the superscript (i) also stands for the ith order in κ, Due to the feature of Floquet matrices, Q(0) k,∆ is a diagonal matrix, and Q(1) k,∆ is a secondary diagonal matrix, etc. For ∆ q 0 , we have where the superscript "12" stands for the matrix element in the first row and second column. When we keep terms up to O(κ), normal fermionic Green's functions with dissipations are From QK k,p/h (0, ω), we find that when we keep terms up to O(κ), the fermionic distribution function is still the Fermi-Dirac distribution, which is different from that in O(κ 2 ) case and where we have assumed ∆ to be real, F (ω) = [1 -2n F (ω)] 1 N with 1 N being the identity in the Nambu space and n F (ω) = 1/(e βω + 1) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution. Substituting k with d k ρ F , one will get the quasi-classical Green's function Then according to Eq.(B4), one will get the gap equation in the main text. Now we turn to consider ∆ q ±1 . Seeing as Q(1) k,∆ is not a diagonal matrix, for convenience, we truncate the Floquet matrix to a 3 × 3 one. Then, one can solve the matrix equation Eq.(B3) to get Solving this equation, one can derive QK k,∆ (±1, ω), then one can get equations that decide ∆ q ±1 . Since it is difficult to analytically solve them, we resort to numerical calculations. where we have truncated the Floquet matrix to a 3 × 3 one, Γ ≡ k Γk , the superscript (i) denotes terms kept up to the ith order in κ, and where 1 K is the identity matrix in the Keldysh space. Expanding (1 -g Γ ⊗ σ1 ) -1 up to κ 2 , one will get Then one can get matrix elements of Dcl,q (n, ω) up to the second order in κ: Dcl,q (0, ω) = -g 1 -g Γcl,q (0, ω) -g 3 Γcl,q (1, ω -Ω) Γcl,q (-1, ω) 1 -g Γcl,q (0, ω) 1 -g Γcl,q (0, ω -Ω) 1 -g Γcl,q (0, ω) -g 3 Γcl,q [-1, ω + Ω) Γcl,q (1, ω] 1 -g Γcl,q (0, ω) 1 -g Γcl,q (0, ω + Ω) 1 -g Γcl,q (0, ω) , (C6) Dcl,q (±1, ω) = -g 2 Γcl,q (±1, ω) 1 -g Γcl,q (0, ω ± Ω) 1 -g Γcl,q (0, ω) , (C7) Dcl,q (±2, ω) = -g 2 Γcl,q (±2, ω) 1 -g Γcl,q (0, ω) 1 -g Γcl,q (0, ω ± 2Ω) -g 3 Γcl,q (±1, ω) Γcl,q (±1, ω ± Ω) 1 -g Γcl,q (0, ω) 1 -g Γcl,q (0, ω ± Ω) 1 -g Γcl,q (0, ω ± 2Ω) . (C8) In order to make the diagram rules we show in the main text clearer, we summarize them again and give one more example. The diagram rules read as: 1. Attach g/[1 -g Γcl,q (0, ω)] to a direct vertex shown in Fig. to an indirect vertex. Read from the left to the right. 4. As for the diagram of one complete process, we just need to sum up those relative direct vertices and indirect vertices. In the main text, we use the example of Dcl,q (0, 0) to introduce the diagram rules, and in the following, we will use the diagram rules to derive Dcl,q (±2, ω), and comparing it to Eq.(C8) to show the correctness of the diagram rules. Here, we also keep terms up to the second order in κ. For Dcl,q (±2, ω), since there exist energy exchange processes(n = ±2), thus in the diagram, the energy exchange vertex must exist. • The simplest process is that there are only one energy exchange vertex, which stands for one particle absorbing/emitting two parts of energies(±2Ω), and two direct vertices. The diagram is shown in Fig. • One may find that a process that contains two energy exchange vertices, which stands for one particle first absorbing/emitting one part of energy(±Ω), then absorbing/emitting one part of energy as well, can also contribute to Dcl,q (±2, Ω). It indeed does, and the diagram is shown in Fig. • Since the leading order term of the process, in which one particle absorbs/emits n parts of energies, is proportional to κ n (that is Γcl,q (±n, ω) ∼ κ n + O(κ n+2 )), in the O(κ 2 ) case, there are only the above two diagrams that contribute to Dcl,q (±2, ω). The diagram for Dcl,q (±2, ω) is just the sum of Fig. • Use the diagram rules shown previously, one can easily derive the expression of Dcl,q (±2, ω): -Dcl,q (±2, ω) = g 2 Γcl,q (±2, ω) 1 -g Γcl,q (0, ω) 1 -g Γcl,q (0, ω ± 2Ω) + g 3 Γcl,q (±1, ω) Γcl,q (±1, ω ± Ω) 1 -g Γcl,q (0, ω) 1 -g Γcl,q (0, ω ± Ω) 1 -g Γcl,q (0, ω ± 2Ω) which is exactly the same with Eq.(C8). [1] A. Eckardt, Rev. Mod. Phys. 89, 011004 (2017). [2] T. Oka and S. Kitamura, Annual Review of 