Alloying enables engineering of the electronic structure of semiconductors for optoelectronic applications. Due to their similar lattice parameters, the two-dimensional semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides of the MoWSeS group (MX2 where M= Mo or W and X=S or Se) can be grown as high-quality materials with low defect concentrations. Here we investigate the atomic and electronic structure of Mo(1-x)WxS2 alloys using a combination of high-resolution experimental techniques and simulations. Analysis of the Mo and W atomic positions in these alloys, grown by chemical vapour transport, shows that they are randomly distributed, consistent with Monte Carlo simulations that use interaction energies determined from first-principles calculations. Electronic structure parameters are directly determined from angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy measurements. These show that the spinorbit splitting at the valence band edge increases linearly with W content from MoS2 to WS2, in agreement with linear-scaling density functional theory (LS-DFT) predictions. The spinorbit splitting at the conduction band edge is predicted to reduce to zero at intermediate compositions. Despite this, polarisation-resolved photoluminescence spectra on monolayer Mo0.5W0.5S2 show significant circular dichroism, indicating that spin-valley locking is retained. These results demonstrate that alloying is an important tool for controlling the electronic structure of MX2 for spintronic and valleytronic applications. Semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenide monolayers, such as the MoWSeS group (MX2 where M= Mo or W and X=S or Se), are of great interest both for their practical applications and for the fundamental science that can be studied in them. Band engineering through alloying has been essential to the development of III-V semiconductors, giving control over band parameters such as band gaps and band alignments, leading to their application in commercial optoelectronics. Following this, theoretical and experimental works have shown that for MX2 alloying allows not only continuous tuning of the band gap over a large range, from 1.55 to 1.99 eV, Crystal growth and exfoliation. Single crystals were synthesised by chemical vapor transport (CVT) in a two-step process. For PL measurements, the as-grown crystals were mechanically exfoliated onto a Si/SiO2 wafer using scotch tape. Prior to peeling off, the substrates were heated for a few minutes on a hot plate at 130°C. Compositional analysis. Crystal composition was analysed by a combination of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX), further details are given in SuppMat S2. EDX showed uniform composition across individual crystals, indicating homogeneity at the microscale. The compositions determined by XPS and EDX were consistent with each other and with those measured from analysis of the atomic resolution STEM images, indicating homogeneity also at the nanoscale. Atomic resolution imaging. Flakes were mechanically exfoliated onto chemical vapour deposition (CVD) grown graphene on copper Polarisation-resolved low-temperature photoluminescence spectroscopy. The PL was excited using a CW dye laser with a wavelength of 625 nm via a 50x 0.55 NA microscope objective producing a 2 μm laser spot. The power incident on the sample was kept below 100 μW. The measurements were performed in backscattering geometry with the sample in vacuum at 4 K. In order to ensure good circular polarisation purity, a quarter wave plate (Thorlabs AQWP05M-600) was placed just before the objective so that in the rest of the optical system the input and output polarisations corresponded to vertical and horizontal linear polarisations. The output polarisation was determined using a linear polariser (Thorlabs LPVIS100) and a half wave plate (AHWP05M-600) used to ensure a constant input polarisation for the spectrometer. The spectrometer used was a Princeton Instruments TriVista 555 with a liquid nitrogen cooled CCD. Measurements were repeated on multiple areas of the sample. Monte Carlo simulations. We model the equilibrium distribution of the cations W and Mo using an Ising-like model of nearest-neighbour interactions between pairs of cations on a hexagonal lattice. The model comprises a single layer with 120×120 in-plane unit cells, a size corresponding to several times the largest apparent feature size in the final distributions. This was initialised to a random distribution constructed to achieve the target concentration x. The growth process was simulated by Monte Carlo sampling on proposed site swaps to achieve an equilibrium of the system after 20000 cycles at a temperature of 800 K. To parameterise the Monte Carlo simulations, DFT calculations were performed on a selection of models, as shown in SuppMat Figure Plane-wave DFT. For calculations of the optimized lattice constants of the pure materials, MoS2 and WS2, the planewave DFT package CASTEP was used. Linear-scaling DFT. The ONETEP linear-scaling density functional theory package Calculations were performed within the Virtual Crystal Approximation Mo1-xWxS2 alloy crystals were grown by chemical vapour transport, as described in Methods, across the range from x = 0 to 1. Their compositions, determined by a combination of XPS and EDX analysis (see Methods and SuppMat S2 for further details), were found to be consistent within 3% between crystals grown in the same batch, and across individual crystals when averaged at the micrometre scale. When exfoliated to monolayers, they exhibit room temperature photoluminescence with peak emission frequency varying nonlinearly from 1.85 eV at x = 0 to 1.98 eV at x = 1, consistent with prior literature reports To determine whether the alloys are atomically ordered, atomic resolution ADF-STEM images of monolayer Mo1-xWxS2 flakes were acquired. Example images are given in Figure For comparison, we performed Monte Carlo simulations made with varying interaction energies, J, and compositions, x. Details of the simulation methodology are given in the methods and SuppMat S3. To predict J for these alloys, a range of atomic configurations were tested, from which the binding energy of substitutional W atoms within the MoS2 monolayer was found to be well-represented by an average value of J = 7.6 meV. This was further verified by comparison of the Monte Carlo model to DFT calculations of a range of larger cells (SuppMat S3). Figure For J=0, when there is no energy difference between the W and Mo, they are randomly arranged; qualitatively, Monte Carlo simulations with J = 7.6 meV look similar to those with J = 0. Although close visual inspection of the images can suggest some ordering, quantitative statistical analysis is required to rigorously test whether the Mo/W atoms are randomly distributed within the sheets. SuppMat S3 shows that in the Monte Carlo model, strong ordering disappears beyond 50 K and is completely absent by temperatures comparable to the growth conditions. For a given composition, ADF-STEM images with areas of 120×120 atoms were analysed, fitting the intensity at each atom coordinate and thresholding to determine the arrangement of Mo and W atoms, as described in Methods. With the atom coordinates identified, statistical analysis can be used to investigate whether the arrangements are ordered. Following Cowley , where n i is the number of W atoms out of the c i atoms in the ith coordination shell surrounding each W atom (as defined schematically in Figure Figure To correlate the electronic structure to the atomic structure, the valence band dispersions of the Mo1-xWxS2 alloy crystals were measured by ARPES. Since the measurements are surface sensitive, the as-grown bulk crystals were mounted flat onto a sample plate and cleaved in the ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) chamber immediately prior to analysis, to generate the clean surface required. Cleaving naturally results in exposure of the (002) planes to the beam, so that ARPES probes the electronic structure in the plane of the 2D layer. Typical spectra are given in Figure The qualitative trends are apparent by visual inspection of the ARPES spectra: as the W content increases, the spin-orbit splitting between the upper valence bands near K (SOCVB) increases; the band width (Dvb) increases and the effective mass decreases. To quantitatively evaluate the evolution of the band structure with composition, measurements were performed on all the compositions (x = 0.22, 0.37, 0.49, 0.71, 0.87 and 1) and band parameters extracted quantitatively by fitting the ARPES spectra, as described in Methods. The data are presented in Figure Ab initio calculations of the electronic structure across the alloy compositions were made using two approaches: the virtual crystal approximation (VCA), Figure Caution should be taken when comparing the PL emission peak energies to the predicted band gaps (Eg) which are determined from the energy difference between the VBM and the CBM. The large exciton binding energy (several hundred meV) means that the PL peak emission energy is not a good measurement of the single-particle electronic band gap. Prior direct measurements of Eg from ARPES of electrostatically doped monolayers found Eg = 2.07 ± 0.05 eV for MoS2 and Eg = 2.03 ± 0.05 eV for WS2 ARPES provides a direct and visual measurement of the valence band dispersion of the alloys, allowing easier comparison to calculated spectra than is possible from optical spectroscopy data. Measured values of SOCVB from the Mo1-xWxS2 single crystals (blue data points) are compared in Figure Figure The ARPES spectra do not give information about the conduction band as they only probe the occupied states. However, the spin-orbit splitting at the conduction band edge (SOCCB) can be extracted from the DFT spectral functions and this is plotted as a function of composition in Figure Calculations were performed on three different random realisations of the 8×8 supercells for each x, allowing a rough estimate of the disorder potential to be made, on a similar lengthscale to the exciton radius, based on the variation of the CBM position between these random realisations. From these we observe that the disorder potential is larger than SOCCB at least for 0.125 ≤ x ≤ 0.5, becoming smaller again as SOCCB increases (see SuppMat S5). This casts doubt over the usual picture of separated states split by SOC at the conduction band edge and merits further investigation of the spin-valley locking in these alloys. To test whether spin-valley locking is retained in the alloys, optical spectroscopy measurements were performed on an exfoliated heterostructure consisting of a monolayer flake of Mo0.5W0.5S2 encapsulated in hBN. An optical image, and schematic, of the sample is shown in Figure No ordering or segregation was found in CVT grown Mo1-xWxS2 alloys, consistent with Monte Carlo simulations parameterised by ab initio calculations. ARPES measurements showed that the spin orbit coupling at the valence band edge increases linearly with increasing x (increasing W content). LS-DFT simulations using large unit cells gave predictions consistent with the ARPES measurements, but DFT simulations using fractional atom concentrations in a primitive unit cell were found to be inconsistent with the experimental results. This conforms to expectations of the known severe limitations of the predictive power of VCA, which becomes even more apparent for properties that are nonlinear with atomic number Z, such as SOC. This is especially apparent for materials which retain some localised character in the valence band, and strongly suggests instead the need for large-scale disordered models to study alloy properties. From the LS-DFT models, for intermediate alloy compositions the spin orbit coupling is predicted to be smaller than the spatially localised changes in the conduction band edge due to the atomic-scale heterogeneity of the alloy. Despite this, polarisation-resolved PL measurements of a monolayer Mo0.5W0.5S2 flake show circular dichroism consistent with spin-valley locking. The ability to rationally and continuously tune the spin-orbit coupling, effective mass and band gap suggests a promising future for MX2 alloys in valleytronic and spintronic applications. Single crystals were synthesised by chemical vapor transport (CVT) in a two-step process. Mo, W and S element powders (all purity 99.9%, Sigma-Aldrich) were mixed stoichiometrically into an ampoule which was pumped down to a pressure of 10 -6 mbar and sealed. The ampoule was heated to 1000 °C for 3 days to form Mo1-xWxS2 powder. Some of this powder (about 2 g) was transferred to a new quartz ampoule with larger inner diameter ( 1.6 cm) and mixed with the transport agent, I2 (10 mg cm -3 of the ampoule volume). To keep the I2 stable, the ampoule was evacuated to 10 -6 mbar and placed in ice while sealing. The ampoule was then placed into a three-zone furnace as shown in Figure 