The manipulation of the magnetic direction by using the ultrafast laser pulse is attractive for its great advantages in terms of speed and energy efficiency for information storage applications. However, the heating and helicity effects induced by circularly polarized laser excitation are entangled in the helicity-dependent all-optical switching (HD-AOS), which hinders the understanding of magnetization dynamics involved. Here, by applying a dual-pump laser excitation, first with a linearly polarized (LP) laser pulse followed by a circularly polarized (CP) laser pulse, we identify the timescales and contribution from heating and helicity effects in HD-AOS with a Pt /Co /Pt triple layer. When the sample is preheated by the LP laser pulses to a nearly fully demagnetized state, CP laser pulses with a muchreduced power switches the sample's magnetization. By varying the time delay between the two pump pulses, we show that the helicity effect, which gives rise to the deterministic helicity induced switching, onsets instantly upon laser excitation, and only exists for less than 0.2 ps close to the laser pulse duration of 0.15 ps. The results reveal that the transient magnetization state upon which CP laser pulses impinge is the key factor for achieving HD-AOS, and importantly, the tunability between heating and helicity effects with the unique dual-pump laser excitation approach will enable HD-AOS in a wide range of magnetic material systems for the potential ultrafast spintronics applications. The all-optical magnetization switching (AOS) was first observed in a landmark experiment Heating and helicity effects are entangled in HD-AOS using circular polarized lasers, and the individual contribution cannot be distinguished by using just one circularly polarized pump beam. Furthermore, as the HD-AOS has been reported as a multi-pulse effect HD-AOS induced by a sequence of 100 LP and CP pulse pairs with different power combinations and a fixed delay time, 1.6 picoseconds, between them was investigated first. At this delay time, the hot electrons/spins excited by the first LP pulse has reached their thermal equilibrium state with the system temperature close to its peak value when the second CP pulse arrived. Fig. As indicated in Fig. A two-temperature model has been employed to simulate the demagnetization rate and magnetization recovery after the LP pulse for both cases, i.e. of 40 and 80 μW, and the results are superimposed on their switching rate curves in Fig. To make this picture clear, the two-temperature model has been applied again to simulate the demagnetization rate and magnetization recovering excited by both the LP and CP pulses. Fig. Even though the transient magnetization is reduced to about 70% of its saturation value after another 0.2 ps time delay, as marked by two short vertical dash lines (blue) in Fig. The LP pulse heating induced demagnetization has two sides. It assists helicity effect in achieving HD-AOS, upon which CP pulses impinge. Once the helicity effect ends, it starts to demagnetize reversed magnetization from the helicity effect. We have further investigated the relationship between HD-AOS switching ratio and laser ellipticity using a single pump and the results are included in Fig. In conclusion, we have applied dual-pulse laser excitation to identify the contribution and time dependence of heating and helicity effect in HD-AOS in a Pt/Co/Pt triple layer. We have shown that pre-heating plays an essential role in HD-AOS. The laser power requested by helicity effect in HD-AOS could be very low when magnetization is close to a fully demagnetized state. By varying the time delay between LP and CP pulses with different energy combinations, we have demonstrated unambiguously that the helicity effect, which gives rise to the deterministic helicity-induced switching, occurs instantly upon laser excitation, and only exists over the laser pulse duration. This work has disentangled the heating and helicity effects and revealed their timescales in helicity-dependent all-optical magnetization switching. At the same time, the unique LP/CP dual-pump scheme makes the manipulation of HD-AOS feasible, which provides a promising way for achieving HD-AOS in a wide range of material systems. The sample Pt (2 nm)/Co (0.6 nm)/Pt (2 nm) triple layer was fabricated on a Corning glass substrate by magnetic sputtering. The base pressure for the sputtering system was better than 4 × 10 -5 Pa. The working Ar pressure was 0.5 Pa. The thickness of the Corning glass substrate is 0.13 mm. A 5 nm Ta buffer layer was deposited prior to the Pt/Co/Pt growth, which improves the Pt/Co interface smoothness and the (111) orientation, and therefore enhance the perpendicular magnetic anisotropy of the Co layer, as confirmed in the MOKE hysteresis loop shown in Fig. A Ti:sapphire laser amplifier system with 150 fs pulse duration and 800 nm central wavelength was used. For the dual-pumping measurements, the pulse was split into two pulses. The first pump pulse was linearly polarized (LP) and used to heat up the sample's electron/spin systems. The second pump pulse was circularly polarized (CP), delayed with respect to the first LP pulse, and used to switch the sample's magnetic state, as illustrated in Fig. The sample was mounted on a motorized 3-axis nanomax flexure stage. The magnetization of the sample was initially saturated along the perpendicular direction of the sample plane defined as M ↑ state. When the sample was exposed to the dual-pump beams, the stage was scanned over a 300 μm distance at a velocity of 10 μm/s. It is equivalent to 100 pulses' excitation per every 1 μm illuminated path on the sample from each pump beam. After laser excitation, the magnetic domain state was recorded as a MOKE image via a wide-field Magneto-Optical Kerr (MOKE) microscope. Then the sample was re-magnetized to M ↑ state and a reference MOKE image was taken. The MOKE images presented are the subtractions of each pair of these images, where any effects from the surface morphology are eliminated. 