We report a joint study, using Raman micro-spectroscopy and molecular dynamics simulations, on the substrate effect on thermal properties of 2D materials and revisit measurement of thermal expansion coefficient (TEC) of supported 2D film. Graphene is employed as a representative. We find that the out-of-plane coupling between graphene and substrate strongly affects the temperature-dependent vibrational modes and TEC of graphene. Density of states for long-wavelength out-of-plane oscillations is significantly reduced when graphene is supported on an alkane substrate. To account for the contribution of the out-of-plane coupling to TEC, a Raman micro-spectroscopic scheme is developed. The TEC of graphene on octadecyltrichlorosilane substrate is found to be (-0.6±0.5)×10 -6 /K at room temperature, which is fundamentally smaller than that of free-standing graphene. Our results shed light on the understanding of the interaction between 2D material and substrate, and offer a general recipe for optical measurement of TEC of a supported 2D film. Two-dimensional (2D) materials, such as graphene, h-BN, silicene, h-MoS2 and black phosphorus, have generated enormous interest because of its unique physical properties and promising applications in next-generation electronic and optoelectronic devices. Theoretically, TEC of 2D materials can be calculated using quasi-harmonic approximations as shown in the following equation: 5 Here, index "0" means the ground state, a is the lattice constant, and E is the total energy of the system, (k,s) is the contribution of point k in s sub-band to the heat capacity. (k,s)  is the so-called Grüneisen parameter, with the form of , 0 0, , 0 (k,s) . Obviously, knowledge of phonon vibrational modes is crucial to understand the origin of negative TEC of some 2D materials. In a simplified physical picture, unlike its bulk counterpart, 2D structure leads to the ease of out-of-plane deformations, while the lattice is less "stretched". (1). Note that 2D materials are generally fabricated on a supporting substrate. The interaction between the 2D film and substrate not only introduces in-plane deformation in the film, but is expected to strongly suppress the out-of-plane modes and the membrane effect. Several techniques had been applied to TEC measurements of 2D materials, such as the scanning electron microscope (SEM), Unfortunately, the reported values of TEC of monolayer graphene diverge, varying from -8.0×10 -6 /K to +1.6×10 -6 /K at room temperature. In this letter, we report an in situ Raman micro-spectroscopic study on TEC of a 2D material on substrate. Graphene on octadecyltrichlorosilane(OTS)-coated glass was chosen as a representative. By introducing a tunable in-plane strain and monitoring the local Raman shifts of graphene as a function of temperature from 290 K to 390K, the contributions of in-plane and out-of-plane substrate effects were able to be separated. We found that, although the terminal methyl groups of OTS interact only weakly with graphene, resulting in weak in-plane strain on the graphene, their presence at close range still affects TEC of graphene appreciably. A Raman micro-spectroscopic scheme is developed to measure TEC of 2D materials with the out-of-plane coupling effect being considered. The experimentally deduced TEC of graphene on OTS was found to be (-0.6±0.5)×10 -6 /K, the amplitude of which is fundamentally smaller than that of free-standing graphene reported in literature. Graphene samples used in this work were commercial CVD single-layer graphene grown on copper foil (6Carbon Technology Inc.). PMMA (molecular weight 95000) was used to transfer the graphene on to a piece of 170 m-thick cover glass (VWR International, LLC) with or without OTS surface coating, respectively. Raman spectra of graphene G-, D-and 2D-bands were measured to confirm the number of graphene layers. The temperature-dependent Raman frequency shift of graphene on substrate is given by 17 ( ) ( ) ( ) The first term, ( ) , is attributed to the combination of lattice expansion and anharmonic effect of graphene. The second term, ( ) sub T   , originates from the substrate contribution, which consists of the lateral strain ( ( ) ls T   ) and the out-of-plane coupling ( ( ) In particular, ( ) ls T   is induced by stress as a result of TEC mismatch between graphene and substrate as temperature increases, which can be expressed as 17 Here, T is the sample temperature, β is the biaxial strain coefficient, ε is the strain imposing on graphene. Experimentally, βeff can be determined by applying a known strain on the substrate at a certain temperature. As shown in Fig. To demonstrate the importance of out-of-plane coupling between sample and substrate, we transferred graphene onto OTS-coated glass, where the lateral strain induced by substrate is expected to be weak. The strain coefficient (βeff) for graphene on OTS-coated glass is found to be 10 cm -1 /%. It indicates graphene is slipping on OTS surface when bending the substrate. As a result, according to Eq. ( ) of graphene on OTS should have been close to that of free-standing graphene. Instead, as sketched in Fig. Such large difference signifies the important contribution of the out-of-plane coupling to the phonon vibrations of graphene. in this work and free-standing graphene (blue dot) measured by Lin et al. To better elucidate the effect of out-of-plane coupling, molecular dynamics simulations were performed on graphene using the PPBE-G model exchange correlation functional. The model has been shown to give good properties for free standing graphene. The substrate is modeled with a periodic array of CH4 in a square lattice. The lattice spacing of CH4 is chosen to be 4.5 Å mimicking the methyl group of OTS at similar areal density. The substrate is modeled using simple Lennard Jones potential from the OPLS-AA parameterization. Both free standing and supported graphene are expected to ripple, the amount of rippling can be quantified using the normal-normal correlation function, With the PPBE-G graphene model, the TEC of free standing graphene was computed to be (-3.0±0.7)×10 -6 K -1 and that of supported graphene was (2.0±0.7)×10 -7 K -1 . The suppression of ZA vibrational modes normal to the substrate by the van der Waals interactions with the model substrate is thus strong enough to significantly reduce the in-plane contraction. This is not surprising since graphene can no longer ripple into the perpendicular dimension in presence of the out-of-plane coupling with the substrate. With the perfectly flat model substrate reducing the negative contribution to the TEC, the computed TEC reduced by more than a factor of ten in magnitude and becomes slightly positive. length (1/q). Note that q has a unit of 1/Å. The above experimental and theoretical results alert that it is problematic to ignore the effect of out-of-plane coupling in the measurement of graphene TEC as conducted in some previous experiments. In the following, we revisit the experimental determination of graphene TEC by taking into account the out-of-plane coupling. In order to obtain TEC using Raman spectroscopy, one needs to two sets of measurements with different lateral stain while the out-of-plane coupling and the ( ) terms remains the same. As shown in Eq. ( We therefore designed a patterned substrate consisting of 25m diameter OTS disks surrounded by gold film on glass substrate as illustrated in Fig. After collecting a set of Raman spectra of graphene at a marked location on the OTS domain versus temperature, we used tightly focused femtosecond laser pulses to cut graphene along the edge of the OTS disk. It allows isolation of the piece of graphene on the OTS disk from the rest as sketched in Fig. ) in Eq. ( ) can be obtained by taking the differences of the two sets of Raman shifts: Here, the superscript "pat" and "iso" denotes the corresponding parameters of patterned and isolated sample, respectively. With known ( ) sub T  , and βeff calibrated in situ following the protocol presented in Fig. Our result gives a much smaller TEC of graphene at room temperature than previous reported data. In summary, we have studied the thermal properties of monolayer graphene supported on OTS-coated glass using in situ Raman micro-spectroscopy and molecular dynamic simulations. We showed clearly that the out-of-plane coupling between graphene and OTS can fundamentally change the thermal expansion coefficient, although their interaction is rather weak. Theoretical analysis found that the reduction of the density of states for longer wavelength out-of-plane vibrational modes is responsible for the suppression of TEC when graphene is supported on a substrate. The modeling on a perfectly flat single layer substrate diminished the negative TEC to the extent of being positive as a result of out-of-plane coupling with the substrate. The experimental OTS substrate has more irregularity, thus the TEC shows substantial reduction without sign change. Nonetheless the pronounced TEC reduction with out-of-plane coupling is clear from both theory and experiment. It alerts that in order to deduce TEC of a 2D material on substrate, besides the lateral strain, the out-of-plane coupling effect is of critical importance and must be taken into consideration in experiment, which is unfortunately ignored in literature. The TEC measurement scheme proposed in this work offers a solution that is able to separate the contributions of lateral strain and out-of-plane coupling to TEC. Our results provide new insight on thermal property and substrate effects of 2D material, which will help the development of future applications like next-generation electronic and optoelectronic devices.