Recent breakthroughs in bulk crystal growth of β-Ga2O3 by the edge-defined film-fed technique has led to the commercialization of large-area β-Ga2O3 substrates. Standard epitaxy approaches are being utilized to develop various thin-film β-Ga2O3 based devices including lateral transistors. This article will discuss the challenges for metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) of β-Ga2O3 and the design criteria for use of this material system in power electronic device structures. Properties β-Ga2O3-based transistors and diodes possess fundamental electronic properties that make them ideal candidates for high power devices (Table (where Imax ≈ qnvsat, q is the elementary charge, and n is the charge density) in devices. [8] The generally accepted value for breakdown field of β-type of Ga2O3 is 8 MV/cm although this exceptionally high value has not been experimentally confirmed. [9] Examining the structure of the β-Ga2O3 crystal helps to frame a number of issues in the growth and behavior of Ga2O3. The valence band maximum in β-Ga2O3 forms from weakly interacting O 2p orbital states with contribution of Ga 3d and 4s orbitals while the conduction band minimum forms from Ga 4s states. Dramatic progress has been made over the past few years in the bulk crystal growth of β-Ga2O3. The edge-defined film-fed growth (EFG) technique involves pulling the boule along the [010] direction at a rate of approximately 15mm/hr. The EFG process has led to the production of up to 4-inch diameter Ga2O3 substrates oriented in or (001) planes. The float zone technique is able to produce (100), (010), and (001) oriented boules with a diameter of 1 inch at a growth rate approaching 5mm/hr. The Czochralski technique has produced, at a pull rate of 2 mm/hr, (100) oriented boules of 2-inch diameter with potential for larger diameter boules in the future. The availability from the Czochralski process of (100) orientated wafers provided a basis for a series of homoepitaxial studies In order to describe this process of adatom diffusion to step edges vs. formation of (potentially twinned) islands, Schewski et al. extended a model of Bales and Zangwill A follow-on study by Schewski et al. found that the substrate monoclinic offcut direction of [00 ] and [001] were not equivalent. [18] A Ga2O3 substrate offcut towards [00 ] resulted in steps that reconstruct as the facet. Subsequent deposition proceeded in a 2D step-flow manner and the resultant film had high mobility. In contrast, a Ga2O3 substrate offcut towards [00 ] reconstructed as a twin defect nucleated at a (001)-B step. The film deposited on this substrate possessed a high density of stacking faults (that behaved as acceptor-like electron trap states) and displayed low electron mobility. An earlier ab-initio studies by Bermudez reported a low surface energy of β-Ga2O3 on the (100) plane. There has also been progress in the development in the epitaxy of doped β-Ga2O3 by a number of techniques, including MOCVD, HVPE, and MBE with reports of n-type doping over the range 10 15 to 10 19 cm -3 using Sn or Si shallow donors. It has been generally observed that MOCVD films produced via a Ga source of TMGa are resistive except at high n-type doping and with H2O as the oxygen source. Using TMGa and H2O, Gogova et al. doped β-Ga2O3 with Sn on (0001) sapphire and (100) β-Ga2O3 substrates (Figure Tuomisto et al. employed positron annihilation spectroscopy to relate the concentration of negative and neutral vacancies to the conductivity of doped and undoped β-Ga2O3 thin films. An underlying mechanism for unintentional conductivity in β-Ga2O3 was suggested to be based on hydrogen. The reported theoretical room temperature mobility of β-Ga2O3 is in the range of 200 to 300 cm 2 /V•s; however, typical experimental mobilities are reported in 50 to 150 cm 2 /V•s range. Examining the mobility at a low donor level in Figure A key design criteria in MODFETs is the physical spacing between the two-dimensional electron gas in the channel and the delta doped layer. As is visible in Figure As discussed earlier, polar optical phonon scattering creates a fundamental limitation that is difficult to mitigate in the mobility of polar semiconductors. Ghosh and Singisetti recently made a dramatic prediction of a screening mechanism for polar optical phonons in Ga2O3. From the previous section it is clear that research is needed in epitaxy of (AlxGa1-x)2O3 / Ga2O3 heterostructures. The (AlxGa1-x)2O3 alloy is challenging as α-Al2O3 is stable as the corundum phase (Figure Early work by Hill et al. into the equilibrium diagram of Al2O3 in β-Ga2O3 found the presence of a stable phase of AlGaO3. The addition of (InxGa1-x)2O3 to heterostructures would also be beneficial for the development of electronic devices. Again, the In2O3 crystal possesses a different stable phase (as seen in Figure Development of β-Ga2O3-based MOCVD technology will enable power electronic devices not possible with other semiconductor materials. The energetics of the crystal facets has a strong influence on growth morphology and defect formation for a given substrate orientation and offcut, growth temperature, and growth rate. It is clear that the growth environment, particularly metalorganic precursor selection and the presence of hydrogen, has a strong impact on the formation of gallium vacancies and the resulting compensation of intentional dopants. These compensating centers may be native defects or complexes from either sublattice. The understanding of the role of hydrogen including in the formation the vacancy complex is still evolving. The mobility in β-Ga2O3 is limited at low donor densities by polar optical phonons. The possibility to screen the longitudinal optical phonon modes by the electron gas plasmon further motivates development of modulation doped (AlxGa1-x)2O3 / β-Ga2O3 heterostructures. To achieve efficient devices based on this structure requires additional development into the growth of (AlxGa1-x)2O3 particularly at high alloy mole fraction.