Collective motion of dislocations is governed by the obstacles they encounter. In pure crystals, dislocations form complex structures as they become jammed by their anisotropic shear stress fields. On the other hand, introducing disorder to the crystal causes dislocations to pin to these impeding elements and, thus, leads to a competition between dislocation-dislocation and dislocation-disorder interactions. Previous studies have shown that, depending on the dominating interaction, the mechanical response and the way the crystal yields change. Here we employ three-dimensional discrete dislocation dynamics simulations with varying density of fully coherent precipitates to study this phase transitionfrom jamming to pinningusing unsupervised machine learning. By constructing descriptors characterizing the evolving dislocation configurations during constant loading, a confusion algorithm is shown to be able to distinguish the systems into two separate phases. These phases agree well with the observed changes in the relaxation rate during the loading. Our results also give insights on the structure of the dislocation networks in the two phases. While deforming, crystalline materials change irreversibly through discrete plastic events, i.e. avalanches, originating from the collective motion of dislocations -the topological defects of the crystal lattice Indeed in the case of dislocation jamming of pure dislocation systems, the interacting dislocations enter a state of 'extended criticality' where the system shows no distinct critical point but seems to recede in the constant vicinity of the transition independent of the loading force Our recent study of 3D discrete dislocation dynamics (DDD) simulations of FCC aluminium with the inclusion of stationary fully coherent precipitates (see Fig. An open question regarding the phase transition from jamming to pinning is how exactly does it alter the dislocation structures in the systems? Furthermore, despite the apparent similarities in the response (i.e. power law relaxation) of the dislocation systems in the different phases, could one be able to distinguish them by their dislocation structures without specific a priori knowledge of the transition? To address this problem, we use machine learning (ML). ML is proving to be a flexible and useful tool for physics and materials science Here we followed the evolving systems by concentrating on both the fine details and the long-ranged structures of the dislocation network. To accomplish this we computed the dislocation junction lengths, geometrically necessary dislocation (GND) density and dislocation correlation, and used these separately to describe the microstructure for the ML algorithm. Our results show that the algorithm was able to find the phase transition from all of the used descriptors and the discovered values of ρ c p are in perfect agreement. Therefore, as the dislocation structures in the two phases evolve in notably different ways, we were able to quantify some of the changes in the systems by analyzing the used structural descriptors. The rest of this paper is structured as follows: the implementation of the ML method, along with the details of the DDD simulations and our approaches to characterize the dislocation structures, are presented in the next section. After the methodology, we proceed to show results obtained with the ML algorithm and we finish with some discussion. We study the effect of varying the precipitate density ρ p on the nature of the collective dislocation dynamics within 3D DDD simulations using our modified version of the ParaDiS code where A is a constant, r is the distance from the precipitate to the dislocation and r p is the radius of the precipitate. In the context of transition from dislocationdominated jamming to disorder-dominated pinning, the relevant parameters are the precipitate density ρ p and the precipitate strength A For our simulations, we set parameters to approximate those of FCC aluminium with precipitates of fixed strength and size in a simulation box with periodic boundaries -A was especially chosen so that the system exhibits both jamming and pinning-dominated response depending on ρ p The simulations started with two relaxation periods, the first with only the dislocation networks and the second with also the precipitates present, to ensure the systems reached meta-stable states. After the initial relaxation, the systems were driven by applying a constant external stress σ. Depending on the magnitude of driving force, the systems tend to either get stuck (exponential decay of strain rate ε with small σ) or reach linear creep-like conditions (constant ε with large σ). However independent of precipitate density, all of the systems possess also a critical value σ c (dependent on ρ p , see Table In the characterization of the dislocation structures, we used three distinct descriptors. First, we exploited the fact that disorder causes the dislocations to stretch when parts of the dislocations get pinned. With this in mind, we measured the length of dislocation links between two junction nodes which represents the roughness of a dislocation and by collecting its distribution inside a system provides information on the dislocation structure. As an example, Fig. The second used descriptor was GND density where V voxel is the voxel volume, b is the Burgers vector, l is the line direction giving also the segment length and the sum is over all dislocation segments i inside the voxel. Then, the GND density ρ GN D was calculated from the Nye tensor. The resulting GND density fields, for instance the one with 10×10×10 voxels illustrated in Fig. As the third and final descriptor, we calculated the dislocation spacing correlation according to where ρ is the total dislocation density and L(r) is approximated by computing the mean line length in spheres of radius r centered at random points along the dislocation structure. We note that in the case of 2D DDD simulations, the average dislocation-dislocation correlation function changed drastically when mobile solutes (pinning points) were introduced to the system [29]. Here we focused on longerrange correlations to avoid possible effects caused by the assigned segment length restrictions of the computations. Fig. To observe the transition from dislocation jamming to pinning in an unsupervised manner, we used the confusion method presented in As we were dealing with a data set of 190 systems with more than one thousand of collected features, we applied some dimensionality reduction before teaching any classifier. The three distinct data sets (different descriptors) were cast to lower dimensions by principal component analysis (PCA). In PCA, every feature of the data is first scaled to zero mean and unit variance, and then the entire dataset is represented by n orthogonal linear combinations of the original data which maximize amount of explained variance. This happens in descending order, so that with the first principal component (PC), the explained variance is the largest. Fig. For a classifier, our choice was based on linear discriminant analysis (LDA) where x is the feature vector of a sample, w and w 0 are the weights and bias of the classifier and y(x) = 0 is the boundary. We used the implementation by scikit-learn where d is the length of x, μ k is the class-specific mean of features and Σ k is the covariance matrix. Moreover to obtain a linear boundary, the different classes are assumed to have identical covariance matrices, so in our case of two classes, k = -1 or k = 1, Σ -1 = Σ 1 = Σ. The weights for the decision boundary are obtained by applying the Bayes theorem, as at the boundary the probabilities of different classes given the sample are equal P (y = -1|x) = P (y = 1|x) and, thus, the log-probability ratio is log P (y = 1|x) P (y = -1|x) = log P (x|y = 1)P (y = 1) P (x|y = -1)P (y = -1) = 0. From this, the final weights, w and w 0 , are obtained by substituting the probability distribution of Eq. 6 and comparing to Eq. 5, The LDA classifiers were evaluated by the straightforward accuracy, i.e. score S = number of correctly predicted test samples / number of test samples, and trained by 2-fold cross-validation to provide some tentative confidence intervals. The confusion curves with the different dislocation structure descriptors in Fig. The used number of PCs for the best confusion curves (i.e. the curve with the highest maximum accuracy somewhere else than the ends of the range) was 5 for junctions and GND density, and 10 for correlations. Interestingly, the confusion curve obtained with junction lengthening data shows another distinct maximum near ρ p ≈ 3 • 10 20 m -3 , although there the accuracy is not as good as at ρ c p . Similar fluctuations from the pure W -shape are also observed in Fig. As the results with the unsupervised ML scheme showed, the dislocation configurations can be separated into two phases with different relaxation rates even though the general response, i.e. the power-law relaxation, is similar in the two cases. The confusion scheme succeeded extremely well, as it was able to achieve accuracy > 0.95 at the observed transition indicating that the systems where the dislocation-dislocation interactions dominate are significantly different from the precipitate-dominated systems. This was further supported by the fact that all the three dislocation structure characterization metrics considered captured the transition happening at the same value of ρ c p where also the relaxation starts to turn more rapid. The success of all three descriptors reveals some of the notable differences between dislocation structures in the two phases. Firstly, the distribution of the junction lengthening J captures the bowing of the dislocation lines and, clearly, the pinning points cause more stretching and bowing of junctions than the other possible obstacles, namely the jamming dislocation structures, as depicted already in Fig. Thirdly, the evolution of the local GND density finds similar structural changes as the other two descriptors: On one hand, the bowing dislocations are seen as a 'spreading' density of GND, while on the other hand with only few precipitates dislocations tend to move more in their straight forms. This is illustrated in Fig. To conclude our findings, we have studied the transition between dislocationdislocation interaction dominated jamming and disorder dominated pinning. By tuning the disorder content through precipitate density and strength, the system changes the mechanical response and yielding which is also seen in the power-law relaxation rate during the plastic flow with constant loading. Here we have been able to distinguish the simulated systems to the two phases of jamming and pinning solely by their dislocation structures during the constant stress simulations and, thus, highlighted the changes in the microstructure caused by the phase transition. These results offer two obvious prospects for future study: first, to conduct further simulations of the borderline case system where neither dislocation-dislocation nor dislocation-precipitate interaction dominates over the other. The second one is that our results tell that the dislocation structures are different in the two phases. This means that one can correlate these with the most interesting engineering quantity, the yield strength, possibly on a sample-to-sample basis as well. One should thus use the dislocation structure -oriented approach in the experimental verification of the different phases of crystal plasticity and for strength prediction. 