Second-order topological insulators (SOTIs) are the topological phases of matter in d dimensions that manifest (d -2)-dimensional localized modes at the intersection of the edges. We show that SOTIs can be designed via stacked Chern insulators with opposite chiralities connected by interlayer coupling. To characterize the bulk-corner correspondence, we establish a Jacobian-transformed nested Wilson loop method and an edge theory that are applicable to a wider class of higherorder topological systems. The corresponding topological invariant admits a filling anomaly of the corner modes with fractional charges. The system manifests a fragile topological phase characterized by the absence of a Wannier gap in the Wilson loop spectrum. Furthermore, we argue that the proposed approach can be generalized to multilayers. Our work offers perspectives for exploring and understanding higher-order topological phenomena. Introduction.-Identifying and classifying topological phases of matter plays an important role in modern physics. Bulk-boundary correspondence and emergent particles with quantized charge reflect the most fundamental property of a topologically protected system While wavefunctions and spectra may be similar or even identical, the topological classification can be evaluated by integration of the Berry curvature over a closed manifold HOTIs have been simulated in a plethora of platforms, including solid state In this Letter, we put forward a theoretical design of SOTIs by stacking Chern insulators with opposite chiralities coupled by interlayer hopping. We start from a bilayer Haldane model Model.-As illustrated in Fig. where ) T is the two-component creation operator acting at the site i of the α and β layers. The Pauli matrices σ(τ ) x , σ(τ ) y , σ(τ ) z and the identity matrix σ(τ ) 0 refer to the layer (sublattice) degree of freedom. t 1 denotes the intralayer hopping between the nearest neighbor sites. t 2 emulates the spin-orbit coupling between next nearest neighbor sites, where v ij = d i ×d j /|d i ×d j | depends on the orientations of the mediating bonds, where d i and d j are unit vectors connecting site j and i. t ⊥ denotes the interlayer hopping between site i in different layers. By Fourier transformation of the Hamiltonian (1) into momentum space, we obtain the Bloch matrix with with the topological property determined by the second Stiefel-Whitney number w 2 where [N - occ (Γ i )/2] counts the number of occupied bands with odd parity. w 2 also can be determined by nested Wilson loop calculation Two manifolds with the same Euler characteristic can be continuously deformed into each other. Thus, the Wilson loop is redefined in the standardized square primitive cell as a path-ordered product of the exponential of Berry connections, N , k y ) , |u n and |u m denote occupied Bloch functions, N is the number of discrete points along the k x direction, and m, n = 1, • • • , N occ . The Wilson loop eigenvalues indicates Wannier centers e iv x (k y ) at given k y . According to Figs. 2(b) and 2(c), the Wilson loop spectra have no Wannier gap and belong to the orthogonal group SO(2) where The determinant of the nested Wilson loop operator is det( W ) = (-1) w2 , and we can assert a nontrivial topological phase. Edge spectrum and topological corner states.-We now investigate the edge spectrum and the physical properties of topological corner states. In a zigzag terminated ribbon with open boundary condition, without t ⊥ , a pair of helical gapless edge modes forms a Dirac-like band crossing projected by T symmetry, see Fig. where v F = 3t 1 a/2 is the Fermi velocity and m H is the Haldane mass. Upon replacement k x,y → -i∂ x,y , the real-space Dirac Hamiltonian reads in the 2D semi-space x ∈ (-∞, ∞) and y ∈ (-∞, 0]. Manifestly, we have T H bulk T -1 = H bulk . Solving the Dirac equation H bulk Ψ(r) = EΨ(r), the spinor Ψ(r) must satisfy a boundary condition that ensures a vanishing normal component of the particle current density, A suitable boundary condition is where T BT -1 = B and the T symmetry is conserved at the edges. Solutions with Bloch wave propagation along the edge with wave vector k x and decaying exponentially into the bulk with length scale λ seeking in the form Ψ kx (r) = Φe ikxx+y/λ . With the constraint Γ 2 Φ = -iΓ 3 Φ resulting from the boundary condition, Eq. ( Setting the decay length λ = v F /m H , one can solve Eq. ( with edge energy spectrum E ± = ± ( v F k x ) 2 + m 2 I . Therefore, a 0D corner state must appear at the intersection of two edges with masses of opposite sign, corresponding to the Jackiw-Rebbi topological domain wall mode Generalization to multilayers. The proposed approach can be generalized to multilayers of Chern insulators, as illustrated in Fig. For a state-independent interlayer coupling, we have where C † m is the creation operator acting on the whole layer m. We stress that only an even number of helical modes (layers) can be used for construction of a SOTI. For an odd number of layers, there will always be a single helical mode corresponding to a strong topological phase, which cannot be gapped by a local perturbation as illustrated in Fig. For an even number of layers, Fig. Summary.-We propose and analyze a scheme to create SOTIs by stacking Chern insulators with opposite chiralities subject to interlayer coupling. To characterize the bulk-corner correspondence and quantify the topo-logical invariant, we establish a Jacobian-transformed nested Wilson loop method. We demonstrate a fragile topological phase by the absence of the Wannier gap in the Wilson loop spectrum. The topological invariant is found to admit a filling anomaly of the corner modes with fractional charges |e|/2. Finally, we show that the introduced approach can be generalized to multilayers. Our proposal can be readily realized by topological circuitry, and developing new bulk materials or van der Waals heterostructures calls for a thrilling challenge. d 2 (k) =2t 1 sin(3ak y /2) cos( √ 3ak x /2), d 3 (k) =t 2 [4 cos(3ak y /2) sin( √ 3ak y /2) -2 sin( √ 3ak x )],where Γ (1,2,3,4,5) = (σ 0 ⊗τ x , σ 0 ⊗τ y , σ z ⊗τ z , σ y ⊗τ z , σ x ⊗τ z ) and Γ ab = [Γ a , Γ b ]/2i are the Clifford-algebra matrices. Due to common pseudospin 1/2 representation in momentum space, we can regard the BZ to be that of a 2D hexagonal lattice with spin. By diagonalizing Eq. (2), we obtain the band structure shown in Fig.1(b). Dimensionless units are used throughout this Letter. Topological invariant.-Emergence of topological corner states is the physical manifestation of a SOTI, Γ ' M