Although deep structures guarantee powerful expressivity of deep neural networks (DNNs), they may also trigger overfitting problems. To improve the generalization capability of DNNs while retaining their expressivity, many strategies were developed to improve the diversity among the hidden units. Following this research direction, we propose a label-based diversity measure (LDiversity) quantified as the gap between a newly added inductive-bias term and a canonical unsupervised diversity measure term by formalizing the effect of the entanglement of the hidden units on the generalization capacity as mutual information. The existence of an inverse relationship between LDiversity and the generalization capacity is proved; i.e., the decrease in LDiversity generally improves the generalization capacity. Further, a regularization method is proposed by using LDiversity as the regularizer. The experiments show that the new method can effectively reduce overfitting and decrease the generalization error, experimentally justifying our approach. Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved significant success in many practical applications due to their strong expression capacity and powerful learning ability. However, the deep structure of DNNs may lead to complicated nonlinear mappings from input to output, giving rise to the problem of overfitting. Therefore, many studies have been devoted to developing approaches to improve the generalization capacity of DNNs in order to address the overfitting problem. One research direction is to constrain the model complexity; these methods include dropout To improve the generalization capacity of DNNs while simultaneously maintaining their expressivity, another research direction to pursue is to explore the diversity among the hidden units of a single specified layer of DNNs and to improve it, encouraging hidden units to be as uncorrelated or independent from each other as possible. For instance, This paper follows the second research direction and further focuses on the role of label information in defining the diversity measure. In fact, while boosting the diversity among the hidden units of DNNs has been shown to be beneficial for the performance in classification tasks, there is no single widely accepted formal definition of diversity measure. It was found that the role of inductive biases should be made explicit and enforced in the process of learning disentangled hidden representations for downstream tasks To achieve this goal, we first introduce a generalization error bound of DNNs from an information perspective, following the work of We then decompose the new bound and naturally obtain a measure of diversity formulated as a difference of two terms, named the label-based diversity measure (LDiversity), where the first term that has been used to obtain independent features By using LDiversity as the regularizer, we develop a new regularization method named the LDiversity method (LDM), the goal of which is to minimize the classification loss and newly added LDiversity. In particular, the process of minimizing LDiversity is the same as that of training generative adversarial networks (GANs), where two additional "discriminators" are involved to estimate LDiversity by maximizing their output values. Finally, we apply this method to fully connected neural networks and convolutional neural networks. Many experiments show that LDM can effectively reduce the overfitting and decrease the generalization error compared to the methods without the LDiversity regularizer. Furthermore, LDiversity between hidden units is demonstrated to be a crucial factor for reducing the generalization error in DNNs. Let Z = (X , Y) be an instance space, where X is a feature space and Y is a label space. A training set S of size n is an n-tuple, i.e., S = (Z 1 , Z 2 , ..., Z n ) (1) of i.i.d random elements of Z = (X, Y ) ∈ Z with an unknown PDF P Z (z). Given a neural network with multilayers, let ĥ = (h 1 , h 2 , ..., h m ) be the set of all hidden units h i in the discussed layer and W ∈ W be the collection of model parameters from the specified hidden layer to the end layer, where W is the hypothesis space of W . Due to the randomness in the realization of the dataset S, the values in W are considered to be random variables. We will make frequent use of the following standard information theoretical quantities where E X [•] denotes the expectation of the random object within the brackets w.r.t to the subscript random variable X. The mutual information of two stochastic variables is which by capturing the nonlinear statistical dependencies between the variables can be reformulated as the Kullback-Leibler (KL-)divergence between the joint density and the product of the marginal densities, i.e., which is zero if and only if h 1 and h 2 are independent. For more than two variables, the multivariate mutual information is defined as We will later use it to measure the entanglement in the hidden units and still call it the mutual information in the following for consistency. Consequently, the conditional mutual information of multiple variables given Y is ) and will be employed below to describe the class-conditional correlation. This section gives an upper-bound of the generalization error from an information-theoretical perspective, formulating the absolute difference in the expectation between the expected risk and the empirical risk as the mutual information between the hidden units and the model parameters. We follow the framework proposed by Russo and Xu et al. . Now, we are ready to obtain the upper bound. The empirical risk of a hypothesis W ∈ W over the dataset S is The expected risk of W on P S is where Taking expectation on the difference between L f (S) (W ) and L f (S) (W ) with respect to the joint distribution P (S,W ) (s, w), we obtain Then, the generalization error can be decomposed as We focus on g(P S , P W |S ), which reflects the quality of the generalization of the output hypothesis. Some further steps show that ) where E f (S)⊗W means taking the expectation w.r.t the product of the marginal PDFs of f (S) and W . Xu and Raginsky (Lemma 1 in [Xu & Raginsky(2017)Xu and Raginsky]) have justified that given two random variables X and Y with the joint PDF P XY and the product of the marginal PDFs the loss function in Eqs. ( Lemma 1. If the loss function l is σ-subgaussian, then the absolute value of g(P S , P W |S ) is upper-bounded in terms of the mutual information between f (S) and W , i.e., 4 Label-based Diversity Measure The generalization error bound deduced by Lemma 1 may be more tightly coupled to the generalization error than some existing bounds can because the new bound depends on almost all ingredients of learning problems, including the distribution of the dataset, the hypothesis space and the learning algorithm, while some existing bounds, such as VC dimension or Rademacher complexity, mainly depend on the hypothesis space and neglect of the learning algorithm, which potentially means a looser quantity of bound to unify the other ignored ingredients in the learning problems. Moreover, Lemma 1 implies that regularizing the empirical risk with I(f (S); W ) may lead to improved genelarization capacity. However, due to the high dimensions of hypothesis space W, the direct usage of I(f (S); W ) is usually intractable. In this section, we decompose the upper bound in Eq. ( Theorem 1. Decomposing the upper bound in Eq. (13), we obtain Proof. Only a belief proof is given here (see the the supplementary material for the details). By adding ), S y ) to the right-hand side of the above equa-tion, it follows that Considering that the samples (X i , Y i ) in S are sampled in an i.i.d. fashion, we have Combining above equations gives Eq. ( Let us focus on the Eq. ( (18) As discussed in the introduction, the first term in the diversity measure is the canonical unsupervised diversity measure, which was used to learn independent data representations It is worth noting that the diversity measure is identical in form to the ensemble diversity measure proposed by where we continue to use the previous symbols and see ĥ = (h 1 , h 2 , ..., h m ) as a set of base classifiers for the sample (X, Y ); C(•) is any given combination function that minimizes the probatility P (C( ĥ) = Y ). By decomposing the mutual information term in Eq. ( and defined the sum of the last two terms as the ensemble diversity measure. Although the two measures have the same form, the ensemble diversity measure is based on the the Bayesian learning framework where only 0-1 loss is permitted, which makes it not very suitable for the cases in deep learning; they also did not propose an effective process for using the measure in practice. Nonetheless, their work implies that if we can regard the hidden units as base classifers, the decrease in LDiversity may well lead to a decrease of the classification error. In this section, a new regularization method named the labelbased diversity method (LDM) is proposed by using LDiversity D LB as the regularizer. Its total loss function is formulated as where E loss is the premier loss function of the DNNs without any regularizer, for instance, the cross-entropy between the outputs of DNNs and the labels; D LB controls the labelbased diversity among the hidden units in one specified layer; and λ > 0 is the balance parameter. The regularizer D LB is actually the difference of two mutual information terms. Although the estimation of mutual information was recognized as a very difficult problem due to the continuity and high dimensions of data, recent studies where T is usually realized as a neural network such that the two expectations are finite. Then, by Eq. ( (24) where h = (h 1 , h 2 , ..., h m ) obeys the distribution ⊗ m i=1 P hi and hereinafter σ(•) represents the sigmoid function. Similarly, for the conditional mutual information, we have where taking expectation on Y requires using Eq. ( (26) where the maximization process guarantees a sufficient approximation to LDiversity D LB by T 1 and T 2 ; and the minimization process is the training process of the regularizing DNNs to obtain the classifier θ. The overall training process of LDM is similar to that of generative adversarial networks (GANs) To implement the learning algorithm presented in Eq. ( We apply LDM to fully connected neural networks and convolutional neural networks. We compare it with the method without a regularizer (NONE), dropout with a dropout rate of 0.5 Algorithm 1 Adversarial train loop of LDM Input: dataset S, classifier θ as well as auxiliary networks T 1 and T 2 , hidden units ĥ = (h 1 , h 2 , ..., h m ) in one specified layer as maps, loss function l(•) Parameter: λ Output: θ 1: while Not converged do 2: Sample a batch S b of K data vectors from S. ĥS b ← ĥ(S b ), E loss ← l(S b , θ). Resample from ĥS b to obtain new samples h S b that obey the product of the marginals. 5: 6: Update T 1 to maximize D JS . 7: for each label i do Get all samples S i in S b with label i 10: ĥSi ← ĥ(S i ). 11: Resample from ĥSi to obtain new samples h Si that obey the product of the marginals. 12: 13: Update T 2 to maximize D Li JS . 14: Estimate P (Y = i). 15: 16: end for 17: 18: Update θ to minimize T loss . 19: end while 20: return θ Method Settings. Since the goal is to check the role of the inductive-bias term in LDiversity and evaluate the performance of LDM and other regularization methods, we used a simple 3-layer fully connected network in this work, with 32 ReLUs in the hidden layer and ten units in the output layer. The batch size was set to 64. The main network was trained using the Adam algorithm where μ i = 1 n k h k i is the sample mean of the activations of hidden unit i over all the samples. Then the class-independent correlation is defined as Conformably, the class-conditional correlation is the expectation of correlation over the class labels, which is estimated by using Eq. ( Further, we examined the classification performance of these methods, where the generalization capacity is evaluated by the difference between the training accuracy and test accuracy. The results are shown in the left part of Table From Table Dataset. The experiments were conducted on the CIFAR-10/100 datasets. The CIFAR-10 dataset consists of 60000 32x32 color images in 10 classes, with 50000 training images and 10000 test images. CIFAR-100 is similar to CIFAR-10: it has 100 classes 6000 images, with per class 600 images. Method Settings. We compared these methods on the CIFAR10-quick architecture, which contains 3 convolutional layers followed by a fully connected layer with 64 hidden units and a softmax layer. Since the different features in the obtained representation by CNN may come from the same weights, i.e., they share the same mappings, while LDM measures the diversity among different mappings, we applied LDM to the last pool layer and regarded the resampled filters in this layer as mappings (see the Section Regularization Method). For fair comparison, we also apply Decov and UDM to this layer because they also used some diversity measure as the regularizer. Dropout is applied to the fully connected layer. With exception of setting the number of iterations to 20000, other training settings including the architectures of the two auxiliary networks were set to be the same as those in the fully connected neural networks. Regularizer Comparisons. We also investigated the changes in the values of the correlation gap with increasing numbers of iterations. The average results of all the methods over trials are shown in The average classification accuracy of the examined methods on the CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets are presented in the right two parts of Table We also observe similar results on the CIFAR-100 dataset, justifying our hypothesis that the diversity measure should reflect the inductive-bias information. Finally, we tested the influence of hyperparameters on experimental performance and record the results on Table In this paper, by investigating the upper bound of the generalization error from an information perspective, we found that we can naturally derive a measure of the diversity among the hidden units of DNNs, which differs from the other measures because it contains an inductive-bias term. Based on this insight, we designed a regularization method using the diversity measure as the regularizer. Our experiments verified the effectiveness of the proposed method and provided empirical evidence for the validity of our approach.