The ability to imprint a given material property to another through proximity effect in layered two-dimensional materials has opened the way to the creation of designer materials. Here, we use molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE) for a direct synthesis of a superconductor-magnet hybrid heterostructure by combining superconducting niobium diselenide (NbSe 2 ) with the monolayer ferromagnetic chromium tribromide (CrBr 3 ). Using different characterization techniques and density-functional theory (DFT) calculations, we have confirmed that the CrBr 3 monolayer retains its ferromagnetic ordering with a magnetocrystalline anisotropy favoring an out-of-plane spin orientation. Low-temperature scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) measurements show a slight reduction of the superconducting gap of NbSe 2 and the formation of a vortex lattice on the CrBr 3 layer in experiments under an external magnetic field. Our results contribute to the broader framework of exploiting proximity effects to realize novel phenomena in 2D heterostructures. Two-dimensional magnetic materials constitute an ideal platform to experimentally access the fundamental physics of magnetism in reduced dimensions Layered materials that remain magnetic down to the monolayer (ML) limit have been recently demonstrated In this work, we report a detailed characterisation of the CrBr 3 /NbSe 2 hybrid system using low-temperature STM/STS and X-ray photo-electron spectroscopy (XPS). Combining magneto-optical Kerr effect (MOKE) measurements and density functional calculations (DFT), we unambiguously confirm the ferromagnetism of the CrBr 3 islands on NbSe 2 substrate. Our results give further experimental information on the magnetic properties of CrBr 3 , and demonstrate a clean and controllable platform for creating superconductingmagnetic hybrid systems with a great potential for integration into future electronic devices that could be controlled externally through electrical 6 , mechanical Figure We study the truly 2D itinerant ferromagnetism in CrBr 3 monolayer on NbSe 2 using magneto-optical Kerr effect (MOKE) microscopy (details of the experimental procedures are given the Methods section). The magnetic field was applied perpendicular to the sam-ple. Figure After confirming the existence of ferromagnetism on the monolayer CrBr 3 on NbSe 2 substrate, it is interesting to see the effects of the superconducting substrate NbSe 2 on the monolayer CrBr 3 . Isolated CrBr 3 is a ferromagnetic insulator; however, due to the monolayer thickness, it is possible to tunnel through such a structure with STM. In addition, due to the charge transfer at the interface between CrBr 3 and NbSe 2 , the heterostructure itself has a metallic nature. Therefore, one can expect a measurable interaction between CrBr ture, we investigate the dependence of our dI/dV b spectra under an applied out-of-plane magnetic field. In a type-II SC such as NbSe 2 , we would expect to observe an Abrikosov vortex lattice in a dI/dV b map acquired near the energy of the superconducting gap Figs. In summary, we have provided experimental evidence for the realisation of a 2D ferromagnetsuperconductor van der Waals heterostructure. More importantly, we have experimentally confirmed that the CrBr 3 monolayer retains its ferromagnetic ordering with a magnetocrystalline anisotropy favoring an out-of-plane spin orientation on NbSe 2 . Our DFT calculations showing an induced moment in Nb from hybridization with Cr d-orbitals confirm the imprinting of magnetic order on NbSe 2 from a 2D vdW magnetic insulator. Our results provide a broader framework for employing other proximity effects to tailor materials and realize novel phenomena in 2D heterostructures. The CrBr 3 thin film was grown on a freshly cleaved NbSe 2 substrate by compound source MBE. The anhydrous CrBr 3 powder of 99 % purity was evaporated from a Knudsen cell. Before growth, the cell was degassed up to the growth temperature 350 • C until the vacuum was better than 1×10 -8 mbar. The sample was heated by electron beam bombardment and temperatures were measured using an optical pyrometer. The growth speed was determined by checking the coverage of the as-grown samples by STM. The optimal substrate temperature for the growth of CrBr Sample transfer: After the sample growth, the sample was transferred to the load lock (∼ 10 -9 mbar) and then to the directly connected glove bag. The load lock is slowly vented with pure nitrogen to the glove bag atmosphere, and the sample is then transferred into the glove bag with a magnetic transfer rod for XPS and MOKE measurements. The XPS spectra were measured using a Kratos Axis Ultra system, equipped with monochromatic Al K α X-ray source. All measurements were performed using an analysis area of 0.3mm × 0.7mm. The black curve in Fig 1b was measured using 80 eV pass energy and 1 eV energy step whereas the colored curves were taken with 20 eV pass energy and 0.1 eV energy step. The energy calibration was done using the C 1s peak at 284.8 eV. Magneto-optical Kerr effect (MOKE) measurements: MOKE was carried out using an Evico Magnetics system based on a Zeiss Axio Imager D1 microscope with a Hamamatsu C4742-95 digital camera. The sample was placed in a Janis research ST-500 cold finger cryostat with optical access and cooled using liquid He. Imaging of the sample was carried out in a polar Kerr configuration. Hysteresis loops were constructed from images taken using a long working distance 100x lens after background image subtraction and corrected for a linear background slope due to the Faraday effect on the lens. DFT calculations: Calculations were performed with the DFT methodology as implemented in the periodic plane-wave basis VASP code The interactions between electrons and ions were described by PAW pseudopotentials, where 4s and 4p shells were added explicitly as semicore states for Nb and 3p shells for Cr. An energy cutoff of 550 eV is used to expand the wave functions and a systematic k-point convergence was checked, where the total energy was converged to the order of 10 -4 eV. Spin polarization was considered by setting an initial out-of-plane magnetization of 3 μ B per Cr atom and zero otherwise.