Field decay rate is the key characteristic of the superconducting magnets based on closedloop coils. However, in Maglev trains or rotating machines, closed-loop magnets work in external AC fields and will exhibit an evidently accelerated field decay resulting from dynamic resistances, which are usually much larger than joint resistance. Nevertheless, there has not been a numerical model capable of systematically studying this behaviour, which is the main topic of this work. The field decay curves of a closed-loop high-temperaturesuperconducting (HTS) coil in various AC fields are simulated based on H-formulation. A non-uniform external field generated by armature coils is considered. Reasonable consistence is found between experimental and simulation results. In our numerical model, the impact of current relaxation, which is a historical challenge, is analysed and subsequently eliminated with acceptable precision. Our simulation results suggest that most proportion of the field decay rate is from the innermost and outermost turns. Based on this observation, a magnetic shielding pattern is designed to reduce the field decay rate efficiently. This work has provided magnet designers an effective method to predict the field decay rate of closed-loop HTS coils in external AC fields, and explore various shielding designs. Various high temperature superconducting (HTS) magnet applications may require closed-loop coils to work in persistent current mode (PCM) to reduce heat losses and generate stable magnetic field Researchers have studied the experimental field decay of closed-loop magnets under AC field Dynamic resistance for single or stacked tapes, as a key feature of HTS flux pump devices, have been studied by both analytical expressions A double-pancake (DP) HTS coil and two copper coils were established in a 2D axisymmetric model based on the Hformulation and E-J power law in COMSOL TM The anisotropy of our experimental GdBCO tape at 77 K was calculated by equation (1) introduced by To fully simulate the excitation and decaying procedures of closed-loop coils, no constraint should be applied to the current of HTS coil. Because the transport current in the closed-loop coil, IDC, is the unknown variable. The transport current in HTS coil is excited by the field-cooling method A case study is conducted for a single-turn HTS coil. The detailed coil system is shown in section 4; however, the HTS coil is a single-turn coil with an inner radius of 5 cm. As is shown in figure In figure To calculate the Rdyn value at a certain point of a current decay curve, the intended transport currents in the HTS coil and copper coils are applied using pointwise constraints This study calculates Rdyn within the HTS coil using the average electric field. For 2D axisymmetric coils, the resistive voltage (V) can be calculated by only one-time integration of the entire HTS volume where s and rn are the cross-sectional area and radius of each homogenised turn, EΦ is the azimuthal electric field and ΩSC is the entire superconducting volume. Hence, the dynamic resistance (Ω) can be calculated as: where T is the period and f is the frequency of AC field. In section 2.3, the IDC in the HTS coil, is applied after undergoing a ramping function. However, in the field decay experiment, IDC is supplied by the inductance of the HTS coil and is a decaying function. Therefore, the influence of the differing history of the IDC on the calculation of Rdyn must be investigated. The Rdyn values calculated by the method in section 2.3 were compared to which in section 2.2, because the history of the IDC in the latter simulation is identical to the experiment cases. The case study of the single-turn coil in section 2.2 is also performed by the method in section 2.3. For the method in section 2.3, IDC is ramped to the period-average current of each cycle in the current decay curve of figure The Rdyn values of our experimental multi-turn HTS coil are calculated. The detailed coil system is introduced in section 4. IDC in HTS coil and Iem, which is the RMS current of each copper coil, are applied and kept their values of 55.38 A and 69.3 A, respectively. In figure Considering that the experimental field decay process continues for hundreds of seconds (~10 4 cycles), we assume that simulation results from larger cycles or steady state will be more related to the experimental conditions. Thus, two questions are posed: (1) Is there a lower limit for the descending Rdyn? (2) Is there an effective method to determine the stabilised value of Rdyn with a reasonable error over limited cycles? This phenomenon is concerned with a historical simulation challenge involving the E-J power law model: current relaxation In this study, the DC current density under external AC field also tends to penetrate toward the centre of the coil crosssection, causing Rdyn values descending with cycles. However, in this case, the current relaxation can be somewhat different from the pure DC current cases. The DC current penetration under AC field is driven by not only the power law resistivity, but also dynamic resistivity. Although the decay of resistance is endless, the impact of current relaxation and descending Rdyn on the final results can be very inconsequential by carrying enough number of AC cycles. The simulation presented in section 3.1 was extended to 100 cycles. In figure Thus, the lower limit of the Rdyn of the coil can be defined by the stabilised Rdyn of the turns shown in figure In figure The experimental HTS coil was wound with GdBCO tape with a width of 6 mm and a thickness of 190 μm, provided by Shanghai Superconductor Technology Co., Ltd. The thickness of the tape with Kapton insulation was 440 μm and the total length was about 20 m. Thickness and width of the HTS layer were about 1 μm, 4.75 mm, respectively. The DP coil, with inner/outer diameters of 10 cm/12.46 cm and a height of 2.1 cm, has 28 turns for each pancake. The coil constant at the centre is about 0.62 mT/A, and the coil Ic is 135 A. The two terminations of the coil are soldered together by a thin tin layer to form a joint with a resistance of Rj=12.5 nΩ. The terminals are arranged close to the coil surface to avoid nonaxisymmetric geometry that deviates from our model. The geometry of the field decay system is shown in figure To avoid the influence of the induced AC current circulating in the closed-loop coil, two copper coils were connected anti-parallel to the transformer and symmetrically placed on both sides of the HTS coil. In this way, the axial magnetic fluxes, Bz, generated by the two copper coils are in opposite directions and the net Bz variation in the HTS coil was zero. Besides, an epoxy resin sealed XPS box was used to fix the HTS coil and isolates it from the temperature and mechanical disturbances from copper coils. Figure The experimental Rdyn is calculated by The effectiveness of this magnetic shielding design was tested in simulation. In figure Field decay performances in various AC fields are of great importance for the operation of closed-loop HTS magnets. In this work, H-formulation models to calculate the field decay curve affected by dynamic resistance is demonstrated. Feasibility of this model has been tested by comparing with a field cooling and decay model under AC field. The impact of current relaxation on the Rdyn results is eliminated by simulating with enough number of AC cycles, at which time Rdyn of the turns still under relaxation is negligible, because the threshold for generating Rdyn was not reached. The simulated current decay curves and Rdyn values show reasonable consistence with the experimental results, although the subtle additional current decay caused by the induced current was not completely eliminated in the experiment. This model suggests that the field decay in AC fields is mainly caused by the dynamic resistance of innermost and outermost turns, so higher Ic tapes or particular magnetic shield structure should be equipped at these locations. This shielding design was examined in simulation and proved to reduce the field decay rate significantly. With this model, the behaviour of closed-loop HTS in AC fields is predicable, and more efficient shielding can be designed by varying the width and number of shielding turns, as well as their spatial distributions.