Controlling infrasound signals is crucial to many processes ranging from predicting atmospheric events and seismic activities to sensing nuclear detonations. These waves can be manipulated through phononic crystals and acoustic metamaterials. However, at such ultra-low frequencies, the size (usually on the order of meters) and the mass (usually on the order of many kilograms) of these materials can hinder its potential applications in the infrasonic domain. Here, we utilize tunable lattices of repelling magnets to guide and sort infrasound waves into different channels based on their frequencies. We construct our lattices by confining meta-atoms (freefloating macroscopic disks with embedded magnets) within a magnetic boundary. By changing the confining boundary, we control the meta-atoms' spacing and therefore the intensity of their coupling potentials and wave propagation characteristics. As a demonstration of principle, we present the first experimental realization of an infrasound phonon demultiplexer (i.e., guiding ultra-low frequency waves into different channels based on their frequencies). The realized platform can be utilized to manipulate ultra-low frequency waves, within a relatively small volume, while utilizing negligible mass. In addition, the self-assembly nature of the meta-atoms can be key in creating re-programmable materials with exceptional nonlinear properties. Infrasound waves are ubiquitous in nature, appearing in animal communications, To design our infrasound phonon demultiplexer, we start by considering a unit cell composed of a disk with a concentrically embedded magnet, referred to as meta-atoms hereinafter. The meta-atoms are confined between two arrays of fixed, identical, permanent magnets (Fig. To analyze our magnetic lattices, we first consider the basic building block of our structure, a single meta-atom and its coupling to the boundary. We use Bloch's theorem to generate the dispersion curves of our magnetic lattice. where ω is the frequency, κ is the wavenumber, φ = [u v] T is the Bloch displacement vector in x and y direction, M = m 0 0 m is the mass matrix and K is the stiffness matrix where shows a pass band sandwiched between two band gaps (Fig. To experimentally verify the analytically computed dispersion curves, we fabricate three separate U-shaped boundaries with the parameters of designs 1-3 out of acrylic glass using a laser cutter (Full-spectrum 24 pro-series). The meta-atoms (i.e., disks) are identical across all three designs with a radius r disk = 4 mm. The meta-atoms are placed within the boundary and the magnets oriented with the north pole facing upwards. The fixed magnets inside the boundary are oriented in the same way. To minimize friction, we attach a glass slide at the bottom of each disk and float them on an air bearing (New way S1030002). Each design is excited separately with a chirp signal between 0.1 Hz and 10 Hz at its open end with a mechanical shaker (Brüel and Kjaer 4180) and a function generator (Keysight Technologies 33512B). The motion of the disks is captured using a computer vision camera (Blackfly S USB3) and the resulting images are analyzed using the digital image correlation software (DICe). The displacement profiles of all the meta-atoms in each design (characterized separately) are post-processed using 2D fast Fourier transform (2D-FFT). The resulting FFT corresponds to the longitudinal dispersion curve of each design, as we only consider the x-displacement in our analysis (Fig. To test our design principle we connect the three distinct To characterize the performance of the demultiplexer at a single operational frequency, we excite the input channel with two sine waves, separately, and measure the transmission at each output terminal (Fig. 