Radiation-induced segregation (RIS) of solutes in materials exposed to irradiation is a wellknown problem. It affects the life-time of nuclear reactor core components by favouring radiation-induced degradation phenomena such as hardening and embrittlement. In this work, RIS tendencies in face-centered cubic (fcc) Ni-X (X = Cr, Fe, Ti, Mn, Si, P) dilute binary alloys are examined. The goal is to investigate the driving forces and kinetic mechanisms behind the experimentally observed segregation. By means of ab initio calculations, point-defect stabilities and interactions with solutes are determined, together with migration energies and attempt frequencies. Transport and diffusion coefficients are then calculated in a mean-field framework, to get a full picture of solute-defect kinetic coupling in the alloys. Results show that all solutes considered, with the exception of Cr, prefer vacancy-mediated over interstitial-mediated diffusion during both thermal and radiation-induced migration. Cr, on the other hand, preferentially migrates in a mixed-dumbbell configuration. P and Si are here shown to be enriched, and Fe and Mn to be depleted at sinks during irradiation of the material. Ti and Cr, on the other hand, display a crossover between enrichment at lower temperatures, and depletion in the higher temperature range. Results in this work are compared with previous studies in bodycentered cubic (bcc) Fe, and discussed in the context of RIS in austenitic alloys. Ni-based alloys and austenitic stainless steel are common structural materials in current and future generation nuclear power plants (NPPs). Novel material classes such as high-entropy alloys (HEA), or concentrated solid solution alloys (CSA) are also materials that can be Ni-based with a face-centered cubic (fcc) structure. Such materials can in the nuclear technology sector, be exposed to intense radiation fields, which can have a great impact on their properties. In Nibased alloys, experimental observations show radiation-induced creep, swelling, and embrittlement In Ni-based, austenitic, and high entropy alloys, a number of different chemical species are present. For this reason, the impact of irradiation on the material cannot be understood only by looking at the behaviour of pure Ni. Multiple studies have been undertaken to clarify how common species behave in fcc Ni under irradiation. Fe and Cr have been shown to slow down defect migration and decrease the accumulation and average size of defect clusters in Ni alloys The solute RIS tendencies can be obtained by computing the full matrix of transport coefficients The goal of this study is to improve the current understanding of irradiated Ni alloys by an accurate description of RIS stemming from calculations of transport coefficients in dilute binary alloys. This has been done by applying the SCMF method parametrized with DFT calculations of solute-PD binding and migration energies to get a more accurate description of the behaviour of Fe, Cr, Si, Ti, Mn, and P solutes in fcc Ni. As the ground-state phase of Ni has an fcc structure, and austenitic steels used in today's NPPs feature a high Ni content (~10%), results obtained for fcc Ni are not only of interest for Ni-based alloys. Results here presented will, for this reason, be compared with previous results from bcc Fe and discussed in the context of radiation damage in austenitic steels. Atomic transport properties are examined in the framework of SCMF theory Even though vacancies occur naturally in any metallic material, in a reactor at its operating temperatures (~300o C for Gen II-III, ~600o C for Gen IV), the vacancy population is dominated by irradiation induced effects. In addition, the radiation field is responsible for the generation of an equal amount of self-interstitial atoms (SIAs) that are essentially negligible under thermal conditions. The spatially inhomogeneous formation of defects results in chemical potential gradients (CPG), which in turn induce atomic and defect fluxes in the material. The flux of a species α due to the CPGs acting on each species β is given by Eq. 1. where L αβ are the transport coefficients (also known as the coefficients of the Onsager matrix), i.e., the proportionality factors between the flux of a species α and a CPG, μ, acting on species ∇ β. In a binary alloy, α = A, B, V, and I, which represent solvent atoms (Ni), solutes, vacancies, and interstitial defects respectively. In this case, there are three independent coefficients for each defect, namely L VV , L VB , L BB (V) for vacancy-assisted diffusion, and L II , L IB , L BB (I) for interstitialassisted diffusion. These coefficients describe the kinetic response of a system to thermodynamic forces. The off-diagonal coefficients, L VB and L IB , describe the coupling between different species, i.e., when a flux of a given species is induced by the CPG acting on another species. In addition, the knowledge of the full Onsager matrix allows for the calculation of tracer self-and solute diffusion coefficients, as well as for the prediction of solute radiation-induced segregation tendencies. If the transport coefficients are known, it is possible to model RIS under steady-state conditions in a binary alloy (AB) using Eq. 2 where where D A and D B are the intrinsic diffusion coefficients of solvent and solute atoms. These can be computed directly from the transport coefficients (the full set of equations are provided in a previous publication where the left fraction is related to vacancy-coupled fluxes, and the right one to SIA-coupled ones. From the two fractions, it is possible to investigate the segregation tendencies induced by each mechanism independently. The two fractions are termed Partial Diffusion Coefficient (PDC) ratios, and the impact of the respective mechanisms is determined by setting the opposite PDC ratio to 1, describing in this case an uncorrelated flux between the solute and that defect. In the case of vacancy-mediated diffusion, the competition between the solute and the bulk species can result in three distinct cases. In the case of preferential vacancy-solute exchange and positive flux coupling (L BV > 0), solutes migrate in the same direction as vacancies, and solute enrichment at sinks occurs. This process is known as vacancy drag, and is indicated by a negative vacancy PDC ratio since L AV is always negative. When vacancy drag does not take place, enrichment can still take place, as in this case, both solvent and solute atoms diffuse against the vacancy flux (inverse Kirkendall mechanism), thus away from the sink. If the solute is slower than the solvent (preferential solvent-vacancy exchange), the solute will effectively be enriched at sinks. This is indicated by 0<PDC vac <1. In case, instead, of preferential solute-vacancy exchange, solutes will diffuse away faster than solvent atoms, and depletion occurs (PDC vac > 1). For interstitialmediated diffusion, the flux of solutes cannot be in the opposite direction to that of interstitials, so the PDC SIA is always positive. If solute transport is faster than solvent transport, this results in enrichment at sinks, and in this case the PDC SIA is greater than 1. The PDC SIA is smaller than 1 in the opposite case. Solute and solvent diffusion coefficients in thermodynamic equilibrium have been determined experimentally for many systems. As diffusion coefficients can also be calculated based on the transport coefficients obtained in the context of SCMF theory, they are useful for validation of results. Under thermal-equilibrium conditions, migration occurs predominantly by a vacancyassisted mechanism, and the self (solvent) and solute diffusion coefficients can be computed with Eq. 4 and 5 respectively where g is a geometrical factor (g=1 for monovacancy diffusion in fcc), a 0 is the lattice constant, f 0 and f B are the self-and solute correlation factors, ω 0, B are the jump frequencies of a vacancy exchanging respectively with a solvent atom (in the absence of solutes nearby) or a solute atom, ν 0,B are the corresponding attempt frequencies, p1,nn is the probability of having a solute-vacancy pair at a first nearest neighbour (1nn) distance, E V f and S v f are the vacancy formation energy and entropy, E B m is the solute migration barrier, E BV b , 1 nn is the 1nn solutevacancy binding energy, here defined as attractive when positive. The solute correlation factor, f B , is related to the probability for the solute atom to make an immediate reverse jump back to its previous position, thus leading to no net displacement. In the context of the 5-frequency model The resulting correlation factors f0 and fB are included in L A*A* and L BB respectively. Within SCMF theory and its implementation in the KineCluE code, the calculation of the transport coefficients considers kinetic trajectories of increasing amplitude, up to a cut-off kinetic radius that can be arbitrarily chosen by the user. In addition, whereas in Eq. 5 the probability of a vacancy-solute pair accounts for 1nn thermodynamic interactions only, KineCluE allows for a more accurate evaluation of the pair partition function, thus providing a pair probability that takes into account longer-distance vacancy-solute interactions. Thanks to this approach, it is thus possible to provide a more accurate evaluation of the kinetic properties of Ni alloys with respect to previous works based on the 5-frequency model. The symmetric Onsager matrix is calculated in this work using the KineCluE code, which implements SCMF theory to expand the Onsager matrix in terms of cluster contributions The transport coefficients are in this case given by Eq. 8. where ζ is the total concentration of all monomers and clusters and f c is the concentration fraction of cluster c. For a full discussion of the breakdown of transport coefficients into cluster contributions, see [ L BB (IB) ] ) (9) where f X represent the corresponding cluster concentrations. Interstitial-vacancy correlations represented by the LIV =LVI coefficients are neglected in this work, under the assumption that the recombination probability is low when the concentrations of the two types of point defects are sufficiently low. In order to calculate the transport coefficients of Eq. 9, thermodynamic interactions and migration mechanisms must be outlined. In the case of interstitial migration, three possible configurations should be considered in the fcc lattice; octahedral, tetrahedral, and dumbbell. DFT calculations in this work demonstrate that, the 〈100〉 dumbbell is associated in Ni with the lowest energy of the possible interstitial configurations for all species considered, with the notable exception of P. Indeed, it is shown in section 3.1 that the mixed-P 〈100〉 dumbbell displays a severe instability, and that the octahedral configuration is significantly more stable for that species. DFT calculations in this work also demonstrate that if a pure Ni-dumbbell comes sufficiently close to a substitutional P, the P will be kicked out into a octahedral configuration, as one of the Ni atoms of the dumbbell takes its place in the lattice. For this reason, only dumbbellinduced octahedral diffusion is relevant in the case of P interstitials. As the P atoms need the presence of a pure Ni-dumbbell to be kicked out into an octahedral configuration, the diffusion process is strongly coupled with pure-Ni dumbbell diffusion. Regarding all other solutes in this work, DFT results indicate that the 〈100〉 dumbbell is of main importance for interstitial migration. In this configuration, a solute can be part of the defect as a mixed dumbbell, or in its neighbourhood. Concerning 1nn configurations, which are characterized by the strongest thermodynamic interactions, the solute can be in a compressed (a-type) or tensed (b-type) position depending of the dumbbell orientation in relation to the solute. The dumbbell can for this reason move in multiple ways in relation to the solute. The 〈100 〉 mixed-dumbbell and 1nn configurations considered in this work are illustrated in Fig 1 . As it is reasonable to assume that the solute-dumbbell interaction quickly drops to zero after the 1nn, as was the case for Fe alloys After the thermodynamics of the system has been analysed, the corresponding migration paths of the energetically favourable configurations are determined in order to calculate the transport coefficients. The set of symmetry-unique configurations and jump-frequencies needed for the calculation of the transport coefficients can be determined either explicitly using ab initio (DFT), or by the Kinetically-Resolved Activation (KRA) approach The calculation of transport coefficients relies on thermodynamic parameters (formation and binding energies), and kinetic parameters (jump frequencies). For a configuration containing n atoms of the solvent X and p sites of the solute Y, the formation energy is given by Eq. 10. Where E imp is the reference state of the solute. The crystal structures of the used reference states are: body centered cubic (bcc) for Cr, Mn, and Fe, tetrahedral structure (p4) for P, diamond structure for Si and hexagonal closed packed (hcp) structure for Ti. The binding energy between n objects in a supercell is given in Eq. 11. where E ref is the energy of the supercell without any defects, E(A i ) is the energy of the supercell with the isolated defect A i , and E(A 1 +A 2 +...+A n ) is the energy of the cell containing all A i interacting defects. With this definition, positive values are binding (or attractive) configurations. The jump frequency is defined by Eq. 12. where E mig is the migration barrier and ν the attempt frequency, given by Eq. 13. where ν j R are the vibrational eigenfrequencies in the relaxed defect supercell, and ν j S the eigenfrequencies in the saddle-point configuration. The above properties (formation, binding and migration energies, and attempt frequencies) were obtained through ab initio density functional theory (DFT) calculations using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) The defects considered in this work are the mixed and pure 〈100〉, 〈110〉, and 〈111〉 dumbbells, the octahedral, tetrahedral, and substitutional impurities, as well as the vacancy in pure Ni. The defect formation energies in bulk Ni are presented in Table The vacancy-solute binding energies from Table II are illustrated in Fig. The migration barriers for vacancy-mediated diffusion of solutes in fcc Ni are presented in Table Results in Table The migration barriers and attempt frequencies of the species considered for interstitial-mediated diffusion are presented in Table From the DFT data presented in sections 3.1 and 3.2, the transport coefficients of each binary alloy were calculated. In section 3.3.1, the accuracy of the calculated transport coefficients is assessed based on results from experiments. In section 3.3.2, the dominant diffusion mechanisms of the various species during thermal equilibrium are discussed, and in section 3.3.3, radiationinduced segregation tendencies are evaluated. As diffusion coefficients can be determined experimentally, these can be used to validate the results of this study. However, is should be noted that experiments are mostly performed in the high-temperature range, whereas the diffusion and transport coefficients computed in this work are based on 0-K DFT parameters. By relying on the 0-K data only, the self-diffusion coefficient, Eq. 4, can be written as: where the equilibrium vacancy concentration, c V eq , the vacancy migration rate in pure Ni, ω 0 , are given by Eqs 15 and 16. ω 0 =ν 0 exp(-E V mig /k B T ) EC corr EC corr =exp( π where E c is the difference between the electronic density of states at the saddle point and in the equilibrium on-lattice position From the 0-K results of this work ( E V f =1.4 eV, ν 0 = 14.32 THz, and E V mig =1.05 eV), together with data from Tucker et al. ( S V f =1.82 k B , E c =-0.66 eV) .09 eV, ν 0 =4.48 THz). The results, represented by the green line in Fig. The correction with Gong's model improves slightly the match with the experimental diffusion coefficients, both in terms of activation energy and prefactor (Table perform as well at lower temperatures. It should be noted that calculations in this work are performed with the Generalized Gradient Approximation (GGA). In a study by Hargather et al., the self-diffusion coefficients of fcc Ni was calculated as functions of temperature using the LDA functional The fitted vacancy concentration, c V fit , together with the vacancy concentration obtained by the corrections according to the model proposed by The dominant diffusion mechanism (vacancy or dumbbell) under thermal conditions can be determined from the ratios of the respective solute tracer diffusion coefficients, D BI /D BV . As shown in Eq. 5, the solute diffusion coefficients are proportional to the equilibrium defect 23 FIG. concentration. The ratio c V /c I can to a first approximation be estimated by D I /D V As can be seen in Fig. In Fig. drag, as a result of competition with the surrounding bulk atoms. This is indicated by 0≤PDC vac ≤1 . See section 2.1 for a full description of the PDCs. P and Si are shown in Fig. In Fig. In the case of dumbbell mediated diffusion, Fig. Once the segregation tendencies of vacancy-and interstitial mediated diffusion have been determined through the PDCs, the overall RIS behaviour can be estimated. RIS tendencies are described by α, defined in Eq. 3. If the factor is positive, enrichment of the solute occurs at defect sinks, whereas a negative factor describes depletion. The RIS factors of the solutes considered in this work are presented in Fig. Previous studies of austenitic alloys show Ni, Si, and P enrichment, and Fe, Cr, Mn depletion at grain boundaries and interfaces due to RIS In the case of Si, results in this work show that both interstitial and vacancy mechanisms contribute to its enrichment. Enrichment at sinks has been observed experimentally following irradiation of Ni and fcc Fe alloys P displays enrichment due to both vacancy and octahedral mechanisms. From results in Fig. Based on DFT results in section 3.1, it can be concluded that Ti does not migrate via the interstitial mechanism, and that only the vacancy mechanism contributes to RIS for this species. In bcc Fe, Ti diffusion by dumbbells has been shown to be negligible due to repulsion of the Fe-Ti dumbbell Results in this work indicate that a possible explanation for these observations is the trapping of vacancies due to the preferential exchange with Ti. A more thorough investigation of vacancy trapping by Ti would entail the computation of the vacancy diffusion coefficient as a function of Ti concentration, but this is beyond the scope of this work. In Fig. In their study, RIS in three different Ni based alloys (Ni-18Cr, Ni-18Cr-9Fe, and Ni-18Cr-0.08P) was examined by exposing the materials to either thermal treatment or proton irradiation. Cr depletion was observed for all samples, with the exception of one, where enrichment at sinks was observed. The authors of the study suggested that the behaviour of Cr is very sensitive to interactions with the surroundings. In bcc Fe, the dumbbell mechanism results in enrichment and vacancy mechanism in depletion of Cr near sinks Results here presented indicate that vacancy-mediated diffusion is dominant for all species in fcc Ni, with the exception of Cr where the dumbbell mechanism is prominent. The dominant diffusion mechanism does not change for either species depending on whether thermal or nonequilibrium conditions are considered. Interestingly, the vacancy dominated migration in Ni is in line with the common explanation that RIS in austenitic Fe alloys occurs as a consequence of the inverse Kirkendall mechanism Characterizations of irradiated austenitic alloys following reactor service show a high number density of Ni-Si enriched and Cr-Fe depleted clusters, together with P segregation at the interfaces of the clusters Although not directly applicable to austenitic alloys, results in the current study are relevant for transport phenomena occurring inside and near the internal surface of such clusters or in the vicinity of segregated grain boundaries. A natural continuation of this work would be to perform a similar study in fcc Fe, as this would give a more precise insight on the impact of the lattice structure on segregation tendencies. In future works, the effect of local composition could also be included in order to evaluate the segregation tendencies as functions of solute concentration. With that said, this study provides valuable information for improving the current understanding of RIS in Ni-based alloys. V. CONCLUSION Solute diffusion, flux coupling, and radiation induced segregation (RIS) of Fe, Cr, P, Si, Ti, and Mn in fcc Ni have here been investigated by coupling first-principles calculations with the selfconsistent mean field theory. The goal has been to improve the current understanding of radiation-induced segregation processes of materials commonly used in today's and future generation nuclear power plants. For this reason, findings have been compared with similar studies in bcc Fe, and discussed in the context of RIS in austenitic steel. Results show that interstitial migration has little impact on solute diffusion in fcc Ni compared to that of vacancies, with the exception of Cr, for which the migration is dominated by a dumbbell mechanism. In addition, it has here been shown that P, Si and Cr are enriched at sinks as a consequence of radiation-induced segregation, whereas Fe and Mn are depleted. Ti was shown to enrich at sinks at low temperatures, with a switchover near room temperature, followed by depletion in the higher temperature range. Results in fcc Ni are to a great extent in line with observations in bcc Fe, where Si and Ti migration are dominated by the vacancy mechanism, and Cr dumbbell migration leads to enrichment at sinks. Interstitial P however, behaves very differently in fcc Ni compared to bcc Fe. In Fe, the solute forms a quickly-migrating, hardly dissociating mixed dumbbell, whereas in Ni, substitutional P will preferentially be kicked out into a more slowlymigrating octahedral configuration. This work has improved the understanding of the underlying atomic-transport phenomena behind solute segregation in irradiated materials. As calculations were performed in the dilute limit, the results are not directly applicable to concentrated Ni alloys in current nuclear power plants. However, this is the first comprehensive modelling-based analysis of RIS tendencies due to both vacancy and dumbbell mechanisms in Ni alloys. The results shed a light on the intrinsic kinetic behaviour of several important solutes in Ni alloys and austenitic steels, and can for this reason be considered an important milestone towards a broader picture of irradiation damage in nuclear structural materials. Solute-defect binding energies (eV) in pure Ni; positive values represent binding configurations. Unstable configurations are omitted and marked with "-". See Fig.