Graphene holds promises for exploring exotic superconductivity with Dirac-like fermions. Making graphene a superconductor at large scales is however a long-lasting challenge. A possible solution relies on epitaxially-grown graphene, using a superconducting substrate. Such substrates are scarce, and usually destroy the Dirac character of the electronic band structure. Using electron diffraction (reflection high-energy, and low-energy), scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy, angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, and density functional theory calculations, we introduce a strategy to induce superconductivity in epitaxial graphene via a remote proximity effect, from the rhenium substrate through an intercalated gold layer. Weak graphene-Au interaction, contrasting with the strong undesired graphene-Re interaction, is demonstrated by a reduced graphene corrugation, an increased distance between graphene and the underlying metal, a linear electronic dispersion and a characteristic vibrational signature, both latter features revealing also a slight p doping of graphene. We also reveal that the main shortcoming of the intercalation approach to proximity superconductivity is the creation of a high density of point defects in graphene (10 14 cm -2 ). Finally, we demonstrate remote proximity superconductivity in graphene/Au/Re(0001), at low temperature. Except in the rare cases of magic-angle-twisted bilayer graphene heterostructures An alternative approach is to induce superconductivity in graphene "from below", using a superconducting substrate, Re(0001) Intercalation of a buffer atomic layer of certain elements in between graphene and its substrate is an efficient way to recover the intrinsic structural and electronic properties expected for isolated graphene. Obviously, the intercalated species should passivate the metallic substrate. In particular, graphene shows structural and electronic properties that are strongly reminiscent of isolated graphene (hence it is coined "quasi free-standing") when the metallic intercalant has full higher-energy d sub-shell, as shown with graphene/Ag/Re(0001) Intercalation is however not neutral, and may have desired or spurious effects on graphene, including the possibility to adjust the electronic doping of graphene "from below" The choice of the intercalant can also be motivated by the wish to induce spin-orbit coupling in graphene: electronic bands with spin-splitting due to the spinorbit proximity effect have been reported with Au Using epitaxial graphene strongly bound to its rhenium substrate as a starting point, we produce the first superconducting epitaxial graphene sheet with a preserved two-dimensional character by intercalating sub-monolayers to few layers of gold atoms in between graphene and rhenium. The quasi-free standing character of graphene is extensively investigated by means of electron diffraction (reflection high-energy, RHEED, and low-energy, LEED), scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy (STM/STS), atomic force microscopy (AFM), angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), Raman spectroscopy, and density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Beside establishing the quasi-free standing character of graphene and its unaltered rhenium-induced superconductivity, we show that graphene becomes slightly hole-doped (with the Fermi level 65 meV below the Dirac point) and that intercalation induces a significant density of point defects in graphene, amounting to 10 14 cm -2 . Remote proximity superconductivity in intercalated epitaxial graphene opens a route for the exploration of exotic superconducting states, in the presence of spin impurities or spin-orbit effects. Sample preparation was performed under ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) conditions (base pressure of 10 -10 mbar). Two separate UHV systems were used for sample preparation: one was equipped with a roomtemperature UHV-STM and the other was used for ARPES experiments. A rhenium single-crystal cut with a (0001) surface and a thin Re(0001) film on sapphire were used as substrates. To grow graphene, we used: (i) repeated cycles of annealing/cooling down under C 2 H 4 in the case of the Re(0001) single-crystal The deposition rate of Au was estimated using either a quartz microbalance or Auger spectroscopy. Gold deposition and intercalation were performed as follows. First, gold deposition on graphene-covered Re(0001) was performed using either a Au evaporator or via pulsed-laser deposition, at room temperature. Then, a subsequent annealing was performed at 970 K and 670 K in the two different UHV systems. An alternative method was used and gave similar results: Au deposition was performed with the sample held at 770 K, and a subsequent annealing at 930 K led to Au intercalation. ARPES experiments were performed in situ using He I and He II discharge spectral lines (21.22 eV and 40.81 eV) as photon sources, at a sample temperature of about 100 K, using a SPECS PHOIBOS 225-2D-CCD hemispherical analyser (see more details in the SI). STM measurements were performed in two separate systems. In one of the same UHV systems where graphene was grown and intercalated with gold, STM was performed at room temperature using a commercial Omicron UHV-STM 1. The samples were also taken out of UHV, in a homemade STM/STS setup implemented inside an inverted dilution refrigerator working with a 3 He/ 4 He mixture down to 50 mK. The differential conductance spectra were acquired using a standard lock-in technique (see more details in the SI). We used VASP Raman spectroscopy measurements were acquired with a 532 nm Nd:YAG laser using a commercial confocal WITEC spectrometer at room temperature under ambient conditions. To optimize the Au intercalation process, we monitored the deposition of Au onto graphene/Re(0001) at 770 K, and the subsequent annealing of the sample to 930 K, with the help of real-time in situ RHEED measurements (figure Before Au deposition, the RHEED patterns consist of the characteristic streaks produced by diffraction by the graphene, rhenium and moiré lattices. The latter (super-)lattice corresponds to the 2.1 nm-periodicity coincidence lattice that stems from the lattice mismatch between graphene and Re(0001) (see also STM image in figure After depositing 0.6 monolayer (ML) of Au (with 1 ML denoting a 100% coverage with Au pseudomorphic to Re(0001)) at 770 K (figure Scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy Figure featuring the characteristic moiré superlattice (also detected in RHEED and LEED, see figures 1(a) and S1(b)) with a superperiodicity in the nanometer range (in figure Figure The local conductance was measured at different locations on the STM image shown in figure In the data shown in figure To discuss the possible origin of the extrema observed in the scanning tunneling spectroscopy data we make first-principles calculations of the local density of states. Match between the experimental and calculated energy positions is expected within no better than a few 100 meV given the deviation from the (necessarily) simple and ideal model that we use for the simulations (see Materials and Methods). Our analysis of graphene/Au/Re(0001) should be compared to that made for graphene/Re(0001), which was reported in Ref. Contrary to graphene/Re(0001) Figure Regarding the density of states on C atoms, one marked peak around the Fermi level is found in the calculations (with no additional feature). In agreement with the conclusion drawn in Ref. Regarding the density of states on Au atoms, two marked maxima at about -0.08 eV and 0.15 eV are observed. We suggest that the higher-energy maximum is responsible for the intense close-to-Fermi resonance, which is only present in gold-intercalated graphene, as shown in figure Overall, the two resonances observed in conductance measurements performed on gold-intercalated graphene on Re(0001) at -0.1 eV and close to the Fermi level are assigned to maxima appearing close to the Fermi level in the C density of states, and around 0.15 eV in the Au density of states, respectively. Quasi free-standing character of gold-intercalated graphene on Re(0001) Photoemission measurements were performed on graphene/Re(0001) intercalated with 1.2 ML of Au, to maximize the surface fraction of intercalated graphene. No moiré satellite spots are visible in LEED (figure A first-nearest neighbour tight-binding fit was performed on the π state of graphene/Au/Re(0001) (see figure In contrast, on graphene/Re(0001), Ag Figure Besides the Dirac cone, the band structure of goldintercalated graphene on Re(0001) presents a parabolic state at Γ with a minimum at about -0.2 eV. This state was not observed before Au intercalation. It can be seen in figure Here, the electronic state measured in ARPES is shifted by 300 meV with respect to the Shockley state of Au(111) single-crystals, which can be attributed to the presence of graphene and, more importantly, to the reduced thickness of the intercalated Au film (1 ML) compared with Ref. The observation of quasi free-standing electronic properties in graphene/Au/Re(0001) suggests that the characteristic G and 2D vibration bands of graphene could be observable in Raman spectroscopy. Indeed, unlike in the case of graphene/Re(0001) Figure We start with a short discussion on the Raman spectrum measured on graphene/Re(0001) (without intercalant). For this particular measurement, graphene growth was performed on a rhenium thin film. As mentioned before, this procedure yields single- layer graphene covering the whole sample surface. No specific Raman signal is observed, and in particular no G or 2D band is detected (figure The G and 2D bands are not observed either after the intercalation of 0.6 ML of Au, at odds with our expectations for graphene decoupled from its substrate (via the Au intercalant). We conclude that the background level is too high and the graphene vibration modes are too weak for this fraction of intercalated graphene. For larger amounts of intercalated Au (1.2 and 2.6 ML), we do observe some of the typical graphene vibration bands. AFM measurements show that for a nominal 2.6 ML Au deposit, 5-6 ML of Au are locally intercalated (see SI), versus 1-2 ML for a nominal 0.6 ML Au deposit (as previously deduced from STM measurements). The G peak appears at 1595 cm -1 in (2.6 ML Au)-intercalated graphene on Re. It is split into two peaks in (1.2 ML Au)-intercalated graphene on Re, referred to as G 1 and G 2 in figure Our measurements reveal no 2D band, the overtone of the D band that is active even without defects. Indeed, from the D band wavenumber (around 1350 cm -1 , see later) the 2D band's wavenumber would be 2700 cm -1 . We attribute the absence of the 2D band to a broadening and concomitant reduction of intensity of the 2D peak due to defects The D peak, which stems from a double-resonance scattering process in the presence of defects, appears at 1349 cm -1 and 1351 cm -1 for (1.2 ML Au)-and (2.6 ML Au)-intercalated graphene on Re, respectively. These values are consistent with Refs. We observe other Raman bands, at 891, 2825, 2892, 2914 and 2935 cm -1 in graphene/(1.2 ML Au)/Re (figure highest-energy band could also correspond to the D+D' feature in graphene, that is linked to the presence of defects We now turn to a discussion on the consequences of intercalation on the structural quality of graphene. The width of the Raman bands informs on the quantity of defects in our samples. We choose to focus on (2.6 ML Au)-intercalated graphene on Re, as the signal-to-noise ratio is higher and hence allows a quantitative analysis. Canado et al. introduced two methods for assessing the inter-defect distance L D based on the analysis of the D and G peaks To obtain a better estimate of L D we turn to the second method described by Canado et al., which was also proposed by Lucchese et al. Finally, using the quadratic form proposed by Ferrari et al. All three estimates of the distance between defects seem consistent and correspond to a 10 14 cm -2 defect density. Obviously, these estimates apply only to Raman-active defects. For such a high level of defects, one can consider that the broad feature appearing at 1595 cm -1 is actually composed of both the G and D' peaks What the source and nature of the defects are is a natural question. Graphene on Re(0001) already contains a certain amount of defects prior to intercalation Figure Carbon monovacancies are indicated with white arrows. We detect no such defects in graphene/Re(0001) (see Ref. Figure We have investigated the structural, electronic and vibrational properties of graphene on Re(0001) intercalated with Au, by means of RHEED, LEED, AFM, STM/STS, ARPES, Raman spectroscopy measurements, and DFT calculations. Our data consistently show that graphene recovers a free-standing character after Au intercalation, in sharp contrast with the strongly hybridized graphene-on-Re(0001). This is apparent in the electronic band structure, in the flattening of the graphene topography, in the disappearance of the moiré-related streaks in diffraction measurements, and in the vibrational spectra of graphene. The weak corrugation observed in STM, as well as the absence of minigaps and replicas in ARPES indicate a weak graphene-Au interaction. The vibrational spectra allowed us to assess the density of defects in the systems, which is high, with a typical distance between phonon scattering centers of the order of 1 nm. This value, and the ones we extracted from previous data published for other systems, indicate that a high density of defects is created in graphene during the process of intercalation. Obviously, this is a serious issue often overlooked in works relying on intercalated graphene, which calls for further, specific efforts devoted to the optimization of the intercalation process. We finally prove superconductivity in graphene, induced by a remote proximity effect through the Au layer, from the Re(0001) substrate. Graphene/Au/Re(0001) appears as an ultra-clean platform, ideally suited to address, for example, the competition between superconductivity and magnetic orders. In this context, this new platform could allow testing the predictions of Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states 