LECTRON sources fabricated on a chip have attracted continuous interest over a long time due to their promising applications in miniature vacuum electronic devices and systems Recently, we proposed a high-efficiency electron source based on a horizontal tunneling junction (HTJ), where an insulator nanogap is horizontally sandwiched between two thin conducting films on an insulating substrate Here, we propose a cascade tunneling electron source consisting of series HTJs and analyze its emission efficiency in theory. Based on three Si-SiO x -Si HTJs in series, a cascade tunneling electron source is experimentally realized and an emission efficiency of up to 47.6% is demonstrated. The schematic structure of a cascade electron source (CES) is shown in Fig. When a bias voltage is applied on the two outmost electrodes of this CES, electron emission from all HTJs can take place simultaneously and emission current from each HTJ is additive due to the lateral electron extraction (Fig. . The total emission efficiency of a CES is then obtained as Therefore, emission efficiency η of a CES increases with the number n of series HTJs. In case of η ≪ 1, we can obtain η nη , which means η increases approximately linearly with n. As shown in Fig. To further illustrate the performance of a CES, its emission efficiency is theoretically simulated with specific Si-SiO x -Si HTJs. Si conducting filament was found to form in the shallow surface of electroformed silicon oxide substrate through a SiO x → Si electrochemical reduction process, and can be reversibly ruptured and connected under voltage stress , where A is the cross section area of a HTJ, h is the Planck's constant, χ is the potential barrier at the Si-SiO x interface, m * is the effective mass of SiOx, and E V/d is the strength of electric field, with d being the width of a HTJ. According to the method in our previous work Emission efficiency of a CES with n identical Si-SiOx-Si HTJs can then be simulated based on the relations of η E and I E in Fig. , where V is the voltage applied to the CES, V and E is the voltage-drop and the electric field strength of the ith HTJ, I is conduction current going out of CES, η E and I E are the functions plotted in Fig. A CES with three Si-SiOx-Si HTJs is experimentally demonstrated. Fig. To form a Si-SiO x -Si HTJ, a Ti/Au nanowire is firstly broken by Joule heating under a low voltage of around 1.5 V to form a nanogap (Fig. After a Si-SiO x -Si HTJ is formed between each pair of neighboring electrodes, a CES with three Si-SiO x -Si HTJs is prepared. Its electron emission is driven by applying a bias voltage to the two outmost electrodes. Since the generation and rupture of conducting filaments are drastic redox processes, the local structure of HTJs in the CES changes constantly, bringing large fluctuations to the curves of conduction current and emission current (Fig. An SEM image of the CES after tens of emission current measurements is shown in Fig. A cascade electron source based on series HTJs is proposed for the first time as a new form of on-chip electron sources. Through both theoretical simulation and experimental demonstration, CES is proved to be an effective way to further improve the emission efficiency of tunneling electron sources. Based on Si-SiOx-Si HTJs formed in electroformed SiO2, a cascade electron source with three HTJs is demonstrated in experiments, and an emission efficiency as high as 47.6% has been achieved. Our work provides a new way of realizing highly efficient on-chip electron sources. A Cascade Electron Source Based on Series Horizontal Tunneling Junctions