In the past decades, silicon photonic integrated circuits (PICs) have been considered as a promising approach to solve the bandwidth bottleneck in optical communications and interconnections. Despite significant advances, large-scale PICs still face a series of technical challenges, such as footprint, power consumption, and routing state storage, resulting from the active tuning methods used to control the optical waves. These challenges can be partially addressed by combining chalcogenide phase change materials (PCMs) such as Ge2Sb2Te5 (GST) with silicon photonics, especially applicable in switching applications due to the nonvolatile nature of the GST. Although GST phase transitions between amorphous and crystalline states actuated by optical and electrical pulses heating have been experimentally demonstrated, there is no direct comparison between them. We carried out simulations and experiments to systematically investigate the difference in the phase change process induced by optical and electrical pulses for two types of Si-GST hybrid waveguides. For the phase transition induced by optical pulses, the device has a clear advantage in terms of power consumption and operation speed. For the phase transition induced by electrical pulses, the device is suitable for large-scale integration because it does not require complex light routing. It helps us better understand the phase change process and push forward the further development of Si-GST hybrid integration platform, bringing in new potential applications. Silicon photonics has been widely considered as one of the most promising candidates for lowcost photonic integration by leveraging the complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) infrastructure The phase change process is dependent on the duration time of the excitation pulse. The underlying mechanism is related to both thermal In last five years, a lot of work has also been done on developing phase-change photonics using Si-GST hybrid waveguides, where optical or electrical pulses are often used to induce the phase change. The basic waveguide structures are strip waveguide The influence of GST cell dimensions, namely, length and width, has been computationally studied for the amorphization and crystallization processes in Si3N4-GST hybrid waveguides Figure The optical transmission simulations only give the steady-state optical field distribution and leave us no information about the dynamic process during the phase change process. In the above simulations, we assumed that the GST reaches a fully crystalline or amorphous state. In this section, we study the dynamic phase change process for the two types of waveguides in the presence of an optical pump pulse. The pump pulse comes from the same waveguide and evanescently interacts with GST. We developed a comprehensive 3D finite element method (FEM) model to study the optical-thermal interactions in both waveguides. The power consumption and operation speed were compared in particular. In the simulation, an Electromagnetic Waves Beam Envelopes model from COMSOL was used to calculate the power absorbed in the GST and ITO, while a Heat Transfer in Solids model was employed to calculate the temperature distribution. Table We first compare the power consumption during the amorphization process. The GST layer thickness is 30 nm. Since the amorphization temperature (~600°C) is much higher than the crystalline temperature (~160°C), GST material is more easily to degrade during the amorphization process. Amorphization can be induced by a single pulse, but crystallization needs several pulses to reach a fully crystalline state. Therefore, we only simulate the amorphization process. Figures Although the phase change under optical pulses exhibits a faster response speed, it is difficult to be employed in large-scale optical switch fabrics due to inconvenient routing of the optical pump pulses. Instead, phase change under electrical pulses is more suitable since the electrical pulses can be delivered by electrical wires on another layer. In order to electrically heat up the GST cell, we resort to the crossing structures, as shown in Fig. The temperature variation is less than 100 °C across the GST cell, which indicates that the electrical pulse can induce phase change for the entire GST cell. Figure The separation distance between the two metal electrodes (gap) significantly affects the power consumption in the electrical phase transition process. A smaller gap gives a lower resistance of the microheater, which as a result, facilitating the reduction of electrical pulse voltage. Moreover, reducing the gap also makes heat more concentrated in the central part of the MMI crossing. Figure The doping shape also affects microheater resistance and heat distribution. We investigate three devices with different doping shapes. Device I (T1) is hourglass-shaped and the waist size is smaller 0.25 m than the diameter of GST cell. Device II (T2) also has an hourglass-shaped doping region, but the waist is larger 0.25 m than the diameter of the GST disk. The width of both ends is 1.7 m for Device I and Device II. Device III (T3) has a regular rectangular doping strip. The doping width is equal to the diameter of GST cell. Figures In conclusion, we used two types of Si-GST hybrid waveguides to investigated the differences in the reversible phase transitions induced by optical and electrical pulses. For the phase transition induced by optical pulses, the strip waveguide has a clear advantage in terms of power consumption due to lower thermal dissipation. The MMI waveguide is feasible to achieve a larger extinction ratio and a higher operation speed due to the larger volume and thermal conductivity of silicon material. However, all-optical switching has difficulty in switching large-area GST and need sophisticated light routing systems. The disadvantage can be overcome by adding crossing structures to apply electrical pulses. Although the crossing does not induce additional loss for the MMI, it increases the power consumption and dead time. By optimizing the gap size between the two Au electrodes and the shape of the doped region, we experimentally demonstrate that a smaller gap size and hourglass-shaped doping region can decrease the power consumption. These devices offer a promising solution for specific applications like large-scale rewritable optical circuits with a small footprint and high energy efficiency. The method built in our work also assists the design and optimization of the Si-GST hybrid integration devices such as nonvolatile optical switches, optical memories, and reconfigurable photonic circuits. a