There has been a massive growth in the study of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) over the past decade, based upon their interesting and unusual electronic, optical and mechanical properties, such as tuneable and strain-dependent bandgaps. Tungsten disulfide (WS2), as a typical example of TMDs, has considerable potential in applications such as strain engineered devices and the next generation multifunctional polymer nanocomposites. However, controlling the strain, or more practically, monitoring the strain in WS2 and the associated micromechanics have not been so well studied. Both photoluminescence spectroscopy (PL) and Raman spectroscopy have been proved to be effective but PL cannot be employed to characterise multilayer TMDs while it is difficult for Raman spectroscopy to reveal the band structure. In this present study, photoluminescence and Raman spectroscopy have been combined to monitor the strain distribution and stress transfer of monolayer WS2 on a flexible polymer substrate and in polymer nanocomposites. It is demonstrated that WS2 still follows continuum mechanics on the microscale and that strain generates a non-uniform bandgap distribution even in a single WS2 flake through a simple strain engineering. It is shown that these flakes could be useful in optoelectonic applications as they become micronsized PL emitters with a band gap that can be tuned by the application of external strain to the substrate. The analysis of strain distributions using Raman spectroscopy is further extended to thin-film few-layer WS2 polymer nanocomposites where it is demonstrated that the stress can be transferred effectively to WS2 flakes. The relationship between the mechanical behaviour of single monolayer WS2 flakes and that of few-layer flakes in bulk composites is investigated. The past two decades have witnessed an increasing interest in the application of 2D materials in various applications ranging from device fabrication to polymer composites. As one of the first 2D materials to be isolated graphene, in particular, has been studied extensively In spite of the extensive work on the applications of WS2, however, relatively little is known about one fundamental core aspect of their behaviourthe deformation micromechanics of WS2 flakes for strain engineering in nanocomposites. For example, although the Young's modulus of WS2 has been measured by Liu et al. Similar to earlier studies upon graphene and graphene oxide In the present study, we have combined Raman and photoluminescence spectroscopy to monitor the strain distribution in mechanically-cleaved monolayer WS2 flakes deformed on flexible substrates. This methodology is further extended to WS2/poly(vinyl alcohol) nanocomposites where the deformation micromechanics of multilayer WS2 flakes within the polymer is revealed. A poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) beam was coated by spin coating a 600 nm layer of SU-8 (MicroChem SU-8 2000 Permanent Epoxy Negative Photoresist) as substrate in order to enhance the contrast with the substrate under the optical microscope. The coating was undertaken using a spin coater (WS-650Mz-23NPPB spin coater Laurell Technologies Corporation). The static coating procedure involved dispensing 0.5 ml of the SU-8 resin on the PMMA substrate, followed by 10 s spinning at 500 rpm with 100 rpm/s acceleration and 30 s at 2000 rpm with 300 rpm/s acceleration were obtained by the exfoliation through the micromechanical cleavage The flakes obtained were then transferred to the PMMA substrate with a lay of SU-8 on top by pressing the back of the adhesive film. After the transfer, monolayer flakes were located and identified using optical microscopy and a combination of Raman and photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy. exfoliation was employed to produce WS2 dispersions, termed LPE WS2. A detailed procedure of the exfoliation was reported earlier by Bissett et al. where ρp and ρW are density of the polymer and WS2 flakes, which were taken as 1.3 g/cm 3 [17] and 7.5 g/cm 3 An atomic force microscope (AFM, Bruker dimension 3100) was used in the tapping mode to provide morphological information about the WS2 flakes deposited onto a Si/SiO2 substrate. For transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis, the WS2 flakes were tape exfoliated onto a Si/SiO2 substrate. They were then transferred to a lacey-carbon Cu TEM grid via a polymer-free technique. The TEM phase contrast images were obtained using A JEOL 2100 field emission TEM with an accelerating voltage of 200 kV in a bright field detector. The acquisition time was between 0.5 s and 2.5 s. The concentrations of WS2 dispersions were determined using a UV-Visible spectrophotometer (Thermal Scientific Evolution 201) with a Beer's Law Coefficient of 2756 ml/mg/m (for peak at λ=629 nm) For deformation of the monolayer WS2 flakes, the PMMA substrate was mounted on a 4-point bending rig and placed under the microscope stage in Raman spectrometer. A resistance strain gauge was fixed to the PMMA beam close to the WS2 flakes to monitor the strain. The specimen was then deformed stepwise with the Raman or PL spectra collected for each strain step. Mapping was undertaken using a grid size of 0.5 m  0.5 m or 1 m  1 m depending upon sizes of the flakes and the degree of precision needed. The laser was polarised parallel to the direction of tensile strain. For the deformation test of thin film nanocomposites, the films were mounted and stretched in a tensile rig designed in house and Raman spectra were obtained for the LPE WS2/PVA nanocomposites. The details of the experimental method have been described in detail in our previous report Figure The high sensitivity of PL spectroscopy to detect features at the submicron level also reveals some non-uniformity around the centre of flake where wrinkles and contaminant are present The AFM height profile also shows some contamination on the flake, perhaps due to bubbles trapped by the flake, commonly seen for micromechanically-exfoliated flakes of 2D materials In more detail, as the strain increases, the red-shift of both the A exciton peak and A -exciton peak is in the order of tens of meV as shown in Figure The PL spectra x-y mapped on a 0.5  0.5 m grid across a monolayer WS2 flake, in a region showing no contamination, (Figure The measurements of the positions of the A exciton peaks in Figure The behaviour shown in Figure where εm is the level of strain applied to the matrix, Ef is the Young's modulus of the WS2 flake, Gm is the shear modulus of the polymer, l is the length of WS2 flake along with strain direction, t and T are the thickness of the WS2 flake and the representative volume, respectively and s is the aspect ratio of the WS2 flake (l/t). The dashed line is indicative of the strain distribution at 0% strain (orange) and 0.35% strain (green) drawn using the shear-lag analysis (Eq. 2) with ns=10. A 'shear-lag' curve drawn using Eq. 2 with ns = 10 (Figure By using ns = 10, E f = 272 GPa Although found previously for graphene A recent study As shown above, the intensity of the PL peaks in WS2 drops significantly as the number of layers increases. This limits its wider application in fields where few-layer and multilayer TMDs are employed, such as in nanocomposites It can be seen that the strain distribution in Figure When the specimen was subjected to a strain of 0.55%, the strain in most of the WS2 flake increased to about 0.55%, demonstrating effective stress transfer from the substrate to the flake. However, a slight strain concentration, higher than the applied strain ~0.55%, can be found in the bottom part perhaps due to defects or edge effects The specimen shown in Figure We extended our analysis of the deformation micromechanics of monolayer WS2 further to that of bulk fewlayer WS2/PVA nanocomposites. The few-layer WS2 flakes were liquid-phase exfoliated in large quantities and separated by centrifugation into three grades based on their lateral dimensions, namely, large (LPE WS2-L), medium (LPE WS2-M) and small (LPE WS2-S) WS2 flakes Raman spectra of the LPE-WS2 flakes, neat PVA and their nanocomposites are shown in Figure The critical length for the monolayer WS2 flakes was found to be 4 m and this is indicated on Figure made an attempt to extend this methodology to WS2 flakes where dω(E )/dε(ref) for the deformation of isolated flakes can be taken as -2.05 cm -1 /% as found previously We also investigated the reinforcement of the WS2/PVA nanocomposites further by undertaking tensile testing upon the nanocomposites reinforced with different loadings of the LPE WS2-L flakes. The stress-strain curves in Figure where Eeff is the effective Young's modulus of LPE-WS2, Ef and Em are the Young's modulus of the LPE-WS2 and PVA, respectively. Vf is the volume fraction of WS2 in the nanocomposites. Figure The effective modulus of WS2 flakes in the nanocomposites is given by In this work, photoluminescence and Raman spectroscopy have been combined to successfully monitor the strain distribution and stress transfer of monolayer WS2 on a flexible polymer substrate and also in thin film bulk nanocomposites. It is demonstrated that monolayer WS2 still follows continuum mechanics. Particularly, a non-uniform bandgap distribution has been achieved by strain engineering even within a single WS2 flake due to the non-uniform strain distribution through stress transfer from the substrate. It has been demonstrated that this could have useful applications in optoelectonics in producing tuneable micron-sized PL emitters on a substrate. The micromechanics developed for monolayer WS2 flake has been extended to thin film nanocomposites, where it has been found that the stress can be transferred effectively to thicker WS2 flakes. Their effective Young's modulus is around 30 % of their theoretical modulus which means that their reinforcement efficiency is comparable to that of few-layer graphene-reinforced nanocomposites.