Two-dimensional (2D) MoSi 2 N 4 monolayer is an emerging class of air-stable 2D semiconductor possessing exceptional electrical and mechanical properties. Despite intensive recent research efforts devoted to uncover the material properties of MoSi 2 N 4 , the physics of electrical contacts to MoSi 2 N 4 remains largely unexplored thus far. In this work, we study the van der Waals heterostructures composed of MoSi 2 N 4 contacted by graphene and NbS 2 monolayers using first-principle density functional theory calculations. We show that the MoSi 2 N 4 /NbS 2 contact exhibits an ultralow Schottky barrier height (SBH), which is beneficial for nanoelectronics applications. For MoSi 2 N 4 /graphene contact, the SBH can be modulated via interlayer distance or via external electric fields, thus opening up an opportunity for reconfigurable and tunable nanoelectronic devices. Our findings provide insights on the physics of 2D electrical contact to MoSi 2 N 4 , and shall offer a critical first step towards the design of high-performance electrical contacts to MoSi 2 N 4 -based 2D nanodevices. The discovery of monolayer graphene 1 has initiated tremendous experimental and theoretical efforts for the search of new two-dimensional (2D) materials with exotic physical properties and functionalities. One important example is the family of 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs), such as MoS 2 and WS 2 , whose potential in nanoelectronic 2 , optoelectronic Beyond 2D TMDC, ultrathin transition metal nitride (TMN) have been actively explored in recent years Although recent experiment have shed important lights on the structural, electrical, mechanical and optical properties of MoSi 2 N 4 In this work, we address the above questions by performing a first-principle DFT simulation on the electronic properties of MoSi 2 N 4 when it is vertically contacted by 2D metallic electrodes -graphene and NbS 2 monolayers. We find that MoSi 2 N 4 /NbS 2 Schottky contacts exhibits an ultralow Schottky barrier height (SBH) of 0.042 eV, which is beneficial for room-temperature device operation. For MoSi 2 N 4 /graphene, the SBH can be controlled by interlayer distance or by external electric field, thus allowing the contact to be reconfigured between p-type and n-type Schottky contact. As the extended family of MA 2 Z 4 contains myriads of 2D monolayers with exotic physical properties yet to be unearthed, our findings shall form a harbinger for designing efficient electrical contact and VDWHs based on MA 2 Z 4 monolayer family. The structural optimization and electronic properties of an isolated monolayer MoSi 2 N 4 and its VDWH when interfaced with graphene and NbS 2 are performed using the Vienna simulation package (VASP) The top and side views of an isolated MoSi The stacking configurations have minimal effect on the physical properties of the heterostructures (see Supplementary Material). After structural relaxation, the interlayer distances are obtained as 3.302 Å and 3.192 Å for MoSi 2 N 4 /graphene and MoSi 2 N 4 /NbS 2 , respectively, which are much larger than the sum of the covalent radii of N and C (S) atoms. The interfaces are found to be dominated by the VDW interactions. We further test the interlayer distances using different VDW functionals (see Supplementary Materials), and the interlayer distances of the fully relaxed structures are found to be similar. We calculated the binding energy E b as, and N denotes the total energies of the heterostructures, isolated MoSi 2 N 4 , isolated grephene (or NbS 2 ), and the number of atoms in the heterostructures, respectively. The calculated binding energies are -199.89 eV/atom and -280.29 eV/atom for MoSi 2 N 4 /graphene, and MoSi 2 N 4 /NbS 2 , respectively, which are substantially lower than other 2D-material-based heterostructures E l e c t r i c f i e l d ( V / Å ) Changing the interlayer spacing, which can been achieved experimentally by nanomechanical pressure Electrically tunable electronic properties is a useful characteristics for the design of all-electrical devices Finally, we discuss a design of nanodiode composed of MoSi 2 N 4 /graphene and MoSi 2 N 4 /NbS 2 electrical contacts. A 2D/2D homo-lateral p-n junction can be constructed using a single continuous sheet of MoSi 2 N 4 , contacted by graphene and NbS 2 on both sides (Fig. In summary, we investigated the electrical contacts between monolayer MoSi 2 N 4 with 2D semimetal (graphene) and 2D metal (NbS 2 ), using firs-principle simulation. Here, the ultralow SBH in MoSi 2 N 4 /NbS 2 contact can be a particularly beneficial feature for devices operating at room temperature. For MoSi 2 N 4 /graphene contact, the SBH can be controlled externally via an electric field or via interlayer distance, thus revealing a potential in reconfigurable device applications. Our findings shall shed important light on the design of MoSi 2 N 4 -based 2D/2D contacts and heterostructrues, thus paving a critical firststep toward the development of VDW heterostructure devices See supplementary material for the complete electronic band structures of MoSi 2 N 4 heterostructures under different contact orientation, and the evolution of the electronic band structures under different interlayer distance and external electric fields.