Polycrystalline members of the GaV 4 S 8-y Se y family of materials with small levels of substitution between 0 ≤ y ≤ 0.5 and 7.5 ≤ y ≤ 8 have been synthesized in order to investigate their magnetic and structural properties. Substitutions to the skyrmion hosting parent compounds GaV 4 S 8 and GaV 4 Se 8 , are found to suppress the temperature of the cubic to rhombohedral structural phase transition that occurs in both end compounds and to create a temperature region around the transition where there is a coexistence of these two phases. Similarly, the magnitude of the magnetization and temperature of the magnetic transition are both suppressed in all substituted compounds until a glassy-like magnetic state is realized. There is evidence from the ac susceptibility data that skyrmion lattices with similar dynamics to those in GaV 4 S 8 and GaV 4 Se 8 are present in compounds with very low levels of substitution, 0 < y < 0.2 and 7.8 < y < 8, however, these states vanish at higher levels of substitution. The magnetic properties of these substituted materials are affected by the substitution altering exchange pathways and resulting in the creation of increasingly disordered magnetic states. In recent years there has been significant interest in the field of magnetic skyrmions and in the search for new materials which exhibit skyrmions One family of materials in which a few members have been shown to stabilize Néel type skyrmions (for example GaV 4 S 8 and GaV 4 Se 8 ) are the lacunar spinels AB 4 X 8 (A = Ga, Al, Ge, Ti, Fe, Co, Ni, Zn; B = V, Cr, Mo, Re, Nb, Ta; X = S, Se, Te), which have been studied due to their intriguing electronic and magnetic properties GaV 4 S 8 hosts a variety of magnetic phases. In zero-field there is a transition from a paramagnetic to cycloidal magnetic state In order to further examine how the evolution of the magnetic states is intricately linked to structural transformations and instabilities, we have now synthesized and investigated selected compositions very close to the two end compounds in the GaV 4 S 8-y Se y family of materials (y = 0 to 0.5 and y = 7.5 to 8). By effecting extremely subtle distortions by these low level substitutions, we have been able to examine the stability of these local structural units, which are crucial to these materials acting as skyrmion hosts. We have also been able to evaluate the critical S/Se substituted compositions at which the transition from a skyrmion hosting to a non-skyrmion hosting material occurs and determine the mechanisms leading to this. Detailed structural analysis has been carried out using both X-ray and neutron diffraction. The magnetic properties have been investigated using ac/dc magnetometry to understand the strong correlations between the structure and magnetic behaviors existing in these systems and to probe the critical phenomena in this narrow composition range. Our results indicate that small levels of substitution create a coexistence of both cubic F 43m and rhombohedral R3m structural phases in the region surrounding the temperature of the structural phase transition. This phenomena is coupled with a reduction of the structural transition temperature with increasing substitution levels, until the structural transition is no longer present for y = 0.5 and nearly eradicated for y = 7.5. The magnetic susceptibility is dramatically suppressed and the nature of the magnetic phase diagram is significantly altered with increasing levels of substituents. We show that both the structural and magnetic properties of the substituted materials exhibit marked changes for substitution levels as low as 2.5% (i.e. 0 ≤ y < 0.2 and 7.8 < y ≤ 8) in both parent compounds, thus demonstrating the fragility of the systems to substitutional or similar disorder and its effect on the ability of these systems to host skyrmions. Polycrystalline GaV 4 S 8-y Se y samples with y = 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 7.5, 7.6, 7.7, 7.8, 7.9, and 8 were synthesized by the standard solid-state reaction method similar to that used for the synthesis of polycrystalline GaV 4 S 8 and GaV 4 Se 8 Powder neutron diffraction was performed on the D2B diffractometer at Institut Laue Langevin (ILL) to establish the nuclear structures between 1.5 and 50 K. Powder samples were sealed in thin-walled cylindrical vanadium containers of 8 to 12 mm diameter and placed in a standard orange cryostat. A neutron wavelength of 1.594 Å was used to obtain high-resolution diffractograms for nuclear structure refinements. Structural Rietveld refinements have been used to simultaneously fit the diffractograms of a single composition whilst imposing physical behavior using TOPAS academic v6.0 The magnetic properties of the polycrystaline materials were measured using a Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System, superconducting quantum interference device (SQuID) magnetometer. dc temperature-dependent magnetic susceptibility (χ) measurements were carried out at temperatures between 1.8 and 300 K in an applied field of 10 mT using a zerofield-cooled-warming (ZFCW) protocol. ac susceptibility measurements were performed with a 113 Hz ac field of 0.3 mT after zero-field-cooling to each measuring temperature and then applying a dc magnetic field. Room temperature powder X-ray diffraction data of the polycrystaline GaV 4 S 8-y Se y with 0 ≤ y ≤ 0.5 and 7.5 ≤ y ≤ 8 could all be indexed in F 43m cubic symmetry. A representative pattern is shown in Fig. The structural properties of the family have been examined using high resolution powder neutron diffraction on the D2B diffractometer at the ILL. Both GaV 4 S 8 and GaV 4 Se 8 were found to undergo a structural phase transition from a high temperature cubic F 43m phase to a lower temperature rhombohedral R3m structure, as previously reported For GaV 4 S 8-y Se y with 7.5 ≤ y ≤ 8, Fig. In our previous study A similar observation has been made by Powell et al. The distortion of the lattice when transforming from the cubic to the rhombohedral phase can be quantified by examining the c/a lattice parameter ratio of the R3m phase in the hexagonal setting. This ratio takes a constant value of √ 6 as the rhombohedral distortion goes to zero. The magnitude of the distortion as a function of temperature observed in the GaV 4 S 8-y Se y powders examined is plotted in Fig. Rietveld refinements of the neutron data confirm the preferential site occupation of Se in the GaX 4 tetrahedra and S in the V 4 X 4 clusters as expected for this system Se was observed to occupy GaX 4 tetrahedra, and all substituted S in 7.5 ≤ y < 8 was observed to occupy V 4 X 4 clusters. When undergoing the structural phase transition from the cubic to rhombohedral phase, the V 4 X 4 clusters can distort along any of four possible cubic 1 1 1 directions. The nature of magnetic ordering was examined using bulk magnetization measurements on the synthesized powders in the GaV 4 S 8-y Se y series. Figure To further investigate the glassy-like transition observed for y = 7.8 (shown in Fig. The powder ac susceptibility phase diagrams shown in Ref. The differences in the magnetic response of the substituted materials compared to the end compounds have two main possible sources. The first, of local origin, is the preferred substitution modifying the exchange pathways and hence the global magnetism. The preferential substitution of Se into the GaX 4 tetrahedron affects the inter-cluster exchange whereas S into the V 4 X 4 cluster affects the intra-cluster exchange. The second source is the reduction of the structural distortion that can modify the nature of the exchange including the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions leading to the different magnetic phases present. There is a smaller change to the distortion (as quantified by the c/a ratio) but a larger change in the magnetism observed at the GaV 4 Se 8 end of the family compared to the GaV 4 S 8 end. This suggests that an alteration of the exchange pathways brought about as a result of the preferred occupancy of S and Se in the V 4 X 4 clusters and GaX 4 tetrahedra, has a larger effect on the resulting magnetic properties than any changes caused by the structural distortion. We have undertaken a detailed investigation of the structural and magnetic properties of the GaV 4 S 8-y Se y family of materials for substitutions in the range 0 ≤ y ≤ 0.5 and 7.5 ≤ y ≤ 8, to gain a greater understanding of the effects of low levels of substitutions. Powder neutron diffraction measurements show strong evidence for the first order nature of the structural phase transition in this family. The addition of substituents to the parent compounds leads to a gradual shift of the structural phase transition to lower temperatures, combined with a reduction in the structural distortion until a critical amount of the substituents completely suppresses the transition. In the compositions which undergo the structural transition, the disorder effects lead to the observation of a striking region of coexistence of the cubic (F 43m) and rhombohedral (R3m) phases, in the vicinity of the structural phase transition. Bulk magnetic property measurements show a decrease in the dc magnetization with addition of substituents. This process occurs faster at the Se end where the addition of S into the crystal lattice is seen to have a larger effect on the magnetic exchange pathways, due the preferential sites the S and Se occupy in the lattice. Studies of the evolution of the ac susceptibility to examine the magnetic phase diagrams for these materials show that the phase diagrams for substitution levels as low as y = 0.2 and 7.8 are significantly altered from those observed in the parent skyrmion hosting materials. This indicates that skyrmion lattices with similar dynamics to the parent compounds are present only in materials with less than 2.5% substitution levels, i.e. 0 ≤ y < 0.2 and 7.8 < y ≤ 8. We conclude that the substitution of S and Se even at very low levels (2.5%) brings about a large enough disruption to the crystal structure, and this combined with their preferential site occupancies is sufficient to alter the magnetic phases exhibited by these materials in comparison to the end compounds. The fragility of the structure to any manipulation is strongly linked to the ability of these lacunar spinel structures to host skyrmion lattices. Our findings on the effect of subtle structural distortions adds to the evidence that already exists from studies on similar lacunar spinels such as GaMoSe 8 