The tin-selenide and tin-sulfide classes of materials undergo multiple structural transitions under high pressure leading to periodic lattice distortions, superconductivity, and topologically non-trivial phases, yet a number of controversies exist regarding the structural transformations in these systems. We perform first-principles calculations within the framework of density functional theory and a careful comparison of our results with available experiments on SnSe2 reveals that the apparent contradictions among high-pressure results can be attributed to differences in experimental conditions. We further demonstrate that under hydrostatic pressure a √ 3 × √ 3 × 1 superstructure can be stabilized above 20 GPa in SnS2 via a periodic lattice distortion as found recently in the case of SnSe2, and that this pressure-induced phase transition is due to the combined effect of Fermi surface nesting and electron-phonon coupling at a momentum wave vector q = (1/3, 1/3, 0). In addition, we investigate the contribution of nonadiabatic corrections on the calculated phonon frequencies, and show that the quantitative agreement between theory and experiment for the high-energy A1g phonon mode is improved when these effects are taken into account. Finally, we examine the nature of the superconducting state recently observed in SnSe2 under nonhydrostatic pressure and predict the emergence of superconductivity with a comparable critical temperature in SnS2 under similar experimental conditions. Interestingly, in the periodic lattice distorted phases, the critical temperature is found to be reduced by an order of magnitude due to the restructuring of the Fermi surface. Tin-based binary compounds, Sn x Se y and Sn x S y , have emerged as promising candidates for electronic, optoelectronic, photovoltaic, and thermoelectric applications In the dichalcogenide systems, pressure-induced structural phase transitions have been reported for both SnSe 2 and SnS 2 . For example, two theoretical studies have predicted that SnSe 2 becomes thermodynamically unstable above 18-20 GPa and then decomposes into Sn 3 Se 4 (space group I 43d) and Se While SnSe 2 is no longer on the convex hull tie-line at higher pressures and also becomes dynamically unstable, we have shown in a previous study In the present study, we first address the apparent contradiction among high-pressure experimental results in SnSe 2 above 20 GPa. Next, we explore whether a √ 3× √ 3×1 superstructure can also be stabilized in SnS 2 via a PLD by providing a detailed comparison of the electronic, vibrational, and e-ph properties of the two compounds. We expand on our previous work First-principles calculations were performed within the density functional theory (DFT) using the Quantum Espresso (QE) The EPW code A. Crystal structure evolution under pressure At ambient conditions, bulk SnSe 2 and SnS 2 crystallize in the hexagonal, close-packed CdI 2 -type structure with space group P 3m1 (No. 164) As pointed out in previous studies Up to 10 GPa, there are no appreciable differences seen in the compressibility rates in the two systems. For instance, the lengths of the a and c axes at 10 GPa are reduced by about 3% and 11% with respect to their zeropressure values in both cases. As the pressure increases, the compressibility rate along the a axis becomes slightly smaller in SnS 2 than in SnSe 2 , following the expected trend that a more covalent intra-layer bond is less compressible The present theoretical results for the pressure dependence of the cell parameters are in very good agreement with all experimental data in the low pressure region between 0 and 10 GPa [see Fig. The successful synthesis of Sn 3 Se 4 in laser-heated diamond anvil cells 10 points towards the first scenario, but no traces of the Sn 3 Se 4 phase were detected in the highpressure synchrotron x-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns measured at room temperature in two other recent studies Evidence for the second scenario has also been provided in our combined experimental and theoretical work on SnSe 2 We now focus our attention on understanding whether a √ 3 × √ 3 × 1 superstructure can also be stabilized in SnS 2 via a PLD. Since the K point of the 1 × 1 × 1 unit cell folds onto the Γ point in the √ 3 × √ 3 × 1 supercell, dynamical stability calculations can be performed by determining the phonon frequencies at the Γ point of the nine-atom H1 structure. As pressure is increased, the two nearly degenerate lowest-energy phonon modes with A 2g and A 2u symmetry soften and become imaginary as shown in Fig. To construct the energetically preferred structural derivatives of the original H1 phase, we follow the same strategy employed in our previous work on SnSe 2 As can be appreciated from the pressure dependence plots of the relative enthalpy in Fig. Based on the RDF analysis, we can establish that the distorted configurations are nearby local minima, a situation encountered in other systems In this section we systematically analyze the band structure of SnSe 2 and SnS 2 under hydrostatic and nonhydrostatic pressure. At zero pressure, both systems are found to be semiconducting with an indirect band gap of 0.62 eV in SnSe 2 and 1.35 eV in SnS 2 , respectively. As for bulk TMDs consisting of the same transition metal, the compound with the most electronegative chalcogen has the largest band gap Figure The predicted metallization pressures are consistent with available theoretical results To get a better understanding of how the internal structural parameters of the layers, the inter-layer distance, and the choice of chalcogen atom affect the electronic transition, we calculate the electronic dispersions of (i) SnSe 2 structure at 0 GPa in which the Se atoms are substituted with S and the atomic coordinates are either kept unchanged (labeled as SnSe 2 -str-S) or allowed to relax (labeled as SnSe 2 -str-S-relaxed), and (ii) SnS 2 structure at 0 GPa in which the S atoms are substituted with Se and the atomic coordinates are either kept unchanged (labeled as SnS 2 -str-Se) or allowed to relax (labeled as SnS 2 -str-Se-relaxed). As shown in Supplemental Fig. We further study the evolution of the charge density with pressure. Similar to TMDs, we find that under compression more electronic charge moves away from the Sn atoms and accumulates along the intra-layer bonds formed by Sn with the chalcogen atoms and in the interlayer region between the chalcogen atoms Finally, in Fig. In low-dimensional or layered systems, the appearance of a superlattice is often the signature of a CDW transition, as for example in TMDs To address the microscopic mechanism responsible for the phase transition and the origin of phonon softening at K, we calculate the adiabatic phonon self-energy (Π A qν ) for the lowest-energy phonon mode and the static bare susceptibility in the constant matrix approximation (χ 0,CMA q ) using the following equations 43,74,75 Here, 2 is the spin degeneracy factor, ε nk and f nk represent single-particle energies and Fermi-Dirac occupation factors, respectively, and Ω BZ is the BZ volume. The screened e-ph matrix elements g mn,ν (k, q) were obtained as g mn,ν (k, q) = ψ mk+q |∂ qν V |ψ nk / /2ω qν , where ψ nk represents the Kohn-Sham single-particle eigenstates, ∂ qν V is the derivative of the self-consistent potential, and ω qν is the phonon frequency associated with phonon branch ν and wave vector q. The bare matrix element g b mn,ν (k, q) is calculated by multiplying the screened e-ph matrix elements g mn,ν (k, q) with the electronic dielectric function at ω=0 [ε(q, ω = 0)]. Thus, the matrix elements g b mn,ν (k, q)×g * mn,ν (k, q) in Eqn. (1) can be replaced by |g mn,ν (k, q)| 2 × ε(q, ω = 0) 78 . Both χ 0,CMA q and Π A qν are properties of the FS bands and those electronic states close to them, yet χ 0,CMA q is purely electronic, while Π A qν includes the fully anisotropic e-ph interaction. As can be appreciated in Fig. Having identified the PLD instability in SnS 2 to be of the same origins as in SnSe 2 , we carry on to compare the materials' Raman-active modes' frequencies as a function of pressure, as shown in Fig. The pressure dependence of the high-energy E g mode for SnSe 2 is in very good agreement with the experimental results, however, the high-energy A 1g mode, while reproducing nicely the qualitative trend, underestimates the phonon energies by ∼ 0.5 meV at 0 GPa and ∼ 3 meV at 6 GPa (the metallization pressure) compared to experiments with η being a positive infinitesimal number. The nonadiabatic phonon spectral function ) Equation ( The nonadiabatic spectral functions and the nonadiabatic phonon dispersions obtained via Eqns. ( As SnSe 2 and SnS 2 are polar semiconductors at ambient and low pressures, we also want to address the topic of LO-TO splitting. At ambient pressure, we observe a LO-TO splitting of 7 meV for SnSe 2 and 11.8 meV for SnS 2 [see Supplemental Fig. Experimental evidence of pressure-induce superconductivity in SnSe 2 has been recently provided based on electrical transport and synchrotron XRD measurements In this section we investigate the origin of the observed superconducting transition in SnSe 2 using the Migdal-Eliashberg (ME) formalism implemented in the EPW code In order to understand the origin of the superconducting state, we evaluate the Eliashberg spectral function α 2 F (ω) and the corresponding e-ph coupling strength λ. A comparative analysis of the α 2 F (ω) and the atomically resolved phonon DOS (PHDOS) at the experimental lattice cell parameters at 23 GPa [Supplemental Fig. Considering that superconductivity in SnSe 2 has been achieved experimentally either in Se-deficient For completeness, we also analyze the superconducting properties of SnS 2 . Assuming that the dynamical stability of SnS 2 can be extended to higher pressures under nonhydrostatic compression as for SnSe 2 , we perform superconductivity calculations at 30 GPa and used a smearing value of 0.04 Ry for the phonons at the K point in order to remove the imaginary frequency. The calculated PHDOS and Eliashberg spectral function comprise of two well defined regions separated by a gap between the acoustic and optical branches [Supplemental Fig. Finally, we investigate SnSe 2 and SnS 2 compounds in the H2-1 structure as potential superconductors. The results are presented in Supplemental Figs. S21-S23 51 . Despite the close resemblance between the DOS and PH-DOS of the parent and superlattice structures, the T c in H2-1 phase is found to be an order of magnitude lower than in the H1 phase. This can be linked to a decrease in the e-ph coupling over the full phonon range due to the reorganization that takes place at the FS. Looking at the electronic band structure in the √ 3 × √ 3 × 1 supercell [region enclosed by the green box in Fig. In this work, we have performed a comparative study of SnSe 2 and SnS 2 at ambient conditions and pressures up to 40 GPa. We show that the apparent contradictions among high-pressure results on SnSe 2 can be attributed to differences in experimental conditions and that inclusion of nonadiabatic effects improves the quantitative agreement with the measured Raman-active phonon frequencies. We further demonstrate that a periodic lattice transition, of a similar origin to the one observed in SnSe 2 , also occurs in SnS 2 above 20 GPa. In addition, we examine the nature of the superconducting state recently observed in SnSe 2 under nonhydrostatic pressure, and provide evidence that the superconducting transition can be explained within a standard phononmediated mechanism. The emergence of superconductivity with a comparable critical temperature in SnS 2 under similar experimental conditions is also predicted. Finally, we show that in the high pressure PLD H2-1 phase the T c is reduced by an order of magnitude compared to the high-symmetry H1 phase in both systems, a fact that we attribute to a restructuring and suppression of large parts of the Fermi surface. The space groups were found with the SPGLIB tool [7] interfaced with the MAISE package [8] using a tolerance of 0.01. The lattice parameters are given for H1 at 0 GPa and 30 GPa, and for the H2 derivatives at 30 GPa. The H2 derivatives were constructed from the √ 3 × √ 3 × 1 H1 supercell by considering nonequivalent combinations of the e1 and e2 eigenvectors corresponding to the two nearly degenerate lowest-energy phonon modes A2g and A2u. Configuration H2-1 corresponds to atomic displacements along e1, configuration H2-2 corresponds to atomic displacements along e2, and configuration H2-3 corresponds to atomic displacements along a linear combination of the two eigenvectors. The similarity factor was calculated for each H2 derivative with respect to the undistorted √ 3 × √ 3 × 1 H1 supercell. 