We have carried out a theoretical investigation of hot electron power loss P , involving electronacoustic phonon interaction, as a function of twist angle θ, electron temperature Te and electron density ns in twisted bilayer graphene (tBLG). It is found that as θ decreases closer to magic angle θm, P enhances strongly and θ acts as an important tunable parameter, apart from Te and ns. In the range of Te =1-50 K, this enhancement is ∼ 250-450 times the P in monolayer graphene (MLG), which is manifestation of the great suppression of Fermi velocity vF * of electrons in moiré flat band. As θ increases away from θm, the impact of θ on P decreases, tending to that of MLG at θ ∼ 3 • . In the Bloch-Grüneisen (BG) regime, P ∼ Te 4 , ns -1/2 and vF * -2 . In the higher temperature region (∼10-50 K), P ∼ Te δ , with δ ∼ 2.0, and the behavior is still super linear in Te, unlike the phonon limited linear-in-T ( lattice temperature) resistivity ρp. P is weakly, decreasing (increasing) with increasing ns at lower (higher) Te, as found in MLG. The energy relaxation time τe is also discussed as a function of θ and Te. Expressing the power loss P = Fe(Te) -Fe(T ), in the BG regime, we have obtained a simple and useful relation Fe(T )μp(T ) = (evs 2 /2) i.e. F e(T ) = (nse 2 vs 2 /2)ρp, where μp is the acoustic phonon limited mobility and vs is the acoustic phonon velocity. The ρp estimated from this relation using our calculated Fe(T ) is nearly agreeing with the ρp of Wu et al (Phys. Rev. B 99, 165112 (2019)). I. Recent pioneering experimental discoveries in twisted bilayer graphene (tBLG) by Cao et al Theoretically, the electrical resistivity has been investigated in tBLG, at higher temperature and away from the moiré miniband edge, by considering the effect of electron-acoustic phonon (el-ap) interaction The theory of Wu et al The electron system in samples subject to large electric fields or photoexcitation establishes its internal thermal equilibrium at an electron temperature T e greater than the lattice temperature T because electron-electron interaction occurs at the time scale of several femtoseconds which is much smaller than the electron-phonon scattering time. Consequently, the electron system is driven out of equilibrium with the lattice. In steady state, these electrons will relax towards equilibrium with the lattice by dissipating energy with phonons as the cooling channels. The study of hot electron power loss P is important as it affects thermal dissipation and heat management which are key issues in nanoscale electronics device. Moreover, it is crucial for applications in variety of devices such as calorimeters, bolometers, infrared detectors, ultrafast electronics and high speed communications. Hot electron cooling has been extensively studied theoretically and experimentally in MLG In the present work, we investigate the effect of enhanced el-ap coupling on the power dissipation P of the hot electrons in moiré flat band in tBLG. It is studied as a function of twist angle, electron temperature and electron density. We show that the twist angle θ acts as one of the strong tunable parameters of P . Additionally, a relation between power loss and phonon limited mobility μ p is brought out in BG regime. Wu et al with the degeneracy g = g s g v g l , where g s , g v and g l are, respectively, spin, valley and layer degeneracy each with the value of 2. We consider electron-acoustic phonon interaction within the deformation potential approximation with the longitudinal acoustic (LA) phonons of energy ω q and wave vector q interacting with the tBLG Dirac electrons in the moiré miniband. The LA phonons in tBLG are assumed to be unaffected by the tBLG structure and are taken to be the same as the MLG phonons. In MLG the experimental observations of electrical conductivity where D is the first-order acoustic deformation potential coupling constant, A is the area of the tBLG, ρ m is the areal mass density and v s is the LA phonon velocity. The detailed tBLG moiré wave function gives rise to the form factor function F (θ) which modifies the el-ap interaction matrix element in tBLG as compared with the MLG where n s is the electron density, , is due to the spinor wave function of the electron in the electron -phonon matrix element, in the quasi-elastic approximation which clearly indicates that twist angle effect is very large for θ closer to θ m . We use this relation while computing P for different twist angles. In the Bloch-Grüneisen (BG) regime T , T e << T BG , q << 2k F , the power loss is given by Hence, in BG regime P ∼ T 4 , n s -1/2 and v F * -2 . We obtain the following numerical results of power loss in tBLG using the parameters In figure In order to compare the power loss in tBLG with that in MLG and conventional BLG, P dependence on T e is depicted in figure We have presented in figure 2 (T e 2 -T 2 )/(6E F P )], where p is the exponent of energy in density of states and E F is the Fermi energy and independent of n s (as E F ∼ n s 1/2 ). In figure Finally, in BG regime, we bring out a simple relation of P with phonon limited mobility μ p and resistivity ρ p in tBLG. In this regime, P , μ p and ρ p are sensitive measures of the el-ap coupling. While P determined by the energy relaxation through el-ap interaction, μ p and ρ p involve momentum relaxation through the same mechanism. A relation between these measurable properties is expected because of the same underlying mechanism. This kind of relation between P and μ p is listed for different electron systems in Ref , where e is the electron charge. Expressing Eq. (3) as P = F e (T e ) -F e (T ) We would like to make the following remarks. In the literature the values of θ m given are varying between 1.02 • to 1.1 • We have studied the hot electron power loss P due to the simple acoustic phonon interaction, via deformation potential coupling, in tBLG of low electron density n s ≤ 10 12 cm -2 for small twist angles θ and for T e ≥ 1 K. For θ closer to the magic angle, P is enhanced by a few hundred times that in MLG due to the great suppression of the Fermi velocity v F * leading to the strong el-ap scattering. Consequently, twist angle emerges as an additional important tunable parameter of P . Although BG regime power law P ∼ T e 4 is obeyed in low T e region, P vs T e behavior still remains super linear at higher T e where acoustic phonon limited resistivity ρ p is linear-in-temperature. For a given n s , although T BG is independent of θ, the range of T e in which P ∼ T e 4 is obeyed increases marginally with increasing θ. The energy relaxation time τ e , is found to be smaller by an order of magnitude than in MLG and decreasing with increasing T e . As θ approaches θ m the τ e decreases significantly indicating that θ can be used as an important parameter to tune τ e also. Finally, simple and useful relations of P with μ p and ρ p are obtained in the BG regime. From the relation between P and ρ p , using our calculated P , the estimated value is closer to the ρ p of Wu et al 