A dramatic reduction in man-made CO2 emissions could be achieved if the cost of electricity generated from concentrated solar power (CSP) plants could become competitive with fossilfuel-derived electricity. The solar heat-to-electricity conversion efficiency of CSP plants may be significantly increased (and the associated electricity cost decreased) by operating CSP turbines with inlet temperatures >750 o C instead of <550 o C, and by using thermal energy storage (TES) at >750 o C to allow for rapidly dispatchable and/or continuous electricity production. Unfortunately, earth-abundant MgCl2-KCl-based liquids currently being considered as low-cost media for large-scale, high-temperature TES are susceptible to oxidation in air, with associated undesired changes in liquid composition and enhanced corrosion of metal alloys in pipes and tanks containing such liquids. In this paper, alternative high-temperature, earth-abundant molten chlorides that are stable in air are identified via thermodynamic calculations. The oxidation resistance, and corrosion-resistant containment, of such molten chlorides at 750 o C are then demonstrated. Such chemically-robust, low-cost TES media and effective containment provide critical advances towards the highertemperature operation of, and lower-cost electricity generation from, CSP plants. Concentrated solar power (CSP) technology with thermal energy storage (TES) has the potential to facilitate large-scale penetration of renewable solar energy into the electricity grid The following reactions may be considered to evaluate the relative oxidation resistances of MgCl2, CaCl2, SrCl2, BaCl2, NaCl, and KCl in air at 750 o C: The standard Gibbs free energy change for each of these reactions In order to utilize such air-stable molten chlorides for high-temperature heat transfer and thermal energy storage for CSP (or other electricity-generating) plants, corrosion-resistant pipes and tanks are required for the containment of such molten salts. Consider the following reactions of NiO, Cr2O3, and Al2O3 with chlorine: The calculated chlorine partial pressure associated with the equilibration of CaCl2 present in a molten CaCl2(53 mol%)-NaCl salt with air at 750 o C was 1.2x10 -8 atm In light of the thermodynamic analyses above, the relative resistances of MgCl2, dissolved in a MgCl2(32 mol%)-KCl liquid, and of CaCl2, dissolved in a CaCl2(53 mol%)-NaCl liquid, towards high-temperature oxidation have been examined by exposing these molten salts to flowing pre-dried air at 750 o C (Experimental Methods). Room-temperature X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns obtained from these salts before and after such air exposure are provided in Fig. To demonstrate the corrosion-resistant containment of the air-stable molten CaCl2-NaCl salt, preoxidized, plate-shaped Ni specimens (with continuous external NiO scales) were exposed (in a vertical orientation) to molten CaCl2-NaCl salts in ambient air at 750 o C for up to 48 h. Two types of molten salts were utilized in these corrosion experiments, in order to examine the influence of the starting nickel content of the salt on such corrosion: CaCl2 (53 mol%)-NaCl salts that had been were obtained for corrosion of these specimens in molten CaCl2-NaCl salts with or without presaturation with NiO. As shown in Fig. The extrapolated kp value obtained from this equation for air at 750 o C (i.e., p[O2] = 0.21 atm, 1023 K) was 2.6x10 -7 g cm -2 s -1/2 . This extrapolated value was also not far (within factor of 2. Preparation of the MgCl2-KCl and CaCl2-NaCl salt mixtures. Chloride salts (NaCl, KCl, MgCl2, and CaCl2, 99% anhydrous, ≥50 mesh particle size, Sigma-Aldrich Corp., St. Louis, MO USA) were individually pre-dried in a vacuum oven (DZF-6050 oven, Hardware Factory Store, Covina, AZ USA) at 30 mTorr for 12 h at 200°C. The chloride salts were then mixed to obtain binary chloride compositions of CaCl2(53.0+0.9 mol%)-NaCl(48.0+0.9 mol%) and MgCl2(32.0+0.9 mol%)-KCl(68.0+0.9 mol%) and stored in an Ar-atmosphere glovebox, with oxygen and water contents in the glovebox maintained at <1 ppm and <0.5 ppm, respectively. Molten salt oxidation tests. Pre-dried mixtures of 6 g of the CaCl2(53 mol%)-NaCl composition and 6 g of the MgCl2(32 mol%)-KCl composition were placed in alumina crucibles (1.6 cm internal diameter x 2.4 cm internal height, >99.6% purity, Advalue Technology, Tucson, AZ, USA). After sealing the salt-bearing crucibles in a controlled-atmosphere horizontal mullite tube (7.0 cm internal diameter) furnace (STT-1500C-3-36, Sentro-Tech, Strongsville, OH USA), the salts were heated at 3 o C/min to 750°C in flowing (1 L/min) Ar (99.999% purity, Airgas Co., Danville, IL USA) or flowing synthetic air (21% O2/79% N2, Airgas Co.). Prior to introduction into the furnace, each gas was passed through a column of Ascarite II (5 cm long by 6.6 cm diameter) (Sigma-Aldrich Corp.) and Drierite (23.8 cm long by 6.6 cm diameter) (Sigma-Aldrich Corp.) to remove residual CO2 and H2O, respectively. For the thermal treatments conducted in flowing Ar, both types of salts were held at 750 o C for 50 h, and then cooled at 3 o C/min to room temperature. For the thermal treatments conducted in flowing synthetic air, the MgCl2-KCl salt was held for only NiO-saturated CaCl2-NaCl salt) to an approximate depth of the molten salt of 1.5 cm (i.e., each specimen was fully immersed upon melting of the salt). The specimen/salt-bearing crucibles were heated in a box furnace (Paragon SC-2, Strongsville, OH USA) in ambient air at 10°C/min to 750°C, held at this temperature for a time of 6 h to 48 h, and then cooled at 10 o C/min to room temperature. Some of the plate-shaped specimens were extracted from the solidified salt via dissolution of the salt in purified de-ionized water at room temperature for 2 h. These specimens were then dried under 30 mTorr vacuum at room temperature for 1 h. The mass of each specimen was then measured using an electronic microbalance (2 μg reproducibility, ME 36S Sartorius Lab Instruments GmbH, Goettingen, Germany), to allow for comparison to the specimen mass measured prior to the corrosion test. The dimensions of each specimen were also measured using a digital micrometer (±2.5x10 -4 cm accuracy, 3732XFL-2, L. S. Starrett Co, Athol, MA USA), to allow for determination of the mass change per specimen surface area. For other plate-shaped specimens, cross-sections were obtained of the specimen/salt interface by cutting through the MgO crucible containing the frozen salt and sample with a low-speed saw (200 rpm, TechCut 4TM, Allied High Tech) with a diamond metal-bonded wafering blade (Allied High Tech) using kerosene (reagent grade, Sigma-Aldrich Corp.) as the cutting fluid (i.e., to avoid dissolving the salt during the cutting process). These cross-sections were then polished to a 6 μm finish in an Ar-atmosphere glovebox with oxygen and water contents maintained at <1 ppm and <0.5 ppm, respectively. Such polishing was conducted using a series of diamond-impregnated polishing pads with progressively finer average particle sizes of 30 μm, 15 μm, and 6 μm (Dia-Grid Diamond Metal Plates, Allied High Tech), using hexane (reagent grade, Sigma-Aldrich Corp.) as a lubricant. Manual polishing was conducted for approximately 30 min at each average diamond particle size and rinsed between with excess hexane (prior to using the next average diamond particle size) to remove debris from the previous polishing step. The polished samples were individually placed within a sealed bag (16.5 cm x 14.9 cm Ziploc Sandwich Bag, S. C. Johnson & Son, Racine, WI USA) that was placed inside a second similar sealed bag inside the glovebox. Such double bag sealing was used to keep This work demonstrates that air-stable, CaCl2-NaCl-based liquids may be contained (e.g., in pipes and tanks) within corrosion-resistant materials that possess continuous, external oxide scales that exhibit slow (parabolic) growth kinetics in the salt in air at 750 o C (or within containment materials comprised entirely of such oxides). The thermodynamic calculations above indicated that this corrosion-resistant containment concept for air-stable molten chlorides may be extended, beyond NiO-bearing Ni, to metal alloys capable of forming other slow-growing external oxide scales in air at 750 o C, such as Cr2O3-bearing or Al2O3-bearing alloys (e.g., oxidation-resistant Feo C