The crack tip mechanics of strain gradient plasticity solids is investigated analytically and numerically. A first-order mechanism-based strain gradient (MSG) plasticity theory based on Taylor's dislocation model is adopted and implemented in the commercial finite element package ANSYS by means of a user subroutine. Two boundary value problems are considered, a single edge tension specimen and a biaxially loaded plate. First, crack tip fields are characterized. Strain gradient effects associated with dislocation hardening mechanisms elevate crack tip stresses relative to conventional plasticity. A parametric study is conducted and differences with conventional plasticity predictions are quantified. Moreover, the asymptotic nature of the crack tip solution is investigated. The numerical results reveal that the singularity order predicted by the first-order MSG theory is equal or higher to that of linear elastic solids. Also, the crack tip field appears not to have a separable solution. Moreover, contrarily to what has been shown in the higher order version of MSG plasticity, the singularity order exhibits sensitivity to the plastic material properties. Secondly, analytical and numerical approaches are employed to formulate novel amplitude factors for strain gradient plasticity. A generalized J-integral is derived and used to characterize a nonlinear amplitude factor. A closed-form equation for the analytical stress intensity factor is obtained. Amplitude factors are also derived by decomposing the numerical solution for the crack tip stress field. Nonlinear amplitude factor solutions are determined across a wide range of values for the material length scale l and the strain hardening exponent N. The domains of strain gradient relevance are identified, setting the basis for the application of firstorder MSG plasticity for fracture and damage assessment. Strain gradient plasticity models have enjoyed significant attention in the past 20 years. Constitutive theories accounting for the role of plastic strain gradients, and their associated length scale parameters, have enabled capturing the size effects observed in metals at small scales as well as regularizing otherwise ill-posed boundary value problems at the onset of material softening Local strengthening due to plastic strain gradients can also be observed in large (e.g., macro-scale) samples when plastic deformation is heterogeneous and is confined to a small region, as near the edge of an indenter Attention has also been focused on understanding and characterizing the asymptotic nature of the crack tip stress distribution predicted by the various classes of strain gradient plasticity models. For example, More recently, Martínez-Pañeda and In the present work, analytical and numerical methodologies are used to characterize the crack tip behavior of CMSG plasticity solids. The finite element simulations conducted reveal notable differences with its higher order counterpart; the crack tip field appears not to have a separable solution and the singularity order is sensitive to the plastic properties of the material. Also, a generalized J-integral is defined and used to derive amplitude stress intensity factors for the first time. A plastic stress intensity factor The conventional theory of mechanism-based strain gradient plasticity (CMSG) developed by where  is an empirical coefficient ranging from 0.3 to 0.5. The dislocation density  is composed of the density S for statistically stored dislocations (SSDs), which accumulate by trapping each other in a random manner, and density G for geometrically necessary dislocations (GNDs), which are required for compatible deformation of various parts of the material, i.e., (2) The SSD density is related to the flow stress and the material stress-strain curve in uniaxial tension ( ) The GND density is related to the curvature of plastic deformation, or the effective plastic strain gradient  P , by where r is the Nye factor, which is around 1.90 for face-centered-cubic polycrystals. The measure of the effective plastic strain gradient  P was reported by The coefficients were determined to be equal to c 1 = 0, c 2 = 1/4 and c 3 = 0 from three dislocation models for bending, torsion and void growth. The components of the plastic strain gradient tensor η ijk p are computed from the plastic strain tensor ε ij p as: The tensile flow stress is related to the shear stress by where M is the Taylor factor, taken to be 3.06 for fcc metals. Because the plastic strain gradient  P vanishes in uniaxial tension, the density S for SSDs is described by Eq. ( where is the intrinsic material length in the strain gradient plasticity based on parameters of elasticity (shear modulus ), plasticity (reference stress ref), and atomic spacing (Burgers vector b). For metallic materials, the internal material length is indeed on the order of microns, consistent with the estimate by such that, ( ) and the nondimensional function of plastic strain f(ε p ) is determined from the uniaxial stress-strain curve, which for most ductile materials can be written as a power law relation In Eqs. ( The constitutive formulation described so far is common to both MSG and CMSG plasticity theories. Suitable constitutive choices were established by where e is the effective stress, ij   is the deviatoric strain rate, and m is the rate-sensitivity exponent. Values of m larger than 5 have shown to provide a response very close to the rate-independent limit. In this work, m = 20 is adopted so as to simulate rate-independent behavior. i.e., larger than 10 nm. However, the fracture analyses of this work reveal notable differences with MSG plasticity beyond 10 nm ahead of the crack tip. Numerical solutions are obtained for two boundary value problems of particular interest, see Fig. . The sensitivity of the results to the remote load will be explored and the quantity 1 / y Kl  will be varied across a wide range; from 6.17 to 68.38. Stress quantities will be presented normalized by the initial yield stress Y  and the distance to the crack tip is normalized by the characteristic material length: r/l. The crack faces remain traction-free in the two boundary value problems considered. The elastic stress intensity factor, K1, of the remotely applied field increases monotonically, such that there is no unloading. The theoretical framework described in Section 2 is implemented in the commercial finite element package ANSYS. This is achieved by using a user material subroutine USEMAT. Recall that, unlike the higher-order theory of mechanism-based strain gradient plasticity CMSG is a first-order theory, not involving higher order stresses and with the same governing equations as conventional plasticity. The effect of the plastic strain gradients is taken into account by modifying the tangent modulus. Thus, a non-local formulation is used by which the computation of the plastic strain rate via (13) requires estimating the effective plastic strain gradient from the plastic strain components at the different integration points within the element. Fortran modules are used to store the plastic strain components across the Gaussian integration points, and the plastic strain gradient is computed by numerical differentiation within the element. This is accomplished by interpolating the plastic strain increment within each element via the values at Gaussian integration points in the isoparametric space, and subsequently determining the gradient of the plastic strain increment via differentiation of the shape function. The Newton-Raphson method is used to solve the resulting non-linear problem, similar convergence rates to those obtained using ANSYS's in-built plasticity models are observed. To the best of the authors' knowledge, the present work constitutes the first implementation of a mechanism-based strain gradient plasticity theory in ANSYS. We model a SET specimen (Fig. We begin our analysis by providing a finite element characterization of crack tip fields. First, attention is drawn to the crack tip asymptotic behavior of CMSG plasticity solids. While the asymptotic behavior of solids characterized by phenomenological strain gradient theories and by the higher order MSG plasticity model is known The influence of the remote load, the yield stress and the material length parameter are assessed in Fig. First, in Fig. Further insight is gained by inspecting the angular variation of the stress distributions in the SET specimen. For this purpose, a dimensionless effective stress can be defined as: , the intrinsic parameter value is l =5 m, the applied nominal stress level is σ ∞ /Y =0.155, and the plastic work hardening exponents are N =0.1, 0.2, 0.3, and 0.5. Fig. (a) (b) Three constitutive models are considered. The CMSG plasticity computations using the constitutive model described in Section 2 are denoted as CMSG; the finite element results obtained using conventional J2 flow theory with a Ramberg-Osgood hardening law are denoted as CPS; and the analytical HRR The results reveal a very good agreement between the J2 flow theory results and the analytical HRR solution, in agreement with expectations. Also, little differences between models are observed when the strain hardening exponent is equal to N = 0.5 or higher, as the solution is close to the elastic one. However, notable differences are observed between conventional plasticity and CMSG plasticity for the case of N = 0.1. Unlike the conventional plasticity case (both HRR and our finite element results), the CMSG plasticity-based analysis shows significant differences with increasing the r/l ratio. The sensitivity of the angular stress distributions to the plastic material properties is investigated in Fig. , are plotted in Fig. , the intrinsic parameter value is l =5 m, and the applied nominal stress level is /Y =0.155. The difference between dimensionless stress fields in strain-gradient plasticity is significant, especially for N=0.1, and this difference gradually disappears with an increase in the degree of hardening in the order of transition from plasticity to elasticity. The comparison of these variations to each other as a function of the radial coordinate r/l leaves little doubt that the strain gradient plasticity fields produced in this section are not of separable form (except for N≥0.5), i.e., ( ) ( ) where (r,) are the polar coordinates centered at the crack tip, ij is the stress and  the corresponding angular function,  is the power of stress singularity, and A is the amplitude factor depending on the applied loading, cracked body configuration, and material properties. Similar dependences of the angular distributions on the radial coordinate have been found in the analytical and numerical results of shown in Fig. , where n=1/N is the power of stress singularity, and KP is the plastic stress intensity factor We proceed to formulate new fracture resistance parameters for CMSG plasticity. We distinguish between amplitude coefficients and plastic stress intensity factors by making use of both numerical and analytical formulations. In the framework of the analytical solution of the problem, we must connect the structure of the fields at the crack tip with a governing parameter in the form of a suitable pathindependent J-integral. Let us consider the structure of the numerical (FEM) crack tip stress fields to be of the following form Focusing on the CMSG plasticity results, it is evident that the singular behavior of the asymptotic crack tip fields is the result of the combined influence of plastic strain gradients and plastic material properties of the material. In other words, unlike previous works, we see a sensitivity to the material strain hardening exponent N; this is quantified by fitting the numerical results in Fig. for SET: The numerical amplitude factor A FEM and the plastic stress intensity factor FEM P K are shown in Fig. is almost uniform with respect to these dimensionless quantities for r/l ranging from 0.001 to 0.1 for each value of the work hardening exponent N. This region of the steady state strain gradient effects may be regarded as a domain of determination or domain of validity for the CMSG plasticity. Our numerical analysis confirms the results of This study uses the conventional theory of the mechanism-based strain gradient (CMSG) plasticity detailed by The solid is assumed to be homogeneous and isotropic with an energy density W, which depends on scalar invariants of the strain tensor, while the deformation curvature tensor and coupled stress are negligible. Our starting point is to look for a dominant singular solution derived from an incompressible, irrotational displacement field. Numerous previous asymptotic fields around crack tips have separable forms of solutions, such as the classical K field, HRR field (1968), crack tip field in the couple-stress theory of strain gradient plasticity To formulate the problem for the asymptotic strain-gradient crack tip fields, A separable form for  is taken as where p is the power of stress singularity (p>0) and ( )  is the angular distribution of . Unlike these separable asymptotic crack tip fields previously established, depend on the polar angle , strain hardening exponent n and the normalized r r l = the intrinsic material length parameter, i.e., ( ) ( ) ( ) In the present study, following where r r L = , and L is a characteristic length (e.g., the strain gradient length scale). In Eqs.( We proceed then to define a suitable J-integral where W is the strain energy density, ui, i, Ti, and qi are displacements, rotations, tractions, and couplestress tractions, respectively, and n1 is the unit normal. As mentioned above, while noting that stresses, strains and displacements are given by the constitutive behavior of CMSG plasticity. For convenience, we introduce the following non-dimensional quantities: where y is the yield stress. The strain energy density in Eq. ( The value of J-integral for elastic Mode I far from crack tip stress fields is defined as Conveniently, the asymptotic crack tip field can be used to evaluate the J-integral. Substituting Eqs.( ( ) The path-independence of the J-integral allows the equality between Eq. (34) and Eq. ( (36) Equation ( where ( ) ( ) The path-independent integral ( where r̅ = r/l. A comparison of the terms in Eq. ( dominates by an order of magnitude or more with respect to all the backward terms In,i(i =2,3,4), i.e., the contribution of these terms is negligible. Therefore, without losing generality, we may impose the following simplified expression for the plastic stress intensity factor in the asymptotic crack tip problem Following Dimension matching requires the following structure for the new amplitude coefficient ( ) The numerical and analytical formulations for the plastic stress intensity factors FEM P K and G P K in the form of equations ( Shi Three annular regions are observed close to the crack tip. An outer elastic region, governed by the remote K field, an elastic-plastic region following the HRR solution and an inner CMSG plasticity region where the stress singularity is equal or higher than the elastic one but dependent on the plastic properties of the material. The source of differences could be related to the role that the higher order equilibrium equation plays in suppressing plastic deformation in the vicinity of the crack tip, as observed in other higher order strain gradient plasticity theories (Martínez-Pañeda et al., 2019). Experiments such as nano-indentation demonstrate the influence of strain gradients in governing material response. Large dislocation densities and local hardening is observed when macroscopic strains vary over microns. A similar effect is expected in a cracked solid as the conditions ahead of a flaw resemble those at the tip of an indenter, leading to significantly higher crack tip stresses relative to conventional plasticity predictions. However, validating experimentally quantitative features specific to the various gradient plasticity models proposed is a challenging task. A direct comparison is possible in terms of crack tip opening displacementsless crack tip blunting is predicted using gradient-enriched constitutive models, and this seems to show a better agreement with experiments We use CMSG plasticity, a first-order strain gradient plasticity formulation based on the Taylor dislocation model, to gain insight into plastic strain gradient effects on crack tip mechanics. The main conclusions of our combined analytical and numerical study are the following: 1. Plastic strain gradients elevate crack tip stresses relative to conventional plasticity solutions. A parametric study is conducted to map the regions of gradient plasticity significance. 2. The angular distribution of hoop and effective stresses in CMSG plasticity shows sensitivity to the distance ahead of the crack, implying that crack tip fields in CMSG plasticity do not have a separable form of solution. 3. The numerical analysis shows that, unlike the higher-order MSG plasticity model, the power of stress singularity in the lower-order CMSG plasticity theory is a function of the plastic work hardening exponent N. 4. Analytical and numerical approaches are employed to formulate novel amplitude and plastic stress intensity factors for strain gradient plasticity. A generalized J-integral for strain gradient plasticity is derived and used to characterize the nonlinear factors 5. The newly derived plastic stress intensity factor is uniform within the range r/l = 0.001 to 0.1 and, as in conventional plasticity, exhibits a sensitivity to the strain hardening exponent N. However, the opposite trend is observed relative to the classic HRR solution as in the power of the stress singularity. Also, the sensitivity of the proposed fracture resistance parameter K p to the coupled effects of material length scale l and plastic work hardening N is established. Potential avenues for future work include the coupling with damage mechanics-like models, to enable gradient-enriched damage assessment, and the use of the newly developed plastic stress intensity factors in conjunction with probabilistic Weibull-type schemes to determine the probability of failure of structural materials susceptible to cleavage fracture. The elastic strain energy density in the expression (33) is described by the following equation: A series expansion may be performed to express the stresses and displacements in terms of the local polar coordinates (r,). Consider the first two terms proportional to r -1/2 , and use the following stress and displacement expansion in the form of equations -plane stress. To apply Eq.( 