Nickelate films have recently attracted broad attention due to the observation of superconductivity in the infinite layer phase of N d 0.8 Sr 0.2 N iO 2 (obtained by reducing Sr doped N dN iO 3 films) and their similarity to the cuprates high temperature superconductors. Here we report on the observation of a new type of transport in oxygen poor N d 0.8 Sr 0.2 N iO 3-δ films. At high temperatures, variable range hopping is observed while at low temperatures a novel tunneling behavior is found where Josephson-like tunneling junction characteristic with serial resistance is revealed. We attribute this phenomenon to coupling between superconductive (S) surfaces of the grains in our Oxygen poor films via the insulating (I) grain boundaries, which yields SIS junctions in series with the normal (N) resistance of the grains themselves. The similarity of the observed conductance spectra to tunneling junction characteristic with Josephson-like current is striking, and seems to support the existence of superconductivity in our samples. The recent discovery of superconductivity in N d 0.8 Sr 0.2 N iO 2 thin films Similar films were fabricated successfully by other groups using the same process In view of this, a few groups tried to reproduced Ref. In the present study, we also used physical reduction of the precursor insulating films of N d 0.8 Sr 0.2 N iO 3 and investigated their properties. In particular, annealing under 10 mTorr oxygen increased the films resistivity at low temperatures by two order of magnitudes but didn't change their structural phase. These films showed variable range hopping Standard pulsed laser ablation deposition from N d 0.8 Sr 0.2 N iO 3 ceramic target was used. The target was prepared by mixing stoichiometric amounts of N d 2 O 3 , SrCO 3 and N iO, then baking, grinding and weighing in 5 steps at 930 0 C/12h, 1050 0 C/40h, 1220 0 C/24h, 1250 0 C/24h and finally pressing and sintering a pellet at 1350 0 C/12h. Most of the weight loss was after the first step where the powder lost most of its CO 2 , but even in the last step a small weight lost was still found indicating that CO 2 was still being removed from the target. For obtaining high quality films of the cuprates it was essential to have Carbon free targets and we believe it is just as important here. For the deposition of the thin films we used third harmonic Nd-YAG laser pulses at 355 nm with 1.5 J/cm 2 on the target. The 10 × 10 mm 2 area substrates of (100) SrT iO 3 (STO) wafers were clamped to a heater block and deposition was carried out at four different substrate temperatures of 450, 600, 650 and 700 0 C (the corresponding heater block temperatures were about 150 0 C higher). Deposition was done under 100 mTorr flow of Oxygen and the deposition rate was about 0.07 nm per pulse. After deposition, the heater was turned off and cooling was under the same Oyxgen pressure flow. The resulting films were shiny black, well crystallized and very smooth as can be seen by the AFM images of Fig. For the (002) peak of the films as seen in (b), the measured width is 0.33 0 which is about peaks of the film are depicted in (b) and (c), respectively. The (001) peak of the films is weak while the (003) peak is absent. Note that both Kα 1 and Kα 2 peaks of the copper x-ray lines at 0.154060 nm and 0.154443 nm are present, thus the STO peaks here appear as doublets with intrinsic angular 2θ split of 0.12 0 and 0.36 0 for the (200) and (400) peaks, respectively. The Kα 2 contribution to the data was not removed in order to avoid line shape distortion at the trailing edges of the peaks and for line-widths comparison between the films and the STO wafer. A small amount of minority secondary phases of N iO, N i 2 O 3 and N i are also present in our films as can be seen in (d). The sharp peaks in (d) are due to Tungsten emission lines diffracted of the STO wafer (see the bare STO wafer trace). three times the split of the (200) peak of STO (0.12 0 ). Comparing our data to that of Li et al Another relevant issue is the small minority phases observed in Fig. As mentioned before, physical reduction of our films was carried out rather than the chemical reduction with CaH 2 used previously Two measuring systems were used in the present study. One a physical properties measurement system with a closed cycle refrigerator and a magnet of up to 14 T (PPMS & DynaCool of Quantum Design) and the other a home made transport measurements probe inside a cryogenic dewar with liquid He and a magnet of up to 8 T (Teslatron of Oxford Inst.). The probe of the latter system had an array of 4×10 gold-coated spring loaded tips pressed onto the films for a 10 four probe measurements on different location (R i for i = 1 to 10) of the 10 × 10 mm 2 wafer. Due to a problem with this probe, the high temperature readings were unreliable and therefore the corresponding data in Fig. As can be seen from Figs. results of Fig. Moreover, its annealing under 10 mTorr O 2 flow at 200 0 C for 1 hour yielded a convenient resistance range at low temperatures for IVC and conductance measurements. To find out what is the conductance mechanism of the insulating as deposited film and the reduced film, we plot in Fig. at odds with the existence of conventional spin-singlet superconductivity in our films, where suppression of the zero bias conductance under field is expected. The observed insensitivity to magnetic field therefore might indicate that unconventional superconductivity such as same-spin triplet superconductivity is at the origin of the observed gap in Fig. Nevertheless, the similarity of the present IVC to that of a JTJ with serial resistance lend strong support to the notion that the tunneling here originates in superconductivity. Where this superconductivity resides is an open question. We propose that it resides in the surfaces of the Nickelate grains as depicted schematically in Fig. If that is the case, transport at low temperatures in our films occurs by tunneling between the superconductive (S) surfaces of the grains via the insulating (I) grain boundaries. This would lead to a network of SIS tunneling junctions connected in series with the additional serial resistance of the normal (N) grains themselves. To further understand the fine details of the Joshepson-like tunneling here we plot in Fig. To further shed light on the insensitivity of the conductance spectra to magnetic fields in the present study, we measured the magnetoresistance of the as deposited and annealed NSNO8 films at 2 K. The results are shown in Fig. A priori, the mechanism of the negative MR in the grain boundaries of our NSNO8an1 film is not necessarily the same as in Ref. In the inset of Fig. Next we discuss whether the present MR results have any bearing on the field independent conductance as seen in Figs. 5 (a) and 6 (c). First, since the magnetic field induced ordering of the film as seen in the MR data is robust, it seems likely that unconventional same-spin triplet superconductivity is involved. Spin-singlet superconductivity should have been suppressed by the fields we applied of up to 4 T in the conductance measurements. Second, if superconductivity were present in our films, flux flow would yield negative parabolic-in-field conductance, and we do observe such a behavior between ±2 T as seen in the inset to Fig. . Third, the ordering in the MR measurements deduced from the hysteresis in Fig. Local probe measurements such as scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) could detect the superconductive energy gap or gaps of this superconductor, being either N d 0.8 Sr 0.2 N iO 2 or of a new one. The high film resistance though can make such STS measurements difficult. We have demonstrated that our Oxygen deficient N d 0.8 Sr 0.2 N iO 3-δ films exhibit Josephson-like tunneling characteristic with serial resistance. Though insulating due to the oxygen poor grain boundaries, the films show signatures of superconductivity in their energy gap opening, in their filling up of this gap with increasing temperature, and in their negative parabolic magnetoconductance typical of flux flow in superconductors. The insensitivity of the conductance spectra to magnetic fields, could be attributed to unconventional same-spin triplet superconductivity. The films can therefore be seen as comprised of a network of SIS tunneling junctions residing in the grain boundary regions, on the surface of the grains and the interface regions between them. ceramic target.