MgO-barrier magnetic tunnel junctions with half-metallic Heusler alloy electrodes attracted much attentions for spintronics applications. However, a couples of issues related to materials still remain to be resolved for practical uses. Recently, quarterly equiatomic Heusler alloys attracted attentions as advanced Heusler alloys. CoIrMnZ (Z = Al, Si, Ga, and Ge) half-metallic Heusler alloys were designed and predicted to have moderate Curie temperatures and to be a lattice-matched with the MgO barrier, being advantageous to traditional Co2 Heusler alloys [T. Roy et al., J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 498, 166092 (2020)]. Here we experimentally investigated structure and magnetic properties for thin films of one of those alloys, CoIrMnAl with a sputtering deposition. We successfully obtained the films with the B2 chemical ordering even with no post-annealing process. The lattice constant for the films annealed at 500-600 • C approximates the predicted values. The magnetization at 10 K was near 500 kA/m and the Curie temperature was approximately 400 K were observed, which were about 70% of the values predicted for the fully ordered structure. The magnetic properties observed in those B2 ordered films were well explained by ferrimagnetism appeared in B2 ordered CoIrMnAl with full-swap disorders of Co-Ir and Mn-Al and almost full-swap disorder of Co-Mn, predicted from the first-principles calculations. A magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ) exhibits tunnel magnetoresistance (TMR) effect In addition, there are many discussions on intrinsic and/or extrinsic interface electronic states existing at those interfaces reducing the TMR ratio The part of the present authors have theoretically studied equiatomic quaternary Heusler alloys CoIrMnZ (Z=Al, Si, Ga, Ge) In this article, we experimentally investigated, for the first time, structure and magnetic properties for CoIrMnAl thin films. We successfully obtained B2 ordered CoIrMnAl epitaxial films even without any heat treatments with a sputtering deposition technique. Saturation magnetization at 10 K was near 500 kA/m and the Curie temperature was approximately 400 K. Those values were approximately 70% of the values predicted for Y ordered CoIrMnAl All films were deposited on single crystalline MgO(100) substrates using the magnetron sputtering using Co, Ir, and MnAl alloy targets. A base pressure is lower than 2×10 -7 Pa. Prior to the deposition of the films, the MgO substrates were flushed at approximately 700 • C in the chamber. The 50-nm-thick CoIrMnAl films were deposited at room temperature followed by an in-situ post annealing with an annealing temperature Ta of 300, 400, 500, and 600 • C. All films were capped by the 3-nm-thick Ir after cooling the substrate. The composition for the films (at%) is Co : Ir : Mn : Al = 28.1 : 27.6 : 20.7 : 23.6, which was analyzed with an inductively-coupled plasma mass spectroscopy (ICP-MS). Film structures were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using Cu Kα radiation. Magnetization of the films were measured using a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM). Temperature dependence of magnetic properties were also measured by VSM in a physical property measurement system (PPMS) with temperature ranging from 10 to 400 K with an in-plane magnetic field application. First-principles calculations were carried out using the spin-polarized-relativistic Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker (SPRKKR) method, as implemented in the SPR-KKR program package Figure We observed the (002) superlattice and the (004) fundamental diffraction peaks for all films. Those (002) and (004) peaks shift to higher angle as the annealing temperature increases. However, the diffraction peaks from the (111) plane which should be observed in Y, XA, L21, and D03 type ordering were not detected in any films. This suggests that these films have B2 chemical ordering. It should be noted that the films exhibit the superlattice (002) peaks even though the films are not annealed. Figure As shown in Fig. Here, m, F, LPA, and M are the multiplicity, the structure factor, the Lorentz-polarization-absorption factor, and the Debye-Waller factor, respectively, and those depend on the diffraction peaks index where the atomic form factor fA(B) is expressed with the weighted average of the atomic form factors for the atoms occupying at A (B) site: The Ms value at 10 K is close to 500 kA/m, and this value was by a factor of approximately 0.7 smaller than the theoretical value, 722 kA/m (4.03 μB/f.u.) The experimental data is fitted to the data calculated with Ms0 = 485 kA/m and TC = 405 K. Thus we consider TC for the film is approximately 400 K, which is also by a factor of approximately 0.7 smaller than the predicted values, 584 K, for the fully ordered structure Chemical disorders in our films may be one possibility of the origin for the difference in magnetization Ms0 and the Curie temperature TC between the experiment and the prediction for Y ordered CoIrMnAl For further understanding, we performed the first-principles calculation of the electronic structures for CoIrMnAl with various atomic disorders. Figure Finally, we note that the swap disorders of not only Co-Mn but also Co-Ir and Mn-Al showed no reductions in magnetic moments of Y ordered state when we assumed ferromagnetic spin alignments for all the elements. Hence, the reduction of the magnetic moment in the experiments is explained by ferrimagnetism owing to the swap disorder of Mn elements from the theoretical points of view. Meanwhile, our calculation indicated that the anti-parallel alignment of spins for Mn within B sites, which can be accompanied with the swap disorder of Mn-Al, is energetically very high. Thus, most realistic interpretation is the ferrimagnetic ordering accompanied with the swap disorder of Co-Mn, as discussed above. We experimentally studied structural and magnetic properties for thin films of CoIrMnAl Heusler alloy, previously designed for spintronics applications. We successfully obtained the films with the B2 chemical ordering using the sputtering deposition technique even with no heat treatments. The lattice constants for the films annealed at 500-600 Mn-Al disorders. The predicted disordered state was also accord with the preference disorders in terms of their formation energies evaluated from the first-principle calculations. It will be a future subject to understand the physics and chemistry inducing such swap disorders and to find a way to control them. Curves are the visual guides.