Nanoporosity in silicon leads to completely new functionalities of this mainstream semiconductor. A difficult to assess mechanics has however significantly limited its application in fields ranging from nanofluidics and biosensorics to drug delivery, energy storage and photonics. Here, we present a study on laser-excited elastic guided waves detected contactless and non-destructively in dry and liquid-infused single-crystalline porous silicon. These experiments reveal that the self-organised formation of 100 billions of parallel nanopores per square centimetre cross section results in a nearly isotropic elasticity perpendicular to the pore axes and an 80% effective stiffness reduction, altogether leading to significant deviations from the cubic anisotropy observed in bulk silicon. Our thorough assessment of the wafer-scale mechanics of nanoporous silicon provides the base for predictive applications in robust on-chip devices and evidences that recent breakthroughs in laser ultrasonics open up entirely new frontiers for in-situ, non-destructive mechanical characterisation of dry and liquid-functionalised porous materials. Exploitation of new "nano"-physical effects of matter confined in nanoporous media, like novel phase behaviour and transport properties, is already beginning to revolutionise technologies ranging from water filtering A scaffold structure of self-organised, tubular pores in pSi can be obtained by etching single-crystalline silicon electro-chemically Over the past decades, elastic guided waves (EGW) have turned into the focus of the non-destructive testing and structural health monitoring communities. EGWs have first been described by Horace Lamb at the beginning of the 19 th century Some guided modes of higher order exhibit a remarkable behaviour at frequencies where the group velocity vanishes while the phase velocity remains finite. At these zero group velocity (ZGV) frequencies, sharp and local resonance effects are observed. The sensitivity of the ZGV modes has been exploited for precise local plate thickness measurements In this work we propose a thorough assessment of the effective mechanical behaviour of pSi by exploiting the characteristics of EGWs and ZGV modes combined with waveguide modelling and inverse identification. The waveguide charac-teristics are measured by a laser ultrasonics (LUS) technique: waves are excited by a laser source through thermoelastic conversion and surface displacement is detected by laser interferometry (see Figure A free-standing 105 μm thick pSi membrane was synthesised by electrochemical etching. In general, a porosity of around 50% and a mean pore radius of 37 ± 2 Å, determined by the nitrogen sorption isotherm method, are expected for samples synthesised with the process parameters described in Methods. In this study, a porosity of φ = 55 ± 1% for the synthesised sample was estimated by weighting and volume measurement. The slight difference between the two techniques is explained by small deviations in the synthesis. Moreover, it is hypothesised that during the synthesis of pSi the pore walls exposed to HF were isotropically etched The membrane was first investigated empty and subsequently filled with liquid. The purpose of the liquid was to vary the filling fraction of the pores. Changes in the wave's velocities can be traced back to the variation in filling fractions, as they are inversely proportional to the square-root of the ef-Si ¡t Si porosity, φ FIG. A p + doped bulk silicon wafer with a thickness of around 397 ± 3 μm was investigated for comparison. Both samples were coated with a 20 nm thin layer of silver to enhance the interaction with the laser-based measurement setup. The following sections present a detailed analysis of the measurements and the effective mechanical behaviour of pSi. A short recap of the main characteristics of EGWs and the LUS setup is provided in Methods. Figure A more advanced insight is given by the dispersion curves obtained by 2D Fourier transform of these spatio-temporal signals A closer look on the two dispersion spectra reveals further differences (highlighted by dashed ellipses). The zero-order symmetric (S 0 ) and antisymmetric (A 0 ) modes for bulk silicon cross each other and converge to the Rayleigh wave velocity at kd ≈ ±7. In contrast for the pSi sample the two lowest order modes repulse each other at kd ≈ ±8. Such repulsion can be observed for higher order modes too. For instance, S 1 and A 1 modes cross each other near the first ZGV resonance for the bulk silicon but the corresponding modes repulse each other for pSi. Note that similar repulsion effects already have been observed for other asymmetric structures, such as bilayers Overall, this behaviour is traced back to a break in symmetry in the mid-plane of the membrane, caused by the shape of the directional pores. Owing to this symmetry reduction the two lowest order modes now diverge, each one with a different Rayleigh wave velocity associated with a propagation path on a different surface. Concretely, the qS 0 mode converges toward the faster Rayleigh wave on the dense surface and the qA 0 mode toward the slowest Rayleigh wave on the light surface. In Figure The frequency spectra in Figure For bulk silicon the measured guided modes are in excellent agreement with the guided modes predicted by the theory (continuous white lines in Figure In what follows, we briefly introduce the waveguide model that is used to capture the effective mechanical behaviour of pSi (dry and liquid-infused), as well as the objective function and model parameters sweeping routine involved in the inverse identification procedure used to match measured and predicted guided modes. Forward modelling of guided modes in pSi: pSi was modelled as a 2D transverse isotropic homogeneous free plate waveguide with linearly varying stiffness-to-weight ratios through the thickness. Several observations guided the choice of this model. First, in the frequency bandwidth of interest (several tens of MHz), the wavelengths of EGWs, ranging from around 100 μm to 10 mm, are much larger than the typical size of the heterogeneities (nanometric pores). pSi can thus be considered as a homogeneous propagation medium. Second, based on experimental observations (Figure where α(x 3 ) represents a linearly varying anisotropic stiffness-to-weight tensor across the thickness, with α 0 being the stiffness-to-weight tensor in the mid-plane of the membrane, i.e., at the position x 3 = d/2. It should be noted that α ii (x 3 ) corresponds to the square of the bulk wave velocities, meaning that, overall, Eq. ( where ρ m and ρ p are the density of the membrane's matrix and of the material within the pores (dry or liquid-infused pSi), respectively. In this way, the stiffness coefficients in the midplane can easily be derived as c i j (d/2) = ρ(d/2)α 0 i j . The dispersion characteristics of pSi were investigated using an approach based on Bloch-Floquet analysis Inverse identification of the model parameters: In this section we propose an inverse identification procedure to infer the model parameters that yield the best agreement between the measured guided modes and the guided modes derived from the parametric forward modelling of pSi. Such multiparametric model-based approach requires the definition of an objective function and its optimisation based upon an automatic search routine. The objective function F(θ ) is defined as the mean value of the element-wise product between experimental and modelled dispersion maps, where θ is a vector that contains the model parameters. The experimental dispersion map D is obtained by applying a threshold to the measured dispersion curves (e.g., Figure Formally, the optimal model parameters θ result from the maximisation of the objective function F(θ ) as, where Θ denotes the bounds of the model parameters θ . The objective function F(θ ) was calculated for different model parameters θ along a multidimensional grid in steps The porosity of pSi in the mid-plane of the membrane and the density of its matrix phase were assumed to be known and set to φ (d/2) = 55% and ρ m = 2.329 g cm -3 , respectively. For dry pSi, the bounds of the model parameters Θ were roughly estimated by considering the two first ZGV resonance frequencies from Figure These three bulk wave velocities in turn lead to stiffness-toweight ratios of α 0 11 = 20.7 mm 2 μs -2 , α 0 33 = 30.7 mm 2 μs -2 , and α 0 55 = 10.6 mm 2 μs -2 in the mid-plane of the membrane. The ranges reported in Table The results obtained for the initially empty and subsequently filled pSi sample are displayed in Figure This study investigated the ability of EGWs to characterise the effective mechanical behaviour of pSi using a non-contact and non-destructive LUS setup. The main findings from this study are as follows: (1) our technique allows measuring multiple guided modes and sharp ZGV resonances in thin nanoporous membranes and it is sensitive to the presence of fluid inside the pores; (2) our measurements evidenced that the synthesis of pSi results in an asymmetric membrane, whose impact manifests itself as a repulsion of the guided modes. Moreover, this repulsion effect could be adequately modelled by considering a linearly varying stiffness-to-weight tensor across the membrane's thickness, which is traced back to the cone-shaped geometry of the pores; (3) the porous network was assumed to prevail over the crystalline nature of the bulk silicon membrane, and in such a case using a transversely isotropic model was proven to represent a reasonable approximation to identify waveguide properties at the mesostructural scale; and (4) the resulting effective stiffness coefficients ĉi j (d/2) in the mid-plane of the membrane are much lower than those of bulk silicon (reduction of ∼ 80%). Furthermore, one can also build upon the former results to extrapolate the stiffness coefficients of the matrix phase c m i j of pSi using asymptotic homogenisation A direct quantitative comparison with earlier reported bulk wave velocities is difficult, as the synthesis of pSi may differ from one study to another. Indeed, apart from the porosity amount, doping level or applied current intensity and duration, most studies conducted in the ultrasound field considered a pSi layer etched on a bulk silicon substrate and used coupling medium that is likely to be imbibed into the pores, thus potentially resulting in different pore characteristics (e.g., diameter, morphology, fluid content). For instance, using an ultrasound through-transmission setup for measuring a water immersed pSi membrane with a porosity of 50%, Bustillo et al. In this regard, our EGWs-based approach outperforms such traditional methods, as it allows for the concurrent assessment of two longitudinal and one shear bulk wave velocities from a single measurement sequence, as well as structural parameter related to the shape of the pores. As a further advantage, this non-contact technique opens promising perspectives for the monitoring of the filling process of pSi. Although the overall agreement between measured and modelled guided modes was only moderate for the liquid-infused sample (Figure As a limitation, since our measurements are sensitive to wave velocities, the influence of the effective stiffness cannot be decoupled from that of the effective mass density. Therefore, the impact of the cone-shaped pores was accounted for by considering a continuously varying stiffness-to-weight tensor across the thickness, where all components were assumed to vary following the same linear profile. Furthermore, it should be noted that the LUS measurements were performed along the [110]-direction only, thus limiting the investigation of the in-plane anisotropy of the pSi sample. As such, the assumption of a waveguide model with a transversely isotropic mechanical behaviour still demands direct proof, but the obtained inverse results a posteriori justified that this approximation is accurate enough to recover waveguide properties along that direction. Future studies are warranted to ad-dress the question of whether or not the in-plane anisotropy vanishes for pSi. For instance, measuring the dispersion curves along different directions in-plane Other next steps will be to test our approach on new samples with different porosity amounts and doping levels, as well as different liquids imbibed into the pores, in order to derive porosity-and functionalisation-dependent bulk wave velocity laws. The repulsion phenomenon of the two Rayleigh waves will be further investigated to get a deeper insight in the pores morphology on the upper and lower surfaces of the sample. In addition to the current functionally graded model, a multilayer model could be developed to obtain closed form equations, thereby improving the speed and accuracy of the inverse procedure In conclusion, in this study we investigated the effective mechanical behaviour of a thin pSi membrane using a noncontact technique based on the propagation of EGWs, in which the waveguide characteristics were measured by a LUS technique. In a first part, we thoroughly discussed the main differences between the measured guided modes in bulk silicon and dry pSi. The main outcomes were that our EGWs and ZGV measurements proved to be very sensitive to the pore conicity that developed during the synthesis process of pSi and that the anisotropy induced by these directional pores prevails over that of the original crystalline nature of bulk silicon. In a second part, we introduced a waveguide model to retrieve quantitative information from the measurements in terms of effective anisotropic stiffness and a surrogate factor related to the shape of the pores. The accuracy of the model, in terms of goodness-of-fit between measured and modelled guided modes, was shown to be excellent to satisfying for dry and liquid-infused pSi, respectively. This study provided important insights on the mechanics and pore structure of pSi as a very versatile applicable porous medium not only for the fundamental sciences to study confinement effects in matter We envision that this contactless technique allows also the versatile combination with other methods, e.g., a simultaneous structural characterisation with x-ray or neutron scattering, while processing under complex sample environments, for examples under vacuum, controlled atmospheres, tempering, or external fields (electrical, magnetical). It will also be of particular value to characterise non-destructively the effective mechanics of other nanoporous materials presently revolutionising materials science. Thus, it will help for a rational design of 3D mechanical robust nanostructured materials, a particular challenge for embedding functional nanocomposites in macroscale devices The starting material for the fabrication of the pSi membrane by was a p + doped (001) silicon wafer with a thickness of 525±25 μm. The resistance of the wafer was in the range of 0.01-0.02 Ωcm. The etchant was a volumetric 4:6 mixture of hydrofluoric acid (HF; 48%, Merck Emsure) and ethanol (absolute, Merck Emsure). A current density of 12.5 mA cm -2 was applied between the sample and a platinum counter electrode. After 75 min, a pSi layer with a pore depth of around d = 105 ± 3 μm was obtained. In order to achieve a freestanding membrane, the porous layer was detached by electropolishing. Therefore, a current of 2 A was applied for 30 s. Without any additional pretreatment, this process results in a porous network, with pores randomly distributed in-plane (001) and aligned parallel to [001] (see Figure In this section, we briefly recall the main characteristics of EGWs, together with the different resonances that can occur in anisotropic plates. The propagation of EGWs is typically represented by a set of dispersion curves in the wavenumber-frequency (kf ) plane. Guided modes propagating in homogeneous plates are generally categorised into Sand A-modes, oscillating either symmetrically (S) or antisymmetrically (A) to the mid-plane of the plate. Modes of the same symmetry cannot cross each other, while a symmetric mode can cross an antisymmetric one. For anisotropic materials, these modes depend on the propagation direction. For instance, Figure The lowest order symmetric (S 0 ) and antisymmetric (A 0 ) modes take their origin at zero frequency and converge to a surface wave, known as the Rayleigh wave, when the shear wavelength is small compared to the plate thickness d. Higher order modes originate at a cut-off frequency (i.e., f c = f (k = 0)) associated with either the longitudinal (V L ) or shear (V T ) bulk wave in the [001]-plate thickness direction. For these modes, the group velocity V g = dω/dk vanishes at k = 0, giving rise to a thickness resonance at the cut-off frequency (blue dots in Figure where n ≥ 1 and m ≥ 0, and V L = c 11 /ρ and V T = c 44 /ρ. The subscript associated with each resonance (S or A) corresponds to the number of nodes of the mechanical displacement in the thickness of the plate. Since the wavenumber k is zero, these resonances are associated with infinite wavelength λ . They are not localised and behave like plane waves propagating through the thickness and making the entire surface vibrate in phase. In addition, some higher order guided modes (e.g., the first symmetric (S 1 ) and second antisymmetric (A 2 ) modes) exhibit a particular behaviour at frequencies where the group velocity V g vanishes, while the phase velocity V φ = ω/k remains finite (red dots in Figure Dispersion curves, along with ZGV and thickness resonances, represent a unique signature of the thickness and mechanical properties of a material, which can be efficiently excited by a laser pulse and optically detected by a sensitive interferometer. In particular, for an isotropic plate of known thickness d, the measurement of the two first ZGV resonances provides an accurate estimation of the longitudinal (V L ) and shear (V T ) bulk wave velocities The LUS setup is an enhanced version of that initially developed by RECENDT GmbH (Linz, Austria). It can be divided into two parts with the sample in between: The left part (in magenta) is responsible for the excitation of EGWs in the sample and the right part (in green) for detecting out-of-plane displacement in the x 3 -direction (Figure EGWs were excited by a passively Q-switched frequency tripled Nd:YAG laser (optical wavelength λ E = 355 nm). The pulse repetition was set to 500 Hz. Pulse duration was equal to 350 ps with 25 μJ of energy per pulse and a peak power of 60 kW. The laser was focused by a movable spherical shaped lens with a focal length of 5 cm. The intensity of the laser can be weakened by several neutral density (ND) filters. The waves were detected by a stabilised Michelson interferometer equipped with a frequency doubled Nd:YAG laser (optical wavelength λ I = 532 nm). The laser's power was set to 60 mW. ) The detection point can be moved along the x 1 -direction by a motorised linear stage. Typically, measurements were taken at a total travel range of x 1 = 15 mm with an incremental step of 10 μm. A piezoelectric driven retroreflector maximised the signal and filtered parasitic long-wave vibrations. The reflector was controlled by a custom piezo controller. The interference signal of the interferometer was detected by an optical diode. The signal is proportional to the phase difference of the two paths. The phase shift caused by the probe is in turn proportional to the probes displacement. The monitor output of the diode was connected to the piezo controller completing the control loop. The high frequency part of the signal was fed into an oscilloscope with a bandpass filter in-between filtering frequencies lower than 500 kHz. The filter was necessary as the absorbed energy from the laser heated the surrounding air leading to the variation of the index ∆n in the optical path of the probe beam. This induced an additional phase shift ∆φ n and a large low frequency voltage that would otherwise saturate the electronics detection unit 