Phase change material based thermal energy storage has many current and potential applications in the heating and cooling of buildings, battery and electronics thermal management, thermal textiles, and dry cooling of power plants. However, connecting lab scale thermal data obtained on DSC to the performance of large-scale practical systems has been a major challenge primarily due to the dependence of supercooling on the size and temperature gradient of the system. In this work we show how a phase change material's supercooling behavior can be characterized experimentally using common lab scale thermal analysis techniques. We then develop a statistics based theoretical model that uses the lab-scale data on small samples to quantitatively predict the supercooling performance for a general thermal energy storage application of any size with temperature gradients. Finally, we validate the modeling methodology by comparing to experimental results for solid-solid phase change in neopentyl glycol, which shows how the model successfully predicts the changes in supercooling temperature across a large range of cooling rates (2 orders of magnitude) and volumes (3 orders of magnitude). By accounting for thermal gradients, the model avoids ~2x error incurred by lumped approximations. Roughly 90% of the world's primary energy generation results in thermal energy The lag is in part due to economics, but in larger part is caused by technological barriers. For phase change materials -which this paper focuses on -those technological barriers are widely identified In a broader context, fundamental understanding of supercooling -or metastability -remains a grand challenge in the sciences. Phenomenological models, such as classical nucleation theory Supercooling changes with just about every material and system parameter: geometry, volume, material, microstructure, purity, discharge rate, etc. Due to the fickle nature of nucleation, predicting the performance of any large-scale practical system based on lab scale data on small scale samples is a very difficult task. Phase change is stochastic in nature, and there often exist numerous nucleation pathways that yield the same outcome For applications with narrow temperature ranges (i.e buildings, refrigeration, medicine), supercooling can be even more limiting. As an example, consider a PCM with a transition temperature of 20 °C used in building applications. If the lowest temperature the building can reach is 15 °C, then the PCM cannot supercool more than 5 degrees. If it does, the PCM will never crystallize and the material will be rendered inert, so that the only thermal energy storage comes from sensible -as opposed to latent -heat. Lacking predictive power, industry often cannot rely on lab-scale supercooling data reported in the literature, and instead find it necessary to perform their own time-consuming and expensive large-scale testing before installations. Using lab-scale data to predict supercooling behavior for larger systems is the key bottleneck in translating research into application. To overcome the bottleneck, this paper explores how nucleation theory is inherently coupled to thermal transport phenomena. We first establish a method to characterize the nucleation rate in PCMs using common lab-scale thermal analysis instrumentation (DSC, DTA, T-History). Using the nucleation rate from lab-scale, we show how to predict the supercooling temperature as a function of volume and cooling rate for isothermal (slow) cooling. We then generalize that analysis to calculate the supercooling temperature and transience for an arbitrary geometry, volume, and thermal boundary conditions which results in temperature gradient in the system-enabling accurate supercooling predictions for any system given lab-scale data. The analysis can be used in conjunction with existing numerical methods to accurately incorporate supercooling into phase change models, thus combining material modeling with system modeling. Finally, we validate the methodology outlined by comparing to experimental results in Neopentyl Glycol, which shows how the model successfully predicts the changes in subcooling temperature across a large range of cooling rates (2 orders of magnitude) and volumes (3 orders of magnitude). Nucleation is a stochastic process and as such can be described with an appropriate statistical distribution. As mentioned, phenomenological models exist (e.g. Classical Nucleation theory The non-homogeneous Poisson distribution has been used in fundamental nucleation studies of metals We begin by introducing the properties of the distribution of subcooling temperatures. The cumulative distribution function is described by , and the survivor function is χ(t) = 1 -CDF(t) where λ(t) is the Poisson rate parameter, which corresponds to the system-wide nucleation events per second at time t. In general, λ(t) depends on the number of nucleation sites at the surface and within the volume. Thus, λ(t) is the sum of two contributions so that λ(t) = VJ ) (t) + AJ * (t) where V is the system volume, A is the system surface area, and J ) (t) and J * (t) are the volume-specific and area-specific nucleation rates, respectively. In a given system, normally either J ) (t) or J * (t) will dominate so the nucleation rate can be normalized by only the surface area or the volume, such that J(t) = * . We note that J ) (t) has contributions from both heterogeneous and homogeneous nucleation sites within the volume of the system, whereas J * (t) has contributions only from heterogeneous nucleation sites at the surface of the system. For the rest of this text we will assume that VJ ) (t) ≫ AJ * (t) so that the system's nucleation physics scales only with the system volume. We also note that in principle, most modeling results obtained below could be easily translated to a system with surface area-dominated nucleation physics (AJ * (t) ≫ VJ ) (t)) by suitable exchanges J ) (t) ↔ J * (t) and V ↔ A. In PCM characterization, the temperature is the independent variable of interest -not the time. Moreover, our goal is to couple nucleation with thermal transport, so we make a change of variables from t to T as the independent variable, such that T(t) = T, (-(% = T ̇, and as the initial condition T(t = 0) = T . , where T . is the equilibrium phase transition temperature. In DSC, the most popular PCM characterization technique, the cooling rate is typically constant. We can then simplify by assuming T ̇= -β, where β is the constant cooling rate in degrees per second, defined to be a positive quantity. If b is not constant, T ̇= T ̇(t) in the integration. Applying this change of variables to the survivor function yields: The goal is to compute the volume-specific nucleation rate, J ) (T), from experimental data, so we invert the survivor function, χ(T) The distribution of supercooling temperatures, χ(T), can be determined for a given PCM sample from cooling experiments, and thus from Eq. ( ) is less than 0.1, where L is the length scale of the sample which can be estimated as L = ) * , h is the convection coefficient, and k is the thermal conductivity. An example of this J ) (T) extraction procedure is discussed in Section 6. We emphasize that this procedure is also valid for surfacedominated nucleation, in which case Eq. 2 would be normalized by the surface area instead of the volume and the result is J * (T) rather than J ) (T). To determine whether volume-based or surfacebased nucleation dominates, the nucleation rate can be measured for multiple, different sized samples in a DSC pan and should be normalized by both the volume and the surface area. The volume-normalized and surface-normalized nucleation rates can then be plotted against supercooling temperature, and whichever normalization collapses on a single line with zero intercept is the dominant nucleation mechanism. Equation 2 can be evaluated numerically, but in Sections 2-5 it will prove useful to have an analytical form of the nucleation rate. To that end, it is convenient to define a fitting function to the normalized nucleation rate where ΔT is the difference between the thermodynamic equilibrium phase change temperature and the actual temperature, i.e., the supercooling. Equation 3 captures the nucleation behavior of a material with just two empirical parameters, γ and n. We argue that it is very important that researchers report γ and n, or some other description of J ) (T), when characterizing new PCMs. As will be shown, once γ and n are known, the supercooling behavior of the material in an arbitrary thermal and geometric system can be predicted. Using the nucleation rate determined in Section 1, the goal is to determine the average time it will take for a PCM to nucleate given the system geometry, volume, material properties, and thermal boundary conditions. In Section 1 we established that the volumetric nucleation rate can be described by just two parameters and the subcooling temperature, J ) (T) = γΔT 5 , characterized at the lab scale (e.g. DSC). At this scale (V ≈ 10 μL), we can ensure that the temperature distribution within the PCM is approximately uniform by controlling the sample thickness (L < 1 mm) and the cooling rate (β ≈ 10 °7 89: ). By doing this, the nucleation probability, J ) (T), also becomes approximately uniform in space, ensuring accurate volumetric nucleation rates. In a general system at larger scale, however, the temperature of the material varies considerably with both position and time, and consequently, so does the nucleation probability. The system's nucleation probability is therefore inherently coupled to thermal transport phenomena. Qualitatively, this indicates that the subcooling probability in each material element within the PCM is governed by its own statistical distribution, i, dependent only on the local subcooling history at that point, T(xi,t). Each distribution is characterized by its Poisson rate parameter, λ ; and resides over volume element dV ; . To determine the global nucleation probability of the material, the distributions must be combined into one, and the combined probability distribution of the sum of independent random variables is equal to the convolution of their individual distributions. Fortunately, for a non-homogeneous Poisson process, the convolution is simply the sum of the individual rate parameters where N is the total number of independent distributions; here, N is the number of discrete material elements considered. We can then define a global, or an effective, rate parameter, λ =>> (t) = ∑ λ ; (x, y, z, t) Passing into the limit of infinitesimally small volume elements, the effective rate parameter of the system at a given time can be rewritten as: and the CDF becomes The probability density function (PDF) is obtained directly from equation 6 as PDF(t) = (7AB(%) (% . The average time that it takes for the first nucleation event to occur can be calculated as the first moment of the PDF, and the standard deviation as the second: Thus, if T(x, y, z, t) is known, by applying Eqs. 5-8 the average time until the first nucleation event of the system, and the standard deviation of the distribution of nucleation-onset times, can be calculated from only the two nucleation parameters determined in Section 1. We note that the parameterization of J D is not unique, and the same procedure (equations 5-8) can be followed with an arbitrary parametrization of J D . Analytical solutions for T(x, y, z, t) are not available for all but the simplest geometries and boundary conditions, so in general this procedure must be carried out numerically. Equations 4-8 are naturally discretized in space (index i) and time, and can be easily incorporated into existing numerical schemes for PCMs such as finite element methods, the enthalpy method This output can then be used to identify when to trigger nucleation in subsequent simulations with single-phase initial conditions, thus providing high resolution and high-fidelity initial conditions for crystallization studies, or nucleation triggers for cyclic performance simulations of PCMs. Conversely, the probability of nucleation at each discrete element and time step can be calculated from equations 4-7, which makes this analysis suitable for Monte Carlo based nucleation simulations. Incorporating either workflow into numerical models will take into account the hysteresis inherent in PCM cycling caused by supercooling, and enabling more realistic calculations of PCM charge/discharge times --both of which are critical in predicting PCM performance in real-world applications. Analytical solutions to equations 6-8 are intractable for most boundary conditions. However, for a spatially uniform i.e. lumped, temperature distribution such that T(x, y, z, t) = T(t), and a constant cooling rate β, equation 5 is greatly simplified and the CDF can be evaluated analytically : Using this CDF, equations 6-8 can be calculated (with dependent variable T instead of t), and it has been shown where Γ is the gamma function. The average time until nucleation is triggered is then When b has its traditional units of [°C/min], this expression for t CDE will be in units of We emphasize that for PCMs in large-scale applications, a lumped temperature distribution is generally a bad approximation. It is valid when . * L , so the thickness of the PCM must be less than ~1 -5 mm to justify the lumped approximation, which is not generally useful for large-scale applications. For small-scale applications such as micro-encapsulation, L ≈ 1 μm so equation 10 is generally valid if volumetric nucleation dominates. We can use equation 10 then to interpret the well-known phenomenon that micro-encapsulated PCMs typically exhibit much larger supercooling than a macroscopic-volume sample. We see from equation 10a that ΔT CDE scales inversely with volume, specifically ΔT CDE ∝ V !N ( ()* O , so for a smaller volume the supercooling increases, which has crippled many micro-encapsulation efforts The supercooling temperature is fundamentally different than the phase transition temperature. The phase transition temperature is described by information embedded in the atomic details of the system and are well-described by deterministic equilibrium thermodynamics. The supercooling temperature, on the other hand, is not a fundamental property of the material because it depends on the kinetics. Phenomenologically, the kinetics are dictated by the distribution of nucleation sites and the energy barriers associated with those sites relative to the thermal energy scale. The number of nucleation sites scales with the volume and/or surface area of the material, and the rate at which those nucleation sites gain access to the available thermal energy from the environment is strongly material and problem dependent. The volume/surface-area scaling, coupled to a strong material-transport dependence, makes defining a meaningful supercooling temperature for a given material challenging. To date, many researchers report supercooling values observed in DSC/DTA, but this value provides only a single point in a complex space defined by equations 6-8. For this reason, researchers testing the same material under different experimental conditions often observe and report different supercooling temperatures. To make more meaningful comparisons, it would be helpful for the thermal energy storage community to agree upon a standardized reference system for which a supercooling temperature can be defined. For our work, we choose a reference system that has a volume of 1L with cooling rate β = 1 °7 .;5 as a demonstration. Treating the system as lumped, we use the solution for a uniform temperature distribution (equation 10a), to obtain an expression for the supercooling temperature of this reference system: To be clear, this definition says that a 1L volume of PCM cooled uniformly at 1 °7 .;5 will nucleate at ΔT PQR=STUUV;5E,X%( . With this standardization of b and V, this definition of ΔT PQR=STUUV;5E,X%( depends only on g and n. Researchers testing the same material under different experimental conditions will still observe different supercooling temperatures, but by determining the nucleation parameters n and γ they can now agree on the supercooling temperature of this reference system. The supercooling performance of a PCM can then be compared by comparing the supercooling behavior of each PCM in this reference system. To validate the methodology outlined in Sections 1-5, we characterize the nucleation rate of neopentyl glycol's (NPG) solid-solid phase change using DSC and then perform larger-scale cooling experiments to test the predictions of Sections 3 and 4. We choose NPG because its transition is sharp, near room temperature (T . = 40.8 °C), and it doesn't interact with the aluminum DSC pans so volumetric nucleation dominates. NPG was acquired from Sigma Aldrich at 99% purity, and TA Instrument's DSC 2500 with indium temperature calibration was used. 10 mg of NPG was cycled 150 times from 25°C to 50°C in a DSC at a heating and cooling rate of 10 °7 .;5 . The cooling curves from all 150 runs are shown in figure Using the nucleation parameters characterized via DSC, we can predict how the supercooling temperature will change with volume and cooling rate from equation 10a. To test this prediction, we run cooling experiments for NPG at different volumes spanning 3 orders of magnitude (V = 6.0 * 10 !^, 2.6 * 10 !_ , 1.3 * 10 !Z m Y ). For these experiments, the appropriate volume of NPG was melted in an oven and poured into aluminum weigh-boats such that the thickness L was uniform and less than 0.5 mm, ensuring a uniform temperature distribution during cooling (see SI Section 2). Three thermocouples with uncertainty ± 0.1°C were taped to the opposite sides of each aluminum pan, and the samples were cycled 20 times in an oven at a cooling rate of b=0.1 °7 .;5 . Nucleation temperatures were recorded as the average supercooling value from each thermocouple for a given sample. We note that the crystal growth rate in NPG appears to be very fast, so that all thermocouples record the nucleation event within 5 seconds of each other and thus there is close agreement among the measurements. The experimental results are plotted against the predictions made from the nucleation parameters in Figure To test the predictions in Section 4 we keep the volume constant at V = 2.6 * 10 !_ m Y but vary the aspect ratio, so that the transient cooling is no longer lumped. By varying the geometry, we change the local thermal conditions at each nucleation site. To do this, we iteratively melted 2.6 * 10 !_ m Y of NPG in an oven and cast them into PTFE tubes of varying diameter, ranging from 0.635 to 1.588 cm. We note that the PTFE was chosen because the tubes do not interact with NPG, and they are non-stick for easy removal. Once removed from the PTFE forms, the NPG cylinder (shown in blue in Fig 3 .) was bridged between two columns of foam (diagonal black hatched lines) such that its end faces were insulated, while its circumferential surface was open to the environment (i.e convective boundary conditions). Thermocouples were placed behind aluminum foil contacting one face of the cylinder, so that the thermocouple tip had no direct contact with the NPG. The NPG cylinders were then equilibrated at T U = 50°C in an oven for several hours. Then each cylinder was transferred to an environment held at T¥=25°C to cool by free convection, and the time until nucleation was recorded for each aspect ratio and compared against the predictions given by equations 6-8. For these predictions, edge effects were important so we used COMSOL Multiphysics to calculate T(x, y, z, t). To make these predictions, we calibrated for the free convection coefficient by placing a thermocouple on the outer surface of an NPG cylinder and measuring the temperature vs time curve and fitting numerical solutions for temperature vs time curves to that data to determine h (see SI 2). This calibration yielded h = 18 K . + L , taken as constant, which is a reasonable value for free convection and was used for the predictions in figure The predictions of equations 6-8 are plotted (solid blue line) against experimentally determined nucleation times (black dots) in Figure Previous related work Insulation Insulation both of these requirements by considering non-lumped temperature response (that is, (T(x, y, z, t)) and convectively coupled cooling which leads to variable cooling rate. To demonstrate the effect of relaxing these requirements, we show two additional predictions in Figure (T U -T F ). We used this β and the system volume, V = 2.6 * 10 !_ m Y , as inputs into equation 10b and the results are plotted as the gray line in figure Next, we maintained the lumped approximation and relax the constant cooling rate assumption by using Newton's law of cooling T(t) = T F + (T U -T F )e !`6 7 %8 5 a% to describe the time-dependent convective cooling, which was used as the input into equations 6-8. This ensures that the sample is convectively-coupled to the surroundings with the same value of h = 18 K . + L used in the more detailed simulations. The predictions for this lumped, convective cooling are shown as the gray dashed line in figure Using lab scale experimental data predict supercooling performance in large scale energy storage applications is crucial for the analysis and prediction of PCM performance metrics. This paper has outlined experimental characterization techniques for supercooling in thermal energy storage applications and developed a theoretical framework to use that characterization for prediction of supercooling in a generalized system. The analysis can be used in conjunction with existing numerical methods to accurately incorporate supercooling into phase change models, thus combining material modeling with system modeling. This framework has been validated by comparing to experimental results in neopentyl glycol, which shows how the model successfully predicts the changes in subcooling temperature across a large range of cooling rates (2 orders of magnitude) and volumes (3 orders of magnitude). To expand this framework, future efforts should explore the characterization of more exotic and complex materials (e.g. polymers, mixtures). To make the predictions in figure Fitting: h=18 Experimental Data Ambient Temperature