The TOP-IMPLART project consists of the design and implementation of a linear proton accelerator, its control and monitoring systems for the treatment of superficial and semideep tumors. The energy of 150 MeV (corresponding to a penetration in tissue of about 15 cm) is a milestone in design being useful for the proton therapy treatment of almost 50% of tumors based on their position and depth (including ocular melanoma, head-neck tumors, pediatric tumors, and more superficial tumors). The capability to vary the intensity on a pulse-to-pulse basis combined with an electronic feedback system allows to get the required dose uniformity (±2.5%) reducing the number of re-paintings. In this paper the state of the art and the objectives of the TOP-IMPLART project are described within the framework of the progress of Protontherapy. he aim of the TOP IMPLART Project is the realization of a medium-energy proton accelerator, designed as a sequence of linear accelerating structures, for proton therapy (PT) applications. In fact, the extended name of the acronyms summarizes the peculiarities of the project from the technological point of view to perform PT: TOP "Oncology Therapy with Protons" -IMPLART, "Intensity Modulated Proton Linear Accelerator for RadioTherapy" The project is carried on by three institutions: ENEA (Italian National Agency for new technologies, energy and sustainable economic development), ISS (Italian National Institute of Health) and IFO-IRE (National Cancer Institute in Rome). The TOP IMPLART linear accelerator (linac) is under construction and test at the ENEA Frascati Research Center; it will deliver a 150 MeV energy proton beam, penetrating up to 15 cm in tissue, and therefore suitable for clinical treatment of ocular melanoma, pediatric, head-neck and more superficial tumors. The machine is a high frequency full linear accelerator based of a modular system composed by SCDTL (Side Coupled Drift Tube Linac) structures up to the first clinical energy (71 MeV, valid for the treatment of uveal melanoma) and CCL (Coupled Cavity Linac) modules up to 150 MeV. It is an innovative machine compared to commercial ones and this requires development of original techniques in accelerating machine, radioprotection, dosimetry, and radiobiology, which are tested during the embodiment phase. In fact, the project also includes the development of specific concepts of radio-protection, beam monitors and dosimetric systems, specific dose delivery systems (beam delivery) and the equipment related to irradiation stations for radiobiology studies on cells and animals. At present, the accelerator is operative up to the energy of 35 MeV The TOP IMPLART accelerator being a modular system could be extended to higher energies (200 -230 MeV) by adding new CCL type segment of the LINAC. PT belongs to the broader field of hadron radiotherapy (HRT) in which also light ions like carbon or helium are mainly used. PT is used since several years for some diseases (uveal melanoma, and tumors of the skull base and spine: chordoma, sarcomas and meningiomas), but also for prostate, lung, liver, esophagus and head and neck-cephalic tumours. It has a recognized benefit in all cases where the disease is well localized and adjacent to critical normal organs (i.e. radiosensitive) to be saved, particularly in pediatric treatments aiming at the reduction of late effects (mainly second tumours) in normal tissues. The rationale of the use of HRT lies in the ballistic properties and in the spatial selectivity of these particles, due respectively to the presence of the Bragg peak at the end of the particle path and to their low lateral diffusion, and especially for carbon and helium ions in their high Relative Biological Effectiveness. The modern PT begun in 1957 at the cyclotron of the University of Uppsala (Sweden) and in 1961 at Massachusetts General Hospital (Boston), using the 160 MeV/u synchrocyclotron of the Harvard University. Basic techniques used in HRT were developed in these facilities. In 1990 the first hospital-based PT facility was commissioned at Loma Linda University Medical Center in USA and the first hospital-based heavy-ion facility, HIMAC, was constructed at NIRS (National Institute of Radiological Sciences, Japan), which has been operated since 1994. Now several hospital-based HRT facilities are available worldwide, utilizing protons and carbon-ions. Until the year 2017 almost 200'000 patients have been treated worldwide with charged particle beams (more than 85% have been treated with protons) In Italy the CATANA cyclotron has been active since 2002 in the research laboratory of the Italian National Institute of Nuclear Physics for the treatment of the uveal melanoma The HRT community well recognizes that progress in HRT must pursue the following developments: 1) adaptive cancer therapy, 2) treatment with hypo-fractionation/gating; 3) more compact and/or advanced machines. These developments are necessary due to the increase of precision of conventional RT, in order to decrease cost and size of the HRT facilities. Several companies have offered complete carbon-ion systems; these include the Siemens centers at Marburg and Shanghai, and several recent projects in Japan and other eastern countries involving Hitachi, Mitsubishi, Sumitomo and Toshiba Proton linear accelerators (PLA) have also been proposed for the first time in 1991, by Hamm et al. The low intrinsic beam losses of a linac and the possibility of varying the beam energy by controlling the RF power without using passive systems, reduce the leakage radiation and also may minimize the adverse effects plausibly correlated with secondary neutron fields. Stray radiation exposures to the patient have no known beneficial effect and are believed to increase the risk of second cancer incidence. The NCRP Report No. 170/2011 The attractions of the PLA and the TOP-IMPLART program, described below, have stimulated the development of industrial initiatives currently under way. They are related to the construction of commercial proton therapy devices based on a full linac scheme The TOP-IMPLART project is based on a compact proton linac dedicated to cancer therapy with the active administration of proton beams to be used directly for energy and intensity modulated (IMPT) and high repetition frequency treatment. The accelerator is designed to produce a proton beam, emitted at high repetition frequency pulses (100-200 Hz), whose characteristics (position, energy and intensity) can be varied from pulse to pulse. In this way the tumor target can be hit directing each proton pulse of the machine to a specific position of the target volume, assigning the desired dose, saving the surrounding healthy tissues to the maximum degree. The accelerator, with energy up to 150 MeV, is under construction. Figure The propagation of the beam through the modules and the whole line of the machine is allowed by magnetic focusing systems (permanent quadrupole magnets or electromagnetic) of deflection (electromagnetic dipoles), correctors and on-line monitoring devices. The correct use of the beam is guaranteed by the control and radioprotection systems. The single pulse energy is varied switching on/off the accelerating modules and varying the power in the last powered module. The output intensity can be controlled by varying the injected current as it will be described later. Other peculiarities are a small output beam size, a short beam pulse width and a high repetition rate, making it similar to the electron linacs used for cancer therapy. The TOP-IMPLART characteristics result in a modular and compact design with reduced facility and operating costs with respect to conventional accelerator employed in the cancer proton therapy systems. The first section of the accelerator (up to 35 MeV) has been commissioned and is currently operational producing a 50 μA current pulse at 35 MeV In this paragraph the TOP-IMPLART accelerator, the main systems of the entire machine and its two proton beam extraction lines are described. The initial beam acceleration of the TOP-IMPLART accelerator is produced in a linac manufactured by the AccSys-Hitachi company, the PL-7 model, originally designed for radioisotopes production The main subsystems are a 30 keV duoplasmatron source giving a current up to 10 mA, an electrostatic einzel lens focusing the beam into the RFQ, a 2.3 meters long RFQ resonator enclosed in a vacuum chamber and equipped with a coaxial drive loop and a 1.5 meters long Drift Tube Linac (DTL) with a coaxial drive loop. The RFQ accelerates the beam of H+ ions to 3 MeV and the DTL accelerates the 3 MeV beam to 7 MeV (figure This accelerator was chosen due to its relatively high RF frequency and output energy and the possibility to customize it by adding to the standard high current PL7 model two elements for its use as injector for the ENEA low current proton therapy linac: an insertable beam aperture, reducing the current to the levels required by protontherapy and the possibility to vary the beam current also pulse by pulse pulsing the power supply of an einzel lens placed before the RFQ. Table The booster linac consists of four S-band sections as shown in table III, operating at 2997.92 MHz. The first two sections employ SCDTL linac This high frequency booster operates on RF pulses that have a width than can vary in the 1 μs -4 μs range and a maximum repetition rate of 100 Hz. The division in different sections reflects the RF power delivery to its modules. Each section requires between 8 and 9 MW peak power, generated by a single 10 MW peak power klystron. The RF power is divided among the modules using a power splitting and phase shifting network realized in the waveguide feed. RF tuning of modules in a section is set at construction time and kept, during operation by a Peltier cell thermos-regulator that maintains module temperature within ±0.02 °C of the set point. An additional motorized mechanical tuner (able to accommodate ±50 kHz frequency shift) is built in each module and is controlled by an AFC (Automatic Frequency Control) loop. This tuner is used to keep each module in tune during thermal transients arising from rapid changes in the pulse repetition rate. Figure The horizontal proton beam emerging from the injector (with energy in the range 3 -7 MeV, mean current up to few pA, actively selectable) can be deflected by a dipole by 90 degree toward the zenith, in a vertical line, designed for low energy irradiation applications and specifically for radiobiology studies. In fact, it is widely recognized that the biological response is greatly determined not only by the absorbed dose, but also by the spatial and temporal distributions of the energy deposition events on a microscopic scale, i.e. by the so-called radiation quality. Better knowledge about the action of low energy protons, that are those showing the higher biological effectiveness at cellular level and present close to the end of the particle track, is therefore required. For modelling studies on the mechanisms involved in the development of carcinogenesis, irradiation of cell monolayer with proton fluences smaller than 106 protons/cm2, and beam uniformity on the sample around 10%, is generally required. The vertical line, with unique instantaneous dose rate during the pulse up to hundreds Gy/s, has been recently installed downstream the bending dipole; it includes (see figure Different monitoring devices are under development for the peculiar pulsed proton beam accelerator. For the purpose of accelerator commissioning Currently, 3 AC current transformers (ACCT), from two different manufacturers, are installed along the accelerator and operate in vacuum providing online information on the beam intensity and transmission efficiency through different sections of the machine. The first couple of ACCTs belongs to the diagnostic system of the AccSys-HITACHI injector and monitor the beam intensity at the RFQ and DTL output. The typical current in the injector is 2 mA and the detector nominal gain is 10 3 V/A. The third ACCT is installed at the end of the LEBT for input current measurement before the SCDTL section. This detector is manufactured by Bergoz Instrumentation and provides, with calibrated amplifiers, an overall gain of 10 3 V/A over a 1MΩ load, with a negligible droop for μs-duration pulses. With transmission efficiency in the LEBT over 90%, the current level at the SCDTL input is ≈ 1.5 mA, within the Bergoz ACCT operating range. With an axial length of 20 mm, this ACCT is a candidate for beam monitoring in the inter-tank section between SCDTL4 and SCDTL5. Presently, a second ACCT by Bergoz Instrumentation is installed after SCDTL4 and operated in air. It is the first of a set of detectors used, during the commissioning of the accelerator for beam characterization at the exit of the last SCDTL module, namely a Faraday Cup (FC), a Cavity Intensity Monitor and a Fluorescent Screen coupled with a CCD camera (FS). With the exception of the FS, which is the only detector dedicated to profile measurement, the other devices can be used simultaneously for comparative measurement of the beam intensity and stability. The beam current in the SCDTL section ranges between 50 μA, for commissioning purposes, and 1 μA, for radiobiology experiments and, eventually, patient treatment, close to the sensitivity and resolution limit of the ACCT. Comparison with the FC shows that the current transformer in the present configuration can be used to monitor the beam pulse by pulse intensity with accuracy comparable to the FC up to a current as low as 20 μA. Lower currents (down to ≈ 10 μA) can still be measured but the ACCT underestimates the beam stability, evaluated as σ / μ, by nearly a factor 2. At intensity typical for radiobiology experiments the current transformer can only be used to monitor the average beam current. We are therefore now testing a prototype of Cavity Intensity Monitor (CIM), a non-interceptive detector to be housed, next to Bergoz ACCT, in the inter-tank section between SCDTL4 and SCDTL5 for online monitoring of very low currents. The CIM is a passive RF cavity tuned at 2997.92 MHz equipped with a magnetic field pickup. The induced field intensity is linearly proportional to the inducing beam current; with the current prototype currents as low as 0.2 μA have been detected. Imaging of the beam spot is carried out with an alumina fluorescent screen applied immediately after the vacuum window and a Basler ACE camera with a monochrome CCD sensor to digitally acquire the spot position and size. The camera is hardware triggered for synchronous acquisition and exposure control; the CCD sensor is 3.7 mm x 2.8 mm and has a pixel dimension of 5.6 μm x 5.6 μm; the pixel bit depth is 12 bits. The output beam is elliptical, with the horizontal axis larger than the vertical one. This is consistent with the quadrupole FODO arrangement in SCDTL structures. Typical beam size is σ x =1.5 mm and σ y =1.1 mm. Two small and thin integral 1D ionization chambers (IC_A and IC_B) have been developed for the monitor of the single pulse beam charge, down to 1 pC/pulse The two chambers performs identically but have different mechanical supports and geometries: they operates at a bias voltage of 250 V and the small (few cm 2 area) electrodes are made of aluminized mylar (12 μm mylar, 4 μm aluminum) and are spaced by 2 mm. Their simple front-end electronics, based on a transimpedance amplifier and integrating capacitor is derived from the 2D ionization chamber shortly described later, while the readout of the capacitor transimpedance voltage is managed by a NI-CRIO modular instrumentation, integrated in the beam control system. Chamber IC_A sits at the exit of the beam pipe while IC_B can be placed along the beam line in air. They are currently used as, fast and sensitive, beam delivered charge monitor for development and testing purposes. The high intensity of each beam pulse combined to its short duration (few s) and small transverse size (mm) traveling the first few tens of centimeters in air, generates a large spatial charge density in the chamber gaps, which in turn may cause noticeable volume recombination processes. These effects have been evaluated comparing the response of IC_B with the charge collected by a small Faraday Cup (intensity independent) placed right after the chamber for different pulse intensities (at fixed pulse width and frequency) and at different distances from the beam pipe exit windows. At fixed position (and constant beam transverse size) the charge collected by IC_B is linear respect to the single pulse beam intensity with a coefficient of proportionality depending on the position along the beam path in air (that corresponds to different beam transverse sizes) as reported in the plot of figure The intrinsically high conformation of the proton beam requires an accurate and reliable dose delivery monitor which shall measure the beam position, direction and intensity profile of each pulse. In fact, the peculiar pulsed and fast TOP-IMPLART proton beam demands for a quick and pulse-bypulse response of the dose delivery monitor; the main requirements of this subsystem are: • Good spatial resolution (~1/10 mm) • Wide dynamic range (10 4 at least) • Good sensitivity (~100 fC) • Zero dead time (or near zero) • Rapid response (< 1ms) The real-time dose delivery monitor system is based on 2D segmented ionization chamber in Micro Pattern Gaseous Detector technology for the 2-dimensional simultaneous x/y strip readout. The chamber operates in the ionization regime to minimize saturation and discharge phenomena. The chamber measures the single beam pulse intensity profiles simultaneously along x and y axes with spatial resolution of about 0.3 mm, sensitivity of 100 fC and a dynamic range larger than 10 4 , obtained by a dedicated electronics that automatically adapts the gain on each segment (channel) according to the amount of collected charge, which is proportional to the intensity of the beam. Dedicated front end electronics, with multi-range logic, has been developed to optimally fit the microsecond pulsed structure of the beam One notable advantage of the modularity of a linac is the opportunity to exploit its beam as soon as the first acceleration structure has been installed and tuned. This way, the beam can be iteratively characterized (intensity, spatial and energy distribution, stability and reproducibility), the accelerator optimized accordingly and it can be exploited for final applications during its construction. Two different sessions of measurements for the dosimetric characterization in terms of the homogeneity of the laterally spread spot, the short-term stability and the dose delivery of the beam were performed; the first session was done with a beam energy of 27 MeV (24.1 MeV of maximum energy on the sample) Beam homogeneity of the laterally spread spot was evaluated using EBT3 films and 2D-IC (described in paragraph IV). EBT3 Gafchromic films (Ashland ISP Advanced Materials, NJ, USA), coming from the same batch, have an active layer of 0,028 mm placed between two 0,125 mm thick layers of polyester. Squared pieces of 2x2 cm 2 were placed on a custom-built dosimeter holder and positioned perpendicularly to the beam direction. The films were read using an EPSON Expression 10000XL/PRO color scanner and the beam homogeneity was evaluated as the CV% of the net pixel value (NPV) on the diameters along x and y axes; more details in For the evaluation of the beam short-term stability, by the estimate of its reproducibility, in terms of percent coefficient of variation, CV%, of the detector response of ten consecutive irradiations under the same experimental conditions, all the available detectors were used. In particular, the following dosimetric systems were employed: A high-doped p-type stereotactic field detector (Hi-pSi) DEB050 produced by Scanditronix. The silicon diode sensitive material has a thickness of 60 m and a diameter of 0,60 mm and is encapsulated in a waterproof material. The detector was used with its axis both parallel and perpendicular to the beam axis. The diode is no longer calibrated due to its wide utilization in protons. The microdiamond detector, mD, used was the 600019 (PTW-Freiburg, Germany), accompanied by a certificate reporting the conversion factor in 60Co by the PTW in 2017. The mD was only employed in the second measurement session, the one performed with a 35 MeV energy beam and after the improvement of the accelerating structures. Both the silicon diode (SD) and the microdiamond detector are connected to a Keithley electrometer 6517a with no polarizing voltage. Alanine dosimeters (Gamma Service, Leipzig, Germany), in cylindrically shaped pellets were measured with a bruker ELEXSYS EPR X-band spectrometer equipped with a high sensitivity SHQ cavity and MOSFET detectors (Best Medical, Ottawa ON, Canada) Both the short-term stability and the homogeneity improved between the two measurement sessions, passing from 5% to 3.5% and from 4% to 2.6%, respectively. In figure Novel solid-state radiation detectors based on the photoluminescence (PL) of radiation-induced color centers (CCs) in lithium fluoride (LiF) were successfully used for advanced proton beam diagnostics In the TOP-IMPLART accelerator by mounting the LiF crystals (size: 10x10x1 mm 3 ) in two different irradiation geometries, the wide PL dynamic range, combined with the high intrinsic spatial resolution, allowed obtaining twodimensional images of both the beam transversal and longitudinal intensity distributions, each one in a single exposure. The full Bragg curves are reconstructed from the longitudinal ones, because protons release their energy and create CCs along the propagation path in number proportional to the linear energy transfer (LET). These measurements allowed quantitatively describing the proton beam characteristics in different layouts and configurations and estimating with high precision the energy of the impinging proton beams in radiobiology and dosimetric characterization experiments In order to characterize the low energy proton beam, preliminary radiobiological experiments were conducted at the TOP-IMPLART vertical transport line (before the major upgrade described above) using Chinese hamster cells, and specifically, V79 cells that are well known to be very responsive to changes in radiometric characteristics of ionizing radiation beams. For this reason, this cell line has long and widely been used at hadrontherapy facilities (e.g., at CNAO, NIRS, Ultimate goal is to define the optimal treatment protocol for HT + proton combination for planning the ensuing In-vivo investigations in a xenogenic mouse model. Given the peculiarities of the TOP-IMPLART beam, we implemented an experimental tool for the calculation of its released dose. The tool is based on the convolution of a Gaussian kernel with cylindrical symmetry, obtained by Monte Carlo simulation, with an incident fluence matrix. Monte Carlo simulation codes will be used to simulate the beam delivery line, to optimize of the resources during the design phase of the beam delivery line, to assess the delivered dose and evaluate the accuracy of calculation tool. The results of this tool will also be tested with those obtained with a commercial clinical Raystation PB Treatment Planning System for proton therapy. The tool considers the geometry and composition of the irradiated object, the penetration of the individual beamlets, as well as the distance between the beam output and the voxel contained in the chosen calculation grid located on the target. More in details it determines the water-equivalent depths crossed by each beamlet for each element (i.e. voxel) of the calculation grid. The tool allows performing calculation with a reduced resolution, useful when fast assessments are needed or in presence of homogeneous regions. Moreover, the dose kernels with cylindrical symmetry allow the numerical integration in all the calculation planes perpendicular to the beam axis. The spacing between these calculation planes can be modified in relation to the accuracy acceptable for dose determination. The critical zones from the accuracy point of view correspond to the Bragg peak and the distal fall, in which the dose distribution presents a very high gradient. Our preliminary results indicate the possibility of generating analytical calculation codes to obtain sufficiently accurate dose distributions for the TOP-IMPLART experimental accelerator. For the purposes of numerical calculation, the possibility to vary the spacing between the calculation grid planes in simple geometries allows to have not only a more accurate reconstruction of the dose (<3%), but also to gain in terms of calculation time. Dedicated treatment planning for adaptive radiotherapy are mandatory. More efforts are devoted to predic the behavior of the proton beam in the presence of geometrical / morphological variations of the target and of the organs at risk inter and intra-fraction during therapy. This issue takes advantage of studies based on CBCT and CT collected during radiotherapy treatment with photon allowing the generation of patient-specific models. The possibility of comparing automatically generated rival plans with all the techniques currently available is also under study to identify the more appropriate and personalized treatment for each patient. -IMPLART INJECTOR MAIN CHARACTERISTICS