The dephasing of coherent longitudinal optical (LO) phonons in ion-irradiated GaP has been investigated with a femtosecond pump-probe technique based on electro-optic sampling. The dephasing time of the coherent LO phonon is found to be dramatically prolonged by the introduction of a small amount of defects by means of Ga-ion irradiation. The maximum dephasing time observed at room temperature is 9.1 ps at a Ga + ion dose of 10 13 /cm 2 , which is significantly longer than the value of 8.3 ps for GaP before ion irradiation. The longer dephasing time is explained in terms of the suppression of electron-LO-phonon scattering by the presence of defect-induced deep levels. In the last two decades, the progress of femtosecond (fs) lasers has made possible a time-domain spectroscopy of the coherent lattice vibration in solids. GaP is a III-V semiconductor with an indirect bandgap of ≈2.25 eV at room temperature (RT) and promising material for device applications such as light emitting diodes. The samples used were non-doped GaP (100) wafers with 300 μm thick. In order to introduce lattice defects in a controlled manner, the samples were irradiated with 30 keV Ga + ions at various doses from 1.0×10 13 to 8.0×10 13 Ga + /cm 2 in a focused ion beam (FIB) system [Fig. Femtosecond pump-probe measurements were performed at 300 K. The light source used was a modelocked Ti:sapphire laser with a pulse duration of ≈25 fs, a central wavelength of 830 nm (≈1.49 eV), and a repetition rate of 80 MHz. The average powers of pumpand probe-beams were fixed at 175 mW and 8.7 mW, respectively. Both the pump-and probe-beams were focused via off-axis mirror to a diameter of ∼ 20 μm on the sample and the pump-and probe-fluences were kept at ≈ 1.19 mJ/cm 2 and 60 μJ/cm 2 , respectively. The optical penetration depth at 830 nm was estimated from the absorption coefficient to be ≈130 nm. The time derivatives of the ∆R EO /R signals for nondoped GaP before and after Ga + irradiation are shown in Fig. To further investigate the effect of the irradiation on the dephasing of the coherent LO phonon, the time-domain data were analyzed with an exponentially damped harmonic oscillation as shown in Fig. Scattering of the coherent phonon by lattice defects generally promotes its dephasing when the ion dose was typically ≥ 10 14 /cm 2 (Ref. The prolonged dephasing time can be explained by considering the (one)electron-LO phonon coupling, where ω T O is the TO phonon frequency, and τ ∞ is an average carrier momentum scattering time. From the literatures, we set 1/τ anharmonic ≈ 0.08 ps -1 (Ref. To test the above hypothesis of the dominant contribution for the prolonged dephasing time from 1/τ plasma , we show the electro-optic response from GaP in Fig. where β = 2.0 cm/GW (for 830 nm) represents the TPA coefficient, In the present case, the energy of the pump photon (E p =1.49 eV) approaches the defect-induced deep levels as an intermediate-state. In fact, the anti-site defect of P Ga , where one Ga site is occupied by a P atom, shows the mid-gap energy level of 1.59 eV from the top of the valence band, )*+,-../0-/120 &3 " decreased by depletion of TPA by nearly resonant onephoton absorption at P Ga states, whose carriers decay into underlying Ga P band. In summary, we observed the prolonged dephasing time of the coherent LO phonon in Ga ion irradiated GaP by use of the fs pump-probe reflectivity technique. The prolongation of the dephasing time of the coherent LO phonon observed for defective GaP is not intuitive, since defects generally promote dephasing. However, we present the effective model for suppression of interaction between photo-generated carrier plasma and coherent LO phonon caused by quenching of the TPA photo-excited carriers by P Ga deep levels. Our observation of prolonged dephasing time, which may be called phonon cooling by lattice defects, provides a new insight into controlling the electrical properties of semiconductors for the development of device applications. In addition, the results obtained may be useful for investigating a possible generation of micro-or nano-structures of GaP and even other nonlinear materials by FIB technique, while the lattice properties unchanged.