Van der Waals (vdW) tunnel junctions are attractive due to their atomically sharp interface, gate tunablity, and robustness against lattice mismatch between the successive layers. However, the negative differential resistance (NDR) demonstrated in this class of tunnel diodes often exhibits noisy behaviour with low peak current density, and lacks robustness and repeatability, limiting their practical circuit applications. Here we propose a strategy of using a 1L-WS 2 as an optimum tunnel barrier sandwiched in a broken gap tunnel junction of highly doped black phosphorus (BP) and SnSe 2 . We achieve high yield tunnel diodes exhibiting highly repeatable, ultra-clean, and gate 1 oscillators, amplifiers, switching elements, However, in a vdW heterojunction, the absence of a conventional depletion region due to ultra-thin nature of the layers, and atomic sharpness of the interface, prevents a voltage drop at the tunnel junction which degrades the NDR characteristics. This is because, for NDR to be observable, the tunneling current through the p-n junction must be tunable which requires a voltage modulation of the spectral overlap between the filled states at the conduction band of n-side and the empty states at the valence band of p-side. One thus requires the presence of a spatial gap between the n and p regions created during the transfer process or unintentional oxidation or a tunnel barrier that acts like an artificial depletion region to accommodate the required voltage drop at the tunnel junction. Relying on these processes takes a toll on the device yield, and the achieved NDR characteristics are inferior compared to state of the art Si and III-V semiconductor based tunnel diodes, Architecture of the SnSe 2 /1L-WS 2 /BP tunnel diode is schematically illustrated in Figure The fabrication approach we employ here utilising pre-patterned contacts does not require any chemical processing step after the flake transfer, and thus preserves the pristine nature of the BP interface. More details of the fabrication process are given in Methods and illustrated stepwise in Supplementary Figure Seven such tunnel diodes (D1-D7) are fabricated, and all the devices exhibit repeatable NDR characteristics (summarized in Supplementary Table Band extrema of interest occur at the Z valley for BP Beyond the valley point, I D again increases with further increase in V D , due to an enhancement in the thermionic current over the BP/SnSe 2 barrier. The diode achieves a high PVCR ( I P I V ) of 3.6 at 300 K. The abrupt drops in the I D characteristics has not been observed to date in vdW tunnel diodes, As explained earlier, BP and SnSe 2 form a broken gap vdW heterojunction, which is ideally suited for high BTBT current. However in the absence of the 1L-WS 2 tunnel barrier, due to the high conductivity of such junction along with its atomic sharpness, there is a very little voltage drop across the junction. This forces the quasi-Fermi levels of the BP and the SnSe 2 sides to be almost aligned at the tunneling interface in spite of a change in the applied external bias. This degrades the PVCR, with a possibility of complete suppression of NDR characteristics, although the total tunneling current remains high. When we introduce the WS 2 sandwich layer, it acts like an atomically sharp depletion layer allowing a larger voltage to drop across it. This effectively de-pins the BP and SnSe 2 bands at the tunneling interface, allowing their relative movement which is crucial in observing the NDR characteristics. To establish the point quantitatively, using Richardson equation, The linear trend with negative slope provides further evidence of the defect induced excess current as the primary source of valley current. In the presence of nonzero series resistance, the external bias required to achieve peak or valley configurations is given by where V 0 P,V is the drop at the junction at peak or valley, and R s (T ) is the temperature dependent series resistance. The measured V P and V V are shown in Figure We next measure the characteristics of the tunnel diode by varying V G at a fixed temperature. V G modulates the device response through two different ways: 1) it changes the extent of the p-doping of the BP layer at the junction and hence modulates the tunneling rate, 2) it tunes the lateral resistance R s of the BP channel. For a thin BP layer, both these effects are significant. The response of one such device (sample D4, less than 10 nm thick BP) at 300 K is shown in Figure Similarly, an increasingly positive V G results in a reduced p-doping in BP as shown in Figure To decouple the effects of tunneling rate and series resistance, we measure the response from a device employing a thick (∼ 20 nm) BP layer (sample D1) at 7 K, and the results are summarized in Figure The different rates of modulation for peak and valley positions lead to a gate dependent NDR window, importance of which will be explained later in a memory device. This also tunes the slope of the current in the NDR region and hence results in a gate controllable ac resistance. Such a modulation of the ac resistance is imperative in NDR based amplifier circuits NDR devices find widespread application in oscillator circuits, where the negative differential resistance of the device is used to compensate the stray resistance in the tank circuit, resulting in an undamped oscillation. The measured average power delivered to the entire system (illustrated in bottom panel of Figure We now bias the tunnel diode at a fixed V D in the NDR region, and measure the oscillating voltage across the diode using a digital storage oscilloscope as shown in Figure A voltage value above V V and below V P corresponds to a stored value of logic '1' and logic '0' respectively (Figure The thermodynamic origin of the bistable states can be understood from extracting the power delivered to the circuit at each current bias, as shown by the red circles in the right axis of Figure The logic state stored in the memory cell should be less susceptible to external noise sources and the read operation should be able to distinguish the state of the system with confidence. Thus, the threshold for switching between logics '0' and '1' is an important metric. The separation I P -I V corresponds to the maximum allowed peak to peak fluctuation, and determines the stored bit retention. For device D4 with thin BP, I P being strongly dependent on V G , results in a gate tunable I P -I V as shown in Figure The proposed memory cell with a junction area of 400 nm 2 is expected to exhibit a standby power of 0.33 pW (3.13 pW) when retaining logic '0' (logic '1'), which is significantly less compared with the state of the art Intel 22 nm HDC Tri-gate LP SRAM cell (∼ 40 pW). In conclusion, we report a broken gap van der Waals heterojunction based tunnel diode exhibiting clean, repeatable, and gate tunable negative differential resistance characteristics with a high peak-to-valley ratio over a large temperature range. By altering the constraint from constant voltage to constant current bias, the thermodynamic stability of the tunnel diode circuit is tuned from astability to bistability. This allows us to demonstrate multifunctional operations like a reactive-element-less on chip, compact voltage controlled oscillator, and a highly scalable, single element random access memory cell for ultra-dense memory applications. The operations are sustained at very low temperature, making them attractive for cryogenic electronics as well. Au lines are defined by optical lithography using a 360 nm UV source and AZ5214E resist spin-coated on an Si/SiO 2 substrate with 285 nm thick oxide formed by dry chlorinated thermal oxidation and forming gas annealing. A 20 nm thick Ni film followed by a 40 nm thick Au film is deposited via DC magnetron sputtering and lifted of by Acetone/iso-propyl alcohol rinse to form the bottom contact. The SnSe 2 fakes are exfoliated from bulk crystals using Scotch tape, and are subsequently transferred to a poly-di-methyl-siloxane (PDMS) sheet. Flakes of thickness ∼ 50 nm are identified by optical contrast and transferred onto the Au line forming source contact using a dry transfer technique. This process is performed underneath a microscope using controlled translation and rotation for desired positioning of the flakes with respect to the pre-patterned substrate. This process is repeated for monolayer WS 2 . The SnSe 2 /WS 2 stack is annealed at 70°C for 2 min in ambient for devices D1, D2, D4 and D6. BP of thickness ∼ 20 nm is transferred next contacting another Au line forming drain contact. The stack is immediately encapsulated with hBN following the BP transfer. For devices D3 and D5, the stack is annealed after hBN transfer. Few layer graphene is transferred to form the gate contact. The layers in the whole device fabrication process do not undergo any chemical treatment and hence maintain their pristine quality and clean interfaces. The devices are loaded into a closed cycle He probe station Lakeshore CRX-6.5K or are wire bonded to a closed cycle He cryostat and characterized using a Keithley 4200A SCS parameter analyser for DC measurements and a Tektronix MDO3000 digital storage oscilloscope for frequency measurements. All the measurements were done in vacuum with a pressure < 10 -4 Torr. V G (V) 