Networks inside current data centers comprise a hierarchy of power-hungry electronic packet switches interconnected via optical fibers and transceivers. As the scaling of such electrically-switched networks approaches a plateau, a power-efficient solution is to implement a flat network with optical circuit switching (OCS), without electronic switches and a reduced number of transceivers due to direct links among servers. One of the promising ways of implementing OCS is by using tunable lasers and arrayed waveguide grating routers. Such an OCS-network can offer high bandwidth and low network latency, and the possibility of photonic integration results in an energyefficient, compact, and scalable photonic data center network. To support dynamic data center workloads efficiently, it is critical to switch between wavelengths in sub nanoseconds (ns). Here we demonstrate ultrafast photonic circuit switching based on a microcomb. Using a photonic integrated Si3N4 microcomb in conjunction with semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOAs), sub ns (< 500 ps) switching of more than 20 carriers is achieved. Moreover, the 25-Gbps non-return to zero (NRZ) and 50-Gbps four-level pulse amplitude modulation (PAM-4) burst mode transmission systems are shown. Further, on-chip Indium phosphide (InP) based SOAs and arrayed waveguide grating (AWG) are used to show sub-ns switching along with 25-Gbps NRZ burst mode transmission providing a path toward a more scalable and energy-efficient wavelengthswitched network for future data centers. There is a massive growth in data center network traffic due to emerging applications such as AI, server-less computing, resource disaggregation, multimedia streaming, and big data Optical circuit switching (OCS) has been proposed as an alternative technology to overcome these challenges; it can provide high bandwidth and low network latency (due to no network buffers), and by allowing for a flat data center topology, the network can be more energyefficient as fewer electrical switches and transceivers are required Here we propose and demonstrate in a proof-of-concept experiment a disaggregated tunable transceiver that uses photonic chip-based soliton microcombs as a multiwavelength source, which are generated in high-quality (Q) microresonators exhibiting third-order nonlinearity (χ 3 ) and anomalous dispersion We use a Si 3 N 4 based soliton microcomb as a multiwavelength source to show ultrafast (< 550 ps) optical wavelength switching. In a proof-of-concept experiment, we demonstrate switching of > 20 individual comb channels in a sub-ns time scale (< 550 ps) using discrete SOAs. Further, 25-GBd (baud-rate) no-return to zero on-off keying (NRZ) and four-level pulse amplitude modulation (PAM-4) burst mode transmission systems along with ultrafast switching are shown. Then, a more compact switching system consisting of PIC-based AWG and SOAs is implemented to show sub-ns switching and 25-GBd NRZ burst mode transmission, indicating the potential utilization of such a miniaturized system to mitigate power and scaling issues. A key advantage of the disaggregated transceiver design is that the multi-wavelength comb source can be shared across many (e.g. 64) servers in parallel instead of using 64 separate comb sources, using a split-and-amplify architecture (figure A packaged Si3N4 microresonator is pumped using a continuous wave (CW) pump amplified via an erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) to generate a soliton microcomb. A soliton state is initiated via forward tuning. After filtering the pump using an optical add-drop multiplexer (OADM), a low-noise amplifier is used to further amplify the soliton comb. The post-amplified comb is de-multiplexed using a 48-channels 100G AWG, and the individual comb channels are routed to semiconductor amplifiers (SOAs) which are controlled via a custom-designed switching board. The output signal is detected using a photodiode (PD) and recorded on an oscilloscope (OSC). PC, polarization controller; OBF, (narrow) optical bandpass filter. b) A single soliton spectrum with 3-dB bandwidth around 40 nm and no post amplification. c) Post-amplified soliton spectrum having maximum power up to -4-dBm in comb lines close to pump line (1550 nm). d) The 10%×90% rise and fall time of 493 ps and 395 ps respectively for single comb channel (CH 37: 1554.9 nm). The left and right insets show the zoomed-in view of rising and falling signals. e) The four different microcomb channels simultaneously switching at sub-ns time scale with wavelength separation ∼ 4.9 nm. A guard zone of ∼ 2.56 ns is used to allow smooth switching between two adjacent channels. CH-42: 1558.988 nm, CH-44: 1560.613 nm, CH-46: 1562.238 nm, and CH-48: 1563.863 nm. while allowing for a high-quality and stable light source that can be rapidly wavelength-tuned (cf. discussion on power analysis and Supplementary information (SI)). Figure For a proof-of-concept system-level demonstration, fast switching within a four different comb channels is performed. Figure In the following experiment, we show 25 Gbps (NRZ) and 50 Gbps (PAM-4) burst mode data transmission while switching between four comb channels using the setup shown in figure Next, integrated Indium phosphide (InP) chip-based SOAs and AWG are used to show 25-Gbps NRZ burst mode data transmission along with fast OCS using a soliton microcomb. Figure Similarly, the AWG crosstalk and insertion of loss of the PIC can be further improved to enhance the overall performance of this architecture. Nevertheless, the current results show the potential of a soliton microcomb as a suitable multi-wavelength source for 25 GBd NRZ burst mode transmission along with fast switching. Regarding the power consumption, the current multiwavelength source consumes a total electrical power of ∼ 30 W (cf. SI) providing more than 60 carriers, having an optical power > -20 dBm (∼ 500 mW electrical power per carrier). The electrical power consumption can be improved down to < 193 mW per carrier (15.5 W total) by reducing the splicing loss between UHNA and SMF fibers More importantly, this high power comb source can be shared among multiple servers by adding a hierarchy of passive optical splitters and amplifiers for better power and resource utilization (figure In conclusion, ultrafast optical circuit switching is demonstrated using a chip-based microcomb for future power-efficient and low latency data centers. More than twenty individual comb channels in C-band having a power > -20 dBm have been switched at < 550 ps using discrete SOAs. The optical circuit switching system with 25-GBd NRZ and PAM-4 burst mode data transmission is shown while switching between different comb channels. Further, a PIC containing on-chip SOAs and an AWG is implemented to show sub-ns switching and 25-GBd NRZ transmission. The current demonstration can provide a route for a fully integrated, fasttunable transceiver providing dense carriers for wavelength switching to meet the power and latency requirements posed by future cloud workloads. The link between two servers is only established via a single wavelength (comb tooth) in specific time slots (t 64 , t 128 , ...) as shown in figure Figure The sub-ns switching between four different comb channels having a maximum separation of more than 20 nm is shown in figure In this section, a detailed power consumption analysis is carried out to understand the system performance and to provide possible ways to improve it further. The multi-wavelength soliton microcomb is generated using the setup shown in figure Power consumed Laser 1.5 W TEC 0.5 W High power EDFA 24 W Low-noise EDFA (post amplification) 4 Total 30 As mentioned in the main text, the main origin of excess power consumption is the lower coupling efficiency into the packaged Si 3 N 4 microresonator arising due to splicing loss between the ultra-high numerical aperture (UHNA) and SMF-28 fibers (1 dB per facet). The coupling efficiency can be improved > 50% by using an optimized mode converter and by reducing the splicing loss between the UHNA-SMF fibers In addition, a more compact, power-efficient (electrical power ∼ 0.5 W), and on-chip laser can be used to generate the soliton microcomb without requiring lasers with a stabilized module to more than 80 optical carriers as output coupling will be increased around two times. The optimization of the microresonators' different design parameters (as shown in supplementary information of ref Institute of Physics, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland Microsoft Research, 21 Station Road, Cambridge, CB1 2FB, U.K. (Dated: October 22, 2020)