Artificial spin ice (ASI) are arrays on nanoscaled magnets that can serve both as models for frustration in atomic spin ice as well as for exploring new spin-wave-based strategies to transmit, process, and store information. Here, we exploit the intricate interplay of the magnetization dynamics of two dissimilar ferromagnetic metals arranged on complimentary lattice sites in a square ASI to effectively modulate the spin-wave properties. We show that the interaction between the two sublattices results in unique spectra attributed to each sublattice and we observe inter-and intra-lattice dynamics facilitated by the distinct magnetization properties of the two materials. The dynamic properties are systematically studied by angular-dependent broadband ferromagnetic resonance and confirmed by micromagnetic simulations. We show that the combination of materials with dissimilar magnetic properties enables the realization of a wide range of two-dimensional structures potentially opening the door to new concepts in nanomagnonics. Owing to their versatile properties, magnons, which are the elementary quanta of spin waves, have been explored in recent years as novel strategies to transmit, process, and store information in magnetic materials. 1 Magnons enable spin transport decoupled from electron 1 motion, which potentially reduces the generation of waste heat. We fabricated a set of ASI arranged in a nominally identical square geometry, but with different material combinations (see Supporting Information for details): (A) All elements consist of Ni 81 Fe 19 (Fig. Figures Following the general expression given by Suhl, 36 the resonance frequency f in an in-plane geometry is given by (see Supplementary Fig. where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, μ 0 is the magnetic permeability, H is the external magnetic field, M S the saturation magnetization, θ H,M the angle between the x axis and the external magnetic field and the magnetization, respectively, and N x,y,z the demagnetization factors along each axis. In the derivation of equation ( In the case of a magnetic field applied along the x axis, θ H = 0, and the magnetization pointing along the magnetic field (θ M = θ H = 0), the expression can be reduced to similar to previous results. For the vertical elements, the value of θ M is not constant at low fields. For instance, due to the shape anisotropy, the magnetization points perpendicular to the x axis (θ M = π/2) at zero field, and tilts towards the x axis as the magnetic field gradually increases. When the field is strong enough, the magnetization is aligned with the external field and the x axis (θ M = 0). Hence, cos(θ M ) = H/H 1 , where H 1 ∼ M S is the field at which the magnetization is saturated. Once this field is reached, equation (2) applies. Due to the shape anisotropy in the vertical elements, N x > N y and N x > N z , the resulting resonant frequency is lower than in the horizontal elements, where N y > N x (see Supporting Information for all expressions). We first inspect the single-component Ni 81 Fe 19 network: Figure The results of the corresponding simulations qualitatively agree with the experimental data, as shown in Fig. In addition to the absorption spectra, we determine the excitation profiles of the lattice structures by micromagnetic simulations. In this way, we can characterize the different modes and determine the spatial location of particular excitations. Besides the spatial profile of the FFT intensity, we also obtain the phase of the oscillations, and map both the intensity and the phase using the hsv color space, where h stands for hue, s for saturation, and v for value. Here, the phase is represented by the hue and the intensity by the saturation, with the value being fixed to 1. We find that the most intense curve in Fig. Conversely, a similar behavior can be observed in sample D, where the Co 90 Fe 10 and Ni 81 Fe 19 islands are exchanged, Fig. The micromagnetic simulations show additional modes not obersved in the experiments, produced by higher order modes and modes localized at the edges of the samples. While these modes might be excited in our experiments, their localized nature at the ends of the islands leads to an intensity that is too small to be detected experimentally. Similarly to the case of sample C, the most intense CH mode is due to the central regions of the horizontal islands (Fig. In summary, we showed that using a bicomponent artificial spin ice arranged on a square lattice, we can finely tune the interaction between the lattice sites. We demonstrate that ferromagnetic resonance is an effective tool to probe this interaction. The resonant dynamics in the nanoscale network can be precisely adjusted by changing the magnitude and the angle of the applied magnetic field. As the islands of one sublattice switch, the dynamics of the opposite sublattice is affected due to the change in the local dipolar field distribution. Thus, the choice of materials determines the particular switching field of each sublattice, and a further adjustment can be achieved by changing the external magnetic field direction. The reported tuning mechanism of the inter-and intra-lattice interactions offers a richer manipulation of the specific mode spectra than the previously reported superposition principle of the resonant dynamics in single-component artificial spin ice. Our results demonstrate the ability to realize a novel type of two-dimensional magnonic crystals that opens the door to new concepts in nano-magnonics. We used a dynamic FMR approach for detecting the lattice interactions and we primarily focused on harnessing the tunability of these interactions for nano-magnonics. However, we note that the choice of dissimilar materials for different sublattice sites could also be exploited for controlling the order state of artificial spin ice. 