The use of atomic force microscopy on nanomechanical measurements requires accurate calibration of the cantilever's spring constant (k c ) and the optical lever sensitivity (OLS). The thermal method, based on the cantilever's thermal fluctuations in fluid, allows estimating k c in a fast, non-invasive mode. However, differences in the cantilever geometry and mounting angle require the knowledge of three correction factors to get a good estimation of k c : the contribution of the oscillation mode to the total amplitude, the shape difference between the free and the end-loaded configurations, and the tilt of the cantilever respect to the measured surface. While the correction factors for traditional rectangular and V-shaped cantilevers geometries have been reported, they must be determined for cantilevers with non-traditional geometries and large tips. Here, we develop a method based on finite element analysis to estimate the correction factors of cantilevers with arbitrary geometry and tip dimensions. The method relies on the numerical computation of the effective cantilever mass. The use of the correction factor for rectangular geometries on our model cantilever (PFQNM-LC) will lead to values underestimated by 16%. In contrast, experiments using pre-calibrated cantilevers revealed a maximum uncertainty below 5% in the estimation of the OLS, verifying our approach. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) has evolved and diversified since its invention in 1986 In a typical AFM setup, a laser beam reflects in the cantilever's back to monitor the deflection from the change in the position of the reflected light on a segmented photodiode. To obtain accurate force measurements, it is crucial to know the conversion factor to transform the electrical signal read in the photodiode (in volts) into the actual displacement (typically nanometers). The more straightforward method to obtain the conversion factor is to deflect the cantilever against a hard surface by obtaining force-distance (FD) curves. Knowing the scanner movement in the vertical direction, the slope of the voltage change of the photodiode provides the conversion factor or optical lever sensitivity (OLS), and its inverse (invOLS = ∆z/∆V ) where k B is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, V 2 is the mean-square deflection in volts due to thermal fluctuations of the fundamental mode. The β factor corrects the difference between the spring constant of the cantilever (or static spring constant) from that of the fundamental mode k 1 (or k dynamic). The factor χ corrects the difference in the measured deflection of the end-loaded cantilever, * jorge.r.ramos@outlook.com respect to the freely oscillating cantilever. Finally, the cantilever's mean square displacement is z 2 c = χ 2 invOLS 2 V 2 . Since pushing the cantilever tip against a hard surface is not always possible and may damage the tip, the calibration of both, the spring constant and the invOLS based on the thermal method is becoming popular in biological AFM applications The analytical values of χ and β , for rectangular cantilevers with a tip of despicable mass and a laser spot infinitely small located at the free end are vastly known There is an important correction to include in Eq. 1. In most AFM experimental setups, the cantilever is mounted at an angle θ = 10 to 12 degrees with respect to the horizontal plane. It's been noticed that the effective spring constant of the tilted cantilever (k θ ) is different from k c (non-tilted). The effective stiffness of a cantilever with a despicable tip mass, loaded at the end will increase by 1/ cos 2 θ Finite element analysis (FEA) is a common alternative to derive the cantilever's mechanical properties when analytical solutions do not exist. For example, Stark et al. We used COMSOL Multiphysics version 5.5 (COMSOL hereafter) to perform the FEA modeling Here, we will refer to the results of the static and eigenfrequency studies as 'loaded' and 'free' modelling solutions. The factor β is defined as For a rectangular cantilever, β = 0.971 as determined analytically and from FEA where F z is the vertical load applied and z l is the vertical deflection at the point of force application. In the eigenfrequency study, the fundamental mode of oscillation has a resonance frequency f 1 that is related to the dynamic spring constant k 1 by where m e is the effective mass of the cantilever at the resonance frequency, which is 0.25m c for the rectangular cantilever where ρ is the density and r 1 is the first mode shape solution along the longitudinal axis (x); x l represents the position where the load F z is applied (i.e., at the tip position). This approach was validated by the calibration values obtained for V-shaped cantilevers (Table To obtain χ, we determined the derivative the deflection along the cantilever longitudinal axis of the loaded and free solutions and computed their quotient where z loaded and z f ree are the vertical deflection of the loaded and free solutions, respectively. For a rectangular cantilever, we obtained χ = 1.09, as reported before, using analytical and FEA approaches The values of m e , β and χ obtained for different cantilever geometries are shown in Table Regarding V-shaped cantilevers, the correction factors χ and β were estimated by Stark et al. AC160TS cantilevers, which have been simulated by FEA before It is important to note that the χ values shown in Table I correspond to the end of the cantilever. However, it is common to place the laser spot before the end. This translates into a χ smaller than χ at the end In general, the relationship between the spring constant of the non-tilted cantilever k c , and the effective spring constant k θ of the same cantilever, mounted with an angle θ in the AFM system is where the factor C θ will depend on the tilt angle and the tip's geometry and position If we define the effective invOLS of the tilted cantilever as we can rewrite Eq. 8 to estimate the effective spring constant when using the invOLS θ from static force curves, without need to correct the tilting or the cantilever geometry 1. Determination of the tilt correction factor C θ by FEA We need to implement Eq. 7 to determine the correction factor C θ by FEA. Figure where D is the tip height and L the cantilever's length. Figure The spring constant of PFQNM probes is pre-calibrated by the manufacturer. The mean square displacement z 2 c of each cantilever is determined by using a laser Doppler vibrometer (LDV) as described by Ohler where β = 0.971 (rectangular cantilever) and θ = 12 • , the most common tilt angle in Bruker AFM systems. Since the mean square displacement of the cantilever z 2 c should be the same regardless the measuring technique, we can combine Eq. 8 and Eq. 12 to obtain a 'corrected' value of the pre-calibrated spring constant for our AFM system Note that for a rectangular cantilever with tip of despicable mass k corr = k cal . In our experimental conditions, we used PFQNM cantilevers β = 0.998 (Table The effective invOLS based on the pre-calibrated spring constant provided by the manufacturer will be 3. Practical implementation using cantilevers calibrated by Sader's method The Sader method is widely used to determine the spring constant of a large number of commercial cantilevers To further verify our FEA approach, we experimentally determined the invOLS using both thermal and FC-based methods on three PFQNM cantilevers with pre-calibrated spring constant (Bruker). Experiments were performed in a commercial AFM system (JPK Nanowizard 4, Bruker). For each cantilever, three thermal spectra were recorded in liquid media (10 mM Tris, 150 mM KCl, pH 7.4, Merck), keeping the cantilevers more than 500 μm away from a freshly cleaved mica surface. Then, five force curves were acquired on the mica surface to a force setpoint of 3 V, which guaranteed to have a sufficiently wide linear region to determine the invOLS around the center of the photodiode Fig. where A w is the background noise, A is the amplitude at the resonance frequency ( f 1 ), and Q is the quality factor (Fig. The invOLS θ was recovered by substituting Eq. 17 into Eq. 14, using the pre-calibrated spring constant. The results are summarized in Table For the three cantilevers measured, we found a good agreement between the invOLS θ derived from the force curves and from the thermal spectra. Note that, since we have the calibrated value from the manufacturer, the factor β does not appear in Eq. 14. We obtained a relative difference ∼ 4% on average, far below the 16% uncertainty using the correction χ and β for rectangular cantilevers. We obtained SEM images of all three PFQNM cantilevers and tips after the AFM experiments to accurately determine their geometry, finding small variability between cantilevers and tips (Fig. The comparison of the 'corrected' value of the spring constant with the calculated stiffness using invOLS θ from static force curves (Eq. 10) leads to a fairly good agreement (the average is ∼ 7%, Table If the experiments are performed under optimal conditions on a clean hard surface, and the vertical movement of the piezo-scanner is well calibrated, the actual invOLS θ value is the one obtained from slope of the force curves. The difference in values could be due to the influence of the reflective coating on the cantilever mass (see supplementary Table In summary, we implemented a finite element analysis method to determine the correction factors χ, β and C θ to calibrate the spring constant and the invOLS by the thermal tune method. Our simulations agree with the values reported in classical geometries, like the rectangular and the V-shaped, which suggests the method is valid for arbitrary shape. As relevant case within non-standard geometries, we focused on PFQNM cantilevers, characterized by a paddle shape with a large tip relative to the cantilever dimensions. We found that a beneficial effect of the massive tip is the little variation in the correction factor χ near its free end. Thus, laser positioning changes will produce a little variation of χ, resulting in more robust experimental results. In addition to that, our method provides a 'correction' to the pre-calibrated value provided by the manufacturer. We found a good agreement between the effective invOLS obtained from force curves and the thermal tune method in AFM experiments with PFQNM cantilevers, confirming the approach's validity. See supplementary material for additional cantilever geometries, correction factors χ for the cantilevers studied and additional simulations of PFQNM cantilevers, considering the reflective gold layer coating. a χ value at the end of the cantilever. b See references