Magnetic phase transitions often occur spontaneously at specific critical temperatures and are instrumental to understand the origin of long-range spin order in condensed matter systems. The presence of more than one critical temperature (T c ) has been observed in several compounds rich phase diagrams with novel magnetic features to be explored. Here we show the existence of three magnetic phase transitions at different T c 's in 2D vdW magnet CrI 3 revealed by a complementary suite of muon spin relaxation-rotation (μSR), superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometry, and large-scale micromagnetic simulations including higher-order exchange interactions and dipolar fields Competing electronic phases underlie a number of unusual physical phenomena in condensed matter In a μSR experiment, positive muons implanted into a sample serve as extremely sensitive local microscopic probes to detect small internal magnetic fields and ordered magnetic volume fractions in the bulk of magnetic systems. See details in Methods and Supplementary Sections S1-S2. Zero-field μSR time-spectra are recorded in a powder sample of CrI 3 below (5 K, 30 K, 54 K and 60 K) and above (65 K and 80 K) the magnetic ordering temperature (Fig. Conversely, the spectra from the highest measured temperature from 150 K down to 62 K, exhibit a relatively high transverse depolarization rate λ T 4.9(2) μs -1 . This reflects the occurrence of dense electronic Cr moments and indicates strong interactions between them. In this scenario a novel correlated paramagnetic state may be present in the system at temperatures above the actual Curie temperature. As the crystal is cooled down, in addition to the paramagnetic signal, an oscillating component with a single well defined frequency is observed at T 62 K (Fig. Thus, the two oscillatory components have clearly different transition temperatures. This implies the presence of two distinct magnetic transitions in CrI 3 . We also notice that an upturn on both depolarisation rates, respectively, of components I and II. The λ T is a measure of the width of the static magnetic field distribution at the muon site, and also reflects dynamical effects (spin fluctuations). The λ L is determined by dynamic magnetic fluctuations only. For both components, λ T is higher than λ L in the whole temperature range, indicating that magnetism is mostly static in origin. However, λ L1 has a higher overall value than λ L2 , implying that the magnetic order with T C1 62 K contains more dynamics. The presence of three transitions are clearly substantiated by the anomalies, seen in λ T and λ L (Fig. We note that it is not possible to discriminate in the analysis the contribution of strongly damped components and a high frequency component into λ L1 below 30 K and thus the peak in λ L2 at low temperatures could be due to the contribution from component III. Overall, these results point to the complex, unconventional thermal evolution of the magnetic states in CrI 3 . The behaviour observed involves a volume-wise interplay between various states, providing an important constraint on theoretical models. One possible interpretation of the data is that below T C1 there is an evolution of the magnetic order in specific volumes of the crystal, which coexists with a correlated paramagnetic state. The second magnetic order thereby occurs within the paramagnetic regions below T C2 . This interpretation is supported by the temperature dependent measurements of the total magnetic fraction V m (Fig. To understand the microscopic mechanism of these phase transitions, we undertake macroscale spin dynamics which incorporated atomistic (several Å's) and micromagnetic (μm-level) underlying details of the magnetic and electronic structure of CrI 3 . We modelled the atomistic part using strongly correlated density functional theory based on Hubbard-U methods We find that three main phases emerge in CrI 3 as function of the temperature, which we name them as Disordered-I, Ordered, and Disordered-II (Figure The critical temperatures (T C1,C2,C3 ) are also highlighted. c, Snapshots of the dynamical spin configurations of bulk CrI 3 during field cooling from 80 K down to 0 K. Magnetisation is projected along of in-plane components (S x , S y ) and S z at different temperatures: 68 K, 60 K, 50 K, 20 K and 0 K. Each column and row corresponds to a specific projection of the magnetization at a given temperature provided at the far left. The colour scale shows the variation of the three magnetization components (S x , S y , S z ) throughout the system. 