Owing to its charge-free property, magnon is highly promising to achieve dissipationless transport without Joule heating and thus potentially applicable to energy-efficient devices. Moreover, a kagome lattice, as stacking layers of many magnon ferromagnets, also exhibits valley structure in quasiparticle spectra, which are likely to add a new dimension to magnon excitation. Here, we investigate valley magnon and associated valley modulation in a kagome lattice, with staggered exchange interaction and Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction. The staggered exchange interaction breaks spatial inversion symmetry, leading to gapped degenerate valleys at ±K and consequent valley magnon Hall effect. When the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction is further included, the valley degeneracy is lifted. As a result, net magnon anomalous Hall effect and topological phase transition are realized. More interestingly, by tuning valley splitting and excitation frequency, heat currents in the kagome strip can be localized at one edge to achieve single-edge transport. Besides, for the kagmon lattice, the edge heat currents include local circulating contribution within triangular fine structure, together with currents flowing parallel to the edges. These findings give full play to spin and valley degrees of freedom and enrich energy-efficient magnonic device paradigms. Introduction.-With Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) that plays a role of vector potential like the Lorentz force Inequivalent energy valleys in magnon excitations, if exist, are expected to directly inherit merits from both magnons and valleys, and possible modulations of valley magnons are likely to further gives full play to spin and valley degrees of freedom. Compared with valley electrons, the studies of valley magnons, especially for valley modulation, are relatively few. There are attractive questions, e.g. whether the valley degeneracy of magnons is tunable like its electronic counterpart and correspondingly what transport behavior edge magnons exhibit. Given that magnon Hall effect has been realized experimentally in pyrochlore structures with kagome layers Model. -Figure (1) Here, S m,n are spins on sites m, n, of which the nearestneighboring interactions are considered. The first two terms describe exchange interactions in neighboring A and B triangles of the kagome lattice, respectively, as illustrated in Fig. By the Holstein-Primakoff transformation where Without loss of generality, the spin magnitude, S, and J 1 are set to 1 2 and the unit of the energy, respectively. J 2 -J 1 and D are one order of magnitude smaller than J 1 . Band structures and magnon properties, e.g. magnon Berry curvature, are computed by solving eigenstates of the Hamiltonian 2. More details of deriving the Hamiltonian and calculations can be found in Supporting Information (S.I hereafer). Magnon bands and topological properties.-Fig. Taking into account both SEI and DMI, besides isolated bands, the valley degeneracy is lifted, that is, magnon energies and gaps at ±K become unequal in Fig. The momentum-resolved Berry curvature, Ω(k), and associated Chern number of magnon bands are further computed as indicators of topological quantum transport. They are shown in Figs. When SEI or DMI is added, Ω(k) becomes nonvanishing, and it has extrema at ±K valleys for the lower two bands. Although corresponding band structures in the neighborhood of ±K valleys are similar [Fig. For a staggered lattice with nonzero DMI, Ω(k) at two valleys does not exhibit the same magnitude any longer, owing to the valley splitting. As a result, a net magnon anomalous Hall heat current is realized, no matter single valley or both valleys are excited by magnon waveguide, since anomalous Hall currents contributed by two valleys can't completely cancel with each other. This is in contrast to the lattice with only SEI where the net Hall current is absent. The net Hall heat current can be readily measured by induced transversal temperature difference, which is expected to be used as information carrier in advanced device paradigms. The distinct Berry curvatures in Fig. Moreover, topological phase transitions can occur, depending on interaction strengths. The topological phase diagram is shown in S.I. as a function of J 2 and D. For the isolated lowest band, the phase transition can be easily found from two limits in Fig. Chiral magnon edge transport.-Considering the above significant modifications of valley and topological properties in the kagome monolayer, we further study magnon transport carried by topological edge states. Given that topological edge states are associated with nonzero Chern number according to bulk-edge correspondence and nonvanishing DMI gives arise to nonzero Chern number, two cases, with only DMI considered and with both DMI and SEI, are focused on below. A nanostrip of the kagome lattice, similar to that in Fig. We then construct a two-terminal device of the kagome strip to investigate topological edge heat transport within the lower gap, using non-equilibrium Green's function method In order to demonstrate spatial distribution of edge transport, local magnon density, ρ n ( ), at the site n and local heat current, j mn ( ), from the site n to its nearestneighboring site m are computed for a given energy, Looking at evolutions of local densities and heat currents along the transversal direction of the strip, there are distinct distributions of edge modes in Figs. For the strip with both SEI and DMI, local heat currents and densities appear with obvious asymmetric distributions along the transversal direction when the magnon energy is close to bulk band edge. For an energy, = 1.45, near the upper band, sizable currents and densities are well localized at the upper edge of the strip, while they disappear in the lower half of the strip, as demonstrated by the distributions in Fig. Moreover, the chiral edge transport is influenced by the signs of (J 1 -J 2 ) and D, similar to valley splitting of bulk band. Opposite J 1 -J 2 leads to single-edge transports localized at opposite edges, with opposite current directions. The chirality of edge transport is thus invariant. In contrast, opposite D gives rise to a direction reversal of the current at the same edge, leading to edge transports with opposite chiralities. The change of the chirality results from the reversal of bulk Chern numbers by reversing D, while opposite J 1 -J 2 gives the same band topology and chirality. Moreover, the modification of edge transport is expected to be detected experimentally, e.g. by spatial-resolved magnon temperature measurement For completeness, we also computed topological edge transport when two leads have different temperatures. Even if only DMI is present, there are asymmetric currents and densities by comparing two edges. The edge current, flowing from heat lead to cold lead, is enhanced, while the opposite current is weakened, in contrast to the symmetry distribution at equilibrium. The above changes also apply to the strip with both SEI and DMI. Conclusion.-In summary, we studied valley magnons in a kagome lattice. Valley degeneracy and band topology are tunable by introducing SEI and DMI. As a result, valley magnon Hall effect and topological edge transport are expected to be realized. Topological edge transport includes local circulating currents due to fine triangular structure of the kagome lattice and currents flowing along the edge direction. These currents can be localized at one edge to achieve single-edge transport by tuning valley splitting and frequency. The valley modulation of magnons and associated asymmetric transport add different dimensions to the exploration of unique device paradigms based on coupled spin and valley degrees of freedom.