The Josephson current-phase characteristics, that arise when a supercurrent flows across two fermionic superfluids separated by a potential barrier, can be controlled by varying either the interparticle coupling or the temperature. While the coupling dependence has been addressed in detail both theoretically and experimentally for an attractive Fermi gas undergoing the BCS-BEC crossover, a corresponding study of the temperature dependence of the Josephson characteristics is still lacking in this context. Here, we investigate the combined coupling and temperature dependence of the Josephson characteristics in a systematic way for a wide set of barriers, within ranges of height and width that can be experimentally explored. Our study smoothly connects the two limiting cases, of non-overlapping composite bosons at low temperature described by the Gross-Piatevskii equation, and of strongly overlapping Cooper pairs near the critical temperature described by the Ginzburg-Landau equation. In this way, we are able to explore several interesting effects related to how the current-phase characteristics evolve along the BCS-BEC crossover as a function of temperature and of barrier shape. These effects include the coherence length outside the barrier and the pair penetration length inside the barrier (which is related to the proximity effect), as well as the temperature evolution of the Landau criterion in the limit of a vanishingly small barrier. A comparison is also presented between the available experimental data for the critical current and our theoretical results over a wide range of couplings along the BCS-BEC crossover. * giancarlo.strinati The stationary Josephson effect is one of the most striking consequences of the spontaneous symmetry breaking of the phase φ(r) of the complex gap (order) parameter ∆(r) = |∆(r)|e iφ(r) at a spatial point r, which is at the essence of the macroscopic quantum coherence of superconductivity Extending the study of the Josephson effect from the BCS limit, where it has traditionally been considered In principle, the Josephson characteristics J(δφ), together with the associated critical current J c , can be calculated in terms of the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equations As already mentioned, the BdG equations (or, alternatively, the Gor'kov equations for superconductors In this paper, consideration of the Josephson characteristics and of the associated physical quantities for various types of junctions is extended not only at finite temperature but also over an extended range of interparticle coupling, from the BCS regime traditionally considered for the Josephson effect, up and beyond the unitary regime of the BCS-BEC crossover. To achieve this task, we solve numerically up to self-consistency the nonlinear differential LPDA equation for the spatially dependent gap parameter ∆(r), that was obtained in Ref. To simplify the numerical calculations, we shall limit to considering a rectangular potential barriers of height V 0 and width L. Among these, we will consider values of V 0 and L such that the junction can be assimilated to an SIS structure with small transparency The main results obtained in this paper are as follows: (i) A systematic study is performed for the spatial profiles of the magnitude and phase of the gap parameter, as functions of inter-particle coupling, temperature, and barrier width and height. [Only a limited choice of these profiles will be explicitly shown below.] Complementary information will be extracted from these profiles, as they extend both outside and inside the barrier. (ii) The shapes of the Josephson current-phase characteristics are obtained at finite temperature along the BCS-BEC crossover for a wide set of barriers. For all couplings, these shapes are found consistent with the classification made in the BCS limit The paper is organized as follows. Section II sets up the LPDA approach in the presence of a supercurrent and a potential barrier. Section III applies the LPDA approach to obtain the Josephson characteristics under a variety of conditions. Section IV presents the spatial profiles of the magnitude and phase of the gap parameter associated with these characteristics. Section V relates the gap profiles in the interior of the barrier to the appearance of the proximity effect. Section VI determines how the GL regime gradually emerges from the LPDA approach in the temperature-coupling phase diagram. Section VII addresses the temperature and coupling behaviour of the Josephson critical current for given barrier. Section VIII considers the Landau criterion for superfluidity at finite temperature, whereby a vanishingly small barrier acts as an impurity that probes the stability of the superfluid flow. Section IX proposes a relationship between the critical current and the condensate density, valid on the BCS side of unitarity for a vanishingly small barrier. Section X shows the comparison with available experimental results for ultra-cold Fermi gases. Section XI gives our conclusions. The Appendix describes in detail the numerical procedures and strategies, that we have adopted to solve the LPDA equation in the presence of a supercurrent and of a potential barrier. Throughout the paper, we set = 1. To deal with the stationary Josephson effect for a superfluid Fermi system that evolves along the BCS-BEC crossover at finite temperature, we adopt the geometri- cal set up of Ref. The Fermi system (with attractive inter-particle interaction and balanced spin populations) is made to span the BCS-BEC crossover by varying the dimensionless coupling parameter (k F a F ) -1 , where k F = (3π 2 n) 1/3 is the Fermi wave vector associated with the bulk density n and a F is the scattering length of the two-fermion problem The Josephson effect here considered requires the presence of a stationary supercurrent J flowing across a potential barrier. This condition can be dealt with in terms of the LPDA approach of Ref. Quite generally, the LPDA equation for the spatially dependent gap parameter ∆(r) reads Here, m is the fermion mass, are highly non-linear functionals of the solution ∆(r) of Eq. ( , where μ(r) = μ -V (r) -A(r) 2 /(2m) contains the thermodynamic chemical potential μ and the external potential V (r). Here and in the following, the notations ξ(k|r), E(k|r), and E A + (k|r) signify that these three functions of the wave vector k (which is integrated over in the expressions (2) and ( In the above expressions, A(r) plays formally the role of an "effective" vector potential, although for a neutral Fermi gas its physical meaning differs from the vector potential of classical electrodynamics. For instance, A(r) = mΩ ∧ r for a neutral Fermi gas embedded in a rotating trap with angular velocity Ω, whereby complex vortex patterns can be generated accumulated across the barrier and determining Q 0 consistently, or viceversa. The identification of J with Q 0 n/m was also made in Ref. Here, is the corresponding local number density where with μ(r) = μ -V (r). The expression (5) has the typical form of a two-fluid model at finite temperature where n s (r) stands for the local superfluid density which depends itself on Q 0 In particular, in the zero-temperature limit J given by the expression (5) coincides with Q 0 n/m, provided the second term on the right-hand side of Eq. ( the Fermi function remains positive for all k. Violation of this condition corresponds to the Landau criterion for the collapse of superfluidity It is worth mentioning that, in the BEC limit (k F a F ) -1 ≫ 1 at low temperature, when the GP equation for composite bosons where Φ GP (r) = ∆(r) m 2 a F /8π is the GP wave function of composite bosons in this limit where Ψ GL (r) = ∆(r) 7 ζ(3) n/8π 2 (k B T c ) 2 is the wave function of Cooper pairs in this limit As mentioned in the Introduction, from the way it was obtained in Ref. For these reasons, the LPDA approach may end up in producing physically reasonable profiles for |∆(x)| and φ(x), provided that δφ is somewhat smaller than π. It may then be possible, in practice, to draw only an arc of the Josephson characteristics J(δφ) over a limited interval 0 ≤ δφ ≤ δφ max with δφ max somewhat smaller than π, rather than the complete Josephson characteristics over the whole interval 0 ≤ δφ ≤ π as desirable. This feature of the LPDA approach may also persist at finite temperature, although δφ max is expected to increase for increasing temperature. Under these circumstances, we shall find it convenient to utilize a universal function of the form where A and B are (dimensionless) numerical parameters that depend on the barrier as well as on coupling and temperature, in order to fit the curves |Q 0 |/k F vs δφ (or J/J F vs δφ where J F = k F n/m) that we shall obtain by the LPDA approach. And this in spite of the fact that these curves may extend over a limited interval 0 ≤ δφ ≤ δφ max as discussed above. The expression In Sec. III several examples will be reported, showing how the Josephson characteristics obtained by the LPDA approach recover the above limiting conditions, depending on the ranges of coupling, temperature, and barrier height and width. To test the validity of the expression In this Section we provide a detailed description of the Josephson current-phase characteristics J(δφ) in terms of the LPDA approach described in Sec. II, over an extended region of the temperature-coupling phase diagram of the Fermi system, with barriers of different heights and widths. To this end, whenever necessary we shall adopt the procedure discussed in Sec. II-C, so as to draw the Josephson characteristics over the whole interval 0 ≤ δφ ≤ π. For simplicity, a rectangular barrier centered about x = 0 of height V 0 and width L will be utilized in the following. We shall consider either the dependence of the Josephson characteristic on temperature and coupling for given barrier, or their dependence on the barrier height and width for given temperature and coupling. Figure kF in terms of the superfluid density n s which depends itself on Q 0 . In particular, at T = 0 n s = n irrespective of Q 0 , such that J/J F = Q 0 /k F for a stable superfluid flow. For increasing T , on the other hand, n s < n such that J/J F < Q 0 /k F . This feature clearly emerges when comparing the curves of the bottom panels with those of the upper panels of Fig. It is interesting to compare the temperature dependence of the Josephson characteristics for the couplings (k F a F ) -1 = 0 and (k F a F ) -1 = -1, which are representative of the crossover region and the BCS regime, respectively. This comparison is shown in Fig. One can also examine the dependence of the Josephson characteristics on the barrier height and width, for given coupling and temperature. An example is reported in Fig. In this Section, we consider the spatial profiles of the (complex) gap parameter ∆(x) = |∆(x)|e i2φ(x) , and determine how |∆(x)| and 2φ(x) depend on temperature and coupling as well as on the height and width of the barrier. From these profiles, we will extract the healing length ξ out past which |∆(x)| and 2φ(x) approach their bulk values sufficiently far away from the barrier. Results will be shown for x ≥ 0 only, since |∆(x)| is even and φ(x) is odd about x = 0 within the chosen geometry. The spatial profiles of the magnitude |∆(x)| and phase 2φ(x) of the gap parameter are reported in Fig. (k F a F ) -1 0 on the BCS side of unitarity, in which we have mostly concentrated our numerical efforts. Figure A typical example of the dependence of |∆(x)| and 2φ(x) on the barrier height is shown in Fig. The corresponding dependence of |∆(x)| and 2φ(x) on the barrier width is shown in Fig. C. Extracting the healing length ξ out from the spatial profiles of the gap parameter It is worth characterizing in a systematic way the spread of the profiles |∆(x)| and 2φ(x) as shown in Figs. To this end, from a given spatial profile of |∆(x)| we can extract the healing length ξ out for restoring the bulk value of the gap parameter outside the barrier, by considering an exponential fit of the type for x L/2 (15) in terms of the parameters C out and ξ out . The restriction to x L/2 reflects the fact that the curvature of |∆(x)|/∆ 0 becomes negative for x slightly larger than L/2, as noted after Fig. We begin by considering how the profiles of |∆(x)|, obtained for various couplings and barrier heights and widths by keeping δφ = 0, evolve as a function of temperature. The corresponding values of the healing length T/T c FIG. Thus far, we have compared the spatial profiles of |∆(x)| and 2φ(x) by varying alternatively temperature, coupling, barrier height and width, while keeping fixed the value of δφ. We pass now to compare these profiles for δφ proceeding along a Josephson characteristic. δφ/π From the profiles of |∆(x)| and 2φ(x) like those in Fig. For all cases reported in Fig. In this context, two opposite cases deserve separate consideration, namely, for weak coupling and T ≃ T c and for strong coupling and T ≃ 0, when the results obtained by the LPDA approach reduce, respectively, to those obtained by the GL and GP equations. The results for ξ out obtained in these cases from the spatial profiles of |∆(x)| with a typical barrier are shown in Fig. Of the GL and GP cases which can both be obtained from the LPDA equation, in the following (see Sec. VI) we are going to give special attention to the GL case, by letting T to approach T c from below for couplings on the BCS side of unitarity. And this not only because the LPDA equation (alike the BdG equations from which it originates), by not explicitly including the beyond-meanfield fluctuations required to span the entire temperaturecoupling phase diagram of the BCS-BEC crossover In this Section, we consider the complementary healing length ξ in that can be identified in the interior of the barrier. To extract it in a meaningful way, the barrier width L of the internal (s) region of the SsS junction that we are considering will have to be sufficiently widened, so that an exponential fit analogous to Eq. ( We begin our analysis by following closely the experimental procedure of Ref. Figure performed in terms of three parameters (J 0 c , ξ Jc in , J mini c ) over the extended range 0.1 k F L 30. The results of these fits are represented by the curves in the lower panels of Fig. The information extracted from the fits ( We are in a position to characterize in more detail the features of the proximity effect that we have just discovered, by analysing the spatial profiles of the magnitude |∆(x)| of the gap parameter in the internal (s) region inside the barrier. For L large enough, |∆(x)| may develop a uniform minigap ∆ mini sufficiently deep in the internal region, such that for a given temperature below T c we have to consider an exponential fit of the type |∆(x)| = ∆ in e -|x+L/2|/ξ ∆ in + ∆ mini for -L/2 x 0 (17) in terms of two parameters ∆ in and ξ ∆ in . We recall that profiles of |∆(x)| across a single SN interface were extensively obtained in Ref. Figure ∆ mini (lower panels) for two values of the barrier height, as obtained from the fit In addition, in the upper panels of Fig. , where T ′ c is the temperature at which ∆ mini is seen to vanish from the numerical data reported in the lower panels of Fig. Nevertheless, the limited range available for the width L of the internal (s) region, that can be explored before the value of the critical current J c becomes too small to be numerically detectable, prevents the internal region to be fully identified with an independent piece of material with its own bulk thermodynamic properties. Thermodynamic equilibrium between the external (S) regions with chemical potential μ and the internal (s) region inside the barrier of height V 0 with the effective chemical potential μ eff associated with the coupling (k F a F ) -1 eff would, in fact, require the identity μ eff -V 0 = μ to be satisfied. As shown in the insets in the lower panels of Fig. Strictly speaking, the GL approach is expected to be valid in the extreme BCS limit (k F a F ) -1 → -∞ and for T → T - c The GL equation, which we are going to confront with, has the form where ζ(3) ≃ 1.202 is the Riemann ζ function of argument 3 and the vector potential A(r) is identified with -Q 0 in the context of the Josephson effect (cf. Sec. II-A). Note that the term in Eq. ( The GL equation in the form ( and where N 0 = mk F /(2π 2 ) is the density of states at the Fermi level per spin component. The corresponding expression for the superfluid current is given by Eq. ( As a preliminary check on how the LPDA approach smoothly evolves into the GL approach in the appropriate sector of the temperature-coupling phase diagram, we have monitored how the numerical values of the coefficients I 0 (r) and I 1 (r) obtained from the general expressions ( It appears, however, more interesting from a physical point of view to determine how the profiles of the magnitude of the gap parameter |∆(x)| as well as the values of the critical current J c evolve from the LPDA to the GL approach. To this end, the upper panel of Fig. The behaviour of the critical current J c associated with the Josephson characteristics was considered in Sec. V at unitarity for large barrier widths, to show specifically the emergence of proximity effects. In this Section, we consider the behaviour of J c in a more systematic way, for different barrier heights and widths, as well as couplings and temperatures. Specific efforts will be made to determine the temperature dependence of J c upon approaching the critical temperature under various circumstances. a barrier of fixed width and decreasing heights from top to bottom (left panels), together with the corresponding coupling dependence of J c for a choice of temperatures (right panels). Note from this figure that the maximum value of J c shifts to weaker couplings toward the BCS side for increasing barrier height, but shifts back to stronger couplings toward the BEC side for increasing temperature. These results extend and generalize to finite temperature the results obtained in Ref. Figure of zero temperature compares favourably with those obtained in Ref. It is of interest to determine the behaviour of the critical current J c as it vanishes upon approaching the critical temperature T c . To this end, we associate to this behaviour of J c a positive exponent η, such that for T sufficiently close to T c where D is a numerical coefficient and t = (T c -T )/T c . It turns out that the value of η is not universal but depends on the type of junctions one considers for the Josephson effect For definiteness, we shall explicitly consider two coupling values, for which the analysis to extract the value of the exponent η will be separately carried out with a considerable number of barriers in the following way: (i) For (k F a F ) -1 = -1 on the BCS side of the crossover, we find it convenient to use the results for J c (T ) obtained by the GL equation, to which the results obtained by the LPDA equation have been shown in Sec. VI-B to smoothly connect for T is sufficiently close to T c . In particular, in this case we restrict T /T c in Eq. ( In both cases, the choice of the upper value T /T c = 0.98 is related to the minimum value of J c (T )/J F (≃ 1.0 × 10 -4 ), which can be handled with confidence by our numerical calculations for the shape of the Josephson characteristics to be reliable. The lower value T /T c = 0.90 considered at unitarity might be further reduced down to T /T c = 0.85 with no harm, to be contrasted with the lower value T /T c = 0.93 considered for (k F a F ) -1 = -1. This difference is in line with the expectation about the width of the critical region near T c being larger at unitarity than in the BCS regime Although our analysis to extract the exponent η from the fit (21) could a priori be influenced by the upper value of T /T c which can be reached numerically, in prac- tice the M numerical values of J c (T )/J F on which the fit ( We have extended the above analysis for both coupling values (k F a F ) -1 = (-1, 0) to a large set of barriers, to determine how the exponent η evolves for increasing V 0 /E F and k F L. The results of this extended analysis are given by the colour maps of Fig. In this Section, we exploit the Josephson characteristics obtained by the LPDA approach at finite temper- ature, to determine how the Landau criterion for a superfluid Fermi gas evolves along the BCS-BEC crossover when the temperature is raised from T = 0 up to the critical temperature T c . Quite generally, according to the Landau criterion for superfluidity To this end, at any temperature T in the interval 0 ≤ T ≤ T c we adopt a similar procedure to that utilized at T = 0 in Refs. For given coupling and temperature, we implement the limit of a vanishing barrier by considering progressively smaller values of the barrier height V 0 and width L in the following way. First, the width L is fixed and the critical current J c is calculated for a set of decreasing values of the height V 0 . The values of J c (V 0 ) obtained in this way are then fitted by the exponential form where E and F are parameters. The required limiting value J c (0) = J c (V 0 → 0 + ) is eventually obtained via graphical extrapolation. This process is then repeated several times with progressively smaller values of the width L, in order to verify how does the value J c (0) obtained in this way evolve toward the limit L → 0 + . An example of this procedure is shown in Fig. Also shown in Fig. These apparently favourable outcomes, however, do not eliminate the need of a further inclusion of pairing fluctuations when dealing with inhomogeneous situations (like in the presence of even an infinitesimal barrier here considered), which are expected to quantitatively modify the results of Fig. In any event, the theoretical results of Fig. Recently, a relationship has been put forward to connect the critical Josephson current with the condensate density To this end, the left panel of Fig. Here, the broken line corresponds to a square-root behaviour close to Tc and the star for the value 8/(3π) obtained analytically at T = 0. The inset shows the coupling dependences of Jc(0)/JF (dashed line -left scale) and of nc/(n/2) (full lineright scale) at T = 0, covering the whole BCS-BEC crossover. density n) obtained at the mean-field level for the given coupling and temperature A further comparison between theory and experiment for J c at finite temperature, this time in the presence of a finite barrier with well-defined parameters, can be obtained by comparing the results of the present LPDA approach with the recent experimental data of Ref. To make this comparison meaningful, care should be taken in converting the normalizations J F of the current, E F of the barrier height, and k - from the trapped values used in the experiment to the homogeneous values used in the theoretical calculations. To this end, what one needs to know is the ratio κ = E t F /E 0 F between the trap Fermi energy E t F = ω 0 (3N ) 1/3 (where ω 0 is the average trap frequency and N the total atoms number) and the value E 0 F = (k 0 F ) 2 /(2m) associated with the local wave vector k 0 F at the trap center, obtained by measuring the density profile of the atomic cloud. This is because the moving barrier in the experiment of Ref. In addition, to relate the value of the experimental temperature (in units of the trap Fermi temperature T t F = E t F /k B ) to that of the theoretical temperature (in units of T c , as calculated within the present approach), it is sufficient to identify the theoretical value T /T c with the experimental value T /T t c = (T /T t F )(T t F /T t c ). Here, the values of the critical temperature T t c /T t F in units of T t F for a harmonic trap as a function of (k t F a F ) -1 can be taken from the fully self-consistent t-matrix calculation of Ref. Figure In this paper, we have provided a detailed account of various aspects of the stationary Josephson effect at finite temperature, for a wide choice of barriers and an extended range of couplings along the BCS-BEC crossover. To make these calculations feasible with reasonable efforts, we have resorted to solving the LPDA non-linear differential equation for the gap parameter, obtained by a coarse graining procedure on the BdG equations. In this way, we have not only successfully reduced the computational time within acceptable limits, but especially much compressed the storage space that would otherwise be required when solving the BdG equations. The numerical flexibility achieved in this way has allowed us to perform a systematic study of several aspects of the stationary Josephson effect for a wide choice of barriers in an SsS junction, not only at finite temperature but also by varying the inter-particle attraction along the BCS-BEC crossover, from the BCS regime up to the unitarity limit and beyond. The outcomes of this systematic study, obtained under a variety of circumstances for the Josephson characteristics (cf. Sec. III) and the spatial profiles of the magnitude and phase of the gap parameter (cf. Sec. IV), that deserve a special mention are: The appearance of a novel kind of Josephson-induced proximity effect by increasing the barrier width (cf. Sec. V); The gradual emergence of the GL regime out the LPDA approach for increasing temperature on the BCS side of unitarity (cf. Sec. VI); The smooth variation of the exponent for the critical current in the critical region upon varying the barrier height and width for given coupling (cf. Sec. VII); The extension of the Landau criterion for superfluidity at finite temperature (cf. Sec. VIII); The favourable comparison obtained with the experimental results currently available for ultra-cold Fermi gases (cf. Secs. VIII and X). We have argued in more than one context (cf. Secs. IV and VIII) that, although the BdG approach (and therefore the associated LPDA approach) are based on a BCS mean-field decoupling A convenient choice for the set of variables {u k } and for the functions (A12) is obtained in terms of the normalized Legendre polynomials P n (u) = 2n+1 2 P n (u) where P n (u) are standard Legendre polynomials where h ν = X ν -X ν-1 is the length of the ν-th interval. Here, the choice 2u k = u k + 1 maps the K roots u k of the polynomial P K (u) in the interval (-1, +1) into the K values u k that enter Eq. (A9) and are restricted to the interval (0, 1). In this way, the coefficients (A15) become: among the Legendre polynomials There remains to apply a multi-dimensional Newton method for solving Eq.(A13), within each of the N subintervals in which the domain (0, x max ) of the solution of this equation has been partitioned, as well as to solve Eq. (A16) that connects adjacent subintervals. Accordingly, two successive steps have been set up for achieving the self-consistency of the solution. First step -With the help of Eqs. (A9) and (A14), Eq.(A13) is cast in the form g y(X ν-1 ) + K i=1 a ki q i , X ν-1 + h ν u kq k = 0 (A26) where ν = (1, • • • , N ) identifies the ν-th subinterval and k = (1, • • • , K) the mesh of points in each subinterval. For any given ν in Eq. (A26), the K vectors {q i } (each of 4 dimensions) are considered unknown, while the values of y(X ν-1 ) as well as the value of Q 0 are guessed beforehand as inputs of the calculation. One cycle of Newton method is then applied to determine the values of {q i }. Second step -Once the quantities {q i } have been determined in this way for any given ν, their values are inserted into Eq. (A16) which can be rewritten in the compact form y ν = P(y ν-1 ) with ν = (1, • • • , N ) . (A27) These 4N equations contain (N +1) sets of 4-dimensional unknown quantities y ν , since y ν=0 at the left edge of the interval (0, x max ) has also to be taken into account. Including in y ν=0 also the value of Q 0 that has to be selfconsistently determined, the required additional equations are supplied by the five boundary conditions (A6) and (A8). One cycle of Newton method is then applied to determine the values of {y ν ; ν = (0, • • • , N ). Cycling back and forth -Once the quantities {y ν ; ν = (0, • • • , N )} have been determined in this way, their values are fed back into the first step above and new values for the quantities {q i } are determined from Eq. (A26) through a second cycle of Newton method. These values of {q i } are then fed into the second step above, and new values of {y ν } (including Q 0 ) are in turn obtained. Typically 5 -30 (depending on coupling and temperature) cycles of this two-step Newton method are required to eventually achieve full self-consistency. In practice, the initial values of {y T ν } are taken to be ( |∆| = ∆0 , φ = 0, |∆| ′ = 0, φ ′ = 0) irrespective of ν, as well as Q 0 = 0, where ∆0 is the value of the gap parameter in the absence of the barrier. In this way, the value δφ = 0 is initially assumed for the boundary condition (A8). Cycling back and forth between the first and second steps above produces eventually a nontrivial spatial profile for |∆|(x), although still with φ(x) = 0. This profile is then taken as input for determining the next value of the Josephson characteristic for a non-vanishing value of δφ and the corresponding value of Q 0 . The process is repeated several times for increasing values of δφ. The numerical method just described is computationally quite demanding, to the extent that it becomes progressively more difficult to reach convergence for increasing values of δφ. This is especially true when considering the decreasing branch of the Josephson characteristics in order to approach the limiting value δφ = π. Under these circumstances, we found it more convenient to alternate two types of cycles while searching for the solution, namely, a first type of cycle when δφ is fixed and Q 0 is consistently determined as described above, and a second type of cycle when Q 0 is instead fixed and δφ is consistently determined. In the latter case, the boundary condition (A8) is removed from the second step above and δφ is obtained by integrating the spatial profile of φ ′ (x). At the same time, Q 0 is fixed at the value previously obtained by performing the first type of cycle. The new solution, attained in this way by performing the second type of cycle, is then used back as input for the first type of cycle. Typically, repeating this procedure a couple of times proves sufficient. The LPDA equation (A1) contains the local coefficients I 0 (x) and I 1 (x), which have to be determined from the expressions (2) and (3) with sufficient numerical accuracy at each step of the Newton method. Comparable accuracy is also required to determine the local number density n(x) and current j(x) that enter the condition (A7). This is because the presence of numerical noise may render the convergence of the whole method quite difficult and sometimes even impossible to reach. For these reasons, before starting the convergence procedure described above, all these quantities have been accurately evaluated over a regular grid of points in the variables (|∆|, μ, Q 0 ), and a tri-linear interpolation has been utilized to determine the actual values of these quantities needed at each iteration of the Newton method. In practice, for a Josephson characteristics with a mesh of 50 values of δφ, the computational time ranges from 100 to 800 minutes, 15 minutes of which are used for the calculation of the coefficients I 0 (x) and I 1 (x) of the LPDA equation over the above three-dimensional grid (|∆|, μ, Q 0 ). This wide range of computational time reflects the convergence of a single profile ∆(x) for given δφ, which may require from a few seconds up to 20 minutes depending on the settings. The computer code (with no parallelization) was run on a devise with 3000 Mhz CPU speed, 187 GB RAM memory, 15 GB swap memory, 1 GB/s writing speed, and 250 MB/s reading speed.