Quasiperiodicity has long been known to be a potential platform to explore exotic phenomena, realizing an intricate middle point between ordered solids and disordered matter. In particular, quasiperiodic structures are promising playgrounds to engineer critical wavefunctions, a powerful starting point to engineer exotic correlated states. Here we show that systems hosting a quasiperiodic modulation of antiferromagnetism and spin-singlet superconductivity, as realized by atomic chains in twisted van der Waals materials, host a localization-delocalization transition as a function of the coupling strength. Associated with this transition, we demonstrate the emergence of a robust quasiperiodic critical point for arbitrary incommensurate potentials, that appears for generic relative weights of the spin-singlet superconductivity and antiferromagnetism. We show that inclusion of residual electronic interactions leads to an emergent spin-triplet superconducting state, that gets dramatically enhanced at the vicinity of the quasiperiodic critical point. Our results put forward quasiperiodicity as a powerful knob to engineer robust superconducting states, providing an alternative pathway towards artificially designed unconventional superconductors. Unconventional superconductivity Quasiperiodic patterns display a never-repeating arrangement of elements tals has prominent effects on the electron eigenstates. Incommensurate potentials give rise to electronic wave functions extended, localized or critical Here we demonstrate that quasiperiodic patterns arising from a combination of spin-singlet superconductivity and antiferromagnetism provide a powerful platform to engineer spin-triplet superconductivity. In particular, we show that this antiferromagnetic-superconductor pattern hosts a localization-delocalization phase transition, with an associated quasiperiodic critical point with multifractal wavefunctions. We further show that upon inclusion of residual interactions, a spin-triplet superconducting state emerges that gets dramatically enhanced at the proximity of the localization-delocalization critical point. Our results show that magnetic-superconducting quasiperiodic patterns, as those found in atomic chains in twisted van der Waals materials, provide a new mechanism to engineer unconventional superconducting states by exploiting quasiperiodic criticality. Our manuscript is organized as follows. Sec. II introduces a realization of our model, and we show the emergence of a critical point in quasiperiodic superconductorantiferromagnet patterns, separating the extended and localized regime. In Sec. III, we show that interactions give rise to a spin-triplet superconducting state, and we analyze its dependence with respect to the details of the quasiperiodic modulation. In Sec. IV, we demonstrate the robustness of the interaction induced spin-triplet superconducting state with respect to perturbations in the quasiperiodic Hamiltonian. Finally, in Sec V, we summarize our conclusions. The system that we will study combines a spatially modulated antiferromagnetism and superconductivity, as shown in Fig. where c † i,s (c i,s ) denotes the fermionic creation (annihilation) operator for site n and spin s, and σ z is the spin Pauli matrix. The first term denotes the kinetic energy of the system, the second term denotes the spatially modulated antiferromagnetism, and the third term corresponds to the modulated superconductivity. The parameters ∆ and m are responsible for the strength of the modulation corresponding to the antiferromagnetism and superconductivity, respectively, and Ω is the wavelength of the modulation. The model of Eq. 1 assumes that the proximity-induced superconducting state will be stronger when the magnetism is weaker (Fig. We now address the localization-delocalization transition in the previous model. To determine the extended and localized nature of the states, we compute the inverse participation ratio (IPR) of each eigenstate Ψ n as where i runs over all the components of each eigenstate. For localized states whose wavefunction spans a certain number of sites L, for a system of size N , the value of the IPR is a finite non-zero number. In stark contrast, for extended states, the value of the IPR scales as 1/N becomes zero in the thermodynamic limit. Let us now explore the model of Eq. 1, and in particular, analyze how the localization of the states evolve as we increase the strength of the quasiperiodic modulation λ. We show in Fig. At the previous phase boundary separating extended from localized states, wavefunctions with critical behavior emerge. The different nature of the extended, localized, and critical states can be easily observed by plotting individual wavefunctions. In particular, we show in Fig. Let us now move on to consider the impact of interactions in the previous quasiperiodic system. In particular, we will show that the inclusion of interactions will lead to spin-triplet superconductivity, where the criticality driven by the quasiperiodic pattern can be used as a knob to enhance superconducting order parameter close to the critical point. Local interactions of the form are already accounted for in the stagger antiferromagnet and superconducting terms of the Hamiltonian. Therefore, we will now consider the effect of residual non-local interactions, in particular nearest neighbor density-density interactions. For that sake, we will now include an interaction term in our Hamiltonian of the form where V controls the strength of the nearest-neighbor attractive interaction. In the the following, we will solve the previous Hamiltonian by a mean-field decoupling. Before moving forward with out results, it is first worth to note that quantum many-body methods such as bosonization and density-matrix renormalization group 101 (DMRG) are used to obtain accurate results in interacting one dimensional systems 102,103 . These methods fully capture quantum fluctuations, which are missing in mean-field approaches. Mean-field theory methods are used to approximately study interacting quasiperiodic models in one-dimension, providing qualitatively correct results that can later be refined with more advanced quantum many-body methods. In particular, mean-field methods in one-dimension have been benchmarked with density-matrix renormalization group calculations for Aubry-Andre-Harper models 104,105 , finding a good qualitative agreement between mean-field and DMRG methods 104,105 . Following those results, it is expected that results obtained with mean-field theory provide a qualitatively correct picture. Specifically, a particular difference between the mean-field and full manybody approaches, is that mean-field solutions would predict long-range order, whereas exact solutions would rather show quasi long-range order, with a power-law decay of correlations in the order parameter 106 . Keeping the previous points in mind, we now move on to solve the previous interacting term Eq. 3 using a mean-field approximation H MF V , including all the normal H MF,h V and anomalous contributions H MF,s V , H MF,t V . The previous mean-field decoupling will give rise to hopping renormalization H MF,h V , singlet superconductivity renormalization H MF,s V and most importantly, to poten-tial spin-triplet superconducting order H MF,t V . We will focus in this last term, whose contribution to the meanfield Hamiltonian is of the form where by definition of the fermionic anticommutation relations ∆ s,s n,n+1 = -∆ s ,s n+1,n . It is worth to note that the interaction term we consider can lead to both spinsinglet and spin-triplet components. In our calculations, we have verified that the spin-singlet component is zero in the cases under study. This can be intuitively understood from the fact that the existence of local antiferromagnetism is expected to quench spin-singlet instabilities. where σ are the spin-Pauli matrices. As a first step, it is interesting to look at the real-space distribution of the unconventional superconducting state. In particular we show in Fig. we note that in the case of first neighbor interactions, the previous sum includes only j = -1 and j = +1, yet in the presence of longer range interactions other terms could be included. We observe that the spin-triplet density follows the quasiperiodic pattern, and that it becomes zero in regions only having antiferromagnetism or s-wave superconductivity (Fig. We now move on to examine the impact of the quasiperiodic criticality on the induced spin-triplet state. As anticipated above, the critical behavior of the wavefunctions is known to provide an effective mechanism for enhancing electronic instabilities We now move on to examine the impact of the two quasiperiodic modulations as parameterized by α. As we showed above, the extended-localized transition takes place for λ = 2t, and independently on the value of α. This means that a critical point appears independently on the relative strengths between ∆ and m, and it only depends on λ = √ ∆ 2 + m 2 . In stark contrast, the emergence of a spin-triplet component due to interactions turns out to be highly dependent on α, as shown in Fig. Selfconsistent interaction-induced spin-triplet superconductivity as a function of the superconductorantiferromagnet modulation strength for V = 0.2t, α = π/4 (a), as a function of the interaction strength V for α = π/4, Ω/(2π) = 1/ √ 2 (b), as a function of the SC-AF angle α for Ω/(2π) = 1/ √ 2, V = 0.2t (c), and as a function of the quasiperiodic modulation frequency Ω for V = 0.2t, α = π/4 (d). An enhancement of the interaction induced spin-triplet superconducting state is observed, stemming from the interplay of antiferromagnetism and superconductivity. weight on the singlet superconducting and antiferromagnetic order parameters. This observation emphasizes the importance of the coexistence of antiferromagnetism and superconductivity for the emergence for the interaction induced spin-triplet state. We finally consider the impact of the spatial modulation frequency Ω in the interaction induced spin-triplet state. As shown in Fig. In this section, we address the robustness of our phenomenology with respect to perturbations. In particular, we will focus on the impact of next to nearest-neighbor hopping and Anderson disorder. The next to nearestneighbor hopping breaks the bipartite nature of the lattice, whereas the Anderson disorder would drive the system to a localized state for all λ. In particular, we obtain that the critically enhanced spin-triplet superconducting state also happens with those additional perturbations, as elaborated below. Second neighbor perturbations are expected to appear in a realization of the previous model and break the original bipartite nature of the system. The previous term is included in our Hamiltonian by means of a perturbation of the form The results with this additional perturbation are shown in Fig. Next, we consider the impact of random disorder in the system, included as an onsite Anderson perturbation. where n is a random number between [-0.1, 0.1]t. First, it is interesting to note that the inclusion of an arbitrarily small amount of disorder would drive the extended states to a localized regime. As a result, in the presence of disorder the localization-delocalization transition as a function of λ is completely destroyed, as the state becomes localized for all λ. The disorder strength λ will define a minimal localization length for the system. As λ is ramped up, the system will go from a localized regime dominated by the disorder, to a regime in which the localization is dominated by the quasiperiodic potential. Although the critical point is washed out, the enhancement of the superconducting state will still be visible at this quasiperiodic-disorder localization crossover. This is shown in Fig. Finally, we comment on the prospects of extending the previous phenomenology to two-dimensional systems. In our manuscript, we focused on showing the existence of a localization-delocalization transition for a quasiperiodic one-dimensional model. Right at the transition, the existence of a critical point lead to an enhancement of an interaction-induced instability, that due to the nature of our system was a spin-triplet superconducting instability. Interestingly, quasiperiodic system in higher dimensions also show localizationdelocalization transitions, and associated critical points to them. 117 Enhanced symmetry broken orders induced by interactions have been found in those quasiperiodic two-dimensional models, To summarize, we have demonstrated that antiferromagnet-superconductor moire patterns show a critical point associated with a localization-delocalization transition. We showed that the quasiperiodic criticality happens for arbitrary ratios between the superconducting and antiferromagnetic order parameters, and that the critical point is universally located in a curve defined by the two order parameters. Upon inclusion of residual electronic interactions, we demonstrated the emergence of an unconventional spin-triplet state, whose d-vector is locked along the antiferromagnetic spin direction. We showed that the emergence of this unconventional superconducting state is finely related to the interplay between antiferromagnetism and superconductivity, having a spatially inhomogeneous superconducting order maximal when the two parent orders coexist. We finally showed that this phenomenology happens for generic quasiperiodic modulation frequencies and survives the presence of perturbations to the Hamiltonian. Ultimately, the phenomenology presented can be realized in twisted graphene superlattices with atomically engineered impurities, and generically on moire patterns between two-dimensional antiferromagnets and superconductors. Our results put forward antiferromagnetic-superconducting quasiperiodicity as a powerful knob to engineer robust superconducting states, providing a new route towards the design of artificial unconventional superconductors.