Optical communication systems are always evolving to support the need for ever-increasing transmission rates. This demand is supported by the growth in complexity of communication systems which are moving towards ultra-wideband transmission and space-division multiplexing. Both directions will challenge the design, modeling, and optimization of devices, subsystems, and full systems. Amplification is a key functionality to support this growth and in this context, we recently demonstrated a versatile machine learning framework for designing and modeling Raman amplifiers with arbitrary gains. In this paper, we perform a thorough experimental characterization of such machine learning framework. The applicability of the proposed approach, as well as its ability to accurately provide flat and tilted gain-profiles, are tested on several practical fiber types, showing errors below 0.5 dB. Moreover, as channel power optimization is heavily employed to further enhance the transmission rate, the tolerance of the framework to variations in the input signal spectral profile is investigated. Results show that the inverse design can provide highly accurate gain-profile adjustments for different input signal power profiles even not considering this information during the training phase. O PTICAL amplifiers are key devices in optical com- munication systems, with the erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) as the most deployed technology in commercial systems Therefore, a problem that have gained renewed interest is the Raman amplifier inverse design. It consists in finding the laser pump configuration (power and wavelength) for a desired Raman gain spectral profile. Conventionally, the Raman amplifier inverse design requires solving a set of nonlinear ordinary differential equations (ODEs) that govern the complex pump-signal, signal-signal and pump-pump interactions during their propagation in the optical fiber. Therefore, it is a timeconsuming and complex optimization process, especially for counter-propagating pump scheme, which is a better approach in terms of noise figure All these approaches completely rely on optimization loops that, even fastened by approximations and simplifications, require several iterations to provide the pump configuration. Moreover, such optimizations need to be restarted for every new target gain-profile. Therefore, the development of new tools to reduce the Raman amplifier inverse design complexity is essential for dy-arXiv:2010.12458v1 [physics.app-ph] 23 Oct 2020 namic optical networks targeting near-real-time adaptation against physical layer changes To avoid time-consuming optimization loops, an inverse system design based on machine learning has been recently applied to the Raman amplifier case In this paper, we extend our recent work Additionally, we evaluate the impact of different input power profiles on the NN models that build the ML framework. This is done by training these models in a data-set with constant input signal power spectral density (PSD) profiles and validate them over different input signal PSDs. This analysis is performed over a 100-km standard single mode fiber (SSMF) distributed Raman amplifier. Although we do not expect high gain-profile dependence for different input signal PSD due to the low inter-signal stimulated Raman scattering (SRS) inside the C-band, results show that the inverse mapping NN is quite sensible to the input signal PSD. In fact, the results show some degradation in predicting the pump powers, with a maximum error of 90 mW, when evaluated over different input signal PSDs. Results also show that this degradation can be overcome by either applying the gradient descent (GD)-based fine-optimization routine or considering the information on the input signal PSD as an additional input on the NN models. The paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the experimental setup for the Raman amplifier that provides the data-set to train and validate the NN models of the ML framework. Section III describes the machine learning framework for the inverse system design, detailing the proposed modification to consider input signal PSD information. Section IV presents and discussed the experimental results for the ML framework validation when trying to achieve arbitrary, flat and tilted gainprofiles for the different fiber types. Section V concludes this work. The experimental setup for the Raman amplifiers is depicted in Fig. In this work, we validate and modify the machine learning framework introduced by The inverse design is performed by a neural network referred as N N inv and illustrated in Fig. The N N inv output (pump power configuration) is tested using another NN, referred as N N f wd and illustrated in Fig. Regarding the input signal PSD profile awareness, henceforth, the N N inv and N N f wd models are referred as P in -aware when considering the additional input P in ; ∆P in -aware when considering the additional input ∆P in ; and P in -unaware when none of these inputs are considered. To generate the experimental data-sets to train and test the NN models considered in this work, we measured M gain-profiles on the experimental setup in Fig. DS-∆P in -var is considered only for the distributed Raman amplifier using SSMF. In this data-set, the total input power varies from 7 to 9 dBm, depending on the considered slope ∆P in . For the DS-∆P in -fixed, the total input power remains constant, being around 9 dBm for SSMF, and ULLF and 3 dBm for HNLF, DCF and IDF. To evaluate the ML framework performance over different fiber types, only the P in -unaware models are considered. These models are trained and tested over DS-∆P in -fixed data-set without the input signal PSD information. In this case, the data-sets are given by D M ×(n+N ) = {(P i 1 , ...P i n , G i 1 , ..., G i N )|i = 1, ..., M }, with n= 4 and N = 40. On the other hand, the input profile impact over the ML framework considers all input signal PSD awareness models. P in -unaware models are trained as before. P in -aware and ∆P in -aware models are jointly trained over DS-∆P in -fixed and DS-∆P in -var data-sets. These data-sets are given by either .., M }, depending on whether the entire P in or just ∆P in is considered as the input signal PSD information, respectively. All these models are separately tested over DS-∆P in -fixed and DS-∆P in -var. Regarding the data-sets sizes, for each fiber type (except SSMF 100-km), a different DS-∆P in -fixed data-set with M = 3000 cases is generated. All N N inv models are trained using random projection (RP) (also known as extreme learning machine, ELM) The inverse models accuracy in predicting the pump powers are shown in terms of maximum error between true and predicted power values for each pump laser over the test data-sets D 2 . The results in Table IV are for different fiber types considering the P in -unaware models tested over DS-∆P in -fixed data-set only. Table V presents the results for SSMF 100-km considering all input signal PSD awareness models: P in -unaware, P inaware and ∆P in -aware, where each model is separately tested over DS-∆P in -fixed and DS-∆P in -var datasets. In Table For the SSMF 100-km, the results in Table To evaluate the prediction accuracy of the forward models, the maximum absolute error E N N f w M AX between target and predicted gain-profiles along the frequency is calculated for the cases on the test data-sets D 2 . A statistical analysis of E N N f w M AX in terms of probability density function (PDF) is performed for each evaluated case. The PDF curves are shown in Fig. As observed for the N N inv , the forward models for HNLF and IDF present the worst prediction performance when compared to the other fiber types. However, all forward models in Fig. The results for the SSMF 100-km shown in Fig. To validate the ML framework on designing/achieving a target Raman gain profile, a new set of measurements is taken. The procedure consists in feeding the target gainprofile into the ML framework in Fig. Two sets of target gain-profiles are investigated: arbitrary and flat/tilted. The gain profiles on the test data-set D 2 are used as the target arbitrary gains. These gains are achievable profiles for the considered experimental setup. By using them as target gains it is possible to evaluate the ML framework for both: generalization (since these gains were not used on the NN models training stage) and accuracy in terms of how close it can provide feasible gain-profiles. Flat and tilted gainprofiles realization, on the other hand, are not guaranteed on the available experimental setup. This way, the ML framework is tested on its handling of a broader generalization problem, where the target may only be approximated. Fig. The results in Fig. Although DCF (Fig. By considering the GD fine-optimization routine (N N inv + N N f wd curves), the performance for HNLF and IDF significantly increase. Their CDF curves in Fig. The results for SSMF 100-km are separately shown in Fig. When applying the GD-based fine-optimization (solid lines), significant improvement is observed only for the P in -unaware model over the DS-∆P in -var data-set, as in Fig. Overall, when designing arbitrary gain-profiles, no matter the fiber type or the input signal PSD condition when training the NN models, the ML framework is able to maintain more than 80% of the cases with errors below 0.5 dB by just considering the P in -unaware models. Moreover, for DCF, SSMF and ULLL this high accuracy is achieved by just applying N N inv , leading to a non-iterative gain-profile adjustments relying on matrix multiplications. This is also true for the P inaware and ∆P in -aware models. With the last being a very interesting and low complex approach that increases the NN dimension by just one additional input when considering linear PSD profiles. Next, the ability of the ML framework to provide accurate flat and tilted gain-profiles for the different fiber types is investigated. This analysis is taken using P inunaware models trained over constant input signal PSD (DS-∆P in -fixed data-set). Flat and tilted gains-profiles ranging from 1 to 6 dB are evaluated in steps of 1 dB. For the tilted profiles, negative and positive slopes of 1 dB over the C-band are considered. Fig. For the flat gain-profiles in Fig. Tilted gain-profiles with a positive slope (Fig. Fig. The HNLF has the best performance, with just three pumps (P 1 , P 3 and P 4 ) being necessary to achieve a highly accurate flat and tilted gain-profiles. The errors are more related to our available Raman amplifier, in terms of number of pumps and their fixed wavelengths than to pump power limitations, since no pump power has reached its limit (Table For SSMF 100-km, again the same three pumps are needed to achieve most target gain-profiles. For 6 dB of target flat gain-profile (Fig. More intense consequences of the pump power limi-tation are observed for the low Raman gain coefficient ULLF, showing high limitations in manipulating the gain shape given our experimentally limited pump powers. For this fiber, all pumps are needed to achieve gainprofiles higher than 2 dB. For flat and negative gainprofile slopes, P 1 already reaches its limits for 2 dB of target gain, and P 2 for 4 dB. For positive slopes, these limits are achieved for slightly higher gains. But for all cases, the need for higher pumps powers limits the performance in providing flat/tilted gain-profile for higher gain levels. In Fig. Therefore, when operating under pump power limits, the ML-FM is able to generalize and experimentally provide gain-profiles really close to completely new targets. The performance in this region is limited just by total number of pump lasers and their fixed wavelengths, presenting errors of up to 0.5 dB. In this work, the machine learning framework for the Raman amplifier inverse design extensively tested. The ability to provide arbitrary, flat and tilted gain-profiles was evaluated for different experimental realizations of the Raman amplifier, considering different optical fiber types, and both discrete and distributed amplifiers. For this analysis, results showed that more than 80% of the 1500 target arbitrary gain spectra were achieved with a maximum error below 0.5 dB. For the flat/tilted gain profiles, maximum errors are up to 0.5 dB for all cases allowed by the available pump power within our experimental setup. Moreover, we also evaluate the machine learning robustness over different input power spectral distributions. Results show that the worse performance of the machine learning framework in this new scenario can be improved in two ways. One possibility is by considering the already proposed fine-design routine based on a gradientdescent optimization on a model not requiring the signal profile information. Another option is to incorporate this information on the training phase, creating input signal aware models as the ones developed in this work, and avoiding the iterative optimizations. Overall, this experimental analysis has proven that the machine learning framework is a versatile tool able to experimentally provide highly accurate designs for different and practical scenarios covering a wide range of target gain-profiles.