With the more recent shift in research focus to truly extended systems such as layered materials and surface adsorption, this issue becomes highly pertinent. The vdW-DF framework was published in 2004, 27 with the original functional form referred to here as vdW-DF1. Later improvements However, all improvements of vdW-DF thus far have left its fundamental framework unchanged since its inception. Here, we present an updated framework for next-generation van der Waals density functionals. This new framework is entirely built on the original framework, 27,29 which is rigorously derived from a manybody starting point The fundamental ideas for a non-local density functional theory-capable of reliably capturing van der Waals interactions-were already conceived in the 1990's. In 2004, a seminal paper introduced the first practical non-local exchange-correlation functional called vdW-DF, which has become widely successful and laid the foundation for much further research. However, since then, the functional form of vdW-DF has remained unchanged. Several successful modifications paired the original functional with different (local) exchange functionals to improve performance and the successor vdW-DF2 also updated one internal parameter. Bringing together different insights from almost two decades of development and testing, we present the next-generation non-local correlation functional called vdW-DF3, in which we change the functional form while staying true to the original design philosophy. Although many popular functionals show good performance around the binding separation of van der Waals complexes, they often result in significant errors at larger separations. With vdW-DF3, we address this problem by taking advantage of a recently uncovered and largely unconstrained degree of freedom within the vdW-DF framework that can be constrained through empirical input, making our functional semi-empirical. For two different parameterizations, we benchmark vdW-DF3 against a large set of well-studied test cases and compare our results with the most popular functionals, finding good performance in general for a wide array of systems and a significant improvement in accuracy at larger separations. Finally, we discuss the achievable performance within the current vdW-DF framework, the flexibility in functional design offered by vdW-DF3, as well as possible future directions for non-local van der Waals density functional theory. Systems with van der Waals interactions are ubiquitous in nature and they determine the structure of a vast and diverse array of materials around us, reaching from cement to DNA. These materials are often of scientific and technological importance, such as for gas storage and sequestration, Developments of vdW-DF The original vdW-DF1 of 2004 was of tremendous importance in establishing the ability to describe van der Waals forces at the pure DFT level. It introduced a nonlocal correlation energy functional of the electron density n(r) taking the form of a six-dimensional integral where the kernel Φ(r, r ) connects different regions of space and is derived from the adiabatic connection formula (ACF), see Section II B. This non-local correlation energy functional includes both short-and long-range contributions, but vanishes seamlessly in the homogeneous electron-gas limit. In vdW-DF, the non-local correlation part is therefore paired with that of the local density approximation (LDA), . The exchange part of vdW-DF, on the other hand, is evaluated at the generalized-gradient level (GGA). The GGA exchange can be expressed as a modulation of the LDA exchange as where hom x is the exchange-per-particle in the homogenous electron gas and the exchange enhancement factor F x (s) is a function of the reduced gradient s(r) ∝ |∇n(r)|/n(r) In vdW-DF1, revPBE exchange Around the same time, Cooper 36 demonstrated that the systematic overestimation of binding separations could be avoided by using a "soft" exchange functional, i.e. having an exchange enhancement factor F x (s) that increases slowly with s for small values of s < 1. Similarly, the exchange functionals optB86b 39 for vdW-DF1 correlation and B86R 66 for vdW-DF2 correlation explicitly set the low-s limit to that of the gradient expansion μ GEA used in the soft PBEsol, Lesson 1: The specific shape of F x (s) strongly impacts the bonding in vdW-DF and must be part of any functional design. The small-s limit should be soft, i.e. similar to PBEsol 67 in the small s regime, to provide accurate solid lattice constants and F x (s) should be asymptotically increasing (i.e. with a positive non-zero derivative in the asymptotic s limit) rather than going to a constant to avoid spurious binding from the exchange energy. This insight was also used in the CX Lesson 4: The plasmon-pole model is the key for improving the ability to simultaneously describe short-and long-range contributions to van der Waals interactions and thus also its ability to describe both small dimers and extended systems accurately. And, the asymptotic behavior of any vdW-DF functional has limited influence on the binding curves over physically relevant distances. All these lessons laid the foundation for our design of vdW-DF3. The kernel Φ(r, r ) in Eq. ( where S is given by: S q,q (iu) = 1 2 Sq,q (iu) + S-q ,-q (iu) (4a) Sq,q (iu) = d 3 r e -i(q-q )•r 4πn(r) iu + ω q (r) (-iu + ω q (r) (4b) Here, u = -i ω is the imaginary frequency and 4πn(r) is the square of the classical plasmon frequency. Note that there are two symmetric two-point S in Eq. (3), each of which contains one density and one spatial integral (see Eq. (4b)), leading to the two densities and spatial integrals in Eq. (1). This particular form of S is chosen such that it can fulfill four important physical constraints, i.e. time invariance, charge conversation, the f -sum rule, and maintaining self-correlation at large q. As the main ingredient in Eq. (4b), the dispersion model for ω q comes into focus. The small-q limit of ω q has to be a constant (i.e. independent of q). On the other hand, for the choice of S in Eq. (4b), the above constraints are fulfilled if the plasmon dispersion has the large-q limit of lim q→∞ ω q (r) = q 2 /2. For q values inbetween, the dispersion is not known. As such vdW-DF uses a switching function h that smoothly switches between the two known limits. In particular, vdW-DF defines for the plasmon dispersion where the switching function h determines the relation between density-density fluctuations and electromagnetic induction at different length scales. To facilitate the numerical evaluation, the vdW-DF framework uses only one length scale ∼ 1/q 0 n(r) in the switching function, which depends on the density and parameterizes the local response of the electron gas. q 0 (r) is determined by the requirement that the first-order expansion of the ACF in S reproduces a generalized gradient approximationtype local exchange-correlation (XC) functional. This XC functional is referred to as the internal functional, int xc , and is in general different from the total exchangecorrelation functional. The first-order expansion then yields for the internal functional If we set then q 0 (r) takes a particularly simple form of a modulated Fermi wave vector For practical purposes, the internal functional is approximated as LDA exchange correlation plus simple quadratic exchange gradient corrections of the form -Z DF1(2) ab s 2 /9, which differ in vdW-DF1 and vdW-DF2 because their Z ab are different. Both these functionals represent two different directions for design philosophies and yield varying levels of accuracy for different classes of materials. As a final point, the dispersion model for ω q increases with q, which effectively dampens the dispersion correction compared to the asymptotic response. Thus, tuning the dispersion model is somewhat reminiscent of optimizing damping functions in dispersion-correction schemes that start from an asymptotic formula. We have recently demonstrated that the freedom in choosing the h function can be exploited to significantly improve the notoriously bad C 6 coefficients that derive from the vdW-DF framework. In our new development, we explore a larger space of h functions in order to improve the general accuracy for short, medium, and long separations. This problem is vastly more complicated compared to the C 6 coefficients as it does not separate and competing interests have to be balanced. The accurate description of interactions beyond the binding separation is important for e.g. surfacemolecule vibrations and related zero-point energies Based on what we learned from our work on the C 6 coefficient, combined with an extensive amount of trial and error, we identified a new switching function which is both smooth and more flexible, in the form of α, β, and γ are adjustable parameters in this model, albeit one of them is constrained by Eq. ( This particular form of h has a small-y expansion of the form or equivalently, This allows a clear interpretation of the parameters, as the γ parameter sets the long-range van der Waals interactions, whereas the β parameter is the leading-order term causing damping of van der Waals interactions at shorter ranges. Finally, the αy 8 term ensures that Eq. ( which leads to the small-y expansions The quadratic term in y 2 /h DF3 (y) is absent, which correspond to the long-range limit of vdW-DF being well suited to describe the entire long-to-mid range van der Waals interactions; at the same time β = 0 also allows a sharper damping of van der Waals interactions in the mid-to-short range because of a larger α term, corresponding to a faster increase of h at y 1. Note that in this context "long-range" in our design does not correspond to the asymptotic limit, but rather corresponds to separations of about 5 -6 Å beyond the optimum separation. Figure plotting the physically relevant quantity y 2 /h(y), which shows stark difference for y < 0.8. As both vdW-DF1 and vdW-DF2 correlation is in use in standard functionals today and their performance is comparable (Lesson 3), for our new functional form we want to explore possibilities for improvements both within the vdW-DF1 and vdW-DF2 design philosophies and thus present two different parameterizations, which we call h DF3-opt1 and h DF3-opt2 . Both functions are nearly constant for y 2 /h DF3 (y) within 0 < y < 0.3, which is related to β = 0. In contrast, for h orig this function behaves quadratic for small y. All plotted h functions have intercepts at different values lim y→0 y 2 /h(y) = 1/γ because they all have different values for γ. This intercept is directly related to the asymptotic behavior of the functional and different degrees of accuracy for the corresponding C 6 coefficients can thus be expected. where c = 2 4/3 (3π 2 ) 1/3 . These exchange functionals are inspired by optB88 37 and B86R, Our original theoretical development leaves three adjustable parameters, i.e. β and γ from the proposed new switching function in Eq. ( where For the S22×5 set used in our optimization we have n = 5 and m = 22. Note that MARD puts the deviation in relation to the QC result at that separation and thus treats all separations on the same basis. However, when using MARD we found that the optimization equally weights large percentage deviations at large separations, which, however, may on the absolute scale only be in the sub-meV range-to the detriment of performance around the binding separation. We thus weigh the deviation by the interaction energy at the optimal separation, E QC sys,opt (where "opt" is the one separation out of the five for which the interaction energy is largest), and optimize WMARD instead. The optimization is now performed on a grid for all three parameters, where we use a coarse grid at first and later a finer grid around the minimum. Note that each point in this three-dimensional space requires 22 × 5 + 22 × 2 = 154 (dimers + monomers) calculations, which quickly becomes cost prohibitive. We thus decouple the exchange degree of freedom from the h-function degrees of freedom and transform the three dimensional optimization into a one-dimensional and two-dimensional optimization. This can be achieved through performing non-selfconsistent calculations and extracting the exchange energy as a function of κ (which is almost entirely independent of β and γ) and the non-local correlation as a function of β and γ (which also to a good approximation can be viewed as independent of κ). As mentioned in the previous section, we found optimized β values that are a small positive number and zero for DF3-opt1 and DF3-opt2, respectively, so we chose to set β = 0 and thus reduce the amount of parameters in our functionals down to two. Our optimized values All our calculations were performed with the quantum espresso (QE) package, For calculations on the dimer sets, spurious interac-tions due to the period boundary conditions in QE were minimized by padding dimers and monomers with at least 15 Å of vacuum. A list of 22 metals, semiconductors, and ionic salts were also used as in Ref. [39] except Li. A 15 × 15 × 15 k-point mesh was used for these periodic solids. To calculate their lattice constants and cohesive energies, a Birch-Murnaghan equation-of-state was used and the individual atom energies were calculated in a box surrounded by at least 15 Å of vacuum. Results for cohesive energies and lattice constants are in addition compared to PBE To investigate the performance of vdW-DF3-opt1 and vdW-DF3-opt2, we benchmark those functionals on an extensive list of systems reaching from molecular dimers to periodic systems including solids, layered systems, molecular crystals, and surface adsorption on coinage metals. We compare our results with the most popular functionals, finding good performance in general for a wide array of systems and a significant improvement in accuracy at larger separations. The two adjustable parameters of our functionals (see Table The more diverse and larger S66×8 set of molecular dimers is our first proper benchmark. A more detailed picture of the performance for the S66×8 emerges in Fig. In addition, we also provide data for the S66 data set, As a simple check that our reparameterization of the non-local correlation and semilocal exchange does not cause vdW-DF3 to fail in basic chemistry areas, we test our two functionals for the G2-1 100,101 set of molecular atomization energies as well as the G2RC 101 set for reaction energies. Results are depicted in Fig. Within DF3-opt1 and DF3-opt2 the non-local correlation is purposefully combined with an exchange en-FIG. ergy that has a smaller, PBEsol-like enhancement factor for small s, i.e. F DF3-opt x (s) = 1 + μ PBEsol s 2 + . . . , which significantly improves lattice constants of solids. In Fig. We also benchmark our functionals for a set of 9 layered structures against RPA reference calculations 89,90 and results are given in the right column of Fig. best out of all vdW-DF functionals. The progress made by our two functionals within the vdW-DF family can better be seen in Fig. An important benchmark for all van der Waals functionals are molecular crystals. The results in the previous sections showed that our new functionals vdW-DF3-opt1 and vdW-DF3-opt2 perform very well. The main advancement is the greatly increased performance for dispersion-dominated molecular dimers, especially at larger-than-binding separations, see Fig. We have noticed this trend early on and investigated measures to also achieve highly accurate performance for hydrogen-bonded systems at the equilibrium separation. These systems are very much controlled by the choice of exchange and we have investigated further parameterized versions of Eq. ( We show in Fig. To describe van der Waals interactions and non-covalent interactions beyond van der Waals interactions-in particular halogen-and hydrogenbonded systems-with high accuracy at the same time is a long-standing problem within DFT and has been linked to the delocalization error resulting from incomplete self-interaction correction. We have presented the next-generation non-local van der Waals density functional vdW-DF3. It is entirely built within the design guidelines of the original vdW-DF, but takes advantage of a newly discovered degree of freedom within the framework to significantly improve performance, in particular for beyond-binding separations. At the same time, we show that-by observing the vdW-DF constraints and building on lessons learned in successive developments-vdW-DF3 can retain the same wide transferability as earlier variants. This finding is based on benchmarking on a wide array of systems, in which we also compare with earlier van der Waals functionals, allowing us to document successive improvements. While we find generally good performance of vdW-DF3 for many systems, the most striking improvement is found for dispersion-dominated systems beyond binding separation. Our analysis also indicates that, with recent developments in general and vdW-DF3 in particular, the vdW-DF framework is operating close to its limits in terms of overall accuracy. This is also evident through the similarity of the DF3-opt2 parametrization of vdW-DF3 and the DF2-B86R functional. However, as the vdW-DF3 design is more flexible than its predecessors, it opens the door for functionals tailored to more specific classes of systems, which will likely cause some worsening in other areas. Finally, we provide an outlook for research directions that could overcome the fundamental bottlenecks of the vdW-DF framework and lead to further improvements for even broader classes of systems. This work was supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation Grant No. DMR-1712425. KB also acknowledges auxiliary funding from the Research Council of Norway No. 302362. We also thank Tonatiuh Rangel for providing some initial molecular crystal structures. The majority of calculations were performed on the WFU DEAC cluster, with some parts utilizing resources provided by uninett Sigma2 (National Infrastructure for High Performance Computing in Norway). We also gratefully acknowledge Per Hyldgaard for providing input files for the G2-1 and G2RC sets. Appendix A: Statistical Data TABLE II. Comparison of mean deviation (MD), mean absolute deviation (MAD), mean absolute relative deviation (MARD) from Eq. ( 