Using the first-principles calculations, we report the existence of the single-layer (SL) di-titanium oxide Ti 2 O (labeled as MOene) that constructs a novel family of MXene based on transition metal oxides. This MOene material strongly contrasts the conventional ones consisting of transition metal carbides and/or nitrides. SL Ti 2 O has high thermal and dynamical stabilities due to the strong Ti-O ionic bonding interactions. Moreover, this material is an intrinsic electride and exhibits extremely low diffusion barriers of ∼12.0 and 6.3 meV for Li-and Na diffusion, respectively. When applied as anode materials in lithium-ion batteries and sodium-ion batteries, it possesses a high energy storage capacity (960.23 mAhg -1 ), surpassing the traditional MXenes-based anodes. The superb electrochemical performance stems from the existed anionic electron on Ti 2 O surface. Astonishingly, SL Ti 2 O is also determined to be a superconductor with a superconducting transition temperature (T c ) of ∼9.8 K, which originates from the soft-mode of the first acoustic phonon branch and enhanced electron-phonon coupling in the low-frequency region. Our finding broadens the family of MXenes and would facilitate more experimental efforts toward future nanodevices. Recently, two-dimensional (2D) metal-shrouded crystals (MSC) (M 2 X, M = metal and X = C, N) have triggered enormous interest due to their excellent mechanical and electronic (metallic and/or semiconducting) properties, providing promises for sensors, 1,2 catalysts, The former includes alkali-metal and alkali-earth-metal carbides and nitrides (e.g., Ca 2 N, Following remarkable promises of conventional MSM, metal-shrouded monochalcogenides, such as single-layer (SL) Tl 2 O, 20 A 2 X (A = Na, K, Rb, or Cs; X = O, S, Se, or Te), It is worthy noted that the bulk Ti 2 O phase in a hexagonal lattice has been accessed in experiments since 1970, In this work, the first-principles calculations suggest that SL di-titanium oxide Ti 2 O is a novel family of MXene based on transition metal oxides (labels as MOene to underline the 2D morphology) rather than conventional ones consisting of transition metal carbides and/or nitrides. This MOene is a stable material and an intrinsic electride with anionic electron on the surface. The anionic states of 2D Ti 2 O enable the very low diffusion barrier and large charge storage capacity when explored as an anode material of lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and sodium-ion batteries (SIBs). Meanwhile, this MOene is a 2D superconductor with a T c of ∼9.8 K. Such a combination of stability and exceptional electronic features implies a number of potential applications of Ti 2 O in the next-generation nanodevices. First-principles calculations based on the density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed the projector augmented wave (PAW) scheme. The exchange and correlation contributions were simulated within the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) Figure Obviously, it breaks the traditional definition for MXenes, where X = C, N. Also, it is different from SL MBene, where X = B. Intriguingly, FM, AFM-Stripy, and AFM-Zigzag tend to be nonmagetic system with the same energy and zero magnetic moment on per Ti atoms. However, the AFM-Néel is the most stable configuration and has a magnetic moment 0.76 μ B per Ti atom, arising from the dangling 3d orbitals of Ti atoms. Thus, the AFM-Néel configuration is used in the next simulations. The equilibrium lattice parameters are a = 2.82 Å, b = 4.88 Å, which is in accordance with experimental values of Ti 2 O film (a = 2.84 Å). The elastic constants are calculated to be C 11 = C 22 = 133.7 N/m, C 12 = 33.7 N/m, C 66 = 6.2 N/m, respectively, satisfying the mechanical stability criteria for rectangle unit cell. The cohesive E coh and formation E f energies are 5.20 and -0.44 eV/atom, respectively, indicating its exothermic feature in the chemical synthesis and high experimental feasibility. Fortunately, the SL Ti 2 O may be accessed via the chemical deposition on (0001)-oriented α-Al 2 O 3 single crystalline substrate, as observed in Ti 2 O thin films. The chemical formula can thus be expressed as [Ti 2 O] 2+ •2e -, similar to the Y 2 C electride. (PBE) and 1.1 eV (HSE) (Figure Thus, the electronic properties of SL Ti 2 O can be efficiently tuned upon varying the surface functional groups. SIBs, site to be the most stable site with the lowest adsorption energies of being -0.75 and -0.96 eV for Li and Na atoms, respectively (Figure Based on Bader analysis, The charge-discharge rate was assessed via the energy barrier of Li/Na ion diffusion on Ti 2 O monolayer using the climbing-image nudged elastic band (CI-NEB) method. The superconductivity of the metallic SL Ti 2 O was further investigated. Figure The mid-frequency region from 200 to 300 cm -1 mainly consists of in-plane vibrations of Ti atoms. Figure 