Injection from metallic electrodes serves as a main channel of charge generation in organic semiconducting devices and the quantum effect is normally regarded to be essential. We develop a dynamic approach based upon the surface hopping (SH) algorithm and classical device modeling, by which both quantum tunneling and thermionic emission of charge carrier injection at metal/organic interfaces are concurrently investigated. The injected charges from metallic electrode are observed to quickly spread onto the organic molecules following by an accumulation close to the interface induced by the built-in electric field, exhibiting a transition from delocalization to localization. We compare the Ehrenfest dynamics on mean-field level and the SH algorithm by simulating the temperature dependence of charge injection dynamics, and it is found that the former one leads to an improper result that the injection efficiency decreases with increasing temperature at roomtemperature regime while SH results are credible. The relationship between injected charges and the applied bias voltage suggests it is the quantum tunneling that dominates the low-threshold injection characteristics in molecular crystals, which is further supported by the calculation results of small entropy change during the injection processes. An optimum interfacial width for charge injection efficiency at the interface is also quantified and can be utilized to understand the role of interfacial buffer layer in practical devices. The successful industrial application of organic light emitting device (OLED) might be one of the great scientific achievements in the last decades. Researchers are still devoting effort to improve the efficiency so that it can be extended to more application scenarios such as illumination, and more comprehensive analysis of the microscopic working mechanism is thus highly demanded In statistical physics, the charge injection at interfaces can be well described by the Richardson formula in the framework of thermionic emission theory Since the semiconductors are almost without free charges in the initial (as-prepared) stage, the injected charge easily enforces the system to the nonequilibrium state and the dynamical process of injection turns out to be essential. In addition, organic materials normally possess strong electron-phonon interactions, making the intrinsic mechanisms of charge injection more complicated In recent years, mixed quantum-classical dynamics (MQCD) has become an important tool to study the charge injection and transport properties in the organic semiconductors The discussion of charge injection in the practical organic semiconductors is still one of the pronounced topics especially when the device physicists want to understand the role of realistic device parameters such as the electric field, the interfacial morphology and so on. It is known that due to the strong interaction between electrons and phonons, the organic systems may undergo non-adiabatic transitions among different PESs. The non-adiabatic phenomena are very common for a large number of situations, such as the atomic and molecular collision reactions, molecular photochemistry and photophysics, and photoexcitation of condensed phase systems As typical organic semiconducting materials, the rubrene possesses large mobility and has lately attracted much research interest due to its low-threshold injection characteristics in heterojunction devices The influence of the bias voltage applied at the metallic electrode on the injected charges and the optimum width of the interfacial layer for the charge injection will be investigated. Finally, the charge injection process at the metal/organic interfaces will be featured by the evolution of entropy change. The paper is organized in the following sequence. The model for the metal/organic system and the dynamic evolution method are given in Section II. The results and discussion are presented in Section III. Finally, in Section IV, the main conclusions are drawn. Throughout this work, we take rubrene as instance to show the simulation results from our developed dynamic approach. Without loss of generality, a metallic electrode and the rubrene molecules are placed head-to-tail to construct a one-dimensional metal/organic structure, in which totally 160 sites are considered and we take 70 sites on the left to mimic the atoms of metallic electrode and the other 90 sites on the right for the organic molecules, respectively. Moreover, as a crucial consideration of this work, we notice that the morphology of the interface is essential for the charge injection. Specifically, as the organic materials are normally soft and amorphous, there is remarkable permeability of organic molecules into the metallic electrode. Therefore, a certain number of sites in the electrode close to the organic side will be regarded as the interfacial layer. The model Hamiltonian consists of three terms as follows: The first term in Eq. ( where ĉ † n (ĉ n ) creates (annihilates) an electron on n-th site and t n = t 0(1) -α n (u n+1 -u n ) is the nearest-neighbor hopping integral in which the vibronic coupling is involved, namely, with α n being the vibronic coupling strength and u n being the displacement of n-th site. Herein, t 0 is the hopping constant in both electrode and organic material, and t 1 is the coupling between them. The vibronic coupling α n = 0 for metallic sites far away from interface so that it is gapless. For the organic molecules, we take uniform vibronic couplings, namely α n = α, so that the initial state of the organic molecules is dimerized due to the Peierls instability and the gap is determined by the value of α. In this situation, there naturally exists a barrier between electrode and organic material. In the interfacial layer, the vibronic coupling strength in the side of metallic electrode is given by a half Gaussian function, namely, with n 0 being the last site of the metallic electrode and W being the width of the interfacial layer. Here, W is an essential parameter in our model to characterize the interface. The second term in Eq. ( with K being the elastic constant and M being the mass of molecules. The third term of Eq. ( where U n (t) is the potential energy induced by the applied bias voltage and the electric field. In the metallic electrode a bias voltage is applied and written as U n (t) = |e|V (t). In the organic molecules an electric field E n (t) along the -x direction is thus generated and then the potential energy is determined by U n (t) = -|e|V n (t). As another important input of our approach, we consider to embed the device modeling into the dynamic simulations. That is, considering the feedback of the distribution of the injected charges onto the electric field, E n (t) and V n (t) are given by the Poisson's equation where e is the elementary charge of an electron, ε r is the relative dielectric constant, ε 0 is the permittivity of vacuum, a 0 is the lattice constant, V rub is the occupying volume of a single molecule and ρ n is the injected charges on the n-th site. In the practical simulations, in order to minimize the numerical errors, we turned on the external field smoothly by using a half Gaussian function, that is, ] for 0<t<t c and V (t) = V 0 for t ≥ t c with t c being a smooth turn-on period and t w the width. We set t c = 30 fs and t w = 25 fs which are optimum values for numerical accuracy through our testing. The electric field E 1 (t) at the first organic molecule is also turned on smoothly in the same way, and the initial value E 1 is determined by V 0 = La 0 E 1 with L being the site number of the organic molecules. The model parameters in this work are obtained from the earlier work by Troisi for investigating the charge transport of rubrene, namely, t 0 = 1150 cm -1 , α = 3980 cm -1 / Å, K = 48200 amu/ps 2 , M = 532 amu For most organic materials, the dielectric constant normally ranges between 3 and 4 The motion of the sites can be described by the Newtonian equation. As we want to concurrently take the thermionic emission into account, the temperature should also be involved as a parameter in our model. Hence, the Langevin equation is employed as follows: Herein, F n (t) represents the force exerted on the n-th site and the density matrix ρ is given by ρ n,n ′ = μ ψ * μ,n (t)f μ ψ μ,n ′ (t) with f μ (equals to 0, 1 or 2) being the time-independent distribution function determined by the initial occupation of electrons, γ is the friction coefficient which is set to 0.01 ps -1 , and ξ n is a Markovian Gaussian random force with standard deviation (2γMk B T /∆t) 1/2 to mimic the thermal effect. With these considerations, the lattice displacement u n (t j+1 ) and the velocity un (t j+1 ) are respectively given by The time evolution of the electronic wavefunction is given by the time-dependent Schrödinger equation: where ψ μ,n is the μ-th eigenstate of the Hamiltonian (1) on the n-th site. Herein, in order to numerically solve the electronic wavefunction, the integration time step ∆t in the discretization procedure must be set to be sufficiently small, namely below the order of the bare phonon frequency ω Q = 4K/M. It is thus set to be 0.2 fs except for the trivial crossings. Therefore, the solution of the time-dependent Schrödinger equation is finally written as where φ ν and ε ν are the instantaneous eigenfunctions and eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian, respectively. The eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian can be expressed with the original diabatic orbitals, The electronic wavefunction is described with a linear expansion of these eigenfunctions, ψ = ν c ν φ ν . The time-dependent Schrödinger equation is then written as with d n ν,μ = φ ν | dφ μ /du n being the non-adiabatic coupling which is obtained by the Hellmann-Feynman theorem, i.e., If the quantumness of the system is strong enough, the charge injection will be dominated by the quantum tunneling which is featured by the non-adiabatic transitions among different PESs adhere to the electrode and organic molecules, respectively. In inorganic semiconductors, one can simply consider a scattering process through, for example, a triangle-shaped energy barrier to simulate this tunneling effect. In organic semiconductors, however, the electron is self-trapped and relatively localized such that it is not easy for the electron to hop across the barriers by their own kinetic energy, and the electron-phonon interactions normally serve as the main driving force to induce the quantum tunnelings. To this end, we have to adopt the Tully's standard SH algorithm to take this tunneling effect into the simulations, and the hopping probability from the active surface ν to another surface μ is given by If g ν,μ <0, it is reset to be zero. A uniform random number ζ is generated and then a surface hop takes place if μ-1 X =ν g ν,X <ζ ≤ μ X =ν g ν,X . A velocity adjustment is then made to conserve the total energy if where It is known that the trivial crossings are very common in large systems involving many electronic states due to the rapid change with time of the non-adiabatic couplings Adaptive time intervals We first discuss the dynamical process of the injected charges in the organic molecules. By using the SH algorithm, we calculate the injected charge distribution ρ n (t) and the corresponding electric field distribution E n (t) in the organic molecules at different time points with interfacial width W = 20a 0 , bias voltage V 0 = 5V and temperature T = 300K. As shown in Fig. Afterward, enforced by the built-in electric field E n (t), the injected charges are redistributed and accumulated on the left hand side of the organic molecules near the metal/organic interface after a relaxation time of ∼ 80 fs. This is because we do not consider the other electrode in the devices such that there is not a drain for the carriers; we are dealing with a single contact for the first step. From Fig. In order to show the crucial role of quantum tunneling in charge injection, we give a comparison of efficiency for the charge injection at the metal/organic interfaces by individ- To further manifest the advantages of the SH algorithm for simulating the charge injection, we calculate the mean value of injected charges Q over the smooth time range between 400 fs and 500 fs for more typical temperatures. Fig. The curves can be analyzed in two different temperature regimes. One is from 5 K to 30 K, in which Q obtained by the Ehrenfest dynamics is slightly larger than that from the SH algorithm, and the other is from 30 K to 300 K, in which Q obtained by the SH algorithm is significantly larger. More importantly, the temperature dependence of injected charges calculated from Ehrenfest dynamics shows a counterintuitive result that the charge injection efficiency decreases with increasing temperature, so we can conclude the Ehrenfest dynamics breaks down at room temperature. The reason is that, at low temperature the non-adiabatic transitions are largely suppressed so the mean-field treatment of PES in Ehrenfest dynamics shares the similar results with the SH algorithm. At room temperature, on the other hand, non-adiabatic transitions obviously dominate the charge injection so we have to use SH algorithm to properly simulate this process. It is also found that the lineshape deviates from that of Richardson formula, namely ∼ T 2 exp(-φ/k B T ) with φ being the injection barrier. Our result exhibits larger injection efficiency than that from the Richardson formula within 30 K to 300 K, which is explicitly the consequence of involving quantum effects. For the sake of device modeling, our dynamic approach has to be working with the influence of the bias voltage V 0 applied at the metallic electrode on the charge injection efficiency. To this end, three different values of W are chosen for the calculation of the total injected charges at T = 300 K, which is displayed in Fig. As well known, interfaces are essential for organic semiconductors in any way. In our previous work, we have discussed an optimum width of donor/acceptor (D/A) interface for the dissociation of the charge-transfer (CT) state For the cases of V 0 = 3 V and V 0 = 4 V, with the increase of the interfacial width, Q dramatically increases for W < 30a 0 followed by a remarkable decrease. Differently, for the case of V 0 = 5 V, Q first dramatically increases and then behaves a slight increase except for the case W = 40a 0 . As a consequence here, the optimum value of the interfacial width for the charge injection is determined to be 30a 0 (∼ 10 nm) in our case, which is consistent with Hou's results Before ending this section, we would like to discuss more on the quantumness of the charge injection process at the metal/organic interfaces. As stated above, the classical thermionic emission theory can not be directly applied to the organic semiconductors; lots of quantum effects have been discussed in this systems especially taking photoemission into consideration where ρ L is the reduced density matrix of the charges in organic molecules. Fig. Combined these two studies, our findings may enlighten the understanding of the quantumness of charge dynamics in organic semiconductors which may facilitate the establishment of a systematic device modeling method specifically for this system. In summary, we develop a unified dynamic approach based upon surface hopping algorithm combined with Poisson's equation to investigate the charge injection process at metal/organic interface. It is found that the charges can be dynamically injected into the organic materials and then quickly spread onto the molecules in a delocalized fashion followed by an accumulation induced by the built-in electric field. The injected charges obtained by the SH algorithm are compared with that by the Ehrenfest dynamics, and the former one works well for simulating efficient charge injection at room temperature while the latter one is merely valid at ultralow temperature. The influence of the bias voltage applied at the metallic electrode on the charge injection efficiency is discussed and the injected charges behave a significant increase by increasing applied bias voltage. With the assistance of quantum effect, the charges could be injected into the organic molecules efficiently even if the bias voltage is small compared with the bandgap of the organic material, which can be utilized to explain the low-threshold feature. The width of ∼ 10 nm is regarded to be the optimum value of the interfacial layer for the charge injection at the metal/organic interfaces. In addition, the von Neumann entropy provides a further insight into the quantumness of the charge injection dynamics. In inorganic semiconductors the thermal equilibrium is basically valid in an approximate manner, since the thermal motions of atoms are almost completely disordered. In contrast, the molecular vibrations in organic materials are always concentrated at some specific modes so that the quantum coherence of electrons could be well protected to keep quantumness alive. In organic photovoltaic devices, the coherent exciton dynamics has been demonstrated in many experiments and widely discussed 