We studied metastable α-FeGe 2 , a novel layered tetragonal material, embedded as a spacer layer in spin valve structures with ferromagnetic Fe 3 Si and Co 2 FeSi electrodes. For both types of electrodes, spin valve operation is demonstrated with a metallic transport behavior of the α-FeGe 2 spacer layer. The spin valve signals are found to increase both with temperature and spacer thickness, which is discussed in terms of a decreasing magnetic coupling strength between the ferromagnetic bottom and top electrodes. The temperature-dependent resistances of the spin valve structures exhibit characteristic features, which are explained by ferromagnetic phase transitions between 55 and 110 K. The metallic transport characteristics as well as the low-temperature ferromagnetism are found to be consistent with the results of first-principles calculations. Vertical spin valves are essential building blocks for spintronic applications and valuable tools for fundamental research In this article, we introduce the novel layered material α-FeGe 2 as one of the few promising candidates regarding the search for two-dimensional spintronic materials. The successful synthesis of metastable α-FeGe 2 was only recently demonstrated utilizing a solid phase epitaxial process Here, we utilized vertical transport in spin valve structures to shed light on the electronic and magnetic characteristics of embedded α-FeGe 2 as well as testing their potential for spintronic applications. The investigated vertical spin valve devices are based on a trilayer structure, in which an α-FeGe 2 film serves as the spacer layer between a ferromagnetic bottom (FM1) and a ferromagnetic top (FM2) electrode. The trilayer structures were grown by a combination of low-temperature molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and solid-phase epitaxy (SPE) on semi-insulating GaAs(001) substrates according to an approach described previously To fabricate the spin valve devices, photolithography and wet etching were used to define square pillars with a surface area of 1 μm 2 as shown in Figs. The current-voltage (I-V) characteristics for vertical transport through the devices #1 and #3 is shown in Fig. The spin transport through the trilayer structures in the different devices was studied by examining the change in resistance ΔR(H) = R(H) -R p during upward and downward sweeps of an external magnetic field (H), where R p denotes the resistance in a large magnetic field. Figure In striking contrast to the commonly observed behavior for vertical spin valves The electronic band structure of isolated bulk α-FeGe 2 resulting from DFT calculations is shown in Fig. Regarding the magnetic ground state of α-FeGe 2 , we con-sidered three different configurations: (i) paramagnetic (PM) phase, where the atoms are considered to have no collective magnetization axis; (ii) ferromagnetic (FM) phase, in which all Fe atoms have aligned magnetic moments along the caxis; and (iii) antiferromagnetic (AFM) phase, where the ferromagnetic Fe sheets within α-FeGe 2 form sublattices with antiparallel order. From the total energy analysis of these cases, we found that the FM phase is the energetically most favorable ground state. The PM phase was about 56 meV higher in energy (or about 7 meV per unit cell) compared to the FM phase, while the AFM phase was only about 2.9 meV higher in energy (or about 0.36 meV per unit cell). For the DFT-relaxed structure, the FM phase was about 35 meV (19 meV) lower in energy than the PM (AFM) phase. Again, we found that the FM phase should be the ground state. These results indicate the possibility to tune the magnetic ground state of α-FeGe 2 via the strain state. Note that the strain in α-FeGe 2 might also depend on temperature because of different thermal expansion coefficients of the film and the GaAs substrate The layered tetragonal material α-FeGe 2 embedded as a spacer layer in vertical spin valve structures exhibits metallic transport behavior. Successful spin valve operation is demonstrated for structures with ferromagnetic Fe 3 Si (bot-tom and top) and Co 2 FeSi (top) electrodes. An enhancement of the spin valve signals with increasing temperature and spacer layer thickness is attributed to a decreasing magnetic interlayer coupling between the ferromagnetic bottom and top electrodes. Characteristic features in the temperature derivatives of the device resistances are assigned to a ferromagnetic phase transition between 55 and 110 K. Both the metallic characteristics and the ferromagnetic ground state at low temperatures are confirmed by DFT calculations. Supplemental Material: Electronic and magnetic properties of α-FeGe 2 films embedded in vertical spin-valve devices Dietmar Czubak, 1, * Samuel Gaucher, 1 Jens Herfort, 1 Klaus Zollner, 2 Jaroslav Fabian, 2 Holger T. Grahn, 1 and Manfred Ramsteiner The calculations of the electronic structure and the structural relaxation of our geometries are performed with density functional theory (DFT) The geometry of FeGe 2 is shown on the left side of Fig. If we fully relax the lattice structure and internal coordinates of bulk FeGe 2 derived from the calculated energy minimum of the lattice, we obtain the lattice constants a = 2.8525 Å and c = 5.4118 Å and distances d 1 = 2.9191 Å and d 2 = 2.4927 Å. In the calculated relaxed structure, the calculated magnetic moments are 0.1823μ B for Fe and -0.0066μ B for Ge. In the following, we discuss results obtained for the experimentally determined lattice structure of FeGe 2 , if not indicated otherwise. In Fig. In Fig. In Fig. To determine the magnetic ground state of α-FeGe 2 , we consider a supercell of 2 × 2 × 2 of FeGe 2 and three different magnetic configurations as depicted in Fig. FM AFM E FM + 56.39 meV E FM E FM + 2.89 meV FIG. about 56 meV higher in energy (or about 7 meV per unit cell) compared to the FM phase, while the AFM phase is only about 2.9 meV higher in energy (or about 0.36 meV per unit cell). To determine the ground state of the relaxed structure, we performed the same analysis and found that the FM phase is about 35 meV (19 meV) lower in energy than the PM (AFM) phase so that the FM phase corresponds again to the ground state. arXiv:2010.04453v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 27 Oct 2020