In the development of quantum microwave-to-optical (MO) converters, excessive noise induced by the parametric optical drive remains a major challenge at milli-Kelvin temperatures. Here we study the extraneous noise added to an electro-optic transducer in its quantum ground state under an intense pulsed optical excitation. The integrated electro-optical transducer leverages the inherent Pockels effect of aluminum nitride microrings, flip-chip bonded to a superconducting resonator. Applying a pulsed optical drive with peak power exceeding the cooling power of the dilution refrigerator at its base temperature, we observe efficient bi-directional MO conversion, with near-ground state microwave thermal excitation (ne = 0.09 ± 0.06). Time evolution study reveals that the residual thermal excitation is dominated by the superconductor absorption of stray light scattered off the chip-fiber interface. Our results shed light on suppressing microwave noise in a cavity electro-optic system under intense optical drive, which is an essential step towards quantum state transduction between microwave and optical frequencies. Hybrid superconducting-photonics systems operated in cryogenic conditions has drawn wide attention in the past decade, in pursuit of quantum microwave-tooptical (MO) conversion, microwave-optical quantum entanglement distribution, etc, as a building block of the envisioned future quantum network For quantum transduction applications, it is crucial to obtain both high electro-optical interaction rates and low thermal occupations, which is assisted by integrating an intense optical parametric drive into device operation at the milli-Kelvin temperature In this work, we study near-ground-state microwave thermal excitation induced by strong pulsed optical drives in an integrated electro-optical device mounted in a dilution refrigerator at milli-Kelvin. The microwave thermal noise from the device microwave port is calibrated through precise noise thermometry assisted by an ultra-low-noise travelling wave amplifier Device design and implementation.-The electrooptical transducer studied in this work utilizes a tripleresonant scheme: a microwave mode couples to two optical modes via the Pockels effect. In our previous implementations In this electro-optical system, the interaction Hamiltonian is H int = g o ab † c + a † bc † , where a, b, and c are the annihilation operators for the optical drive mode, optical signal mode, and microwave modes, respectively, and g o is the vacuum electro-optical coupling rate due to Pockels effect. Pumping the lower frequency optical mode a enables coherent conversion between the optical mode b and the microwave mode c. When the two optical modes are separated by the microwave mode's frequency, we have the peak conversion efficiency The microwave and photonic chips are fabricated independently and then assembled through flip-chip bonding, as illustrated in Fig. When a resonant optical drive is sent to the device through the fiber, a large portion of the input optical power, which is around 50% based on a room temperature calibration, is not coupled to the waveguide and scattered off the chip-fiber interface. These uncoupled photons, when absorbed by the device assembly, lead to heating of the chip as well as the packaging. The coupled light propagates along the waveguide, and eventually dissipates in the microring, inducing local heating in the cavity. Heat generated in the device is dissipated through thermal contact between sapphire substrate and the copper housing, which is well thermalized to the MXC. Device performance under pulsed drive.-To parametrically enhance the electro-optical coupling without excessively heating up the device as well as the MXC, we implement a pulsed drive scheme. As illustrated in Fig. By measuring the spectra of the complete tranducer's scattering matrix, we calibrated the conversion efficiency with both CW and pulsed drive of different powers. In Fig. To study the dynamical noise performance of the device, we implement a fast precision measurement to mon-itor the power spectral density of the microwave port output noise as illustrated in Fig. The fast frequency shift and linewidth broadening when light is shined on the superconducting material are typically attributed to the superconductor absorption of photons From the microwave output noise power spectra, we can infer the optically induced effective thermal bath occupancy as well as microwave mode thermal excitations. As introduced in detail in reference Here the first and second term are contribution from the external bath and intrinsic bath, respectively, and ∆n out,add represents the additional output line added noise induced by light. κ b,in and κ b,ex are the coupling rates to the intrinsic and the external decay channels, and ω 0 is the angular resonant frequency of the resonator. nen and nex are the respective bath occupancy of the intrinsic bath and the external bath. By fitting each noise spectrum to Eq. 2, the intrinsic and external thermal bath occupancy can be found. Given both bath occupancies, the microwave mode thermal excitation can be calculated as the weighted average of the two thermal baths ne = κ b,in nen + κ b,ex nex κ b,in + κ b,ex . Fig. Based on the fitted microwave noise power spectra, the average thermal occupancy of the superconducting mode when driven with different optical pump is plotted in Fig. Heating mechanism analysis.-To gain insight on the underlying heating mechanisms, we further analyze the time evolution of the noise spectrum with various optical drive powers. Figure The next subject we study is the contribution to the microwave thermal excitation from different optical pho-ton sources, among which we mainly focus on two categories: the cavity photons that are dissipated in the microring and those stray photons scattered off the chipfiber interface. For this device under test, based on the calibration at room temperature, 50% of light in the fiber is not coupled to the waveguide and scattered off the chip-fiber interface. The rest is coupled to the waveguide and mostly dissipated in the microring for a resonant drive because of the critical-coupling condition, or, for a detuned drive, transmitted in low loss waveguide and then coupled back to the fiber. To discriminate the impact of the optical photons scattered off the chip-fiber interface, we characterize microwave noise when applying a non-resonant optical drive. In contrast to a resonant drive, a non-resonant drive does not launch cavity photons nor generate local heat in the microring. Figure Regarding the optically induced microwave noise, our work revealed two types of thermal bath with distinct time constants. The slow responding bath, which is determined by the average optical drive power, could be further suppressed by using lower duty cycle at a given peak drive power. The fast responding bath, which is a more dominant factor at higher optical drive powers, is relatively insensitive to the change of pulsed drive configuration within one order of magnitude, because the new steady state is rapidly established within 200 ns after the drive is turned on. Separate measurements with T = 16 ms and duty cycle of 0.2% yields similar results to that with T = 1 ms and 0.2% duty cycle. To further reduce the fast responding bath occupancy at a given optical pump power, possible solutions include spatially distancing the chip-fiber interface from the superconducting resonator, creating proper shield to block stray light from the chip-fiber interface, and providing better thermal dissipation channels to the superconducting material, for example immersing the device in superfluid helium For an arbitrary quantum transduction between microwave and optical states, it is required to have at least 50% conversion efficiency while maintaining low microwave noise, which means approximately 3 orders of magnitude of improvements needs to be made in terms of the enhanced electro-optical coupling coefficient g o . In principle, we can bypass these demanding requirements by using quantum teleportation protocol To summarize, we present a focused study of nearground state microwave thermal excitations in a cavity electro-optical system driven by strong pulsed optical drives. Dynamical noise characterization reveals that the microwave noise is limited by a fast responding effective bath caused by superconductor absorption of stray drive photons scattered from the chip-fiber interface. We show vii that with practical improvements, microwave-to-optical quantum interface based on pulsed cavity-electro optical system is highly feasible.