Manganese oxides have received much attention over the years among the wide range of electrocatalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) due to their low toxicity, high abundance and rich redox chemistry. While many previous studies focused on the activity of these materials, a better understanding of the material transformations relating to activation or degradation is highly desirable, both from a scientific perspective and for applications. We electrodeposited Na-containing MnO x without long-range order from an alkaline solution to investigate these aspects by cyclic voltammetry (CV), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) at the Mn-K and Mn-L edges. The pristine film was assigned to a layered edge-sharing Mn 3+/4+ oxide with Mn-O bond lengths of mainly 1.87 Å and some at 2.30 Å as well as Mn-Mn bond lengths of 2.87 Å based on fits to the extended X-ray fine structure (EXAFS). The decrease of the currents at voltages before the onset of the OER followed power laws with three different exponents depending on the number of cycles and the Tafel slope decreases from 186±48 to 114±18 mV dec -1 after 100 cycles, which we interpret in the context of surface coverage with unreacted intermediates. Post-mortem microscopy and bulk spectroscopy at the Mn-K edge showed no change of the microstructure, bulk local structure or bulk Mn valence. Yet, the surface region of MnO x oxidized toward Mn 4+ , which explains the reduction of the currents in agreement with literature. Surprisingly, we find that MnO x reactivates after 30 minutes at open-circuit (OC), where the currents and also the Tafel slope increase. Reactivation processes during OC are crucial because OC is unavoidable when coupling the electrocatalysts to intermittent power sources such as solar energy for sustainable energy production. Among the wide range of transition metal oxides used for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), manganese oxides have received much attention over the years because their low toxicity and their high abundance (10 th in Earth crust). Furthermore, photosystem II has an active site consisting of CaMn 4 O 5 , which makes manganese oxides scientifically interesting as biomimetic catalysts Understanding the processes of activation and degradation of oxides in alkaline media requires measurements complementary to electrochemical methods. Frydendal et al. Valuable insight into the mechanism of catalysis, activation and degradation of manganese oxides has been obtained in the last decade from spectroscopy including X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) In this study, we electrodeposited Na-containing MnO x films without long-rang order directly in an alkaline electrolyte using a complexing agent, while most other manganese oxide catalysts are deposited at lower pH (e.g. Mn(NO 3 ) 2 ٠4H 2 O (≥ 99.99 %), MnO 2 (≥ 99 %), Mn 3 O 4 (≥ 97 %), Mn 2 O 3 (≥ 99.9 %), L-(+)-Tartaric acid (≥ 99.5 %) and (2 M and 0.1 M) NaOH solutions were ordered from Sigma-Aldrich. Graphite foil (≥ 99.8) with a thickness of 0.254 mm ordered from VWR, deionized water (>18 MΩ cm). All reactants were used as received, without any further treatment. 0.6 mmol of Mn(NO 3 ) 2 ٠4H 2 O and 6 mmol of L-(+)-tartaric acid were dissolved in a small volume of deionized water (approx. 1 mL). 120 mL of Ar-purged 2 M NaOH solution were added slowly with stirring to the previous solution, changing from colorless to beige. Electrodeposition was carried out using a Gamry 600+ potentiostat and a three-electrode cell made from a three-neck round-bottom flask. The separation between the necks and thus electrodes was less than 1 cm. The working electrodes were either a glassy carbon disk (4 mm diameter; HTW Sigradur G) in a rotating disk electrode (RDE) or graphite paper (Alfa Aesar). The unrotated RDE was mounted onto a commercial rotator (ALS RRDE-3A Ver 2.0). We used a saturated calomel reference electrode (SCE; ALS RE-2BP) and a graphite rod (redox.me, HP-III, High Pure Graphite) as the counter electrode. The galvanostatic deposition was performed at 150 μA/cm 2 until a charge density of 40 mC/cm 2 was reached. The detailed protocol for electrocatalytic investigations is documented in Table The instantaneous Tafel slope was calculated by the first derivative of the iR-corrected voltage as function of the logarithm of the current density. The Tafel slope was also calculated with a fitting of voltage as function of the logarithm of the current, using the cathodic half-cycle of the cyclic voltammetry of iRcorrected data in the range between 1.71 and 1.77 V vs. RHE. The electrodes were swept at 100 mV s -1 and rotated at 1600 rpm. The Tafel slope was obtained by linear regression of the iR-corrected voltage (E-iR) against log 10 (i). The error represents the standard deviation of three independently prepared electrodes. The sample morphology was determined using a Zeiss LEO Gemini 1530 scanning electron microscope, acceleration voltage of 3 keV and in high vacuum (around 10 -9 bar) and using a secondary electron inLens detector. The images were taken in different regions of the sample to get representative data. EDX measurements were performed using a Thermo Fischer detector with an acceleration voltage of 12 keV. All XAS data were collected at an average nominal ring current of 300 mA in top-up and multi-bunch mode at the BESSY II synchrotron operated by Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin. Soft XAS measurements at the Mn-L edges were conducted using the LiXEdrom experimental station at the UE56/2 PGM-2 beamline Hard XAS at Mn-K edge was performed at the KMC-2 beamline EXAFS simulations were performed using the software SimXLite. After calculation of the phase functions with the FEFF8-Lite An electrodeposition protocol was developed to produce Mn oxides at alkaline pH. In these electrolytes, manganese might deposit in a numerous of stable oxide forms, commonly Mn 3 O 4 (Mn +2 , Mn 3+ ), Mn 2 O 3 (Mn 3+ ) or MnO 2 (Mn 4+ ) Manganese oxides were deposited on glassy carbon electrodes for electrocatalytic investigations and on graphite paper for X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS). We first focus on the discussion of the samples deposited on glassy carbon disks. The deposition setup consisted of a commercial rotator for RDEs and a three-electrode cell (Fig In order to evaluate the catalytic activity, activation and possible degradation of the films on glassy carbon disks, series of CV were performed in a RRDE station (representative data of MnO x sample A in Fig. The trends of the disk currents during cycling were also evaluated at selected voltages with and without oxygen evolution (Fig. The current ratios i/Δi 1.5V of MnO x followed a power law with different exponents depending number of cycles and whether oxygen is evolved (Fig. In summary, the currents decreased with cycling for MnO x and reached a steady-state only at the voltage which support oxygen evolution (1.75 V vs. RHE). These trends can be explained by (1) change in coverage with intermediates (hydroxylation or O 2 coverage) To distinguish irreversible surface changes and transient changes, we let the films rest at open-circuit voltage (OCV) for 30 minutes and then performed an additional 10 cycles. This simple test was recently introduced by El-Sayed et al. Here, we extend it to electrocatalyst tests using CV (Fig. The exponents of the current ratio differed depending on the previously applied voltage after the OCV period for all films, suggesting partially reversible processes. The exponent was identical (-1/3) below the onset of the OER and less negative at the onset (-1/4) and above (-3/20). Furthermore, the current ratios were offset to lower values, i.e. the prefactor of the power law was lower. We interpret these observations as follows: the reduced prefactor indicates irreversible changes due to a reduction of active sites, either by material dissolution or deactivation of the active sites. Note that we normalized by a quantity proportional to the surface area so that we can exclude it as the source of the lower prefactor and hence currents. We cannot exclude dissolution of specific cations that leads to a different surface composition as observed, e.g. for the perovskite La 0.6 Sr 0.4 MnO 3 We analyzed the Tafel slope during selected cycles of a representative sample (Fig. We used XAS to study the irreversible changes due to cycling. XAS experiments were necessary due to its fine chemical sensitivity and the absence of crystallinity required for diffraction techniques. Changes in the local structure of the oxides were identified using the EXAFS at the Mn-K edge The sample for the XAS investigations were prepared on graphite foil by the same procedure as discussed above (Table Parameter Mn-O1 Mn-O2 Mn-Mn R -factor MnO x -0 The R-factor used Fourier filtered data between 1 and 3 Å using the formula Rf = 100 Σ(m i ff -e i ff ) 2 /Σ(e i ff ) 2 , where m ff represents the Fourier-filtered model and e ff represents the experimental k-weighted EXAFS curve. The Fourier transform of the EXAFS of MnO x showed the expected features of layered hydroxides (Fig. A qualitative estimation of the average bulk metal valence can be achieved by comparison of the XANES spectra of the films and suitable reference materials (Fig. As catalysis is a surface process, we turned our attention to soft X-ray spectroscopy accessed by the electron yield mode. The escape depth of the electrons is 2.6±0.3 nm at the Mn-L edge of a comparable oxide We conclude that the MnO x films were deposited as layers of edge-sharing octahedra with low long-range order. The local bulk structure was preserved upon cycling. There were no changes in the bulk, while the surface region of MnO x oxidizes toward Mn 4+ and Mn 3 O 4 or another phase that contained tetrahedral Mn 2+ was consumed but did not vanish completely. Having uncovered the local structure and surface valence changes on MnO x , we can now interpret the trends during electrocatalytic cycling in this context. Irreversivle catalyst changes lead to a decrease of the current ratio at all voltages below the onset of the OER. The current ratio at low overpotential achieved steady-state after 50 cycles, which did not persist after OCV. This irreversbile decrease in current ratio could either be explained by loss of tetrahedral Mn 2+ , possibly as Mn 3 O 4 , at the surface or surface oxidation toward Mn 4+ . While the role of the former is not well understood, there is a broad consensous on the role of Mn 4+ as discussed in the next paragraphs. The most commonly studied oxide with tetrahedral Mn 2+ is Mn 3 O 4 , which consists of tetrahedral Mn 2+ and octahedral Mn 3+ cations. Some studies state that (bulk) Mn 3 O 4 is an active electrocatalyst The role of (octahedral) Mn 4+ for the OER is better understood. Mn 4+ forms at voltages below the onset of the OER In addition to the previously reported irreversible change of manganese oxides, we also found that the film could be partially reactivated after 30 minutes at OCV (Fig. We deposited a Na-containing layered oxide of Mn 3+/4+ without long-range order in NaOH solution with a complexing agent added. The onset of the OER was at 1.7 V vs. RHE as determined by oxygen detection at the ring of an RRDE. We tracked the currents by CV during 100 cycles where 3 regions with different trends could be identified: 1-10 cycles, 10-40 cycles and 40-100 cycles. At voltages below the onset of the OER, the currents decrease with cycling but the OER currents at 1.75 V vs. RHE reached a steady-state in the 3 rd region. Thus, an activation protocol at 100 mV s -1 should at least be performed for 40 cycles on our MnO x . The bulk of the cycled MnO x film was not changed but its surface was oxidized toward Mn 4+ . It agrees with previous reports that the oxidized MnO x surface hinders the OER. Interestingly, the currents during CV could be partially recovered after 30 minutes of OCV, which was not observed previously. We attribute the underlying process to high coverage with unreacted intermediates as supported by the high Tafel slopes. The reactivation after OCV is significant as some manganese oxides or Mn-containing oxides may be more robust as estimated based on continuous cycling. A measurement protocol without continuous cycling may prevent some but not all activity-reducing processes. Coupling of electrocatalysts to intermittent sources such as solar energy naturally leads to OCV conditions during operation. Therefore, it is important how an electrocatalyst for sustainable fuel production reacts to OCV, which is understudied. 