The application of new materials in nanotechnology opens new perspectives and enables groundbreaking innovations. Two-dimensional van der Waals materials and more specific, 2D chalcogenides are a promising class of new materials awaiting their usage in the semiconductor industry. However, the integration of van der Waals materials relying on industry-compatible manufacturing processes is still a major challenge. This is currently restricting the application of these new materials to the research laboratories environment only. The large-area and single-crystalline growth of van der Waals materials is one of the most important requirements to meet the challenging demands implied by the semiconductor industry. This review contributes to a more generalized understanding on the integration of van der Waals materials -and in more specific 2D chalcogenides -through the growth process of epitaxy. This, can pursue further the aspiration of large-area, single-crystalline and defect-free epitaxial integration of (quasi) van der Waals homo-and heterostructures into the great world of the semiconductor industry. 1 Introduction: the emerging need for new materials Materials are the most essential building blocks of everyday life. They shaped our civilization for more than thousands of years and will shape our future society for the many years to come. Materials are constructed from elemental species whose list (and unfortunately occurrence) is finite. The continuous search for ingenious combinations of elemental species to create new materials with new functionalities, has led to breakthrough innovations in many different fields. In the field of nanotechnology, such fundamental materials research is of key importance. This, since nanotechnology concerns the manipulation of matter at the atomic scale and hence directly links with the ultimate material properties. To drive the innovation in nanotechnology further, original materials are today being researched from which the lucky few will soon bring new applications to the semiconductor industry. One of these promising materials are the so-called van der Waals (vdW) materials, which are materials having a layered two-dimensional (2D) crystal structure The main driver of the semiconductor industry, already for more than 50 years, is the logic complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) technology. It relies on the ingenious combination of pMOS (p-type-channel) and nMOS (n-type channel) transistors in integrated circuits (ICs) to dramatically reduce the power consumption of the implemented logic functions As a result, until today, new materials are continuously being explored to maintain the continuous progress in CMOS technology. Van der Waals materials are such a perfect example of today's general interest Besides, developing technologies apart from logic such as flexible electronics, large-area electronics, energy and sensing applications, etc., similarly, highly benefit from materials research and innovation. It is in these perspectives (both logic CMOS and beyond), that materials research focused on vdW materials is predicted to yield promising developments Pioneering the field, graphene is the most well-known and studied vdW material The main limitation of graphene, however, is the absence of an energy band gap which makes this material challenging to apply in semiconductor devices. The absence of an energy band gap in graphene has triggered material scientists to explore the existence of other 2D compounds, which has significantly boosted the research on vdW materials. As a result, besides graphene, to date, also other compounds of the same group IV crystal family are being researched such as silicene, germanene, stanene, etc. Furthermore, the stacking of vdW materials to vdW heterostructures further enlarges the potential of vdW materials For all of the above future nano-and optoelectronic applications, one of the most appealing types of vdW materials, are the layered 2D chalcogenides An overview of the elements that are applied as building blocks in commercially available binary 2D chalcogenide materials is presented in Figure The most attractive property for MX and MX 2 compounds is the presence of the energy band gap making these compounds semiconducting. This property attracted researchers' interests and has significantly boosted the research and development of these vdW compounds. Moreover, the range of the energy band gaps covered by these compounds is in the very desirable window for nanoelectronic applications (between ∼0.5-2.0 eV). Even more, in some specific cases, the band gap nature is direct (instead of indirect for silicon), which additionally attracts lots of interests for optoelectronic applications Besides the band gap, these compounds also exhibit other interesting properties for advanced semiconductor devices and applications. These are for example the different band offsets interesting for tunnel devices The most appealing property of M 2 X 3 compounds is its topology. This is resulting from their characteristic electronic band structure that demonstrates non-trivial band topology, which gives rise to robust, spin-polarized electronic states with linear energy-momentum dispersion at the surfaces of these 2D chalcogenide materials The layered crystal structures of the various 2D chalcogenides are displayed in Figures These crystal structures hence have strong intralayer interactions and weak interlayer interactions. In theory, this results in a negligible chemical reactivity in the third dimension thanks to the selfpassivated surfaces at the interfaces which enables ultimate semiconductor thickness scaling down to the atomic level The in-plane symmetry of the 2D chalcogenide single-layers, that is of crucial importance for their defect-free epitaxial growth, is visually represented in Figure 2e According to the definition of epitaxy, epitaxy involves the growth of a crystalline layer on a crystalline substrate, where the crystalline layer replicates the orientation of the underlying crystalline substrate Different types of epitaxy are distinguished in the literature. When the crystalline layer is of exactly the same crystalline nature as the crystalline substrate underneath, it is referred to as homoepitaxy. When the crystalline layer is of a different nature, it is called heteroepitaxy. Homoepitaxy is generally applied to enable the manipulation of the grown material's properties by for example the introduction of dopants during the crystal growth. Heteroepitaxy is generally applied to introduce new singlecrystalline materials on existing underlying single-crystalline templates. In this review, epitaxy is categorized based on the nature of the interactions between the crystalline layer and the crystalline substrate Until today, conventional epitaxy is one of the most critical fields in semiconductor material research. When studied and performed properly, it can enable the integration of new conventional materials that encompass new functionalities The major challenge of conventional heteroepitaxy is the mismatch between the epi-layer and episubstrate material. This involves both the mismatch in lattice parameter (a) and the mismatch in coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE, α) during both the heteroepitaxy and the cooldown process from the growth temperature, and can thread through the complete thickness of the epi-layer (threading dislocations) Many cases of conventional heteroepitaxy are studied in the literature such as germanium on silicon Van der Waals epitaxy involves the growth of a vdW material on a vdW substrate. It was described for the first time in the 1990s by the group of A. Koma (University of Tokyo, Japan) The major difference with conventional epitaxy is that in this case, at the interface, no covalent bonding is possible due to the vdW nature of both the epi-layer and the epi-substrate. Hence, the interactions that govern the epitaxy processes are vdW interactions which are generally one order of magnitude weaker as compared to covalent interactions (see also Figure Similarly, as vdW epitaxy, quasi-vdW epitaxy was described and defined for the first time by the group of A. Koma Raman and PL of ML flake to prove excellent crystallinity generally overlooked (or neglected) in the literature. Therefore, in the following, we also include multilayer epitaxy in the discussion of quasi-vdW heteroepitaxy. The phenomena that are seen in these multilayer epitaxies are then associated to quasi-vdW epitaxy, and not to vdW epitaxy as described in the previous section. In Figure The 3D crystal structure of the substrate and the 2D layered structure of the epi-layer as well as the incompatible and complex covalent/vdW nature of the heterointerface are clearly highlighted in both the ball-and-stick schematics and the TEM image. The details about defect formation in quasi-vdW epitaxy will be comprehensively discussed in Section 4.2. The key aspects of the epitaxy processes that will be discussed in the following (Section 4) are schematically summarized in Table The formation of stacking faults is generally well-controlled in conventional homoepitaxy (Table Lastly, the generation of strain is generally reported in convention heteroepitaxy through strong lattice and CTE matching resulting from the covalent nature of the heterointerface (Table 4 Epitaxial growth of 2D chalcogenides 4.1 Van der waals epitaxy The orientational replication of vdW layers on vdW substrates through vdW interaction is successfully demonstrated in many different cases Also many other different combinations using different growth techniques like for example MOVPE vdW epitaxy on graphene One remarkable feature of vdW heteroepitaxy is the observation of multiple in-plane epitaxial orientations of the vdW crystals In a similar case, the MBE growth of Sb 2 Te 3 on graphene is highlighted, which also yields multidirectional orientations of the 2D crystals epitaxially grown on the single-crystalline 2D graphene surface Besides multiple in-plane registries, the formation of stacking faults such as 60°twins in vdW epitaxy is a major but generally hidden concern, and seems invariant from the applied growth technique and/or the vdW substrate The presence of these stacking faults (60°twins) and others, is studied in more depth for the curious case of WSe 2 MBE vdW homoepitaxy Similarly, also for heteroepitaxial cases like Bi 2 Se 3 MBE vdW epitaxy on h-BN surface, 60°twins are systematically observed in the nucleation studies In vdW epitaxy, generally, the strain is fully relaxed resulting from the weak interlayer vdW coupling at the heterointerface. This is highlighted in Figure However, in some cases, strain through lattice matching at the vdW heterointerface is reported or predicted Similarly as for vdW epitaxy on vdW surfaces, in-plane epitaxial alignment of vdW layers on 3D crystalline substrates is demonstrated in numerous cases. The quasi-vdW heteroepitaxies performed using MBE focus on a wide-ranging set of substrates such as sapphire AlN In quasi-vdW epitaxy, the surfaces of the (engineered) substrates are found to play a crucial role in the quasi-vdW heteroepitaxial registry of the 2D crystals. This is for example emphasized in the case of WSe 2 nucleated on (1x1) and ( √ 31x √ 31)R9 reconstructed sapphire surfaces Coincident lattice formation controlled by the uppermost layer of surface atoms is hence largely responsible for the specific in-plane epitaxial registry. This, clearly demonstrates the crucial impact of the starting surface's symmetry and orientation on the in-plane registry of 2D vdW crystals in quasi-vdW heteroepitaxy. Moreover, the complexity of the quasi-vdW heterointerface is clearly highlighted for the case of Sb 2 Te 3 grown on (7x7) reconstructed ( Raman and PL of ML flake to prove excellent crystallinity surface in order to reduce the lattice mismatch. In Figure The formation of stacking faults such as 60°twins is also frequently observed in quasi-vdW epitaxy Interestingly, one particular case of twin reduction in MX 2 quasi-vdW heteroepitaxy is reported and relies on the ordering of the vdW crystals at the surface steps of the single-crystalline substrate In Figures Both atomic force and optical microscope images (Figure In comparison with MX 2 quasi-vdW heteroepitaxy, twin reduction in M 2 X 3 quasi-vdW heteroepitaxy is notably more frequently reported. The reduction of twinning in these quasi-vdW heteroepitaxial systems generally relies on optimized growth conditions Remarkably, these various strategies for twin reduction in quasi-vdW heteroepitaxy are inexistent in the cases of vdW epitaxy. This, can potentially result from the weaker interlayer coupling in pure vdW epitaxy and/or the more challenging engineering possibilities on purely vdW templates compared to 3D crystalline surfaces for efficient twin reduction. Like in the scenario of vdW epitaxy, quasi-vdW epitaxy is generally assumed to be fully relaxed enabling the growth of largely lattice mismatch heterostructures. This statement, however, is difficult to validate, since many reports include vdW homoepitaxy into quasi-vdW heteroepitaxy which impact the analysis and the observation of strain at the quasi-vdW heterointerface. Only few cases report on the formation of strain in the very first vdW layer in quasi-vdW heteroepitaxy One particular case that demonstrates strain through lattice matching in single-layer quasi-vdW heteroepitaxy is highlighted in Figures 11a-b is in-depth analysed using the in situ polar RHEED characterization technique 100) (at 0°, 60°, 120°, ...), and fully relaxed crystals in the incommensurate regions (Figure Similarly, the formation of strain through lattice matching in "multilayer quasi-vdW epitaxy" is observed in MBE-grown superlattices of 2D Sb 2 Te 3 and 3D GeTe compounds (Figures Here, the lattice parameters of the grown structures, monitored by in situ RHEED analyses (Figure Raman and PL of ML flake to prove excellent crystallinity The review presented above on the epitaxial growth of 2D chalcogenides, has learned that in both vdW and quasi-vdW epitaxy, the presence of stacking faults, mainly, combined with the general absence of lattice matching and the unintentional presence of multiple in-plane epitaxial registries, make the nucleation density a key measure for the intergrain defect density of the 2D films. Therefore, in the following, the focus is placed to a generalized nucleation density benchmark on the epitaxy of TMDs (MX 2 ), an important member of the 2D chalcogenide family, based on the data extracted from all reported AFM, SEM, TEM and/or STM images at the nucleation level. In order to enable a fair comparison from all these different data, the extracted nucleation densities are corrected for the differences in surface coverage using a simplified nucleation model as reported previously Here, D represents the diffusion constant expressed in cm 2 /s, θ the surface coverage expressed in #/cm 2 , t the growth time expressed in s and N the nucleation density expressed in #/cm 2 . The subscript 30% represents the values at a corrected surface coverage of 30 %, with a M X2 the lattice paramater of the MX 2 compound (Equation The generalized nucleation densities at a surface coverage of 30 % (N 30% ) for both vdW and quasi-vdW epitaxy of TMDs using the growth methods of MBE, MOVPE and CVD are presented in The MBE method systematically yields the highest nucleation densities, typically above 1E10 cm -2 , for both vdW and quasi-vdW TMD epitaxy (Figure However, lower nucleation densities are systematically obtained in MOVPE (∼1E8-1E9 cm -2 ) and CVD (<1E7 cm -2 ) growth methods, with finest values extracted from the latter (Figure The inferior chemical (rather than physical) stability of vdW surfaces compared to 3D crystalline surfaces during the more demanding processes of the chemical growth methods (high temperatures (∼900 °C), high pressures (∼1 atm)) could explain this inverse behavior. Moreover, a clear link between the generalized nucleation density and the growth temperature is revealed from Figure The MBE method is shown to cover a wide range of growth temperatures positioned in the lowto-mid growth temperature window (300-600 °C for most of the reports). The observed correlation between the higher MBE growth temperature and the lower generalized nucleation density can be explained by the increased surface diffusion of adatoms at elevated growth temperatures, yielding TMD epitaxies having a lower nucleation density. Moreover, the MBE experiments that yield the lowest nucleation densities at the lowest thermal budgets (Loh et al. The MOVPE and CVD methods with their typically higher growth temperature windows (700-950 °C) are able to yield TMD epitaxies with nucleation densities below 1E8 and 1E4 cm -2 , respectively, which are multiple orders of magnitude lower compared to the typical nucleation densities of the MBE method (∼1E11 cm -2 ). Here, the best performers with lowest thermal budgets are all of the quasi-vdW heteroepitaxy type (Zhang et al. Although owing to the general presence of stacking faults, the absence of lattice matching and the challenging unique in-plane epitaxial alignment, the nucleation density of epitaxial 2D chalcogendies acts as a good measure for the intergrain defect density, the nucleation density only, cease to provide the complete picture of defectivity in 2D materials' epitaxy. Each individual epitaxial system (vdW layer / epi-substrate, growth technique used, growth conditions applied) will always have its individual and characteristic response on (at least one of) these three parameters defining the intergrain defectivity, in addition to intragrain defects such as vacancies and interstitials resulting from impurities and doping. Nevertheless, the presented methodology uncovers the tip of the iceberg of the challenging defect density benchmarking of new epitaxial 2D chalcogenides. This review represents the emerging need for new materials to further boost the innovation in the semiconductor industry. One of these interesting materials are the vdW materials from which 2D chalcogenides hold lots of promise. The growth approach of epitaxy is presented as one of the most interesting methods to integrate these new materials at large-scale and large-area in a single-crystalline manner with high crystalline quality and low defect density. The epitaxy of 2D chalcogenides is a fast evolving field with many publications following each other, which is attempted to be systematically reviewed in this work. Different from conventional epitaxy, the epitaxy of 2D chalcogenides is shown to suffer from flaws like unintentional multiple in-plane epitaxial registries, high densities of stacking faults and the more likely absence of lattice matching, resulting from the weaker coupling between the vdW epi-layers and the growth surfaces. This is emphasised to result in a significant dependence of the nucleation density on the film's defect density, making nucleation density a key parameter for the crystalline quality of the 2D epitaxial growth. The exposed relation between nucleation density and defect density facilities the generally challenging defect density quantification for these complex materials systems. Therefore, a benchmark on a generalized nucleation density corrected to a surface coverage of 30 % is performed, that demonstrates the important differences between both quasi-vdW and vdW epitaxy and the impact of the various growth techniques such as MBE, MOVPE and CVD on the epitaxy of 2D chalcogenides. An important trend is highlighted that reveals the general decrease in nucleation density upon increasing growth temperature of the grown 2D chalcogenide, universally for all the discussed growth techniques. The MBE method with its generally moderate growth temperatures systematically yields 2D chalcogenides with the largest nucleation densities, followed by the growth methods of MOVPE and CVD with their typical higher growth temperatures hence lower nucleation (and defect) densities. Although, every individual 2D chalcogenide epitaxial system has its unique and individual response in the growth characteristics such as grain size, nucleation density, in-plane alignment, strain, stacking faults, intragrain defects, etc., the general observations that are uncovered in this work bring us one step closer to a better identified epitaxial growth process of one the most promising families of future functional materials that are 2D chalcogenides.