We developed a calorimeter with a vacuum container made of superconducting niobium (Nb) to study monolayers of helium adsorbed on graphite which are prototypical two-dimensional quantum matters below 1 K. Nb was chosen because of its small specific heat in the superconducting state. It is crucially important to reduce the addendum heat capacity (C ad ) when the specific surface area of substrate is small. Here we show details of design, construction and results of C ad measurements of the Nb calorimeter down to 40 mK. The measured C ad was sufficiently small so that we can use it for heat capacity measurements on helium monolayers in a wide temperature range below 1 K. We found a relatively large excess heat capacity in C ad , which was successfully attributed to atomic tunneling of hydrogen (H) and deuterium (D) between trap centers near oxygen or nitrogen impurities in Nb. The tunnel frequencies of H and D deduced by fitting the data to the tunneling model are consistent with the previous experiments on Nb doped with H or D. rich quantum phase diagrams In general, for studies of adsorbed 2D systems, comparison of heat capacity data obtained on substates with different surface coherence lengths (ξ) is crucially important for determining the true nature of detected phase transitions The heat capacity contribution from the empty calorimeter (addendum) with ZYX should be minimized to keep reasonably good experimental accuracies, because the specific surface area of ZYX (= 2 m 2 /g) is ten times smaller than that of Grafoil. Previously, Nakamura et al . constructed a calorimeter with a ZYX substrate in a container (sample cell) made of Nylon In this article, we report design details and measurement results of the addendum heat capacity of the Nb calorimeter. It turned out that the measured addendum is as low as that of the previous Nylon calorimeter but is at least twice as large as the estimation based on the amounts of all construction materials of the cell and their known specific heats. By comparing with a theoretical estimation for heat capacities due to atomic tunneling of hydrogen and deuterium impurities trapped by oxygen or nitrogen impurities in Nb, we concluded that the measured excess heat capacity comes from these contributions. There are three basic concepts in our calorimeter design. The first is to minimize the addendum heat capacity, of course. The second is to increase thermal conductances among essential parts, such as the ZYX substrate, a thermometer and a heater, as high as possible to realize a short internal thermal relaxation time over the whole measurement temperature range. The third is to achieve a tunability of the thermal conductance between the calorimeter and the base temperature plate of a refrigerator so that the same calorimeter can be used in a wide temperature (T ) range from 1 K to even below 1 mK depending on the experiment. To meet these requirements, we carefully chose the other construction materials, besides superconducting Nb, as well as the thermal contact and isolation methods. For example, no stainless steel or BeCu parts such as bolts and nuts to tighten demountable thermal contacts were used in order to reduce the addendum heat capacity. Instead, a specially manufactured alloy, Si 0.15 Ag 0.85 (Tokuriki Honten Co., Ltd.), was used for this purpose. Most of the thermal links are made of high purity silver (Ag) (Tokuriki Honten Co., Ltd.; 99.999%) rather than copper (Cu), since higher residual resistivity ratios (RRRs) of up to 3000 can more easily be obtained for Ag than Cu by a simple heat treatment at 630 • C for 2 h in an oxygen pressure of 0.1 Pa unless the size effect limits RRR. The mechanism behind this heat treatment is the "internal oxidation and segregation" of magnetic impurities in noble metals To our knowledge, Nb has never been used as a main construction material in previously developed vacuum chambers for low-T experiments. This is presumably because it does not seem easy to make a leak-proof seal for Nb which cannot be soldered. Note that Nb has a very small thermal contraction Fig. The (d)adsorption substrate consists of ZYX plates (1 mm thick each). Every two such ZYX plates are diffusively bonded on both sides of a 50 μm thick Ag foil to assist thermalization of the substrate. Details of the original substrate preparation are reported elsewhere The Nb cell is supported from the mixing chamber plate with (m)three Vespel SP22 rods. The (n)weak thermal link, which consists of two copper wires of 0.1 mm in diameter and 10 cm in length (RRR = 133), connects between the ZYX substrate and the (o)mixing chamber with a moderate thermal conductance so that we can employ the quasi-adiabatic heat pulse method As can be seen in Fig. the cell (see Table high-T component of our data is likely due to the H tunneling and the low-T one due to the D tunneling. Based on the above-mentioned scenario, we analyzed our data, c ex (T ), quantitatively following the method described in Ref. where J is the tunnel frequency, and is the potential energy difference between the two minima caused by a random arrangement of neighboring O(N)-H or O(N)-D complexes. Such has a distribution approximated by the Lorentzian distribution function Z( ) Here the width 0 is the typical energy difference of the double well. The specific heat of this tunneling system per one O(N)-H(D) complex, c TS , can be written as where Table where N A is Avogadro's number, and n H and n D are the concentrations of O-H and O-D complexes in Nb, respectively. Here, i stands for H or D. The fitting result is shown as the (blue) solid line in Fig. We developed the calorimeter that is mainly made of Nb for the study of low temperature properties of He monolayers adsorbed on a ZYX graphite substrate. The use of Nb is because of its small contribution to the addendum heat capacity, C ad , in the superconducting state. The measured moderate thermal relaxation time, lowest attainable temperature (40 mK) and the small C ad meet the requirements to detect subtle heat capacity anomalies associated with phase transitions in adsorbed He systems in the temperature range between 40 mK and 1 K. One promising application is the possible finite-T gas-liquid transitions in 3 He monolayers expected to be observable at temperatures between 80 and 740 mK. We also found the additional heat capacity (C ex ), an excess over the expected addendum heat capacity that is calculated from the known specific heats of construction materials. C ex can be explained by atomic tunneling of hydrogen (H) and deuterium (D) impurities in Nb. The tunneling frequencies of H and D obtained by fitting the C ex data to this model are consistent with those obtained in the previous studies. If one can anneal Nb parts in a high vacuum at T = 2200 • C before assembling the cell, C ad would be further reduced by a factor of three providing a further improvement in the resolution of heat capacity measurement. ad : (blue) dashed dotted line