Deformation twinning, which occurs in fcc metals only under particular conditions of intrinsic material properties, microstructure, and loading conditions, occupies an indispensable place in their deformation mechanism maps. Nonetheless, dedicated studies have seldom been carried out to explore the fundamental properties of twinning dislocations mediating this process. Here we employ a combination of atomistic computations and continuum modeling to investigate the nucleation of twinning dislocation loops in metals with fcc crystal structure. Besides the conventional layer-bylayer model of twin nucleation, the newly proposed alternate-shear mechanism has been investigated, and the energy barrier and shear stress for twinning loop nucleation have been determined. We find the nucleation stress in the latter mechanism to be smaller than that in the former. The study also highlights the non-uniform variations of the critical loop size and fractional Burgers vector with the applied shear load. Except for low stacking fault energy (SFE) systems, deformation twinning is typically absent in pure metals and alloys with fcc crystal structure. However, under the non-trivial conditions of loading, the metals with moderate and high SFEs can also exhibit this mechanism. Conditions favorable to deformation twinning include high strain rates and stresses, along with the reduced temperature Given the elusive nature of deformation twinning, multiple mechanisms have been proposed to explain the formation and growth of twins in fcc metals. While the twin formation in bulk systems is often described in terms of the pole-mechanism, fault-pair model, or layerby-layer shear model, the shear model is the most feasible mechanism in their nanosized counterparts on account of the confined space available Despite the improvements in simulation and analytical strategies, the studies on fcc metals have primarily confined to the nucleation of full or Shockley partial dislocation loops Figure The first set of atomistic computations estimates the minimum-energy paths of the nucleation of twinning dislocation loops by employing the climbing-replica version The replica-chain is initialized by creating fourteen intermediate images between the end states through linear interpolation. In order to prevent the loop from completely expanding and sweeping through the slip plane, feedback forces are applied on the end state, which confine it to an isopotential surface. In the NEB computation, the chain of replicas is made to evolve through the recently improved FIRE algorithm The second set of atomistic computations involves quantifying the generalized planar fault energy, which is an input parameter of the nucleation model described further below. Here the set-up is similar to the one created for the initial structure of the NEB calculations, but with free surfaces normal to the 111 direction. In the first configuration with an embryonic twin, the upper twin boundary is the slip plane, whereas the plane between the two stacking faults is chosen as the slip plane in the second configuration. The part of the crystal above the selected slip plane is displaced laterally relative to the lower part, and the energy of the system is recorded as a function of disregistry. At each step of the lateral displacement, the system is structurally relaxed, such that the atoms are allowed to move only normal to the slip plane. All the atomistic computations reported here have been performed using the LAMMPS molecular dynamics code The atomistically informed nucleation model employed in this study is based upon the approach demonstrated by Aubry et al. where b f is a variable fractional Burgers vector and γ(δ) is the GPFE obtained as a function of the disregistry, δ. In the above equation, u 0 is the offset-displacement calculated by equilibrating the applied stress against the gradient of the GPFE. Apart from the GPFE, the other intrinsic material parameters are the effective shear modulus (G) and Poisson's ratio (ν), which in general, depend upon the relevant crystallographic orientation A noteworthy feature of this nucleation model is recognition of the fact that at large enough stress, the GPFE itself becomes sensitive to the applied stress, thereby justifying the incorporation of the stress, τ , as an extrinsic parameter in Eq. ( Figure As compared to the ABC shear, a contrasting feature is visible in the GPFE plots corresponding to slip in the alternate-layer (ACB ) mechanism. Here we find that the disregistry of a 11 2 /6 leads to a structure with energy, which is lower than the initial energy, and effectively represents a negative stacking fault energy (Fig. Having explored the generalized planar fault energies corresponding to the two shear models, we now examine the transition pathways revealed by the NEB computations. Figures In the case of a shear loop of Shockley partial, a positive stacking fault energy tends to oppose its expansion. Therefore, it is interesting to note that the negative fault energy observed in Figs. Equation By way of summary, this study examines the nucleation of twinning dislocation loops in fcc metals through the technique of transition-pathway-search and atomistically informed continuum model. In particular, we consider the newly proposed alternate-shear model of twin formation, in addition to the conventional layer-by-layer model. A particularly interesting feature of the twinning dislocations is that while their Burgers vectors resemble those of Shockley partials, the generalized fault energy in the layer-by-layer nucleation does not exhibit the stable stacking fault energy, which is otherwise a quintessential characteristic of the GSFE. Besides, the alternate-shear model reveals a negative stacking fault energy, which motivates a comparison between the twinning loop nucleation in these two mechanisms. Our computations indicate that the nucleation stress of twinning loops is larger for metal with higher unstable fault energy. Furthermore, the nucleation stress for a given metal is smaller in the alternate-shear mechanism, as compared to its layer-bylayer counterpart. When tuned with a single free parameter, the continuum model produces excellent fits to the NEB results. A closer look at the critical loop reveals that its fractional Burgers vector plays a vital role in dictating the critical loop size and stress of nucleation. The computational results highlight the significance of perceiving the twinning deformation in terms of nucleation and growth of twinning partial loops in the fcc materials. An obvious extension of this work is to study the process of heterogeneous nucleation of twinning loops. Although the surface nucleation would be comparatively easier to model analytically due to the simpler treatment of image stresses, it would be more challenging to model grain boundary nucleation. Moreover, as the computations provide us with the energy barrier to loop nucleation, it can be subsequently utilized to estimate the kinetic parameters associated with the process at different strain rates and temperatures. The results and insights rendered here can motivate further investigations into the fundamental computational modeling of twinning dislocations.