Electronic correlation is of fundamental importance to high temperature superconductivity. Ironbased superconductors are believed to possess moderate correlation strength, which combined with their multi-orbital nature makes them a fascinating platform for the emergence of exotic phenomena. A particularly striking form is the emergence of an orbital selective Mott phase, where the localization of a subset of orbitals leads to a drastically reconstructed Fermi surface. Here, we report spectroscopic evidence of the reorganization of the Fermi surface from FeSe to FeTe as Se is substituted by Te. We uncover a particularly transparent way to visualize the localization of the dxy electron orbital through the suppression of its hybridization with the more coherent d electron orbitals, which leads to a redistribution of the orbital-dependent spectral weight near the Fermi level. These noteworthy features of the Fermi surface are accompanied by a divergent behavior of a band renormalization in the dxy orbital. All of our observations are further supported by our theoretical calculations to be salient spectroscopic signatures of such a non-thermal evolution from a strongly correlated metallic phase towards an orbital-selective Mott phase in FeTe1-xSex as Se concentration is reduced. In multi-orbital quantum materials, orbital-dependent correlations and interactions often lead to exotic emergent phenomena. An extreme case is in the heavy fermion systems where the strongly localized f electrons coexist with itinerant electrons, the interactions between which give rise to an abundance of competing magnetic ground states and unconventional superconductivity in proximity to quantum criticality Recently, orbital-dependent correlation effects have been found in iron-based superconductors (FeSCs) These developments set the stage to address a crucial question that remains open for the FeSCs: Is there an OSMP among the ground states that compete against the all-orbital-itinerant metallic ground state? To proceed, one must go beyond the study of any thermal crossover and, instead, scan the ground state landscape by tuning a non-thermal control parameter while staying at low temperatures. An added benefit of doing the latter is that the FS is only sharply defined at low temperatures, and studying the quantum phase transition through a nonthermal parameter variation allows for unambiguously detecting any FS reconstruction. More broadly, it is particularly opportune to address this issue in 3d-electron systems such as the FeSCs. These systems have energy scales that allow for a direct momentum-space visualization -by ARPES -of the Fermi surface and its reconstruction across their ground states, a feature that is not possible for alternative materials platforms with much smaller energy scales such as for the heavy fermion systems as mentioned earlier. In this work, we present systematic evidence for a low-temperature tunability towards an OSMP in the FeTe 1-x Se x family of superconductors without raising temperatures. Remarkably, strong reorganization of the FS is observed in the absence of any symmetry-breaking electronic order. We demonstrate how the more coherent d-orbitals, in particular, the d z 2 orbital, serve as a transparent means to visualize the suppression of the d xy states at the Fermi energy. In addition, we show that the FS reconstruction is accompanied by an orbitaldependent mass enhancement, and signatures of lower Hubbard band as we tune from the FeSe end towards FeTe. Combined with the temperature axis, we arrive at a comprehensive phase diagram of the orbital-selectivity in FeTe 1-x Se x , the understanding of which is discussed in connection with anomalies reported in measurements of the Hall coefficient, resistivity, and magnetic excitations. FeTe 1-x Se x is a prototypical iron-based superconductor with the simplest crystal structure consisting of Fechalcogen layers simplicity, we drop the y index in further discussions. The high quality FeTe 1-x Se x single crystal series was synthesized using the flux method We begin by comparing and contrasting the measured FS of the optimally-substituted FeTe 0.56 Se 0.44 with that of the paramagnetic state of FeTe (Fig. To understand the evolution of the change shown in Fig. We first examine the low-temperature (10 K) band renormalization across the phase diagram. Near the BZ center along the high symmetry direction Γ-M, three hole-like bands are observed near the Fermi level (E F ) for all Se content (Fig. In addition, a previous report shows that at x = 0.44, the d xy spectral weight gradually disappears with increasing temperature S3 The orbital-dependent band renormalization, nearly divergent d xy band effective mass, and redistribution of spectral weight around the FS, taken together can be understood as manifestations of the tendency of the FeTe 1-x Se x system towards an OSMP when Se is gradually replaced with Te. In the presence of relatively strong electron correlations, orbital-dependent correlations become strong, where the d xy orbital-dominated band near E F gradually diminishes together with the divergence of its mass enhancement. This disappearance of the d xy states near E F in turn results in a redistribution of the residual electronic states at E F as the FeTe end of the phase diagram is approached. But why should the diminishing d xy weight at the Fermi level be seen through the crossing of the d z 2 band through the Fermi level? Qualitatively, we attribute this to the hybridization picture. Recall that symmetry dictates a nonzero hybridization matrix between the d xy and d z 2 states near X. Just like the f -electron states in a heavy fermion metal produces a "large" FS, the itinerant d xy states hybridize the d z 2 state near X in the Fermi-surface formation. However, just like the localization of the f -electrons in heavy fermion systems leads to a "small" FS of the spd conduction electrons, localizing the d xy -electron state allows the d z 2 -electron state to cross the Fermi level near X. To substantiate this qualitative picture, we have carried out theoretical calculations based on a five-orbital Hubbard model for FeTe 1-x Se x (Section VI of SI All salient features of our experimental observations presented are captured in this set of calculations, as shown by a direct comparison of the calculations for the correlated metallic phase and the OSMP (Fig. We stress that, the selective localization of the d xyelectron states also causes the suppression of their hy- Finally, taking all the results together, we arrive at the phase diagram for the FeTe 1-x Se x material family (Fig. Our understanding of the evolution from an orbitaldependent correlated metallic phase to an OSMP across the FeTe 1-x Se x phase diagram as observed from ARPES is also consistent with results reported by other probes. It has been reported that the compensated parent compounds of multi-band iron-based superconductors exhibit a negative Hall coefficient, R H , due to the dominance of the electron mobility. This is observed in isovalent-substituted BaFe 2 (As,P) 2 , where across the entire phase diagram, R H remains negative We also note that in a recent magneto-transport measurement, such coherent-incoherent crossover is also reported Previous studies of both Dynamic Mean Field Theory (DMFT) and ARPES have also identified the incoherent spectral weight in the high binding energy regime of FeSe as the lower Hubbard band (LHB), indicating the presence of strong electron correlations in this material system Further connection between our ARPES report of OSMP and magnetic excitations via inelastic neutron scattering can also be made. It has been reported that the total magnetic spectral weight at 300 K in FeTe is reduced by roughly half at 10 K, signaling a change in the number of localized electrons as in the scenario of an OSMP An OSMP is depicted by the coexistence of itinerant orbital and localized orbital within one material system 