Higgs spectroscopy, the study of Higgs bosons of a superconductor, is an emerging field in studying superconductivity. Here we show that the Berry curvature and the quantum metric of bands play a central role in the Higgs mode generation. They allow the detection of Higgs bosons even when the conventional contribution from the band curvature vanishes. Furthermore, we show that the Higgs mode can couple to the external electromagnetic field linearly when mediated by the Berry connection. As a result, we predict the existence of a second harmonic generation, in addition to the well-known third harmonic generation. We elucidate our theory further by considering a flat band superconductor realized by the Harper-Hubbard model and show that the geometric Higgs mode is lower bounded by the band Chern number. We demonstrate in twisted bilayer graphene the existence of the geometrically induced Higgs modes when superconductivity is realised in the nearly flat band at the magic angle. The Anderson-Higgs mechanism The magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) was recently discovered to host superconductivity from strong correlations As an application to realistic systems accessible to experiments, we also consider the important case of TBG superconductor. We use the ten-band model, which was shown to faithfully capture the correct symmetries and fragile topology of the active bands General Theory-We start by giving a general discussion of our theory and emphasize that the framework is useful for general multiband superconductors. Consider the tight-binding Hamiltonian coupled to an external field via Peierls substitution where i and j label the lattice sites; α and β label the orbitals; σ denote spins; K σ iα,jβ is the hopping amplitude; and A is the vector potential. The Fourier transform of this can be diagonalized: , where E kσ ≡ diag(ε nkσ ) is a diagonal matrix composed of band dispersions ε nkσ and n labels the bands. The n-th column of the unitary matrix G kσ is the Bloch function of the n-th band. To account for the pairing, we use the mean field theory: For our purposes, we only consider intra-orbital pairing so that we can write the self-consistency condition as ∆ iα = U ĉiα↓ ĉiα↑ , where U is the strength of the effective electron-electron interaction. We further assume that the pairing potential has lattice-translation symmetry so that it is also diagonal in momentum space. The Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian now reads , where the Bloch Hamiltonian, upon introducing a chemical potential μ, is given by Here, ∆ is the pairing potential matrix in the orbital space. The Nambu spinor is given by ψk = ( d1,k↑ , T where 1, 2, • • •, N labels the bands. We focused only on the case where the particles have spin up and the holes have spin down. Expanding the diagonal block of (3) in powers of A gives the conventional contribution in the Higgs generation The geometric contribution to the Higgs mode comes from the pairing terms involving ∆k (A) = G † k-A ∆G k+A , which are the off-diagonal blocks of (3). When expanded in terms of A, this gives the geometric terms where We introduce the generalized version of pseudospin for an Nband superconductor: where {Γ} are composed of the generators of SU(2N ) and the identity matrix, and 2N comes from the particle and hole copies of each band. The expectation value is taken with respect to the superconducting ground state. The BdG Hamiltonian can now be written in the form where the pseudomagnetic field is given by B a (k, A) = Tr{Γ a H k (A)}. The pseudomagnetic field contains the geometric terms (4) when expanded in powers of A(t). The equation of motion for the pseudospin is obtained from the Heisenberg equation where {f abc } are the structure constants of SU(2N ). For the single band case, this reduces to the usual where the superscripts in Λs come from our splitting of the SU(2N) generators into tensor products of the Pauli matrices (particle-hole space) and the SU(N) generators (band space). For multi-band systems, the electronelectron interaction U should be, in general, a matrix. For simplicity we consider only pairings in a single band, which is sufficient in illustrating the interesting geometric effects. This is justified as a typical band gap and band width is of the order eV while typical pairing potential is of the order meV. The main message here is that when the pseudomagnetic field in ( Example A: Gapped graphene -We now elucidate the role of band quantum geometry to the Higgs mode generation with a simple toy model of gapped graphene s-wave superconductor. We assume that μ > ∆ 0 so that the pairing only occurs in the conduction band, and consider an incident external field with frequency Ω. The system of differential equations can now be solved order by order in perturbation A using the Laplace transformation δ∆ (1) p (t) = B (1) where the B (1) geom (t, A) ij matrix is a functional of the Berry connection. The appearance of the Berry connection here comes from gauge fixing where we choose the zeroth order parameter ∆ 0 to be real. The Higgs mode is gauge invariant as we show explicitly in the Supplementary Material (SM) Notice that (8) is linear in A. The coupling has a similar structure as the nonlinear case, figure The resulting expression for the second order Higgs mode is long but can be schematically divided into two major contributions: The explicit forms of C (2) band (t) ij and B (2) geom (t, A, g) ij are given in Example B: Harper-Hubbard model -It is also useful to consider a model capturing the physics of strong correlation, flat multi-bands, and non-trivial band topology, but is sufficiently simple to allow analytical calculations. These are captured by the Harper-Hubbard model. While our main motivation for using this model is purely theoretical, the rapid progress of various platforms such as cold atom and Moire systems to engineer strong correlation and non-trivial band topology opens up the possibility that such model can be experimentally realized in the future. Using this model we will also show that the strength of the geometric Higgs mode is bounded from below by the band Chern number. The Harper-Hubbard model has the hopping matrix: where we have ρ = exp{2πin φ } with n φ = 1/Q, Q ∈ Z + the flux per plaquette and σ = ±1 for spin up and down, respectively. It has a self-consistent superconducting solution Here ν is the band filling fraction and U is the on-site Hubbard interaction. We omit the band label n in the energy ε measured with respect to the chemical potential μ, as we will be concerned only with one partially-filled band. We consider the situation where the band gaps are much larger than the interaction strength U , which in turn is much larger than the band width. This can be satisfied for n φ 1. The band is then approximately flat. We label the band where the pairing occurs by n and the k-independent band energy by E n. The resulting equations of motion can be solved numerically for an external pulse field A(t) = A sin(Ωt)e -(t/τ ) 2 . The evolution of the pseudospin components is shown in figure Analytic results can be obtained for purely sinusoidal external field. In compact form: where α 1 (s) and α 2 (s) also depend on the parameters U , ν, and n φ . Their explicit forms are given in the SM [38]. The argument s comes from the Laplace transformation t → s. The tensor in the second term of the numerator is The interesting physics, however, comes from the quantum metric G ij and the denominator, which we now discuss. The poles in The geometric contribution to the Higgs mode for the Harper-Hubbard model is proportional to the quantum metric G ij , which in matrix form is given by G = 2π diag(2n + 1, 2n + 1), where n = 0, 1, 2, • • • labels the Landau levels Using the positive semidefiniteness property of the quantum geometric tensor, this coupling with the quantum metric is bounded from below by the Chern number C n of the nth band: |2n + 1| ≥ C n Twisted bilayer graphene -An important application of our theory would be for the twisted bilayer graphene, which hosts superconductivity in its nearly-flat bands We first consider a mean-field s-wave superconductivity To gain further insight, we investigate the Higgs mode in the frequency domain. This allows us to identify the collective modes from the resonance frequencies. The equations of motion can be solved analytically for a purely sinusoidal external field A(t) = A sin(Ωt). The calculation is further simplified if we assume that the pairing occurs only in the lower active band. This is justified since, while this active band is narrow ∼ 10 meV, the pairing gap is 0.1 meV and is therefore at least two orders of magnitude smaller than the bandwidth. To calculate the self-consistent equation for the Higgs mode, we only integrate within a narrow strip ±ω D around the Fermi surface since the pseudospins are significantly twisted only around this strip The Berry connection allows the linear coupling of the pseudospins with the external vector potential. However, from the time-reversal symmetry, the Berry connection obeys A +,k = -A -,-k , where the subscript ± labels the valleys. Because of this, the first order Higgs contribution vanishes when summed over the two valleys. We get a non-vanishing contribution if the integration over the Fermi surface is shifted by a finite amount, say p, for both valleys. This can be done by inducing a supercurrent in the sample so that the Cooper pairs have center-of-mass momentum 2p. The first order Higgs mode is now given by ∆ (1) where A kj with the summation over the neighborhood of the Fermi surface. In frequency domain, the pole at ν = Ω gives the driving frequency of the external field, while the pole ν = 2∆ 0 gives the gap of the Higgs excitation. We plot the second order Higgs mode in the frequency domain in figure (1) 2 and is therefore a band-geometric contribution. Note here that we only fixed the gauge once so that the zeroth-order order parameter is real but the higher order corrections can have imaginary part. This is in contrasts to readjusting the gauge order by order to keep the order parameter real We have also calculated the case of d + id pairing Conclusion -We have shown that there are couplings involving the Berry connection, quantum metric, and external field to generate an anomalous Higgs mode beyond those that are predicted in the conventional theory. More importantly, such geometric Higgs mode exists even in the flat band limit. We demonstrated that there can be a linear coupling with the external field and, as consequence, we predict the generation of second harmonics. Using the Harper-Hubbard model, we have shown that the coupling is bounded from below by the band Chern number. We have calculated the Higgs mode for TBG and showed that the geometric contribution gives rise to a resonance distinct from the conventional one. In this Supplemental Material, we show the details of our calculations and expound some discussions that were left out in the main text. Section B gives details of our general theory. Sections C and D give the details of our calculation for the gapped graphene and Harper-Hubbard model examples, respectively. Our calculations for TBG is given in Section E. Lastly, Section F gives a detailed discussion of the gauge invariance. There we show that the gauge invariance of the Higgs mode is satisfied order by order in the expansion of the external field. Appendix B: General Theory. We assume that the electromagnetic perturbation is sufficiently weak. The expansion of the matrix whose column elements are composed of the Bloch functions is given by where the partial derivatives are understood to be taken with respect to k. For the diagonal block of the BdG Hamiltonian, that is, the kinetic part, we have The third term, which is second order in electromagnetic field, is responsible for the Higgs generation in the conventional theory. This term vanishes when the electron has linear dispersion or flat band. The geometric contribution to the Higgs mode comes from the pairing terms involving ∆k (A) = G † k-A ∆G k+A , which are the off-diagonal blocks of the BdG Hamiltonian. As discussed in the main text, this can be expanded in terms of the generators of su(N) as To see the appearance of band geometric quantities, we expand the components of ∆k (A) in powers of the external field A. This comes from the expansion of G ( †) k±A in (B1). We further separate the time-dependent Higgs mode δ∆ α (t) in the coefficient of (B3): ∆kα (A) = ∆ 0 1 + δ∆ α (t)T α . For α = 0, we have ∆k0 while for α > 0, we have Here, is the Berry connection in matrix form and g k,ij = g k,ijα T α is the quantum metric. These enters into the pseudomagnetic field, which in turn, enters into the equations of motion for the pseudospins as discussed in the main text. Appendix C: Gapped graphene. The monolayer graphene with different on-site potentials is described by the Hamiltonian where Ψ † k ≡ (c † Ak , c † Bk ) and the operator c † Ak (c † Bk ) creates an electron at sublattice A (B). The bond vectors are given by δ 3), and δ 3 = (-1, 0). The first-order equations of motion are then From (C2) and (C4), along with the intial conditions δσ x( (0) = 0, one can show that ∆ 0 δσ x( k (t) at all times. Hence, we can eliminate δσ z( We note that here the momentum is measured with respect to the valley K. Let us consider when the Cooper pairs have center-of-mass momentum p. This can be realized experimentally by inducing a supercurrent on the superconductor. We can write the momentum of an electron (half of the pair) as k = k F + p/2 where k F is a Fermi momentum. We will eventually sum k F over the Fermi surface. We assume that p k F so that we can expand: where ∇ F mean derivative with respect to k F and v Recall that the energy is measured with respect to the Fermi level so that ε k F = 0. It follows that ∇ F ω k F = 0. Eq.(C5) and (C6) become δσ x(1) We now sum over the Fermi surface k F using the approximation A -k F = -A k F which is valid so long as the chemical potential is not so large so that the massive Dirac Hamiltonian is a good description for each valleys. We obtain This gives the Higgs mode in Laplace space now written as δ∆ (1) To calculate the second order correction to the Higgs mode, we need the explicit first-order solutions of the pseudospins δσ x(1) k (t) and δσ They are given by: where and The second order equations of motion are We perform Laplace transform to the equations above. We only need δσ given by δσ where (1) . (C34) The Higgs mode in Laplace space is given by δ∆ In calculating the second order equations of motion, we need the following Laplace transforms appearing in (C34): Here the constants E k1 , E k2 , and E k3 are given by Substituting (C29) and (C30) into (C35) and performing an inverse Laplace transform, we get As described in the main text, we divided the result into two main contributions. The conventional term C (2) band (t) ij is dependent on band curvature ∂ i ∂ j ε k F and has the form Here, the second term inside the square brackets contribute when there is supercurrent p = 0. The functions κ 1 (t) and κ 2 (t) contain the explicit time dependence of the oscillation Note that the denominators contain the information about the Anderson pseudospin resonance Ω = ±∆ 0 , with the ± coming from the particle-hole symmetry. As discussed in the main text, the presence of the supercurrent allows a linear coupling with the external field. In the second order, the presence of p = 0 does not lead to interesting physics and only vastly complicates the explicit expression for the geometric contribution. Hence, we only confined to the p = 0 case. The geometric part is now given by B (2) geom (t, A, g Note the appearance of the geometric quantities A k F ,i A k F ,j and g k F ,ij . The functions β 1 (t) and β 2 (t) contain the explicit time dependence Note that the denominators contain the known Higgs gap Ω = ±2∆ 0 and the Anderson pseudospin resonance Ω = ±∆ 0 . We assume the general pairing case ∆ k = ∆ 0 f k = ∆ 0 (u k + iv k ). The s wave case can be obtained by taking v k = 0 and u k = 1, while the d + id pairing by Let us expand the x and y components of the pseudomagnetic field explicitly The equations of motion is In the lowest order, this gives This gives the nontrivial solution where This simply says that the pseudospin is anti-parallel to the pseudomagnetic field. Note that, unlike the s wave case, we now have a non-zero y component. This is due to the fact that the pairing potential has an imaginary part v k . We now calculate the first order Higgs mode. The equations of motion are We can solve the equations of motion using Laplace transformation. The self-consistent equation then gives for the real part Similarly, the imaginary part is ∆(1) We can solve the system of equations (E11) and (E13). This gives where For sinusoidal external field Ã(s) ∼ (s 2 + Ω 2 ) -1 , which in frequency domain s → iν contributes the poles ν = ±Ω. This describes the driving frequency. The resonance occurs when the poles from the driving frequency coincides with the poles from the collective modes. In frequency domain this comes from the denominators of (E15) to (E16): -Ω 2 + ω 2 k . Recall that for the s wave pairing, when we focused on the Fermi surface, this factor becomes -Ω 2 + 4∆ 2 0 which can be pulled out from the summation or integration to give a simple pole at Ω = 2∆ 0 (we consider only positive frequencies). For d + id, and in general beyond s wave, there is still k dependence even if we focused only on the Fermi surface. Specifically, the resonance from the collective modes comes from the factor -Ω 2 + 4∆ 2 0 |f k | 2 . The symmetry factor f k = 1 therefore broadens the resonance peak. For the second order, the equations of motion give, after Laplace transformation where We solve the system of equations (E17). We only need the result for σx( k . We have σx( The self-consistent equations for the Higgs mode is which gives, upon separating the real and imaginary parts, the system of equations We will define all the functions involve above shortly. The solution of the set of equations above is where The necessary functions are given by For the functions F 1 (s) and F 2 (s), we separate the three main contributions, for a = 1, 2. We will give the explicit forms for F a (s) con , F a (s) int , and F a (s) geo below, but first let us discuss the physical meaning of these terms. The first function F a (s) con is the conventional driving term and is proportional to the band curvature and second order driving ∝ L{A i (t)A j (t)}. The 2nd term, F a (s) int , are the contributions of the products of the first order excitations. For example, it has contributions of the form L{A i (t)σ k }, which is a first order pseudospin excitation interacting with the external field. The explicit form will be shown below. The last term of (E33) is the geometric driving term. It is proportional to the quantum metric and the product of Berry connection, g k,ij + A ki A kj . The explicit forms of these functions are The Laplace transforms for the products of first order contributions are where C = R, I denotes real and imaginary parts, respectively. The other variables are given by δ I1 = Ω 2 , δ I2 = Ω, δ R1 = Ω 1 , δ R2 = Ω, and ω 1,2,3,4 = ω, Ω 1 , Ω 2 , and Ω. Here Ω 1 is given by while Ω 2 2 = ω2 -2∆ 0 U h 4 . The functions h 1i , h 2 , h 3i , and h 4 are to be defined below in (E54). The different factors appearing above are as follows. For s yn : For s zn : (E52) The d Cm s: The hs are defined as We perform analytic continuation to go from Laplace space to frequency space s → iν. This gives the different poles For s wave (u k = 1 and v k = 0), the Anderson resonance comes from the factor s Of particular importance is the poles due to the coupling of ∆ I (t) and the external field A(t) to give a first order Higgs mode discussed in the main text. This gives coincident poles at 1 2 (ω + Ω 2 ), 1 if we also simultaneously transform the many-electron wavefunction Another example is the BCS groundstate This is gauge invariant under the set of gauge transformations Note that φ, which can depend on k, is the phase of the Cooper pair wavefunction. Hence, (F5) actually comes from the gauge transformation of the two-electron wavefunction, which is a special case of (F3). In the main text, we fixed the gauge by choosing this phase to be zero. The interaction Hamiltonian responsible for superconductivity has the general form where with the indices {lmij} denoting the collective indices for the band, wavevector, and spin. The Hamiltonian is invariant under simultaneous gauge transformation b i → e -iθi b i and φ i → e iθi φ i as it should be. Let us now apply this prescription to the reduced BCS Hamiltonian pairing term where the pairing potential satisfies the self-consistency condition Note that V kp is a special case of V lmij in (F7). Eq. (F6) is invariant under the set of gauge transformations Gauge transformation of pseudospins. Recall the definition of speudospin Let us see how this change under a gauge transformation. The x component becomes Similar calculations for the y component yields Hence, the gauge transformation acts as a rotation about the z axis for the pseudospins with the rotation angle given by α k = θ k↑ + θ -k↓ . This shows that the pseudospin formalism is not manifestly gauge invariant as the pseudospin variables transform non-trivially under such transformation. However, as we show below, the Higgs mode is gauge invariant. Multiband superconductor. Let us consider the hopping part of a tight-binding Hamiltonian ignoring first the Peierls substitution. The hopping amplitude matrix elements are given by The hopping Hamiltonian is invariant under the gauge transformation Note that under this transformation the hopping amplitude transforms as This is consistent with the gauge transformation of a Wilson link of a lattice gauge theory. Similarly in band space The gauge transformation for the matrix can be thought-of as coming from the gauge transformation of the Bloch functions for fixed m and n. Note that above, we are careful in using lowered indices to label rows and raised indices to label columns. This will be useful later. The pairing Hamiltonian, written in band space has a term of the form This invariant under along with (F19). In the presence of vector potential. Let us now consider the gauge transformation in real space in the presence of a vector potential. The hopping matrix with Peierls substitution transforms as where R iα,jβ = r iα -r jβ , with Riα,jβ and R iα,jβ its corresponding unit vector and magnitude. In the continuum limit R iα,jβ → 0 we get the familiar gauge transformation The tight-binding Hamiltonian in Fourier space has the form Note that the exponential factors are just gauge transformation, i.e. they can be gauged away. The Hamiltonian can therefore be written as in orbital and band spaces, respectively. This is gauge invariant under The Nambu spinor is written as Note that since this is written as a column vector, the creation operators are written with lowered band and orbital indices as they label rows. Another way to think of the bottom-half row is that they are annihilation operators for the holes. The pairing Hamiltonian contains the term of the form This is invariant under In the pseudospin formalism, we expand in powers of the vector potential. Let us see how this gauge transformation looks like when this is done on a Bloch function. That is, G with fixed band index m, or a column element of G. We denote this by Ḡ. We have We are mostly interested in the case ∆ β α = ∆δ β α , for which we have where A k is the Berry connection. Hence, we see the known gauge transformation of the Berry connection A k -∇ k θ k . Let us focus on a single band with Bloch function given by the column vector G kβ . Here we suppressed the band index as we are considering only a single band. The order parameter in band space is given by and transforms as It only acquires a phase which makes it clear that the magnitude is gauge invariant. However, it is instructive to show the gauge invariance of the magnitude order-by-order in the expansion in powers of A since our method of calculating the Higgs mode uses this expansion. Before the gauge transformation, we have the following expansion where g k,ij is the quantum metric. In expanding the gauged-transformed order parameter, we need the following expansions e iθ k-A↑ = e iθ k↑ 1 -iA j ∂ j θ k↑ - We now have Hence, we see the familiar gauge transformation of the Berry connection: 2A k -∂ j θ k↑ -∂ j θ k↓ . The factor of two in front and the two theta terms comes from the fact that we are actually treating two Bloch functions for the two spins simultaneously. In addition, we see additional term i 2 A j A i ∂ i ∂ j α k coming from the expansion of the exponentials (F30) and (F31). We will now show that order-by-order in powers of A the magnitude of the right-hand side of (F29) is equal to the magnitude of the right-hand side of (F32). The magnitude squared of the right-hand side of (F32) can be written as Let us group the terms involving α k in powers of A. The zeroth and first order satisfy the self-consistent condition: 0 = 0. The second order gives This shows explicitly that even if we expand in powers of A, the α k terms coming from the gauge transformation cancel order by order so that the magnitude of the order parameter remains invariant. Since the Higgs mode is a fluctuation of this magnitude, this shows explicitly its gauge invariance even when expanded in powers of A. In the pseudospin formalism, the order parameter is given by In general, this is complex so that δ∆(t) is not yet the Higgs mode as it contains imaginary part. The Higgs mode is the fluctuation of the magnitude with respect to the initial constant value A gauge transformation changes the phase of ∆(t), but it is obvious from (F36) that the Higgs mode is gauge invariant. For simplicity, we usually perform a gauge transformation so that the zeroth order ∆ 0 is real. We can then write ∆(t) = ∆ 0 + δ∆ R (t) + iδ∆ I (t). (F37) This gives the Higgs mode We are interested in the small fluctuations so that we can expand the square root factor and obtain That is, for small fluctuations |δ∆(t)| ∆ 0 , the Higgs mode is simply the real part δ∆ R (t). (Ω 1 + Ω 2 ), and Ω 2 , This effectively gives a 3rd order pole which results in a very strong peak.