While charge carrier dynamics and thermal management are both keys to the operational efficiency and stability for energy-related devices, experimental techniques that can simultaneously characterize both properties are still lacking. In this paper, we use laser-induced transient grating (TG) spectroscopy to characterize thin films of the archetypal organic semiconductor regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and its blends with the electron acceptor [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) on glass substrates. While the thermal response is determined to be dominated by the substrates, we show that the recombination dynamics of photocarriers in the organic semiconductor thin films occur on a similar timescale and can be separated from the thermal response. Our measurements indicate that the photocarrier dynamics are determined by multiple recombination processes and our extracted recombination rates are in good agreement with previous reports using other techniques. We further apply TG spectroscopy to characterize another conjugated polymer and a molecular fluorescent material to demonstrate its general applicability. Our study indicates the potential of transient grating spectroscopy to simultaneously characterize thermal transport and photocarrier dynamics in organic optoelectronic devices. A thorough understanding of the dynamics of the photogenerated charge carriers in semiconducting polymers is critical for improving organic photovoltaics (OPVs) and optoelectronics Also, device-level current-voltage (I-V) characterization Laser-induced transient grating (TG) spectroscopy is an optical technique successfully used in a wide range of applications In this work, we apply the TG technique to measure the grating decays in the model system regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and its blend with the electron acceptor [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM). Charge transport in this system has been extensively studied The diffracted signal is coherently superposed with the reference beam, and then they are directed into a fast photodiode (Hamamatsu C5658). The signal is subsequently read out using an oscilloscope (Tektronix TDS784A). The heterodyne detection can increase the signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio, as well as yield a signal that is linear with respect to the material response, simplifying the analysis and interpretation of the measurements Samples were prepared by spin-casting solutions of P3HT:PCBM dissolved in 1,2dichlorobenzene onto cleaned glass substrates, inside an inert atmosphere glovebox. The solution was approximately 4% wt added solids. A spin-speed of approximately 800 rpm produced samples with thickness ranging from 50 to 250 nm (determined after all measurements using an Ambios XP-100 profilometer). After spin-casting, samples were annealed in the glovebox at 150 degrees Celsius for 15 minutes, followed by encapsulation with another clean glass slide with epoxy around the edges, with a gap between the sample surface and the encapsulation slide. Encapsulation of the samples ensured no contamination by water or oxygen during the TG measurements. Grating periods from ~3 μm to ~9 μm were adopted in our experiment, and the measured real-time decay data of the transient gratings with two periods (L~ 8.81 μm and 3.75 μm) are shown in Fig. The "magnitude" of the transient gratings is the change of the local optical refractive index caused by the pump excitation. Both photocarrier generation and temperature rise can lead to the change of the optical refractive index. Thus, in principle, the TG technique is sensitive to both the heat diffusion process and the photocarrier dynamics. In inorganic materials, these two processes typically happen over distinct time scales: the photocarrier dynamics typically occur within one nanosecond The heat diffusion process is governed by the heat equation with a 1D-periodic initial temperature distribution. Generally, TG spectroscopy is used to detect thermal transport properties of suspended films where erfc(x) = (2π) :; < ⁄ ∫ e :@ A dt B C is the complementary error function, q = 2π L ⁄ is the grating wave vector, α 56 is the thermal diffusivity of the glass substrate, and D is a fitting parameter related to the initial temperature rise. As shown in Fig. In P3HT and its fullerene blends, it is well established that the photocarriers initially exist in the form of excitons, which quickly decay within a few nanoseconds in neat films and even faster in blends where the donor-acceptor interfaces strongly facilitate exciton dissociation into free charge carriers. These free charge carriers can persist much longer, up to microseconds, and in fact, their transport and recombination dynamics directly impact the performance of organic optoelectronic and photovoltaic devices where α IJ is the diffusivity of the photogenerated free carriers, τ is the time constant for first-order recombination processes and B is the second-order recombination coefficient. The general solution to Eq. 2 is where A = α IJ q < + ; M , and C is a fitting parameter related to the initial photogenerated free charge carrier density. When the second-order recombination process is negligible, the solution simplifies to an exponential decay n = Cexp(-At) due to first-order recombination and carrier diffusion. The recombination and carrier diffusion processes can be distinguished due to their different dependences on the grating wavevector q, which can be conveniently varied in the experiment by changing the grating period The fitted carrier decay rates as a function of grating periods and blend weight ratios: (a) First-order rates for neat P3HT, 1.8% and 50% P3HT:PCBM blends, neat PCDTBT, and 4CzIPN-Ph; (b) Second-order rate for the 50% P3HT:PCBM blend and 4CzIPN-Ph. The fitting uncertainty of A is ~5% for neat P3HT and 1.8% blend and ~10% for 50% blend. The average fitting uncertainty of B is ~10% for the 50% blend and ~18% for 4CzIPN-Ph. The first-order decay rate A and the second-order recombination coefficient B extracted from our measurements as a function of the grating period are shown in Fig. To generalize the applicability of the TG spectroscopy to other organic semiconducting materials, we also studied a neat film of poly[N-9"-hepta-decanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole) (PCDTBT), another typical donor material used in OPVs The second-order recombination rate coefficient in the 50% P3HT:PCBM blends, as shown in Fig. In summary, we demonstrated the capability of probing photocarrier dynamics and thermal transport simultaneously in a semiconducting polymer thin-film-on-substrate system. Although thermal transport is dominated by the substrate, we were able to separate the contribution from the photocarrier dynamics in the organic thin films. Our study indicates that TG spectroscopy is a promising technique to simultaneously characterize charge carrier transport, recombination and thermal transport in semiconducting polymers and other organic and hybrid optoelectronic materials, provided that thicker samples are used and/or sub-micron grating periods are achieved 