Cloud platforms allow users to execute tasks directly from their web browser and are a key enabling technology not only for commerce but also for computational science. Research software is often developed by scientists with limited experience in (and time for) user interface design, which can make research software difficult to install and use for novices. When combined with the increasing complexity of scientific workflows (involving many steps and software packages), setting up a computational research environment becomes a major entry barrier. AiiDAlab is a web platform that enables computational scientists to package scientific workflows and computational environments and share them with their collaborators and peers. By leveraging the AiiDA workflow manager and its plugin ecosystem, developers get access to a growing range of simulation codes through a python API, coupled with automatic provenance tracking of simulations for full reproducibility. Computational workflows can be bundled together with Computational simulations constitute an integral part of contemporary science, and are often referred to as the "third pillar of science", after theory and experiments AiiDAlab is built on top of AiiDA The challenges in tackling scientific workflows, data sharing and reproducibility have been addressed by a number of initiatives launched in the last decade. Some of these resulted in the creation of repositories for storage, management, and sharing of scientific data Platforms providing a web-environment to run scientific software already exist. Notably within industry Here we highlight how AiiDAlab, when coupled with the Materials Cloud This manuscript is divided into two main sections: a detailed description of the AiiDAlab architecture and the presentation of three different AiiDAlab applications. The main goal of the AiiDAlab platform is to provide an environment for users with diverse expertise to access and run computational workflows embedded in AiiDAlab apps. The general structure of the platform is shown in Fig. Central to AiiDAlab is the concept of an "application" (app): a set of AiiDA workflows that encode simulation tasks, combined with graphical user interfaces (GUIs) to manage them. The apps allow users to submit calculations to different remote computational facilities, monitor the status of the calculations, analyze the data that are automatically retrieved, and run post-processing calculations. The core of a scientific AiiDAlab application is constituted by the AiiDA workflows, which encode the computational and scientific knowledge about a simulation. The development of a reliable computational workflow is a complex design problem. The scientists developing the workflow are responsible for the methodologies and related approximations that are selected to tackle the scientific problem under investigation. Additionally, an efficient workflow should be robust and resistant to externalities, such as temporary failures of the remote computing facility, network failures or shutdowns. Several such cases can be resolved by AiiDA itself; for instance, if a computer becomes unavailable, AiiDA detects it and puts the calculation on hold. However, some situations are specific to a given simulation code (run time error due to lack of convergence of an interative routine, or a problem with the input parameters). These cases must be handled by the corresponding workflows. All user interactions within an AiiDAlab app are facilitated by Jupyter notebooks As an example, Fig. For more technical details about AiiDAlab applications, the reader is referred to the "AiiDAlab application" section of the Supplementary Information, with information about the structure of the applications, their creation, and examples of usage of Appmode. Importantly, a library of user-interface elements (widgets) and their logic to interface with the underlying AiiDA infrastructure is available as a base app called "AiiDAlab widgets". This app provides out-of-the-box some of the high-level functionalities that are most often needed in AiiDAlab applications. Examples of such high-level functionalities include uploading data from a local computer, browsing data that are stored in an AiiDA database, and selecting the computational resources where to run the simulations (see more in the "Monitoring submitted calculations" section of the Supplementary Information). This base app is contained in the GitHub repository aiidalab-widgets-base The AiiDAlab home app Available AiiDAlab apps are listed in a central "AiiDAlab registry" We provide two deployment solutions for AiiDAlab: a "distributed model" and a "centralized model", that are described below. From the interface point of view, both distributed and centralized AiiDAlab solutions are identical. The distributed model follows the traditional way of sharing software. To share an entire stack, we provide a Virtual Machine (VM) image for download, which users can run locally. This is the case of Quantum Mobile The centralized model is generally referred to as Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) or Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS). To date we provide the following centralized AiiDAlab platforms as a service Last, it should be noted that companies could have strict policies on the physical location of their data, often requiring "in house" storage capabilities. For this reason, we have decided to license all core parts of AiiDAlab with the industry-friendly MIT open source licence [50] allowing for companies to deploy a custom AiiDAlab server on their premises for internal use. Moreover, to facilitate re-deployment and setting up a (new) AiiDAlab instance, we provide automated scripts to re-build the whole infrastructure using the Ansible tool In order to showcase the benefits of the AiiDAlab platform, we describe some use cases in which it has already been used in production, driven by the needs of experimental research in on-surface chemistry. This is a powerful method toward bottom-up fabrication of complex nanostructures, unattainable via traditional solution chemistry Our goal then has been to create AiiDAlab applications with intuitive user interfaces to perform automated workflows for the calculations mentioned above. We designed the apps in such a way so that they could be used also by researchers who are not familiar with the details needed to set up a calculation. Obtaining a specific GNR structure requires a considerable effort from the experimental point of view, both in terms of solution chemistry processes needed to fabricate the appropriate molecular precursors and in terms of the "on-surface synthesis" itself. Key steps before entering the experimental effort are the prediction of the relevant electronic properties associated to GNRs with a specific geometry and understanding how their topology and composition (for example insertion of heteroatoms) allow to tune such properties. The Nanoribbon AiiDAlab app To deal efficiently with the computational tasks needed to interpret and predict the outcome of experiments related to on-surface chemistry, the On-Surface Chemistry AiiDAlab app Scanning probe microscopy is the main experimental tool to acquire structural and electronic information about molecules and nanostructures on metal surfaces. More specifically, scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) and spectroscopy (STS) allow to determine the spatial distributions of the electronic states and the electronic band gap of the system under investigation. However, to validate the correctness of the assignment of the electronic states, to investigate the effect of the substrate, and to determine the geometry of the system, experimental electronic signatures need to be compared with computational simulations. To run these simulations, we have developed the Scanning Probe Microscopy app The interfaces for submission and for analysis of the result for the two workflows provided in the Scanning Probe Microscopy app as shown in Fig. We presented the overall concept and the implementation of AiiDAlab, an ecosystem for the development, sharing and deployment of user-friendly simulation apps that 1) provides convenient user interfaces to computational workflows, hiding their technical details and making them straightforwardly available to a broad range of researches, and 2) facilitates the development of such interfaces via a Python-based programming language and the availability of common interactive widgets. AiiDAlab offers the possibility to contribute and share computational workflows and data: the software stack is standardized using Docker containers, which provide every user with the same identical software environment. In order to minimize the entrance barrier for new users, the platform can run directly "in the cloud", requiring only a web browser and a login to access it (servers are currently hosted at CSCS, Switzerland and EOSC, Czech Republic), but can also be redeployed on internal resources or run locally using the Quantum Mobile virtual machine We also provide examples of a full range of apps which were developed in collaboration with experimentalists to tackle specific problems in the field of carbon-based nanostructures and surface-supported chemical reactions, enabling to run complex simulations effortlessly. In addition to the applications presented here, that demonstrate the benefits and functionality of the platform, numerous more apps are currently under development. To facilitate this process, we provide a set of tools for the creation of new apps, including a "cookie cutter" recipe that automates the initial steps of the app creation and the AiiDAlab widgets which can be readily embedded into new apps (see Supplementary Information). Last, in order to encourage not only the sharing of data, but also the sharing of codes, workflows and applications within the community, we deployed an open AiiDAlab registry. Developers can use it to register their apps and make them automatically available to all other users via the App Store. AiiDAlab is a modular and efficient platform granting a collaborative environment centered on simulations and targeted to people with different expertise. The platform can serve a broad range of communities beyond the original focus on materials science, and facilitates sharing of turn-key computational workflows and of the data produced by simulations. AiiDAlab allows for a direct exchange of processed simulation results in an appropriate format, introduces an easy way to standardize routine calculations, reducing to a minimum bottlenecks such as human mistakes. We expect that computational scientists from diverse fields will start adopting the platform and contributing to it with workflows and interfaces, empowering the scientific community by making simulation tools more directly and easily accessible to a broader range of researchers. From a technical point of view, an AiiDAlab application is a folder consisting of Jupyter notebook(s), metadata.json, and start.py (or start.md ) files. When opened, jupyter notebooks are converted into user friendly web based interfaces by the Appmode plugin In addition, Appmode allows to have independent copies of the same notebook opened simultaneously and to pass information from one notebook to another via URL parameters. To avoid overload of the server, the Appmode Jupyter kernel is automatically shut down once a user closes the corresponding web page. The creation of an AiiDAlab application is a straightforward task. Any folder created in the "/home/{user}/apps" directory of the AiiDAlab environment is considered an application and processed accordingly. The appearance and behaviour of the app can be controlled by placing specific files in this directory (see Fig. When using AiiDAlab in the cloud, every user works in an isolated virtual environment -a Docker container AiiDAlab widgets base package Figure The app is designed as follows: • A chemical sketch produced with a software for chemistry design is uploaded as a CDXML file. Starting from it, an interactive tool allows the user to define the unit cell of a GNR selecting two equivalent atoms in the structure (Fig. • An interactive tool allows the user to add or remove atoms from the ribbon and to define an initial guess for the spin distribution. • Submission of the workflow will perform a cell optimization, a band structure calculation, a projected density of states calculation and a calculation of Kohn-Sham orbitals. The Quantum ESPRESSO • The results are automatically organized in a database that can be consulted searching for structures with a specific chemical formula, with specific values for the electronic gap or the total magnetization, or with a specific energy position of the top of the valence band and of the bottom of the conduction band. • From the list of structures matching the search criteria, the user can select structures for band structure comparison or access a discovery section where an interactive band structure is displayed (Fig. The starting point is the geometry of a molecule or a set of molecules uploaded in the AiiDA database. A web-based interface allows the user to select a molecule and to build automatically a noble-metal substrate onto which the molecule can be positioned at will (see Fig. Once the geometry for a adsorbate-substrate system is available, either created with the mentioned interface or directly uploaded into the database, the equilibrium geometry can be obtained via submission of a geometry optimization workflow. The workflow automatically resubmits the calculation in case convergence has not been achieved within the queuing time limit on the compute infrastructure. For specific substrate-adsorbate combinations, it is possible to select different levels of theory for the geometry optimization: Full DFT will perform a DFT simulation for the whole substrate + adsorbate system; Mixed DFT (DFTB) will treat the molecules at the DFT (DFTB The results of the slab optimization workflow can be accessed through a search interface. In Fig. To investigate chemical reactions, such as dehalogenation of a GNR precursor or a polymerization process, we developed two workflows together with their interfaces: one to run a chain of constrained geometry optimizations and one to run Nudged-Elastic-Band (NEB) calculations. Let us take as an example the case where we want to investigate a dehalogenation process, i.e. the removal of a bromine atom from the a GNR precursor molecule adsorbed on Au(111). The molecule is shown in the NEB viewing interface, in Fig. The NEB workflow then expects as input a slab geometry stored in AiiDA, a set of geometries sketching the initial guess for the reaction path and the total number of images to consider in the optimization of the reaction path. The app automatically takes care of running the NEB simulation and retrieving results. Visualization of the results is facilitated by means of a web interface that shows the energy profile along the reaction path, a convergence plot for the height of the barrier, and a list of chemical sketches for the geometries of the system along the path. A visualizer, shown in Fig. The Scanning Probe Microscopy app also includes a workflow to perform PDOS and orbital hybridization analysis on systems consisting of an adsorbate on a metal slab. The interface to run this calculation is shown in Fig. The EOSC-hub instance is connected to European Grid Infrastructure (EGI) check-in for authentication, giving access to a wide community of researchers.