A sensitive vector magnetometry with high spatial resolution is important for various practical applications, such as magnetocardiography, magnetoencephalography, explosive materials detection and many others. We propose a magnetometer based on the magnetic irongarnet film possessing a very high magnetic anisotropy, placed in the rotating external magnetic field. Each of the measured magnetic field spatial components produces different temporal harmonics in the out-of-plane magnetization dependence. The dielectric resonant grating placed on the top of an ultrathin film enhanced the magneto-optical response 10 times which makes it possible to achieve 10 times higher spatial resolution in the perpendicular to the film direction. The reported magneto-optical magnetometer allows one to measure simultaneously all three spatial components of the magnetic field with high spatial resolution and sensitivity up to 100 pT/Hz 1/2 . Registration of weak magnetic fields is an important tool for study of different animate and inanimate objects. Magnetocardiography based on the measurement of the small magnetic signals associated with the blood currents provides novel information essential for diagnostics For many practical applications, it is essential to provide not only high sensitivity of the magnetometer, but also micrometer spatial resolution and an ability to distinguish orientation of the external magnetic field. There are many types of the magnetometers developed nowadays, among which one of the most perspective approaches is the flux-gate magnetometery Recently various nanostructures were demonstrated to enhance the magneto-optical effects, among which are photonic crystal-based We consider a 1D TiO2 grating deposited on the top of the smooth ultrathin iron-garnet film grown on a gadolinium-gallium garnet (GGG) substrate and having a very high magnetic anisotropy. Performed analysis and numerical simulations show that one can perform vector magnetometry in the proposed structure with a high sensitivity up to 100 pT for Hz bandwidth. The subwavelength size of grating perforation and film width allows for the significant device miniaturization. Actually, the magnetic film thickness determines the spatial resolution of the magnetometer which is 30 nm in the reported device. Let us consider a magnetic dielectric film of cubic crystal lattice and crystallographic axis orientation (111) placed into an external saturating magnetic field H (see Fig. M s h x sinφ -M s h y cosφ + HM s sin (φ -φ H ) -√2θK 1 cos(3(φ -φ K )) = 0, where φ K is the angle between the anisotropy axis [21 ̅ 1 ̅ ] and the axis X, φ H is the angle between H and X , K 1 is the cubic anisotropy constant, K U is the uniaxial anisotropy constant (see Fig. Since we consider a rotating magnetic field, the following condition describes magnetic field direction: Analysis shows that under the assumption that the measured field is small (H >> h) we can obtain the following equations for θ and φ: In Eqs. ( Fourier spectra of the magneto-optical signal associated with θ(t) determined by Eq. ( where h τ = √h x 2 + h y 2 , and φ h =tan -1 h x h y . Therefore, according to Eq. ( Magneto-optics is a very convenient tool for measurement of the out-of-plane magnetization component of the iron-garnet film, which contains the information on both in-plane and out-ofplane components of the measured weak magnetic field. There are two magneto-optical effects, the polarization Faraday rotation and the even magneto-optical intensity modulation, namely, which arise from the M z component and should be taken into account. Both of these effects can be significantly enhanced in nanostructures contacting iron-garnet films compared to the smooth materials. We consider the s-polarized light incident normally on the nanostructure designed in the following way. 1D TiO2 grating having period P = 370 nm, TiO2 stripe width W = 335 nm, and height d gr = 240 nm is fabricated on a top of an ultrathin iron-garnet film with thickness d BIG = 30 nm grown on a gadolinium gallium garnet (GGG) substrate. Such 1D grating is resonant, which means that no propagating diffraction orders in the reflectance or the transmittance are generated. On the other hand, it has a narrow resonance at λ = 783 nm corresponding to a TE0-guided mode excited in the hybrid iron-garnet+TiO2 grating layer. We have tuned the parameters of the grating to make λ correspond to the typical wavelength of laser diode, however it can be easily tuned to any desired wavelength. The exact resonance position is determined by the period of the grating and the guided mode effective refractive index n β as λ res = n β P The optical transmittance spectra and the spectra of the Faraday rotation angle for a smooth iron-garnet film and a heterostructure with resonant grating are shown in Fig. where ∆f is the spectral bandwidth of the sensor, μ is the quantum yield of the photodetector, P is the power of the incident light, ħω λ is the energy of photons of incident radiation. Let us also notice that the optical resonance is very narrow: its spectral width is Δλ = 6.5 nm. The resonance of the magneto-optical Faraday rotation is about 2.5 times narrower. In order to take into account, on the one hand, very sharp resonances, and on the other hand, the finite spectral width of the light source, we performed an averaging of the values T, Φ, MO FOM, MO signal over the finite bandwidth (Δλ av =0.2 nm was taken as the typical spectral width of the laser diode radiation). Such consideration did not significantly affect the characteristics of the structure. MO FOM and MO signal were calculated for the considered structure. Fig. so that the signal at the frequency 3ω corresponds to the applied magnetic field, the signal at 2ω and 4ω correspond to the in-plane component of the measured magnetic field, and the signal at 6ω is responsible for the out-of-plane component of the measured magnetic field. The phase of the signal at 2ω and 4ω frequencies carries the information on the in-plane direction of the measured magnetic field φ h . Fig. where the coefficients δ jj refer to the corresponding even magneto-optical effect produced by the corresponding m j = M j /M s components. Formally, cross-components δ i≠j m i m j should also be present in Eq. The ratio between δ jj coefficients depend on the magneto-optical properties of the structure. For a smooth iron-garnet film of 30 nm thickness the coefficients are δ xx = 2 ⋅ 10 -4 %, δ yy = 1 ⋅ 10 -4 %, δ zz = 4 ⋅ 10 -4 %. Fig. As we are interested in measurement of all three orthogonal components of the weak magnetic field h, which are present in θ temporal dependence as harmonics with different frequencies, let us consider the nanostructure with δ zz ≫ δ xx, δ yy , which is fulfilled for the considered nanostructure, too. Therefore, only this term in Eq. ( and according to Eq. ( while the applied external magnetic field H will result in modulation at a different frequency Therefore, Fourier transform of the transmitted through the grating light temporal dependence enables measurement of the in-plane component magnitude and direction, h τ and φ τ at 7ω, 5ω frequencies, while 3ω, 9ω components are responsible for the out-of-plane h z component of the measured magnetic field, correspondingly. Although this method allows one to determine the measured field h, its sensitivity is obviously much smaller than the sensitivity of the Faraday method: Eq.c Recent studies A 1D nanograting deposited on an iron-garnet film with strong magnetic anisotropy is promising for the magneto-optical magnetometry. The magnetic properties of such grating enable the magneto-optical measurement of all orthogonal components of the weak magnetic field vector due to the multifold enhancement of the Faraday effect. The 1D grating magneto-optical magnetometer based on measurement of the Faraday rotation was predicted to have 100 pT/Hz 1/2 sensitivity. It is important that the sensitivity of the magneto-optical signal to all of the spatial components of the measured magnetic field is the same in this scheme. A second approach, based on the magneto-optical intensity modulation measurement due to the even in magnetization components magneto-optical effects was considered and showed a 4 order of magnitude lower sensitivity. Excitation of the guided modes allowed us to increase the thin-film Faraday rotation 100 times compared to a smooth film of the same thickness. Although the achieved enhancement is associated with the lower transmittance of the structure, we show that magneto-optical figure of merit and signal-to-noise ratio are 10 times enhanced compared to the uncoated film. Utilization of the thin films instead of the bulk crystals is important for applications, since it allows for significant miniaturization of the device and better spatial resolution.