Since their discovery three decades ago it has emerged that the physics of high-T c cuprate superconductors is characterised by multiple temperature scales, and a phenomenology that deviates significantly from the conventional paradigm of superconductivity experimental data according to a consistent definition; this reveals a remarkable consistency of behaviour across the whole high-T c family, despite the appreciable variations in other parameters. Our analysis suggests that in the cuprates there is an inherent limit to T c ∼ 135 K. We compare this behaviour with other strongly-correlated superconductors and propose a unified picture of superconducting fluctuations close to the Mott state. The Nernst effect, the transverse electric field E y generated by crossed temperature gradient ∇ x T and magnetic field B z , where e N is the Nernst signal and N is the Nernst coefficient. In the normal state, N = is usually expected to be small (though its magnitude can be enhanced under some circumstances A qualitatively larger signal is expected in a superconducting vortex liquid state, because the flow of heat-carrying vortices down a temperature gradient generates a transverse phase-slip. An appreciable Nernst coefficient N = N s + N n is measured above T c in many high-T c materials Here, we have reviewed the extensive literature on the Nernst effect in high-T c superconductors, and we have extracted T onset from all high-T c families for which data are reported. We have attempted to use a consistent definition, where T onset is identified as the temperature at which there is a deviation of N from linearity in temperature. When the magnetic field dependence is also reported, we find that in most cases, this definition of T onset is coincident with the temperature at which a magnetic field dependence emerges in N . We note in Table In Fig. We note that the trend-line for T onset /T c crosses 1 at about 135 K at the upper limit, the maximum ambient-pressure transition temperature found experimentally more than two decades ago in Hg-based superconductors (HgBa 2 Ca 2 Cu 3 O 1+x with T c ∼ 133 K) Fig. Within each family of materials, we find that T onset has a weak dependence on p (see Fig. In summary, we have identified a consistent behaviour in the Nernst effect across a wide range of high-T c superconductors. First, we find that T onset /T c follows a consistent trend across the family and that T onset is limited at around 135K, close to the highest ambient- Of course, the cuprates are not the only materials to exhibit superconductivity in the proximity of a Mott or charge-ordered state. The κ-phase quasi-two-dimensional BEDT-TTF organic molecular metals Throughout the κ-phase series the stoichiometry is preserved, so this family of materials gives us the opportunity to explore the phase diagram along an axis orthogonal to that relevant for the cuprates (see Fig. As yet, we do not know of an experimental system in which we can probe this bridging regime. However, recent experiments on films on κ-BEDT-TTF materials have allowed both doping (by gating the sample) and the application of strain We also note that in the cuprates literature there is significant variation in the reported temperature scales associated with phenomena such as charge order and fluctuation Nernst effect. Both are expected to be sensitive to magnetic field, which suppresses superconductivity but stabilises charge order 