A compact near-eye visor (NEV) system that can guide light from a display to the eye could transform augmented reality (AR) technology. Unfortunately, existing implementations of such an NEV either suffer from small field of view or chromatic aberrations. See-through quality and bulkiness further make the overall performance of the visors unsuitable for a seamless user experience. Metasurfaces are an emerging class of nanophotonic elements that can dramatically reduce the size of optical elements while enhancing functionality. In this paper, we present a design of composite metasurfaces for an ultra-compact NEV. We simulate the performance of a proof-of-principle visor corrected for chromatic aberrations while providing a large display field of view (>77° both horizontally and vertically), good see-through quality (>70% transmission and less than a wavelength root mean-square (RMS) wavefront error over the whole visible wavelength range), as needed for an immersive AR experience Augmented reality (AR) technology has recently attracted considerable attention and could revolutionize technologies ranging from applications in the military and navigation, to education and entertainment. Using these devices, we can effectively integrate computer-generated virtual information into the real world. AR can be implemented in various ways, including smartphone displays, head-up displays (HUDs), and head-mounted displays (HMDs) In this paper, we propose a metasurface freeform opticsbased NEV, that will circumvent real-world distortions and eliminate chromatic aberrations, as needed for an immersive AR experience. For this purpose, we propose to use a composite metasurface: one of the metasurfaces reflects light from the display to project the virtual world to the user's eye while the second metasurface circumvents the distortion of the real-world due to the first metasurface. The first metasurface is designed to have multi-chrome operation, which two metasurface together preserves the color information in transmission. The resultant display FOV of the composite metasurface NEV is more than 77° both horizontally and vertically which is better than current existing AR visors and also it has acceptable see-through quality over the visible range (less than a wavelength RMS wavefront error). First, we design and model the single metasurface NEV that can guide light from a display at the HMD to the human eye via ray optical simulation (ZEMAX-OpticStudio). The size of the visor is assumed to be 4 cm×4 cm to maintain a compact form-factor comparable to that of ordinary sunglasses while still having a large field of view when placed only 2.5 cm away from the eyes. The display is placed between the visor and the eye: 1cm away and 1.5 cm upwards from the visor with an angle of 45° with respect to the optical axis. The display is initially assumed to be monochromatic (540 nm). The eye model which we use here for simulation is the widely accepted model proposed by Liou & Brennan We also evaluate the modulation transfer function (MTF) and the grid distortion cause by the NEV to estimate the image quality. The MTF of the system along the tangential and sagittal plane is shown in Fig. So far, we assumed the NEV to be made of bilayer, ideal phase masks. In practice, these masks will be implemented using metasurfaces. The proposed stack of metasurfaces are shown in Fig. One of the major issues facing metasurfaces is their strong chromatic aberrations. For example, a metalens will produce a focused image at one wavelength and an unfocused image at another Where (x, y) is the position on the phase mask, λ i is the design wavelength, r is the pillar radius, and n is the number of wavelengths (here n = 3). The desired phase is given by φ and the calculated phase shift for each pillar is given by f. The final radii distribution of our multi-wavelength reflective metasurface visor is shown in Fig. Once we finalize the multi-wavelength reflective visor design, we then optimize the design for the second metasurface at the central wavelength. We found that while the second metasurface is designed to negate the effect of the first metasurface, such negation happens over the full wavelength range simulated. As can be seen in Fig. The proposed composite metasurface visor can overcome the bulkiness, FOV limitations, chromatic aberrations, and seethrough quality of existing NEVs. Using our proposed structure, we can make the eye-wear devices flat and ultrathin and close to eye, while maintaining a large FOV for virtual world. However, there are some challenges with the current design, including small eye-box and large area fabrication. The eye-box for our current visor is 2.5mm×2.5mm (denoting exit pupil diameter without any expansion) which is lower than current waveguide-base visors Our work explored the possibility of using a metasurface to design and create a compact near-eye visor which provides a large field of view and also reasonable see-through quality for an immersive AR experience. The proposed metasurface visor does not suffer from chromatic aberrations, while providing a large display field of view (>77° both horizontally and vertically), and good (>70% transmission and no distortion) see-through quality. The current visor includes two layers of metasurfaces which have different phase masks. The scatterers in the metasurface near the eye (which is reflecting the virtual world to the eye) are designed to have 30% reflectivity and multi-chrome behavior, whereas the scatterers in the metasurface further from the eye (which helps improve the see-through quality) are designed to have 100% transmission. The main idea behind our multi-chrome behavior is that we start with the desired phase profiles for each color, and then find the scatterer distribution that provide the phase profiles closest to the desired one. In this work, we focused on design and simulation of the whole AR metasurface visor due to the complexity of design. Additionally, there are many other relevant factors for highquality immersive AR experience including large eye-box, high efficiency, broadband operation and tunability (to mitigate VAC) which are not specified in our current architecture. However, we believe that the demonstrated multi-layer metasurface visor is capable of addressing those issues. All the RCWA simulations for the phase and amplitude calculation (in reflection and transmission mode) were performed under normal incidence as shown in Fig. As we mentioned in section 4, we have primarily designed a metasurface that works at certain specific wavelengths, and true broadband operation is not expected here. However, we also analyzed the bandwidth of the light-source for the display and we found that the MTF does not fall very quickly, and at least works for over a ~20 nm bandwidth. We define the bandwidth by the range of wavelengths over which the MTF exceeds 0.3 at 33 cycles/mm (Fig. While the fabrication of the current design is challenging, fabrication methods already exist that show that such largearea fabrication using DUV Lithography is possible with high throughput as we discussed in section 5. One of the challenging tasks will be to align two metasurfaces during fabrication on both side of a quartz substrate. Here, we have simulated the tolerance of the metasurfaces to lateral misalignment. In this test simulation, the operation wavelength is 540 nm and the angle of incidence is assumed to be normal. We are looking for changes in RMS wavefront error in see through mode. We found out that up to 100μm misalignment, error remains below one wavelength, which is still close to our current RMS at normal incident angle. 