Using first-principles calculations, we examine the transition temperature T c of superconductivity in sodium tungsten bronze ( Na x WO 3 , where x is equal to or less than unity ). Although T c is relatively low T c ( < ∼ 3K), it is interesting that its characteristic exponential dependence on x has been experimentally observed at 0.2 < ∼ x < ∼ 0.4. On the basis of the McMillan equation for T c including the effect of plasmons, we succeed in reproducing the absolute values of T c and its x dependence. We also find that the plasmon effect is crucial for the estimation of T c as well as phonons. Since the calculated T c may not exceed ∼ 20 K even for x < ∼ 0.1, the superconductivity at a low T c can be interpreted by the usual phonon mechanism, including the plasmon effect. On the other hand, a high T c up to about 90 K, which is found on the surface of a Na x WO 3 system at x ∼ 0.05 by recent experiments, cannot be explained by our results. This discrepancy suggests that another mechanism is required to clarify the nature of the high-T c superconductivity of Na x WO 3 . Sodium tungsten bronze ( Na x WO 3 ) and related materials [ A x WO 3 (A= K, Rb, Cs,..) ] have been studied for a long time as typical oxide superconductors, where the concentration x is equal to or less than unity. In this study, we examine the electronic state of Na x WO 3 by first-principles calculations using 'Quantum ESPRESSO', which is an integrated software of Open-Source computer codes for electronic-structure calculations. In Fig. where ω log is the logarithmic average frequency, which means a characteristic phonon frequency of the system, λ is the electron-phonon coupling constant, and μ * is the Coulomb pseudopotential, which is usually treated as a constant of about 0.1 for metals. 17) However, μ * is dependent on the electron density of the system, n for n < ∼ 10 22 cm -3 owing to the effect of plasmons. which well reproduces the x dependence of μ * obtained in the previous work for 0.01 < ∼ x < ∼ 0.5. To calculate x dependences of ω log and λ by RBA, we use two independent results, WO and NaWO Here, we use the 24 × 24 × 24 MP grid for the electronic state and the 4 × 4 × 4 grid for the phonon calculation. In Fig. To examine the effect of Na atoms in more detail, we calculate phonon dispersion, phonon DOS, and the electron-phonon coupling function α 2 F(ω) for WO RBA- 3 and NaWO RBA+ 3 at x = 0.4. Since the tungsten atoms are staggered in adjacent unit cells in the case of x ≤ 0.3, The theoretical estimation obtained by Pellegrini et al. In an actual Na x WO 3 system, it becomes an insulator when x is smaller than about 0.2 and its superconductivity is not observed. Because the structural transition occurs and the crystal symmetry of the system changes, the effect of the Anderson localization may be enhanced, which causes the metalinsulator transition observed at x ∼ 0.2. The inset in Fig. Finally, we discuss the relationship between our result and the HTS of Na x WO 3 . If we use the above fitting equation for T c , it becomes about 13 K at x = 0.05. The result is clearly inconsistent with the result of the experiment on HTS. Of course, HTS is observed on the surface and we should pay attention to the dimensionality of the system. The surface superconductivity has already been examined by the first-principles calculations, although the result is limited to hole doped diamond systems. In summary, we have investigate the x dependence of T c in sodium tungsten bronze (Na x WO 3 ) first-principles calculations. We find that the superconductivity is dominated by a part of WO 3 , and the role of Na atoms is almost limited to providing carriers to the conduction band of the system. Combined with the McMillan equation and the phenomenological relation of μ * including the plasmon effect, we show that T c is given as T c ≃ 20.7 exp(-9.3x) for 0.1 < ∼ x < ∼ 0.6, which is consistent with the result obtained by the experiment for 0.2 < ∼ x < ∼ 0.4. We have found that plasmons are as important as phonons for the superconductivity of Na x WO 3 . Although T c increases with decreasing x, it may not exceed ∼ 20K for small x. This result is inconsistent with HTS up to about 90 K at x ∼ 0.05 observed in the recent experiment for the surface. This discrepancy may require some new mechanism to explain the HTS of Na x WO 3 beyond the conventional phonon mechanism. In this work, we used the Gaussian smearing method to obtain λ, ω log , and α 2 F(ω). The possible errors of these values are not large. 27) However, more efficient method introduced by Koretsune and Arita 