Compared to common density functionals, ab initio wave function methods can provide greater reliability and accuracy, which could prove useful when modeling adsorbates or defects of otherwise periodic systems. However, the breaking of translational symmetry necessitates large supercells that are often prohibitive for correlated wave function methods. As an alternative, we introduce the regional embedding approach, which enables correlated wave function treatments of only a target fragment of interest through small, fragment-localized orbital spaces constructed using a simple overlap criterion. Applications to the adsorption of water on lithium hydride, hexagonal boron nitride, and graphene substrates show that regional embedding combined with focal point corrections can provide converged CCSD(T) (coupled cluster) adsorption energies with very small fragment sizes. In electronic structure theory, ab initio wave function methods provide a hierarchy of approximations that allow for systematic improvability-a feature missing in density functional theory (DFT). While ab initio methods were originally limited to molecules, advances in the past decade have enabled approaches like many-body perturbation theory or coupledcluster theory to be applied to atomistic periodic systems. However, when translational symmetry is broken by spatially-localized perturbations, the high cost of conventional treatments by large supercells is often artifical and can be avoided. To substantiate this claim, we here demonstrate that ab initio molecular adsorption energies can be obtained at significantly reduced cost, compared to the conventional supercell treatment, by a regional embedding technique. In general, the accurate prediction of noncovalent adsorption energies is challenging because they arise as small energy differences between large total energies. Unlike most previous embedding approaches, we localize the orbitals based upon their overlap with the fragment of interest in Hilbert space, rather than invoking real-space densities or localization functionals. The approach builds on quantum information concepts and, in particular, density matrix embedding theory (DMET). where ρ, τ are the minimal AO basis functions on the fragment and S is the overlap matrix in the minimal AO basis; let |a| indicate the total number of minimal AO basis functions on the fragment. The eigenvectors of Pocc in the basis of canonical occupied orbitals, P occ i j = φ i | Pocc |φ j , define a rotated set of occupied orbitals whose eigenvalues quantify their overlap with the fragment space. As a unitary transformation of the occupied orbitals, this procedure does not change the HF wavefunction, but merely separates the occupied orbitals into a set with nonzero overlap on the fragment (at most |a|) and a set with zero overlap on the fragment. If we were to use the same projection operator to rotate the canonical virtual orbitals, this procedure would generate the atomic valence active space We propose to correlate only those orbitals that have significant overlap with the fragment, defined by a threshold on the eigenvalues of the projection operators. The rotated orbitals with insufficient overlap on the fragment space are simply frozen in the post-HF calculations, making the insertion of regional embedding into existing quantum chemistry workflows straightforward. Compared to other localization procedures, the one proposed here does not require minimization of a cost function (as in Foster-Boys, While any high-level quantum chemistry method may be used in the fragment calculation, here we focus on secondorder Møller-Plesset perturbation theory (MP2) and coupledcluster theory with single and double excitations (CCSD) and perturbative triples (CCSD(T)). These methods are valuable in this problem area for their nonempirical treatment of dispersion interactions. Furthermore, CCSD(T) is a powerful method in molecular thermochemistry: in small and electronically benign molecules, energy differences computed at its basis set limit typically deviate by ≤2 kJ/mol from the exact result, far outperforming all known DFT methods. Figure 1. An illustration of the embedding scheme used in this paper, for water on a 7 × 7 graphene supercell, with an example of randomly selected canonical and projected occupied orbitals. Carbon atoms from graphene are selected to be in the fragment based upon the radial distance from the oxygen atom in the water molecule. found from three separate calculations, where the embedding procedure is applied to each calculation. We apply the counterpoise correction for basis set superposition error by performing each calculation in the full basis set of the water and substrate, All calculations are performed with periodic boundary conditions as implemented in PySCF, Figure The adsorption energy of water on LiH, Figure In contrast, the MP2 adsorption energy curves for hBN, Figure The inset of each panel in Figure In Figure where N is the number of fragment atoms and E is the adsorption energy. The adsorption energies, plotted with solid lines and filled symbols, follow the same shape and rate of convergence as the MP2 results presented in Figure where we estimate E MP2 (∞), the MP2 adsorption energy in the thermodynamic limit by a 1/N extrapolation of a series of full supercell MP2 calculations (see the dashed lines in Figure Although previous work has used a 1/N 2 extrapolation of the adsorption energy, we find our data fits much better to 1/N (shown in the Supporting Information). The finite-size corrected data are frequently converged to within 10 meV when correlating only five to ten atoms in the substrate! We note that the finite-size correction can also be viewed as a focalpoint basis set correction, accounting for the frozen orbitals in the supercell calculation. LiH hBN graphene present lit. In summary, we have presented regional embedding, which allows an isolated treatment of local chemical changes with high level wave function methods. This is achieved by unitary transformations of the occupied and virtual Hartree-Fock orbitals based on the degree of overlap with the fragment's Hilbert space. The conventional use of high level wave functions in sufficiently large supercells is expensive. In contrast, regional embedding restricts the correlated calculation to the Hilbert space associated with the target fragment; consequently, large supercells can be used and the finite-size error can be efficiently eliminated. The benchmarks presented indicate that regional embedding with finite-size (focal point) corrections allows remarkably quick convergence to the thermodynamic limit, although the rate of convergence depends on the nature of molecule-substrate interaction. Converged results are achieved with correlated calculations on much smaller systems than the supercells used in contemporary periodic quantum chemistry and quantum Monte Carlo methods. We expect this method to have broad applicability in molecular, biological, and condensed systems. The simplicity and performance should make it an appealing choice whenever modeling localized chemical changes in large systems. This covers many applications scenarios, and we have already started projects in heterogeneous catalysis and in the optical and thermochemical properties crystal defects. Concerning the theory, treating the frozen orbitals at levels beyond focal-point corrections may further increase the power of the method; self-consistent quantum embeddings, canonical transformations, or screened interactions may provide viable avenues. Finally, a core appeal of this method is that the embedded quantum system can be handled with essentially arbitrary many-body solvers, including quantum chemical multireference methods for strongly correlated systems. This may open a pathway to reliable treatments of complex electronic structure phenomena also in condensed phases and at interfaces. For example, these methods can be used to address long-standing problems in catalyst doping, catalysis at surface defects (e.g. kinks and edges), or the surface chemistry of transition metals and radicals.