The MAX phases are a family of of ternary layered material with both metal and ceramic properties, and it is also precursor materials for synthesis of two-dimensional MXenes. The theory predicted that there are more than 600 stable ternary layered MAX phases. At present, there are more than 80 kinds of ternary MAX phases synthesized through experiments, and few reports on MAX phases where M is a rare earth element. In this study, a new MAX phase Sc2SnC with rare earth element Sc at the M sites was synthesized through the reaction sintering of Sc, Sn, and C mixtures. Phase composition and microstructure of Sc2SnC were confirmed by X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy and X-ray energy spectrum analysis. And structural stability, mechanical and electronic properties of Sc2SnC was investigated via density functional theory. This study open a door for explore more unknown ternary layered rare earth compounds Ren+1SnCn (Re=Sc, Y, La-Nd, n=1) and corresponding rare earth MXenes. The MAX phases are a family of nanolayered ternary carbides or nitrides with a hexagonal lattice structure (P63/mmc), the chemical formula is Mn+1AXn (where M is an early transition metal; A belongs to group of 13-16; and X is carbon or/and nitrogen, n=1-3) As previous reported, Sc2InC was listed as one of possible stable MAX phases MXenes can be promising candidate materials for the next generation electronic devices The raw materials used to prepare the MAX phase are scandium (Hunan Rare Earth Metal Materials Research Institute, Hunan, China; ~300 mesh, 99.5 wt.% purity), tin (Target Research Center of General Research Institute for Nonferrous Metals, Beijing, China, ~300 mesh, 99.5 wt.% purity), graphite (Qingdao Tianshengda Graphite Co. Ltd, Shandong, China; ~300 mesh, 99 wt.% purity), sodium chloride (Aladdin Industrial Co. Ltd, Shanghai, China; NaCl, 99.5 wt.% purity), potassium chloride (Aladdin Industrial Co. Ltd, Shanghai, China; KCl, 99.5 wt.% purity). The powders were mixed in a stoichiometric ratio of Sc: Sn: C = 2: 1.1: 1 (Due to the melting point of Sn is relatively low, we increased the content ratio of tin for compensating the weight loss of tin at a high temperature, as in the preparation of V2(Sn,A)C MAX phases) The phase composition of the samples was determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD, D8 Advance, Bruker AXS, Germany) with Cu Kα radiation. X-ray diffraction patterns were collected at a step size of 0.02° 2θ with a collection time of 1 s per step. The microstructure and chemical composition were observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, QUANTA 250 FEG, FEI, USA) equipped with an energy-dispersive spectrometer (EDS), and the EDS values were fitted by XPP (extended Puchou/Pichoir). Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were programmed in the CASTEP code It is well known that MAX phases crystallize in hexagonal structures and their grains are generally layered hexagonsin morphology The structural analysis of Sc2SnC phase was carried out via DFT calculations. Fig. In conclusion, a new MAX phase was successfully synthesized for the first time by heating the Sc, Sn, and C raw powder mixtures. The XRD data of Sc2SnC is useful for further phase identification and structure analysis; and Sc2SnC exhibits a typical laminar microstructure similar to other MAX phases. The first-principle calculations were employed to further study structure stability of Sc2SnC MAX phase, and the results showed that Sc2SnC is metallic in nature where the contribution from Sc-3d states dominates the electronic conductivity at the Fermi level. This work implies the great potential of the ternary rare-earth metal carbide Ren+1SnCn (Re=Sc, Y, La-Nd, n = 1) family waiting for further explore. More importantly, the introduction of rare earth elements can give the special properties of MAX phases, and can be used as a precursor material for preparing rare-earth MXenes.