We present a theoretical framework for understanding the behavior of the normal and superconducting states of overdoped cuprate high temperature superconductors in the vicinity of the doping-tuned quantum superconductor-to-metal transition. The key ingredients on which we focus are d-wave pairing, a flat antinodal dispersion, and disorder. Even for homogeneous disorder, these lead to effectively granular superconducting correlations and a superconducting transition temperature determined in large part by the superfluid stiffness rather than the pairing scale. For over three decades, research on the cuprate superconductivity primarily focused on the underdoped and optimally doped region of the phase diagram. Here, it is now widely accepted that T c is not set by the scale of Cooper pairing (as in BCS theory), but is instead largely determined by the onset of phase coherence (i.e. by the superfluid density) Thus, it was a surprise that recent penetration depth measurements The primary goals of this paper are to present a simple theoretical model that captures what we believe to be the essence of the above phenomena, and to explain the cause of the superconductor-metal transition. We are aware that our model does not capture various quantitative aspects of the actual materials. In the next two paragraphs we present the physical picture underlying this work. A sketch of the Fermi surface of an overdopped cuprate is shown in Fig. Model Fermi surface. Antinode to antinode scattering induced by the disorder potential is indicated by the yellow arrow. disorder, the scattering between anti-nodal regions (indicated by the orange line in the figure) is particularly important, as it is pair-breaking. Such anti-node to antinode scattering is apparent in STM quasiparticle inteference measurements in both non-superconducting When the Cooper pair coherence length is comparable to the correlation length of the disorder potential, the prior mentioned pair-breaking causes the pair field amplitude to be spatially heterogeneous Note that the normal state transport is dominated by the nodal quasiparticles, which are known to be less affected by impurity scattering The model we use to describe the superconducting state contains hopping terms, interaction terms, and disorder potential terms. The Hamiltonian is where t ij is the hopping integral between sites i and j on a square lattice which we take (to produce a cuprate-like Fermi surface) to be t ij = 1 between nearest-neighbor sites, t ij = -0.35 between second-neighbor sites, and t ij = 0 for all further neighbors. To compare different pairing symmetries, we consider two different forms of H int : 1) As a model of a d-wave superconductor (relevant to the cuprates) we adopt a model with a nearestneighbor antiferromagnetic Heisenberg exchange interaction, 2) As a model of an s-wave superconductor, we consider an attractive Hubbard interaction, We fix the strength of the pairing interactions to J = 0.8 and U = 1.35, respectively, so that the two superconducting gap scales in the absence of disorder are approximately the same. In treating the problem with disorder, we consider a finite system of size 40×40 and, unless otherwise indicated, assume periodic boundary conditions. The random potentials, w j , represent the effects of disorder: on a randomly chosen fraction n imp of sites we set w j = w > 0, with w j = 0 on all other sites. Modelling disorder as point-like impurities is a simplification. In reality the potential produced by the dopants can extend over multiple unit cells. The point-like impurity is considered because it can cause the large momentum transfer anti-node to anti-node scattering seen in STM We solve the model by self-consistent BCS meanfield approximation. However, the disorder scattering is treated exactly. Since H lacks translation invariance, the self-consistency equations need to be solved numerically. Since our calculation does not capture the thermal and quantum fluctuations, we focus primarily on zero temperature and on doping sufficiently away from the quantum critical doping of the superconductor-metal transition. The carrier concentration is controlled by the chemical potential μ and the impurity concentration n imp . Sometimes we fix μ while changing n imp to reach the desired carrier (hole) concentration. In the case where we want to study the effect of disorder at a fixed carrier density we tune μ while varying n imp to achieve the desired carrier density. To avoid the complex issues of the pseudogap, intertwined orders and strange metals, we take our lowest carrier concentration to be slightly larger than optimal doping. Thus except in Fig. The local value of the gap parameter, ∆ ij , that enters the mean-field equations, which we will refer to as the pair field, is given by the product of the pairing interaction times the expectation value of the pair annihilation operator. In the s-wave case, ∆ is site diagonal, ∆ j ≡ ∆ jj = U c j↑ c j↓ while for the d-wave case, ∆ ij = J c i↑ c j↓ +c j↑ c i↓ , where i, j are any pair of nearest- In the s-wave case, we find that ∆ j has a uniform sign and a magnitude that is weakly dependent on position. Moreover, it does not depend on the doped hole concentration strongly. The red symbols in Fig. In the d-wave case, ∆ ij has a magnitude that varies significantly as a function of position and which is strongly doping dependent. It also reflects the d-wave symmetry of the uniform state from which it descends in that, with minor exceptions, ∆ ij is positive on bonds oriented in the x direction, and negative on bonds in the ŷ direction. The black symbols in Fig. Note that the band structures used in the two cases are the same; only the pairing interaction is different. The dramatic contrast between the two cases manifests Anderson's theorem for the s-wave, and pair breaking by the scalar disorder for the d-wave. Specifically, in the d-wave case, pair-breaking induced by the anti-node to anti-node scattering tends to strongly suppress superconducting pairing. A consequence of this is that when disorder is strong, the pair field amplitude becomes granular (heterogeneous) with significant pairing occurring only in rare regions where disorder is weak We have also computed the T dependence of the mean-field superfluid density. For the d-wave case, the results are shown in Supplemental Figure A subtle but remarkable feature of the mean field solution in the highly overdoped regime is shown in Fig. We stress that we have not added any time-reversal symmetry breaking perturbation. The currents form loops, thus satisfying the continuity equations, and are manifestations of the spontaneous breaking of time reversal symmetry expected from the random-in-sign Josephson couplings that emerge when superconducting islands are small and sparse. The patterns of currents are analogous to those in an XY spin-glass, with near-degeneracies associated with reversing the local currents around localized loops in different regions of the system. This near degeneracy is reminiscent to the existence of two level centers in a glass. They can give rise to orbital paramagnetism. However, since all these effects occur where the superfluid density is small, there may be important qualitative changes in this behavior when the effect of thermal and quantum phase fluctuations are included. For instance, the near degeneracy of the two-level centers can be lifted by tunneling processes in which the local currents reverse direction. To the extent that they survive fluctuational effects, these spontaneous current loops are a qualitatively significant result of the combination of dwave pairing and scalar disorder. Because the d-wave gap is maximal in the anti-nodal region of the Brillouin zone (BZ), many features of the mean-field solution depend sensitively on the bandstructure in this region. Here we show the effects of the flat antinodal dispersion in overdoped cuprates. Such effects have been emphasized in the recent photoemission work In Fig. A feature of the inhomogeneous state is that there remains a large density of gapless quasi-particle states arising from the approximately normal metallic regions between the superconducting grains. This is reflected in a residual T linear contribution to the specific heat and to the ω → 0 optical conductivity that survives even as T → 0. In Fig. Doping dependence of specific heat coefficient γ1 normalized by the corresponding normalstate value γ1N . The zero-temperature specific heat coefficient is extracted by fitting C(T )/T using C(T )/T = γ1 +γ2T and extrapolating to T = 0. The fitting is illustrated in the inset, where the left panel is for the d-wave SC state while the right corresponds to the normal state. There are several aspects of the superconductor-tometal transition in overdoped cuprates that have been the subject of various recent theoretical studies. One issue concerns the microscopic mechanism for the superconductor to insulator transition. While on the underdoped side of the superconducting dome, the gap scale appears to remain large even as T c → 0, on the overdoped side the gap (measured in various ways) decreases significantly as T c → 0. Since it is generally believed that spinfluctuations are a dominant contributor to the d-wave pairing, and since signatures of incipient antiferromagnetic order become increasingly weak with increasing p, it is reasonable to associate the drop in ∆ with a weakening of the pairing interaction. That such a trend occurs in a Hubbard model with a band structure suitable for the cuprates has recently been shown in Ref. Another issue concerns how disorder is treated. In recent theoretical studies of overdoped cuprates The current work, emphasizing the interplay of d-wave pairing and disorder as the cause of a superconductorto-metal transition, is qualitatively different from older studies of the superconductor-to-insulator transition in the case of an s-wave SC Finally, we reiterate that the model, and the mean-field treatment of it we have discussed, are simplified compared to any actual cuprate. Indeed, it follows from the present results that thermal and quantum fluctuations, not included explicitly in our treatment so far, are inevitably important in the vicinity of superconductor-tometal transition. Thus, while our work is a step towards understanding the basic physics of superconductor-tometal transition in overdoped cuprates, many important issues are still unsettled. The results are obtained by numerically self-consistency mean-field calculation. The system size in our calculation is 40 × 40. We average over distinct disorder configurations to compute the physical observables. Typically, the number of disorder configurations is 64, but we average over 128 configurations when the impurity concentration is large and the superconducting pairing is highly inhomogeneous. We employ self-consistent, superconducting, mean-field approximation to study Eq.( where pair field for d-wave and s-wave are given by: ∆ ij = J c j↓ c i↑ -c j↑ c i↓ and ∆ i = U c i↓ c i↑ , respectively, which are determined self-consistently. To study the averaged pair field amplitude and superfluid density in strongly disordered regime, we plot the logarithm of the pair field amplitude and superfluid density as a function of doping concentration, or impurity concentration (see Fig. Supplementary Figure In the regime where doping (hence impurity) concentration is high, the pair field amplitude obeys approximately an exponential behavior. This is consistent with the prediction of Ref. Assuming the presence of 90 degree rotation symmetry after impurity averaging, we compute the zero temperature superfluid density by twisting the phase of the pair field in a pre-chosen, say, x-direction. Alternatively, it can be calculated as the current response to a gauge field in x. Using the standard Kubo formula: ρ s = -K x -Λ xx (q x = 0, q y → 0, ω = 0). (S2) Here with t 1 being the hopping integral between nearest-neighbor sites, and t 2 is the hopping integral between secondneighbor sites, Λ xx (q, ω) is the current-current correlator defined as follow: dte iωt [J x (t, q), J x (0, -q)] . (S3) In the equation above N is the number of lattice sites, J x (q) = i J x (r i )e iq•ri is the Fourier transform of the current operator along x-direction.