We evaluate the effectiveness of different classical potentials to predict the thermodynamics of a number of organic solid form polymorphs relative to experimentally reported values using the quasi-harmonic approximation. Using the polarizable potential AMOEBA we are able to predict the correct sign of the enthalpy difference for 71±12 % of the polymorphs. Alternatively, all point charge potentials perform on par with random chance of correcting the correct sign (50%) for enthalpy. We find that the entropy is less sensitive to the accuracy of the potential with all force fields, excluding CGenFF, reporting the correct sign of the entropy for 64±13 -75±11 % of the systems. Predicting the correct sign of the enthalpy and entropy differences can help indicate the low and high temperature stability of the polymorphs, un-fortunately the error relative to experiment in these predicted values can be as large as 1-2.5 kcal/mol at the transition temperature. Theoretical predictions of crystal polymorph stability are aimed at determining the crystal energy landscape of a given molecule to help aid in material design. Organics commonly pack in multiple stable and metastable forms, which can alter the solid form properties. Polymorphism can help aid in material design, but the emergence of previously unknown polymorphs has the potential to be detrimental to the development of pharmaceuticals. Getting a correct lattice energy ranking is largely dependent on the potential used to describe the intermolecular interactions. Early work by Day et al. looked at CSPs of 50 rigid molecules comparing the use of fixed charges to multipoles when determining the crystals electrostatic interactions. The success of using atomic multipoles was summarized by all experimental structures being within 1.22 kcal/mol of the global minimum rather than 1.74 kcal/mol for point charge potentials. By using atomic multipoles the known experimental structures within the CSP were closer in energy and ranking to the global minimum than the results produced using fixed charges. Despite the improvement, the study concluded found that neither electrostatic model were ideal, especially for crystals with hydrogen bonding. Free energy stabilities give a better thermodynamic description of the crystal lattice, which is why methods to approximate en-tropic stability have become more prevalent in CSPs. A challenge to the utility of latticeenergy based CSPs are enantiotropic polymorphs, which change in stability ordering with temperature. While there are many cases of monotropic crystal polymorphs, We will compare the sensitivity in crystalline thermodynamics of four off-the-shelf pointcharge potentials and one polarizable potential. Each molecule in figure • OPLS2 parameterized using Maestro; • AMOEBA (eq ). Where k b is the bond force constant, r and r 0 are the current and equilibrium bond lengths, k θ is the angle force constant, θ and θ 0 are the current and equilibrium angles, f ij is the fudge factor between atoms i and j, ij and σ ij are the Lennard-Jones potential well depth and equilibrium distances for computing the van der Waals interactions, r ij is the distance between atom i and j, and q i is the point charge on atom i. The energy for U dihedral and U misc vary between the four potentials. For OPLS2 U dihedral uses Fourier dihedrals for both proper and improper dihedrals. GAFF and SMIRNOFF U dihedral uses the proper dihedral form ( • OPLS2 geometric for both σ and ; • GAFF arithmetic for σ and geometric for ; • SMIRNOFF arithmetic for σ and geometric for ; and • CGenFF arithmetic for σ and geometric for . The potential for AMEOBA varies further from the fixed charge potential, with a couple of additional terms. The functional form for AMOEBA is shown in equation . Where the first three summations are similar to fixed charge potentials, k χ is the force constant and χ is the out of plane angle for sp2 hybridized groups, and the dihedrals are the same as OPLS2. For the non-bonded interactions there are some large differences. With the electrostatics being modeled with permanent and induced multipoles. U vdW uses a buffered 14-7 function with the combining rules: The quasi-harmonic approximation assumes that the entropic contributions of the crystal are a sum of the harmonic static lattice modes for the lattice geometry that minimizes the free energy at a given temperature and pressure. Since we are using classical potentials we will be using the classical limit for the Helmholtz free energy of a harmonic oscillator (A v ). Where the Gibbs free energy (G) at a given temperature (T ) and pressure (P ) is determined by finding the lattice geometry (C) that minimized the free energy. The free energy is a sum of the potential energy (U ), Helmholtz free energy of a harmonic oscillator (A v ), and a P V term, which is small at the pressures we're working at. In eq. 7 the Helmholtz free energy is a sum of the energy attributed to each vibrational frequency (ω k ). We can simplify QHA further by using the Grüneisen parameter (γ k,i ) in eq 8, which approximates the change in the k th vibrational mode due to changes in any of the six principle lattice strains (η i ). Our recent development of a gradient approach in conjunction with a variant of anisotropic expansion allows us to determine the free energy minimum for QHA with little error. In previous work we presented a 1D-variant to anisotropic expansion, which assumed the ratio of thermal expansion between the lattice parameters remains constant with temperature. Temperature replica exchange was performed to overcome crystal restructuring that standard QHA cannot. All crystals in the four fixed charge potentials were simulated with temperature REMD for a temperature range between 10 -400 K with replica spacing that achieved approximately a 0.3 probability of exchange per replica. All crystals were run for 20 ns with a time step of 0.0005 ps. All simulations were performed with Gromacs 2019.3. The quasi-harmonic approximation was performed on the lattice minimum structure found by energy minimizing the 10 K replica of temperature REMD. All harmonic approaches were run using the Tinker molecular modeling package 8.7. For the fixed charge potentials, the lattice minimum structure was found by energy minimizing 5 random configurations from the equilibrated 10 K NPT simulation from REMD. Here the lattice minimum were found using xtalmin to a tolerance of 10 -5 and the lowest energy minimum was selected for QHA. QHA was performed using our Python wrapper package that is available on GitHub at http://github.com/ shirtsgroup/Lattice_dynamics. AMOEBA is currently implemented in Tinker and Force Field X, but neither have temperature REMD implemented. Each lattice minimum was determined by energy minimizing the experimental structure directly from the CCDC. Using xtalmin the experimental structures were energy minimized to a tolerance of 10 -5 . We then performed HA on all crystals using our Python wrapper package Lattice_dynamics. All force fields are able to find a lattice minimum structurally similar to the experimental crystal, with AMOEBA possibly performing slightly better. In figure All five potentials poorly predict the magnitude of ∆H (RMSE>1.46 kcal/mol) and T ∆S (RMSE>0.93 kcal/mol) at the transition temperature with the entropy being predicted slightly better. Using the restructured lattice minima QHA/HA was performed using all five force fields. In some cases QHA Figure would fail prior to the transition temperature so the free energy, entropy, and enthalpy differences were extrapolated with a linear fit of the last 50 K of the QHA data, providing the transition temperature thermodynamics reported in figure Entropic differences are less sensitive to the force field than enthalpy, with all force fields performing statistically better than random chance except for CGenFF If the sign of the entropic difference between polymorphs is correctly computed, than we can determine the high temperature stability of the polymorphs. In table 1 GAFF and OPLS2 correctly determine the sign of T ∆S for 75±11% of the polymorph pairs statistically better than random chance. Both AMOEBA and SMIRNOFF perform slightly better than random chance, but more samples would improve the confidence in these force fields ability to determine the sign of the polymorph entropy differences. The signs of ∆H and T ∆S are correlated for all force fields except for CGenFF, allowing us to accurately model the enantiotropic behavior of 43-64±13% of the polymorphs. Determining the correct sign in both entropy and enthalpy differences in polymorphs will allow us to determine both the high and low temperature stabilities of the polymorphs and therefore the change in ranking. Table Fixed charge potentials perform on par with random probability (50 %) for enthalpy differences, while the polarizable potential AMOEBA determines the correct sign for 71±12 % of the polymorph pairs. Alternatively, all potentials except CGenFF determine the correct sign of entropy for 64±13 -75±11 %, indicating that the entropy is less sensitive to the force field used. We also note that all force fields introduce error in ∆H and T ∆S (1-2.5 kcal/mol) at the transition temperature that is greater than or equal to the experimental values. The signs of of entropy and enthalpy differences are correlated with one another, with 43-64 % of the systems having both the entropy and enthalpy difference with the correct sign for all force fields except for CGenFF. The results here are limited in scope to a limited number of enantiotropic polymorphic transformations and require more systems for a statistically meaningful result. Chlorpropamide 7 Free energy as a function of temperature 