Solid state battery technology is motivated by the desire to deliver flexible power storage in a safe and efficient manner. The increasingly widespread use of batteries from mass-production facilities highlights the need for a rapid and sensitive diagnostic for identifying battery defects. We demonstrate the use of atomic magnetometry to measure the magnetic fields around miniature solid-state battery cells. These fields encode information about battery manufacturing defects, state of charge, impurities, or can provide important insights into ageing processes. Compared with SQUID-based magnetometry, the availability of atomic magnetometers, however, highlights the possibility for a low-cost, portable, and flexible implementation of battery quality-control and characterization technology. Lithium-ion rechargeable batteries (LIBs) currently are considered the most promising secondary battery technology to power mobile devices, electric transportation, and power tools. Conventional LIBs typically employ liquid or gel-based electrolytes. These are often volatile and flammable, which gives rise to safety concerns All these factors highlight the need for the development of advanced diagnostic methodology that would allow proper device characterization at different stages of a battery's life. Currently used techniques which can give in-situ/operando information include ultrasound diagnostics Rapid techniques that can be used non-destructively are typically limited to electrical impedance spectroscopy, and lately ultrasound techniques. Recently, it was also demonstrated that magnetic susceptibility changes within cells could be measured without contact, and non-destructively using an inside-out MRI (ioMRI) technique that used the 1 H nuclear spin resonance frequencies in water to measure the susceptibility-induced magnetic field changes surrounding a cell when placed in a strong magnetic field Superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) based magnetic properties measurement systems (MPMS) were used to demonstrate the relation between battery charge state and susceptibility in the lab Here, we extend the measurements to miniature commercial solid-state batteries (both operational and defective) and benchmark the atomic-magnetometer results with those based on SQUIDs (Quantum Design MPMS-XL-5). The sensitivity of atomic magnetometers provides opportunities for device characterization to sense small differences in magnetic properties as a function of device history or state. For these chip-based cells, in particular, overheating leads to loss of saturation magnetization, and hence is easily identifiable in the measurements. The studies are further supported by Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS) in order to identify the composition of the cells under study and the origin of the magnetization in these measurements. 2 Materials and methods All the measurements were performed on a commercially available all-ceramic solid-state battery (CeraCharge T M ), which is a rechargeable surface-mount device (SMD) pictured in Fig. The measurements in our setup The cells are prepared in different states, which include healthy cells that can power the equipment like the LED normally, broken cells (that were heated to a high enough temperature that the voltage after cool-down is zero, and that can no longer be recharged to a level where they can power equipment), "healthy" cells (that can power equipment normally) demagnetized with a degaussing machine and magnetized with a permanent magnet with a field of 0.05 T applied for 20 s. The SQUID-magnetometry measurement was carried out with a commercial setup (Quantum Design MPMS-XL-5), and a gelatine capsule was used as a sample holder to position the cell. For each ICP-MS measurement, two cells were microwave-digested in 4 mL HNO 3 at 210 • C. In order to dissolve further inorganic components, in a second step, the digestion was repeated with 1 mL HCl at the same conditions. The sample was subsequently diluted to 50 mL with 18 MOhm water. Low concentrations were measured from this solution and highly concentrated elements after 1:100 dilution with 1% HNO 3 . ICP-MS measurements were performed using an XSeries 2, Thermo Scientific ICP-MS instrument. The MPMS measurements show that the cells under study here produced stronger induced magnetic field than the cells studied in the earlier work An examination of ICP-MS results [see Table . 1] indicates that a possible origin of the ferrormagnetic components is nickel metal. While nickel can also be a component of cathode materials, for typical cathodes, the amount identified is much lower than what would be needed to account for our observations, for example for different types of Nickel Manganese Cobalt Oxide (NMC) materials Figure In order to provide an independent verification for the origin of the magnetization that gives rise to the measurements, we performed these measurements by first pre-magnetizing the cell with a 0.05 T magnet and comparing the measurement with one from a cell that has undergone degaussing. The results show that the pre-magnetized cells show similar values as the healthy cells measured, and the degaussed cells show significantly reduced magnetization, similar to the broken (heated) cell[see Fig. As the results show, our battery scanner could rapidly measure that the magnetization becomes weaker or stronger, depending on whether the cells are either degaussed or magnetized. In particular, these measurements allow one to immediately conclude that a cell has been overheated, for example, something that is of concern for chip-based devices. MPMS is an ideal tool to study magnetic properties of materials, and is widely applied to the battery prototype research The magnetic field detection sensitivity of our setup is better than 400 fT/ √ Hz from 1 to 150Hz, which could help to detect a milligram difference in nickel content between cells. The dynamic range of our atomic magnetometer is approximately 5 nT, which also puts an upper limit on the nickel concentration. Recent developments in earth-field atomic magnetometers with larger dynamic ranges We have examined here the possibility of using atomic magnetometers to characterize the magnetic properties of rechargeable solid-state Li-ion batteries, in a rapid, non-destructive and non-contact fashion. The measurements are compared to SQUID magnetometry based measurements and supported by an elemental analysis. The magnetic components (nickel) in the cells are determined to be the source of the measured magnetization, and atomic magnetometry provides a convenient means of determining whether cells have been overheated. In a broader sense, atomic magnetometry provides sufficient sensitivity to sense the dependence of the magnetic susceptibility on the charge state and to identify certain defects or cell history. Given the difficulty of characterizing solid-state cells, such non-destructive and non-contact techniques could become useful tools in the analysis of cells at different stages of their life cycle.