Magnetization switching in a fine-structured ferromagnet of nanoscale by the spin-transfer torque excited via the spin Hall effect has attracted much attention because it enables us to manipulate the magnetization without directly applying current to the ferromagnet. However, the switching mechanism is still unclear in regard to the ferromagnet having an in-plane easy axis parallel to the current. Here, we develop an analytical theory of the magnetization switching in this type of ferromagnet, and reveal the threshold current formulas for a deterministic switching. It is clarified that the current should be in between a certain range determined by two threshold currents because the spin-transfer torque due to a large current outside the range brings the magnetization in an energetically unstable state, and causes magnetization precession around the hard axis. Spin-orbit interaction in a nonmagnetic metal scatters conducting electrons in a direction perpendicular to both current and spin angular momentum. Spin Hall effect is a physical phenomenon generating pure spin current via such spin-orbit interaction 1-3 . Attaching a ferromagnet to the nonmagnet, the pure spin current injected into the ferromagnet excites spin-transfer torque The physical systems related to the spin Hall effect are classified into three different types. The first one is the system with a ferromagnet having an in-plane easy axis orthogonal to the current direction The purpose of this work is to develop theoretical formulas of the magnetization switching caused by the spin Hall effect in the ferromagnet having the easy axis parallel to the current. Solving the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation numerically, phase diagrams clarifying the magnetization state in a steady state are obtained. An analytical formula is derived for the critical current inducing the magnetization switching, showing good agreement with the phase diagram. The magnetization state after turning off the current is also investigated. The numerical simulation reveals the existence of another threshold value of the current for the switching, i.e., a deterministic switching can be achieved when the current is in between a range determined by two threshold currents. An analytical formula for this second threshold is also obtained. The results contribute to building a comprehensive view of the magnetization manipulation by the spin Hall effect. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we provide a system description, and show the phase diagram of the magnetization in a steady state. In Sec. III the critical current formula destabilizing the magnetization from the initial state is derived. In Sec. IV the condition for a deterministic switching after turning off the current is studied. In Sec. V the comparison of the critical current with that in the different systems are discussed. Section VI summarizes the conclusion of this work. The system we consider is schematically shown in Fig. where γ and α are the gyromagnetic ratio and the Gilbert damping constant, respectively. The magnetic field is given by where H K is the in-plane magnetic anisotropy field in the x direction, whereas -4πM is the shape anisotropy field in the z direction. The strength of the spin-transfer torque by the spin Hall effect is where θ is the spin Hall angle of the nonmagnetic heavy metal, and M and d are the saturation magnetization and thickness of the free layer, respectively. The values of the parameters used in this work are derived from typical experiments and simulations of the spin Hall phenomena and/or magnetic multilayers as M = 1500 emu/cm 3 , H K = 200 Oe, θ = 0.4, d = 1.0 nm, γ = 1.764 × 10 7 rad/(Oe s), and α = 0.005 For the latter discussion, it is useful to introduce the magnetic energy density Note that the energy density E has two minima corresponding to where m 0z = H appl /(H K + 4πM ) and m 0x = 1 -m 2 0z . The minimum energy density is The saddle point of the energy density locates at where m dz = H appl /(4πM ) and m dy = 1 -m 2 dz . The saddle-point energy density is An example of the constant energy line is shown in Fig. Figure It should also be noted that the magnetization state after turning off the current is also of interest, in particular for practical applications. Note that the magnetization finally saturates to m 0+ or m 0-because these "mx.dat" u 1:2:3 applied field, H appl (kOe) current density, j (10 8 "mx.dat" u 1:2:3 applied field, H appl (kOe) current density, j (10 8 "mx_relax.dat" u 1:2:3 applied field, H appl (kOe) current density, j (10 are energetically stable states. Figure In this section, we derive the theoretical formula of the critical current density to move the magnetization from the initial state. First, we study the case of the zerofield switching. Second, the theory is extended to the case of the finite-field switching. The role of the thermal fluctuation at finite temperature is also discussed. Let us first investigate the magnetization dynamics in the absence of the external magnetic field. In the meantime we consider the dynamics caused by a positive current, and assume that the initial state is m 0+ , which is parallel to the x axis as m 0+ = +e x for H appl = 0. We should first note the definition of the critical current density for the zero-field case. The spin-transfer torque due to the spin Hall effect moves the magnetization parallel to the y axis. The precession torque due to the magnetic field also becomes zero when the magnetization is parallel to the y axis because the point corresponds to the saddle point of the energy density. Therefore, the critical current density in the zero-field case is defined as a current density over which the magnetization saturates to the saddle point. Figure On the other hand, Fig. We note that the monotonic evolutions of m x and m y shown in Figs. Equations ( Substituting Eq. ( Since m x > 0 during the switching in the present case, we find that Eq. ( The value of Eq. ( We note that Eq. ( The numerically evaluated value of m x at the critical point is 0.520 [see Fig. At the end of this section, we would like to provide a brief comment on two timescales observed in Fig. Let us extend Eq. (13) to the system in the presence of a finite external field. Figures Equation ( For example, the value of Eq. ( Eq. ( Note that j c.+ is the critical current density for H appl > 0, whereas j c,-is that for H appl < 0. On the other hand, when the initial state is m 0-, the critical current density for H appl > (<)0 is -j c,-(+) . The value of j c,+ estimated from Eq. ( This work mainly focuses on the magnetization dynamics at zero temperature to derive the critical current formula for the switching. Simultaneously, however, the role of the thermal fluctuation at finite temperature The thermal fluctuation provides a torque, which should be added to the right-hand side of Eq. (1). The components h k (t) (i = x, y, z) of the random field h obeys the fluctuation-dissipation theorem where V = Sd is the volume of the free layer consisting of the cross section area S and the thickness d. According to Ref. Next, let us show the dependence of the switching probability P on the current density. We note that the existence of the random torque does not guarantee the switching, although Fig. In this section, we derive the critical current formula to move the magnetization from the initial state. The main results are Eqs. ( The black solid lines in Figs. Finally, we discuss the theoretical condition for the deterministic switching. In many cases including practical purposes, the magnetization state not only in the presence of the current but also the state after turning off the current is of great interest. The phase diagrams in Figs. Before the discussion, we briefly note that the word "deterministic" in this section is used to express the switching which is not sensitive to the values of the external magnetic field and the current density, and is not used to distinguish from the dynamics at finite temperature studied in Sec. III C. Since the phase diagram in Fig. Note that the switched and non-switched states coexist above this second threshold, and as a result, the phase diagram shows a complex structure, as shown in Figs. Summarizing these considerations, the second threshold current bounding the deterministic switching to m 0- is derived from the condition that the steady-state solution locates inside the energetically stable region, and is given by (see also Appendix D) We note that j th,+(-) for a negative (positive) H appl is the threshold current density to guarantee that the final state after turning off the current is m 0-, whereas -j th,± for a negative (positive) field determines the boundary that the final state is m 0+ . The black solid lines in Figs. In summary, the existence of the threshold current below which the deterministic switching is achieved is found. We remind the readers that the critical current formula derived in Sec. III determines the instability threshold to move the magnetization from the initial state. On the other hand, the threshold current formula derived in this section determines the relaxed state of the magnetization after turning off the current. Summarizing these discussions, the current density j should be in the range determined by two current scales. For example, the current density should be in the range of j c,+ < j < j th,+ for the deterministic switching when the external field is applied to the negative z direction (H appl < 0) and the initial state is close to the positive x direction (m 0+ ), as shown in Fig. In this section, we discuss the comparison between the present and previous works. First, we mention that the experimentally observed value of the critical current density for the same device structure in Ref. When we compare the the critical current of the present system, named as type X, with another system named type Y, we should first emphasize that a fair comparison is difficult because the deterministic switching in the type-X device requires the external magnetic field, whereas the switching in the type-Y device can be achieved without, in principle, applying the external field. The experimentally observed value of the critical current density for the type-Y device was on the order of 10 7 A/cm 28 , which was well explained by the critical current formula derived by the macrospin assumption. The critical current density of the type-X system can be either small or large compared with this value, depending on the magnitude of the applied field. If we focus on the small field limit, however, the type Y shows a small critical current density compared with that in the type X. This is due to the smallness of the damping constant. The critical current density of the type-Y device is proportional to the damping constant α The critical current density of the type-Z device has been found to be on the order of 10 6 -10 8 A/cm Summarizing these switching properties, the three device structures, type X, Y, and Z, have both advantages and disadvantages for the practical applications. An appropriate choice of the device structure, depending on the purpose, will be necessary. In conclusion, theory of the magnetization switching caused by the spin Hall effect was developed for a ferromagnet having the easy axis parallel to the current direction. The analytical formula of the critical current for the magnetization switching was obtained from the theoretical condition of monotonic switching as a result of the competition between the spin-transfer torque and the precession torque. It was also found that a deterministic magnetization switching after turning off the current is achieved only when the current is in a certain range determined by another threshold current. Outside the current range, the final state of the magnetization becomes sensitive to the parameters such as the current and the magnetic field, and therefore, a precise manipulation of the magnetization becomes difficult. This is because the spin-transfer torque due to a large current brings the magnetization in an energetically unstable state, and induces the magnetization precession around the hard axis. The theoretical formula of another threshold current was also derived, showing good agreement with the result of numerical simulation. Summarizing these results, the current density for the deterministic switching should be in a certain range determined by two current scales. These results provide a solid direction for designing the three-terminal magnetic devices with in-plane easy axis. where the damping torque is neglected, as mentioned in the main text. Substituting m 0+ = (1, 0, 0) for H appl = 0 into Eq. (B1), the dynamic trajectory in the xz plane with a linear approximation is described as Figure Next, let us extend the above discussion to the finite field case. We again approximate the dynamic trajectory from the initial state to the critical point to be linear. The gradient of the linear line is Therefore, the approximated dynamic trajectory in the xz plane is B4) where m 0x and m 0z are given by Eq. (5) Again, using Eq. (B4) as approximation well describes the dynamic trajectory from the initial state m 0+ to the critical point. The numerically evaluated value of m x at the critical point satisfying dm z /dt = 0 is 0.806, which is close to the value of 0.828 estimated as the intersection between Eq. ( Appendix C: Calculation method at finite temperature The LLG equation with the random torque given by Eq. ( In this Appendix, we show the derivation of Eq. (20). As mentioned in the main text, the deterministic switch-ing occurs when the steady-state solution in the presence of the current locates inside one of the energetically stable regions. The result of the numerical simulation indicates that the steady-state solution in the presence of finite field and current locates at m y = 0; see, for example, Figs. 4(a) and 4(b). We notice that dm x /dt = 0 and dm z /dt = 0 are naturally satisfied at this point, as can be confirmed from the LLG equations for m x and m z . On the other hand, using m y = 0, the condition of the steady state for m y , dm y /dt = 0, becomes -H appl m x + (H K + 4πM ) m x m z = -H s . (D1) Although an exact solution satisfying Eq. (D1) can be obtained by, for example, introducing a variable θ defined as m x = sin θ and m z = cos θ, the solution is complex and is not useful. Instead, we use the fact that the switched state m 0-is close to the easy axis direction, -e x . Then, m x ≃ -1 and m z ≃ (H appl + H s )/(H K + 4πM ). Substituting these values into Eq. ( On the other hand, the saddle-point energy density is given by Eq. ( We note that the condition to keep the magnetization near the initial state can also be derived in a similar way. In this case, m x ≃ +1 and m z = (H appl -H s )/(H K + 4πM ). The energy density at this point is The threshold current for the switching to m 0+ obtained from the condition E + < E d is -j th,± . M. I. Dyakonov and V. I. Perel, Current-induced spin orientation of electrons in semiconductors, Phys. Lett.A 35, J. E. Hirsch, Spin Hall Effect, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1834 (1999). Y. K. Kato, R. C. Myers, A. C. Gossard, and D. D. Awschalom, Observation of the Spin Hall Effect in Semiconductors, Science 306, 1910 (2004).