We propose a nonvolatile, reconfigurable, and narrowband mid-infrared bandpass filter based on surface lattice resonance in phase-change material Ge2Sb2Te5 (GST). The proposed filter is composed of a two-dimensional gold nanorod array embedded in a thick GST film. Results show that when GST transits from the amorphous state to the crystalline state, the narrowband reflection spectrum of the proposed filter is tuned from 3.197 μm to 4.795 μm, covering the majority of the mid-infrared regime, the peak reflectance decreases from 72.6% to 25.8%, and the corresponding Q-factor decreases from 19.6 to 10.3. We show that the spectral tuning range can be adjusted by varying the incidence angle or the lattice period. By properly designing the gold nanorod sizes, we also show that the Q-factor can be greatly increased to 70 at the cost of relatively smaller peak reflection efficiencies, and that the peak reflection efficiency can be further increased to 80% at the cost of relatively smaller Q-factors. We expect this work will advance the engineering of GST-based nonvalatile tunable surface lattice resonances and will promote their applications especially in reconfigurable narrowband filters. Dynamically tunable narrowband mid-infrared (3 μm to 5 μm) filters are key devices in a diverse range of applications, including chemical spectroscopy, thermography, multispectral/hyperspectral imaging or Fabry-Pérot interferometers based on micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) Recently, chalcogenide phase-change materials, especially germanium-antimony-telluride (Ge x Sb y Te z , GST), have attracted increasing attention because of their appealing merits such as nonvolatile, rapid and reversible switching between the amorphous and the crystalline states by electrical or short optical pulses, tremendous differences in optical and electronic properties between these two states, and high chemical and long-term stability Recently, plasmonic surface lattice resonances (SLRs), which are collective Fano resonances formed by the diffraction coupling of localized surface plasmon resonance In this work, we propose a novel nonvolatile and reconfigurable mid-infrared bandpass filter based on tunable SLR supported by a two-dimensional (2D) array of gold nanorods, which are embedded in a thick Ge 2 Sb 2 Te 5 film. The operation principle will be elaborated. Results will show that the reflection spectra of the proposed structure can be dynamically tuned by changing the GST crystallization fraction, which can be achieved with a single nanosecond laser pulse Figure Figure The operation principle of the proposed filter is as follows. For such a gold lattice surrounded by homogeneous GST environment, the Rayleigh anomaly (RA) wavelength of the (p, q) diffraction order, λ (p,q) RA , can be calculated by where RA and θ the incidence angle, n is the refractive index of GST, and is the reciprocal vector that is inversely proportional to the lattice period Λ. Thus under normal incidence (θ = 0) we have (2) If the gold nanorod array are well designed such that SLR can be excited at wavelength that is close to the RA wavelength of the (±1, 0) order, λ (±1,0) RA = nΛ, the SLR wavelength can be tuned by ∼ (n c -n a )Λ when GST transits from the amorphous state with refractive index n a to the crystalline state with refractive index n c . In the mid-infrared regime, n a ≈ 4 and n c ≈ 6 where m is the crystalline fraction of GST, ranging from 0 to 1. ε a (λ) and ε c (λ) are the dielectric constants of GST in the amorphous (m = 0) and in the crystalline (m = 1) states, respectively, which are calculated through the wavelength-dependent refractive indices taken from 3 Results and discussion Figure In other words, compared with the literature, our design has extremely large spectral tunability, which covers the majority of the mid-infrared regime (3 μm to 5 μm). It also has relatively high reflection efficiency and meanwhile relatively large Q-factor. In order to understand the physics underlying the large spectral tunability and the high Q-factors of the designed filter, in Fig. We now study the effects of the gold nanorod sizes on the filtering performance. Figures If the thickness of gold nanorods h increases or decreases by the same amount of 50 nm, however, Figs. In conclusions, we have proposed a nonvolatile, reconfigurable, and narrowband mid-infrared bandpass filter based on SLRs in phase-change material GST. Results have shown that when GST transits from the amorphous state (m = 0) to the crystalline state (m = 1), the narrowband reflection spectrum of the proposed filter can tuned from 3.197 μm to 4.795 μm, covering the vast majority of the mid-infrared 3 μm to 5 μm atmospheric window. For m = 0 the peak reflectance reaches 72.6% and the Q-factor is up to 19.3, while for m = 1 the peak reflectance reaches 25.8% and the Q-factor is 10.3. Near-field distributions, and the strong dependence of the reflection spectra on the lattice period and the incidence angle have confirmed that the narrowband filtering originates from the excitation of SLR. We have also found that the Q-factor can be greatly increased to Q = 70 for m = 0 (or Q = 16.5 for m = 1) at the cost of relatively smaller peak reflectance, and the peak reflectance can be improved to 80.0% for m = 0 (or 42.5% for m = 1) at the cost of relatively smaller Q-factors. We expect that the designed nonvolatile reconfigurable narrowband mid-infrared filters will find applications in chemical spectroscopy, thermography, and multispectral/hyperspectral imaging. We also expect that dynamically tunable SLRs based on phase change materials can be extended to other spectral regimes and to other applications besides filtering. 