Permeability is the key parameter for quantifying fluid flow in porous rocks. Knowledge of the spatial distribution of the connected pore space allows, in principle, to predict the permeability of a rock sample. However, limitations in feature resolution and approximations at microscopic scales have so far precluded systematic upscaling of permeability predictions. Here, we report fluid flow simulations in capillary network representations designed to overcome such limitations. Performed with an unprecedented level of accuracy in geometric approximation at microscale, the pore scale flow simulations predict experimental permeabilities measured at lab scale in the same rock sample without the need for calibration or correction. By applying the method to a broader class of representative geological samples, with permeability values covering two orders of magnitude, we obtain scaling relationships that reveal how mesoscale permeability emerges from microscopic capillary diameter and fluid velocity distributions. Element, Finite-Volume and Lattice Boltzmann; or nodes and edges, used by network-based methods -depends on the flow simulation algorithm to be used for performing subsequent permeability predictions Table Permeability is a critical figure-of-merit in the characterization of porous geological samples for applications ranging from water management to fluid recovery and carbon dioxide sequestration Methodically, the application of X-ray microtomography to rock samples provides a series of images of the spatial distribution of the pore space from which three-dimensional, digital rock representations are created For establishing those requirements, we have systematically analyzed a representative group of highly resolved, three-dimensional microscopic image cubes measured on rock samples for which permeability and porosity were experimentally verified at lab scale. For evaluating the influence of pore scale representation quality on the accuracy of permeability predictions, we have used three candidate network representations as geometrical template: (1) the Capillary Network Model (CNM), which transforms the pore space into a voxel-wide line at the center of the pore channels; (2) the Reduced Max Ball Model (RBM) We have measured the porosity and permeability of a set of 11 cylindrical sandstone samples with radii and heights of 19 and 38 mm, respectively. The connected porosities found in these samples range from 14% to 27%, with a mean of 20±3%, and the absolute permeabilities from 9mD to 386 mD, with a mean of 150±40 mD, as summarized in Table We have acquired X-ray microtomography image cubes on sub-samples (height = 30 mm, radius = 5 mm) extracted from each of the rock plugs listed in Table We have then used the connected pore space in the image cube as a template for performing numerical flow simulations and permeability predictions. By analyzing the dependence of flow simulation accuracy on rock image cube size, see Supplementary Figure For quantifying the accuracy of geometric approximation in the digital rocks, we have compared three network-based representations of the microscopic pore space -PNM as algorithmically implemented in the PoreSpy open-source package In Figure In PNM, nodes are associated with pores, which have a finite volume, and links are associated with throats, which impose a resistance to the flow between the two nodes it connects. In CNM, on the other hand, nodes are considered zero-volume points that do not contribute to the pore space, while links represent finite-volume cylinders that account for all the pore volume and flow resistance. Finally, RMB has features of both pore and capillary network representations as it uses extended cylinders to represent the pore space. In Figure In Figure A practical application of the scaling results is estimating lab scale permeabilities based on mean capillary diameters and flow speeds taken from CNM predictions performed on X-ray microtomography data or, conversely, getting insight into microscopic flow speeds based on lab scale permeability measurements. We have computationally predicted lab scale permeabilities based on X-ray microtomography data for a sample set containing 11 sandstones. A high-accuracy, network-based geometrical representation of a microscopic volume fraction of the connected pore space of a rock was used as a basis for performing fluid flow simulations. This representation enables predicting experimental permeability results obtained from the same rock sample at lab scale (more that 3000x volume) with a mean relative error between microscopic model prediction and lab scale experimental result of 38%. By aggregating the results, we have obtained scaling relationships between the lab scale permeabilities and the mean capillary diameter and flow speed, respectively, for the sandstone sample class that can be used for estimating lab scale permeabilities based on X-ray microtomography data. Future research should extend the above methodology to geological sample classes with higher degrees of heterogeneity and more complex capillary diameter distributions, such as carbonate and shale rocks. We have acquired a set of sandstone rocks (Kocurek Industries INC.) with the following 11 samples: Bandera Gray (A), Parker (B), Kirby (C), Bandera Brown (D), Berea Sister Gray (E), Berea Upper Gray (F), Berea (G), Castlegate (H), Buff Berea (I), Leopard (J) and Bentheimer (K). We have experimentally characterized the cylindrical plug samples (height = 38mm, radius = 19mm) at lab scale following the API RP-40 norm In a next step, the plugs were sub-sampled to obtain smaller cylindrical samples (height = 30 mm, radius = 5 mm). We have obtained pore scale image data by using high-resolution 3D X-ray Microtomography (SkyScan 1272, Bruker). Source voltage and current were set to 50 kV and 200 μA, respectively. The CCD camera was configured to acquire projections of 4904 x 3280 pixels, resulting in a pixel side length of 2.25 μm. We have performed image reconstruction using SkyScan NRecon (version: 1.7.0.4, Bruker). We have processed the rock image data into subsets containing 1000 3 cubic voxels and converted the image from 16-bit to 8-bit gray scale. We have then applied an enhancement filter to equalize the contrast across multiple images. For each data set, we have cut off the grayscale level where the accumulated grayscale histogram achieved 99.8% and mapped the remaining grayscale levels to the [0, 255] interval. To reduce image noise, we have executed on each data set a 3D non-local means filter We have then used the binary image data sets containing the connected pore voxels as input to three representative network extraction algorithms: PNM, RMB and CNM. Briefly, all algorithms calculate distance maps of the images and construct a hierarchical graph of the voxels associated with the void space. The PNM is extracted using the SNOW algorithm based on watershed transformation The RMB algorithm The CNM representation is based on the Centerline algorithm The flow simulation algorithm applied in this study operates on nodes and links of the network representations. Specifically, the algorithm applies Poiseuille law to the links and mass conservation law to the interior nodes, while maintaining a fixed pressure difference between inlet and outlet boundary nodes. This is represented by a system of mass conservation equations Σj Qij = 0 for all nodes i, where Qij = (πRij 4 /8μLij) (Pi-Pj) is the flow rate in the capillary that connects node i to node j. The geometrical parameters R and L, respectively, represent the radius and the length of a capillary (link) connecting two nodes of the network and μ is the dynamic viscosity of the fluid. Unless stated otherwise, all simulations used a viscosity of μ = 1 cP and applied a 10 kPa/m pressure gradient along the flow direction in addition to atmospheric pressure. In order to validate the flow simulations, we have benchmarked them against OpenPNM The microtomography datasets generated and/or analyzed during the current study are available in the Digital Rocks Portal repository, at https://dx.doi.org/10.17612/f4h1-w124. A commonly used formal definition of the centerline, which is agnostic to the extraction algorithm, requires these four properties to be obeyed: 1. Connected: There must have at least one path between any two voxels of the centerline. Any voxel of the centerline must be centered with respect to the object's boundary. Centerline should be only 1-voxel thick. Small surface details should not produce large twists or numerous small branches in the centerline. In the following, we outline a novel adaptation of the Dijkstra shortest path algorithm to extract the centerline, or CNM, from a rock tomography image cube. The algorithm uses a penalization function and gradient vector for building a centerline with minimal centerline property violation, while detecting and connecting image voxels that form cycles in the image. In a first step, the algorithm establishes the distance map of the object by computing for each pore space voxel its closest distance to the boundary. The algorithm uses a priority list as its main data structure for iteratively computing dmin(v) for every voxel v. First, boundary voxels vb are added to the list with their priority set to 0. Then, in the main loop, the voxel t with lowest priority (voxel index is used as tiebreaker) is picked from the list and the distance to its neighbor voxel v (that were not yet picked from the list) is set as follow: • dmin(v) = dmin(t) + E(v,t) and included into the list, if visited for the first time; or The process finishes once the priority list is empty. In addition, voxels v for which dmin(v) is greater or equal to dmin with regards to all adjacent voxels are annotated as local maxima leading to the creation of labeled, local voxel clusters. The main differentiator of our algorithm with regards to published works For identifying those voxels, a depth-first search (DFS) algorithm The penalty function is vital for the algorithm to heuristically produce pathways matching the centerline definition as close as possible. For avoiding image boundaries, the penalty function takes into account a normalized gradient vector computed for every voxel based on distance transformation. The gradient vectors indicate which direction keeps the centerline away from the boundaries. The penalty of going from t to v depends on the angle α formed by the line that connects voxel t to v and the gradient vector at voxel t; penalty(t,v) = 0.5 + ( sin 2 (α)+1 ) / dmin (v). However, inside a cluster of voxels annotated as local maximum, we use an alternative penalty function that sets a straight pathway. Finally, we note that typical 3D rock tomography images contain centerlines with cycles. However, the centerline produced by the algorithm described above is acyclic. Therefore, we detect during the centerline algorithm potential pairs of voxels forming centerline cycles. A pair of neighbor voxels t and v is set to form a potential cycle when the voxel v is removed from the queue has its neighbor t that was already removed from the queue and satisfies the following conditions: (1) sin 2 (α) < 0.1, where α is the angle between the line from t to v and the gradient vector of v and, (2), the resultant cycle forms a LMpath For obtaining the Representative Elementary Volume, we have simulated permeabilities for Berea (G) sample volumes with varying number of voxels in the cube, while keeping the voxel resolution at 2.25 μm. Specifically, we have analyzed 1000 samples with 100 3 voxels, 512 samples with 125 3 voxels, 125 samples with 200 3 voxels, 64 samples with 250 3 voxels, 8 samples with 500 3 voxels, and 5 samples with 1000 3 voxels. In Supplementary Figure 