Interactions are essential for the creation of correlated quantum many-body states. While twobody interactions underlie most natural phenomena, three-and four-body interactions are important for the physics of nuclei Engineering an interacting many body system requires control of many particles distributed across space or over multiple sites. Recently, superconducting circuit quantum electrodynamics (cQED) has emerged as a platform for creating photonic fluids and materials A pure N-body interaction is one in which the system remains linear until the N th quantum is added to the system. This interaction has been engineered on a single cavity mode by using a dispersively coupled transmon qubit for photon blockade In this work, we broaden the applications of photon blockade for quantum control by using it to demonstrate universal operations on qudits realized in arbitrary bosonic modes of a multimode cavity. We use quantum optimal control pulses that act exclusively on the cavity mode to prepare all basis Fock states of the qudit, despite their equal frequency spacing system and realize a pure N-body interaction across an arbitrary number of sites (modes) by selectively driving the transmon near the transition corresponding to a set of chosen N-photon states. This dressing results in a frequency shift that blockades those states, effectively partitioning the multimode cavity's Hilbert space and resulting in the creation of entangled W-states using only uniform drives on the cavity modes. Our system consists of a multimode rectangular waveguide cavity which supports numerous ultralow loss modes on one physical device that are manipulated with multimode cQED via integration with a superconducting transmon circuit, as shown schematically in Fig. where ω m are the storage cavity mode frequencies and χ m are the dispersive shifts -the qubit Stark shifts per added photon in storage cavity mode m (indexed starting from 0). The coupling to the transmon causes the cavity modes to inherit Kerr nonlinearities, both a self-Kerr shift within a single mode (k m ), and a cross-Kerr interaction between modes (k mn ). The increased detun- ing from the transmon causes the dispersive shift to decrease with mode number, despite the increase in the interaction strength, with χ m /(2π) ranging from -2.39 to -0.55 MHz for the first 9 storage modes (N = 9) that are used for operations (see supplementary information). The storage cavity mode lifetimes (T m 1 ∼ 2 ms), dephasing times (T m 2 ∼ 2-3 ms) ∼ 1/(χT q ), which is comparable to that of SNAP gates in the absence of cavity decay. The Rabi oscillations produced by driving the cavity while blockading |2 allow us to create arbitrary superpositions of |0 and |1 . This universal control can be extended to higher dimensional qudits, despite the nearly identical transition frequency of the d levels, as shown theoretically in We extend photon blockade to implement N-body interactions across multiple modes and utilize them for quantum state preparation. Creating these interactions requires shifting the energies of multiple multimode states. We accomplish this by choosing a single drive tone that blockades a set of multimode states whose dispersive shifts are sufficiently close in frequency. This creates a hyper-plane of blockaded states with the same total photon number, whose energies are all shifted, defining the multimode N-body interaction. This hyper-plane effectively partitions the space of states that are accessible by cavity drives weaker than the interaction strength. This could also be accomplished by using multiple blockade drives at different frequencies, but we will focus on the single-tone case. This plane is shown in Fig. We first demonstrate this interaction with qubit spectroscopy. In the absence of the blockade drive, independent weak drives in each mode produce coherent states with occupation in the two photon levels |200 , |020 or |002 , as shown in Fig. To completely characterize the entangled states prepared in this system, we perform multimode Wigner tomography using the protocol shown in Fig. Multimode photon blockade: Supplementary Information Supplementary Figure The multimode cavity device is heat sunk to an OFHC copper plate connected to the base stage of a Bluefors LD-400 dilution refrigerator (7-8 mK). The sample is surrounded by a can containing two layers of μ-metal shielding, with the inside of the inner layer connected to a can made out of copper shim that is attached to the copper can lid and painted on the inside with Berkeley black. A schematic of the cryogenic setup, control instrumentation, and device wiring is shown in SFig. 1. The device is machined from a single piece of 5N5 aluminium and consists of a readout cavity and a multimode storage cavity fabricated using the flute method described in The transmon qubit was fabricated on a 430 μm thick C-plane (0001) sapphire wafer with a diameter of 50.8 mm. The wafer was cleaned with organic solvents (Toluene, Acetone, Methanol, Isopropanol, and DI water) in an ultrasonic bath to remove contamination, then annealed at 1200 °C for 1.5 hours. Prior to film deposition, the wafer underwent a second clean with organic solvents (Toluene, Acetone, Methanol, Isopropanol, and DI water) in an ultrasonic bath. The junction was made out of aluminum using a combination of optical and electron-beam lithography. The base layer of the device, which includes the capacitor pads for the transmon, consists of 120 nm of Al deposited via electronbeam evaporation at 1Å/s. The features were defined via optical lithography using AZ MiR 703 photoresist and exposure by a Heidelberg MLA150 Direct Writer. The resist was developed for 1 minute in AZ MIF 300 1:1. The features were etched in a Plasma-Therm inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etcher using chlorine based etch chemistry (30 sccm Cl 2 , 30 sccm BCl 2 , 10 sccm Ar). This was followed by a second layer of optical patterning and thermal evaporation of 50 nm of Au for the alignment marks used for ebeam lithography. The resist was subsequently removed by leaving the wafer in 80 • C N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) for 4 hours. The junction mask was defined through electron-beam lithography of a bi-layer resist (MMA-PMMA) in the Manhattan pattern using a Raith EBPG5000 Plus E-Beam Writer, with overlap pads that allow for direct galvanic contact to the optically defined capacitors. The resist stack was developed for 1.5 minutes in a solution of 3 parts IPA and 1 part DI water. Before deposition, the overlap regions on the pre-deposited capacitors were milled in-situ with an argon ion mill to remove the native oxide. The junction was then deposited with a three step electron-beam evaporation and oxidation process. First, an initial 35 nm layer of Al was deposited at 1 nm/s at an angle of 29 • relative to the normal of the substrate, azimuthally parallel to one of the fingers in the Manhattan pattern. Next, the junction was exposed to 20 mBar of a highpurity mixture of Ar and O 2 (80:20 ratio) for 12 minutes to allow the first layer to grow a native oxide. Finally, a second 120 nm layer of Al was deposited at 1 nm/s at the same 29 • angle relative to the normal of the substrate, but azimuthally orthogonal to the first layer of Al. After evaporation, the remaining resist was removed via liftoff in 80 • C NMP for 3 hours, leaving only the junction directly connected to the base layer. After both the evaporation and liftoff, the device was exposed to an ion-producing fan for 30 minutes to avoid electrostatic discharge of the junction. The Hamiltonian of the multimode cavity QED system realized by the transmon and the storage modes is: where ω q is the frequency of the transmon |g -|e transition, ω m the memory mode frequencies, χ m the dispersive shifts, k m the self-Kerr shift of each mode, and k mn the cross-Kerr interactions between the modes. The value of ω q is obtained through a standard Ramsey measurement on the transmon. The χ m are initially calibrated by performing qubit spectroscopy with a resolved pulse swept near the qubit frequency, following a coherent drive at the cavity frequency. The χ m are then determined more precisely with a Ramsey experiment on the transmon |g -|e transition after the addition of a photon in the cavity mode, as shown in SFig. Cross-shift between mode pairs. The measurement is performed by placing a photon in mode m, then sweeping the cavity frequency when probing the 0 to 1 photon peak of mode n. as shown in SFig. 2(c) for cavity mode 3. The cross-Kerrs k mn are obtained by adding a photon to mode m and performing cavity spectroscopy on a different mode n. This procedure is also repeated, on the same mode to verify the consistency of the self-Kerr shifts. The values of k mn are shown in SFig. 2(d). A summary of all measured quantities relevant to the Hamiltonian, as well as Liouvillian terms corresponding to transmon and cavity decoherence and decay, is provided in STable 1. The minimal description of the dynamics during the blockade of a single mode includes the dispersive coupling between the transmon and the cavity, a Rabi drive on the transmon |g -|e transition, the self-Kerr of the mode, and the cavity drive. The corresponding Hamiltonian in the frame rotating at the dressed mode and transmon Transmon thermal population Supplementary Table To blockade the |n 0 Fock state of a single mode, the transmon is driven at frequency ω q + χn 0 . The blockade drive can thus be expressed as Ω(t) = Ωe -iχn0t . We make the blockade drive term static through the frame transformation Û = e -iχ|e e|n0t , resulting in: The blockade is valid in the regime that √ n 0 < Ω < χ. The first of these conditions prevents leakage to | g, n 0 , | e, n 0 , while the second selectively blockades only the |g, n 0 ↔ |e, n 0 transition and minimally affects transitions corresponding to other photon numbers. This Hamiltonian can be simplified by individually diagonalizing each photon number subspace (|g, n , |e, n ). The blockade drive is resonant with |g, n 0 → |e, n 0 , splitting those levels by 2Ω and mixing them equally. For levels on either side of n 0 , the dressing between the ground and excited states is proportional to Ω/ (χ (nn 0 )) to leading order in Ω/χ. The Hamiltonian can be rewritten in terms of these dressed states as: In the above, we have dropped the drive terms that couple the dressed ground and excited states, which are offresonant and suppressed by Ω/χ. The physics of the blockade can be approximated within a truncated Hilbert space that involves only the dressed transmon ground state, described by the following Hamiltonian: We characterize the blockade interaction with the experiments shown in SFig. scribed above. We then sweep the frequency of a weak cavity drive tone, and perform spectroscopy as a function of the Rabi amplitude (Ω) of the blockade drive. We observe peaks corresponding to the Stark shifted |0 -|1 transition and the two Rabi split |1 -|2 transitions, as shown in SFig. 3(c). The Rabi amplitude Ω is calibrated using transmon Rabi oscillations. Optimal control pulses were generated with the GrAPE algorithm using the package developed in The pulses produced typically had a bandwidth much greater than χ. While this can be decreased by adding bandwidth constraints during the optimal control pulse generation, here we filtered the pulses to a bandwidth of ±χ/2 about the cavity frequency after generation, with no detriment to the simulated or experimentally measured fidelities. The second approach used the simplified Hamiltonian given by SEqn. ( The Fourier transform of the optimal control pulse can be measured in-situ by using the cavity as a narrow band (∼ 20 Hz) spectral filter. We apply the optimal control pulse to the cavity mode (with the blockade drive off) while varying the central carrier frequency, and measure the resulting photon number distribution via resolved qubit spectroscopy. Since the mode only responds on resonance, the magnitude of the resulting coherent state (|α(ω c )|) as a function of the carrier frequency (ω c ) allows us to determine the FFT of the optimal control pulse. The experimentally measured |α(ω c )| and the theoretical FFT of the AWG output pulse with the calibrated transfer function are shown in SFig. 4(c). Single mode Wigner tomography is performed via a measurement of the photon number parity ( Π) following a series of displacements of the cavity mode. This effectively measures the Wigner operator, Ŵ(α) = Dα Π D-α . The measurements of the Wigner operator for a set of mode displacements α i , x i = Tr[ Ŵ(α i )ρ] were inverted to reconstruct the density matrix ρ following the procedure described in The displacements we perform are to an optimized set of points in phase space that are chosen with the method described in The parity measurement in Wigner tomography is performed using a qubit Ramsey sequence that is composed of two broadband π/2 pulses with opposite phases, separated by a wait time τ = 1/(2χ m ) during which the qubit acquires a θ = π phase if a single photon is in cavity mode i, followed by qubit readout. Since rotations are only distinguishable modulo 2π, all odd (even) photon numbers will place the qubit in the excited (ground) state, resulting in a measurement of photon number parity Π = cos(π N ). A similar qubit Ramsey sequence that idles for an arbitrary τ corresponds to a phase shift of θ = 2πχ m τ for a single photon in mode m, and a measurement of Θ = cos(θ N ). Displacing the cavity mode prior to this general qubit Ramsey sequence allows for the measurement of a generalized Wigner operator Ŵ(α, θ) = Dα Θ D-α . As long as θ is known, we can invert the measurements of the expectation value of this operator for a series of known displacements to obtain the density matrix, like in the case of θ = π. The error in reconstruction fidelity is dependent on θ, with the smallest error occurring around θ = π-where the generalized Wigner function has maximum contrast, and is also the least sensitive to errors in the calibration of θ. Multimode Wigner tomography has previously been performed via measurements of the joint photon number parity following displacements of each of the cavity modes, effectively corresponding to a measurement of a joint Wigner operator. However, joint photon number parity measurements become challenging when the modes do not have the same χ m , requiring the use of higher transmon levels In the case of two modes, we used cavity modes 3 and 4 and combined the measurements at three different Ramsey times τ 1 , τ 2 , and τ 3 to reconstruct the state density matrix. While only one τ is necessary, additional times improve the accuracy of the final state re- construction. The set of τ 's at which we measured was {τ j } = 419.8, 483.3, 454.0 ns, which corresponds to {θ 3 } = π, 3.63, 3.39 and {θ 4 } = 2.74, π, 2.94 . For these sets of angles, the condition numbers are κ 3,4 = 1.6. For the three mode case, we used modes 2,3, and 4 of our cavity, and chose the Ramsey time that corresponds to θ 3 = π. We made this choice because χ 3 is between χ 2 and χ 4 , resulting in a set of {θ} that are as close to π as possible. This is desirable for reasons as discussed in Section V A. The resulting tomography angles for this single value of τ are (in radians) {θ 2 , θ 3 , θ 4 } = 3.44, π, 2.64 . The corresponding values of κ are κ 2,3,4 = 1.6. In addition to the density matrices of the multimode W-states presented in the main text, here we provide 2D slices of their multimode Wigner functions. These can be seen for the two and three mode states in SFig. 6 and 7, respectively. The slices correspond to all pairwise combinations of real and imaginary quadratures of each of the modes, leading to 6 slices in the two-mode case and 15 in the three-mode case. We determine the phases φ j of our multimode Wstates, (|10 + e iφ |01 ) √ 2 in the two mode case and (|100 +e iφ1 |010 +e iφ2 |001 )/ √ 3 in the three mode case, by maximizing the fidelity of the projection onto those states as a function of the φ j 's. That is, we map our prepared state onto the appropriate (two-or three-mode) expected W-state while sweeping the phase parameters, and pick the angles that give us the projected value closest to 1. This is shown in the insets of SFig. 6 and SFig. 7. We are able to prepare states with different phases by varying the relative phases of our cavity drives. There is a 2π gauge freedom in the definition of the phase of each cavity mode. For a given choice of these phases, we determine the phase of the prepared states using Wigner tomography. These phases can be can be modified by a gauge transformation, allowing us to make the reconstructed density matrices real, as in Fig. In addition to experimental noise, the Wigner tomography reconstruction has systematic errors that appear in the parity measurement and come from two main sources. The first source is the limited bandwidth of the parity measurement. We mitigate this by using DRAG pulse shaping to maximize the bandwidth of the pulses (Gaussian pulse with σ = 5 ns). The second source is readout error arising from the cross-Kerr interaction between the storage and readout modes. This results in a systematic shift in the readout voltage of transmon states that depends on the number of photons in the storage modes. We calibrate both these errors using the protocols described below, and use them to correct the Wigner tomography. The correction to the bandwidth of the parity measurement is calibrated by displacing the cavity to a phase space point used in the Wigner tomography and subsequently applying two π/2 pulses with either the |n same or opposite phase, with no wait time in between. This would ideally place the qubit in either the excited or ground state, corresponding to P e = 1 or 0, respectively. However, despite the large bandwidth of the qubit π/2 pulses, the dispersive shift takes the pulses off resonance for larger |α|. As shown in SFig. 5(d), this reduces the contrast of the parity measurement and therefore the Wigner operator measurement. We compensate for this effect by scaling the Wigner operator measurement for a given state and displacement using a linear transformation (W(α, ρ) → aW(α, ρ) + b), that takes the upper and lower bounds for the parity measurement (c 1 , c 2 ) to their ideal values This correction is performed for each Wigner point used in the tomography, with varying calibrated values of a and b. Wigner points with larger values of |α| deviate more from the ideal 0 to 1 range, as the magnitude of the cross-Kerr and dispersive shift effects scales with |α|. We simulate multimode blockade dynamics using a master equation that includes the decay of the cavity modes (κ m = 1/T m 1 ), as well as the decay (γ q = 1/T q 1 ) and dephasing (γ q φ = 1/T q 2 -1/(2T q 1 )) of the transmon: Here, D is the Lindblad dissipator, and Ĥ is the blockade Hamiltonian given by SEqn. (3) for the single-mode case. We include the thermal occupation of the transmon (n th q = 1.2 ± 0.5%), but ignore the thermal population of the storage cavity modes (n th m ≤ 0.01%). For the case of multiple cavity modes and drives, this Hamiltonian-written in a frame co-rotating with the blockade (ν b = ν q + δν b ) and cavity mode frequencies (ν m ), generalizes to: where Ω is the blockade Rabi frequency, k m , k mn the self and cross-Kerr interactions, and m (t) the time dependent cavity drive amplitudes. All the drive tones are sent through the readout port and are directly coupled only to the readout resonator ( Ĥd = r cos(ω d t)(â r + â † r )). However, the coupling between the transmon and the modes and their resulting dressing leads to effective transmon and storage mode drives when the readout is driven on resonance with either of them. To lowest order in the dispersive approximation, the resulting transmon and storage mode drives are Ω ≈ r g r /(2∆ r ) and m ≈ r g r g m /(2∆ r ∆ m ), respectively. For generating the optimal control pulses, we treat the drives as being directly on the transmon and the storage modes. This approximation is valid because the detuning between the transmon and the readout (∆ r ) and storage modes (∆ m ) is large compared to the coupling strengths (g r , g m ), which we additionally verify using master equation simulations that include the readout cavity/drive. We first use the master equation simulations to obtain the expected fidelity in experiments involving the blockade of a single cavity mode, corresponding to the data presented in Fig. and the optimal control pulses used to prepare |1 and |2 while blockading |3 , is shown in SFig. 8. The populations are extracted from the density matrices reconstructed from Wigner tomography (diamonds), as well as through number resolved qubit spectroscopy (circles), from the raw data presented in Fig. Wigner tomography, resulting in the density matrices and Wigner functions shown in SFig. 7. The simulated fidelity of the three-mode W-state was F = 0.896, compared to the experimental measured value of 0.864 ± 0.014. A comparison of the simulated, measured, and ideal state populations that produce these fidelities is shown in SFig. 10 for both the two-and three-mode Wstates. The simulations (yellow edge boxes) include loss and decoherence effects from the transmon and cavity, as well as the qubit temperature. The simulated and measured data are generally in good agreement. The ideal W-states (black dashed edge boxes) are included to serve as a guide. In order for the blockade drive to simultaneously address the dispersively shifted peaks corresponding to 2-photons in any combination of modes, we pick a blockade Rabi strength (Ω/(2π) = 227 kHz) which is roughly twice that used in the single-mode blockade experiments, resulting in 5% higher participation of the transmon in the cavity levels from off-resonant dressing. From the reconstructed density matrices for two-and three-mode W-state preparation shown in SFig. 10(a) and (b), we additionally extract the W-state entanglement witness where N is the number of entangled modes. For each measured density matrix ρ, we extract the witness by sweeping the free phases that characterize the W-state to maximize the state fidelity F = Tr[ρρ W ]. The results of these measurements are presented in SFig. 10(c). In the two-mode case, we evaluate the witness as a function of the duration of the cavity drive, while in the three-mode case, we evaluate it at the single time corresponding to the creation of the W-state. We note that -1/3 < Ŵ3 = -0.2 < 0 indicates genuine tripartite entanglement for the three-mode W-state (the orange band in SFig. 10). are again determined by the maximum fidelity projection, and shown in the inset. The corresponding state fidelity is 0.864 ± 0.014. (c) The 15 orthogonal 2D slices of the three-mode Wigner function through the origin of phase space, involving all combinations of the real and imaginary quadratures of the three modes.