We investigate the dynamics of a charge qubit consisting of two Coulomb-blockaded islands hosting Majorana zero modes. The frequency of the qubit is determined by coherent single-electron tunneling between two islands originating from the hybridization of two Majorana zero modes localized at the junction. We calculate the sequential tunneling current I through the double-island device coupled to normal metal leads. We demonstrate that the I -V characteristics in the large-bias regime can be used as a measurement of the coherent Majorana coupling EM . We propose dc and ac transport experiments for measuring EM , and discuss their limitations due to intrinsic dephasing mechanisms such as excited quasiparticles. Introduction. Topological qubits promise long lifetime and precise operations due to exponentially suppressed error rates. The simplest topological qubit based on Majorana bound states requires four decoupled Majorana modes Our idea is similar to the one used to demonstrate coherent Cooper-pair tunneling in the first generation of the conventional superconducting charge qubits As with superconducting qubits Here we focus on the sequential tunneling regime of large bias voltage eV b E m C , see Eq. ( At low temperature, T E C , the current through the structure is given by a sequential-tunneling expression of arXiv:2010.05963v2 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 24 May 2021 The double island can be based on a) a 2D topological insulator edge the three junctions in series (see Fig. (1) where the rate γ M (ε) across the central junction The current I(ε) is a Lorentzian function of ε with , the current has a prominent resonance at ε = 0, see Fig. M /( 2 Γ Σ ) and the width W = Γ Σ . Under these conditions (ignoring QP transport) the current is limited by the Majorana coupling, and one can thus extract E M from the product I(0)W . The intra-island hybridization (splitting) of MZMs does not qualitatively change Eq. ( At finite temperature or in a non-equilibrium scenario, intrinsic dephasing due to QP poisoning will modify the idealized results above. Quasiparticles open a parallel transport channel across the central junction which introduces a new tunneling rate Γ qp and changes the form of current Model. The charging Hamiltonian of the double island can be written as [28] where NL,R are electron number operators of the left and right islands and N gL,R = -C gL,R V gL,R /e are dimensionless gate charges [28], Fig. We aim to probe the coherent coupling between the two Majoranas on different islands. This coupling conserves the total charge of the double-island but changes the charge distribution within it. For this reason, it is useful to project H C on a fixed total number of electrons NL + NR and define an effective Hamiltonian that only depends on the charge difference N-= ( NL -NR )/2. The effective charging Hamiltonian is where Starting from a charge state |N L , N R , the energy cost to transfer an electron from the left island MZM to the MZM on the right island is where we denote The two states are degenerate, ε = 0, when N g is halfinteger. This is a charge degeneracy line in the N gL -N gR -plane, see Fig. The islands have neutral excitations corresponding to broken Cooper pairs. We model the islands with a meanfield BCS Hamiltonian. After a Bogoliubov transformation [28] to neutral quasiparticle operators d nL,R , the neutral sector of the α = L, R island Hamiltonian becomes where ε nα = ξ 2 n,α + ∆ 2 and ξ n,α are the normal state single-particle energies. We consider quasiparticles in the parent s-wave superconductor (Al) with gap ∆. Each island also contains a fermionic level at zero energy [and therefore absent from Eq. ( Tunneling of the quasiparticles across the central junction dephases the Majorana charge qubit. The tunnelcoupling between the islands consists of quasiparticle tunneling and Majorana coupling, where we have ignored pair-breaking terms such as In addition to neutral excitations, the double island also has excitations that change the total charge. For concreteness, we pick the degeneracy line between charge states |2, 0 and |1, 1 , see Fig. 0), and ε R = U (1, 1) -U (1, 0). The coupling to outside normal metal leads generates these excitations. We describe the lead-island couplings by a tunneling Hamiltonian, where c kL,R are the electron annihilation operators for the left and right leads, which are assumed to be spin polarized. Once again, we assume here relatively low bias voltage and ignore the tunneling from leads to above-gap quasiparticles in the island, see remarks below Eq. ( α ) between the leads and the islands. Here ε ( ) α is one of the four different energies required for removing/adding an electron from the double island. We assume uniform density of states in the leads so that the rates Γ L,R are independent of the dot charge state. We also neglect the E M -induced modification to the double-island spectrum, which is a valid approximation away from zero bias, eV b E M . Rate equations. Let us next study the charge transport through the island. In the high-bias regime the dominant process is sequential tunneling rather than cotunneling Steady-state current. The current in steady state is equal to the rate of electrons flowing to the right lead [28], I = eΓ R (p 11;11 + p 21;21 ), assuming high bias so that no electrons originate from the right lead, n R = 0. By using the steady state solution dp/dt = 0 from Eq. ( ) which vanishes at ε = 0. When quasiparticle tunneling is weak, Γ 20→11 qp (0) γ M (0), the transport through the central junction is carried by the Majorana states and current vs. detuning is given in Eq. (1). In the considered high-bias limit, the finite-temperature corrections to Eq. ( Estimation of the required regime of parameters. In this Section, we connect the phenomenological rates in Eq. ( where g α = G α /(e 2 /h) is the normal state dimensionless conductance of the junction to lead α. Since the junction conductances are independently controllable, it should be straightforward to enter the regime Γ L , Γ R E M . For the QP tunneling rate, we use Eqs. ( where we denote π|t| 2 ν 2 0 = 1 2π g c . Here g c is the normalstate dimensionless conductance of the central junction and ν 0 is the density of states at the Fermi level per volume. Near the resonance, we can approximate The precise form of Γ 20→11 qp (ε) near the resonance (ε T ) depends on the density of states of the superconducting island near the band edge; for example, at zero magnetic field the BCS singularity in an s-wave superconductor leads to a log-divergence, |ε| . Although we derived Eqs. ( Finally, in Eqs. ( With Eq. ( Current after a voltage pulse. Finally, we discuss the possibility to measure Majorana hybridization E M in time-domain experiments. Perhaps the simplest way to study coherent dynamics of the hybridized Majorana states is by using a voltage pulse experiment Conclusions. We analyzed theoretically a way to measure the Majorana hybridization energy E M in ac and dc transport experiments through a double-island device. The former involves a measurement of conductance peak broadening as a function of island detuning at large bias. The latter requires measurements of charge dynamics and dephasing of E M -induced coherent oscillations in the presence of a voltage pulse. In this work we estimated intrinsic dephasing due to above-gap QP tunneling which provides a lower bound on measurable E M value. We believe that our proposal can be readily implemented in both nanowire In this Supplementary Material, we present the detailed electrostatic Hamiltonian, the Bogoliubov transformation leading to Eqs. ( Let us denote by C gL,R , C L,R , C m the islands' capacitances to the gates, leads, and their mutual capacitance. Ignoring cross-capacitances, the total capacitances of the two islands are C 1,2 = C gL,R + C L,R + C m . The charging energies and induced charges in Eq. ( Since The induced charges are It is possible to introduce gauge-invariant gate charges, which satisfy In this choice of gauge, every voltage is measured relative to the left lead. It is then convenient to take the left lead to be grounded, V L → 0. II. BOGOLIUBOV TRANSFORMATION LEADING TO EQS. ( Equations ( where e iφ decreases the charge of the condensate by 2, e iφ N c = e iφ (N c -2) so that the model is charge conserving. The total charge operator of the island is N = N c + n,τ c † n,τ c n,τ . We consider here a single island and leave out the index α = L, R used in the double-island case. Even though H island is time-reversal symmetric, we do not expect qualitative changes in the presence of broken time-reversal symmetry, see remarks below Eq. The operators d n,τ correspond to neutral quasiparticles since they commute with N . The coherence factors are The above diagonalization for both the left and the right islands leads to the Hamiltonian (5) of the main text. In the main text we dispensed with the spin index τ which is not expected to be a good quantum number in the realistic case with spin-orbit coupling and broken time-reversal symmetry. In our model, the Majorana operators γ , γ are included phenomenologically by including a zero-mode d = (γiγ )/2 in the diagonalized Hamiltonian. The tunneling of electrons between the islands can be described with the Hamiltonian = nn τ where we introduced the labels for the islands and denote e iφ L,R /2 = N - L,R = (N + L,R ) † . In the main text, Eq. (??), we have also included phenomenologically the hybridization term ∝ E M between the inner Majorana modes. Finally, we note that d † n,τ,α creates a quasiparticle with energy ε n,α = ξ 2 n,α + |∆| 2 > ∆. Thus, the terms such as in the tunneling correspond to a pair-breaking excitation with energy 2∆ [or ∆ if one Majorana level is involved]. Assuming low bias voltage and temperature, these terms are not allowed in the sequential tunneling and were dropped from Eq. (??) of the main text. III. GENERAL EVOLUTION OF THE DENSITY MATRIX. In Eq. (??) of the main text we took n L (ε where n s ( ) = (e ( -μs)/T + 1) -1 is the Fermi distribution function of the s = L, R lead. The high-bias limit n L (ε C under symmetric biasing at the resonance ε ≈ 0 and N g,tot = 2. Here N g,tot = 2 is the "center of mass" dimensionless gate charge and is the total charging energy. The more general condition on the lower bound for the bias voltage depends on both N g,tot and The upper bound on bias voltage is set by the condition that above-gap quasiparticles are not excited. In the simple case of an s-wave superconductor with a sharp density of states, this condition can be written as eV b < ∆ -T where ∆ is the s-wave gap. The current operator can be taken to be the rate of change of the number of electrons in the right lead, Î = e∂ t k c † k R c k R . From the Heisenberg equation of motion we find, where we projected to the relevant charge states. We use the Kubo formula to calculate the averages, where we factored the average and approximated the slowly-evolving island averages by their static steady-state values. Similarly, we find We find therefore the current used to derive Eq. ( V. COHERENT OSCILLATIONS AFTER A VOLTAGE PULSE. We can use Eq. ( A simple analytical expression for P(t, 0), and its coherent oscillations, can be obtained in the symmetric case (Γ R = Γ L ) and in absence of quasiparticles (Γ Σ /2 = Γ L ): by taking initial condition p 20;20 (0) = 1 in Eq. ( 