Solid-state electrolytes for Li-ion batteries are attracting growing interest as they allow building safer batteries, also using lithium metal anodes. Here we studied a compound in the lithium superionic conductor (LISICON) family, i.e. Li4-xGe1-xPxO4 (LGPO). Thin films were deposited via pulsed laser deposition and their electrical properties were compared with ceramic pellets. A detailed characterization of the microstructure shows that thin films can be deposited fully crystalline at higher temperatures but also partially amorphous at room temperature. The conductivity is not strongly influenced by the presence of grain boundaries, exposure to air or lithium deficiencies. First-principles molecular dynamics simulations were employed to calculate the lithium ion diffusion profile and the conductivity at various temperatures of the ideal LGPO crystal. Simulations gives the upper limit of conductivity for a defect free crystal, which is in the range of 10 -2 S cm -1 at 300 °C The ease of thin film fabrication, the room-temperature Li-ion conductivity in the range of a few μS cm -1 make LGPO very appealing electrolyte material for thin film all-solid-state all-oxide microbatteries. Lithium ion batteries are nowadays among the most widely used technology for energy storage. Conventional batteries use liquid organic solvents as the electrolyte, which are corrosive and flammable, therefore posing important safety issues. The risk of leaks precludes the potential use of these batteries for biomedical implants. A liquid electrolyte imposes also severe restrictions to the possible miniaturization of the battery, which is needed for on-chip power sources for portable/wearable applications. Also, Li metal dendrites can easily grow into a liquid electrolyte, short circuiting the electrodes. Here we report the deposition via PLD of thin films of lithium germanium phosphate, with the general formula Li 4- x Ge 1-x P x O 4 (LGPO), a solid solution of γ-Li 3 PO 4 and Li 4 GeO 4 . First-principles molecular dynamics simulations were then employed to calculate the Li-ion diffusion profile and diffusivity at different temperatures in an ideal (defect-free) LGPO crystal. Li3.2P0.80Ge0.20O4 (LGPO) powders were synthesized via the solid-state synthesis method using lithium carbonate (Li2CO3), germanium oxide (GeO2) and lithium phosphate (Li3PO4). Lithium carbonate and germanium oxide were mixed in stoichiometric amount and grounded using an agate mortar, and the resulting powders were pressed uniaxially with 0.5 GPa. The pressed powders were sintered at 800 °C for 8 hours. Resulting Li4GeO4 and Li3PO4 powders were then mixed and pressed uniaxially with 0.5 GPa. The powders were then placed in a tubular furnace with constant oxygen flux at 900 °C for 12 hours. The resulting pellets were 13 mm in diameter with a thickness of 2 mm. The same procedure was repeated for sintering ceramic LGPO pellets used for conductivity measurements and as target for thin film deposition. The crystal structure of the synthesized LGPO powders were characterized by X-ray diffraction (Siemens D500 diffractometer with Cu-Kα radiation). Thin films of LGPO were deposited via pulsed laser deposition (PLD) with a KrF excimer laser, wavelength 248 nm, laser fluence of 2.1 J/cm 2 , repetition rate of 10 Hz. To compensate the expected Li loss (a problem often encountered during the growth of Li-containing thin films) a ceramic target with 10 mol% excess Li (as Li2O)was used. The distance between target and substrate during deposition was 60 mm. Thin films were deposited on single crystal (100) -oriented MgO substrate. Silver paste was used to provide the thermal contact between the substrate and the heating stage in the vacuum chamber. The oxygen pressure was set to 0.01 mbar during the deposition. Films were deposited at 500 °C and at room temperature at the same oxygen background pressure. The crystal structure of the films was characterized by X -ray diffraction (out of plane /2 scan) with a Seifert diffractometer with monochromatic Cu -Kα1 radiation. The thin films deposited at low temperature were characterized also by 2 scan. While  was fixed at 1°, 2 was scanned between 10° and 65°. For the in-plane (along the direction of the substrate surface) electrical characterization two strip-shaped gold electrodes, 100 nm thick, were sputtered on the surface of the films. Electrical characterization was performed by impedance spectroscopy (IS) in Ar flow, between 2 MHz and 1 Hz, applying an excitation of 1 V. Ag paste and Au wires were used to connect the electrodes to the measurement cell. A Solatron 1260 gainphase analyzer and the software Zplot were used for the impedance measurement. The software Zview was used to fit the complex impedance plane plots. Thin films deposited at high temperature were equilibrated for 2 hours at 430 °C. The temperature was then decreased in steps of 20 °C and the samples were equilibrated for 30 minutes at each temperature step before acquiring a complex impedance plot. Thin films deposited at room temperature were equilibrated 24 hours at 25 °C and data was acquired while increasing the temperature up to 480 °C. The conductivity was also measured decreasing the temperature following the same procedure as described above. Rutherford Back Scattering was performed with a 2 MeV 4He beam and a silicon PIN diode detector under 168°. Data were analyzed by the RUMP code. To examine Li-ion diffusivity in LGPO on the atomic scale in a perfect crystal with a composition of Li 3.33 Ge 0.33 P 0.67 O 4 , extended first-principles molecular dynamics (FPMD) simulations were performed. The Car-Parrinello (CPMD) scheme was used, based on Kohn-Sham density-functional theory (DFT) were extracted and the Li-ion probability density Li nr was calculated as: (1) The normal distribution was used to account for finite statistics, setting the deviation to σ = 0.3 Å, and the summation was performed on a grid of 0.1 Å -1 . In addition, we analyzed the trajectory using the SITATOR package for an unsupervised analysis of the diffusive pathways in the system. (2) Li-ion position at time t, and the angular brackets t define a time average over the starting times t, that, following the ergodic hypothesis, we assume corresponding to an ensemble average. We computed this average, and its statistical error, by means of a block analysis. From the tracer diffusion coefficient at each temperature, the ionic conductivity was extracted via the Nernst-Einstein equation:   LGPO ceramic pellets, with a nominal composition of Li 3.2 Ge 0.2 P 0.8 O 4 were prepared by solid -state synthesis, then pressed and sintered. The density of the pellets was 2.20 g cm The electrical conductivity was measured by impedance spectroscopy (IS) with gold (Li -ion blocking) electrodes. Two representative Nyquist plots, used to calculate the total resistance, are reported in Figure LGPO thin films were grown by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) on MgO (100) -oriented single crystal substrates. A ceramic pellet fabricated in our laboratory was used as target for the ablation process. In the case of complex multi-element materials, containing elements with very different atomic masses, the target-to-film compositional transfer can be a severe issue. Instead, no diffraction peaks can be seen in the plot of the 2θ/ω scan of the sample grown at room temperature (Figure The Nyquist plots were fitted to the response of an equivalent circuit composed of a resistance (R) and a constant phase element (Q) in parallel (inset in Figure At both temperatures, a pronounced Li deficiency was observed, as expected. The two complementary ion beam-based compositional analyses also revealed the formation of carbonates. Lithium carbonate is a very common contaminant in Li-containing material when exposed to air. The presence of carbonates is particularly high in the film grown at room temperature, while for the film deposited at high temperature only a thin layer at the surface was detected. This observation suggests a much rougher and porous micromorphology of the LGPO films grown at room temperature, with respect to those grown at 500 °C. Roughness and porosity widen the surface area of the film, therefore allowing the formation of carbonates not only at the surface, as in the case of dense films. The formation of carbonate was taken into account for the calculation of the thin film compositions. The conductivity of the LGPO ceramic pellets fabricated for this study is about 1.2 μS cm -1 at room temperature, with an activation energy of about 0.53 eV. Figure In previous works, LGPO pellets with different Ge to P ratio (from 0.25 to 1.5) showed conductivities ranging from 1 to 10 μS cm -1 at room temperature and the reported activation energies are all around 0.53 eV. The correlation between chemical composition, morphology and conductivity seems to be not completely clear. It is however clear that the ionic conductivity near room temperature of LGPO with different compositions ranges between 1 and a few tens μS cm -1 . Figure LGPO thin films show electrical properties that are very similar to those of the pellets, independently of the deposition temperature. The film grown at room temperature shows an activation energy that is about 0.07 eV higher. This range of conductivity overlaps with that reported in the literature for LiPON amorphous thin films (highest value 2.3 μS cm -1 at room temperature). An advantage of LISICON thin films is that the same conductivity of the stoichiometric compound can be reached already for low lithium content. For example, in case of solid solutions of lithium silicate -lithium phosphate (Li 4 SiO 4 -Li 3 PO 4 ), the conductivity strongly depends on the lithium stoichiometry only up to a certain threshold ( Li/(P+Si) ~ 1). Above this value, the conductivity becomes independent of the lithium content as the mobile lithium sites are saturated. Considering the results of the XRD analysis in Figure A 100 -atom (1 × 1 × 3) supercell was built starting from the single crystal unit cell for which crystallographic data are available in the literature (ICSD #250066 To understand Li-ion density and diffusion properties in an ideal (defect-free) LGPO crystal, we performed extended (200 ps -500 ps) FPMD simulations on the above described periodic supercell in the NVT ensemble, between 300 °C and 1100 °C. The isosurfaces of the Li-ion probability density at different temperatures, displayed in Figure The absence of preferential conduction pathways for the ionic transport is an important advantage, since channelblocking effects can lower significantly the diffusion and have detrimental consequences on the charge/discharge properties, when the material is used as electrolyte in batteries. Li-ion MSDs were used to calculate the ionic diffusion coefficients and the conductivity dependence on the temperature. The non-quantitative agreement between FPMD-calculated (0.37±0.04 eV) and ISmeasured (0.51±0.01 eV) activation barriers is not new for ionic conductivities in solid-state electrolytes. In this work we synthesized and characterized pellets and thin films of Li 4- x Ge 1-x P x O 4 (solid solution between γ-Li 3 PO 4 and Li 4 GeO 4 ) belonging to the ionic conductors in the LISICON family. Pellets with nominal composition Li 3.2 Ge 0.2 P 0.8 O 4 and a relative density of 85% show a conductivity and activation energy in agreement with previously published data. Thin films were deposited via PLD at different temperatures. The compositional transfer from target to substrate during laser ablation is not stoichiometric, resulting in different ratios between Ge and P and the lithium content. Samples deposited at low temperature are deficient in lithium and show contaminations in the form of lithium carbonate. In addition, thin films deposited at low temperature are not completely amorphous as reported previously for similar materials, but appear to possess a nanocrystalline morphology. Compared to the deposition at high temperature, the deposition at low temperature reduces the conductivity of the films by approximately a factor of 4 at room temperature. This is most probably due to the higher roughness and porosity, which favors the formation of carbonates throughout the film. Lithium carbonate is present as a contaminant only at the surface of the dense crystalline films without strongly affecting the conductivity after exposing the sample to air. . From the characterization of pellet and thin films, it appears that the conductivity is almost independent of the microstructure and lithium content, if this is above the threshold of saturation of the mobile lithium sites. Conductivities at different temperatures calculated by FPMD and experimental results are then compared. A clear, but expected difference exists between the short length scale conductivity calculated by FPMD and the conductivity measured on the whole sample by IS. This suggests that there is a blocking effect of large-scale defects that is not detected by the experimental characterization. Effects of the Li-ion collective diffusion (Haven ratio) were not taken into account here, due to the modest conductivity of this material, that would have required longer simulation times. At the same time, it was reported previously for similar systems that the Haven ration does not significantly affect the activation barrier. It was previously reported that LGPO (with formula Li 3.33 Ge 0.33 P 0.66 O 4 ) is stable between -0.5 and 7 V vs Li/Li + , which make it suitable to be used also with high voltage electrodes. National Science Foundation and by DAIMLER AG, Stuttgart, Andreas Hintennach. EG, TL and DP would like to dedicate this work to their colleague, Andreas Hintennach, who unfortunately, died prematurely this year. He will be sorely missed and his personal, scientific and technical contributions will be irreplaceable.