In this communication we consider generalities of the proximity effect in a contact between a conventional -wave superconductor (S) nano-island and a thin film of a topological insulator (TI). A local hybridization coupling mechanism is considered and a corresponding model is corroborated that captures not only the induced unconventional superconductivity in a TI, but also predicts the spreading of topologically protected surface states into the superconducting over-layer. This dual nature of the proximity effect leads specifically to a modified description of topological superconductivity in these systems. Experimentally accessible signatures of this phenomenon are discussed in the context of scanning tunneling microscopy measurements. For this purpose an effective density of states is computed in both the superconductor and topological insulator. As a guiding example, practical applications are made for Nb islands deposited on a surface of Bi 2 Se 3 . The obtained results are general and can be applied beyond the particular material system used. Possible implications of these results to proximity circuits and hybrid hardware devices for quantum computation processing are discussed. The ongoing efforts in developing superconducting hardware that enables topologically protected fault-tolerant quantum computation The proximity effect and Josephson physics in hybrid topological systems, including various geometrical configurations and combinations of unconventional superconducting materials, have been extensively studied theoretically. Several designs of proposed circuits were utilized experimentally in functional devices. We briefly overview and highlight recent work as well as the outstanding challenges and open questions in the context of physics properties and efforts geared towards topological qubit development. The following presentation is organized by the material platforms. (i) S-Sm platform. Since the original measurements reported in Ref. (ii) S-TI and TSC platforms. The prospect of incorporating S-TI-S junctions as inductive elements for topological qubits attracted great interest. The proposed -wave symmetry of the induced superconductivity into TI surface states in these structures was tested in numerous experiments by phase-sensitive techniques such as measuring surface supercurrents in the Josephson effect (iii) CPB and JJA platforms. The alternative ideas in superconducting electronics to realize quantum states robust against sources of local noise and bit flips are also being actively pursued where the notion of topological protection is encoded in a different system property. The advantages of these approaches is that they employ only conventional materials and mature technologies based on Cooper-pair boxes (CPB) and Josephson junction arrays (JJA). The context of topological protection in these circuits can be introduced in a different way by encoding the state of the qubit by a discrete variable that cannot be measured without taking the qubit out of the protected domain. For instance, the simplest example involves two logical states constructed as coherent superpositions of a large number of states with e.g. even or odd quantum numbers. Clearly, such states are physically indistinguishable and thus protected from the environment, provided that transitions between the odd and even sectors are mitigated. The promising implementation of this idea is to identify such discrete quantum states with dual variables of either charge or phase parity representing the number of Cooper pairs on a small superconducting island or the number of trapped fluxons, respectively. This architecture requires only conventional materials such as Al-AlO -Al junctions with an artificially engineered -periodicity of Josephson energy, ( ) ∝ cos (iv) Multiterminal JJ platforms. Another fruitful method tailored towards achieving topological properties with conventional materials explores the potential of multiterminal proximity circuits as artificial emulators of topological matter In the context of qubit performance, the fundamental issue that pertains to each of the above hybrid platforms is the quasiparticle poisoning that severely limits qubit lifetimes. The combination of disorder effects and magnetic fields, which break time reversal symmetry, contributes to the softening of the proximity gap and induces tails of subgap states thus enabling quasiparticle population down to the lowest energies. Experimentally, gap engineering, with a combination of materials in proximity effects with large gap mismatch, was effectively used to stimulate quasiparticle relaxation and trapping. Theoretically, the sub-gap structure in the density of states was exhaustively studied, especially in S-Sm structures. The same set of issues is expected to be a limiting factor in the performance of the Majorana qubit in S-TI platforms, but far fewer detailed studies are available for this system that go beyond the basic models. This motivates the current work where we formulate and solve the hybridization model of the proximity effect in S-TI interfaces, and discuss its dual nature in Sec. 3. We extract effective density of states in SC and TI in Sec. 4 and develop effective models in Sec. 5. We specify our analysis to a particular geometry amenable to surface state measurement instruments such as scanning tunneling and magnetic force microscopes that can test predictions of the extended model. We close with a brief summary and outlook in Sec. 6. In this work we focus on the frequently overlooked dual nature of the proximity effect in S-TI layers. The term topological PE is used to describe the generically expected phenomenon of topologically protected surface states (TPSS) leaking into the adjacent superconducting material, thus effectively inducing properties native to intrinsic TSCs. This effect opens new perspectives for observing and manipulating MZMs. From the recent modeling there exists a substantial supporting evidence that TPSS can migrate and spread in multilayer heterostructures In this study we expand on our earlier proposal, reported in conjunction with the experiment S is the standard BCS Hamiltonian for a clean two dimensional metal with mean field -wave pairing. TI describes the TI surface states (TPSS), and C is a spin independent local hybridization between the TPSS and the SC states. These are all described in more detail below. Throughout we will use j for the Hamiltonian, with the corresponding Hamiltonian density  j such that for example = ( , ) is the 2D spatial coordinate. For the SC states we use the Nambu basis, with Ψ † = { † ↑ , † ↓ , ↓ , -↑ }, and a wavefunction : { ↑ , ↓ , ↓ , ↑ }. † creates a particle of spin at position . Similarly for the TPSS we have where † creates a particle of spin at position . Additionally we will set ħ = = 1 throughout. First, the BCS Hamiltonian density is given by Note that we follow the convention that identity matrices are not explicitly written, so equation ( ̃ is the chemical potential of the TPSS, which in general can be different to . Note that in our hybrid model the velocity of the TPSS, , will depend on the thickness of the superconducting layer. A simple hydrodynamic consideration suggests that = 0 TI ∕( TI + S ) where TI is the penetration depth of the TPSS into the TI bulk and S is the thickness of the SC layer. 0 is the Fermi velocity of the TPSS in the absence of the SC and the dimensionless parameter has been introduced to model any further effects of the interface itself. For the hybridization we consider the simplest possible coupling term with a strength . For our model we can also expect that the coupling decays exponentially with the thickness. The Hamiltonian (1) can be decoupled into two independent blocks by a Fourier transform, followed by a spin rotation which diagonalizes  TI but naturally leaves  S and  C unaffected. Following the Fourier transform the Hamiltonian densities are diagonal in momentum space with momentum = ( , ) and = | |. Now let Ψ =  † Ψ and ̃ =  † , with  =  †  where  is a spin rotation which commutes with  S and  c . Its exact form is given by where = ∕2 -tan -1 [ ∕ ] is the polar angle coordinate. The rotated Hamiltonian density for the TPSS becomes As stated previously S =  S and C =  C . In the new basis the Hamiltonian Eq. ( by a simple reordering. The resulting two independent 4 × 4 Hamiltonian densities are -̃ , i.e. the dispersion of the uncoupled TPSS. If we consider the anti-unitary symmetries used to classify topological Hamiltonians in the ten-fold way From Eq. ( , Another check one can perform that the hybridized bands have the right properties that can lead to topological superconductivity in the appropriate limit, is that there is spin momentum locking in the gapped Dirac cones near = 0. In figure The density of states of the hybrid structure can be directly measured on the surface by scanning tunneling mi- croscopy, see figure For our full hybrid model, given the dispersion relation where the delta function peaks have been broadened into Gaussians of width Γ = 1meV. This we then calculate numerically with Eq. For the purposes of plotting the density of states we introduce a phenomenological broadening via → + i . As a comparison we can compare the density of states of our model to that of the Fu-Kane model. In the limit that momentum → 0, i.e. at the centre of the TPSS Dirac cone, our model An analytical expression for the density of states of this Hamiltonian can be calculated by starting from Gorkov's equation with where ± = ± i . The matrix = Δ is the -wave pairing. This is in the Matsubara representation with the Green's function and anomalous Green's function The operator  stands for time ordering along the imaginary time axis and ( , ) is a Heisenberg operator. The Matsubara frequencies are = 2 ( + 1 2 ) for ∈ Z, and temperature . The anomalous Green's function is therefore where The normal Green's function can be found from the anomalous Green's function resulting in from which the density of states can be calculated. The Fu-Kane model density of states is calculated from the Green's function using the standard formula which after a small amount of manipulation leaves the integral This integral can be performed using standard techniques and we find, , and, in the case of interest ̃ = 0, this is simply where Θ is the Heaviside theta function. In the limit Δ → 0 (and ̃ → 0) one recovers the density of states, for a Dirac cone in two dimensions. In figure In figure where TI is the penetration depth of the TPSS into the TI bulk. This is likely to be further reduced by effects of the boundary, which are modelled by the dimensionless parameter . If TI ≪ S then we have = 0 TI ∕( S ) and ≪ 0 , which is in agreement with experiments At strong coupling, further features appear around the coherence peaks. In figure We will derive two effective models for which either the SC or TPSS degree of freedom has been removed. This leads to a modified topological superconductor like model for the TPSS, and to a superconductor with an induced spin-orbit like coupling term. We will use a functional integral representation where ± = √ 2 ± . This results in the diagonal Hamiltonian density In this new basis the coupling term is We make no changes to the field operators for the TPSS. In the following Ψ and are Grassmann fields corresponding to the fermionic field operators Ψ and ̃ respectively. The functional integrals we will need to perform are over quadratic actions and are given by , where for the SC and , where for the TPSS. To find our effective model for the TPSS with the SC states integrated out we must calculate the correction to TI from the coupling term with the BCS states integrated out. We therefore want to calculate After performing the functional integral, and using standard formula that relates determinant of an operator to its trace, ln det = tr ln , we find where Thus in the static limit we are left with the effective model: The effective s-wave pairing near the Fermi level is therefore ∼ 2 ∕Δ. For an appreciable pairing strength in this model the hybridisation must therefore be similar in magnitude to the s-wave gap of the superconductor. Close to the centre of the Dirac cone the Fu-Kane model As discussed earlier this model is known to host MZM at the centre of vortices. The effective TPSS model (37) has eigenenergies with = ±1 and = ±1. As in the case of the full hybrid model, using Similarly the SC will be modified by the presence of the TPSS. In this case we need to calculate the action ′′ from In complete analogy to the preceding calculation, following this standard integral we find the effective Hamiltonian Figure where and ef f is an effective spin-orbit like term introduced by the TPSS. In the static limit this gives This effective model for the SC has eigenenergies with = ±1 and = ±1. As previously we can use In this communication we have introduced and solved a minimal model which describes the interplay between SC and TPSS in a thin superconducting film on top of a topological insulator. Due to a dual proximity effect TPSS from the TI tunnel into the SC, and conversely Cooper pairs from the SC tunnel into the TI. Our model describes the hybridization between these states. We show that this gives rise to low energy bands with the appropriate SC gap and spin momentum locking to potentially give rise to a topological superconductor. Second we calculate the density of states of this full hybrid model, and demonstrate that it has distinctive features which could be measured in STM experiments. We benchmark this density of states to the standard BCS density of states and that for the minimal Fu-Kane model of -wave proximitized TPSS. The hybridization leads to a modified gap structure and distinctive slopes outside of the gapped region which originate from the TPSS. We also find that the coherence peaks become modified. We then consider two effective models which describe the effect of the SC states on the TPSS, and the TPSS on the SC states. We find that for the TPSS a modified Fu-Kane like model is formed, with a momentum dependent gap. In the limit → 0 this tends toward the standard Fu-Kane result. The effect of the TPSS on the SC is rather to introduce a complicated spin-orbit coupling term, due to the spin-momentum locking of the TPSS. For both models we derive an effective Hamiltonian, the resulting band structure, and the density of states. We demonstrate that the effective TPSS model density of states has a proximity induced gap and shows coherence peaks which are absent from the minimal Fu-Kane model. Further features can also appear in the case of strong hybridization. For the SC, the TPSS tend to widen the gap and coherence peaks, and induce mid-gap states. All of these features would be visible in STM experiments. There are several possible extensions of this work which would be interesting to consider. One limitation of the full hybrid model which is introduced here, is that it is strictly two dimensional. A future extension of this work would be to solve the full three dimensional strongly-coupled system self-consistently, for instance by generalizing the earlier analysis of Ref. 