Porosity is a key parameter on thermal barrier coatings, directly influencing thermal conductivity and strain tolerance. Suspension high velocity oxy-fuel (SHVOF) thermal spraying enables the use of submicron particles as feedstock, increasing control over porosity and introducing nano-sized pores; these fine-scale porosities being challenging to measure. Neutron scattering represents a non-destructive technique, capable of studying porosity with a pore size range of 1 nm to 10 μm, thanks to the combination of small-angle (SANS) and ultra-small-angle neutron scattering (USANS) techniques. Image Analysis (IA) on digital images allows for the study of porosity with a size above ~100 nm. In this work, two yttria-stabilised zirconia (ZrO2 with 8 wt.% Y2O3) suspensions were sprayed and heat treated at 1100, 1200, 1300 and 1400 °C for 72 h. For the first time in SHVOF 8YSZ, pore size distribution, total porosity and pore morphology were studied using SANS & USANS and IA to determine the effects of heat treatment. X-ray diffraction and micro-hardness measurements were performed to study the phase transformation, and its effects on the mechanical properties of the coating. The results show an abundant presence of nano-pores in the as-sprayed coatings, which are eliminated during heat treatment at 1100 °C; a transition from inter-splat lamellar pores to globular pores and the appearance of micro-cracks along with the accumulation of micro-strains associated with the phase transformation from the initial metastable tetragonal into tetragonal and cubic phases at 1200 °C. The phase transformation was completed at 1400 °C, with no presence of monoclinic phase. Yttria-stabilised zirconia (YSZ) currently represents the most used material within thermal barrier coatings (TBC) for gas turbine engine components Even within APS deposited coatings, the variation of the amount of total porosity and pore size distribution has an effect on the thermomechanical properties of the system, directly affecting properties such as the hardness Despite the potential shown by the use of nanostructured YSZ powders, APS deposited coatings present a lower limit on the feedstock particle size of around 10 -100 μm Due to the nature of the environment to which TBCs are exposed during service, where temperatures of 1200 °C are expected, the deposited coating will experience several heat-induced phenomena. Microstructural changes are to be expected, such as coalescence of pores (coarsening) or closure of pores (sintering) as well as the appearance of micro-cracks, having a direct impact on the thermal conductivity of the coating. The importance of a deep understanding of the evolution that the porosity on thermal sprayed TBCs undergoes during heat treatment is evidenced by the abundant literature in the topic In this work, a comprehensive study of the evolution of porosity on SHVOF thermal sprayed 8YSZ coatings during heat treatment at 1100 °C, 1200 °C, 1300 °C and 1400 °C for 72 h is presented. Pore size distribution and total porosity were measured using neutron scattering techniques (SANS and USANS) and IA. To further understand the effects of porosity, phase composition and micro-hardness were measured and correlated to the pore size distribution and total porosity measured. Two commercially available 8YSZ ethanol-based suspension were used in this study, one supplied by Oerlikon (Pfäffikon, Switzerland) being referred to as O-YSZ here, and the other one supplied by Treibacher Industrie AG, (Althofen, Austria), being referred to as T-YSZ. To avoid differences arising from the yttria content or solid content of the suspension, both suspensions had an 8 wt.% yttria content and the solid content of the suspension was 25 wt.% as supplied by the manufacturers. Particle size distribution (PSD) for both suspensions had very similar values, as stated by the manufacturers. O-YSZ had a d90 value of 0.8 -2.0 μm, d50 value of 0.3 -1.0 μm and d10 value of ~0.1 μm. T-YSZ had a d90 value of 1.32 μm, d50 value of 0.60 μm and d10 value of 0.26 μm. The coatings were deposited using a modified GTV TopGun HVOF thermal spray system with direct injection of suspension at the centre of the gas mixing block. The injector had a diameter of 0.3 mm, the length of the combustion chamber was 22 mm and a 110 mm long barrel nozzle was used. A detailed description of the setup can be found elsewhere Free-standing coatings were produced submerging the coated mild steel substrate in HCl 37 wt.% for 2 -4 hours, until the coating detached from the substrate. The produced free-standing coatings were subjected to heat treatment using an Elite Thermal Systems Ltd. (Leicestershire, UK) BRF14/5 box furnace at temperatures of 1100 °C, 1200 °C, 1300 °C and 1400 °C, with a heating rate of 10 °C/min in air for 72 h. Once the heat treatments were finished, the samples were allowed to cool down inside the furnace to prevent drastic temperature drops that would induce stresses. SANS and USANS measurements were performed on free-standing samples using the QUOKKA The acquired data was corrected for sample transmission, empty cell scattering, detector sensitivity and background scattering. The corrected data was scaled to absolute intensities by comparison to empty beam flux using a package of macros in Igor software (Wavemetric, USA) modified to accept data files from QUOKKA and KOOKABURRA. The SANS and USANS data were then desmeared and merged. Raw data included the uncertainty of each data point, showing typical values of ~0.5 -3.5 % for low scattering angles and ~10 -20% for high scattering angles. Due to the data analysis procedure, uncertainty in the raw data did not translate into uncertainty on the obtained volume distribution or total porosity. More details of the neutron scattering techniques and the consequent data analysis is presented in Appendix A. Cross-sections of the coatings were prepared by cold mounting a free-standing coating using EpoFix resin and hardener (Struers, Denmark) and cure it for 24 hours. The mounted free-standing was then ground and polished to a 1 μm finish using SiC grinding papers (Buehler, Germany). For the SEM images a Quanta 600 (FEI Europe, Netherlands) scanning electron microscope was used to image the cross-section of the free-standing coatings using backscattered electron (BSE) mode. Imaging parameters were kept constant, with an accelerating voltage of 15 kV, a spot size of 3 and a working distance of 10 mm. A magnification of 1500× was used for the IA, taking 5 images on different regions of the coating which contained representative porosity. The magnification was chosen as a balance between the need to encompass sufficient microstructural features, allowing for valid averaging results, while obtaining high enough resolution to capture detailed features. Areas with unusual large features, such as cracks, were avoided Phase determination was carried out using a D8 Advance Da Vinci diffractometer (Bruker, Germany) with Cu cathode (wavelength of 1.5406 Å) using transmission mode on free-standing coatings. The angular range investigated was from 20° to 90° for the complete spectra, and from 72° to 76° for detailed measurements. Step size was set to 0.02° and dwell time was 1 s for all the measurements. Rietveld refinement (TOPAS v4.2 software package) was used to determine the c/a√2 parameter, where c and a are the unit cell dimensions. Quantitative Rietveld refinement was employed to determine the quantity of each phase (t-, t'and c-phase), and principles of whole powder pattern modelling (WPPM) were used for crystallite size and micro-strain calculations Five SEM-BSE images were taken at different areas of the centre of cross-section of the coating. All five images per sample were analysed using the open source software ImageJ with the image processing package "Fiji" As outlined in the Introduction, the pore size measurable is determined by the technique chosen to measure the porosity. The main purpose of this work is to present a comprehensive study of the evolution of the porosity over a wide pore radii range using neutron scattering and IA. It is evident from the results that the combination of SANS and USANS allows the study of pores with a radius between ~1 nm and ~10 μm, effectively encompassing the nano-sized features expected from suspension thermal spray and traditional micron-sized features. The overall response to a heat treatment process was in the two samples a striking modification of both the pore volume distribution profile and the total porosity present. Figure One immediate observation that can be made from Figure Regarding the T-YSZ coating, there is a considerable larger reduction in porosity with radius below 100 nm, with only a minor increase in porosity with a radius above ~200 nm. No signs of populations of pores at larger radii could be observed. The behaviour observed for both samples when heat treated at 1300 °C is fairly similar, with an overall reduction in the total porosity measured and flatter pore volume distributions, showing pore sizes more evenly distributed instead of clearly grouped in populations. The changes related to the samples heat treated at 1400 °C, both O-YSZ and T-YSZ, are less obvious from the pore volume distribution plot, presenting a similar profile to the corresponding samples heat treated at 1300 °C. SEM-BSE images of polished cross-section of the coatings were taken and analysed to measure the porosity using IA. This technique allows not only for the determination of the total porosity within the coating, but to investigate the microstructure of the coatings in the as-sprayed condition as well as after heat treatment. High magnification images of the as-sprayed and after heat treatment at 1400 °C cross section of the O-YSZ and T-YSZ coatings can be observed in Figure The data in Figure To understand the different behaviour of the coatings when heat treated at 1200 °C, the phase content was investigated using XRD measurements. It is a generally well-known fact that 8YSZ undergoes phase transformation when exposed to high temperatures. During prolonged heat treatment above 1200 °C The XRD spectra of the as-sprayed and heat-treated coatings are presented in Figure The data indicates that for both O-YSZ and T-YSZ samples, the phase composition of the as-sprayed coatings is only metastable tetragonal phase (i.e. t'-YSZ). Due to the close proximity between the main t'-YSZ peak (~74.1°) and the main t-YSZ peak (~74.4°), the determination of the phases is a challenging task. The data presented in Figure A heat treatment at 1300 °C seems to mostly complete the t'-YSZ decomposition into t-YSZ and c-YSZ, with only traces of the initial t'-YSZ peak. The heat treatment at the higher temperature, 1400 °C, shows no evident signs of t'-YSZ phase, which would indicate that the decomposition is completed at or below this temperature. Even after 72 h at 1400 °C no evidence of monoclinic m phase could be detected. To further investigate the effect that this phase transformation has on the heat-treated coatings, Rietveld refinement was conducted to calculate the tetragonality, as it is shown in Figure As it can be seen, the tetragonality of both as-sprayed coatings is approximately 1.0096, corresponding to the t' non-transformable phase region as indicated in Figure From the Rietveld refinement, it can also be calculated the crystallite size and the micro-strain of the coatings, as it is shown in Figure As well as the phase content and porosity are related to the heat treatment temperature, such process has an impact on the mechanical properties of the coating, such as micro-hardness. Aiming to further understand the implications of the evolution of porosity within heat-treated 8YSZ coatings, the microhardness of the as-sprayed and heat-treated, free-standing coatings was measured. The relationship between micro-hardness and porosity, measured using both neutron scattering and IA, can be seen in Figure Both neutron scattering and IA techniques can be successfully applied to study the porosity present within thermal sprayed coatings, but some considerations should be taken first. Three main differences were observed in this work, namely, the pore size range measurable, the inclusion of micro-cracks as porosity features and the need for pore shape assumption. First, as it was shown in Figure Regarding the differences between neutron scattering and IA size distributions, the first thing that should be considered is that only the range from 70 to 700 nm could be compared, although for neutron scattering there is much more information outside these limits. Secondly, the IA profile is obtained as the average of the five individual areas imaged. This has the effect of "smoothing out" outliers and individual features only present in one area. As a result, the black profiles in Figure Such difference can be clearly seen in Figure The porosity was studied attending to three main characteristics: pore shape, pore volume distribution and total porosity present in the coating. These three characteristics presented an evolution as the samples were heat treated. First, pore shape was highly irregular in the as-sprayed coatings, presenting a combination of elongated, inter-splat pores and globular pores, as represented in Figure The porosity volume distribution obtained from the neutron scattering curves for both the 8YSZ coatings, presented in Figure The effect on the total porosity is represented in Figure Heat treatment will have an effect on the phase composition of the 8YSZ coatings, particularly as the temperature approaches 1200 °C, which is traditionally considered as the threshold for the decomposition of pure metastable tetragonal to tetragonal plus cubic phase, as discussed in section 3.2. As it could be appreciated in the XRD spectra in Figure This temperature is consistent with the literature, with an established temperature of 1200 °C as the upper limit for the presence of metastable tetragonal phase. A shift in the metastable tetragonal phase peak at 2Θ ~74° is also observed, which has been associated with a decrease of the yttria content in the t phase and an increase in the c phase The tetragonality of both coatings is almost identical on the as-sprayed samples, but once the heat treatment at 1100 °C is conducted, O-YSZ presents a higher tetragonality value. At this temperature, the tetragonality value is ~1.011, almost at the transition point between the initial t' non-transformable phase region and the t transformable phase region, as reported by Ilavsky et al. This phase transformation is believed to be the cause for the appearance of the previously mentioned micro-cracks. In addition, the presence of aligned porosity, as it could be seen in Figure Such micro-cracks would correspond to the features observed in the scattering profiles above 100 nm and at 800 -900 nm. The reason why this phenomenon has a higher effect on the O-YSZ coating could be due to the differences observed in the micro-strain profile in the T-YSZ, reaching at 1300 °C a lower micro-strain value (~1.4 × 10 -3 ) than the O-YSZ coating at 1200 °C (~1.6 × 10 -3 ). In addition, O-YSZ suspension showed a larger particle size distribution, as well as a higher content of larger pores in the as-sprayed sample, when compared to T-YSZ. This increase in pores of larger size could lead to more aligned pores, producing micro-crack initiators. Once the heat treatment temperature is further increased to 1300 °C or 1400 °C, the phase transformation from pure metastable tetragonal to tetragonal plus cubic phases seems to be mostly completed. The appearance of the cubic phase at this temperature produced a reduction of ~1.7% in the micro-strain of the coating. In addition, the higher temperatures, once they had completed the phase transformation, produced a relaxation of the accumulated micro-strain. These phenomena contributed to the self-healing of micro-cracks to some degree, as it was appreciated during SEM imaging (not shown here). This would explain why the disproportionate increase in porosity, which has been associated with micro-cracking, was only seen at 1200 °C. Above this temperature, micro-cracking still took place, explaining why the porosity is still higher than the IA value, but to a lesser degree than at 1200 °C. In no case presence of monoclinic phase could be detected, which indicates that in both coatings a heat treatment of 1400 °C for 72 h is not enough to promote the transformation from tetragonal to monoclinic phase. This corroborates the results reported by Ilavsky et al. In this work, we have demonstrated that 8YSZ coatings deposited using SHVOF thermal spray present a large amount of nano-sized porosity, contrary to more traditional powder-based thermal spray techniques such as APS, and a mixture of elongated, inter-splat pores and spherical pores. SANS & USANS and IA techniques were used to investigate evolution of porosity after heat treatment at 1100 °C, 1200 °C, 1300 °C and 1400 °C for 72 h. Both techniques were capable of measuring the pore size distribution and total porosity; however, for suspension thermal sprayed coatings, due to the presence of nano-sized pores, neutron scattering is needed to study the entire range of porosity present. IA is needed to visually inspect the microstructure of the porosity, assessing artefacts and shape, information required for an accurate modelling of the SANS and USANS data. The results show that heat treatment at 1100 °C reduces the presence of nano-pores and overall porosity, with a transition from elongated pores into spherical pores. Heat treatment at 1200 °C induced, in addition to a continuation of the evolution of the microstructure, a phase transformation from the original metastable tetragonal into stable tetragonal and cubic phases. This process, which was accompanied by a raise in the micro-strain, led to the formation of micro-cracks within the coating. Heat treatments at higher temperatures (1300 and 1400 °C) completed the phase transformation, without the formation of monoclinic phase, limiting the accumulation of thermal stresses, further reducing the presence of fines pores and presenting a degree of self-healing of micro-cracks. The The differential scattering cross-section can be defined as described in Equation A.1. (A.1) As it can be seen, for both coatings the samples in the as-sprayed condition (Figure2a and c) present higher level of porosity than the heat-treated coatings, with abundance of inter-splat porosity. The morphology of the pores evolves into more globular structures as the heat treatment is conducted, being the effect more predominant the higher the heat treatment temperature is (not shown here). Additionally, it can be easily appreciated that the overall level of porosity is reduced as the heat treatment is conducted. An increase of the heat treatment temperature further continued this process, seeing a reduction in the inter-splat porosity with a transformation into spherical pores, and an overall reduction of the total porosity observed. SEM-BSE cross-section images of the coatings were analysed to determine the apparent pore size distribution. The data can be used for comparison with the pore distribution profiles obtained using neutron scattering, as it is shown in Figure3.