Cu 2 ZnSnS 4 (CZTS) is a promising thin-film solar-cell material consisted of earth abundant and nontoxic elements. Yet, there exists a fundamental bottle neck that hinders the performance of the device due to complexed intrinsic defects properties and detrimental secondary phases. Recently, it was proven experimentally that Na and K in co-evaporation growth of CZTS can enlarge the grain size and suppress formation of ZnS secondary phase near surface, but the reasons are not well understood. We used first principle calculations to investigate the kinetic processes on CZTS ( 112 ) surface involving Group I elements, including Na, K, and Cs, to demonstrate their surfactant effects. Both the structure of the reconstructed surfaces involving Group I elements and various diffusion paths of a Zn ad-atom in these reconstructed surfaces were explored. The advantages and concerns of the surfactant effects of Na, K, Cs, were systematically compared and discussed. Although Group I elements protect Cu sites on the subsurface layer, a disordered metastable configuration with a diffusion barrier of about 400meV was found. Therefore, a precise control of growth condition is essential to avoid the metastable phase. In addition, our studies provide a systematical design principle for surfactant effects during the growth. Thin film of Cu 2 ZnSnS 4 (CZTS), as a solar-cell absorber material, has attracted vast research interest in past years due to several benefits Surface modification method can be effective to solve these problems Recently, several experimental studies discovered that alkali atoms including Na, K could increase the efficiency of CZTS solar cell through enlarging the grain size and passivating nonradiative trap states Therefore, there could easily be undiscovered surfactant related surface configurations and kinetic pathways due to the intrinsic complexity in this material system. To answer these complex problems, it's necessary to review the current knowledge of the intrinsic surface reconstructions. XRD patterns indicate the most preferred surface orientation are (112)/(1 " 1 " 2 " ) polar surfaces during the growth of CZTS The calculations of bulks and slabs were based on density functional theory where E "#" [X] is the total energy derived from a supercell calculation containing the defect X, and E $#" [bulk] is the total energy for host crystal using the equivalent supercell. The integer n % represents the number of host atoms or impurity atoms that have been added to or removed from the supercell, and the μ % is the corresponding chemical potentials of these atoms. The formation energy of the reconstructed surface is calculated as following where A &)* is the area of the surface, E &)* is the total energy of the CZTS 6-bilayer slabs. μ + ,-, is pseudo chemical potential of the bottom pseudo-hydrogen In this section, the properties of various surfactants of Group I (Na, K, Cs) elements were systematically investigated and compared through the aforementioned aspects: volatility, bulk incorporation, stability, surface diffusion enhancement, vulnerable sites protection and growth temperature window. Although volatility is important in surfactant design, the boiling points of Na and K are similar and above 1000 K Bulk incorporation of Group I (Na, K, Cs) were calculated thermodynamically and kinetically since it is a prerequisite of surfactants. In the experiments, CZTS is often grown by sputtering After reproducing the calculations of Na and K in previous work Moreover, if we assume a Boltzmann distribution at typical CZTS growth temperature 500°C 8 , concentration ratio between Na and K, and that between Na and Cs defects are 10 -8 and 10 -24 , respectively, indicating much lower K, Cs concentration than Na. For kinetics, CI-NEB calculations were performed to find the energy barriers for Group I elements diffusing from the surface to the subsurface. First, the most stable initial configurations of single element attachment on CZTS (1 " 1 " 2 " ) surface were searched. We found that Na, K, and Cs ad-atoms all favor the hollow site, as shown in Figure Also, Na related stable point defects are generally benign 10 , thus Na is still a reasonable choice for the surfactants in CZTS even if a small amount of Na is incorporated into the bulk. In summary, Group I (Na, K, Cs) all satisfy the prerequisite of low bulk incorporation, under the consideration of both thermodynamics and kinetics. Group I (Na, K, Cs) atoms, as surfactants, significantly change the electronic environment near (1 " 1 " 2 " ) surface through saturating the dangling bonds, according to our calculation details. Various alkali atoms related surface reconstructions were considered here, and the most stable configurations were used for surface diffusion calculations. Based on the ECM, totally four Group I atoms were put on the (2×1) CZTS (1 " 1 " 2 " ) surface to fully passivate all dangling bonds because four electrons are needed for bare surface. We calculated totally thirty types of configurations for each group I element and found that five representative configurations, including H3 (hollow) rectangle (Figure Although the diffusion paths on the surface are numerous, we adopted paths starting from most stable surface adsorption site of Zn with surfactants involved. There are two orthogonal paths: along the zigzag chain and across the zigzag chain. We have calculated the MEPs for single Zn ad-atom diffusing along and across the surfactant chain of Na, K, Cs, as shown in Figure For diffusion across the zigzag chain, Na has a completely different diffusion path from the K and Cs since the initial position of Zn ad-atom is higher than Na-capped surface while lower than K-capped or Cs-capped surface. The barriers for diffusion across the zigzag chain for Na, K, Cs are 0.250 eV, 0.260 eV, 0.310 eV, respectively. Moreover, there is only one saddle point for the Na case while there are two saddle points for the K and Cs case according our calculation, as shown in Figure To investigate which candidate has the best protection for the Cu atoms on the subsurface layers, we performed further calculations in this section. Due to the systematic complexity and large interstitial space near the surface layers, there could be various local minima. During our diffusion investigations, we indeed discovered new metastable configurations that may trap Zn on the subsurface layer on Na, K, and Cs capped surfaces. For the Na case, one S atom is pushed up by Zn ad-atom incorporation with the breaking of two Cu-S bonds and one Sn-S bond, as shown in Figure Therefore, this metastable configuration satisfies ECM and the total energy is largely reduced. Based on this trapped configuration, a complete MEP of single Zn ad-atom incorporating into underlying Cu site at cation layer from Na-capped surface was calculated, as shown in Figure This complicated diffusion path contains multiple saddle points because of the large lattice distortion with the incorporation of Zn ad-atom. After overcoming the first energy barrier, Zn adatom falls into a trap and the energy needed to escape from the trap is over 1 eV. Despite Zn adatom has low probability to invade vulnerable Cu site on Na passivated surface, it faces a severe trapping problem with a large distortion. We further calculated the similar trapping configuration for K and Cs capped surface and found the similar local minima, as shown in Figure Therefore, we can use the first energy barrier that prevents the trapping process as an indicator to quantify the protection ability of the Group I elements. There are several factors including size effect and distortion argument to explain this abnormal phenomenon. Cs provides better protection due to its largest size and strongest ionic potential among the three elements. Moreover, for K case, smaller distortion contributes to the reduction of the total energy at the saddle point. Actually, the bond length of K and S (2.92Å), and that of Zn and S (2.44Å) near the saddle point are both very close to that in the K 2 S and ZnS compound The advantages and concerns of Group I elements (Na, K, Cs), as surfactants, were systematically compared. This comparative study is based on the above analysis in six aspects: volatility, bulk incorporation, stability, surface diffusion enhancement, vulnerable sites protection, and growth temperature window, as defined by the difference between the energy barriers on surface diffusion and that of the diffusion into the sublayer, as shown in Table The assessments on the 6 aspects are based on the following facts: (1) The boiling points for Na and K are both above 1000K while Cs is slightly lower; (2) The formation energy of dopant related defects and the dopant incorporating kinetic barriers for Cs are the highest, followed by K and Na; (3) Surfactant involved reconstructed surface for K is the most stable, followed by Na and Cs; (4) The surface diffusion barriers of Zn ad-atom are the lowest for Na and the highest for Cs; (5) The incorporation barrier of Zn ad-atom is the highest for Cs and the lowest for K; (6) Growth temperature window is the largest for Na and smallest for K. To evaluate the overall performance, we assign 3 points for good aspect, 2 points for fair aspect, and 1 point for limited aspect, and sum the scores for each surfactant. Based on this simple evaluation system, Na is the best surfactant among three candidates. Table 