Cross-correlation between magnetism and dielectric is expected to offer novel emergent phenomena. Here, magnetic excitations in the organic donor-acceptor spin-chain system, TTF-BA, with a ferroelectric ground state is investigated by 1 H-NMR spectroscopy. A nonmagnetic transition with a ferroelectric order is marked by sharp drops in NMR shift and nuclear spin relaxation rate T -1 1 at 53 K. Remarkably, the analyses of the NMR shift and T -1 1 dictate that the paramagnetic spin susceptibility in TTF-BA is substantially suppressed from that expected for the 1D Heisenberg spins. We propose that the spin-lattice coupling and the ferroelectric instability cooperate to promote precursory polar singlet formation in the ionic spin system with a nonmagnetic ferroelectric instability. One-dimensional (1D) systems possess coupled electron-lattice instabilities, a metal-insulator Recent under-pressure studies of TTF-CA have revealed that the ionic phase above ∼9 kbar is nondimerized and paraelectric around room temperature and undergoes a dimerized ferroelectric transition on cooling The present study aims to reveal the nature of spin excitations in TTF-BA, a polarizable Heisenberg antiferromagnetic spin-chain system with a non-magnetic ferroelectric transition, by 1 H-NMR measurements. In gen- eral, 1 H-NMR has insufficient sensitivity for probing the electronic state because of small hyperfine coupling and molecular motions unwantedly contributing to the NMR relaxation rate. TTF-BA, however, has sizable 1 H hyperfine coupling constants, no motional molecular parts and, further, appreciably large static and dynamical spin susceptibilities as described later. Owing to all these features of TTF-BA, 1 H-NMR is competent for probing the spin states. We performed 1 H-NMR measurements on a single crystal of TTF-BA under the magnetic field H of 3.7 T applied parallel to the b * axis (perpendicular to the ac plane). In this field configuration, there are four nonequivalent 1 H nuclei above T c [denoted by H α (1) and H α (2) on the α-stack running along the a axis and H β (1) and H β (2) on the β-stack along the b axis in Fig. A. NMR spectra 1 H-NMR spectrum at around room temperature is formed by slightly asymmetric two broad peaks [Fig. The lattice structure of TTF-BA is rather complicated as seen in Fig. On the other hand, the exchange interactions can be evaluated from the experimental data of T -1 1 using the following formula for localized spins in the hightemperature limit where Z is the number of the neighboring sites, g is the electron g-factor, γ N is the nuclear gyromagnetic ratio, is the reduced Planck constant, and a ⊥ is the hyperfine coupling component perpendicular to the field direction given by where a ii (i = x, y, and z) is the principal value of the hyperfine coupling tensor and H i is the direction cosine of the applied field for respective 1 H sites. In calculating a ⊥ , we employed the a iso value of -0.52 kOe/μ B as the isotropic part and calculated the anisotropic dipole part from the on-molecular spin, which yields (-0.3a aniso , -1.7a aniso , 2a aniso ) with a aniso ∼ 0.27 kOe/μ B in principal values. The principal axes of the hyperfine tensor differ among the four 1 H sites so that H i depends on the 1 H site. The average of a 2 ⊥ over the four 1 H sites yields (a 2 ⊥ ) ave ∼ 0.44 kOe 2 /μ 2 B for the present field configuration of H b * . Considering the inter-chain exchange interaction, we replace J to J 2 + J 2 ⊥ + J ′2 ⊥ in Eq. ( Anomalous spin excitations in TTF-BA are highlighted by comparing the spin susceptibilities derived from the spin shifts with the Bonner-Fisher curve expected in 1D antiferromagnetic (AF) Heisenberg spin systems We discuss the origins of the discrepancy in the light of the distinctive nature of TTF-BA as a localized spin system. The first one is the enhanced spin-lattice coupling. Theoretically, working with the semiclassical treatment of bosonized Hamiltonian for NI transition systems, Tsuchiizu et al. suggested that the spin susceptibility in the 1D AF Heisenberg spin systems with spin-lattice couplings and site-alternating potentials does not follow the Bonner-Fisher curve but carry unconventional excitations, called "spin polarons", unlike the conventional spinon excitations The large ∆/k B T c value suggesting the spin gap far exceeding the energy scale of the transition and the small α value signifying outstanding robustness to magnetic field invoke an additional mechanism to stabilize the non-magnetic phase beyond the conventional spin-Peierls framework. Polar fluctuations, which cause local donor acceptor pairing, possibly favor precursory singlet formation in the paramagnetic phase, suppressing spin susceptibility above T c . It is a highly likely view that the precursory singlet fluctuations observed in TTF-BA manifest themselves in an extreme manner as a dimer liquid in TTF-CA, where most of the TTF and CA molecules form polar singlet pairs, whose long-range order is interrupted by soliton excitations. TTF-BA with a charge transfer of ρ ∼ 0.95 is a nearly perfect ionic ferroelectric, whereas TTF-CA with ρ ∼ 0.6-0.7 is an intermediately charge-transferred electronic ferroelectric. It is intriguing to see how the donor-acceptor spin chain system vary its magnetic excitations from the local spin regime to the soliton regime when ρ is reduced from unity. In conclusion, 1 H-NMR spectroscopy of the alternating donor-acceptor ionic chain system, TTF-BA, revealed that it hosts an extraordinary spin system, neither understandable by the soliton matter realized in the analogous system TTF-CA nor the conventional Heisenberg spin system with the spin-Peierls instability. The spin shift and nuclear spin-lattice relaxation rate clearly captured the spin-singlet transition at 53 K. The paramagnetic state above 53 K is demonstrated to host localized spin chains. However, the analyses of the spin shift and T -1 1 found a substantial reduction in the spin susceptibility from that expected for the antiferromagnetic Heisenberg spin chains, evoking a view that TTF-BA offers an exclusive ionic spin system with unusually coupled magnetic and polar fluctuations enhanced prior to a nonmagnetic ferroelectric order. This potentially novel crosscorrelated fluctuation, which is possibly a generic feature for extensive ionic spin systems, is a profound addition to the correlated electron physics, awaiting theoretical challenges to treat jointly spin dynamics and electric polar correlation.