Recent developments in microscopic imaging techniques and correlation algorithms enable measurement of strain fields on a deforming material at high spatial and temporal resolution. In such cases, the computation of the stress field from the known deformation field becomes an interesting possibility. This is known as an inverse problem. Current approaches to this problem, such as the finite element update method, are generally over-determined and must rely on statistical approaches to minimize error. This provides approximate solutions in some cases, however, implementation difficulties, computational requirements, and accuracy are still significant challenges. Here, we show how the inverse problem can be formulated deterministically and solved exactly in two or three dimensions for large classes of materials including isotropic elastic solids, Newtonian fluids, non-Newtonian fluids, granular materials, plastic solids subject to co-directionality, and some other plastic solids subject to associative or non-associative flow rules. This solution is based on a single assumption of the alignment of the principal directions of stress and strain or strain rate. No further assumptions regarding incompressibility, pressure independence, yield surface shape or the hardening law are necessary. This assumption leads to a closed, first order, linear system of hyperbolic partial differential equations with variable coefficients. The solution of this class of problems is well established and hence the equations can be solved to give the solution for any geometry and loading condition, enabling broad applicability to a variety of problems. We provide a numerical proof-of-principle study of the plastic deformation of a two-dimensional bar with spatially varying yield stress and strain hardening coefficient. The results are validated against the solution of the corresponding forward problem -solved with a commercial finite element solver -indicating the solution is exact up to numerical error (the normalized root mean square error of the stress is 1.63 × 10 -4 ). No model calibration or material parameters are required. The sensitivity of the solution to error in the input data is also analyzed. Interestingly, this solution procedure lends itself to a simple physical interpretation of stress propagation through the material. Finally, we provide some examples showing how this approach may be analytically applied to both solid and fluid mechanics problems. Numerous experimental approaches can be used to measure deformation fields in two and three dimensions such as digital image correlation (DIC) Note that the inverse problem has exact solutions in some cases with high degrees of symmetry. One example is static tension applied along the length of a bar with a constant cross section. Here, the stress is constant along the bar regardless of any complexity or variability in the constitutive equations. Other examples include the triaxial test In the finite element update method, for example, the form of the constitutive equations is assumed, force equilibrium is solved, and the material parameters are updated to minimize the difference between the computed and observed strain The constitutive equation gap method minimizes the error between the stress computed with assumed constitutive equations and a stress consistent with force balance These approaches, and similar approaches (e.g. This article shows that by making more limited assumptions about constitutive equation, one can arrive at a closed, mathematically determinate, set of equations consistent with force balance and the observed strain field. The key assumption made is the alignment of the principal directions of stress with either the strain or the strain rate. We refer to this as the alignment assumption. Our approach makes specifying the form of the constitutive equation unnecessary and one can avoid multiple commonly made assumptions such as incompressibility, pressure independent behavior, yield stress value, hardening law, or yield surface shape. However, unlike approaches such as the finite element update method, this cannot be applied to in cases which violate the alignment assumption, such as crystal plasticity, without significant modifications. Combining this assumption of alignment of principal directions with force balance gives rise to a closed, three dimensional, first order, linear system of hyperbolic partial differential equations with variable coefficients ( §2), the solution of which is well established and enables the stress to be directly computed for any geometry and loading condition. This article is structured as follows. First, the governing equations are derived for small strain and finite strain viscoplasticity and elasticity ( §2). We provide a numerical proof-of-principle study showing our approach gives accurate results for a bar with yield stress and hardening coefficient spatially varying in two dimensions ( §3). This solution procedure has a simple physical interpretation of stress propagating through the material which gives insight into how the boundary conditions should be specified ( §4). We discuss more extensively for what material classes our approach can and cannot be applied ( §5). Finally, this solution procedure may also be applied analytically, hence, we give examples for both solids and fluids ( §6). 2 Governing equations The key assumption made is the alignment assumption: that the principal directions of the Cauchy stress T are the same as either the strain or strain rate. This assumption was first made by saint-Venant in 1871 As co-directionality is a sufficient condition for the alignment of principal directions, all materials consistent with co-directionality will be consistent with the alignment assumption. Force balance and the alignment assumption are the only assumptions used, hence, the derived system of equations will be valid for a range of deformation regimes and material classes, regardless of the geometry and loading condition. These include many metals, ceramics, granular materials, elastomers, glasses, polymers and fluids. The set of assumptions made will be valid in a number of cases that cannot be analyzed using conventional experimental methodologies. In particular, in cases where heterogeneous stress fields arise that are not possible to measure, such as those caused by strain softening, high strain rates, material heterogeneity, complex geometries and complex loading conditions. See §5 for a more extended discussion on the applicability of the approach. Here we derive equations for infinitesimal strain plasticity and later show how the results can be generalized to finite strain elasticity and plasticity ( §2.3 and 2.4). In this case we assume the principal directions of the Cauchy stress T are aligned with the strain rate Ė. Note that for this to be valid one must assume that Ėe << Ėp and hence that Ė ≈ Ėp 1 . Applying the spectral theorem to Ė and T we have Because the principal axis are aligned we have Hence, Since Therefore, the symmetric matrix Q T Ė TQ Ė must be diagonal, leading to three equations specifying that each of the off diagonal terms are zero. Since Q Ė is computed as a function of Ė, these equations are linear in the coefficients of T. Note that geometrically, we have just rotated the T matrix so that the basis vectors are the principal directions of Ė, then we specified that the shear components are zero. In addition to this requirement, force balance must also hold giving rise to six total equations where b is the body force, ρ is the density and v is the velocity of a material point. Since the deformation field is known (i.e. Q Ė and v), Eqs. (4-5) give six equations with six unknowns and form a mathematically determinate, hyperbolic, first order, linear system of partial differential equations with variable coefficients. In Cartesian coordinates, Eq. ( where each of these coefficients c i are functions of Ė and have analytical expressions using the Ėij components. In addition, Eq. ( As this system of equations is hyperbolic, the boundary conditions necessary depend on the characteristic lines, which in turn depend on the coefficients c i . These are discussed in §4. We make some remarks: • In the case of quasi-static plastic deformation where Ė → 0, Ė can simply be replaced with the strain increment dE. • In the case of viscous deformation we also know that the principal directions of T and Ė are aligned. Hence, Eq. ( • In the case where two or three of the principal values of Ė are the same, any perpendicular principal directions consistent with the spectral decomposition can be chosen to give a valid solution. • If ρ is also unknown the continuity equation (conservation of mass) can be used in conjunction with the measured deformation field to compute ρ from an initial condition. Hence, we still have a complete set of equations. Equations of the same form can be derived for isotropic elastic deformation. Previously we assumed alignment of the principal directions of T and Ė. Instead of this, for isotropic elasticity we have that the principal directions of T are aligned with the principal directions of E where the spectral decomposition of E is given by In general the principal directions of Ė and E are different, so one cannot directly apply our approach to elasto-plastic deformation. In this case, the decomposition of E and Ė into its elastic and plastic components will be unknown. However, there are cases where the principal directions of E and Ė are aligned throughout deformation and Eq. ( We use standard notation to specify the kinematics of large deformation. We have the position of a point in the reference body X and a smooth one to one mapping to the deformed body x = χ(X, t). We then define the deformation gradient, velocity, and velocity gradient by Applying a polar decomposition to F gives where are the right and left stretch tensors respectively. The right and left Cauchy-Green deformation tensors are L can be decomposed into its symmetric and skew parts which are known as the stretching and spin tensors respectively. For the case of plastic, viscous, or visco-plastic deformation, T will have its principal axis aligned with the stretching tensor D where the spectral decompositions of D and B are The two-dimensional forms of Eqs. (4-5) have applicability in several areas, for example, when the strain is measured on the surface of a sample using digital image correlation. In two dimensional quasi-static conditions with no body force, Eqs. with These equations hold for plane stress, plans strain, or any other stress state with T xz = T yz = E xz = E yz = 0. This gives three equations and three unknowns. Here, we can define the Airy stress function ψ such that When this is substituted into Eqs. Note that c specifies the angle of the principal directions with respect to the horizontal with c = 0 corresponding to θ = π/4, c → ∞ corresponding to θ = 0 and c → -∞ corresponding to θ = π/2. More generally, Also note that when c = 0 everywhere, Eq. ( We consider the elasto-plastic deformation of a bar in plane stress where the yield stress and hardening behavior vary as a function of position (shown in Fig. A two-dimensional rectangular bar with initial dimensions of l x in the x direction and l y = l x /4 in the y direction is subject to a constant traction perpendicular to its boundary at each end. The material is elasto-plastic with a Mises yield surface and co-directionality assumed. The material has an elastic modulus E = 200 GPa and a Poisson's ratio ν = 0.3. The material has linear hardening with a hardening coefficient H and initial yield stress Y that both vary as a function of position (these are specified in Fig. The stress and strain fields were computed using a commercial finite element solver ABAQUS/standard (2017). There were 100 equally sized cuboid elements in the y direction, 400 elements in the x direction, and 1 element in the z direction, giving 40000 total elements. The elements were 20 node bricks, triquadratic displacement, hybrid, linear pressure and reduced integration Figure As Eq. ( though there are other subsets of Eq. ( for any a 1 , a 2 and a 3 . In order to remove these degrees of freedom we fix the following values From Eqs. ( However, we cannot directly apply these boundary conditions as they are second order in the derivatives of ψ. Nevertheless, we can combine Eq. ( subject to: where c as a function of x and y is given. As the stress in computed in the forward problem over just one increment, the principal directions of the strain and strain rate will be aligned, hence one can just compute c using the strain field. Specifically, c is computed from the strain values output from the forward problem (Fig. Although the governing equations are linear, there are several challenges in developing a robust numerical method due to the variable coefficient c and the susceptibility of hyperbolic numerical methods to be becoming unstable. The system of governing equations has no preferred direction of the characteristic curves complicating the problem further (unlike many hyperbolic systems where characteristic curves go forward in time). Here, the objective it simply to demonstrate the validity of the governing equations and overall approach. Hence, we implement a simplified finite difference based approach that exploits the fact that the characteristic lines deviate from the x and y axis by only a small amount, and that the geometry is simple. However, development of more robust numerical methods, such as those using the finite volume method, is likely warranted. We implement the solution using a finite difference discretization. As the equation is hyperbolic, we use methods analogous to those that are implicit with respect to time. A rectangular mesh is used with 100 by 400 nodes and the boundaries are specified on the right, left and bottom sides (Fig. Solving the system took approximately 0.4 seconds (on a 2014 Macbook Pro with a 2.5 GHz Intel Core i7 processor and 8 GB RAM), and future speedups could could be achieved by exploiting the structure of the matrix, for example, by using fast Poisson solvers Here we make two remarks: • It was not necessary to express the problem using ψ, one could have used Eqs. • It was necessary to remove a subset of the boundary conditions in Eq. ( -1 3 -1 -2 The solution produced is close to exact over the entire domain, this is shown in Figs. where ∆T is the difference between the stress computed from the inverse problem and the stress output by the commercial finite element solver the mean is taken over all positions except nodes on the boundary which are known from the boundary conditions The strain E used was imported from numerical finite element software, and hence, is only subject to small numerical errors. However, the error in experimentally measured strain is typically much higher In addition, we consider uncertainties in the boundary conditions. These could arise due to sample heterogeneities and imperfect sample preparation (random error), or by making an imperfect approximations such as uniform stress along the gauge section of a tensile specimen (systematic error). Note that we do not investigate systematic error in the displacement field, such as lens distortion error, due to the complexity of the analysis required and the fact that many of these errors can be addressed using sophisticated optical setups or through image post processing. In order to investigate these errors we use a modified strain field or modified boundary conditions for the inverse problem computation (Fig. The mean error in stress is shown in Fig. We remark that the error for this particular problem is likely to be acceptable for the typical noise values encountered in DIC. We have a NRMSE(T) = 1.92 percent are obtained with std(u i ) = 3.2 × 10 -6 l x , a root mean square error of the strain RMSE(E) = 1.29 × 10 -4 , and l u→E = 10 pixels (Fig. In addition to the error of the displacement field, there are several factors which may impact the accuracy of T. First, we consider the average magnitude of the strain. Typically, the error in the strain field will be approximately independent of average strain. Hence, the larger the average strain, the smaller the impact of noise on the principal directions of the strain from which T is computed. One can show that the error in the principal direction is inversely proportional to |E| if the error in E is much less E itself. Hence, the algorithm will be more accurate at larger strains, such as those that arise during significant plastic deformation. Second, the magnitude of the strain gradients present in the deformation will impact the accuracy. Lower gradients will enable more accurate computation of T because more points can be used to compute the strain without overly smoothing the strain gradients. The problem investigated has relatively sharp gradients (Fig. The error in T due to error in the boundary conditions is comparatively easier to understand. One can use linear superposition to split the stress field into the true solution with the correct boundary conditions, plus a stress error field due to the error in the boundary conditions. One can then use scaling analysis to estimate the magnitude of the stress error field. For the problem considered here, one can show that the magnitude of the stress directly scales with the magnitude of the stress at the boundary, hence the error in the stress scales with the error of the stress at the boundary. This explains the slope on Fig. Since the governing equations are hyperbolic, it is mathematically sufficient to only specify a subset of the full traction boundary conditions We first consider the simplest case of static one-dimensional deformation, which shares key features with the multidimensional case. We consider a bar of constant cross section, deformed in tension, with a force at the boundary F (x = 0) = F (Fig. Because of this, only a subset of all boundary conditions (one side) is required. Also note that this solution is valid despite the fact that no constitutive equations are specified; these could be very complex and vary as a function of position along the bar (Fig. Figure We now consider how the solution procedure works in the two-dimensional example shown in Fig. We just assumed that there was no force propagation along the upward characteristic lines as propagation along curved characteristics is more complicated. Fig. Here the shear component T rθ is zero since the coordinate system is chosen to be aligned with the characteristic lines. If T θθ is set to be constant the force per unit depth propagating between two radial lines is F rr = T rr rθ and changes according to The general case is again more complex, with some curvature and divergence of characteristic lines in all three dimensions. However, this is quantitatively captured in Eqs. Figure gives insight into what boundary conditions are required in order to solve the governing equations. Specifically, the boundary stress only needs to be specified at one end of each characteristic line Eqs. (4-5) allow one to compute the full-field stress when (i) the boundary conditions are known, (ii) the deformation field is known, and (iii) the material is consistent with the alignment assumption. The authors anticipate several scenarios that meet these conditions where the approach will provide practical utility. First, in characterizing the strain softening of a material which is often impaired by deformation instabilities such as shear band formation or necking. Here, obtaining the full strain field and boundary conditions is often feasible using approaches such as digital image correlation and load cells Despite its simplicity, the alignment assumption is valid for a range of materials with highly complex constitutive equations, allowing one to characterize these complexities using our approach. Examples include non-linear stress strain responses such as those that arise in hyperelastic deformation of elastomers As discussed in §2 the approach applies in the case of isotropic elasticity and is not restricted to the linear case. Complex non-linear hyperelastic behavior, such as that which occurs in rubbers or ceramics, is consistent with the alignment assumption. We also consider linear anisotropic elasticity which governs a number of materials ranging from crystals to wood. Here we have where C is a fourth rank elasticity tensor. Although the symmetries of a material (e.g. that it is transversely isotropic) allow us to significantly reduce the number of coefficients in C, they generally do not allow us to compute the principal directions of stress from the strain without further assumptions or data (unless it's isotropic). Nevertheless there are special cases. For example, when a transversely isotropic material is subject to plane strain or plane stress, this allows the components of stress in the plane to be computed. Another case is when the principal directions of strain are aligned with the symmetry axis of an orthotropic material. As an alternative to co-directionality, an associative flow rule may be used to specify the plastic flow direction N p . In this case, N p is normal to the yield set and is given by where f (T) is the yield function. For simplicity, we omit additional arguments such as the equivalent plastic tensile strain and assume a rigid-plastic material. The normality equation can be derived using using the maximum dissipation hypothesis First we consider the classic case of the von Mises yield function where and Y is the yield stress Next we consider the Tresca yield criterion with the normality assumption. Unlike the von Mises criterion, this violates co-directionality where T i are the principal components of T. If we express f (T) in a reference frame aligned with its principal axis, the off diagonal terms of ∂f (T) ∂T will be zero, hence, Ė will have its principal directions aligned with T. This can be extended to any f (T) which is only a function of the principal components T i . Hence, our approach applies to any associative flow rule where the yield function is isotropic (i.e. only a function of the stress invariants or principal components). Note that while the approach is valid for these associative flow rules with isotropic hardening, it breaks down in the case of kinematic hardening when the material is subject to a complex strain path. Here, only the principal directions of T -T back are known, where T back is the back stress and remains unknown without further assumptions. Finally, we consider the example of isotropic dry granular material which gives rise to a non-associative flow rule that violates commonly used simplifying assumptions such as co-directionality, but for which our approach still applies. Here, the constitutive equations may be written as: where γ is a strain rate scalar, P accounts for the material shearing, N accounts for the dilatancy of the material, ξ is the slip plane angle, β is the dilatancy parameter, ê1 is the direction of the maximum principal stress, and ê3 is the direction of the minimum principal stress (see This example also illustrates that our approach is valid for materials that violate the common assumption that plastic flow is independent of the pressure (e.g. While the emphasis has been on cases where the alignment assumption is valid, the only real requirement is that the principal directions of T are known. If there is some other orientation relationship that can be obtained from the deformation field this may be sufficient. For example consider an associative flow rule with an anisotropic yield function which depends on all components of T and does not adhere to the alignment assumption. If this yield function shape is known, i.e. but the hardening law and yield stress is unknown, one may still be able to apply our approach by inverting this equation, assuming it is one to one. This will give the principal directions of stress which can be substituted into Eqs. (4-5). There is also the important special case where the material does not generally follow the alignment assumption, but does for a specific deformation. For example, the case of elasto-plastic deformation where E and Ė have the same principal directions and E e cannot be neglected. This often occurs when the deformation is small because the minor changes in geometry are often not sufficient to significantly change the principal directions of E. I.e. E = Ėt + O(t 2 ) ≈ Ėt when t is small. Practically, this can checked for any specific finite deformation by simply observing if the principal directions of E change. To summarize, our approach can be applied whenever material symmetries or other assumptions allow us to deduce the principle directions of the stress from the deformation fields. While this can be applied directly to a range of isotropic materials, it does not apply in most anisotropic materials, materials with kinematic hardening subject to complex strain paths, or general elasto-plasticity. However, that it may be possible to extend this model with additional assumptions that overcome these issues. 6 Analytical examples Here we analytically examine the example of a bar plastically bending in the center, something that is commonly observed (Fig. (a) (b) Because the t characteristic lines have no curvature, there will be no change in T ss in the s direction ( §4). Furthermore, T st = 0 since the principal directions are aligned with the curvilinear coordinate system. Hence, we have T tt will also be equal to a constant in the straight segments of the bar, since there is no curvature in the s characteristic lines. Due to the zero traction boundary condition on the lower side of the bar T tt (t = R 1 ) = 0, we have: for the straight segments. We now consider the bent segment using force balance in the t direction (using standard polar coordinates): Hence, we have the following equation Applying the zero traction boundary condition at the lower surface T tt (s, t = R 1 ) = 0 we have for the bent segment. This equation, combined with Eqs. because T tt (R 1 ) = 0 and T tt (R 2 ) = 0. Hence, the average axial stress must be zero. This is physically consistent with the observation that if this were nonzero, there would be a net vertical force acting on the bar and it would not be in equilibrium. We now consider a specific example of a force distribution: This changes linearly with t, takes on a value of σ at t = R 1 , takes on a value of -σ at t = R 2 , and satisfies Eq. ( The maximum value of T tt is: which occurs at t = √ R 1 R 2 . This relationship is depicted in Fig. Here, show how this approach may also be applied to fluid flow. We have a two dimensional fluid flow between two parallel plates subject to a constant pressure gradient -dP dx . Here we take an Eulerian approach and specify the velocity field v(x, t). We make the following assumptions: (i) the flow is steady, (ii) the flow is incompressible, (iii) the velocity is x independent, (iv) and the velocity is in the x direction. This gives v(x, t) = v x (y) where x is in the direction of fluid flow and y coordinate is perpendicular to the two plates. This flow condition gives a velocity gradient tensor D with only off diagonal terms. Hence, using Eq. ( T xx -T yy = 0. Solving these equations along with T xx = P gives: ∂T xy ∂y = -∂P ∂x = constant. This agrees exactly with the specific case of Poiseuille flow Here we demonstrated the inverse problem can be formulated deterministically and solved exactly in a number of cases. This approach can be applied whenever the principal directions of stress are aligned with the principal directions of strain or strain rate. A proof of principle study is conducted showing the approach gives essentially exact results in the two dimensional case of spatially varying, plastic, constitutive relations. The sensitivity of the solution to this error in the input data was quantified. Further numerical validation may be beneficial for more complex three dimensional deformation problems, though we do not anticipate any particular issues as the equations are still relatively straightforward and linear. This alignment condition is readily realized in a range of material classes such as isotropic metal alloys, granular materials, polymers, and fluids, but not in textured or anisotropic materials, and materials with kinematic hardening subject to complex strain paths. However, it may be possible to extend the approach to these cases with additional assumptions that specify the principal directions of the stress based on the material and deformation path. We believe that the approach will have utility in experimental design and analysis in scenarios that involve complex geometries, plastic flow instabilities, or heterogeneous material properties. More importantly, it will enable straight-forward determination of constitutive relations: if the full field deformation is measured for multiple increments, one can directly compute the local stress-deformation path and fit a constitutive relationship to characterize the material. Here, E e and E p correspond to the elastic and plastic parts of the small strain such that E = E e + E p . Notation: We use bold upper-case letters to denote second order tensors (A, B,...). We denote the deviatoric part of a second order tensor A as A0, and the material time derivative as Ȧ or Ȧ. DivA and divA correspond to the divergence A with respect to the initial and deformed reference frame respectively. Similarly, GradA and gradA correspond to the gradient of A with respect to the initial and deformed reference frame respectively. |A| = AijAij gives the magnitude of A. The spectral decomposition of a symmetric tensor A is written asA = Q A Λ A Q T Awhere Q A has columns with the Eigen vectors (principal directions) and Λ A is a diagonal matrix containing the Eigen values (principal values). We use circular parentheses (•) to denote functional dependence and square brackets [•] to specify the order of operands. Note that the error on the boundary nodes themselves was relatively high, however this problem should be addressed by developing more robust numerical methods. For clarity of presentation we omit constant factors such as 3/2.