Higher-order topological insulators exhibit multidimensional topological physics and unique application values due to their ability of integrating stable boundary states at multiple dimensions in a single chip. However, for signal-processing applications in high-frequency mechanical systems, the current realizations of higher-order topological mechanical materials are still limited to large-scale systems for kilohertz or lower frequencies. Here, we report the experimental observation of a on-chip micromechanical metamaterial as higher-order topological insulator for high-frequency mechanical waves. The higher-order topological phononic band gap is induced by the band inversion at the Brillouin zone corner which is achieved by configuring the orientations of the elliptic pillars etched on the silicon chip. With consistent experiments and theory, we demonstrate the coexistence of topological edge and corner states in the megahertz frequency regime as induced by the higher-order band topology. The experimental realization of on-chip micromechanical metamaterials with higher-order topology opens a regime for applications based on megahertz mechanical waves in an integrated platform where the edge and corner states act as stable waveguides and resonators, respectively. Introduction.-The discovery of higher-order topological insulators (HOTIs) opens a frontier in the study of topological phenomena and materials beyond the conventional paradigm of topological insulators and their classical wave analogs In this Letter, we report the experimental realization of higher-order topological micromechanical metamaterials based on etch-patterning of thin silicon films that form twodimensional square-lattice structures consisting of elliptic pillars on the substrate. The band topology is controlled by the geometry configuration of the elliptic pillars in each unitcell. By inducing a band inversion at the Brillouin zone corner, a higher-order topological band gap is formed on the phonon branches dominated by out-of-plane polarization. The topological edge and corner states are predicted to emerge as due to the higher-order band topology. We experimentally demonstrate the presence of the edge and corner states at MHz frequencies, and characterize their dispersions through piezoelectric excitations and laser vibrometer scanning. The consistency between the theory, simulation and experiments demonstrate the multidimensional topological physics and re- On-chip mechanical HOTI.-A sample with a mechanical HOTI surrounded by a mechanical normal insulator (NI) is fabricated by etching a silicon chip on the silicon dioxide substrate using micro-manufacturing technology (see Supplemental Material The elastic waves on the silicon chip, known as Lamb waves which consist of an out-of-plane and two in-plane polarizations (see Supplemental Material Topological index from symmetry analysis.-The topological index of the micromechanical metamaterial can be analyzed through the symmetry eigenvalues of the two phononic bands dominated by the w displacement below the band gap where , and #M 1 denote the number of even parity eigenvalues at the X, Γ, Y , and M points for the two Lamb-wave phononic bands below the band gap. The higher-order band topology is characterized by the following corner charge, A fractional corner charge Q c indicates nontrivial higherorder topology Experimental and theoretical characterizations of the edge states.-We first study the edge states along the x and y directions. For this purpose, two samples are fabricated. One has edge boundary along the x direction between the HOTI (θ = -60 • ) and the NI (θ = 25 • ) [Fig. In experiments, the edge states are excited by tungsten nee-dle mounted on piezoceramic. We measure the amplitude and phase distributions of the displacement w using laser vibrometer and network analyzer (see Supplemental Experimental characterization of the corner states.-To host the bulk, edge and corner states in a single chip, a boxshaped large structure illustrated in Fig. To experimentally detect and visualize the corner states, we excite each corner state using a point source in the HOTI region with 3 √ 2a away from the corner at various frequencies. For each corner boundary, a single localized resonance is spotted in our experiments. This indicates that each corner supports only a single corner state which is consistent with the theory of HOTIs We further measure the corner states at other three corner boundaries. The measured spatial distributions of the vibration amplitude |w|, as presented in Fig. Note added: We notice a preprint appearing veal the effectiveness of our approach toward higher-order topology in micromechanical systems. The coexisting edge and corner states could be used in integrated microelectromechamical systems as stable and compact waveguides and resonators, respectively.