Intuitively, doping represents one of the most promising avenues for optimization of best prospect superconductors (SC) such as conventional high-pressure SCs with record critical temperatures. However, doping at high pressure (HP) is very challenging, and there is not a proved route to achieve it in a controlled fashion. Aided by computing simulations, we show that it may be plausible to start by alloying primary materials and subsequently incorporate high ratios of hydrogen at moderates pressures (≈1.5 Mbar). Our theoretical results evidence the possibility to tune the electronic structure of LaH10, increase the density of states at the Fermi level by doping of various elements and hence change their superconducting properties. We found aluminium to increase the occupation at the Fermi level by more than 30 %. Incorporation of other elements such as Si, Ge, H, Ir, Ca, and others with a varying percentage also play in favour to tune the electronic structure. More importantly, these predictions lie in experimentally attainable doping levels. Also, for the first time, we shed light on how the formation of defects and vacancies influence on the electronic structure of a HP-hydride superconductor. The concepts presented in this work can be extended to other high-pressure, hydrogen-based superconductors such as H3S. Arguably, doping is one of the promising paths to reach room-temperature superconductivity, a Holy grail of condensed matter physics. With the advent of hydrides as high-temperature superconductors, particular emphasis has been put in studying systematically binaries and ternaries to find materials higher transition temperatures An alternative solution to reach the complex synthesis and that has been overlooked experimentally is doping. It is well known that by introducing sufficient electronor hole-donating impurities, one can transform semiconducting systems into metallic phases. This strategy has been successfully demonstrated by inducing superconductivity in several semiconductors (see Ref. In this work, we screen for the best elements that can dope LaH 10 , currently the best superconductor with an extraordinarily high-T c of 250 K. The ensemble of results issued of first principles shows that it is possible to tune the electronic properties of LaH 10 and induce a sizable change in the electronic occupation at Fermi level. The interplay between structure and dopant (electronic behaviour) is discussed, and essential hints are proposed. Finally, to connect our predictions with experimentation, in this first research article we propose a simple, yet clear idea that stands an excellent chance to be generalized in the case of hydrides materials and other materials subject of pressure studies. Based on the conclusions found by Errea et al. • It is desirable to opt for highly symmetric cages of hydrogen. • To have a compact (dense) basis of lanthanum positions (or guest element) that minimize enthalpy. • The electronic density of state should ideally show arXiv:2010.06446v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 13 Oct 2020 a Van Hove singularity (VHS) pinning at or nearby the Fermi level. • The heat of formation of solid or liquid metal alloy for the guest atoms should be favourable, i.e. the dopant atom should be miscible in the guest matrix, i.e. X atom miscible to La, in the case of LaH 10 . Finding the best element that holds the above criteria is something that can be accessed using state-of-the-art first principles, in return, there is a large computational overhead (see details in Ref. For the entire set of elements, we did explore a higher doping percentage, 25 %. However, we notice that the physics of the La-H 10 system change enormously. Indeed, for many elements, new crystalline structures are found after a full geometry optimization. At higher doping, i.e. 1 atom every 4 La, enthalpy plays in favour of other more stable structures; making the study of the 25 % to widely deviate from our initial assumptions. To be sure of having meaningful results at such a large percentage, it would be necessary to calculate the formation enthalpy, which will be cumbersome and computationally intractable with such vast channels of decomposition. Based on the structural patterns and results from the high-throughput, we claim that our results are valid for small doping percentage, approximately below 12%, where the enthalpy of the parental phase dominates. For 3.70% doping, it is unusual to find only two elements (coloured in red) Hf and Lu that after a full optimization (starting with breaking symmetry) relaxed back to the lock position, preserving the highly symmetrical Figure pattern of H-cages. In yellow, the elements mostly group I and II, halogen and noble gases that retain symmetriccentres (of fcc La basis) but induce deformation of the hydrogenic cages. In light blue, transition metals and block-p elements for which the local environment of the dopant produces XH x phase (dopant atom off-centred of the fcc basis). Based on the results of 3.70 %, as input for 1.56 %, we optimized the volume only for particular cases. Coloured in red all the elements considered at the centre of cages with highly symmetric hydrogenic cages (no breaking symmetry). Form the electronic perspective; ideally, one should look for a dopant that increases the density of states at the Fermi level. Fig. It is clear that the crystalline structure of LaH 10 and its electronic features Moreover, our results are in line with recent evidence by Seho et al. In the present study, we cannot rule out the possibilities that a complete quantum treatment of nuclear positions (see the work of Errea et al. The Bader analysis ]. The number of electrons at the Fermi level correlates with the excess electrons supplied by the dopant. Interestingly, adding one hydrogen has a positive impact on the electronic structure, for 1.5% the ionic charge is [La 1.27+ , H 0.05- WP-1 , H 0.07- WP-2 , H 0.23- center ]. However, it should be take with precaution this result; the excess of hydrogen is placed in the centre of the H-cage, position that seems odd for a stable structure. Finding a suitable position (interstitial or in the H 32 framework) will have a beneficial impact by shift the VHS and populating the Fermi level by adding electrons. Theoretically, incorporating the right dopants can have significant implications in the electronic properties of LaH 10 . The remaining question is, how do we incorporate these, in a controlled way, without destroying the high symmetry and stoichiometric phase. We propose to start by first, synthesizing the alloy, as for example the La 0.9 Al 0.1 that at low doping limit should follow the ordered fcc of La. Then follow the steps of Drozdov et al. Recently 813 binary alloys were studied and classified using Miedemas theory In conclusion, this work provides a thorough study of doping and structural stability in LaH 10 for a wide variety of elements (see SM for details). The best elements to tune the electronic structure in LaH 10 at 150 GPa are Al, Si, Ge, Ir, Mg, Ca, Sr, and Ba at 12.5%. Mn, N, Br, Ru and H at 3.7%. For lower concentrations, the incorporation of dopants although plays in favour of enthalpy stability, it downturns the stability of the Van Hove singularity. For the first time, we shed some light on formation of charge defects and vacancies at high pressure. In this work we propose the idea that hydrides when successfully synthesized at HP, these can only be formed in almost perfect crystals (free defect) and in perfect stoichiometries. Assuming a BCS phonon-mediated superconductor, where T c is proportional to ωexp(-1/λ), where ω represents the frequency of the phonon mode mediating the electron pairing, and λ is the electronphonon dimensionless parameter representing the pairing strength. Because the electron-phonon coupling is proportional to the DOS at the Fermi level, a peaked DOS is to be a crucial factor in enhancing T c 