The Li2SiO3 compound, a ternary electrolyte compound of Lithium-ion based batteries, exhibits unique geometric and band structures, an atom-dominated energy spectrum, charge densities distributions, atom and orbital-projected density of states, and strong optical responses. The state-of-the-art analysis, based on an ab-initio simulation, have successfully confirmed the concise physical/chemical picture and the orbital bonding in Li-O and Si-O bonds. Additionally, the unusual optical response behavior includes a large red shift of the onset frequency due to the extremely strong excitonic effect, the polarizations of optical properties along three-directions, 22 optical excitations structures and the most prominent plasmon mode in terms of the dielectric functions, energy loss functions, absorption coefficients and reflectance spectra. The close connections of electronic and optical properties can identify a specific orbital hybridization for each distinct excitation channel. The developed theoretical framework will be very appropriate for fully comprehending the diverse phenomena of cathode/electrolyte/anode materials in ion-based batteries. Lithium-ion based batteries (LIBs) are one of the main-stream materials in basic science and play important roles in life and technology since they have many outstanding properties namely low cost, lightweight, long lifetime, rapid charging/discharging, and work with a voltage of the order of 4V with specific energy ranging between 100 Whkg -1 and 150 Whkg -1 However, recent commercial LIBs with liquid electrolytes contain potential security risks concerning volatilization, flammability, and explosion. Currently, experimental and theoretical studies evidence that secondary batteries using solid electrolytes would overcome these safety issues. Additionally, the battery cell design with the solid states would be more simplified, providing a wider electrochemical window than liquid ones Furthermore, recent studies also indicate that the Li2SiO3 compound also has been actively investigated as a luminescent material Up till now, Lithium metasilicate has been successfully synthesized by various methods respectively. Regarding the optical responses, photoluminescence, absorption, and transmission measurement have been done conducted On the other hand, in spite of the previous theoretical investigations that have investigated the electronic properties, transport mechanisms and the optical properties of the Li2SiO3 compound In this Letter, the theoretical framework, which is established on the significant orbital hybridizations, is utilized to examine the crucial features in electrolyte materials of Li + related batteries. This strategy is based on the density functional theory calculation on the optimized geometric structure with position-dependent chemical bonding, the atom dominated energy spectrum at various energy ranges, the spatial charge distribution due to different orbitals, and the atom-and orbital-projected density of states associated with the overlap of orbitals. The specific orbital hybridizations will be used to interpret the onset of the optical frequency, stable excitonic states, a lot of prominent absorption structures, a very strong plasmon mode in terms of the dielectric functions, energy loss functions, absorption coefficients, and reflectance spectra under the distinct electric polarization. The predictions in this work require highly-resolved experimental measurements. We have used the density functional theory (DFT) method via the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) In this paper, the optical properties of the Li2SiO3 compound have been investigated by adopting the method of Rohlfing and Louie In this Letter, we have chosen to investigate the electronic and optical properties of the Li2SiO3 compound. This solid-state electrolyte crystallizes in an orthorhombic structure with space group [Cmc21] (Fig. The unusual physical/chemical environment is generated by the complex orbital hybridizations and directly reflected in the electronic structure. To examine this property, the energy spectrum along high symmetry points (Fig. Additionally, band edge-states which are the extreme or saddle points in the energy-wave-vector, are situated at the highly symmetric points and the other wave vector between them. These critical points in the energy spectrum will create strong van Hove singularities and therefore are responsible for the prominent peaks in the optical absorption spectrum. Very interestingly, the highest occupied state and the lowest unoccupied state, respectively, are located at the Z and Γ points, leading to a wide indirect insulator gap of 8.4 eV. This indirect band gap is located very close to the HSE06 calculated band gap In addition to the band structures, the atom dominated-energy spectrum also provides partly Following the absorption of a photon with suitable energy, an electron will be vertically excited from an occupied to unoccupied states. The single-particle excitation spectrum can be described by using the linear Kubo formula , where the first part,|e⟨vk|v|ck⟩| 2 is the square of the electric dipole moment, which is responsible for the strength of the excitation peaks, and the second part, δ(ω -(E ck -E vk )), is the joined of the density of states, which corresponds to the available excitation transition channels. In addition to the independent single-particle excitations, the bound state of the electron-hole pair, or so-called exciton is formed through the mutual Coulomb interaction between excited electrons and holes. Under a sufficiently strong attractive interaction, this quasi-particle may be stable enough against collisions with a phonon. The tightly bound exciton is usually observed in large gap materials, strongly affecting the main feature of the optical excitation, and closely related to the critical orbital hybridizations. The physics of the selective optical absorption and the effect of the robust exciton are the main study focus of the current work. As direct consequence of the electromagnetic (EM) wave absorption, the dielectric function is complex and provides very important information for comprehending the optical transition mechanisms, in which, the prominent responses are due to the electronic excitation and therefore, strongly related to the orbital hybridization. As presented in The real part ε 1 (ω) of the dielectric function is related to the imaginary part ε 2 (ω) through the Kramers-Kronig relationship Within the inactive region, the real part is weakly dependent on the energy. As an example, the background dielectric constants, ε 1 (0), are about 1.9-2.0 for the x-, y-and z-directions and almost stay dispersionless for frequencies less or equal to the optical gap, through which, the low and the vanishing range of absorption coefficients could be identified. Contrarily, during the excitation events, the real part is very sensitive to a change of the photon energy. Very interestingly, at some frequencies, the real part almost vanishes. The simultaneous existence of the zero points of the real part with very weak single-particle transitions indicated corresponds to the weak damping of the plasmon resonances (discussed in detail in Fig. The energy loss function (ELF), being defined as | As we mentioned before, the zero points in the real part, ε 1 (ω), is also one way for explaining the coherent behavior of the free electrons. However, due to the combination with the remarkable imaginary ε 2 (ω) part at certain zero points, the prominent peaks in the ELF may be better in this In addition to the geometric structures, the measurement of other features, such as electronic and optical properties require high-resolution techniques. For example, the density of states near the Fermi level can be tested by Scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS). Unfortunately, this method might only be suitable for a thin-film sample because of the weak quantum current. Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) is utilized for examination of the occupied energy band structure. Apparently, the complicated orbital hybridizations in Li2SiO3 would create a daunting challenge in the examination of the energy subbands. Very interestingly, the rich optical properties of the Li2SiO3 compound, such as the onset of excitonic peaks, a lot of prominent absorption structures, and the strongest coherent excitation mode at ω p > 16.5 eV could be obtained by various optical measurements. For example, by combining the absorption, reflectance or transmission measurements with Kramers-Kronig relationship, the frequency-dependent optical excitations could be verified. We have performed first-principles calculations of the geometric, electronic properties and exitonic effect on optical spectrum of Lithium metasilicate. Under this state-of-the-art analysis, a concise physical/chemical picture and the crucial characteristics of the electrolyte in Li + related materials are achieved, through which the diversified essential properties of cathode/electrolyte/anode materials in ion-related materials in general could be fully understood. Lithium metasilicate exhibits special properties, a large Moire cell with extremely non-uniform physical/chemical environments, wide-indirect insulator gap, a significant spatial charge distribution generated by the orbital hybridizations, and atom-/orbital-projected density of states. Consequently, the distinct orbital hybridization related to the optical response could be identified. The outstanding optical properties involve the un-isotropic optical behaviors under three electronic dipole directions, the robust excitonic states with a largely reduced optical gap (E 