We report the detailed analysis of specific heat [CP(T)] and ac-susceptibility for magnetically frustrated Sr2-xLaxCoNbO6 (x = 0-1) double perovskites to understand low temperature complex magnetic interactions and their evolution with x. Interestingly, the observed Schottky anomaly in the x 0.4 samples shifts gradually towards higher temperature with magnetic field as well as x, and the analysis reveal the persistence of the discrete energy states in these samples resulting from the spin-orbit coupling and octahedral distortion. Moreover, the extracted values of Landé gfactor indicate the existence of high-spin state Co 3+ ions close to non-magnetic low-spin state. The specific heat data show the λ-type anomaly for the x 0.6 samples due to evolution of the long range antiferromagnetic ordering. Our analysis of low temperature CP(T) data for the x 0.6 samples demonstrate the 3D isotropic Heisenberg antiferromagnetic (AFM) interactions and the temperature induced second order AFM-paramagnetic phase transition. More interestingly, we demonstrate the presence of the free Co 2+ like Kramers doublet ground state in the x =1 sample. Further, the ac susceptibility and time evolution of the magnetization data reveal the low temperature cluster-glass like behavior in the x = 0-0.4 samples, where spin-spin correlation strength decreases with x. Frustrated antiferromagnetic (AFM) insulators have attracted great interest due to their peculiar magnetic ground states namely spin glass, cluster glass, spin liquid, spin ice etc., unlike the conventional long range antiferromagnets In this direction, the Co based oxides have been extensively studied due to the various possible oxidation and spin states of Co, which give rise to the exotic magnetic ground states In this regard, Co-Nb systems are of particular interest as Co 3+ -Nb 5+ lies at the border line of the phase diagram of ordered-disordered structures due to their moderate ionic and valence mismatch (∆V = 2, ∆r ≈0.06 Å), whereas Co 2+ -Nb 5+ lies largely towards the ordered structure (∆V = 3, ∆r ≈0.06 Å) Therefore, in order to systematically understand the effect of B-site ordering on the geometrical frustration and hence the magnetic ground state, we present the detailed analysis of specific heat data of the Sr 2-x La x CoNbO 6 (x = 0-1) samples, which have not been explored before. We observe a Schottky anomaly peak in the x 0.4 samples due to the fine splitting (spinorbit coupling and octahedral distortion) of the crystal field states of Co 3+ ions, which gradually shift towards high temperature with x as well as magnetic field. This indicates an increase in the splitting of the responsible energy states in either case. For the x 0.6 samples the specific heat curves show clear λ-type peak due to evolution of the AFM ordering as a consequence of the increased concentration of Co 2+ ions. Further, the shift of the λ-peak to the lower temperature and a reduction in the peak jump with the magnetic field clearly indicate a second order phase transition for the x 0.6 samples. This is supported by the absence of the thermal hysteresis in the C P (T) curves recorded in heating and cooling modes. Moreover, the analysis of the Schottky anomaly in case of the x 0.4 samples, and calculated values of magnetic entropy and λ-like peak jump in case of the x 0.6 samples indicate the presence of the discrete energy levels in these samples due to spin-orbit coupling and octahedral distortion. Also, the obtained values of the Landé g-factor indicate the presence of the HS state Co 3+ close to the non-magnetic LS state in the x 0.4 samples. Further, the detailed analysis of field cooled thermo-remanent magnetization and ac susceptibility data demonstrate the low temperature cluster-glass behavior in the x 0.4 samples, where the inter-cluster and spin-spin interaction strength decrease with x. Polycrystalline samples of Sr 2-x La x CoNbO 6 (x = 0-1) were synthesized in single phase by solid-state route using stoichiometric amounts of SrCO 3 , Co 3 O 4 , Nb 2 O 5 , La 2 O 3 and final sintering at 1300 0 C, more details of preparation and characterization can be found in In Fig. The close agreement between the experimental ∆C P (10.0 J/mole-K) and the predicted value for the S=1/2 system in equation 1 indicate the persistence of the single Co 2+ ion like discrete energy levels with a ground state doublet in these samples suggests the presence of the short-range magnetic correlations above the T N , which is a typical feature of the magnetically frustrated systems Note that the measured specific heat in the present case can be mainly comprised of the lattice specific heat due to phonons (C latt ), electronic specific heat due to conduction electrons (C el ), magnetic specific heat due to exchange interaction between the spins (C mag ), and Schottky type anomaly due to the closely spaced electronic energy levels of Co cations (C S ) as well as hyperfine splitting due to interaction between electronic and non-zero nuclear spins (I=7/2) of 59 Co 3+ (C hyp ), i.e., C P (T) = C latt + C el + C mag + C S + C hyp . We first analyze the high temperature (from 30 K to 300 K) specific heat data, as shown in Fig. where m is the fractional contribution of the Debye model in the total lattice heat capacity, C V(Debye) is the Debye lattice specific heat at constant volume, given as and C V(Einstein) is the Einstein specific heat capacity at constant volume, given as Here we use single Debye (θ D ) and Einstein (θ E ) temperatures due to acoustic and optical phonons, respectively. The black solid lines in Fig. where k B and D(E F ) are the Boltzman's constant and density of states at the Fermi energy for both the spin directions, respectively where ρ is the concentration of the contributing magnetic sites, and E i and g i are the energy and degeneracy of the shows the specific heat of the x = 0-0.4 samples plotted as C P /T vs T on the semi-log scale to clearly represent the low temperature (1.8-20 K) behavior. A two level Schottky contribution used for the Co 3+ ions in case of LaCoO 3 Here, our analysis suggest that the spin-orbit triplet of ), causing the octahedral distortion, as also evident from the XRD and Raman spectroscopic measurements reported in For the detailed analysis of the Schottky peaks at low temperatures, we measured the high resolution specific heat data from 2 K to 30 K at different applied magnetic fields up to μ 0 H = 9 Tesla, as the C P /T vs T plots are presented (2-20 K) in Figs. dT, where T 1 and T 2 are the lower and upper temperatures of interest. The S mag curves are shown on the right scale of Figs. It is vital to investigate the nature of low temperature AFM ordering observed in the x 0.6 samples, and therefore we present high resolution C P (T) data in Figs. To further confirm the order of magnetic phase transition in these samples, in Figs. Here, this peculiar behavior indicates the transformation from 2D to 3D AFM spin wave ordering with increase in the La concentration from x = 0.6 to 1, which is possibly due to the inclusion of the Schottky anomaly at the low temperatures as a result of the HS Co 3+ ions in the x = 0.6 and 0.8 samples. This is also evident from the shape of the low temperature C P curves of the x 0.6 samples [see inset (a1) of Fig. where t = (T-T N )/T N is the reduced temperature and B, C, and E ± are the adjustable parameters. The superscripts + and -on A and E in equation 5 represent their values for T > T N and T < T N , respectively. The linear term is the background contribution to the specific heat and last term is the anomalous contribution to the specific heat, where factor within parentheses represent the scaling correction The magnetization and magnetocaloric studies show the low temperature mixed FM and AFM interactions in the x 0.4 samples where M 0 , M SG , t r , η are the FM and spin glass components of the magnetic moment, mean relaxation time, and relaxation rate, respectively. The best fit curves for the x 0.4 samples are shown by the solid lines in Figs. The low temperature spin dynamics in these samples can be further investigated by analyzing the frequency dependence of T f following the critical slowing down model, i.e., using the equation below where τ is the relaxation time corresponding to the excitation frequency f (i.e. τ =1/f ), τ 0 is the characteristic relaxation time for a single spin flip, T SG is the freezing temperature in the limit of zero excitation frequency where τ diverges, and zν is the dynamical critical exponent, which is related to the spin-spin correlation length (ξ) as ξ = (T f /T SG -1) -ν and τ ∼ ξ z where k B is the Boltzmann's constant, ω 0 is the characteristic frequency (ω 0 =2π/τ 0 ), T 0 is the Vogel-Fulcher temperature, which is the measure of the strength of the inter-cluster interactions, and E a is the average thermal activation energy. Here, we fix ω 0 =2π/τ 0 for all the samples and fit the data keeping T 0 and E a as the free parameters. The slope and intercept of T f vs 1/ln(ω 0 /ω) plots give E a /k B and T 0 , respectively, as shown in the Figs. It is important to note that the degree of antisite disorder in these samples decreases with increase in the La concentration, as qualitatively estimated by refining the occupancy of B-site cations at their respective Wyckoff positions during the Rietveld refinement of the x-ray diffraction data [61]) due to broad peak in C P (H,T) curves [see inset of Fig. In conclusion, we study the low temperature complex magnetic interactions in Sr 2-x La x CoNbO 6 (x = 0-1) double perovskites by performing detailed measurements and analysis of temperature and magnetic field dependent specific heat C P (T) and ac susceptibility. We found the high value of Debye temperature from the analysis of C P (T) data for all the samples. Our analysis of the temperature and field dependent behavior of Schottky anomaly present in the x 0.4 samples indicate the presence of the spin-orbit triplet of HS Co 3+ just above the LS state and the extracted value of the Landé g-factor (≈3) discard the presence of the IS state of Co 3+ in this series of the samples. The specific heat data show the evolution of λ-type anomaly in the x 0.6 samples and detailed analysis indicates the second order AFM-PM phase transition and having 3D Heisenberg like isotropic magnetic interactions below the T N . The calculated value of the magnetic entropy and peak jump in C P (T) curves in case of the x = 1 sample indicate the presence of the free Co 2+ like Kramers doublet ground state. We suggest that the persistence of these discrete atomic energy states in these compounds is a valid evidence against the long-standing over simplified assumption of the complete quenching of the orbital angular moment in 3d complexes, and this will lead to the much deeper insight into the complex magnetic interactions and electronic structure of such compounds. Moreover, the ac susceptibility and TRM measurements for the x 0.4 samples show the low temperature cluster-glass like behavior owing to the B-site disorders, where inter-cluster interactions and spin-spin interaction strength within the glassy clusters decreases with the La substitution. FIG. 3. (a-c) 3+