The quasi-static anisotropic permittivity parameters of electrically insulating gallium oxide (β -Ga 2 O 3 ) were determined by terahertz spectroscopy. Polarization-resolved frequency domain spectroscopy in the spectral range from 200 GHz to 1 THz was carried out on bulk crystals along different orientations. Principal directions for permittivity were determined along crystallographic axes c, and b, and reciprocal lattice direction a * . No significant frequency dispersion in the real part of dielectric permittivity was observed in the measured spectral range. Our results are in excellent agreement with recent radio-frequency capacitance measurements as well as with extrapolations from recent infrared measurements of phonon mode and high frequency contributions, and close the knowledge gap for these parameters in the terahertz spectral range. Our results are important for applications of β -Ga 2 O 3 in high-frequency electronic devices. Single crystalline monoclinic structure beta gallium oxide (β -Ga 2 O 3 ), an ultra-wide bandgap semiconductor with direct band gap reported in the range from 4.8 eV to 5.04 eV, Due to the monoclinic symmetry, the anisotropy of β -Ga 2 O 3 requires careful consideration of lattice directions, and unambiguous assignment of lattice axes and coordinate systems. In general, the dielectric tensor possess four independent complex-valued elements, and cannot be diagonalized for all wavelengths due to frequency dependence of the permittivity. Optical axes, which describe directions within a given crystal along which light can propagate maintaining its polarization, change angular orientation in spectral regions where the permittivity undergoes dispersion in monoclinic crystal systems. This phenomena is also known as rotation of optical axes. This was recently demonstrated for the IR and FIR range for β -Ga 2 O 3 , where all 4 tensor components show strong dispersion behavior across the phonon mode spectral region. Figure where expressed by a second-rank tensor 16 where elements ε xx , ε xy , ε yy , and ε zz are generally independent functions of frequency. With the coordinates defined in Fig. We use matrix algebra approaches to calculate the Mueller matrix elements for arbitrary anisotropic permittivity configurations, as explained in detail previously. THz-GSE measurements were carried out at 40 • and 60 • angle of incidence in reflection configuration on Sample A and Sample B, wherein the samples were also rotated to mul- The sample thickness for the fits in (a) and (b) was found to be 515 μm while that in (c) is taken to be 656 μm tiple azimuth orientations as described in Ref. Figure Figure All permittivity values obtained here are listed in Table . I and compared with previous RF and FIR investigation results. Our results are consistent among our different techniques and compare very well with the previous electrical and optical methods. The RF measurements report permittivity values which correspond to the reciprocal directions of the principal lattice planes, and (100), (010), and (001) planes, respectively, a ⋆ , b ⋆ , and c ⋆ , were investigated. Some of us reported previously on FIR-IR GSE analysis introducing an eigendielectric polarization model for phonon mode contributions to best-match model parameterize the four functions of the permittivity tensor. From the extrapolation in this model towards zero frequency, the DC permittivity values were reported. It is noted here that due to a misprint, values reported in Ref. 16 for permittivity parameters corresponding to a and c ⋆ were accidentally switched, and are reported correctly here. We also include values corresponding to a ⋆ and c, which change very little and within the uncertainty limits. In Table In conclusion, we determined the dielectric permittivity along principal lattice directions and directions perpendicular to principal planes for β -Ga 2 O 3 for 200 GHz to 1 THz. In this spectral range we do not observe any significant dispersion in the real part of the dielectric permittivity. Our results are in good agreement with recent RF and FIR-IR measurements. Our data can be used to predict the permittivity along any direction within the highly anisotropic crystal. The data reported here will be of importance for electronic device designs and simulations involving β -Ga 2 O 3 . Science on Functional Materials at Linköping University, Faculty Grant SFO Mat LiU No. 2009-00971. This work was also partly performed in the frame-work of GraFOx, a Leibniz-Science Campus partially funded by the Leibniz Association -Germany. M. S. acknowledges the University of Nebraska Foundation and the J. A. Woollam Foundation for financial support. The authors thank John Blevins (Air Force Research Lab) for providing the Synoptics (010) β -Ga 2 O 3 bulk substrates used in the measurements. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. Given the multiple reflection scenario resulting from the 'Air/GO' and 'GO/Air' interfaces the ABCD matrix formalism was adopted to model the measured Fabry-Perot oscillations: where φ GO = n GO ωd GO c provides the propagation phase of the terahertz wave along a certain direction, n GO is the refractive index along a given direction, ω is the angular frequency, c is the speed of light, d GO is the sample thickness and, Z GO = Z o n GO where Z o is the free-space impedance (Z o = 377 Ω). The following formula represents the final (complex) terahertz transmission through the substrate Equations ( where 'ψ' is the in-plane angle between the E-field polarization and the sample's crystal axes. C. Mueller matrix data of (010) Fe doped substrate Figure Additionally, in Figure 