Aflatoxin M1 (AFM1) is a carcinogenic compound commonly found in milk in excess of the WHO permissible limit, especially in developing countries. Currently, state-of-the-art tests for detecting AFM1 in milk include chromatographic systems and enzyme-linked-immunosorbent assays. Although these tests provide fair accuracy and sensitivity however, they require trained laboratory personnel, expensive infrastructure, and many hours for producing final results. Optical sensors leveraging spectroscopy have a tremendous potential of providing an accurate, real time, and specialists-free AFM1 detector. Despite this, AFM1 sensing demonstrations using optical spectroscopy are still immature. Here, we demonstrate an optical sensor that employs the principle of cavity attenuated phase shift spectroscopy in optical fiber cavities for rapid AFM1 detection in aqueous solutions at 1550 nm. The sensor constitutes a cavity built by two fiber Bragg gratings. We splice a tapered fiber of < 10 μm waist inside the cavity as a sensing head. For ensuring specific binding of AFM1 in a solution, the tapered fiber is functionalized with DNA aptamers followed by validation of the conjugation via FTIR, TGA, and EDX analyses. We then detect AFM1 in a solution by measuring the phase shift between a sinusoidally modulated laser input and the sensor output at resonant frequencies of the cavity. Our results show that the sensor has the detection limit of 20 ng/L (20 ppt) which is well below both the US and the European safety regulations. We anticipate that the present work will lead towards a rapid and accurate AFM1 sensor, especially for low-resource settings. The feed of animals is often contaminated by a specific fungus which results in contamination of the produced milk with aflatoxin M1 Currently, well-established methods of effective detection of AFM1 include thin-layer chromatography, high performance liquid chromatography, and immunoassays such as enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay In one of the promising approaches, researchers utilized long range SPR in conjunction with fluorophore-labeled AFM1 molecules for demonstrating a highly sensitive and rapid sensor Cavity attenuated phase shift spectroscopy (CAPS) was first developed by Herbelin et al. in early 1980s for determining reflectivity of mirrors in free space cavities where the minus sign indicates that the cavity output lags the input. The constant monitoring of φ then gives continuous information about τ and consequently information about any attenuation events inside the cavity. CAPS and the one of its well-established variant, cavity ring down spectroscopy (CRDS), have been successfully applied in gaseous phase for various applications using free space cavities CAPS and any of its variants have never been utilized for detection of AFM1 either in free space or fiber based structures. Moreover, in all laser based fiber platforms utilizing CAPS, generally the Pound-Drever-Hall (PDH) technique is required for parking the laser for continuous monitoring of the phase shift. Here, we demonstrate an optical fiber sensor that not only utilizes the principle of CAPS for the first time to detect AFM1 but also involves a simpler experimental setup that does not require the use of the PDH technique. We show that our sensor has the detection limit of 20 ng/L (20 ppt) which is lower than the limits imposed by US and European authorities. The organization of paper is such that, Section 2 gives detailed experimental procedures which include surface functionalization protocol and the sensor architecture. It is followed by Section 3 which discusses results of the demonstrated sensor. Finally, Section 4 concludes the paper along with some suggestions for future work. In this section, we discuss various steps involved in developing the AFM1 sensor. For developing the sensing head, we taper an optical fiber to expose its core for interaction of the optical wave with an analyte. The tapered fiber is fabricated by pulling an SMF-28 fiber with computer controlled motorized stages, while simultaneously heating the fiber with a butane flame. We fix the fabricated tapered fiber on a U-shaped piece of copper clad printed circuit board (PCB) using the nichrome soldering and then safely remove it from the tapering setup. The use of alloy to fix the tapered fiber is critical as generally glues or epoxies malfunction with the application of abrasive chemicals like piranha during the functionalization steps. We adapt the the surface functionalization protocol reported in Ref. In the present work, we first anneal the U-shaped copper PCB containing the silica tapered optical fiber at 1050 • C for 1.5 hours for removing any organic contaminants from the tapered fiber. For hydroxylation, we orient the U-shaped PCB in such a way that the fiber is dipped into a curved petri dish containing the piranha solution. We then reperat the same procedure for silanization of the fiber with 0.01%, V/V solution of 3-glycidoxypropyl methyldiethoxy silane prepared in anhydrous-toluene. The petri dish is then heated at 60 • C for a period of 10 min. The fiber is then immersed into 100 μM solution of a DNA aptamer having one end terminated with the amino group, 5AmMC6 /GTTGGGCACGT-GTTGTCTCTCTGTGTCTCGTGCCCTTCGCTAGGCCCACA, maintained in a phosphate buffer having pH of 8. All chemicals used in the functionlaization process are purchased from Sigma Aldritch Inc. USA except the aptamer which is obtained from IDT integrated DNA technologies Inc. USA. The initial implementation of the protocol is done on a glass slide since its surface properties are very similar to a silica fiber. The FTIR results presented in Fig. In the second phase, the protocol is implemented on a non-tapered SMF-28 fiber. The thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) for the processed fiber in Fig. The schematics of our sensor for conducting CAPS measurements with fiber cavities is shown in Fig. The sensor source is a 1550nm continuous wave laser diode that is purchased from Eblana Photonics (EP1550-0-NLW-B26-100FM) and operated with Thorlabs CLD1015 controller. For initiating the CAPS measurements, we sinusoidally modulate (4 MHz, 1 V pp ) the laser using an external Mach-Zehnder modulator (Sumitomo Osaka T.MZH1.5-10PD-ADC). For scanning the cavity resonances, the laser is current tuned continuously using a triangular wave (5 mHz, 100 mVpp). The simultaneous current and amplitude modulations allow us to conduct CAPS measurements at resonant peaks without needing the PDH technique A representative CAPS measurement for an FBG based cavity is shown in Fig. where, R 1 and R 2 are reflectivities of the two FBGs, c is the speed of light, n is the SMF-28 fiber effective index, l is the cavity length, ω o is a resonant frequency of the cavity, and ω is the laser scan frequency. At a resonant frequency, ω = ω o , Eqs. ( (2) that |E op | is always maximum whenever ω = ω o -ω m ≈ ω o . In the case of Eq. (3), it is clear that | tan φ| is maximum whenever ω > (ω o -ω m ≈ ω o ) within a cavity resonance peak. This results in red-shift and blue-shift of a |φ max |, with respect to a resonance amplitude peak, for the upward and downward frequency scans, respectively. The AFM1 solution, derived from the aspergillus flavus, is purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Inc. USA. We then dilute it in DI water for preparing its various concentrations. We start our measurements with DI water followed by a known AFM1 concentration solution. We inject liquid samples into the fluidic cell by using a common syringe. After recording CAPS measurements with each AFM1 sample, we rinse the fluidic cell along with the tapered fiber first with a glycerine based buffer solution and then afterwards with DI water. This rinsing step removes any AFM1 binding event and consequently the functionalized tapered fiber is recycled for a new measurement. The phase shift data collected from the lock-in amplifier is analyzed in MATLAB. We subtract the maximum and minimum phase of each phase peak (representative data shown by circles in Fig. From these results we can see that our demonstrated CAPS sensor has the sensitivity and detection limit of 0.029 o /ppt and 20 ppt, respectively. The noise in the sensor is measured by taking the laser out of the cavity resonance and continuously monitor the phase data coming from the sensor. The noise histogram data along with the normal probability distribution fit is shown in Fig. The concentration in an unknown sample can be estimated from the response curve accordingly to the phase observed for it. We also see that as the AFM1 concentration increases, the phase decreases. This trend is due to the increase in the cavity losses caused by the AFM1 binding events. We also try to measure similar AFM1 concentrations with a non-functionalized tapered fiber and find no phase changes. This indicates that functionalizing the sensing head is critical for detecting lower concentrations. In this work, we demonstrate the first application of CAPS to fiber cavities for detecting AFM1 in a solution. The experimental results obtained depict AFM1 detection as low as 20 ng/L which is well below the the safety limits laid down by both the US and the European regulatory authorities. In comparison to traditional and previous AFM1 sensors, the demonstrated sensor modality offers reduction in detection time and cost, minimum sample pre-treatment, decrease in system complexity, lower fabrication challenges, and increased potential for portability. There are various future directions for improving the present work. These include testing with actual milk samples, introducing temperature controlled environments for the FBGs and fluidic cell, improving and optimizing the tapering of fibers for enhancing the sensor sensitivity. We anticipate that the demonstrated sensing setup with alteration to the surface chemistry protocol will lead to an inexpensive, real-time and reliable optical sensor for numerous applications in food security, health, environmental, and agricultural sectors especially in low-resource settings.