Growth of two-dimensional van der Waals layered single-crystal (SC) films is highly desired to manifest intrinsic material sciences and unprecedented devices for industrial applications. While wafer-scale SC hexagonal boron nitride film has been successfully grown, an ideal growth platform for diatomic transition metal dichalcogenide (TMdC) film has not been established to date. Here, we report the SC growth of TMdC monolayers in a centimeter scale via atomic sawtooth gold surface as a universal growth template. Atomic tooth-gullet surface is constructed by the one-step solidification of liquid gold, evidenced by transmission-electronmicroscopy. Anisotropic adsorption energy of TMdC cluster, confirmed by density-functional calculations, prevails at the periodic atomic-step edge to yield unidirectional epitaxial growth of triangular TMdC grains, eventually forming the SC film, regardless of Miller indices. Growth using atomic sawtooth gold surface as a universal growth template is demonstrated for several TMdC monolayer films, including WS2, WSe2, MoS2, MoSe2/WSe2 heterostructure, and W1-xMoxS2 alloy. Our strategy provides a general avenue for the SC growth of diatomic van der Waals heterostructures in a wafer scale, to further facilitate the applications of TMdCs in post silicon technology. Two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) layered materials, including graphene, transition metal dichalcogenide (TMdC), and hexagonal boron nitride (hBN), have been extensively investigated in various fields owing to their unusual physical and chemical properties for developing unprecedented electronics, valleytronics, twistronics, spintronics, and catalysts. The key to achieving SC TMdC growth is to construct the atomic sawtooth Au surface, to serve as a universal growth template, consisting of periodic tooth-gullet step edges to accommodate the self-assembly of unidirectional TMdC grains (Figure The chemical inertness of Au and negligible solubility of metal and chalcogen atoms in Au film make the epitaxial growth of monolayer TMdC film possible. The grain boundary in 60° triangular region at the junction between two merged WS2 grains is carefully analyzed (Figure The absence of GB lines is analyzed in a macroscopic scale via oxidation in air at 350 °C. Coherent triangular WS2 grains are consistently obtained, despite the possible generation of several other Miller indices in addition to the main (236) and (2,10,25) surfaces at fixed ( Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) image of the WS2 film grown on, for example, an Au (221) surface, shows aligned hexagonal S atoms along its regular periodic linear features (Figure The atomic sawtooth Au surface can serve as a universal growth template for synthesizing other SC TMdC monolayers, lateral heterostructure, and alloy such as WSe2, MoS2, MoSe2/WSe2 lateral heterostructure, and W1-xMoxS2 alloy. SC WSe2 was grown with a supply of Se precursor at 780-820 °C under growth conditions similar to that used to produce SC WS2 films (see Experimental Section and Figure To strengthen the growth platform, lateral MoSe2/WSe2 heterostructure was prepared using different growth conditions. Se pellets were vaporized with elevating temperature after spincoating of liquid Mo precursor (see Experimental Section and Figure We propose an atomic sawtooth Au surface as a universal growth platform for SC TMdC Precursor preparation: Prior to chemical-vapor-deposition (CVD) growth, transition metalprecursor solutions (sodium molybdate dihydrate (Na2MoO42H2O, ≥ 99.5 %, Sigma Aldrich) for Mo and sodium tungstate dihydrate (Na2WO42H2O, ≥ 99 %, Sigma Aldrich) for W, with 2 wt% in acetylacetone) were spin-coated onto atomic sawtooth Au substrates with 2500 rpm for 60 sec. were evaporated at 360 °C in a two-zone furnace system. Growth procedures of various single-crystal (SC) transition metal-dichalcogenide (TMdC) monolayers: Metal precursor-coated Au substrate was loaded into the quartz tube and purged by high purity Ar (99.999 %) with a flow rate of 500 sccm for 15 min. The furnace was ramped to the growth temperatures (750-880 °C) and maintained with a supply of chalcogen precursor during the growth of TMdCs for 5-20 minutes. After growth, furnace was naturally cooled down to the room temperature. The overall procedure was performed under Ar and H2 atmosphere with flow rates of 350-500 and 0-20 sccm, respectively. Coherent WS2 grains were grown on W precursor-coated Au/W substrate by supplying (NH4)2S at a flow rate of 2-5 sccm at 800-880 °C for 5-20 min. Ar gas was used during the entire growth procedure. For the growth of MoSe2/WSe2 heterostructure, triangular MoSe2 grains were first grown on Mo precursor-coated Au/W substrate by supplying Se vapors while the temperature was increased to 800 °C in a two-zone furnace. The MoSe2/WSe2 heterostructure was subsequently grown with a supply of W source from W foil underneath the Au foil via sublimation of native tungsten oxides at 800 °C for 10 min. Computational details: Adsorption of W3S6 cluster on the various Au facets were studied by DFT calculations using VASP. The revised PBE exchange-correlation functional and PAW method were used. Periodic supercell geometries were constructed to model (100), ( 