Co-rich Co1-xMnx alloys have hcp or fcc disordered phases and those ferromagnetic orderings are significantly deteriorated with increasing Mn concentration x in bulk. On the other hand, those metastable bcc phases show properties attractive to spintronics, e.g., high tunnel magnetoresistance (TMR) ratio of more than 200% (600%) at 300 K (10 K) in magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJs) with the x = 0.25 bcc alloy electrodes [Kunimatsu et al., Appl. Phys. Express 13, 083007 (2020)]. Here, we report systematic study of structure and magnetism for epitaxial thin films as well as the TMR effect in MgO(001)-barrier MTJs with electrodes comprising those bcc films. The single phase bcc Co1-xMnx(001) films were pseudomorphically grown on Cr(001) for 0.14 < x < 0.50 with a sputtering technique. The magnetization was larger than that of pure Co for x = 0.14-0.25 and deceased with further increasing x. This behavior mainly stemmed from the composition dependence of magnetic moment of Mn that exceeded 2 μB at the maximum, unveiled by X-ray magnetic circular dichroism. Correspondingly, within the range of 0.25 < x < 0.37, the TMR ratio decreased from 620% (229%) to 450% (194%) at 10 K (300 K) as x increased. We discussed the relationship between the magnetism and high TMR ratio with different x with the aid of the ab-initio band structure calculations. A magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ) exhibits tunnel magnetoresistance (TMR) effect Most of the previous works focused on bcc FeCo(B) One candidate is the metastable bcc Co1-xMnx We reported 10-nm-thick bcc films with x = 0.25 fabricated by sputtering whose saturation magnetization, ~ 1.6 MA/m, was slightly larger than that of fcc or hcp Co, ~ 1.4 MA/m In this article, we systematically study structures and magnetism of the metastable bcc Co1-xMnx disordered alloys epitaxial thin films as well as the TMR effect in those MgO(001)barrier MTJs with different x to deeply understand the physics related to the TMR effect in the MTJs. In particular, we employed the X-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) to probe microscopic magnetism, and we discuss relationship between the magnetism and the TMR effect, based on the ab-initio band structure calculation of the bulk alloys. All samples were deposited on MgO(001) single crystal substrates using a magnetron sputtering under a base pressure of below 2×10 -7 Pa, similar to the samples in the previous reports The film structures were characterized using x-ray diffraction (XRD) using Cu Kα radiation. Magnetization measurements were performed using a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM). X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and XMCD measurements were performed at BL-7A, High-energy accelerator research organization, Photon Factory (KEK-PF), Japan. The XAS spectra with different helicities were obtained by switching the magnetic fields in the parallel and antiparallel directions along the incident beam. The total-photoelectron-yield mode was adopted by directly detecting the sample current. XAS and XMCD measurements were performed at room temperature. A magnetic field of ±1 T, produced using an electric magnet, was applied along the direction of incident polarized soft X-rays. In order to detect the in-plane magnetic signals, the sample surface normal direction was rotated 60 deg from incident beam and magnetic field ab-initio calculations were carried out using the spin-polarized-relativistic Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker (SPRKKR) method, as implemented in the SPR-KKR program package shows the out-of-plane 2θ-ω XRD patterns for the Co1-xMnx films. The Co film, i.e., x = 0, showed the diffraction peak at ∼ 75 deg in addition to the (002) peak from the Cr buffer and the (002) peak from the MgO substrate, which may be attributed to that from fcc (220) or hcp Figure Figure Figure Figure Figure The evaluated values are shown in Fig. For the coherent tunneling in MgO(001)-barrier MTJs, the TMR ratio is predominantly determined by the spin polarization at the Fermi energy for the energy band with a ∆1 symmetry for magnetic electrodes due to the symmetry filtering effect of MgO(001) Figure Regarding the band dispersion for bcc Co, the Fermi energy is located across the ∆1 band in the majority spin state [Fig. The influence of the ∆5 bands on the TMR effect has been discussed We systematically studied structure and magnetism for epitaxial thin films of the metastable bcc Co1-xMnx as well as the TMR effect in MgO(001)-barrier MTJs with electrodes comprising those films. The XRD analysis clarified that the 10-nm-thick and single phase bcc Co1-xMnx(001) films were grown on Cr(001) in pseudomorphic fashion for 0.14 < x < 0.50. From the XMCD analysis, the magnetic moment of Mn of ~ 2 μB was evaluated at x = 0.14 and those decreased with increasing x. The TEM analysis indicated the coherent epitaxial growth of the MTJs. The TMR ratio decreased with increasing x within the range of 0.25 < x < 0.37, from 620% (229%) to 450% (194%) at 10 K (300 K). We discussed the relationship between the high TMR ratio observed and the spin polarization of the ∆1 band dependent on the substitutionary disorder of the alloy that was predicted from the ab-initio calculations. In addition, we found the large difference in the magnetic moment for Mn obtained from the experiments and first-principles calculations, whose origins and effects on the TMR effect were also discussed. FIG.6. The cross-sectional TEM image for the MTJ with the electrodes of the x = 0.34 films.