Metal reflects electromagnetic waves because of the large conductivity that is responsible for dissipation. During which the waves undergo a 180 • phase change that is independent of the frequency. There is no counterpart material for acoustic waves. Here we show that by using an array of acoustic resonators with a designed high-density dissipative component, an "acoustic metal" can be realised that strongly couples with sound over a wide frequency range not otherwise attainable by conventional means. In particular, we show the acoustic Faraday cage effect that when used as a ring covering an air duct, 99% of the noise can be blocked without impeding the airflow. We further delineate the underlying volume requirement for an acoustic metal based on the constraint of the causality principle. Our findings complement the missing properties of acoustic materials and pave the way to the strong wave-material couplings that are critical for the applications as high-performance audio devices. Large dissipation coefficient does not always lead to effective energy absorption. The best example is metal, which has a large conductivity but reflects the electromagnetic (EM) waves strongly In what follows, Section II presents a "phase diagram" to position the acoustic metal in relation to other acoustic materials as characterised by their impedance. In Section III we describe the design strategy for the acoustic metal, followed by the presentation of experimental results in Section IV. The underlying volume requirement for an acoustic metal, in relation to its effective frequency range, is described in Section V. We conclude with a short recapitulation in Section VI. By denoting the specific acoustic impedance of the air by Z 0 , the displacement velocity on sample's surface equals to 1. Acoustic metal. a, Normalised by the displacement velocity of the incident sound vi, ṽ = v/vi of all the different sample responses forms a circle on the complex plane ṽ = ṽ + iṽ . Most of the solid materials are around the origin with the acoustic foam extending to the centre (the grey region). In contrast, acoustic metals are in the red shaded section in which the reflection is 180 degrees out of phase with the incident wave. Perfect acoustic metal (PAM) is at the limit of ṽ = 2. The colour gradient maps the relevant absorption coefficient. At the green-coloured circumference the absorption is zero. Absorption is maximised at the centre of the circle. b, The absorption as a function of the acoustic conductivity σ (normalised to the inverse of the specific air impedance Z0), plotted along the real axis in a. Amax is at σZ0 = 1. Acoustic conductivity σ → ∞ for PAM. c, Like the metallic mesh shielding the EM waves, the acoustic metals (the structured cavities) covering the inner wall of an air duct (the circular cylinder) can block the sound, indicated here by the blue arrow, without impeding the airflow. the superposition of the particle velocities of the incident and reflected waves, v = p i /Z 0p r /Z 0 . Here, p i and p r are the respective incident and reflected sound wave pressure modulations and the negative sign is due to their opposite propagating directions. Conservation of energy dictates that |p r | = |p i -vZ 0 | ≤ |p i | which corresponds to the dimensionless ṽ = vZ 0 /p i inside a circle of radius 1 on the complex plane ṽ = ṽ + iṽ , |ṽ -1| ≤ 1, as shown in Figure monotonously increases (indicated by the colour gradient) as a function of decreasing radial distance to the centre and reaches the maximum absorption A max at ṽ = 1 (i.e., the impedancematching condition). Most of the solid materials are around the origin while the porous acoustic materials such as foam and wool extend to the centre of the circle along the real axis (the grey region) which is along the real axis in Figure Our strategy is to design an array comprising a large number of resonators within a sub-wavelength scale so that the resonators respond in unison. While the response of each of the resonators can be delineated mathematically by the Lorentzian form, the array as a whole would respond as an acoustic metal as shown below. Consider an array of resonators whose resonance frequencies are uniformly distributed. The oscillatory nature of the individual ε n may tend to cancel each other while, in contrast, the individual σ n are always positive and can accumulate. As a result, the overall permittivity becomes small while the conductivity can increase to a large value that is approximately constant in frequency as desired. Mathematically, the velocity of the nth resonator is given 2. The surface displacement velocity of acoustic metal. a, The averaged dimensionless velocity of the acoustic metal, ṽ = ṽ + i ṽ , plotted as a function of frequency. Within the designed frequency band (region without shading), ṽ → 0 (green) while ṽ (red) is close to the target values (dashed) when σZ0 = 9 and ε = 0. b, On the complex plane, the magnitude of ṽ in the designed frequency band (region with no shading) are noted to be closely distributed around the PAM limit. The red arrow points to the direction of increasing frequency. In both a and b, the solid curves are theoretical predictions from Equation ( by 30 with ω n (f n ) being its resonant frequency(oscillator strength), and β n the damping coefficient. Denoting its surface area by a n , only the averaged v = n a n v n / n a n over all the resonators can couple to the propagating waves, owing to the sub-wavelength nature of the array. Hence p = 2p i -vZ 0 in Equation (3). Together with the definition of v, we obtain an expression similar to Equation (2): In Equation (4) the averaged σ and ε of the composite are defined by Equation (5a) shows that indeed, the averaged σ can accumulate and become large in magnitude whereas the summed terms in Equation (5b) are always opposite in sign between adjacent ω n , hence cancelling each other. For a uniformly distributed ω n each separated from the neighbours by a small δω = ω nω n-1 , we wish to focus on the two parameter f n and β n that are crucial to the acoustic metal design. In the limit of δω → 0, the summation in Equation (5a) becomes an integral that gives f n σ × 2δω n a n /(πa n ). In the following, we design the acoustic metal by targeting σ = 9/Z 0 over a broad frequency band from 290 to 625 Hz. If there are 27 resonators, δω = 12.9 × 2π Hz and f n Z 0 × a n / n a n = 464.4 Hz. Therefore, by choosing β n = 2δω, as shown in Figure We wish to demonstrate the effect of the acoustic metals by realising an acoustic counterpart to the Faraday cage effect that blocks EM waves through a layer of metallic mesh whose pores are smaller than the wavelengths. For simplicity, we consider only one pore of a mesh in practice, designed as a ring covering the inner wall of an air duct as shown in Figure As shown in Figure We have fabricated the designed structure by the stereolithography 3D printing technology. To carry out the measurement, the sample was connected to two circular impedance tubes of the same inner diameter on the two sides as shown in Figure Figures Be noted that our simulations did not consider the airflow in the air duct since the airflow speed is usually only a few percent of the sound speed (wind tunnel being the exception), therefore only has a negligible effect. The above conclusions can be further confirmed experimentally by individually measuring the 27 HRs by blocking the 26 resonators and retrieving the relevant normalised velocity ṽn = v n /v i for the one not blocked. As illustrated by the three examples in Figure The conductivity, σ, of an acoustic metal cannot be arbitrarily large. As proven in Appendix B, it is constrained by the given volume because of the principle of causality where, λ = 2πc/ω the wavelength and for the structures of our design. According to Equation ( in Figure We can experimentally verify Equation ( A useful approximation of Equation ( in which, λ 1(N ) = 2πc/ω 1(N ) are the wavelengths at the lower and upper bounds of the designed frequency band. Take our first sample as an example, σZ 0 = 9 within the band (290,625) Hz, so that 2σZ 0 (λ 1λ N )/π 2 gives an effective length about 1.1 m and, for the duct of cross-sectional area a = 7.85 × 10 -3 m 2 , V 8.64 L that is quite close to the sample's real volume of 7.92 L. We have realised the acoustic counterpart of EM wave's metallic behaviour by integrating an array of HR resonators each with a large dissipative coefficient. Instead of absorbing the acoustic energy, the composite array strongly reflects sounds within an octave (from 290 to 625 Hz). A circular ring of acoustic metal lining the inner wall of an air duct blocks 99% of the noise energy within a distance 1/30 of the longest wavelength, without impeding the airflow. One can therefore expect its application to effectively reduce noise generated by fans and heavy machinery (as shown in Appendix C and the Supplementary demo video). We further delineate the causality constraint on absorption Appendix A: Supplementary Note for the Design Methodology Figure Unlike the Lorentz resonator whose response was always suppressed by the damping mechanism, our proposed acoustic metal can have large damping while simultaneously display large displacement velocity. Here, we will try to visualise this fact by drawing the ṽ of our sample in the phase-diagram, as shown by the top row in Figure On the contrary, if we block all the other 26 resonators and leave only one open (e.g., the 14th one), there is only one term left in the summation in Equation (5a) and the relevant responded velocity has a simple Lorentz-form (as shown in Figure The bottom row of Figure We also wish to show the role of the mode-density in the acoustic metal by a series of numerical examples. Let's start from 20 resonators uniformly distributed in an octave, (ω 1 , 2ω 1 ). Their f n = 2ω 1 a/(19πρca n ) and β = 2/19 × ω 1 so that meet the requirement of a good broadband absorber. Figure The above phenomenon recalls for us an optical analogy in the drying of a drop of ink. As shown in Figure For a pair of symmetrically incident sound waves in the same amplitude and phase, the relevant symmetric reflections from the array are given by Here, we use the superscript + to denote the symmetric feature. Meanwhile, anti-symmetric incidents will not excite the motions of the array, hence the anti-symmetric p - r = -p - i . The scenario of sound coming from one side is the superposition of the symmetric and anti-symmetric scattering processes equally weighted: 19 p i = p + i + p - i and p + i = p - i . Therefore, the transmitted and reflected sounds are given by or, in terms of ṽ, Because there is always half of the energy in the incoming sound cannot be coupled to the objects, the maximum of their absorption coefficient can only be A max = 0.5. To explore the role of causality in acoustic metals, we consider a thought experiment of embedding the sample in an FIG. imaginary medium having the specific impedance Z 0 = 1/σ, the reciprocal of the target acoustic conductivity σ (as shown in Figure with r(δt) = 0 when δt < 0. Therefore, the reflection coefficient as a function of frequency, can be analytically continued into the complex frequency and still be analytic in the upper half-plane. In terms of the wavelength λ = 2πc/ω, that means r(λ) has no poles in the lower half-plane of complex λ but may have zeros. Similar as in Ref. 20, we consider the logarithmic function ln r which is analytic except in the positions, λ n , where r = 0. Such logarithmic singularities can be removed by multiplying the factor (λλ * n )/(λλ n ) with unity amplitude, where, * denotes the complex conjugation. Then for ln r(λ) is analytic with no singularities in the lower halfplane. Therefore, according to the Cauchy's theorem, the integral along the contour in Figure here C ∞ is an lower half-circle with radius tends to infinity. In the long wavelength limit of |λ| → ∞, Where, C∞ dλ = -π 0 iλdγ with λ = |λ|e iγ . Meanwhile, when λ → ∞, the composite was uniformly compressed and expanded under the external pressure p i + p r . According to Hooke's law, p i + p r = κ 0 ∆V /V = iκ 0 v n a n /(ωV ) with κ 0 the static bulk modulus of the composite and V their total volume. On the other hand, since v = (p ip r )/Z 0 = σ(p ip r ), the reflection coefficient can be solved as here κ = ρc 2 denotes the air bulk modulus. Hence, ln r iκ/κ 0 × 4πV /(σρc n a n λ) at the long wavelength limit and For our acoustic metal, according to Equation ( in the current case, Z 0 = 1/σ, and irrelevant to the target σ. Also, if the composite was rigid cavities filled with air as what in the main text, κ 0 = κ, Equation (B9) becomes That gives a lower limit for the volume proportional to σ. To further evaluate the integral in Equation (B14), we assume that the system's averaged acoustic conductivity ideally takes the value of σ within the frequency range (ω 1 , ω N ) and being zero elsewhere. According to the Kramers-Kronig relationship, The substitution of Equation (B15) into Equation (B11) gives with λ 1(N ) = 2πc/ω 1(N ) . Its substitution into Equation (B14) gives The above equation can provide an estimate for the volume of an acoustic metal based only on the knowledge of the target conductivity and bandwidth. Usually, this estimate will be a little bit higher than the volume's actual lower limit, since Equation (5a) cannot so perfectly match the target in practice. The understanding about the causality constraint provides us with a new perspective for the application of noise control. According to Equation (B17), the better blocking efficiency in an air duct, that corresponds to larger values of σ, requires larger volume of V . However, in practice, there is usually limited volume available for the noise treatments. In this case, the spectrum design becomes crucial, with which one can design the reflection ability given by a volume to concentrate in the frequencies where the noise energy is most intensive, so as to narrow the bandwidth in Equation (B17) for a larger σ of better noise reduction effect. This strategy is particularly useful for the noise having a characteristic spectrum, such as from the fan and machine. To demonstrate the advantage of our spectrum design, we have compared our composite liner with a traditional one which comprises an acrylic cavity filled by acoustic foam, as shown by the inset photo in Figure In acoustics, acoustic foam has been generally considered as a high dissipative material. However, as mentioned at the beginning of this paper, the associated damping is not large enough for being an acoustic metal. That is evidenced by the absorption data as shown in Figure To show the sound blocking effect of acoustic metal, we have made a demo video in the Supplementary Material in which, a Bluetooth speaker, playing an audio recording of broadband wind noise, was placed at the bottom of the air duct with the HRs' openings closed by a metallic ring. The loud noise can be heard at the top port. A Decibel meter near the top port recorded a sound pressure level (SPL) at 95 dB. After removing the metallic ring to expose the HRs to the noises, the emitted SPL suddenly drops to 70 dB. This contrast evidenced a very significant 25 dB of the TL for the specific wind noise.