A formal hierarchy of exact evolution equations are derived for physically relevant space-time averages of state functions of microscopic dislocation dynamics. While such hierarchies are undoubtedly of some value, a primary goal here is to expose the intractable complexity of such systems of nonlinear partial differential equations that, furthermore, remain 'non-closed,' and therefore subject to phenomenological assumptions to be useful. It is instead suggested that such hierarchies be terminated at the earliest stage possible and effort be expended to derive closure relations for the 'non-closed' terms that arise from the formal averaging by taking into account the fullstress-coupled microscopic dislocation dynamics (as done in Chatterjee et al. ( This paper is concerned with the formal derivation of governing field equations of increasingly detailed space-time averaged behavior of microscopic dislocation dynamics, and assessing the value of such systems. The microscopic dislocation dynamics is posed as a system of pde, capable of representing the dynamics of a collection of possibly tangled smooth curves representing dislocation core cylinders, each core cylinder movable by a combination of glide and climb due to the action of a vectorial velocity field. The velocity field is determined, following well-accepted notions, purely from the dislocation density field (with the possibly tangled web of core cylinders viewed simply as appropriate smooth localizations in space of the dislocation density field), and the (nonlinear crystal elastic) stress field in the body; even when linear elasticity is used, the point-wise Burgers vector direction and line direction (information built into the dislocation density field) are adequate to describe the motion of edge segments, and the motion of screws are restricted to within a geometrically defined set of planes. In any case a resolution into slip system dislocation densities is not essential (cf. The above line of inquiry was initiated in In the Continuum Dislocation Dynamics (CDD) framework of Hochrainer and collaborators The model in Despite postulating the microscopic dynamics on which their entire approach is based, making phenomenological closure assumptions of their own, and making ad-hoc choices of cutting off the infinite hierarchy of their equations, the CDD authors have criticized the MFDM approach as inadequate for describing the plasticity of metals The MFDM approach starts from a well-accepted fundamental microscopic dynamical statement (unlike CDD), and produces an exact hierarchy of equations for any desired level of detail in the coarse description as an implication of this fundamental microscopic dynamics. Extending the work in It is also important to generate lower level closure assumptions that account for the stress coupled dynamics of dislocations. Such work has been demonstrated in 2 Hierarchy of averaged equations for nonlinear microscopic equations: the basic idea In this section, we will utilize an averaging procedure used in the literature for multiphase flows (see where B is the body and I a sufficiently large interval of time. In the above, Ω(x) is a bounded region within the body around the point x with linear dimension of the order of the spatial resolution of the macroscopic model we seek, and I(t) is a bounded interval in I containing t. The weighting function w is non-dimensional, assumed to be smooth in the variables x, x , t, t and, for fixed x and t, have support (i.e. to be non-zero) only in Ω(x) × I(t) when viewed as a function of (x , t ). The one-dimensional analogue of (1) is where x is the spatial coordinate and t is time and f is a function of x and t . We call the system given by equation (2) as the fine scale system. We aim to understand the macroscopic evolution of the fine dynamics (2) in terms of averaged (coarse) variables. To do so, the averaging operator (1) is applied to both sides of (2), which results in the following: We denote A 0 := f and A 01 := ∂ t A 0 = F . The fluctuation of function f is defined as: The average of the product (p) of two variables f and g is given by so that Here, f and g can be scalar, vector or tensor valued. Some examples of the product (p) are scalar multiplication, vector inner product, tensor inner product, cross product of a tensor with a vector etc. For example, if f and g are scalar and (p) is the scalar multiplication operator, Using (5), we obtain the average of product of three variables as Similarly, for f , g and h scalars and (p) the scalar multiplication operator, Equations ( It can be shown using ( where Thus, in the coarse evolution of F , new terms (e.g. ∂ 2 F ∂ 1 F ) emerge and therefore, it is necessary to augment (9) with coarse evolution equations of the new terms (that appear on the rhs of ( where G i (i = 1 to 4) are functionals of the state. In general, these functionals cannot be expressed as functionals of the independent fields of the averaged model, such relations being referred to as 'closure' relations. The functionals G i can be generated by applying the averaging operator (1) to the fine scale equations and decomposing the average of product of functions in the fine scale into product of their averages and their associated fluctuation terms. For example, the coarse evolution where Thus, new terms appear in the coarse evolution of the term ∂ 2 F ∂ 1 F , and similarly for the other terms in (10). In this manner, we can generate an infinite hierarchy of nonlinear coarse equations corresponding to the fine dynamics (2). Solution of such an infinite system is not possible. It is therefore necessary to close the equations at a desired level, which means to use physics based assumptions for the necessary terms instead of solving their exact evolution equation (for example, in equation ( The model of FDM The tensor α is the dislocation density tensor, V is the dislocation velocity vector, C is the fourth-order, possibly anisotropic, tensor of linear elastic moduli, u is the total displacement vector, χ is the incompatible part of the elastic distortion tensor, and uz is a vector field whose gradient is the compatible part of the elastic distortion tensor. Upon application of the averaging operator (1) defined in Section 2 to both sides of (11), we have the following system of averaged equations Acharya and Here, L p is defined as and it represents the strain rate produced by 'statistically stored dislocations'. It follows from ( where b is the Burgers vector density per unit area and l is the line direction at each point of the loop and b remains uniform along the loop, and both l and V change sign going from one side of the square loop to the opposite side, both α = 0 and V = 0. However, α × V is identical for opposite sides of the loop and does not cancel out and hence, L p = 0. We consider as descriptors of the system the averaged total dislocation density ρ and the plastic distortion rate L p , which are commonly used in the literature (also see 3.1.1 Evolution equation for averaged total dislocation density, ρ l . The total dislocation density is defined as Suppose we have many dislocation segments in a box of volume V . We see that , where α i , l i and A i (which is assumed to be |b i | 2 up to a constant) are the dislocation density tensor, line length and cross section area of segment i respectively. We also have that , where b i , m i and t i are the Burgers vector, Burgers vector direction and the line direction of segment i. Therefore, i α i :α , which is the averaged dislocation density in the box. Since ρ is the microscopic total dislocation density, V ρdv V is ρ averaged over V , which gives the averaged dislocation density of the box. This acts as a verification that ρ is indeed the total dislocation density. The space-time averaged total dislocation density ρ is given by This follows from ( given by the second term on the rhs of ( The evolution of ρ is given by The derivation of ( Example: Circular dislocation loop The evolution equation for ρ (as derived in Appendix A.1 and given by ( Application of the averaging operator (1) to the above results in the following: We aim to understand the evolution of ρ for the case of a circular dislocation loop of inner radius R, width ∆R (see Fig. Let us assume that its velocity has the same magnitude for all points (r, θ, z) of the loop (where z is the spatial coordinate along the thickness) and points radially outwards. Hence, the velocity is given by the averaging domain be a circular plate of radius L and thickness H, where L R and H t. We have Moreover, Hence, We also note that divV = divV = div0 = 0 . We also have We have that Noting that l = e θ and hence, ∂ l ∂r = 0 and ∂ l ∂θ = -e r , we have Substituting the results from ( Since ṽ > 0 for an expanding loop, this shows that ρ > 0. This is justified because as shown before, ρ give the averaged line length and therefore it has to increase for an expanding loop. There are many quantities whose evolution are governed by the average of the fluctuation terms. For example, the evolution of L p defined by ( This shows that the evolution of L p is governed by the sum of the averages of the fluctuation terms. For the example of an expanding circular loop, using the results from ( where e z = e r × e θ . From ( This observation is in agreement with classical theory which states that ρ (where the averaged line length ρ is a measure of the strength of the material) is proportional to |L p |. However, in classical theory, strength of a material cannot decrease whereas ρ can decrease in our case. Conventional crystal plasticity involves resolution of the system of evolution equations into individual slip systems and superposing the effect of plastic strain on different slip systems. Motivated by the work in Here, α is the dislocation density tensor, χ l (x, t) is the characteristic function of dislocations of slip system l (with normal n l and slip direction b l ) at position x and a l and ρ l are the dislocation density tensor and total dislocation density respectively, corresponding to slip system l. The characteristic function χ l (x, t) indicates whether the point x at time t is occupied by a dislocation of slip system l. We denote the exponential operator as e(.). The characteristic function can be approximated as and c 1 and c 2 are very small positive constants and m and n are very large positive constants. For a dislocation to belong to slip system l, it must satisfy α•n l = 0 (as , where b and l are the Burgers vector and line direction of the dislocation respectively). In that case, the first term on the rhs of ( is approximately 0, since c 1 is a small positive constant and m is a very large positive constant. Moreover, if the Burgers vector b of the dislocation coincides with b l , the term | bl . α αT . bl |= 1. Hence, in that case, the second term on the rhs of ( An implied assumption in the definition of the characteristic function and the slip system variables is that a particular spatial location is occupied at any instant by a dislocation of a single slip system, which excludes the proper accounting of junctions in the definition of the slip system variables, even though the microscopic dynamics does not involve any such exclusion. We are interested in understanding the plastic behavior of metals at a length scale which is much coarser than the atomic length scale and at a time scale comparable to real life load applications (which is much larger compared to the time scale of the motion of dislocations, set by the drag). Therefore, we are interested in the averaged theory of the microscopic dynamics, which involves the evolution of the coarse variables corresponding to the variables defined in ( Corresponding brackets have been marked with the same color to make the equations look more readable. The primary averaged variables have been marked in blue, to show how much of the rhs is known in terms of them. We also define the following variables to make the equations look more readable and compact: By their definition, P, Q, and p are indexed by the slip-system indicator l, and this will be understood in the following without explicit notation. The evolution of α (following (30) The evolution equation for the averaged characteristic function, χ l , for slip system l χ l is obtained by applying the averaging operator (1) to (28). Its evolution equation is where B l (state) represents the state function given by the rhs of ( The evolution equation for the averaged dislocation density tensor, a l , for slip system l a l is obtained by applying the averaging operator ( where B l is defined in the discussion following (31) in Section 3.3. The derivation of (32) is given in Appendix A.3. The merit of ( The evolution equation for the averaged total dislocation density, ρ l , for slip system l ρ l is obtained by applying the averaging operator (1) to (27b). Its evolution is given by ρl where B l (state) is defined in the discussion following (31) in Section 3.3. The derivation of ( In the evolution equations for ᾱ (30), āl (32) and ρl (33), the plastic distortion rate L p appears. It is defined in (13) and is a fluctuation term (L p = Σ α × Σ V ). As shown in Section 2, the hierarchy can involve equations of evolution for the fluctuations. We derived the evolution equation for L p in (25) which is as follows: The L p for a uniformly expanding circular loop was obtained in Section 3.1 and is given by (26). However, this was possible due to the drastic assumption of uniform velocity (of same magnitude pointing radially outward) at all points of the loop. In reality, the value of the local velocity is difficult to obtain without consideration of the microscopic DD problem, as it depends on the Peach-Koehler force acting on the dislocation segments, which is a function of the internal stresses. This makes it essentially impossible to define an evolution equation for L p in realistic situations without some sort of 'on-the-fly' coupling to local DD calculations. The coupled DD-MFDM strategy that is described and implemented in We stated some descriptors of the microscopic dynamics and obtained the evolution of the coarse variables generated from such descriptors. The coarse variables give an idea of the averaged behavior of the system at a much coarser length and time scale. We see that the evolution of the total dislocation density ( and the total dislocation density (33) of any particular slip system is extremely cumbersome, which shows the limitations of such a refined description. The evolution equations of the coarse variables involve many average terms, average of fluctuation terms and their partial derivatives, all of which have their own evolution given by other pdes. Thus, we get an infinite hierarchy of non-linear non-closed coarse evolution pdes, which cannot be solved for all practical purposes. The CDD framework While cumbersome, one could try to work with these exact equations if they were known in full detail. If this is not the case, the justifications for using such infinite hierarchies is scarce. It is much more reasonable, and important to focus on closure assumptions, gener-ated from the actual stress coupled microscopic dislocation interaction dynamics and their averaging, at a lower level in the hierarchy, about which such 'kinematic' infinite hierarchies say nothing. In previous work starting from 1. It is fair to say that beyond the modeling in 1 space dimension, the plastic distortion in classical plasticity theory has, at best, only a thermodynamic physical meaning with no concrete, tangible connection to the mechanics of dislocations. The MFDM approach based on space-time averaging of microscopic dislocation mechanics brings out an explicit, completely defined, connection between the plastic strain rate employed in phenomenological theories of plasticity and the motion and geometry of an evolving microscopic array of dislocations, as explained in the discussion surrounding 2. With a single extra material parameter beyond a classical plasticity model (and two at finite deformations), the MFDM framework has enabled a significant variety of phenomena to be modeled, in qualitative and quantitative accord with experimental results. In From the definition of P in the discussion following (41) and using (37), From the definition of p and Q in the discussion following (41) and using (39), Substituting ( Using the definition of p in the discussion around (46) , Following ( Similarly, we can obtain ̇ α T = α T |α| by replacing α, α, α and α above with their respective transpose and obtain Using ( A.3 Dislocation density tensor corresponding to slip system l, a l Following (27), the dislocation density corresponding to slip system l is defined as We take time derivative of (54) to obtain ȧl = χl α + χ l α = χl α -χ l curl(α × V ). (55) Using the fact that χ l ≈ (χ l ) 2 , since χ l can (approximately) take either of the values 0 or 1, the second term on the right hand side above can be written as where e mjk is a component of the third-order alternating tensor X and its action on a tensor A is given by {X(A)} i = e ijk A jk , while its action on a vector N is given by {X(N )} ij = e ijk N k . Using ( We average both sides of (57) to get ȧl = χl α + Σ χl Σ α -curl(a l × V l ) -curl Σ a l × Σ V l + 2χ l (α × V )[X(grad x χ l )] ( Using (35), we have, ρl = 2 χl ρ l -2χ l 1 2 gradρ • V + ρ(divV ) -α : {α gradV } -α : (divα ⊗ V ) ≈ 2 χl ρ l -(χ l ) 2 gradρ • V -2(χ l ) 2 ρ divV + 2χ l α : (α gradV ) + 2χ l α : (divα ⊗ V ) = 2 χl ρ l -{χ l gradρ} • (χ l V ) -2(χ l ρ){χ l divV } + 2χ l α : (α gradV ) + 2χ l α : (divα ⊗ V ) = 2 χl ρ l -{gradρ l -ρ gradχ l } • V l -2ρ l {divV l -gradχ l • V } + 2χ l α : (α gradV ) + 2χ l α : (divα ⊗ V = 2 χl ρ l -gradρ l • V l + ρ gradχ l • V l -2ρ l divV l + 2ρ l gradχ l • V + 2χ l α : (α gradV ) + 2χ l α : (divα ⊗ V ). ( We average both sides of (61) to get the evolution of ρ l as ρl = 2 χl + 2 χ l α : (α gradV ) + 2 χ l α : (divα ⊗ V ) (62) Also, χ l α : (α gradV ) = χ l α : α gradV + Σ χ l α : Σ α gradV = (χ l α + Σ χ l Σ α ) : (α gradV + Σ α Σ gradV ) + Σ χ l α : Σ α gradV Similarly, + 2 Σ ρ l gradχ l • Σ V + χ l α + Σ χ l Σ α : α gradV + Σ α Σ gradV + Σ χ l α : Σ α gradV + 2 (χ l α + Σ χ l Σ α ) : (divα ⊗ V + Σ divα ⊗ Σ V ) + Σ χ l α : Σ divα⊗V =⇒ ρl = 2 χl ρ l -gradρ l • V l + ρ gradχ l • V l -2 ρ l divV l + 2 ρ l gradχ l • V + 2 (χ l α) : (αgradV ) + 2 (χ l α) : Finally, using ( |αn l | |α|