The interactions between electrons and lattice vibrational modes play the key role in determining the carrier transport properties, thermoelectric performance and other physical quantities related to phonons in semiconductors. However, for two-dimensional (2D) materials, the widely-used models for carrier transport only consider the interactions between electrons and some specific phonon modes, which usually leads to inaccruate predictions of electrons/phonons transport properties. In this work, comprehensive investigations on full electron-phonon couplings and their influences on carrier mobility and thermoelectric performances of 2D group-IV and V elemental monolayers were performed, and we also analyzed in details the selection rules on electron-phonon couplings using group-theory arguments. Our calculations revealed that, for the cases of shallow dopings where only intravalley scatterings are allowed, the contributions from optical phonon modes are significantly larger than those from acoustic phonon modes in group-IV elemental monolayers, and LA and some specific optical phonon modes contribute significantly to the total intravalley scatterings. When the doping increases and intervalley scatterings are allowed, the intervalley scatterings are much stronger than intravalley scatterings, and ZA/TA/LO phonon modes dominate the intervalley scatterings in monolayer Si, Ge and Sn. The dominant contributions to the total intervalley scatterings are ZA/TO in monolayer P, ZA/TO in monolayer As and TO/LO in monolayer Sb. Based on the thorough investigations on the full electron-phonon couplings, we predict accurately the carrier mobilities and thermoelectric figure of merits in these two elemental crystals, and reveal significant reductions when compared with the calculations based on the widely-used simplified model. Out work not only provides accrurate predictions of carrier transport and thermoelectric performances in these two series of 2D materials by considering full electron-phonon couplings, but also showcases a computational framework for studying related physical quantities in 2D materials. Two-dimensional (2D) materials offer challenging opportunities for a wide range of applications in nanoscale devices. Among the extraordinary properties in 2D materials, carrier transport properties play the key role in determining the performance in microelectronic, optoelectronic and thermoelectric devices. Extensive studies have been devoted on carrier transport properties in 2D materials, which are dominantly determined by the interaction between electrons and phonons. In the simplest way, the electron-phonon (el-ph) interaction can be understood as originated from the electrostatic potential (known as deformation potential) generated by exciting a phonon in the crystal, which in turn affects all carriers directly. Subsequently, the deformation potential approximation (DPA) method based on the intravalley coupling between electrons and long-wavelength longitudial acoustic (LA) phonon modes 1,2 , was proposed to estimate or understand the carrier mobilities in many non-polar 2D semiconductors including graphene 3 , phosphorene 4 and transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) Inspired by the extraordinary properties of graphene, the group-IV elemental materials of silicene (Si), germanene (Ge) and stanene (Sn) as the promising alternatives, have attracted tremendous interests. Studies show that such monolayers all possess Dirac fermions similar to graphene, high mechanical flexibility and high electron mobility, leading to the potential applications in batteries and topological devices Interestingly, the β-antimonene undergoes a transformation from a topological semimetal to a topological insulator at 22 bilayer, then to QSH phase at 8 bilayers and finally to a topological trivial semiconductor at 3 or thinner bilayers Herein, based on the first-principles method, we systematically investigate the full elph coupling effects in 2D group-IV and V materials. These two series of 2D materials indeed possess a broad range of carrier mobilities, which may lead to various applications. Compared with group-IV counterparts, group-V materials are more buckled, strengthening the overlap of the p z orbitals, thus may lead to the enhancement of the interaction between the electrons and ZA phonons. The conduction band and valence band for group-V materials are flatter than group-IV materials, which is beneficial to satisfy the energy conservation condition and further increases the el-ph coupling near the Fermi level. To further investigate the roles of different phonon modes, we also derive in details the selection rule for the full el-ph scatterings in these two series of materials. Based on the group-theory analysis, we find that, the LA phonons play a dominant role in the hole scattering in arsenene and antimonene, which is in contrast to the previous report that group-V materials have the same scattering mechanism as group-IV materials In graphene, the 2s orbital is hybridized with p x and p y orbitals to form three planar σ bonds via sp 2 hybridization, and the remaining p z orbital forms π bonding between adjacent C atoms to guarantee the planarity The one more electron in P, As and Sb increases the degeneracy of electronic states, leading to the unstable state according to the Jahn-Teller theorem, and by a high degree of buckling the degeneracy can be relieved, resulted from the broken symmetry In the effect from the increase of buckling. The calculated band structures of silicene, germanene, and stanene are shown in Fig. However, as shown in Fig. The energy difference between the valleys (peaks) and CBM (VBM) for all studied group-IV and V materials. The calculated carrier mobilities at 300 K along armchair (a) and zigzag (b) directions for these two series of 2D materials, based on the modified DPA theory 29 , are shown in Table The band structures of group-V materials near Fermi level are much flatter than the those of group-IV materials, which is more beneficial to satisfy the energy conservation conditions in the scattering processes. Starting from the CBM, with the increase of electronic energy, the scattering rates increase gradually for group-IV materials while dramatically for group-V materials especially for phosphorene, which possesses a wide and nearly flat region near the C 1 valley as shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. with shallow dopings where only intravalley scatterings are allowed, the intravalley scattering rates for CBM electrons via TO and LO phonon modes are significantly larger than those via acoustic phonon mode, and ZO modes also contribute significantly in monolayer Ge. When the doping increases and intervalley scatterings are allowed, the intervalley scatterings rates surpass the intravalley scatterings, and the contributions from ZA, TA and LO phonon modes dominate the intervalley scatterings. However, the situations for group-V elemental monolayers (P, As, Sb) are different, especially for intravalley scatterings. For intravalley scatterings in monolayer P, the contributions from ZO, LA and TA phonon modes dominate. In monolayer As, the contributions from TO, LO, LA and TA phonon modes dominate, and in monolayer Sb, the contributions from LA, ZO and LO phonon modes dominate. For intervalley scatterings realized by heavy dopings, the contributions from ZA and TO dominate in monolayer P, ZA and TO phonon modes dominate in monolayer As, and TO and LO dominate in monolayer Sb. Furthermore, similar to case in group-IV elemental monolayers, the intervalley scatterings are siginificantly stronger than intravalley scatterings. In addition, due to the small phonon energies, for monolayer Sn, As and Sb, since the energy of the C 1 -valley electrons is well smaller than E C 2 , only the intravalley and intervalley scatterings between degenerate C 1 valleys are possible for small doping. When the energy of C 1 -pocket electrons is higher than E C 2 , C 1 -C 2 intervalley scattering is allowed, and the scattering rate increases abruptly as a result. In particular, for monolayer Sb, when the energy of C 1 -pocket electrons is higher than E C 3 , both C 1 -C 2 and C 1 -C 3 intervalley scatterings are allowed, leading to a further increase of the scattering rates, as shown in Fig. The el-ph scattering rates of V 1 -peak holes for these two series of materials at 300 K within ∼ 0.4 eV are shown in Fig. For the hole scatterings in phosphorene, due to the flat valence band near Fermi level, also reflected in the effective mass as listed in Table In order to further clarify the underlying mechanisms behind electron-phonon interaction, based on the group-theory analysis, the selection rules in terms of the symmetry of systems for the interaction between phonons and electrons are derived. The electron-phonon interaction depends on the electronic wave functions of the initial states φ i (k), final states φ f (k + q) and the coupled phonon with the eigenvector q described by the phonon-induced deformation potential δ q,ν U where the perturbation potential δU = l,a q l,a ∂U (r i ) ∂q l,a , in which q l,a is the ion displacement of the a atom in the l-th unit cell, and r i is the electron coordinate. Therefore, the expression for the selection rules for such transition M based on the group theory is written as, where Γ i/f represents the irreps for electron initial/final states, and Γ ph denotes the symmetry of the corresponding phonon involved in this process. The involved electrons and phonons must obey the rules of momentum conservation and the compatibility relation among little groups, since they possibly locate at different points in the Brillouin Zone. no null/null means the allowed/forbidden transition channels. Due to the lack of in-plane symmetry σ h in monolayer Si, Ge, Sn of group-IV and monolayer P, As, Sn of group-V, their electronic and phonon symmetry is lowered considerably compared to plane graphene. As shown in Figure Because, as shown in Figure It should be noticed that, there are some phonon modes near Γ point transforming with the irreps belonging to the little group of C S , but it is reasonable to exclude them since the initial and final states of carriers are with C 2 symmetry, which are forbidden to be coupled to the phonon modes with C S group considering the incompatibility relation between C 2 and C S Furthermore, as shown in Figure Similarly, as shown in Figure As shown in Figure As. As shown in Table Nevertheless, for the interpeak scatterings of the VBM holes for monolayer P, As and Sb, the situation is quite different due to the different locations of VBMs. For monolayer As and Sb, since the VBM locates at Γ point, which lacks of degeneracy in the Brillouin Zone, the interpeak scatterings between VBMs no longer exist for the V 1 -peak holes. As a result, only LA mode dominates the el-ph scatterings of VBM holes for monolayer As and Sb, which is in good agreement with the mode-resolved scattering rates of V 1 -peak holes for monolayer As and Sb as shown in Figure FIG. in monolayer P, the transitions of V 1 -peak holes to the nearest and the thirdly nearest neighboring local VBM are allowed, and respectively dominated by the TA and ZA phonon modes. The analysis is shown in Figure Based on the calculated full el-ph materix elements, the temperature-dependent and mode-resolved relaxation time and the subsequent carrier mobilites along special directions can be calculated according to Eqs. (A1,A2), and the calculated mobilities for these two series of 2D elemental materials are shown in Fig. (3) The obvious anisotropy in carrier transport for group-V materials obtained by the DPA method no longer exists in the results considering full el-ph coupling. Here, we also calculate the TE and the related transport properties of these two series of 2D elemental crystals by considering full el-ph coupling. Fig. For comparison, the results using the CRTA method are also presented. As we know, the behavior of the Seebeck coefficient can be understood by the Mott relation Where N (E) and τ (E) are the energy-dependent density of states (DOS) and electronic relaxation time, respectively. The Seebeck coefficient can be separated into the band term and the scattering term. A large enhancement of the DOS near the Fermi level leads to a high S. The scattering term indicates that S is also related to the logarithmic energy derivatives of τ (E), which is inversely proportional to the scattering rates. In the CRTA method, the scatterings term is equal to zero considering the definition as shown in Eq. (3). Considering the n-type systems (E f > 0), the scattering rates of electrons gradually increase as shown in Fig. For the electrical conductivity σ as shown in Fig. The total thermal conductivities is the sum of the electronic contribution κ e and the lattice contribution κ L , i.e. κ = κ e + κ L . The electronic thermal conductivity κ e exhibits similar trend with σ for both DPA and the full el-ph scattering methods. According to the Wiedemann-Franz law, κ e = LσT , where L is the Lorenz number, increasing σ leads to the increase of κ e . The lattice thermal conductivities κ L for these two series of 2D elemental crystals are chosen from our previous reports with 28.3 W/mK, 2.4 W/mK, 5.8 W/mK and 106.6 W/mK, 9.0 W/mK, 2.5 W/mK for silicene, germanene, stanene and phosphorene, arsenene, antimonene at 300 K respectively The results of dimensionless figure of merit zT are shown in Fig. In summary, using first principles calculations, we systematically investigate the effects of the electron-phonon couplings in 2D honeycomb group-IV and group-V materials with D 3d symmetry. High buckling increases the overlap between p z orbitals and enhances the interaction between carriers and ZA phonons. The less dispersive band structure of group-V materials further enhance the electron-phonon coupling due to easier satisfaction of energy conservation condition. We find that the D 3d symmetry is not a sufficient condition for ZA phonon scattering to dominate. Based on our results of selection rules, the symmetry of transition process only permits LA phonon to be involved in intravalley scattering within VBM in monolayer phosphorus, arsenene and antimonene. However, TA and ZA modes from intervalley scattering between degenerate VBM is dominant in phosphorus and far beyond LA modes. Yet only LA modes dominate in monolayer arsenene and antimonene since no intervalley scattering between VBM at Γ point due to lack of degeneracy. Moreover, we evaluate the TE performance of all these materials with band and momentum relevant relaxation time indicating that the TE properties of a material can be overestimated with constant relaxation-time approximation from DPA calculation. We carry out density functional theory (DFT) using the QUANTUM ESPRESSO code Yuma Nakamura, Tianqi Zhao, Jinyang Xi, Wen Shi, Dong Wang, and Zhigang Shuai, "Intrinsic charge transport in stanene: Roles of bucklings and electron-phonon couplings," Advanced Electronic Materials 3, 1700143 (2017). Xiao-Juan Ye, Gui-Lin Zhu, Jin Liu, Chun-Sheng Liu, and Xiao-Hong Yan, "Monolayer, bilayer, and heterostructure arsenene as potential anode materials for magnesium-ion batteries: A firstprinciples study," The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 123, 15777-15786 (2019). Hezhu Shao, Xiaojian Tan, Jun Jiang, and Haochuan Jiang, "First-principles study on the elastic properties of cu2gese3," EPL (Europhysics Letters) 113, 26001 (2016). Haifeng Lang, Shuqing Zhang, and Zhirong Liu, "Mobility anisotropy of two-dimensional semiconductors," Physical Review B 94, 235306 (2016). Jinghua Liang, Dengdong Fan, Peiheng Jiang, Huijun Liu, and Wenyu Zhao, "Phonon-limited electrical transport properties of intermetallic compound ybal3 from first-principles calculations," http://arxiv.org/abs/1609.05858v1.