There is a need for numerical models capable of predicting local accumulation of hydrogen near stress concentrators and crack tips to prevent and mitigate hydrogen assisted fracture in steels. The experimental characterisation of trapping parameters in metals, which is required for an accurate simulation of hydrogen transport, is usually performed through the electropermeation test. In order to study grain size influence and grain boundary trapping during permeation, two modelling approaches are explored; a 1D Finite Element model including trap density and binding energy as input parameters and a polycrystalline model based on the assignment of a lower diffusivity and solubility to the grain boundaries. Samples of pure iron after two different heat treatments -950oC for 40 minutes and 1100oC for 5 minutesare tested applying three consecutive rising permeation steps and three decaying steps. Experimental results show that the finer grain microstructure promotes a diffusion delay due to grain boundary trapping. The usual methodology for the determination of trap densities and binding energies is revisited in which the limiting diluted and saturated cases are considered. To this purpose, apparent diffusivities are fitted including also the influence of boundary conditions and comparing results provided by the constant concentration with the constant flux assumption. Grain boundaries are characterised for pure iron with a binding energy between 37.8 and 39.9 kJ/mol and a low trap density but it is numerically demonstrated that saturated or diluted assumptions are not always verified, and a univocal determination of trapping parameters requires a broader range of charging conditions for permeation. The relationship between surface parameters, i.e. charging current, recombination current and surface concentrations, is also studied showing that trapping phenomena are stronger during the diluted steps and that recombination currents are much higher than the steady state obtained flux. Structural integrity of metallic components and structures can be drastically affected by the effects of hydrogen due to the degradation mechanisms operating when hydrogen diffuses through the bulk material. The most challenging phenomenon is hydrogen embrittlement, also named as hydrogen assisted cracking, in which a toughness reduction and an increase in crack growth rate is cause by atomic diffusing hydrogen without the presence of other processes such as H2 or methane combination, blistering, hydride formation, etc. The underlying micro-mechanisms of hydrogen embrittlement are not completely understood but the process appears to be driven by local hydrogen concentration. It has been empirically proved that hydrogen accumulation near the fracture process zone is the triggering process for cracking 50x50 mm 2 sheet samples of pure iron (99.5 %) with a thickness of 1 mm underwent two different annealing treatments in order to obtain homogeneous microstructures with different grain sizes. Consequently, one sample was maintained at 925oC for 40 min followed by furnace cooling and another sample was kept at 1100oC for 5 min also followed by furnace cooling. In order to analyse permeation results for both samples, heat treatment temperatures for the different grain sizes are identified as T g throughout the paper. After carefully cutting the specimen (to avoid microstructural alteration), both samples were metallographically prepared (ground and polished onto synthetic cloths with 6 and 1 μm diamond pastes) and etched with Nital 2%. Their microstructures were observed using an optical microscope (Nikon Epiphot 300) and a scanning electron microscope (SEM JEOL-JSM5600) under an acceleration voltage of 20 kV, as shown in Figure The hydrogen transport and trapping behaviour of pure iron with different grain sizes was characterized by means of electrochemical permeation tests. Flat specimens measuring 20x20 mm were machined and ground up to 1200 grit SiC paper until attaining a final sample thickness of 0.6-0.45 mm. A circular exposed area of 1.25 cm 2 was always used. The permeation tests were performed in a double electrolytic cell based on the one developed by Devanathan and Stachurski Both cells are separated by the specimen, which is the working electrode (WE) in each cell. The cathodic cell, where hydrogen is cathodically generated and adsorbed on the surface of the metal via the application of a cathodic current, was filled with an acid solution (pH≈1) composed of 1M H2SO4 and 0.25g/l As2O3 to mitigate hydrogen recombination reactions. The other side of the specimen, the anodic cell, where hydrogen oxidation occurs, was filled with a basic solution (pH≈12.5) of 0.1M NaOH. Thin platinum plates with a total surface area of 1 cm 2 (similar to the specimen's permeated area) were used as counter electrodes (CE). A reference silver-silver chloride electrode (Ag/AgCl, RE) with a Luggin capillary was employed in the anodic cell and the equipment used for data acquisition was a pocketSTAT Ivium potentiostat with a current operation range of ±10 mA. All tests were performed at room temperature. Before starting the tests, it is necessary to decrease the background current density in the anodic cell to a steady-state value below 0.1 μA/cm 2 (which must be subtracted from the measured oxidation current prior to data analysis). To this end, an homogeneous palladium coating (around 1-2 μm thick measured by SEM) was electrodeposited on the anodic side of the sample from a commercial palladium bath containing 2 g/l Pd, applying a current density of 3 mA/cm 2 for 5 min. Hydrogen oxidation is thereby enhanced in the anodic cell, ensuring a virtually zero hydrogen concentration on the exit side of the specimen. In fact, there is general consensus as to the importance of using palladium coatings on the detection side of ferrous samples so that the permeation results may be reliably exploited, in order to ensure the oxidation of hydrogen atoms on palladiumcoated surfaces under most charging conditions The numerical procedure aims at determining characteristic trapping parameters of pure iron with two different grain sizes and to identify the limitations of the common analysis methods of electrochemical permeation transients. The output magnitude that is being registered during experimental permeation is the exit current measured in the oxidation cell. This current is divided by the exposed area to find the current density, i p , in μA/cm 2 . It is assumed that the flux of egressed hydrogen atoms is proportional to this current density, i.e. j(t) = i p (t)/F, where F is the Faraday's constant, so the flux takes units of In a first approximation, steps are separated and scaled so they are analysed independently. The normalisation is performed considering the initial flux, j 0 and the steady state value j ss for each individual step. Then, the obtained transient is fitted considering analytical solutions of 1D diffusion in an exponential series form, as discussed in Section 3.2. The fitted apparent diffusivity D app can be used to indirectly determine a concentration in the entry surface, which is named as C app . Previously, a two-level modelling approach is presented in Section 3.1, with the aim of establishing a relationship between apparent diffusivity and two important trapping features: density, N T , and binding energy, E b . However, the validity of the required assumptions, i.e. that traps are saturated or diluted Finally, a finite element framework is used to simulate hydrogen permeation considering both 1D two-level model that includes trapping effects and the 2D polycrystal model; the latter is presented in Section 3.5. and the method for determining grain boundary segregation s gb and diffusivity D gb is discussed. Hydrogen entry is taken into account by defining appropriate boundary conditions; the constant concentration assumption, C L 0 , is discussed in contrast to a constant flux that depends on charging (i c ) and recombination (i r ) currents at the entry side. The numerical permeation transients, that have been informed with the fitted trapping and charging parameters, are thus compared to the experimental curves. The complete flowchart is shown in Figure Figure Permeation is numerically solved in Comsol Multiphysics where the associated heat equation, i.e. a parabolic equation with flux, source and capacity terms, is implemented. For unidimensional diffusion in x direction and for a constant lattice diffusivity D L , the mass balance can be written as: where C L and C T are hydrogen concentrations in lattice and trapping sites, respectively. Hydrogen flux j follows the Fick's law: Considering that both the density of lattice sites and trapping sites, N L and N T respectively, remain constant and do not vary over time, the governing equation can be expressed in terms of lattice and trapping occupancies that are respectively defined as θ L = C L /N L and θ T = C T /N T : The source term can be transformed to a capacity term: A normalisation is followed for the sake of generalisation. Non-dimensional time and distance are scaled considering lattice diffusivity and the specimen thickness: The scaling defined in Equations ( And the term ∂θ T /∂θ L is found by assuming thermodynamic equilibrium between trapping and lattice sites: where K = exp(E b /RT) and the trapping binding energy E b is considered positive. Assuming a low lattice occupancy, θ L ≪ 1: Deriving ∂θ T /∂θ L and substituting into At this point, it must be highlighted that the capacity term for the parabolic heat equation is only treatable when the expression ∂θ T /∂θ L can be defined; for generalised kinetic approaches, i.e. following McNabb and Foster's formulation When traps are completely filled, i.e. θ T ≈ 1, D eff = D L . On the other hand, when the trap occupancy is low, θ T ≪ 1, the effective diffusivity can be expressed as: which is a magnitude independent of local concentration and only depends on material parameters and temperature. Even though the equation ( The lattice occupancy in the entry boundary, θ L 0 , must not be confused with an initial concentration. For electro-permeation simulations, θ L (t = 0) = 0. This normalisation is possible for both constant concentration (CC) and constant flux (CF) models that will be described in the following sections; for the former, θ L 0 corresponds to the θ L value prescribed at the boundary while for the constant flux approcach, θ L 0 represents the lattice occupancy that will be reached at the steady state and it can be determined by assuming that j in = j ss and thus θ L 0 = j ss L/(N L D L ). Therefore, non-dimensional flux is also redefined as: The flux scaling within the FE framework must not be confused with the normalisation considering the steady state flux that is used in the following section in order to fit experimental transients to analytical expressions. Permeation transients that have been experimentally measured are usually fitted to analytical expressions in order to determine a diffusion coefficient. Throughout the present work, this phenomenological parameter is named as apparent diffusivity, D app , with the aim of avoiding confusion with other local diffusivities. The analytical approach assumes that the time-dependent solution only depends on D app and on the thickness of the specimen L; thus, the output flux follows a function f(D app , L, t). It is also possible to define a non-dimensional time,τ = tD app /L 2 , so a single-variable function governs the problem, f(τ). Non-dimensional time τ, which depends on the fitted apparent diffusivity, must not be confused with the scaled time t ̅ , which is used for the FE implementation. All permeation steps are also normalised considering the flux at the beginning of the step j 0 and the steady state flux j ss . For rising steps (j 0 ≤ j(t) ≤ j ss ): For decaying steps (j ss ≤ j(t) ≤ j 0 ): It must be noted that time t for permeation fitting represents the individual time for each step, i.e. t = t total -t 0 . The function to be fitted is the analytical solution of Fick's laws for 1D permeation and it is defined using a series expansion form. The solution depends on the problem boundary conditions; for a constant concentration on the entry side Fitting to this expression is recommended in both ASTM G148-97(2018) and ISO 17081:2014 Standards for electrochemical permeation. An alternative that does not require fitting algorithms applies the relationship between a permeation time t i and diffusivity: The most used permeation times are the breakthrough time t b = t 0.10 , defined as the time when the 10% of the maximum flux is reached, and the lag time t lag = t 0.63 , that corresponds to the 63% of the transient steady state. The constant takes a value M = 15.3 for t 0.10 and M = 6 for t 0.63 The second series, i.e. equation or, alternatively, for small times In Section 4.1, the experimental rise and decaying steps for hydrogen permeation through pure iron are analysed considering these three approaches described above: (i) constant concentration (CC) fitting for long times, i.e. equation ( Trapping effects can also be fitted by considering a relationship between trap density, permeation times and charging conditions. The simplified expression that has been derived by McNabb and Foster where t L is defined as L 2 /6D L and the ratios equal: α = KN T /N L and β = KC L 0 /N L . It must be noted that this solution has been derived assuming an initially empty specimen: C L (t = 0) = 0; C T (t = 0) = 0, and constant concentration as boundary conditions: C L (x = 0) = C L 0 ; C L (x = L) = 0. Therefore, errors will inevitably arise when applying this equation to pre-charged specimensor for consecutive steps as in the present workand for a constant flux modelling of hydrogen entry. Since t L represents the lag time (t 0.63 ) without trapping effects, the magnitude t T can be defined as the apparent lag time, i.e. t T = L 2 /(6D app ), and represents the experimental t 0.63 time including trapping effects. Therefore, the relationship between diffusion times can be expressed as: This function is plotted in Figure For the saturated region Kθ L 0 ≫ 1: It must be noted that, even though in some works the limitation is not noted, this expression is only applicable, as shown by McNabb and Foster The limiting cases are vital for the correct design of an experimental test program. When apparent diffusivities are fitted using analytic transients instead of the t 0.63 method, the following equivalence can be considered: Trapping characterisation is thus based on the measurement of the deviation from ideal behaviour and requires the previous estimation of lattice diffusivity D L . Two options are possible: (i) to consider that lattice diffusivity represents hydrogen random walk through a bcc iron ideal crystal. In this case, ab initio simulations are useful; and (ii) to assume that lattice diffusivity is represented by the permeation of hydrogen when traps are completely filled; the apparent diffusivity after many permeation transients is then taken as D L . However, for weak traps, this can be hard to achieve even after many transients. Other methodologies based on decaying transients and slope analysis have also been proposed Two boundary conditions are analysed: (i) constant concentration (CC) in which a constant scale occupancy is imposed on the entry side, θ ̅ L (x = 0); (ii) constant flux (CF): in this case, a constant j̅ (x = 0). The following condition must be fulfilled where F is the Faraday's constant. In order to compare the FE results with the experimental transients, the numerical output current density [A/m 2 ] is found considering Faraday (F) and Avogadro (N A ) constants: Following the previous work of the authors Different homogenization techniques can be followed to define an effective diffusivity where f gb = A gb /A grains is also determined in the generation script; this grain boundary fraction is proportional to the grain boundary thickness but also depends on the boundary network, i.e. the larger grain size, the lower f gb . Here it is assumed that this composite diffusivity is equal to the experimentally found apparent diffusivity, i.e. D H-S = D app , so a grain boundary diffusivity D gb is iteratively obtained for each model with the corresponding grain boundary fraction. Following this procedure, since D app varies depends on concentration, D gb is implemented in ABAQUS by considering a concentration-dependent diffusivity table. Solubility properties are assigned following the approach from Mass diffusion analysis in ABAQUS does not consider concentration-dependent solubilities so the diluted case defined above, Kθ L 0 ≪ 1, is assumed and a constant nondimensional segregation factor can be implemented: This is an advantage of the polycrystalline model with D gb and s gb : the density of traps N T and the binding energy E b do not need to be explicitly determined in the diluted case. Hydrogen input is modelled considering also, as in the 1D FEM and the 1D analytical modelling approaches, two boundary conditions: constant concentration and constant flux. CC model requires a concentration boundary condition whereas the CF in ABAQUS involves a distributed surface flux load. These charging conditions and the fixed exit zeroconcentration are only applied to grain surfaces; output flux from grain boundaries is not well understood yet Following the experimental procedure described in Section 2, galvanostatic conditions are applied to the entry surface, i.e. a fixed current density i c , as shown in Table A weaker trapping effect is explained by the lower expected fraction of grain boundaries due to the coarse grain size; on the other hand, the higher output flux can be due to the lower segregation of hydrogen in grain boundaries. However, experimental results cannot be directly compared because heat treatments produce different thicknesses. To avoid a possible misinterpretation, complete transients are plotted in Figure From the individual transients that have been normalised, the apparent diffusivity is fitted using a non-linear lest squares algorithm implemented in Matlab for both CC and CF analytical solutions considering equations ( D app (CC fitting: eq. ( The sub-surface concentration and the entry flux are not known a priori and can be only predicted by analysing permeated hydrogen at the exit side. As already described in Section 3, two modelling assumptions have been considered: constant concentration and constant flux. These two approaches need to be adapted to the two-level governing PDE that is solved within the Finite Element code; in this equation, the dependent variable is θ L (x, t) or, equivalently, C L (x, t). For the case of constant concentration at the entry surface, the lattice concentration C L (x = 0) = C L 0 must be found: where j ss is the experimental input; for D L the two options described above are possible, but here the theoretical value is used For the constant flux model, the input flux at each charging step is fixed as the steady state value at the end of that step. Thus, a recombination current can be found by determining the difference between the charging current, i c , and the obtained i ss . In order to analyse the charging efficiency, the experimental steady state values are plotted against the charging current in Figure Figure Whether this higher charging current promotes a higher input concentration is assessed in Figure Figure A mapping approach, as described in Section 3.3, is shown in Figure Even though a broader θ L 0 range is necessary to accurately determine N T and E b , e.g.. by broadening the experimental range of i c , in the following subsections the saturated and diluted assumptions are explored and discussed in order to characterise trapping parameters. In the saturated regime, the condition Kθ L 0 ≫ 1 must be fulfilled. This can be attained when traps are very energetic or when the charging conditions introduce a high amount of lattice hydrogen. In this case, Equation ( Figure In contrast to the saturated regime, the energy of traps can only be fitted when the experimentally ratio D L /D app depends on K, i.e. on the diluted regime. Thus, the product KN ̅ is determined for each step following Equation ( Figure Then, considering the theoretical value N L = 5.1×10 29 sites/m 3 , N T is determined. Once N T is found from the saturated assumption in intermediate steps, K can be deduced from KN ̅ values that have been calculated using the diluted simplification in extreme steps and E b is obtained assuming T = 293 K. These results are shown in Table N T (traps/m 3 ) E b (kJ/mol) T g = 925oC 2.13 × 10 23 38.1 T g = 1100oC 1.17 × 10 23 39.9 Table This fitting methodology is repeated for the D app values obtained using the CF assumption. It must be highlighted that this D app must be taken into consideration since the experimental charging has been performed using a constant current density i c so galvanostatic conditions have been followed. Nevertheless, as already mentioned, asymptotic expressions to find N T and E b have been derived from the permeation numerical solution expressed in Equation ( The scaled governing PDE The values of N T and E b that have been experimentally found and shown in Table On the other hand, the transient slope behaviour in FE results is hard to analyse. Figure In order to interpret the influence of hydrogen concentration and trapping occupancy, these magnitudes are plotted for the input node, C L (x = 0) = C L 0 and θ T (x = 0) = θ T 0 . The step evolution of C L 0 for the CC model produces a faster hydrogen permeation whereas in the CF model a progressive build-up of hydrogen concentration occurs in the entry side so the permeation is slower. This critical difference explains the different behaviours; a generalised boundary condition, as implemented in different works shows that the CF model for T g = 925oC predicts transients highly deviated from the experimental results, especially for rising steps; Figure Diffusivity within grains is assumed as the theoretical D L = 4598 μm 2 /s A numerical methodology has been presented in this work with the aim of analysing trapping effects during hydrogen permeation through metals. In order to assess grain boundary trapping and study grain size influence on trapping phenomena, pure iron has been chosen as the studied material and two heat treatments have been carried out. Considering the relationship between apparent diffusivities that have been analytically fitted and the trapping behaviour, some assumptions are considered to determine N T and E b . The limiting cases, i.e. saturated and diluted traps, are demonstrated to be helpful in a stepwise permeation test. After this characterisation for both microstructures, two Finite Element approaches have been explored: (i) a 1D permeation model in which trapping effects are reproduced including a trap density and a binding energy; (ii) a polycrystalline model in which trapping is explicitly simulated in grain boundaries by assigning a lower diffusivity and a segregation factor. The following particular conclusions of this methodology can be summarised: ▪ Trapping sites in pure iron samples have been characterised as medium-energy defects with binding energies between 37.8 and 39.9 kJ/mol; trap densities have been found to take low values, from 1.17×10 23 to 3.75×10 23 sites/m 3 . A stepwise permeation test has been performed in order to evaluate different diffusion regimes. ▪ A common method to fit binding energies and trap densities, which is based on the asymptotic solution proposed by McNabb and Foster, has been revisited. It has been concluded that only a mapping methodology covering a wide range on concentrations is able to univocally determine at the same time binding energy and trap density values. ▪ Considering the saturated limiting case, i.e. traps are almost filled, trap densities can be directly obtained. On the other hand, assuming the diluted limiting case, i.e. traps are almost empty, both trap density and binding energy influence Finite Element simulations have demonstrated that traps in the pure iron samples are almost filled after the first permeation step but the diluted case can be applied to the first rise and to the last decay transients. ▪ Due to the fact that McNabb and Foster's solution is based on a constant concentration as a boundary condition on the entry side, the influence of surface phenomena on hydrogen entry has been analysed. Relationships between recombination and charging currents have been fitted, showing that steady state hydrogen flux is much lower than both charging and recombination fluxes; on the other hand, the relationship between apparent concentrations on the entry side and charging conditions only can be indirectly fitted because it depends on the fitting assumptions to determine apparent diffusivities. ▪ The influence of grain size has been studied by analysing two samples with different heat treatments. Following the analytical fitting of apparent diffusivities, it is concluded that hydrogen diffuses faster through the coarser grain microstructure, so grain boundaries enhance hydrogen trapping, as expected. No acceleration or short circuit effects through grain boundaries are found. The methodology based on McNabb and Foster's asymptotic solution confirms that the coarser grain microstructure implies a higher trap density. However, differences are small and lie on the experimental scatter range. Thus, a polycrystalline model is used to explicitly simulate segregation and diffusion delay in grain boundaries during hydrogen permeation. Due to the limitations in the determination of trapping features, in future research a broader charging range will be tested in order to complete a mapping and univocally determine trapping parameters. Additionally, generalised boundary conditions will be considered to reproduce realistically the influence of overpotential, charging current and pH. The polycrystalline modelling approach will also be developed to incorporate grain orientations in order to assess possible texture effects and to study the influence of grain boundary nature on trapping phenomena.