The few-layer transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have been recently suggested as a platform for controlled unconventional superconductivity. We study the manifestations of unconventional triplet pairing in the density of states of a disordered TMD based monolayer. The conventional singlet pairing attraction is assumed to be dominant paring interaction. We map the phase diagrams of disordered Ising superconductors in the plane of temperature and the in-plane magnetic field. The latter suppresses singlet and promote triplet correlations. The triplet order parameters of a trivial (non-trivial) symmetry compete (cooperate) with singlet order parameter which gives rise to a rich phase diagram. We locate the model dependent phase boundaries and compute the order parameters in each of the distinct phases. With this information, we obtain the density of states by solving the Gorkov equation. The triplet components of the order parameters may change an apparent width of the density of states by significantly increasing the critical field. The triplet components of the order parameters lead to the density of states broadening significantly exceeding the broadening induced by magnetic field and disorder in singlet superconductor. The progress in growth and fabrication techniques made it possible to create high quality ultra-thin multilayer systems with individual layers held together by weak Van der Waals forces Many TMD monolayers such as 1H-NbSe 2 lack the inversion center even though the bulk (2H-NbSe 2 ) has such a center. This gives rise to a spin splitting of electron bands in the presence of atomic spin-orbit interaction. Due to the basal mirror plane symmetry σ h , the electron spins are polarized out-of-plane. The superconducting properties of such systems referred to as Ising superconductors One of the experimentally confirmed signatures of Ising superconductivity is its remarkable stability to the inplane magnetic field, B ⊥ ẑ. The in-plain critical field, B c is demonstrated to greatly exceed the Pauli limit A large B c can be explained by an in-plane spin susceptibility being close to that of a normal state A smooth adjustment of paired electrons to the applied field is secured by a σ h T symmetry combining σ h with the time reversal symmetry T Crucially, the non-trivial triplets are distinct by symmetry from the triplets coexisting with singlets in the absence of inversion center at B = 0 For the trivial triplets to be observed the critical temperature should be large enough, T ctz T cs as otherwise the singlet correlations dominate at experimentally accessible fields. In contrast, the non-trivial triplets noticeably affect the B c and OPs already for T ct T cs . In both cases, for triplet correlations to come into play, electrons forming a triplet Cooper pair should attract. The indirect evidence for attraction in triplet channel comes from the very recent Density Functional Theory calculations performed on the NbSe 2 monolayers either free standing or on a substrate. These studies find a large Stoner enhancement of the magnetic susceptibility indicative of strong ferromagnetic interactions The ferromagnetic fluctuations revealed by Density Functional Theory enhance the pairing interaction in the triplet channel and suppress the interactions in the singlet channel Here we assume finite T ct(z) < T cs and study the effect of triplet correlations on the density of states (DOS), N (ω), where ω is the quasi-particle energy. Typically, the DOS curve, N (ω) is inferred from the low-temperature differential conductance in devices contacted via a tunnel barrier The essential conclusion of this work is that an admixture of a triplet component to the superconducting OP may result in apparent broadening of the N (ω) curves as the applied field increases. Indeed, as detailed in Sec. IV A for ∆ SO E F , the scalar disorder characterized by the scattering rate Γ acts as a spin flipping disorder with the effective rate, Γ eff ∝ ΓB 2 /∆ 2 SO in the experimentally relevant regime, B ∆ SO . This holds also in the opposite limit, ∆ SO E F , Ref. These results are illustrated in Fig. The field dependence of the DOS broadening is a salient feature of Ising superconductors, along with the enhanced B c . As such it applies equally to pure singlet and to the mixed parity superconductors. Its concrete manifestation, however, differs in these two cases. To highlight these differences which are of a potential experimental importance we investigate in detail the (T, B) mean field phase diagrams of a monolayer TMD for a subset of a relevant symmetry constrained OPs. The phase diagrams are constructed for the complimentary models of the nodal and nodeless ∆ SO , and for systems with different degree of purity. In each case the representative DOS curve is presented. The paper is structured as follows. In Sec. II we specify the model Hamiltonian including the kinetic energy, interaction constrained by symmetries and the disorder potential. Section III contains a summary of main results intended for the reader not interested in the details of the derivation. In this section, we show phase diagrams for selected sets of parameters as well as few representative DOS curves computed along different lines on these phase diagrams. The Gorkov equation employed for finding the DOS is detailed in Sec. IV. Qualitative picture of interrelation between the triplet correlations and the DOS is given in Sec. IV A. The Landau expansion of the thermodynamic potential we rely upon in order to map the phase diagram is obtained in Sec. V. Finally in Sec. VI we discuss the results in light of the recent tunneling experiments. Consider a disordered monolayer superconductor without an inversion center. The appropriate Hamiltonian includes the kinetic energy, random disorder potential and pairing interaction term, respectively. Kinetic energy, contains the dispersion measured from the chemical potential, ξ (k), the anti-symmetric spin-orbit coupling (SOC), γ (-k) = -γ (k) due to the lack of the inversion center, and Zeeman field B = B x, Fig. In this work we consider the two models of the band structure and SOC both having D 3h as the point symmetry group, Fig. The σ h symmetric SOC has a form γ (k) = ∆ SO γ (k) ẑ. As the axial vector ẑ belongs to A 2 irrep of D 3h , the same should be true for the scalar function γ (k). For simplicity we write γ (k) = γ (φ k ), where φ k is an angle the vector k forms with the k x axis in the Brillouin Zone. The acceptable functions γ (φ k ) are linear combinations of Fourier harmonics cos(3nφ k ) with integer n = 0. All such functions vanish along ΓM as prescribed by the vertical mirror symmetry. Hence, without loss of generality we take for the Γ-model γ (φ k ) = √ 2 cos(3φ k ) The disorder is modeled as a collection of impurities of a density n imp located at random positions, R j . The resulting scattering potential reads, where u q is a Fourier transformation of the spin independent, scalar potential produced by a single impurity. For simplicity we consider a short range impurity potential such that u q = u 0 . The resulting elastic scattering time, τ is given by the Golden Rule, τ -1 = 2πn imp N 0 u 2 0 , where N 0 is the normal state DOS per spin species. Finally, we treat the pairing interaction within the mean field approximation. To this end we introduce the OP and make an approximation, H int ≈ H MF -Hi , where the mean field interaction Hamiltonian is where h.c. stands for Hermitian conjugated term. Equation ( Next, we introduce a simplified model of interaction, (4) which contains a minimum amount of necessary information to capture the thermodynamic properties and field induced phase transitions in the superconducting TMD monolayer. To this end we invoke the arguments based on symmetry considerations. We now consider the momentum and spin dependence of the superconducting OP written in the standard form as Here ψ (k) and d (k) parametrize the singlet and triplet components of the OP. In our description the leading OP is singlet, T cs > T ct(z) . Here we neglect it's anisotropy setting ψ (k) = η 0 ψ0 with the basis function ψ0 = 1. At B = 0 the triplet OP coexisting with the singlet one is determined by the axial vector d A 1 (k) transforming as A 1 . Since d (k) and the SOC transform in the same way, the reasoning fixing γ(k) applies, and we write d A 1 (k) = η A γ (k) ẑ. In addition to d A 1 we include the triplet OP induced by the field, previously introduced in Ref. The first OP in the full list above written in the form (γ(φ k )x, γ(φ k )ŷ) applies to both Γ-and K-models. In contrast to other E combinations, it couples to the fields via the SOC induced polarization of the bands even when the interaction has a full rotational symmetry such that different Fourier harmonics decouple. Although in the generic situation all E triplets condense together, here we consider the model with rotational invariant interaction. This narrows the list of E triplet OPs down to one entry, (d We do not include the triplet OPs given by the d-vectors cos φ k x + sin φ k ŷ, sin 3φ k ẑ, sin φ k x -cos φ k ŷ, and belonging to A 1 , A 2 and A 2 symmetry, respectively. We also omit the E triplet assuming no strain. In summary, in our model the d-vector characterizing the triplet component of the OP, Eq. ( and our list of OPs includes The above symmetry arguments lead us to the effective interaction Equation ( It is convenient to use the observable transition temperatures than the interaction amplitude. We hence introduce the three transition temperatures T cs , T ct(z) corresponding to the three terms in Eq. where Λ is a high energy cutoff for the attraction and γ E is Euler's constant In this section we present the main findings of this work. The end result is the calculated DOS of a disordered Ising superconductor throughout the (T, B) phase diagram. More specifically, we focused on the role played by the triplet correlations. Although the Γ-and K-model of SOC give overall similar results, there are qualitative differences in some regions of the phase diagram. We, therefore, consider these two models separately. Furthermore, for each of the two models the two physically distinct situations arise depending on the symmetry of the dominant triplet channel. The first scenario for which the field induced E triplet channel dominates over the symmetric A 1 triplet channel is realized for T ct > T ctz . And the opposite scenario is realized for T ctz > T ct . Below we consider these two scenarios separately. A. The K-model of SOC The representative phase diagram in the situation when E triplet channel dominate the A 1 triplets, is shown in Fig. where Ψ is the digamma function. Clearly, T ∞ = T ct in the clean system and is suppressed by the disorder. For instance, for the set of parameters used in Fig. Both OPs and DOS are plotted along two constant temperature cuts in the phase diagram Fig. where Ψ is the digamma function. For the parameters used in Fig. More generally, the temperature at which the critical field diverges is determined by max{T ct , T ctz }. For both Fig. Another manifestation of the similarity of the two triplet instabilities at high fields can be seen by comparison of the OP field dependence in Fig. The DOS and the variation of the OPs for the two constant T cuts of the phase diagram in Fig. A representative phase diagram of the Ising superconductor with nodal SOC is shown in the Fig. The DOS shown for T < T ctz and T > T ct in the Fig. In general, the self-consistent Born approximation fails at low energies For the Γ-model with T ctz < T ct the DOS curves for fixed T = 0.4T cs (T = 0.8T cs ) and ascending sequence of B is shown in in Fig. Our goal is to compute the DOS at any given part of the phase diagram in the (T, B) plane. This goal is achieved in two steps. First the OPs are found by the process of minimization of the mean field thermodynamic potential. Then with these OPs as an input we calculate the DOS by solving the Gorkov equation. The first step is detailed in Sec. V and covered partially in our previous work To this end we introduce the normal and anomalous Matsubara Green functions as 2 × 2 matrices in the spin space, G ss (r, r; τ, τ ) = -T τ ψ rs (τ ) ψ † r s (τ ) , F ss (r, r; τ, τ ) = -T τ ψ rs (τ ) ψ r s (τ ) . Here, ψ rs (τ ) = e Hτ ψ rs e -Hτ are the field operators in the Heisenberg representation, where τ is the imaginary time. The symbol T τ stands for the time-ordering operator, and where we have introduced the Fourier transformed Green function with the Matsubara frequencies ω n = (2n + 1) πT and similarly for F (k; ω n ). The matrix Ĝ is defined in the direct product of particle-particle or Nambu and spin spaces. This implies that each of the Green functions in Eq. ( The spin unresolved DOS is then expressed in terms of the normal Green function, where 0 + is a positive infinitesimal. The Green function, Ĝ satisfies the Gorkov equation which can be written as where σ0 = diag (σ 0 , σ 0 ) is a unit matrix of rank 4. The Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian, where the superconducting OP, ∆(k) is given by Eq. ( where Γ = (2τ ) -1 , and σz = diag (σ 0 , -σ 0 ). To obtain the DOS we solved Eqs. ( Before we proceed to the discussion of the calculated DOS for various representative parts of the phase diagram we present qualitative picture of the effect of the combined action of SOC, magnetic field and triplet correlation on the DOS in the next section. To understand how triplet correlations affect N (ω), it is useful to consider the singlet Ising superconductor first with the OP ∆(k) = η 0 iσ 2 . In this case, when B = 0, SOC does not show up due to Anderson theorem To clarify this we consider the unitary transformation of H BdG , Eq. ( where the angle θ satisfies sin θ = |B|/ B 2 + ∆ 2 SO . The BdG Hamiltonian, Eq. ( where similar to Eq. ( The singlet part of the transformed OP is η 0 = η 0 cos θ, and the triplet part d (k) = ∓iη 0 sin θŷ for k ∈ ±K. The disorder potential, Eq. ( (cos θ ∓ iσ 2;ss sin θ) where denotes the summation over the momenta k and k belonging to the same pocket. This terms accounts therefore for the intra-pocket scattering. The summation in the second term, accounts for the interpocket scattering. The upper (lower) sign describes the scattering from ±K to ∓K pockets, respectively. The shape of the N (ω) close to the peak, ω ≈ η 0 is determined by the states in the energy interval of the order η 0 around E F . For such low energies the bands split by the SOC as appears in Eq. ( where the effective BdG Hamiltonian takes a simple form, and the effective magnetic disorder gives rise to the selfenergy, where σ2 = diag (σ 2 , σ 2 ) and the scattering off the magnetic impurities is characterized by the effective rate, Even though we have considered the limit B/∆ SO 1 we retained the magnetic field in the denominator of The triplet components encoded by d ≈ d describe the pairs of electrons with the parallel spins. Such states differ in energy by an amount ∆ SO . Therefore, these terms represent a small perturbation in the Gorkov equation in the limit, |d| ∆ SO . It makes it clear that except for the overall shift of the spectral peak the equal spin triplet components make a negligible contribution to its shape. We tested this statement numerically. As is evident from Fig. We write the difference of the thermodynamic potential in superconducting and normal state in the form of a Landau expansion, (2) + Ω (4) . ( We first present the second order terms where the last term describes the coupling between the A 1 singlet and the components of the E triplet OP In what follows for definiteness we set B y = 0. The full set of mean field equations yields η E1 = 0 in this case. For this reason we list only the coefficients which are not multiplying the η E1 to simplify the presentation. For the sake of clarity we present the Landau expansion of the thermodynamic potential for the K-model, i.e. for the nodeless SOC. Employing the notations, ω n = πT (2n + 1) for Matsubara frequency labeled by an integer n, and ωn = ω n + sgn (ω n ) Γ we have The terms of the fourth order in the OPs can be represented in the form, Ω (4) = Ω (4) where the first term describes the coupling of the singlet and triplet OPs of A 1 symmetry. The second term describes the contribution of E triplets. And finally the last term describes the coupling of OPs of different symmetry allowed at the fourth order. In the explicit form each term of the equation where c.c. refers to each term in the curly brackets. All of the coefficients appearing in Eq. ( Below we describe the derivation of the expansion coefficients of the thermodynamic potential. The selfconsistency equations, (5) are equivalent to the minimization of the thermodynamic potential, Ω = -β -1 ln Tre -β(H0+H dis +HMF) -Hi -Ω 0 where we have introduced the notation, L(T ) = ln(2Λe γ E /T π). To deal with the disorder we employ a quasi-classical approach Green function In the presence of the disorder it is convenient to use an alternative representation of the thermodynamic potential, Eq. ( and • • • λ stands for the thermal averaging with respect to the quadratic Hamiltonian, H 0 + H dis + λH MF with H MF specified by Eq. We define the λ-dependent anomalous Green function, F λ,ss (r, r ; τ, τ ) by Eq. ( • • • replaced by • • • λ . With these definitions Eq. ( where we have used the explicit form of the mean field Hamiltonian, Eq. ( To deal with the disorder we employ a quasi-classical formalism. The quasi-classical Green's functions are defined by where σ3 = diag(σ 0 , -σ 0 ). We parametrize the quasiclassical Green's functions in terms of Pauli matrices as The λ-dependent quasi-classical Green functions can be defined similarly to Eqs. ( Similar to Eq. ( The definition, Eq. ( For the choice of the OP specified by Eqs. ( For brevity we henceforth write f 0 (k f * and use the same notations for g 0 , g, g * 0 , g * . Furthermore, naturally we extend the same notation to all the λ-dependent quasi-classical Green functions to the remainder of the paper. With these notations, and using Eq. ( The standard regularization, ωn |ω n | -1 = (β/π)L(T ) along with the representation Ω = Ω -Hi , allows us to combine the expression The Eq. ( It is greatly simplified when expanded to the fourth order in OPs. This is done in the next section. In this section, we perform the expansion of the thermodynamic potential in the OPs, η 0 , η A , η E1 and η E2 . For our purposes the expansion up to the fourth order suffices. Clearly, in order to expand the Eq. ( where the superscript ν denotes the order of expansion. In Eq. 0 , g (ν) appearing in Eq. ( Substituting ( The first and third order terms are forbidden by the gauge invariance, Ω (1) = Ω (3) = 0. Technically, this follows from the vanishing of f (0) 0 , f (0) and f (2) 0 , f (2) , respectively, as shown in Sec. V C.) To the fourth order we obtain, The (1, 1)-block of the normalization condition (53) is similarly presented as In Eq. ( where for clarity we henceforth omit the arguments (-k, ω n ) of the expansion coefficients, (f * 0 ) (ν) , (f * ) (ν) , (g * 0 ) (ν) and (g * ) (ν) in the same way as we did for f * 0 , f * , g * 0 and g * before. To solve the Eilenberger equation up to third order it suffice to consider the Eqs. ( The zero order solutions that are exact in the normal state are not fixed by the Eilenberger equation, and can be determined most easily by solving the Gorkov equation With the equation (58) as an input, Eq. (55) expanded to the first order reads (1) . To the first order the normalization condition, Eq. (56) yields g (1) 0 = 0, g (1) = 0. (60) Equation ( (1) 0 , f (1) with f (1) 0 , f (1) considered as given along with the OPs appearing in Eq. ( (1) 0 , f (1) which is easily solved. Finally, the obtained values of the latter angular averages are used to express f (1) 0 , f (1) via the OPs. The first order solutions obtained by following this procedure read, f where we have defined the denominator n and the angular averages are The coefficients in Eq. ( Triplet superconductivity remains elusive in most materials. Uranium-based superconductors are perhaps the only uncontroversial exception In view of the potential importance of the unconventional paring in NbSe 2 based on the recent theoretical and experimental works In this work we have addressed the question of how the triplet correlations affect the DOS in TMD monolayers. In practical terms, we argue that the strength of the triplet correlations is an important knob controlling the DOS evolution with an in-plane magnetic field. We illustrate this point by a concrete example in Fig. T cs . In one system (Fig. In conclusion, the monolayer TMDs are promising platform for studies and controlled manipulation of triplet components of the superconducting OP. In this work, we demonstrate that the field induced triplet correlations can be inferred from the field evolution of the tunnelling data combined with the knowledge of other parameters such as SOC and degree of system purity available from transport measurements. in the way illustrated in section V C. In the remainder of this appendix we perform this consistency check. Considering the zero order terms (58) and the first order terms (60) the first order expansion of Eqs. (C1),(C2) and the second order expansion of Eq. (C2) hold. The second order expansion of Eq. (C1) yields + f (1) • d * (k) + Γ (f * 0 ) (f * 0 ) + f (1) • (f * ) (1) -(f * ) (1) • f (1) , 0 = 2g (2) × (γ (k) -B) -ψ * (k) f (1) (C3b) 0 d * (k) + i (f * ) (1) × d (k) + id * (k) × f (1) + Γ (f * ) (1) f (1) 0 -f (1) 0 (f * ) (1) + f (1) (f * 0 ) (1) -(f * 0 ) (1) f (1) -i (f * ) (1) × f (1) + f (1) × (f * ) . The expressions for f (1) 0 , (f * 0 ) (1) , f (1) , (f * ) (1) , g (2) derived from the procedure illustrated in section V C are consistent with Eq. (C3). This can be seen by direct substitution. Considering Eqs. ( (2) = 0, (C4a) f (1) × g (2) -(g * ) (2) + i g (2) +(g * ) (2) f (1) 0 = 0, (C4b) where we used the property (68). The expressions for f (1) 0 , f (1) , g (2) , (g * ) (2) derived from the procedure illustrated in section V C are consistent with Eq. (C4). This can be seen by direct substitution. In order to complete the check with the third order expansion of Eq. (C1) we first take the third order expansion of Eq. (56b) which together with Eqs. (58),(60),(65) yield g (3) = 0. Considering this result together with Eqs. (58),(60),(65) shows that the third order expansion of Eq. (C1) holds. Tctz > Tct: dominant A 1 triplet channel