A number of recent experiments indicate that the iron-chalcogenide FeSe provides the long-sought possibility to study bulk superconductivity in the cross-over regime between the weakly coupled Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) pairing and the strongly coupled Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC). We report on 77 Se nuclear magnetic resonance experiments of FeSe, focused on the superconducting phase for strong magnetic fields applied along the c axis, where a distinct state with large spin polarization was reported. We determine this high-field state as bulk superconducting with high spatial homogeneity of the low-energy spin fluctuations. Further, we find that the static spin susceptibility becomes unusually small at temperatures approaching the superconducting state, despite the presence of pronounced spin fluctuations. Taken together, our results clearly indicate that FeSe indeed features an unusual field-induced superconducting state of a highly spin-polarized Fermi liquid in the BCS-BEC crossover regime. The discovery of superconductivity in iron-based materials in 2008 opened a new avenue for the exploration of unusual superconducting states and phenomena in multiband superconductors, with wide possibilities for tuning the electronic ground states by variation of the material composition and the ensuing thermodynamic parameters Despite its structural simplicity, FeSe yields a wealth of interesting phenomena. For example, a nematic transition, presumably induced by orbital ordering, occurs at about 90 K, where the C 4 rotational symmetry is broken, while the translational symmetry is preserved Further, very recently compelling evidence for the appearance of a Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state was found when the applied magnetic field is aligned parallel to the ab plane In this paper, we present 77 Se nuclear magnetic res- onance (NMR) data of a high-quality single crystal of FeSe. The parameter range of our study covers magnetic fields between 5 and 16 T applied along the crystallographic c axis, and temperatures between 0.3 and 40 K. Our work mainly focuses on the electronic properties at low temperatures and close to the upper critical field of superconductivity, where the existence of the B phase was reported, thus constituting the first investigation of the local dynamic properties across the A-B transition in FeSe at the BCS-BEC crossover regime. The NMR coil with a vapor-grown FeSe single crystal ) β ]} to the recovery of the nuclear magnetization after saturation, where β is a stretching exponent that accounts for a distribution of relaxation times. The obtained results from the RF reflection measurements, shown in Fig. In the field-dependent sweeps at low temperatures (see Fig. Similar to the RF reflection experiments, a change of the RF volume penetration at the transition to the superconducting state can be probed via the intensity of the NMR spectra, see inset of Fig. Having established the phase diagram, we next turn to our investigation of the intrinsic electronic properties, probed via NMR observables. In general, the NMR Knight shift is defined as K = K orb + K s , being composed of a constant orbital part K orb and a spin part K s , defined as K s = A hf • χ, with the hyperfine coupling A hf and the electronic dc susceptibility χ. From previous 77 Se NMR results of FeSe above the nematic transition temperature, a hyperfine coupling of A hf = 3.77 T/μ B was reported For precise determination of the 77 Se Knight shift, the magnetic field was repeatedly calibrated with a 63 Cu NMR reference during the experiments. For all fields, the temperature dependence of the Knight shift shows no noticeable change below 30 K, see Fig. Next, we turn to the discussion of the low-energy spin fluctuations. As shown in Fig. Upon crossing the superconducting transition, 1/T 1 T drops further -without showing any feature that might be associated with T c -and levels off at about 2 K at 11 T and 3 K at 8 T, in good agreement with the vortex liquid-solid transition indicated by the peak fields obtained from the torque data reported by Kasahara et al. In Fig. The field dependence of 1/T 1 T at 0.3 K (Fig. The field dependence of 1/T 1 T yields two transitional regimes at around 11 and 14 T, respectively. As was reported from measurements of the thermal Hall coefficients, the transverse thermal conductivity changes sign at around 12 T and 0.59 K, indicating that the quasiparticles that determine the thermal conduction change from electron-like to hole-like The second change of the field dependence of 1/T 1 T occurs around μ 0 H ⋆ ≈ 14 T, which gives evidence of a field-driven transition to a distinct bulk superconducting state, in very good agreement with features found in previous reports based on thermodynamic quantities Finally, we comment on the compatibility of our results with an FFLO state underlying the B phase In summary, RF volume penetration and 77 Se NMR measurements of the static and low-energy dynamic susceptibility of single-crystalline FeSe at fields between 5 and 16 T and temperatures down to 0.3 K reveal that the high-field B phase represents a distinct bulk superconducting state of a highly spin-polarized Fermi liquid with nonlinear RF response of the surface conductivity. The B phase yields, within our experimental resolution, no spatial modulation of either the density of low-energy quasiparticle excitations or the static local susceptibility, as evidenced by a non-stretched spin-lattice relaxation and the absence of a discernible inhomogeneous line broadening, respectively. Rather, 1/T 1 T increases monotonically towards low temperatures and increasing fields in the B phase, which sets it apart from standard BCS bulk super-conductivity with gapped excitations. Further, measurements of the orbital part of the NMR Knight shift deep in the superconducting state reveal that the static spin susceptibility in FeSe becomes extremely small below 30 K, despite the presence of pronounced spin fluctuations. In line with previous results, 1/T 1 T reveals a gapped behavior of the low-energy spin fluctuations already well above T c in a wide field range, indicating pseudo-gap formation due to preformed Cooper pairs, which underlines the unusual superconductivity of FeSe in the BCS-BEC crossover regime.