In this chapter we will describe a new development of combinatorial pulsed laser deposition (CPLD) which targets the exploration of interface libraries. The idea is to modulate continuously the composition of interfaces on a few atomic layers in order to alter their functional properties. This unique combinatorial synthesis of interfaces is possible due to very specific PLD characteristics. The first one is its well-known ability for complex oxide stoichiometry transfer from the target to the film. The second one is the layer by layer control of thin film growth at the atomic level using in-situ RHEED characterization. The third one relates to the directionality of the ablated plume which allows for selective area deposition on the substrate using a mobile shadow-mask. However PLD also has some limitations and important PLD aspects to be considered for reliable CPLD are reviewed. Multiple examples regarding the control of interface magnetism in magnetic tunnel junctions and energy band and Schottky barrier height tuning in ferroelectric tunable capacitors are presented. The first report of laser ablation generated plasma to deposit a film dates back to 1965, using a continuous ruby laser Ceramic target vaporization based on laser ablation does not depend on the nature of the atoms within the target and result in a stoichiometric plasma as long as the energy per surface unit (i.e. the laser fluence) is above the ablation threshold. Venkatesan and co-workers were the first to vaporize an YBCO target using a pulsed excimer laser (UV KrF). After fine tuning the ablation conditions by checking the spatial distribution of the cations they rapidly produced superconducting films having the best physical properties of that time. Since then PLD based thin film research thrived over a wide range of materials, physical properties and applications. PLD has benefited from in-situ real-time characterization tools developed for other deposition technique to mature into an epitaxial film growth method with control at the atomic scale and able to produce heterostructures with sharp interfaces. At the end of the 90's, material scientists considered transposing combinatorial synthesis, a high throughput synthesis method developed by the pharmaceutical industry, to the field of multi-cation oxides research. Combinatorial PLD (CPLD) rapidly emerged, the basic idea being to grow on a single substrate, in a single deposition run, a film with continuous in-plane chemical modulation. In this way, a wide range of chemical compositions are produced within the same sample and can be quickly scanned to identify compounds with optimum targeted properties. Since the new millennium, CPLD has been refined and its field extended to ternary phase diagram exploration. More recently CPLD research field has been extended to a new territory: the exploration of interface compositions in heterostructures with enhanced functional properties a.k.a. Interface Combinatorial Pulsed Laser Deposition (ICPLD). The aim of this chapter is not to thoroughly describe PLD but to emphasize its most important aspects, advantages and limitations with regard to combinatorial synthesis of oxide films and heterostructures. The reader interested in an exhaustive description of PLD is encouraged to consult PLD's introduction reference book The first pre-requisite for CPLD is the growth of films with uniform thickness and homogeneous composition over the entire sample surface. Although PLD has a reputation for stoichiometric transfer from the target to the film, this is not however straightforward and several deposition parameters have to be fine-tuned. Starting from the formation of a stoichiometric plasma, target thermal vaporization occurring below the ablation threshold should be reduced as much as possible. This means that local fluence everywhere on the laser beam spot should be above the ablation threshold, implying very steep sidewalls of the laser beam energy distribution. Such a distribution, called a top-hat, necessitate laser beam shaping with a beam homogenizer. The laser beam divergence depends on the discharge voltage and could affect the beam spot size and energy distribution depending on the beam shaping method, so the discharge voltage should be kept constant. The plasma expands from the target toward the substrate in the form of a plume which interacts with ambient gas molecules or atoms. Multiple collisions per atom or ions occur leading to a thermalized but still highly directional plasma reaching the substrate. It follows a radial distribution of thickness and composition at the substrate surface. In order to get a uniform and homogeneous film, one has to scan the plume with respect to the substrate, by either scanning the laser spot over the target surface at constant focus and/or moving the substrate (rotation, translation). Doing so will result in a film with much increased thickness uniformity and homogeneous composition. However the composition may not match the target stoichiometry. Indeed, it has been shown that cationic off-stoichiometry up to a few percent occurs depending on the fluence for a fixed spot size and target-substrate distance The second pre-requisite for CPLD is a layer by layer growth mode for a control of the composition at the unit cell level. Layer by layer PLD growth of various perovskites has been demonstrated multiple times using in-situ real time grazing incidence electron diffraction (RHEED). This ability for 2d growth comes from the very peculiar and sequential PLD surface crystallization kinetic. Indeed, although average PLD deposition rate is quite slow, instantaneous deposition rate a few μs after laser pulses is extremely high, creating a supersaturation close to the surface which results in high nucleation rate. The large number of nucleus present after the first pulse favors 2d growth. Furthermore, as PLD relies on photon to vaporize the target, the ambient gas pressure can be varied over a very wide range from vacuum level to a few mbar. The deposition pressure allows for the control of the energy of the species reaching the substrate and ultimately their remaining kinetic energy to explore the surface and find the nucleation sites. The last pre-requisite for CPLD is the ability to lower the average deposition rate per pulse to produce the smallest composition step when mixing materials from different targets. For a fixed fluence and target-substrate distance, the deposition rate per pulse strongly correlates with the laser spot size on the target which is easily adjustable. Deposition rate as low as a few hundred pulses per perovskite unit cell thick layer can be reached. One drawback of PLD is the lack of deposition rate stability. Indeed the structure of the irradiated target surface evolves with laser exposure; the deposition rate lowering with target aging is more severe for a brand new surface and decays with target exposure. Scanning over a large area of the target reduces the number of laser spots per location and makes this problem less stringent. It is however mandatory to calibrate the deposition rate prior a deposition or to measure it in-situ using RHEED. The concept of combinatorial research, initially introduced in the pharmaceutical industry, aims at synthesizing a large number of compounds with complex and systematically varied composition in a single batch. A high speed characterization technique is then used to scan through this material library and identify the compounds presenting the targeted property. This approach is very appealing regarding multi-cationic perovskite-related oxides. Indeed their physical properties, covering a very wide span (superconductivity, ferroelectricity, ferromagnetism, colossal magnetoresistance, tunable resistivity ...), result from the subtle equilibrium between competing interactions involving charges, spins and orbitals. This results in an extreme sensitivity of the properties to the cationic composition and requires a fine, thorough and systematic scanning in order to optimize the performances. The first thin film combinatorial synthesis attempts implied multiple successive room temperature depositions to vary the composition. Several annealing steps were then required for thermal diffusion and crystallization. This approach, where reaction products are dominated by thermodynamic like in ceramic sintering, is not appropriate for epitaxial thin films and heterostructures. On the contrary, epitaxial oxide thin films growth by PLD does not require post-deposition annealing. Moreover the directionality of the plume allows for localized deposition on the substrate through a shadow-mask. These multiple advantages were soon associated to combinatorial synthesis of oxide materials at the end of the 90's simultaneously in the United States and in Japan. The original approach is schematically described in Figure The single unit cell combinatorial cycle consists of two successive depositions from different targets. The material deposited from each target is distributed across the substrate surface using a moving shadow-mask in order to vary locally the layer completeness (from 0-100%). After one deposition cycle, the resulting 1uc thick layer has a composition which varies laterally from one target composition to the other (composition spread). Then this deposition cycle is repeated N times in order to achieve targeted final film thickness. This idealized combinatorial PLD synthesis produces a continuous variation of compositions on a single sample, guarantying identical growth conditions for all compositions and eliminating the risk of sample variability. Interface Combinatorial Pulsed Laser Deposition to Enhance Heterostructures Functional... DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.94415 A consequence of CPLD is the necessity to use local probes to scan through the compositions library and assess performances. There is a trade-off between the minimum probe size required to measure the targeted physical property and the lateral composition gradient in order to characterize a "homogeneous" compound at the probe level. The main difficulty regarding CPLD synthesis is to reach adequate control of both local composition and thickness using PLD. As explained in the previous chapter this requires long in-depth preparation work involving chemical characterization and exhaustive optimization of all the deposition parameters. A prerequisite to reliable CPLD synthesis is to produce a uniform and smooth film with constant composition and thickness from each target over the surface of the future CPLD samples. One should not attempt CPLD before proving this achievement. Another important point is to keep a statistical approach to the characterization of the libraries. It is tempting to produce ternary phase diagrams using 3 different targets on a single substrate. However, in this case there is only one location on the sample per compound which is statistically insufficient. To our knowledge, any published work concerning CPLD ternary phase diagrams on a single sample does not present a proper characterization that demonstrates the control of the composition and thickness across the library. This is not very surprising knowing how difficult it already is to master a single gradient for a binary diagram across one sample. Unfortunately even for binary samples a large number of CPLD articles have been published without any evidence of control of composition/ thickness which brought some discredit on CPLD among the scientific community. To change this perception and reinforce CPLD credit, we proposed a decade ago a statistical approach to the characterization of both the composition and the physical properties for binary phase diagram. To illustrate the effectiveness of CPLD we will discuss about the search for new lead-free piezoelectrics to replace (1-x)PbZrO 3 -xPbTiO 3 (PZT), the most used material in microelectromechanical systems for sensing, actuating, or energy harvesting applications. PZT ferroelectric films present large piezoelectric coefficients and electromechanical coupling, enabling long range motions and high energy densities. As previously discussed, the first step is to produce uniform films of controlled composition before aiming to CPLD. The Bi element being volatile, the stabilization of pure BFO in thin films is not straightforward, as several parasitic phases can coexist. To compensate for Bi volatility we used an enriched Bi 1.1 FeO 3 target and found the range of temperature, oxygen pressure and fluence which lead to pure BFO films. The structure was studied by x-ray micro-diffraction (μXRD) and Bi/Fe ratio by Rutherford Back Scattering (RBS) versus laser fluence. A fluence of 1.72 J•cm -2 was identified as giving Bi/Fe = 1 with a deposition temperature of 700°C, an oxygen pressure of 0.2 mbar, a laser repetition rate of 6 Hz with a targetsubstrate distance of 4.5 cm. We choose GaFeO 3 (GFO) as the second member of the solid solution to be explored in order to find a MPB. GFO does not have a perovskite structure but crystallizes in a much more complex orthorhombic structure (SG Pc21n). X-ray Reciprocal Space Mapping (RSM) around the (103) pc reflection have shown that BGFO and LSMO are epitaxial on STO (not shown here, see In strongly correlated complex oxides, charge, spin, orbital and lattice degrees of freedom co-exist and interplay cooperatively. In particular the complex balance between these degrees of freedom and related interactions generates a rich spectrum of competing phases in perovskites or perovskite-derived materials (e.g. high Tc superconductor, metal-insulator transitions, magnetism, ferroelectricity, piezo-electricity...). The recent progress in deposition techniques allowed the production of complex perovskites heterostructures with atomically sharp interfaces, which Interface Combinatorial Pulsed Laser Deposition to Enhance Heterostructures Functional... DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.94415 expanded material researcher's horizon. Fascinating phenomena and novel states of matter at complex oxide heterointerfaces have been reported. One can cite for instance the existence of high mobility 2d electron gas at LaAlO 3 / SrTiO 3 interface, even becoming superconducting at low temperature, while both materials taken separately are insulating. One application where oxide interfaces plays a crucial role is the ferroelectric (FE) voltage tunable capacitor envisaged for future RF communication technologies (5G and Near Field Communication NFC). Interface engineering can be used to tailor band alignment and interface polarizability. The insertion of a thin layer with different atomic element(s) at the interface allows to manipulate the chemical bonding and promotes atomic rearrangement. Let us consider for instance the anti-displacement of anions and cations predicted at Ba 2+ O 2-/M and Sr 2+ O 2-/M interfaces and quantified by a rumpling parameter R. [30] R depends on the chemical bonding and is responsible for an interface dipole, which in turn modulate the SBH. Interestingly, the insertion of e.g. a single Al atomic plane at the BaO/M interface strongly affects R and SBH. Indeed, for M = Pd the SBH goes from 1.4 eV to 2.6 eV. LSMO is a ferromagnetic (FM) half-metal, i.e. having a 100% spin-polarization at the Fermi level. For the latter reason it has been intensively studied as a spinpolarized electrode in LSMO/STO/LSMO magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ). MTJs are used e.g. as memory bits in magnetic MRAMs. The tunnel resistance depends on electrode spin-polarization and on the relative orientation of the electrode magnetic moments, with high resistance R AP (resp. low resistance R P ) for antiparallel (resp. parallel) states. A 100% spin polarized electrode leads to a theoretical infinite R AP which is ideal for the cited application. In LSMO/STO/LSMO, a record tunnel magneto-resistance (TMR = (R AP -R P )/R P ) of about 2000% was reported, but unfortunately for temperature far below the Curie temperature T C . Incorporating a few uc of combinatorial LSMO x (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) at the LSMO/STO interface to modulate the chemical bonding, the carrier density and the polar discontinuity could potentially induce STO lattice polar distortion, SBH modulation, as well as restoring interface ferromagnetism. Before producing the described ICPLD heterostructures, we first optimized the LSMO physical properties, composition and thickness uniformity. The magnetic properties of the film were then characterized versus temperature using a Interface Combinatorial Pulsed Laser Deposition to Enhance Heterostructures Functional... DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.94415 commercial Kerr magnetometer equipped with a cryostat (NanoMoke II, Durham Magneto Optics). As the magnetism at the LSMO/STO interface is weakened, the Curie temperature will depend on LSMO thickness for very thin films. To avoid this regime, we worked with 30 nm thick LSMO films (~80uc). Several films were deposited on TiO 2 terminated (100) STO substrates with high-pressure RHEED monitoring (Staib/TSST) at various fluence, temperature and oxygen pressure. The optimized deposition conditions leading to a T C = 341 K were P O2 = 0.2 mbar, T sub = 850°C, f = 5 Hz and a fluence of 0.83 J/cm 2 . RHEED oscillations were clearly visible during all the deposition process implying a layer by layer growth. X-ray diffraction patterns (Θ-2Θ) showed only (00 l) pc reflections with thickness fringes attesting for the crystalline quality and the surface and interface smoothness. RSM confirmed epitaxial "cube on cube" growth of LSMO on STO. The homogeneity of the films in term of composition and magnetic properties over a 1 cm 2 STO substrate was verified for thinner films, in the range where T C is thickness dependent. A 20uc thick sample was deposited with vertical and horizontal scanning of the laser, staying in focus at the target position, and of the substrate respectively. The Kerr magnetometer laser spot (diameter < 5 μm) was scanned on the sample surface at fixed temperatures to measure magnetic hysteresis curves in 311 points spread across the sample surface. This (x,y) scan was repeated every 2.5 K from room temperature to 350 K after thermal stabilization. Each hysteresis curve was processed in order to extract saturation and remnant magnetization (M sat and M r respectively). M(T) curves can then be reconstructed for each point on the sample surface, allowing to assess for Tc in each location. Maps reporting FM and paramagnetic (PM) areas of the sample are reproduced in Figure The relative interface contribution to the overall magnetic signal increases as the LSMO thickness decreases. It is however difficult to predict the optimal LSMO thickness leading to an improved interface contribution detection as the overall magnetic signal also decreases with thickness. A powerful aspect of CPLD is the possibility to deposit wedge-shaped layers with continuous thickness variation using shadow-masking (see Figure To synthesize the ICPLD LSMOx layer we used LaMnO 3 (LMO) and SrMnO 3 (SMO) targets with the deposition parameters identified for LSMO, including laser and substrate stage scans. Deposition rate was evaluated using RHEED oscillations. A 3 uc thick LSMO x layer (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) was deposited onto TiO 2 -terminated STO substrate, followed by a LSMO wedge with thickness variation direction perpendicular to LSMO x composition gradient. A schematic representation of this sample is represented Figure M(H) cycles were acquired versus position (512 sites) and temperature (120 temperatures with 90 K < T < 340 K) automatically during a few days. Then M sat and M r were extracted for each loop, M(T) curves reconstructed and T C estimated for each (composition x, thickness t) doublet. Figure We now turn to interface issues arising in tunable capacitors with thinned FE film i.e. the increased influence of dead ferroelectric layer on tunability and the increased leakage current. As discussed previously the insertion of a LSMOx ICPLD layer at LSMO/BST interface may increase interface polarizability and modulate SBH. In order to easily disentangle spontaneous and chemically induced polarizations we choose to work with a non-polar composition of BST i.e. STO. We deposited onto TiO 2 -terminated STO substrate 38 uc of LSMO followed by 3 uc of LSMO x (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) and in the direction perpendicular to the gradient a STO wedge (3-15 uc) keeping an access to both LSMO and LSMO x with the deposition parameters described above. A schematic of the sample structure is represented Figure The counter-intuitive decrease of W F while E F decreases too is due to the LSMOx induced charge discontinuity variation at the surface. Going from LMO to SMO, the LSMOx terminal plane changes from Mn O +-, i.e. with a surface charge per unit cell going from -1 to 0. The more negatively charged a surface is, the harder for an electron to escape from the surface, the higher the W F . The electrical nature of the contact between a metal and a semiconductor directly depends on the relative values of the metal W F and semiconductor electronic affinity E a for ionic semiconductor Interestingly this value is inside the range of W F spanned within LSMO x .(see pink part of Figure This result is of importance regarding the optimization of the SBH in BST FE tunable capacitor in particular, but more generally for any metal/semiconductor contacts. In this chapter we reviewed the qualities and limitations of PLD for the synthesis of oxides in general and for its use in combinatorial PLD synthesis (CPLD) in particular. We listed some counter-actions to mitigate the PLD limitations together with the mandatory steps to take before attempting reliable CPLD synthesis, i.e. demonstrating the control of both thickness and composition over the whole sample surface. We then detailed a statistical characterization approach to reliably interpret results from CPLD libraries of compounds. An example of this approach is presented, regarding the exploration of lead-free Ga-doped BiFeO 3 solid solution for MPB-related piezoelectric properties enhancement. Finally we described a new interface CPLD development (ICPLD) for the exploration of functional interface libraries. This combinatorial interface synthesis approach, with continuous lateral chemical modulation of a few atomic layers, is unique to the best of our knowledge. The effectiveness of ICPLD regarding the control of interface magnetism for magnetic tunnel junctions and energy band and Schottky barrier height tuning in ferroelectric tunable capacitors was demonstrated. This shows that ICPLD is a powerful tool to accelerate heterostructures functional properties enhancement. Interface Combinatorial Pulsed Laser Deposition to Enhance Heterostructures Functional... DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.94415