Chains of resonators in the form of spring-mass systems have long been known to exhibiting interesting properties such as band gaps. Such features can be leveraged to manipulate the propagation of waves such as the filtering of specific frequencies and, more generally, mitigate vibrations and impact. Adding nonlinearities to the system can also provide further avenues to manipulate the propagation of waves in the chain and enhance its performance. This work proposes to optimally design such a chain of resonators to mitigate vibrations in a robust manner by accounting for various sources of design uncertainties (e.g., nonlinear stiffness) and aleatory uncertainties (e.g., loading). The stochastic optimization algorithm is tailored to account for discontinuities in the chain response due to the presence of nonlinearities. In addition, a field formulation is used to define the properties of the resonators along the chain and reduce the dimensionality of the optimization problem. It is shown that the combination of the stochastic optimization algorithm and the field representation leads to robust designs that could not be achieved with optimal properties constant over the chain. The design of metamaterials has been the object of many studies because interesting dynamic behavior, sometimes non-existent in nature, can be achieved. For instance, a basic phenomenon extensively studied is the appearance of band gaps, which are frequency ranges within which waves cannot propagate Beyond the well-known band gaps, it has long been understood that nonlinearities at the unit cell level can substantially increase the range of possible wave manipulations. There again, there have been many studies exploiting nonlinearities in various forms (e.g., stiffness, constitutive law) to achieve specific wave characteristics The design optimization of metamaterials is tedious for several reasons. First, nonlinearities can lead to discontinuous responses. These discontinuities demonstrate that the system's dynamic behavior is potentially highly sensitive to uncertainties, which must therefore be accounted for in the design process. Examples of sources of uncertainties are design uncertainties (e.g., material properties), loading uncertainties, or initial conditions. Finally, the number of cells in a metamaterial is very large. Therefore, if a non-periodic structure is considered, the individual optimization of each unit is computationally very expensive. It is noteworthy that the non-smoothness of the problem is a major hurdle for topology optimization techniques, which are based on an efficient evaluation of the gradients using the adjoint method. This limitation is even more stringent because of the need to include uncertainties in the optimization problem. This work proposes a methodology to perform the design optimization under the uncertainty of a chain of nonlinear resonators, representative of a metamaterial. One of the key features of the stochastic optimization method lies in its ability to account for discontinuities, which are automatically detected through clustering Among the possible problem formulations, the proposed approach is used to optimize the mean of performance metrics such as the RMS response in the case of vibration mitigation. In this study, the optimization of a one-dimensional chain of resonators is considered for demonstrative purposes. The chain is made of units constituted of a main and an internal nonlinear resonators. This so-called "mass-in-a-mass" design is originally representative of inclusions within a material. The nonlinearities considered in this article are in the form of a cubic stiffness property in the internal resonators. This article is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the chain of resonators and its properties, and provides the governing equations. The derivation of the dispersion analysis of the chain is provided to identify band gaps and understand how they vary as a function of the nonlinearity of the internal resonator. Section 3 describes the optimization problem formulation, the field implementation for dimensionality reduction, and the main elements of the stochastic optimization algorithm. Results are provided in Section 5, including three examples of stochastic optimization with harmonic loading. In this study, a discrete one-dimensional chain of resonators is considered (Figure Figure The governing equations for the j th unit composed of a main and an internal resonators without external load are: where u 1 and u 2 are the displacements of the main and internal resonators, respectively. k 1 and k 2 are the linear stiffnesses. c 1 and c 2 are the viscous damping coefficients. k n is the nonlinear stiffness. After non-dimensionalization, and removal of the unit index j for readability, the equations become: where is the differentiation with respect to the non-dimensional time τ = ωt, v = u L (where L is the spatial distance between adjacent units), mass ratio = m 2 m 1 , stiffness ratio . Note that L does not appear explicitly in the dimensional equations of motion. In order to determine the frequency band gaps and assess the effect of nonlinearities, the dispersion behavior of the chain is studied using the harmonic balance method, as described in where , K (j-1) = -k 1 0 0 0 , 3 is the force term due to the nonlinear springs and f ext is the external load. Based on the non-dimensional time τ = ωt, and setting the external load to zero, Eq. 3 can be condensed as: where, F int (u (j) , u (j-1) , u (j+1) ) = K (j-1) u (j-1) + K (j) u (j) + K (j+1) u (j+1) + f nl where A is the wave amplitude and {c 1i , s 1i , c 2i s 2i } are the normalized amplitude vectors of the i th unit for the main and internal resonators respectively. By changing the summation to matrix/vector multiplication, the harmonic motion defined in Eq. 6, can be rewritten as: where In these equations, j is the reference unit from which the wave propagates through neighboring units. Without loss of generality, j is set to 0, and u (j) , u (j-1) and u (j+1) are shown with u (0) , u (-1) and u (1) . Eq. 4 can be rewritten using Eq. 7. Where, The maximum element of λ is normalized to unity. The differential equation ( There are a total of 4M + 2 variables: λ, wave amplitude A, wave number k and frequency ω. In order to find the dispersion relation between the wave number and frequency, the amplitude and the wave number are fixed thus leading to 4M unknowns. We can now solve for ω and λ for a given amplitude and wave number. Figure As shown in the previous section, the dispersion relation, and therefore the dynamic behavior of the chain, is dependent on the amplitude and also on the nonlinear stiffness of the internal resonator. Another important feature of the dynamic response is that it can exhibit discontinuities. Figure This article aims at optimizing a chain of resonators through the following stochastic optimization formulation: where, E is the expected value. F is a quantity to optimize such as an RMS displacement at a given point on the chain. X d and X a are respectively the (random) design and "aleatory" variables. The aleatory variables are defined as variables which are not controllable. Chains of resonators can include a very large number of units in which the properties such as stiffness and mass should be adjusted. Therefore, it would be impossible to optimize units individually. In this paper, we propose to reduce the dimensionality of the problem by describing the unit features (e.g., nonlinear stiffness) through a field controlled with a handful of coefficients, which become the new optimization variables of the problem. This approach makes the problem scalable by significantly reducing the number of optimization variables. The proposed field θ is expanded over m "basis" functions: where x represents the position of a unit on the chain, and a 1 , b j and c j are the coefficients, which will become optimization variables. The rationale for the proposed field form is that, from a design standpoint, it enables the representation of a range of periodic as well nonperiodic structures in the case of a finite chain. If only one term is used and φ(x) = sin 2 (x), as used in this work, the field becomes: where, for ease of notation, a 2 ≡ b 1 and a 3 ≡ c 1 . If one term is used, defining a property of the chain using the field enables one to reduce the number of optimization variables to three. Note that the purpose of squaring the basis function is to obtain non-negative values from the field description. For two specific choices of coefficients a 1 , a 2 and a 3 , the variations of the stiffness ratio α in a chain of 100 units are illustrated in Figure The stochastic optimization problem in Eq. 13 is solved using a specific optimization algorithm In order to optimize the problem, a surrogate approximation of the response must be used due to the computational burden of each simulation. However, the use of a single meta-model such as Kriging constructed with a design of experiments would not lead to a good approximation because of the presence of potentially large discontinuities. For this reason, a clustering technique such as K-Means Sub-problems based on two Krigings and an SVM are refined iteratively through a specific adaptive sampling scheme which accounts for the random variable distributions The first step of this optimization algorithm is to detect the discontinuity in the response and split the samples into two classes with high and low responses. In this study, the K-Means algorithm is used to cluster the samples based on the RMS displacement. Using the two clusters of samples, the regions corresponding to high and low RMS values can be identified in the space of parameters. The idea is to construct a boundary that splits the parameters space into two regions which are associated with low and high RMS values. For this purpose, an SVM classifier is used which is trained based on the labeled samples and provides an explicit expression of the boundary in terms of the parameters. Given a set of N training samples x i in an n-dimensional space and the corresponding class labels y i = ±1, which in our case is provided by the K-means clustering, an SVM boundary is given as: where b is a scalar referred to as the bias, λ i are Lagrange multipliers obtained from the quadratic programming optimization problem used to construct the SVM, and K is a kernel function. The classification of any arbitrary point x is given by the sign of s(x). The kernel function K can have several forms, such as polynomial or Gaussian radial basis kernel, which is used in this article: where σ is the width parameter. Because the constructed SVM boundary might not be accurate around the optimization iterate, an adaptive sampling scheme is used to refine the boundary. The sampling algorithm is described in detail by Lacaze and Missoum where f X is the d-dimensional standard normal joint probability density function, N s is the number of existing samples, and p 1. This approach selects points on the boundary of the SVM weighted by the known distributions of the design parameters. As mentioned in Section 3, the lower and upper bounds for the means of the design variables are μ min d and μ max d which specify the space where the optimization problem (Eq. 13) is solved. However, because of the distributions defined for the design variables to perform the Monte-Carlo sampling, the samples are created in an expanded space whose boundaries for the design variables are X min In order to approximate the response over the entire space (including both design and aleatory variables), two separate Kriging approximations are constructed. Each one is built based on one of the clusters as identified through clustering. The optimization to minimize E(F ) is performed using these two approximations. Monte-Carlo simulations are used to compute the expected value around the optimization iterate. In order to decide which Kriging approximation will be used to evaluate the Monte-Carlo samples, the SVM described above is used. Based on N M C Monte-Carlo samples x i , the approximated expected value can therefore be written as: where I is an indicator function defined as: F1 and F2 are the two Kriging approximations of response corresponding to the two regions with low and high values. Note that the Monte-Carlo simulations based on Kriging approximations are computationally efficient. The two Kriging approximations and the SVM are updated iteratively using the generalized max-min sample as well as the optimization iterate. However, the optimization is only performed in the space of design variables whereas the SVM and the two Krigings are constructed in the design and aleatory space. In order to provide the optimization iterate with an aleatory component, the readily available prediction variance of the Kriging approximations is used. Specifically, the aleatory variables at the optimization iterate are chosen as the maximizer of the Kriging prediction variance, which can be considered where the Kriging is the least accurate. For a given design iterate μ (k) d , the aleatory variables can be found through the following optimization problem: where σ K is the predicted variance of the Kriging approximations at the k th iteration. This sample will be referred to as the "maximum variance sample". Because the algorithm uses two Kriging approximations, the search is performed over the two surrogates. The stochastic optimization of a chain composed of 1000 units is considered. For the results presented in this section, the chain is subjected to forced harmonic displacement excitation(s) applied to the main resonator of unit 1. The response considered (F in Equation • The design variables X d . In all problems, truncated normal distributions X d ∼ N t (μ d , σ 2 ) are used. The bounds of the distributions are μ d ± 3σ d . The standard deviation is calculated based on a coefficient of variation of 2%. • The amplitude Ā and frequency ω of excitation are chosen as aleatory variables. They follow uniform distributions with bounds of X min a and X max a . Three optimization problems are presented: • Optimization problem 1 Random design variable: nonlinear stiffness X d = {η} constant over the chain. One excitation (frequency and amplitude are aleatory variables). Total of three variables. • Optimization problem 2 Random design variable: stiffness ratio, mass ratio and nonlinear stiffness, X d = {α, , η} constant over the chain. Two excitations (frequencies and amplitude are aleatory variables). Total of 6 variables. • Optimization problem 3 Same as optimization problem 2 with design variables represented using a field. Total of 12 variables. A linear undamped chain is used as a reference design (Table Table α η ξ 1 ξ 2 0.5 0.5 0 0 0 For the interested reader, the appendix provides details related to the accuracy of the surrogate-based optimization and the variance of the results due to Monte-Carlo sampling related to the three optimization problems. In this first problem, the random design variable, non-dimensional nonlinear stiffness X d = {η}, is assumed constant over the chain. The excitation amplitude and frequency are considered as aleatory variables. Their ranges are Ā = The variable distributions are: Results are listed in Table In the second problem, the optimization variables include stiffness ratio, mass ratio and nonlinear stiffness corresponding to the internal resonators, design variables X d = {α, , η}. The chain is subjected to a forced displacement excitation with two frequency ranges of ω1 = [0.48, 0.52] and ω2 = [1. The variable distributions are: Results are listed in Table In the third optimization problem, the field function as described in Section 3.2 is used to represent the properties of the chain. This optimization problem aims at demonstrating the advantage of using spatially varying properties instead of constant properties over chain (optimization problem 2). The previous optimization problem is repeated except that the variables follow a field. optimization variables are of the fields, X d = {a α , a , η }. a α , a and a η are the field coefficients for α, and η, respectively (Eq. 15). The optimization problem reads: min The ranges of the field coefficients (Table The optimization results which are listed in Table 1 , where the excitations are applied is also provided. The figure clearly shows that the band gap frequency range has been extended to accommodate both frequencies. This was made possible by the introduction of the field description which relaxed the optimization problem compared to the case where the properties are constant over the chain (i.e., problem 2). Regarding the robustness of the optimization results, Figure 1 , and unit 100 v . The use of the field has enabled an expansion of the band gap to include both excitations (with frequencies of ω1 = 0.50 and ω2 = 1.25 and amplitude of Ā = 10) that are applied at unit 1. In this work, the stochastic optimization of a one-dimensional chain of nonlinear resonators was presented for the purpose of vibration mitigation. The optimization approach is capable of tackling response discontinuities due to the presence of nonlinearities. It also accounts for uncertainties in design variables and loading conditions through the use of machine learning techniques such as clustering, SVM and Kriging. In addition, to make the optimization problem scalable, this method makes use of a field representation to define properties such as mass and stiffness over the chain. The use of a field representation enables one to optimize the properties of all resonators using a few variables thus substantially reducing the number of optimization variables. As a demonstrative example of the methodology, it was shown, through a twelve-dimensional problem, that the field description enables an extension of the band gap to minimize the chain's response. Such an extension was limited when constant properties over the chain were used. Based on these initial results, the next steps of this research will focus on optimally designing 2D and 3D structures, including considering the influence of damping with the possibility of targeted energy transfers between the main and internal resonators. In addition, the use of multiple basis functions in the field representation will be investigated to further improve the achieved optimal design. The accuracy of the optimization results, obtained using surrogate models must be validated based on the actual models' responses. For this purpose, the "true" E(F ) is also computed using a Monte-Carlo simulation using the actual model. We must also account for the variability due to Monte-Carlo sampling in estimating E(F ). To this end, a histogram of approximations of E(F ) is constructed based on several Monte-Carlo runs. This histogram also enables a correction of the predicted mean value by taking the mean value of the histogram. The relative error between surrogate-based E(F ) and true E(F ) at the optimum is provided in Table A similar study was carried out for the second problem. The relative error is provided in Table Similar to optimization problems 1 and 2, the accuracy of the results is checked, and the results are provided in Table E(F ) Corrected E(F ) True E(F ) Rel.