Via numerical simulation and experimental assessment, this study examines the use of origami folding to develop robotic jumping mechanisms with tailored nonlinear stiffness to improve dynamic performance. Specifically, we use Tachi-Miura Polyhedron (TMP) bellow origami -which exhibits a nonlinear "strain-softening" force-displacement curve -as a jumping robotic skeleton with embedded energy storage. TMP's nonlinear stiffness allows it to store more energy than a linear spring and offers improved jumping height and airtime. Moreover, the nonlinearity can be tailored by directly changing the underlying TMP crease geometry. A critical challenge is to minimize the TMP's hysteresis and energy loss during its compression stage right before jumping. So we used the plastically annealed lamina emergent origami (PALEO) concept to modify the TMP creases. PALEO increases the folding limit before plastic deformation occurs, thus improving the overall strain energy retention. Jumping experiments confirmed that a nonlinear TMP mechanism achieved roughly 9% improvement in air time and a 13% improvement in jumping height compared to a "control" TMP sample with a relatively linear stiffness. This study's results validate the advantages of using origami in robotic jumping mechanisms and demonstrate the benefits of utilizing nonlinear spring elements for improving jumping performance. Therefore, they could foster a new family of energetically efficient jumping mechanisms with optimized performance in the future. The ongoing advances in robotics technology have allowed for exponential growth in their applications in many industries. Robots have been critical to the recent growth of large-scale manufacturing Among the various types of legged robots, jumping robots are particularly interesting because locomotion through jumping has several merits compared to walking or crawling. For example, jumping has higher energy density, efficient obstacle negotiation, and rapid terrain transition For high-performance jumping, energy storage is crucial In a generic, theoretical study, we showed that using a nonlinear elastic element with "strain-softening" characteristics can increase the stored energy The overall background of this study. a) Compression force-displacement curves of three generic spring elements within the same actuation and displacement limits. They are strain-hardening, linear, and strain-softening. The shaded areas (A 1 , A 1 + A 2 , and A 1 + A 2 + A 3 ) represent the stored energy in these three elastic elements. b) The jumping problem of interest in this study: As a jumping mechanism is compressed to the force and deformation limits, its nonlinear spring (e.g., TMP origami) stores elastic energy and then releases it to initiate the jump. since the clearance and airborne time are directly related to the amount of released energy from the spring, a strain-softening mechanism offers the potential for improved jumping performance. pre-jump, and consequently offers higher jumps and ground clearance with a negligible penalty in efficiency While promising, the previous study was theoretical. Therefore, this study aims to investigate the feasibility of using origami -as a jumping robotic skeleton with embedded energy storage -to generate the desired strain-softening behavior, and experimentally validate the corresponding improvement in jumping performance. Origami has found many creative uses in robotics because it is elegant, simple to fabricate, and capable of achieving complex 3D shapes from an easy-to-transport flat configuration To this end, we use a modified Tachi-Miura Polyhedron (TMP) bellow origami (Figure In what follows, section 2 of this paper reviews the kinematics of TMP bellow, discusses its nonlinear stiffness modeling, and details the fabrication method to minimize hysteresis. Section 3 presents the dynamic modeling of the jumping mechanism consisting of a TMP bellow and two end-point masses, and details the the results of the jumping experiments. Section 4 presents a parametric study on the effects of TMP design parameters on its nonlinear stiffness and jumping performance. Finally, section 5 concludes this paper with a summary and discussion. ). Note that the main folds refer to those parallel to the TMP base and sub-folds refer to those with an angle α to the main folds. c) The reaction force-displacement of a sample TMP design. The desired strain-softening behavior is evident when ∆y < 0. The Tachi-Miura Polyhedron (TMP) origami bellow, initially proposed in 2009 where N is the number of unit cells in the TMP. d is the unit cell height. k M and k S are the torsional spring coefficients of the main-folds and the sub-folds, respectively. α is the angle of the sub-folds relative to the main-folds at the unfolded flat configuration. θ M and θ S are half of the dihedral angle of the main-folds and sub-folds, respectively. θ M 0 and θ S 0 are their corresponding resting angles. θ G is the angle between the x-axis and the main fold (2(a)). The kinematic relationships between these folding angles are: where ∆y is the deformation of the TMP from its resting height. Moreover, the crease torsional stiffness can be formulated as k M = kM (l + m + c) and k S = kS d sin -1 α, where kM and kS are the torsional stiffness per unit length of the main and sub-folds, respectively. Finally, we define a folding ratio R F to determine the pre-jump TMP deformation through the final main-fold angle θ M f , However, the force-displacement relationship presented in Equation (1) does not consider the deformation limits due to rigid folding. As the TMP is nearly compressed (θ M = θ S ≈ 0°), its facets will come into contact with one another, increasing the reaction force significantly. On the other hand, when the TMP is nearly stretched flat (θ M = θ S ≈ 90°), its reaction force also increases significantly due to the in-plane facet stretching. To more accurately calculate the force-displacement relationship, we impose an increase in main and sub-fold's torsional stiffness when their folding angles exceed pre-defined upper and lower bounds Figure The analytical results in the previous subsection validate the feasibility of generating strain-softening compression nonlinear stiffness from TMP origami. However, it does not consider a critical issue: plastic deformation and energy loss due to creasing and folding. In the classic origami, creases are created by concentrated material deformation along a thin line, which then holds its shape -this methodology inherently creates plastic deformation and is not conducive to a springy-like response for efficient jumping. For example, we fabricated a TMP bellow using 125 μm thick Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) sheets and classical creasing method (Figure To quantitatively characterize the performance of TMP regarding energy release, we define two different metrics. The first metric -referred to as the "efficiency ratio" η -is the ratio of the released energy from TMP during relaxation over the stored energy during compression. A higher efficiency ratio close to one is desirable for minimal energy loss due to hysteresis. The second metric -"nonlinearity ratio" R n -is the ratio of the released energy from TMP over the potential energy of an equivalent, perfectly linear spring (aka. a spring that has the same reaction force as the TMP at the maximum compression). To benefit from the nonlinear stiffness for better jumping performance, R n should be larger than one To address the issues of high hysteresis and low nonlinearity ratio during release, we use a creasing technique known as plastically annealed lamina emergent origami (PALEO). PALEO works by folding the creased polymer sheet into its desired state -often by plastically deforming the materialand then annealing it well above the glass transition temperature to relax the internal stresses (170°C for 60 minutes, then a rapid cooling of 15°C/min to the glass transition temperature, and finally a slow cooling of 0.5°C/min to room temperature) Figure To validate that strain-softening nonlinearity can improve the jumping performance, we fabricate an additional TMP prototype with a close-tolinear force-displacement relationship during the pre-jump release. This linear TMP has the same reaction force as the nonlinear one at 110mm compression displacement (Figure Figure The jumper is actuated by an external force applied on the upper mass (m 2 ), which compresses the TMP and stores energy, then this force is released instantaneously to initiate jumping. The jumping includes two consecutive phases: pre-jump and post-jump. During the pre-jump phase, the upper mass (m 2 ) accelerates upward due to the TMP's reaction force, but the lower mass (m 1 ) remains on the ground. Due to the complexity of implementing structural damping in dynamic simulation, we use equivalent linear viscous damping instead, so the equation of motion during the pre-jump phase is, where F is the reaction force from the TMP bellow as a function of relative displacement between the two end masses (based on the nonlinear folding mechanics model in the previous section). C is the equivalent damping coefficient, which is related to the experimentally observed hysteresis in that where the equivalent damping ratio ζ eq = 0.25(1 -η)/π, the equivalent natural frequency and k eq is the spring coefficient of the equivalent, perfectly linear spring. The post-jump phase starts when the lower mass (m 1 ) leaves the ground and ends when it returns to the ground. In order for the lower mass to leave the ground, the tensile reaction force from the TMP bellow must exceed the weight of the lower mass: F > m 1 g. The equations of motion in this phase are: The pre-jump phase results are used as the initial conditions for the governing equations during the post-jump phase. Figure To accurately represent end-point masses on the TMP jumpers, we waterjet cut steel shim stocks to size and adhered them to the top and bottom facets using double-sided tape (Figure To conduct the jumping test, we place the jumper in front of a 1-inch square grid paper, providing a height reference for clearance data. We use two thread segments secured to the jumping platform just behind the TMP sample to achieve the initial compression. We drape these threads over the TMP sample, pull them down manually, compress the TMP to 110mm dis- Table To understand how the TMP folding geometry influences the nonlinear strain-softening stiffness and jumping performance, we perform a parametric study by varying the design variables discussed in the previous sections, one at a time, between two pre-defined limits (Table imits are chosen based on folding kinematics, fabrication, and many other factors. For example, we set the lower limit of the unit cell number (N ) at 6 to reduce unfavorable boundary effects and set the upper limits at 10 to avoid localized buckling during compression. The choice of the lower limit on the sub-fold angle α can also help avoid buckling during compression (a small α angle will result in a thin TMP in the z-axis), and the upper limit can ensure proper foldability. The upper limit of the length parameters d, l, m, and c are determined based on the fabrication capability available to the authors, and the lower limit ensures sufficient space for PALEO creasing and proper folding. It is worth emphasizing that the sub-folds in all these TMP designs use the stiff PALEO crease design (Table Figure Based on the results in Figure Based on these parametric study results, we further examine the correlation between the sensitive TMP design parameters (aka. unit cell number N , unit cell height d, and sub-fold angle α) and the dynamic jumping performance by numerical simulations. We observe that a TMP with a larger number of unit cells undergoes larger deformation before reaching the folding limit of R F = 0.75, which results in a more considerable amount of stored energy upon release. As a result, increasing N gives a higher airtime and clearance (Figure The angle of the sub-folds α, on the other hand, affects both reaction force magnitude and nonlinearity ratio. When α angle increases, the TMP outperforms its equivalent linear spring more because of a higher nonlinearity ratio; however, the absolute values of airtime and clearance decreases due to a smaller reaction force and a smaller amount of stored energy (Figure This study demonstrates the effectiveness of using TMP origami to design and fabricate a jumping mechanism that outperforms a linearly elastic element. We begin with a theoretical study of the nonlinear stiffness of TMP bellows by assuming rigid facets and hinge-like fold lines with nonlinear torsional spring coefficients. The theoretical prediction shows that TMP bellows with appropriate designs exhibit a "strain-softening" nonlinear stiffness, thus storing more elastic energy for jumping than an equivalent linear spring with the same reaction force at maximum compression. This nonlinearity originates from the sub-folds' spatial re-orientation during folding; thus, stiff sub-folds and soft main-folds are desirable. However, we encounter a significant challenge when fabricating a TMP jumper that can harness this nonlinearity for better dynamic performance: the hysteresis due to the concentrated plastic deformation along the fold lines. This hysteresis significantly reduces the released energy from TMP right before jumping. To address this issue, we adopt a PALEO creasing design technique, which places carefully spaced cuts (perforations) along the fold lines and then applies annealing after folding to release the residual stress. Moreover, PALEO creasing allows us to fine-tune the crease torsional stiffness for the main-folds and sub-folds. We then fabricate a nonlinear and close-tolinear TMP bellow with the same reaction force at maximum compression and conduct dynamic jumping tests. The results show that the nonlinear TMP outperforms the linear one in terms of air time and clearance. This out-performance is quantitatively consistent with the numerical simulations that treat the TMP as a nonlinear spring connecting two end masses. Finally, parametric studies on both force-displacement curves and dynamic jumping performance indicate that the number of unit cells, unit cell height, and sub-fold angles will affect TMP's jumping performance. Increasing unit cell number and height can offer higher airtime and clearance, but it has minimal effects on the overall nonlinearity. On the other hand, changing the sub-fold angle will create a tradeoff between the airtime/clearance and nonlinearity ratio. These parametric studies offer the necessary design insights for optimizing the TMP bellow for future robotic applications with different constraints. Origami has its inherent advantages for robotic applications (e.g., easy to fabricate, compact in the folded configuration, and scalable in size). This study elucidates a new dimension of using the mechanics of folding for robotic applications, thus expanding the tools available to robotics engineers. The authors thank Dr. Phanindra Tallapradaga at the Clemson University for thoughtful discussions at the beginning of this project. The authors acknowledge the support from the National Science Foundation (CMMI 1751449 CAREER and 1933124). S. Li also acknowledge the additional support from Clemson University (via startup funds and CECAS Dean's Faculty Fellow Award). To investigate how the cut geometry affects the PALEO crease stiffness, we fabricated sixteen samples with different combinations of cut length (P ), the spacing between cuts (t and b), and the number of cut lines (Q) (Figure ). After cutting, we fold these samples completely until their facets come to contact, and then placed them into a customized frame at a 90°d ihedral angle for annealing. After annealing, we reinforced the facets on either side of the crease with a 1.5 mm thick layer of polypropylene to prevent facet deformation during testing. The stiffness of each crease sample was measured by applying a load to the stiff facet's endpoint and observing the crease's angular deflection (Figure where F ⊥ is the perpendicular component of the applied load, d ⊥ is the perpendicular distance from the crease line to the applied load position, and θ 0 and θ l are the resting and the angle after loading, respectively. The results of the stiffness study are summarized in Figure The results show that the torsional stiffness is relatively small near the resting angle (θ 0 = 90°) but quickly increases as the folding angle decreases. This trend supports the assumption that the crease stiffness should be increased as the folding angle becomes small, as shown in Equations ( To experimentally validate the benefits of using a nonlinear elastic element to enhance the jumping performance, we designed a different TMP prototype showing a close-to-linear force-displacement response. This linear TMP's design parameters were determined using the Simplex and Powell single objective optimization algorithms in the ModeFRONTIER TM . We use two different algorithms as a way to cross-validate the results of the optimization. To design the linear TMP, we first define an ideally linear force-displacement curve based on the final compression force and displacement of the nonlinear TMP as the objective. The optimization is then used to minimize the total error between the linear TMP force-displacement curve and this ideally linear response (Equation ( Minimize: e = | F T M P - More specifically, we calculate the error between these two curves at roughly 2000 sample points within the displacement range, and the sum of these errors is the objective function. The upper and lower bounds placed on the linear TMP design variables are consistent with those shown in Table Table 