The environmental corrosiveness is governed for indoor applications by the presence of gaseous pollutants in air and levels of temperature and relative humidity. Its determination is a challenging task and requires the monitoring of thickness reduction of selected metals in the range of few tens of nanometers. The present work aims at developing an UHF RFID sensor dedicated to such measurements. The sensor is based on the coupling between the antenna of a commercial RFID tag and a thin layer of copper exposed to the environment. The ability of the proposed sensor to be sensitive to a variation of the metal thickness in the range of tens of nanometers is demonstrated experimentally through exposure tests in a climatic chamber. The results are supported by electromagnetic simulations performed in the case of a coupling between a dipolar antenna and a thin metallic layer. Atmospheric corrosion of metals is a process which affects most of the metallic objects everywhere in the world due to their chemical interaction with the environment. The number of impacted industrial applications and the associated financial costs are therefore impressive. For indoor environments, the corrosivity of metals is mainly governed by the presence of gaseous pollutants and levels of temperature/relative humidity. It can be categorized on the grounds of corrosion rate i.e. the loss of metal by time unit. For indoor applications, the ISO 11844-1standard During the last decades, electrical resistance (ER) sensors have been developed for the determination of the IC corrosivity classes. In particular, the AirCorr TM sensor was commercialized within a project supported by the European Commission (Protection of cultural heritage by real-time corrosion monitoring) and dedicated to the monitoring of corrosive atmospheres in the cultural heritage sector More recently, several passive RFID sensors sensitive to corrosion or cracks formation were proposed Promising results were obtained for zinc transmission line and resonators during their corrosion Another strategy was considered by several authors for the detection of corrosion of steel. Zhang et al. McLaughlin et al. Despite the interest of all these methods, the application of the RFID technology to the detection of loss of low thicknesses of metal such as copper remains an important issue, in particularly for indoor applications. The present study aims therefore at investigating the effects initiated by the coupling between an RFID antenna and a low thickness metallic layer exposed to a corrosive atmosphere. In the first part of the manuscript, electromagnetic simulations focus on such coupling by considering a dipole antenna which is traditionally used in the RFID technology. The achieved results will serve as a basis to explain the variation of the returned signal from a sensitive commercial RFID tag. As it will be highlighted experimentally, the method is suitable to detect low loss of metal in the range of tens of nanometers and should be considered in the future as a promising technique for indoor applications. To investigate the S11 reflection parameter of a dipole antenna coupled to a sensitive thin metallic element, electromagnetic simulations were realized using the software HFSS (High Frequency Structural Simulator) from ANSYS. It utilizes tetrahedral mesh elements to determine a solution to a given electromagnetic problem. Simulation sweeps were realized between 0.5 and 2 GHz, with an adaptive meshing at the frequency of interest: 868 MHz. At a Experimental validation of the sensor was made by exposing a commercial RFID tag coupled with a thin sensitive layer of copper in a climatic chamber (Vötsh, VCC 0060) at a relative humidity of 90% and with a temperature ranging from 20°C to 35°C. Results were compared with those provided by electrical corrosion sensors (AirCorr TM ). The commercial RFID tag ALN-9654 "G" from Alien technologies with a HiggsTM-3 IC chip was selected. The dimensions of the antenna printed on a substrate of 50 μm height are width = 93 mm, length = 19 mm, height = 10μm. The input impedance of the chip is Z chip = 28.6 -j.204 Ω. The sensitive tag was interrogated in the climatic chamber by using a reader Impinj Speedway Revolution R420 operating with a 31 dBm power. A commercial patch antenna (S8658WPR) from LAIRD connectivity was connected to the reader and placed in the climatic chamber for the interrogation. An RFID tag is composed of an antenna and an RFID chip, which contains an identification number. It is energized by a radio frequency wave coming from an antenna/Reader and then returns back its identification code. The originality of this technology is to use battery-less passive tag on flexible substrate which displays thus very low visual nuisance and cost. Due to the autonomous property of tags, the reading distance i.e. the distance between the tag and the antenna/Reader is typically in the range of few meters. This value can be optimized by carefully designing antenna of both the reader and tag with respect to the environment. Within this technology, the backscattered power by the tag and collected by the reader can be obtained via the Friis equation : Where PR and GR are the power delivered by the reader and the gain of the reader's antenna, respectively. D is the reader to tag distance and λ the wavelength of the electromagnetic wave. The power P collected by the reader depends also on the gain Gant of the tag antenna and , the transmission coefficient factor which accounts for the mismatch between impedance of the antenna (Zant) and the impedance of the chip (Zchip) Most of commercial UHF RFID tags are composed of dipole antennas. These latter are selected since, with meandering techniques, it is possible to reduce their sizes and to ensure an impedance matching with the chip. Placing a dipole in a vicinity of a metallic object decreases the amplitude of electric field and consequently affects strongly its radiation pattern, efficiency and impedance (Gant, Zant,  in relation 1). This prevents the use of dipole attached to metallic object. This behavior is explained by the generation of a current with opposite phase, which results in the reduction of the radiation in the far field. However, to the best of our knowledge, the influence of a thin metallic layer with a thickness lower than 1 m on the dipole antenna efficiency was not studied in the past. This point is of fundamental importance for the development of a sensitive RFID tag based on the coupling between the antenna and such thin metallic layer exposed to the environment. We therefore focus on this point by performing electromagnetic simulations. The sketch of the proposed device is depicted in Fig. The electrical conductivity  is chosen to be 10 7 S.m -1 , a value close to the one of copper and silver which are used for IC class determination. To simulate the degradation of the sensitive element, we consider the corrosion process as uniform and explained by a homogenous loss of metal over the whole surface. In this case, the corrosion rate is simply defined by the loss of metal thickness divided by the time of exposure. HFFS simulations were consequently done for several thicknesses hs which correspond to different times of exposure during the corrosion of the film. Fig. MHz. In these two cases, interrogating the dipole antenna might be feasible even if its efficiency remains mitigated with respect to the initial dipole antenna. To further get some insights on the main parameters which govern the proposed method and to compare the achieved results with those provided by electrical resistance sensors, it is interesting to consider the influence of the variation of electrical resistance R on the results. It is well known that, due to the relation between R, the thickness hs, and the electrical conductivity () of the metallic film, identical variations of R can be obtained by changing either hs or  by the same amount. Electromagnetic simulations were therefore made by considering a decrease the electrical conductivity () of the metal from  =10 8 S/m to 10 5 S/m for the selected values of hs. Fig. The aim being to consider the power collected by the reader from the signal emitted by the modified tag, the influence of the variation of hs and  on the transmission of electromagnetic waves from this dipole antenna to a patch antenna localized at a distance of 15cm was simulated. In Fig. To validate experimentally the monitoring of the loss of metal in the range of 100/10nm by the proposed device, a commercial UHF RFID tag was considered. The Corrosiveness Tag (CTag) is presented in Fig. The thin copper layer was first elaborated on a polycarbonate film with a thickness of 0.1 mm. The adhesive commercial tag was then placed on the polycarbonate substrate. The proposed Ctag differs from device used for simulations. Indeed, as seen in Fig. For the CTag, two parameters can be collected by the RFID reader. The reading rate is the number of time that the tag responds to the reader over a fixed period of interrogation time. of the metallic copper layer of 30 nm thickness In contrast, the reference tag is responding. After 775 minutes of exposure time, a transition occurs and the reader is able to see the CTag. These results can be compared with those obtained by ER sensors. From the data presented in Fig. As a conclusion, we propose a new method for atmospheric corrosion monitoring for indoor applications which enables to follow the loss of thickness of metals at the nanometer scale. It is based on the variation of the signal collected by an RFID reader from a device constituted of an RFID chip coupled with a thin metallic layer exposed to the environment. As shown, the sensitivity of the method is ensured by the increase of the electrical resistance of the sensitive layer due to its corrosion. The experimental results achieved with a copper layer of 30 nm thickness demonstrate indeed the ability of the method with a sensitivity of 0.4 dB/nm. Due the low cost and low visual nuisance of the proposed tag, the method should therefore be considered as a promising technique for the development of new applications concerning corrosion monitoring.