semiconductors have shown great potential as the fundamental building blocks for next-generation electronics. However, all the 2D semiconductors that have been experimentally made so far have room-temperature electron mobility lower than that of bulk silicon, which is not understood. Here, by using first-principles calculations and re-formulating the transport equations to isolate and quantify contributions of different mobility-determining factors, we show that the universally low mobility of 2D semiconductors originates from the high "density of scatterings", which is intrinsic to the 2D material with parabolic electron band. The density of scatterings characterizes the density of phonons that can interact with the electrons, and can be fully determined from the electron and phonon band structures without knowledge of electron-phonon coupling strength. Our work reveals the underlying physics limiting the electron mobility of 2D semiconductors, and offers a descriptor to quickly assess the mobility. Main Text: Single-unit-layer (2D) semiconductors have attracted great interest in recent years due to their unconventional properties and large potential in (opto)electronic applications. The mobility depends on the electronic structure and the scatterings. There are two common sources of scatterings for the 2D semiconductors in electronic applications: defects and phonons. The defects can come from the semiconductor itself or the environment. Although significant efforts have been made to minimize the defect-induced scattering, the improvement in mobility is limited; on the other hand, first-principles calculations have indicated that a low "intrinsic" mobility (i.e. the mobility in perfect material) for various 2D semiconductors For example, Cheng et al. In this work, we identify the high "density of scatterings" ( S D ), which is intrinsic to 2D semiconductors, as the origin for their universally lower electron mobility than that of Si. The paper is organized as follows: we first calculate the intrinsic mobility of various 2D semiconductors, using the stateof-the-art first-principles methods. Then we re-formulate the transport equations to isolate and quantify the contributions of relevant physical factors, which renders the S D as the common source for low mobility of 2D semiconductors. Finally, we use model systems to show that the large S D is inherent to the 2D material with parabolic electron band, and discuss possible strategies to improve the intrinsic mobility. The mobility can be calculated as using Boltzmann transport equation: where τ(ik) is the relaxation time for the electronic state ik (i is the band index, and k is the wavevector), v is the velocity, f is the occupation distribution at equilibrium, E is the energy, and e is the electron charge. In the following, we use μ to denote the intrinsic electron mobility at room temperature. The scattering rate (1/τ) due to the phonons can be calculated as: Here ik, i'k', and jq denote the initial electronic state, the final electronic state, and the absorbed/emitted phonon, respectively. ω is the phonon frequency, n is the Bose distribution, G is the reciprocal lattice vector, and ΩBZ is the volume/area of the Brillouin zone. Cik,i'k',jq is the number of phonons that can scatter the electronic state ik to an infinitesimal energy window around i'k', divided by the range of energy window. Those phonons must satisfy the energy and momentum conservation of scattering, as required by the deltas in Eq. (3). As an example, Fig. Fig. From the computation point of view, the EPC strength is usually difficult to calculate (requiring more time and CPUs), while the non-coupling factors can be computed relatively easily. To quantify and better understand the contributions of these factors, we seek to write the mobility as simple algebraic operations of physically-meaningful terms, so that their contributions can be easily isolated and quantified. To begin with, we first rewrite Eq. ( and Eq. ( accounts for the occupation of ik and i'k' (a less occupied i'k' makes the scattering more "effective"); and the because the carrier concentration is low (Fermi level is in the middle of the band gap, as required by the definition of intrinsic mobility), and the band structures are quasi-isotropic. Consider an extreme situation where there is only one phonon band with constant energy: in this case, the ik state can be scattered to any electronic state with the energy of Eik +/-ħω, and the D S (ik) will approximately be the sum of density of electronic states at these two energies multiplied by the number of phonons with energy ħω. In general, a higher density of electronic states and a larger number of phonons (which can be realized by lowering phonon energy) increase the chance of scattering, resulting in a higher D S , and vice versa. Substituting Eq. ( With further derivations shown in the SM, we can express the mobility as simple algebraic operations of physically-meaningful terms: where * m is the average effective mass Note that the S D can be fully determined once the electronic and phonon structures are given. The reformulation of Eq. ( Therefore, the μ difference between Si and any material (characterized by   log / Si  ) can be fully decomposed to the differences in * m , S D , and * g , which are shown in Figure (2) the * g * m can further enhance/suppress the μ difference. For example, many T-MX2 and all MX have a larger * g than Si (due to their strong electrical polarization oscillation caused by longitudinal optical phonons Finally, we point out the S D is not the only factor that determines the μ. According to Eq. ( Lastly, we note that the high density of low-energy phonons in 2D system may have implications for thermal and thermoelectric properties and applications; and the concept of density of scatterings may also apply to phonons and could also be an important factor in determining the difference in the thermal transport across different materials. In summary, we show that the universally low electron mobility of 2D semiconductors at room temperature originates from their high density of scatterings, which is inherent to the 2D material with parabolic electron band. The density of scatterings characterizes the density of phonons that can interact with the electrons, and can be easily calculated from the electron and phonon band structures without the knowledge of electron-phonon coupling strength, thereby providing a physically intuitive and computationally easy descriptor to explain the mobility or search for high-mobility semiconductors.