Carbon nanotube (CNT)-reinforced nickel matrix composites with different concentrations were processed by high pressure torsion (HPT). We thoroughly characterized the CNT agglomerates' spatial arrangement at different stages of deformation in order to extract information valuable for the optimization of the processing parameters and to elucidate the mechanisms involved during the processing of particle reinforced metal matrix composites by HPT. From the electron micrographs taken on the radial direction with increasing equivalent strains, we observed that CNT agglomerates debond by relative sliding between CNT during HPT, becoming spherical at higher stages of deformation. Furthermore, we introduced a model for the prediction of the minimum strain required for a homogeneous distribution of a second phase during HPT, which can be correlated to the material's three-dimensional structure and agrees well with the experimental data. The distribution of reinforcing phases in composite materials is of great importance and has a big influence on their mechanical performance. Carbon nanotubes have been widely used as reinforcing phase not only in polymer High-pressure torsion, a severe plastic deformation process, has shown to be a powerful tool for improving the distribution of particles in MMC. I. Sabirov et al, showed how ceramic particles are reduced in size and dispersed inside the metallic matrix by debonding Nevertheless, these microstructures possess high stored energy in their large grain boundary area. Recently, based on their ability to pin the microstructure For qualitative assessment of the distribution, directly observation of electron micrographs is sufficient. Previously, a preliminary assessment of the reinforcement homogeneity in CNT/Ni MMC was carried out Furthermore, event-to-event (nearest neighbor distance NND), based methods, commonly used in spatial statistics, have been used in unidirectional composites In this work, an extensive clustering and distribution homogeneity analysis was performed with the aim of understanding the behavior of the CNT during the deformation process as a function of the accumulated deformation. For the evaluation of the studied composites' homogeneity, a NND clustering analysis-based methodology is used, which can be completely carried out using open source software The composites were obtained via powder metallurgy and further processed by HPT. The starting materials were MWCNT (CCVD grown, Graphene Supermarket, USA density 1.84 g/cm 3 , diameter: 50-85 nm, length: 10-15 m, carbon purity: >94%) and dendritic Ni powder (Alfa Aesar, mesh -325). A colloidal mixing process was used to blend the precursor powders by which CNT are dispersed in ethylene glycol EG (CNT/EG concentration ratio at 0.2 mg/ml) and mixed with Ni powder. A thorough description of this process is reported elsewhere Samples with 1 wt. % CNT were processed 30 T at room temperature RT and at 200oC, were also analyzed. Fig. The HPT samples were cut in halves, embedded in conductive resin and fine polished using polishing discs with the aid of 6, 3 and 1 m diamond suspensions and finally with OPS colloidal silica. The samples were then characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a Helios NanoLab TM 600 dual beam field emission microscope (FEI Company). The analysis of the microstructure was carried out along the middle plane, in order to avoid the effect of the microstructural gradients along the height of the specimens , where T is the number of turns, t is the sample thickness and r the distance from the center of the sample The images were digitally binarised and analyzed using the image processing package FIJI Additionally, the position of the agglomerate centers of mass was extracted and used to calculate the NND (nearest neighbor distance). The evolution of the area weighted agglomerate diameter and the mean NND with increasing equivalent strain were studied (Fig. Furthermore, a set of samples was analyzed in terms of homogeneity and distribution using two different methodologies. The quantitative assessment of the homogeneity was carried out following the method proposed by Rossi et al Information about the agglomerates' centers of mass was used for further point pattern analysis by means of the nearest neighbor distance distribution function (Gfunction) using the spatstat package in R Studio As there are numerous configurations for CSR, pointwise critical envelops with fixed respective number of points (corresponding to each case), obtained from 100 Monte Carlo simulations of CSR with a significance level of 2/101 = 0.0198 and spatial Kaplan-Meier edge correction, which is performed in order to correct effects arising from the nonvisibility of points lying outside the evaluated field of view during the evaluation of the G-Function Accordingly, the G-function is a useful tool in spatial statistics that summarizes the "clustering" behavior of points in a point pattern. It displays the empiric cumulative distribution of NND in contrast to that of the CSR with the same number of points within a window of the same size. If a point pattern does not adjust to a Poisson pattern, then it can be either clustered (i.e. when the particles are interacting and tend to come closer together) or regular (i.e. when the points tend to avoid each other). It might be inferred that a homogeneous sample, e.g. with a high HRO value, also does not display a clustering behavior and vice versa. The G-Function can help to confirm or deny this statement. In this case, border corrections are carried out and the size of the window is arbitrary. For this reason, the G-function was chosen as a complementary method. By plotting the area weighted mean agglomerate diameter DCNT and the mean NND vs. Eq. Strain (Fig. The parameter region homogeneity HRO, as proposed by Rossi et al. On the other hand, when studying non-deformed MMC samples, lower magnifications can be used in order to display a higher number of particles without neglecting any significant information since the initial agglomerates are much larger (DCNT > 2m) than in the case of highly deformed samples (DCNT ~100 nm, Fig. Although, in the samples studied here, the agglomerates cannot be considered spherical throughout the entire process because during the first stages of deformation elongated CNT agglomerates in the shear direction are observed (Fig. In the literature, a unique value of inter-particle distance, which only deals with the case of equidistant particles, has been considered for the assessment of a uniform distribution of particles during plastic deformation The nearest neighbor distance NND distribution function in 3D for completely random Poisson distribution is described by equation 1 where NV is the mean number of objects per unit volume. NV for isolated spherical objects of random diameter D is Replacing 2 in equation 1 yields: For point fields it is true that the volume fraction equals the spherical contact distribution V V =H s (r) and from the completely random property of the Poisson field it follows that the NND distribution D(r) and the spherical contact distribution function H s (r) are identical Also, for uniform distribution of CNT, which are expected to be at the grain boundaries due to the nature of the processing route (powder metallurgy), r should be equal or greater than the grain size of the matrix after HPT GSfHPT: Furthermore, for simple shear a volume element, which may be a grain or a second phase in a composite, will be deformed in an ellipsoid with apex ratio r ′ . The reduction ratio of an ellipsoid is given by √r ' . For large shear strains ( > 2), r ' = γ 2 , with γ = √3ε eq GSiHPT corresponds to the grain size of the matrix before HPT, i.e. the grain size of the composite after the sintering process by HUP GS iHPT = GS fHUP . Thus, replacing in equation 6 and solving GS fHUP : and equation 5 can be expressed as: Previously, it was shown for consolidated CNT reinforced Nickel matrix composites that, in the presence of CNT a grain growth stagnation takes place during sintering and eventual annealing and the final grain size is related to the CNT volume fraction VV according to the Zener based relationship GS fHUP = 0.99±0.07 V V 0.4 D [- ) According to equation 9, there is a minimum strain ε hom that should be applied in order to obtain a homogenous distribution of CNT. It can be thus inferred that for increasing CNT volume fraction VCNT a lower strain should be applied in order to obtain a homogeneous distribution of CNT after HPT. This corresponds well with the literature, where, for lower VCNT, inhomogeneity rises due to the presence of reinforcement-depleted regions These homogenously distributed samples presented values of region homogeneity HR  60 %. It can thus be inferred, that a HR over 60% is an empirical lower bound, which is necessary but not sufficient to unequivocally identify a homogeneous random distribution of the second phase. It is therefore unavoidable the utilization of a complementary evaluation, as proposed here, which additionally evaluates the distribution of the mean spatial inter-particle distance. Furthermore, this approach provides information valuable for the optimization of the processing parameters by HPT of MMC.