Diamond nitrogen-vacancy (NV) center magnetometry has recently received considerable interest from researchers in the fields of applied physics and sensors. The purpose of this review is to analyze the principle, sensitivity, technical development potential, and application prospect of the diamond NV center magnetometry. This review briefly introduces the physical characteristics of NV centers, summarizes basic principles of the NV center magnetometer, analyzes the theoretical sensitivity, and discusses the impact of technical noise on the NV center magnetometer. Furthermore, the most critical technologies that affect the performance of the NV center magnetometer are described: diamond sample preparation, microwave manipulation, fluorescence collection, and laser excitation. The theoretical and technical crucial problems, potential solutions and research technical route are discussed. In addition, this review discusses the influence of technical noise under the conventional technical conditions and the actual sensitivity which is determined by the theoretical sensitivity and the technical noise. It is envisaged that the sensitivity that can be achieved through an optimized design is in the order of 10 fT•Hz -1/2 . Finally, the roadmap of applications of the diamond NV center magnetometer are presented. Nitrogen-vacancy (NV) center is a one of hundreds of different color centers in diamonds Magnetometers have a wide range of applications in engineering, science, and medicine . Fiber-based magnetometer. Thanks to the use of ultra-high Verdet constants, the optical rotation effect employed in the total optical fiberbased magnetometer can reach a sensitivity of 20 fT•Hz -1/2 The typical sensitivity and measurement range of the magnetometers listed above are illustrated in Fig. This article is composed of the following main four parts: 1. The basic physical properties of the NV center are discussed. These include its energy level structure, optical dynamic properties, spin Hamiltonian and spin dynamics, charge-state conversion, nuclear spin ultra-fine energy levels, and the effects of temperature and stress. 2. Four methods of DC magnetic measurements are analyzed. Furthermore, the influence of technical noise on the magnetic measurement results and transfer Fig. coefficient are discussed. The principle of AC magnetic field measurements is briefly introduced. 3. The technical solutions of the four key technologies of the NV center magnetometer are presented, alongside the technical indexes that can be achieved. Several special DC magnetic field measurement schemes and non-fluorescent spin readout schemes are introduced, and the magnitude of the technical noise under the existing technical conditions is analyzed. The actual sensitivity is evaluated. 4. The overall scheme and corresponding main application of the NV magnetometer are illustrated. The NV center characteristics have been extensively studied The NV center satisfies the symmetry of C3V. Based on six electrons model and C3V symmetry, the ground state triplet state, singlet states, excited state of NV center has been fully established Due to the ISC effect, the relaxation rate k 61 for the single state to ground state 1 is faster than the relaxation rate k 62 to ground state 2. The complete transition process is shown in Fig. For quantum sensing applications NV -is used rather than NV 0 . However, under certain conditions, a transition can occur between NV -and NV 0 . The stimulated transition between NV -and NV 0 can be achieved by a two-photon process or a one-photon process, as shown in Fig. According to the above analysis, it is possible to derive the master equation, including the internal and external optical dynamics, as follows: Since only the ground state of the NV color center is stable, the magnetic measurement uses the relationship between the ground state spin dynamics and the magnetic field. The spin dynamics of the ground state of the NV center can be described by the Hamiltonian as follows: The first term in Eq. ( The third term in Eq. ( When the transverse magnetic field is modest, the 14 N nuclear spin processions along the NV axis, as the 14 N electric quadrupole moment is very large. If the nuclear spin is not polarized, the effect of the 14 N on the spin of the NV center electron can be considered as equivalent to that of a constant magnetic field D gs shifts with temperature. The offset is -74.2 (7) kHz/K The longitudinal relaxation time T1 determined by the phonon vibrations inside the solid, thus it is related to the temperature. In room temperature, T1 is order of ms. The coherence time T2 reaches the order of 100 μs. the dephasing time T2 * can only reach the order of 1 μs. 2T1 is the upper limit of T2, and T2 is the upper limit of T2 * . At liquid helium temperature (3.7 K), the decoherence time of a single NV center T1 reaches the order of 1000 s, and a decoherence time of 1.58 s Considering the manipulation between ground substates by microwave (MW) with a single frequency f, the dynamics of the electron spin density matrix can be obtained using the rabi oscillation model. where Ω is Rabi frequency which represents the MW power, ρ ij is offdiagonal term of the density matrix, and detuning is δ = f -(μ e B + D gs ). In this way, combining the optical dynamic formula (Eq. 1) and the spin dynamic formula (Eq. 3), the theoretical basis of the master equation method for the magnetic measurement is established. In this section, the principles of four mainstream magnetic field measurements schemes are introduced and compared, including the Ramsey scheme, the pulsed ODMR (PUODMR) scheme, and the continuous wave ODMR (CWODMR) scheme The measurement principle of the Ramsey scheme has been discussed in detail When Ω is sufficiently large compared to the detuning frequency δ, it can be regarded as: . Assuming that the change of magnetic field is ∆B, the change of ρ 11 is The scale factor between ρ 11 and the magnetic field is defined as: Due to spin dephasing, the Ramsey signal decays with time. The phenomenological attenuation term e -pT T 2 * ⁄ is added, with p in the range of 1-2. Thus, the optimal T S and δ, which maximize k Ramsey , satisfy: With ∆I ∆m ⁄ = (I 0 -I 1 ), the sensitivity formula can be expressed as: where is the readout fidelity and N is the number of NV centers involved in the sensing. Considering the low contrast, the following approximation is valid, where, C is the contrast. The PUDOMR sequence is shown in Fig. ) Both the ODMR scheme and the Ramsey scheme can be split into different steps: polarization, sensitivity, and readout. The readout of the two schemes are consistent and both satisfy Eq. . Thus, the sensitivity becomes: The largest k PUODMR is for optimal sensitivity. As ODMR approximately stratifies the Lorentz distribution, the largest k PUODMR for optimal sensitivity occurs at δ = ∆ν √3 ⁄ and is: where, ∆ν is the half-width at half-maximum (HWHM) of OMDR, the limit of which is π/T2 * .the microwave power Ω has influence on both ∆ν and C, as will be discussed via simulations in Section 3.2.1. In CWODMR scheme, both microwave and the laser are continuously applied simultaneously. Under laser excitation, the total number of photons generated per unit time is defined as, F(δ + μ e ∆B, Ω(t), Γ(t), T 2 * , T 1 ) (13) As the CWODMR has no separate steps, its scale factor is defined as k CWODMR = ∆F ∆B . Similar to PUODMR scheme, at δ = ∆ν √3 ⁄ , k CWODMR has maximum, Due to the characteristics of the Poisson distribution, the standard deviation of F is ∆F = √F. Thus, the sensitivity is expressed as: The optimal Ω and Γ are verified via simulations in section 3.2.1. For CWODMR magnetic measurements, the adoption of a direct detection scheme would be severely affected by the low-frequency technical noise. Therefore, a more practical solution is provided by a phase-sensitive detection scheme based on a lock-in amplifier The optimal conditions are verified via simulations in section 3.2.1. As previously discussed, the dephasing time determines the sensitivity of the magnetometer. It is therefore critical to study how to improve the dephasing time. Since the decoherence time T2 is much larger than T2 * , to increase the time limiting the sensitivity from T2 * to T2, sequence decoupling schemes are proposed. The decoupling sequence has a wide range of applications in the field of nuclear magnetic resonance, including the spin-echo (SE) sequence In addition to the SE sequence, more complex dynamical decoupling (DD) sequences exist which achieve longer decoherence time. The most commonly used one is the Carr-Purcell-Meiboom-Gill (CPMG) sequence Microwave power broadening may cause the PUODMR scheme to be worse than the Ramsey scheme η CWLI ≈ 2η CWUL ≫ η PUODMR ≈ η Ramsey (18) Interestingly, the PUODMR and Ramsey schemes are quite similar, thus indicating that the microwave power has less influence than its own dephasing. The sensitivity and T2 * for these two pulsed schemes are consistent with the relationship T 2 * -0.5 ~T2 * -1 . T 2 * -0.5 is considered when T 2 * is much longer than T I + T R , while T 2 * -1 is considered in the opposite scenario, as discussed in Ref Fig. (c) π 2 In the actual measurement process, neither equipment nor technology is perfect. Therefore, technical noise will always be present, as shown in Fig. Magnetic field noise. Since the NV center magnetometer usually requires a device generating a bias magnetic field, the magnetic noise can be divided into two parts, the magnetic noise of the device and the magnetic noise of the environment: ∆B = ∆B environment + ∆B circuit Temperature noise. According to the introduction to Section 2, the temperature fluctuation ∆T affects the D gs , similarly to the microwave frequency noise, its scale factor can be derived as k T = dD gs μ e dT = 2 0 nT/K Detection noise. The detection noise refers to the noise of the photodetector and its standard deviation is defined as ∆I or ∆F . The relative detected fluorescence intensity is defined as: . The relationship between the standard deviation of the relative detected fluorescence ∆R I and the standard deviation of the magnetic field caused by it, is expressed as: Laser power noise. Since the laser excitation at room temperature is a non-resonant excitation, the laser or light-emitting diode (LED) wavelength noise can be neglected in this case. Only the power noise needs to be considered. Here, the noise is defined as ΔΓ, and the relative optical power is defined as R Γ = Γ Γ avg ⁄ . The relative detected fluorescence fluctuations and the relative optical power fluctuations have approximately the same effect on the fluctuation of the magnetic field measurement value Microwave power noise. The inaccuracy ∆Ω associated to the microwave power can be thought of as equivalent to changing the microwave flip angle, that is, . By defining the relative microwave power as Since the transfer coefficient of the second category noise is related to the measurement scheme and system parameters, we verify the transfer coefficients of the four schemes through simulation, For one scheme, the impact of these three noise sources on the results is same, thus we can use k R to represent all there transfer coefficients. The transfer coefficients of the two PU schemes are consistent, while the transfer coefficient of CWODMR is much smaller than the PU method due to a smaller dB dI . The CWLI scheme benefits from the noise suppression of phase sensitive detection and its sensitivity to the noise is more than four orders of magnitude less when compared with the other schemes, as shown in Fig. For pulse-type schemes, there are two more types of noise: microwave pulse time noise and laser pulse time noise. Microwave pulse time noise. The effect of an inaccurate microwave pulse length ∆t MW has similar characteristics as the microwave power noise. It follows that, Laser pulse time noise. The inaccuracy of the laser pulse time ∆t Laser affects both the polarization pulse and the detection pulse. Since polarization is an exponential process Scale factor noise. Laser power noise, microwave power noise, microwave impulse noise, and microwave frequency noise all affect the scale factor, and in turn result in the scale factor noise. It can be calculated that the impact of the scale factor noise, generated by all noises listed above, on the magnetic measurement result is much smaller than the direct impact of those noises themselves. Thus, the scale factor noise can be safely neglected. Summary of technical noise. By adding together the technical noise terms and the photon shot noise, and by taking into account the additive nature of the variance, the total noise becomes: +(∆B environment + ∆B circuit ) 2 + k T 2 (∆T) 2 (26) This result neglects the coupling term between noise and the scale factor term as they are assumed to be neglected compared with other noise terms. In this way, the sensitivity formula used in the actual experimental system is finally obtained. Due to the hyperfine interaction between the 14 N nuclear spin and the electron spin, the energy levels are split into three. This results in a √3fold reduction in sensitivity. Therefore, proposing a method to overcome this issue would be beneficial. One solution consists in using the nuclear spin polarization method to polarize the nuclear spin to the desired state. According to the analysis of the hyperfine energy levels in Section 2.2, there are several different ways to achieve nuclear spin polarization, such as the ESLAC method Compared to polarizing three hyperfine energy levels to one energy level, a more realistic solution would be to use three hyperfine energy levels for simultaneous measurements, as illustrated in in Ref For the Ramsey scheme, since the optimal δ occurs at the position that satisfies Eq. ( Due to the limited decoherence time, i cannot be very large. By taking i = ±1, then T S = 2π A ∥ ≈ 3 μ . This T 2 * is attainable, thus this approach is also feasible. The simulation results shown in Fig. According to the analysis, the Ramsey and PUODMR schemes have the highest theoretical sensitivity, but are more sensitive to various technical noises. Therefore, in these two schemes it is difficult to achieve their high theoretical sensitivity limit. Considering the actual benefits of the lock-in detection, most practical magnetometer solutions use CWLI scheme. The highest index of the existing DC magnetic field measurement sensitivity is achieved using the CWLI scheme. Furthermore, combined with closed-loop control, a large measurement range can be achieved The main experimental devices needed to achieve the diamond NV center magnetic measurement are as follows. A diamond sample with NV center; A light source (generally a laser or LED generating 532 nm green light) to achieve spin polarization and manipulation. Due to the high optical power density required for effective polarization and detection, a focusing device (such as an objective lens) is typically used to converge the beam; A microwave generating device and a microwave antenna are required to achieve spin manipulation; An external magnetic field device, such as a Helmholtz coil or a permanent magnet, is required to achieve the degeneracy of ms = ±1. A fluorescence detection device, such as a photodiode or a charge-coupled device (CCD) camera, is also required. Furthermore, a laser pulse and a microwave pulse generating device are necessary for the pulsed schemes. Typically, pulsed LED or acoustooptic modulator (AOM) are used to generate pulsed light, while microwave switches are employed to generate microwave pulses. The equipment listed above is required to implement the general measurement method. More specific schemes, including the microwave-free scheme and the zero magnetic field scheme, may not need all these devices, or may require additional equipment. These special cases are specifically introduced in Section 4.4 and 4.5. Several of the experimental devices listed above are commercially mature devices, including the 532 nm laser or LED light source, the avalanche photodiode (APD) or photodiode (PD), the magnetic field source, and the microwave generator. Here, only the technologies that require special development for the NV center magnetometer are discussed as key technologies. These mainly include four areas: sample preparation, microwave feed technology, fluorescence collection, and laser excitation technology, which are discussed in the following Sections. According to the sensitivity formulas, the sensitivities of all schemes are inversely proportional to the dephasing time of the sample and to the number of the involved NV centers N. Thus, a long dephasing time T2 * and a high concentration of NV centers enhance the sensitivity, which are characteristics of the sample and are determined by the diamond preparation process. Because of its uncontrollable size, impurity concentration, and output, natural diamond is rarely used for related research on diamond NV center magnetometry. The diamond used in research is mostly synthetic diamond. According to different preparation methods, there are two dominant types of artificial diamond: chemical vapor deposition (CVD) diamond and high temperature and high pressure (HTHP) diamond. In the CVD approach, one can control the concentration of impurities present in the diamond; this is currently the most widely used approach to NV center diamond preparation The conventional HTHP diamond preparation method requires ironcobalt-nickel catalysts and has high concentration of N, which results in a larger number of magnetic impurities and a shorter dephasing time The most common preparation process of the NV center involves electron irradiation, or ion irradiations, to generate vacancy on the C sites, followed by subsequent annealing at temperatures in the range of 800°C to 1000°C After the sample is prepared, the dephasing time and the NV center concentration are fixed. In order to further improve the sensitivity by increasing N, a larger participating volume is necessary. This requires simultaneous improvement of the effective control volume for the microwave antenna, the laser excitation, and the fluorescence detection technologies. The microwave antenna is discussed first. The main indicators for evaluating microwave control include microwave feed efficiency S11, control area and uniformity within the area, and microwave frequency bandwidth. In the past, one or two straight wires were used as microwave antennas, as shown in Fig. (e) Planar ring antenna Fluorescence is typically collected using a confocal light path and objective lens. A major issue for this approach is that, for a bulk diamond, the refractive index of the diamond is 2.4 which leads to a small total reflection angle (24.6°). As a result, the collected fluorescence can be seriously insufficient, as shown in Fig. There are few studies investigating how to increase the light excitation volume as a separate topic, but the excitation volume is considered as part of the research in many NV center magnetometry studies. The laser excitation includes mainly two indicators: the excitation volume and the excitation optical power density. According to the above (f) Optical waveguide schemes Fig. analysis, increasing the excitation volume is equivalent to increasing the number of participating NV centers. According to Ref According to the principles previously discussed, conventional DC schemes have some shortcomings, including the sensitivity to DC noise (such as temperature), short T2 * dephasing time. In order to overcome these limitations, several special approaches are proposed. Since these approaches can improve only a certain aspect of the shortcomings, the sensitivity cannot be effectively improved compared to conventional schemes, and may result in other inconveniences. Therefore, these methods are only briefly introduced here. For DC noise, although the CWLI scheme can effectively eliminate some technical noise, this solution cannot eliminate the noise that directly affects the Hamiltonian, like the temperature noise Furthermore, several schemes have been proposed that use other parameters to modulate and convert the DC magnetic field to an AC measurement, resulting in the decoherence limit of the magnetic field measurement changing from T2 * to T2. One schemes is Utilizing rotation to convert a DC magnetic field to an AC magnetic field As discussed previously, an LAC effect occurs under ~500 G magnetic field, which can lead to the NV center fluorescence changing with the magnetic field (where ESLAC occurs), as shown in Fig. Due to the fixed orientation of the NV center in diamond and the large zero-field splitting, NV center magnetometer is intrinsically directional, thus is a vector magnetometer. The DC and AC magnetometers introduced above are projections of the magnetic field vector onto a single axis and do not use the other three axes. Therefore, if the other three axes can be effectively used, three-dimensional magnetic field vector measurements can be achieved Referring to the traditional magnetometer scheme such as Hall magentometer, ferromagnetic materials were used to achieve magnetic flux concentrator and attain higher sensitivity The sensitivity of the conventional fluorescence readout is limited by the photon shot noise. As discussed in Section 4.3, the photon shot noise is limited by low light collection efficiency and low ODMR contrast. Several other readout methods exist that might further increase the sensitivity As charge state conversion is related to the spin state, the photocurrent generated by conversion could also be used for spin readout. This scheme does not require fluorescence detection and only needs electronic equipment, thus having the potential for miniaturization. The relative device is shown in Fig. The 1042 nm infrared fluorescence corresponding to the singlet level transition can also be used for spin readout Based on the previous discussion, it is possible to estimate the optimal sensitivity that can be achieved through the existing technology, as well as the sensitivity limit that may be achieved in the future. At present, the optimal sensitivity is 15 pT, while the theoretical sensitivity limit reaches 3 pT. By utilizing the same diamond sample as in Ref Although the theoretical sensitivity can reach 10 fT•Hz -1/2 , the technical noise limits its further optimization. In Section 3.2.2, the influence of the technical noise on the sensitivity was analyzed in terms of the transfer coefficient of the technical noise. Here, magnitude of noise terms related special equipment are discussed and specific solutions to reduce their influence are also addressed. Magnetic field noise. The magnetic field generating device is generally a Helmholtz coil or a permanent magnet. Noise of Helmholtz coil is proportional to the current noise of the power supply, which is in the range of sub-nT and hinders high-sensitivity magnetometer applications. The magnetic noise for a permanent magnet suffers from the current-fluctuation-induced noises The highest sensitivity of the commercially available SERF and SQUID magnetometers is in the fT•Hz -1/2 order. In order to achieve this level, a magnetic shielding device is needed. This shielding is usually composed of ferrite, permalloy, and other highly permeable materials. The internal bias magnetic fields of shielding must also be sub-nanotesla which is far small than that is needed by the NV center magnetometer. Solutions involves using a circularly polarized MW The highest-quality Agilent microwave sources can achieve a resolution of 0.001 Hz, which means that the corresponding frequency noise should be less than 10 fT•Hz -1/2 . Temperature noise. Existing equipment is capable to control temperature fluctuations in the order of mK. Furthermore, it should be noted that temperature fluctuations generally occur at low frequency (less than 1 Hz), thus representing a slow drift term that affects more the longterm stability of the magnetometer rather than its sensitivity. For these first category noise, the conversion scale factor does not change upon changing the theoretical sensitivity limit, thus it becomes the main influencing factor as the sensitivity limit decreases. Laser power noise. The RMSE of laser noise is generally 0.11% at low frequencies and 0.001% on the floor. The laser power noise has a bigger impact on samples with the high N compared to the shot noise. Considering it will be important to increase the number of collected photons through technological improvements, the influence of the laser noise will become greater under this trend. There are several different methods to reduce the laser power noise. First, the CWLI scheme can largely eliminate the low frequency laser noise. Second, splitting of the laser beam into two beams, one as excitation light and the other as laser power reference light, which is used to differentiate the final result by a balanced detector. Third, for the pulsed scheme, two pulses can be used to differentiate the fluorescence. This differentiation method causes the root of the theory sensitivity to become 2 0.5 times worse Detection noise. Since the sensitivity limit of the conventional detectors is very high, the noise limit of the detector is generally much lower than the laser noise and photon shot noise. Furthermore, the methods to reduce the laser power noise can also apply on the detection noise, thus detection noise will not limit the sensitivity. Pulse time noise. Several works have now demonstrated that the accuracy of the pulse sequence generation device can reach the ps level Microwave power noise. The RMSE of microwave power noise and laser noise at different frequencies are very similar. Both common mode differential method and lock-in scheme can effectively reduce the influence of microwave power noise. For these second category noise, according to Section 3.2.2, it can be seen that the scale factor of these noise terms decreases upon increasing the dephasing time, thus it becomes crucial to improve the dephasing time of the sample. Finally, we comprehensively consider all technical noise and photon shot noise to get the actual sensitivity. As the result is shown in Fig. The purpose of the design and manufacture of magnetometers is to use magnetic field measurement applications. In this section, the various application scenarios of special designed NV center magnetometers are shown. These applications represent the future development direction of NV center magnetometers: high spatial resolution and high sensitivity. The magnetic measurement system built in a laboratory is typically large and cannot be easily moved Schemes using fibers have also been proposed The magnetic field imaging scheme generally uses a diamond NVrich layer on the surface. The magnetic substance to be tested is placed on the surface of the diamond, and the NV centers at different positions are subjected to different magnetic fields to generate magnetic field imaging. In order to detect the NV centers at different positions, it is necessary to change the optical readout device from PD or APD to a CCD or CMOS camera, as shown in Fig. By placing a nanodiamond on an AFM probe and scanning the object to be measured, magnetic field imaging with nanometer resolution can be achieved, as shown in Fig. Thanks to the excellent physicochemical and biological stability of diamond, nanometer diamond particles can be used for quantum Fig. In this review, a comprehensive description about diamond NV center magnetometer was demonstrated. Principles and sensitivity of four mainstream DC magnetic measurements schemes were analyzed, and the theoretical sensitivity and vulnerability to technical noise were compared. Assuming the diamond sample performance to be equal, the theoretical sensitivity of the CWLI scheme is the worst but its sensitivity to technical noise is the lowest. The PUODMR scheme and the Ramsey scheme have the highest theoretical sensitivity, while the three non-lock-in schemes are all sensitive to noise. The key technologies required by the diamond NV center magnetometer were discussed: diamond sample preparation, microwave antenna, fluorescence collection, and light excitation. The diamond samples preparation determines the concentration of NV centers and the decoherence time in diamond. The elimination of 13 C and the CVD growth technology with impurity content control are consolidated methods to increase the decoherence time and the NV center concentration. Potential methods for future further improvement include the p-type semiconductor diamond technology and the HTHP technology to reduce uneven stress distribution. The main purpose of microwave antenna technology, fluorescence collection, and laser excitation technology is to increase the effective sensitive volume. Among these, the laser excitation technology is the least developed. The impact of the main technical noise affecting the magnetic measurement sensitivity was analyzed, and the technical noise transfer coefficients for the four schemes were compared. Furthermore, the amplitude of each technical noise was also compared for the existing conditions. Several specialist DC magnetic field measurement schemes were also discussed, such as the microwave-free schemes. In comparison with fluorescent spin readout schemes, non-fluorescent spin readout schemes include valence and electrical spin readout and infrared readout schemes. The signal-to-noise ratio of these two approaches does not currently have many advantages over the fluorescent spin readout scheme. Through a comprehensive analysis, we predict that the theoretical sensitivity of the diamond NV center magnetometer has the potential to reach the 10 fT•Hz -1/2 order without major breakthroughs in the existing technology and theory. As discussed, the crucial issues for NV magnetometer are how to improve dephasing time under complex spin environment and inhomogeneity of zero field splitting and how to combine the existing technologies that are most suitable for improving the sensitivity of the magnetic measurement together. the roadmap for NV magnetometer In the future, diamond preparation may lead to the T2 * approaching the order of millisecond at low temperatures and lead to a potential of sub-fT•Hz -1/2 . This will lead to a further increase in the theoretical sensitivity. In the future, a possible technical factor limiting the further improvement of the actual sensitivity might be the magnetic noise. Several specific applications and characteristics of diamond NV center magnetometers were introduced, which demonstrated the roadmap of NV magnetometer application. Fig. 