The optical reflectivity of Al-based and Ti-based quasicrystalline and approximant samples were investigated versus the quality of their structural morphology using optical reflectometry, X-ray diffraction and transmission electron microscopy. The different structural morphologies were obtained using three different preparation processes : sintering, pulsed laser deposition and reactive cathodic magnetron sputtering. The work demonstrates that the canonical behaviour of icosahedral state in specular reflectivity is extremely sensitive to different and very fine aspects of the microstructure : sizes of grains smaller than 50 nm, slight local diffuse disorder and shifts away from the icosahedral crystallographic structure (approximants). The work explains why the optical properties of the same kind of quasicrystals found in literature sometimes reveal a different behaviour from one author to another. The study then confirms the work of some authors and definitely shows that the canonical behaviour of icosahedral state in specular reflectivity over the 30000 -50000 cm -1 domain is characterized by a decreasing function made of steps. It also shows that this behaviour can be interpreted thanks to the cluster hierarchy of the model of Janot. In 1984, the icosahedral crystallographic structure was discovered in the Al-Mn system. In this paper we report on the preparation and on the optical properties of several icosahedral (Al-Cu-Fe, Al-Cu-Fe-B, Al-Pd-Mn, Ti-Ni-Zr) and approximant (Al-Cr-Fe, Al-Cr-Fe-Mo) samples of different structural quality. The different qualities of the quasicrystalline samples were obtained either by preparing samples of the same system by two distinct synthesis processes, either by changing the preparation parameters using one synthesis process. The structural quality of the samples was evaluated by X-ray diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) when necessary. Optical specular reflectivity of all samples was measured and is linked to the structural quality of the samples. The paper insists on the very high sensitivity of optical reflectivity data in the ultra-violet (UV) domain to the degree of structural order of the samples. The optical behaviour of several systems was considered. Results of The reflectivity response of the Al-Cu-Fe-B, Al-Pd-Mn system on all the frequency domain could be found in Bulk samples or thick films were prepared according to three different manufacturing processes : sintering of either powdered crushed ingots, or atomised powder, pulsed laser deposition (PLD), and reactive magnetron sputtering. For each process, several samples were prepared with technical process parameters close one from each other. They are compiled in tables 1 and 2. Al-Cu-Fe-B and Al-Pd-Mn quasicrystalline samples and Al-Cr-Fe and Al-Cr-Fe-Mo approximant samples were prepared according to a classic sintering process. Three Al-Cu-Fe-B samples of the same composition Al58.4Cu25.1Fe12.5B4 (named AlCuFeB-0, AlCuFeB-1, AlCuFeB-2) were prepared. AlCuFeB-0 was prepared by hot-press sing sintering a quasicrystalline atomised powder whose particle size was around 25 m, at 1103 K under 40 MPa uniaxial stress, followed by a post annealing treatment at 1053 K for 3 hours to eliminate the non-wanted CsCl-type  phases. AlCuFeB-1 and AlCuFeB-2 samples were prepared from powders whose particle size was taken in the 25-65 m range, obtained by crushing ingots. The ingots were previously obtained by melting the pure constitutive elements by induction under a helium atmosphere in a copper mould crucible using r-f energy. The sintering treatment of AlCuFeB-1 (respectively AlCuFeB-2) was 1053 K under 15 MPa with a post annealing treatment of 3 hours at 373 K (respectively 903 K). Slow cooling to room temperature at 20 K/min followed, while maintaining the applied pressure. Two Al-Pd-Mn samples of Al69.8Pd21.6Mn8.6 composition (named AlPdMn-0 and AlPdMn-1) were prepared. AlPdMn-0 and AlPdMn-1 samples were prepared from crushed ingots prepared as described above. in a similar way as just. Thermal sintering treatment plateau of AlPdMn-0 (respectively AlPdMn-1) was set at 1103 K and followed by an annealing treatment for 3 hours at 873 K (respectively 373 K). Three Al-Cr-Fe and Al-Cr-Fe-Mo samples were also prepared from crushed ingots : a sample named Approx-0 of Al9(Cr,Fe)4 composition, a sample named Approx-1 of Al71.6Cr22.4Fe6 composition and a sample named Approx-2 of Al71.6Cr20.8Fe5.9Mo1.6 composition. Thermal sintering treatment plateau of 30 min was maintained at 20 K under the melting temperature of the approximant (i.e. 1333 K for the Approx-0  brass phase and 1253 K for the Approx-1 and Approx-2 phases) followed by an annealing treatment for 2 hours at 373 K. Two Ti-Ni-Zr thick films of Ti41.5Ni17Zr41.5 composition (named TiNiZr-0 and TiNiZr-1) were prepared by pulsed laser ablation using a pulsed Nd : YAG (Qantel, YG 571C) laser. The wavelength used was 1064 nm, the repetition rate was 10 Hz and the pulse durations was 10 ns. The laser fluence used was 72 J/cm 2 . Experiments were conducted under high vacuum. The matter source to be ablated was a cylindrical piece of 3 mm in height and 2 cm in diameter cut ted from an ingot prepared by melting the pure constitutive elements by induction under helium atmosphere in a copper mould crucible using r-f energy. TiNiZr-0 (respectively TiNiZr-1) were synthesized by depositing on a substrate whose temperature was kept at 538 K (respectively 298 K). The films were not further annealed. Films of around 0.6 m thickness were obtained. More details concerning the deposition conditions can be found in Al-Cu-Fe samples were prepared by reactive cathodic magnetron sputtering. Two Al-Cu-Fe thick films of composition Al62.5Cu5.5Fe12.5 were prepared. Al-Cu-Fe-1 was prepared on a glass substrate whose temperature was kept at 298 K. The disk target was made of three sectors, each sector being made of each of the elements (Al, Cu, and Fe). Background vacuum was 0.3 Pa, a current of 0.6 A was maintained on the sputtered target and the power used was 250 W. A thick film of around 6 m was obtained. Al-Cu-Fe-0 is the Al-Cu-Fe-1 sample that has undergone ex-situ a thermal treatment of 2 h at 673 K. As thicknesses of the films are huge regarding to the usual coherency lengths of the quasicrystalline structures, they can be considered as bulk material and can thus be compared to the sintered ones. Atomic compositions of the samples were checked by Electron Probe Microanalysis. The structure of the samples was determined by X-Ray Diffraction (CoKradiation, λ = 0.178897 nm). In case of a texture (typically for TiNiZr thick films 21 ), a four-circles diffractometer was used. 22 scans were so recorded at different χ angles and added in order to cumulate and visualize all the possible Bragg reflections on a same diagram. This acquisition was done with χ ranging from 0 to 55° assuring a φ rotation of the sample at 600 rotations per minute. Such an acquisition allows to visualize all the possible Bragg diffraction peaks in the range 30° ≤ 2θ ≤ 96° (where θ is the Bragg angle). Quasicrystalline state was systematically checked by TEM on a PHILIPS CM200 microscope. Morphologies were studied by TEM (PHILIPS CM200) or by SEM on a PHILIPS XL-FEG microscope. The bulk sintered samples were mirror polished before their reflectivity R could be measured (mechanical standard polishing using SiC paper grids, followed by diamond paste polishing was performed). The Ti-Ni-Zr and Al-Cu-Fe samples' reflectivity was measured on the as synthesized films. The reflectivity spectra were measured using a Perkin-Elmer spectrometer in the wide frequency range 4100 -50 000 cm -1 at nearly normal incidence. All samples, due to their preparation method, are very dense. Their porosity (far less than 10 %) makes them adequate samples to be optically characterized, notably in the UV domain. The complete set of optical reflectivity R data obtained with the Al-Cu-Fe-B and Al-Pd-Mn sintered samples and with the Ti-Ni-Zr and Al-Cu-Fe thick film samples is shown on the curves in Fig. B. Morphological and structural characterization of samples X-ray and TEM analyses showed samples are all crystallized (quasicrystalline or approximant) except AlCuFe-1 which is amorphous. Table All sintered samples (Al-Cu-Fe-B, Al-Pd-Mn, Al-Cr-Fe and Al-Cr-Fe-Mo ones) exhibit granular morphologies whose grain size measured on SEM pictures is of the m order. Fig. AlPdMn-0 is the sample owning the best icosahedral order as attested : on the one hand by a close to zero diffuse scattering observed at the bottom-foot of the peaks of the icosahedral phase (as indexed on the figure) and on the other hand by the thin width of peaks very close to instrument resolution only. AlPdMn-1 is an icosahedral sample with local structural disorder as confirmed by the two maxima of diffuse scattering respectively located at 2 and 51°. Fig. The Ti-Ni-Zr samples X-ray diagrams are displayed in Fig. The classification in four groups as well as the contradictory results of literature can actually be interpreted with the Model of Janot 23 and taking into considerations the crystallographic and morphological state of the samples. Indeed, the icosahedral structure (the one of Al-Pd-Mn, Al-Cu-Fe, Al-Cu-Fe-B and Ti-Ni-Zr) is a hierarchical arrangement of clusters where every hierarchical level is obtained by inflation of the one before and where each atomic cluster can be considered as a potential well. The model of Janot says 1) the resonance frequencies in the optical conductivity (optical conductivity and reflectivity data are mathematically linked by a Kramers Krönig transformation The canonical behaviour of a quasicrystalline alloy can be observed on the reflectivity curves of the samples of group A (Fig. When the order of the structure is perturbed as in the case of samples exhibiting X-ray diffuse scattering (sub group of group B : AlCuFeB-1, AlCuFeB-2, AlPdMn-1), the hierarchical geometrical arrangement of atomic clusters is modified. The deterioration of the structural perfection affects the densities and frequencies of electronic jumps, it decreases the conductivity resonance peaks and results in the disappearance of the stair behaviour of the reflectivity. The larger the diffuse scattering is, the less the peaks are defined and the more the distribution of structural distances spreads out. It results in a weaker decrease of reflectivity in the UV domain, and in the smoothing or disappearance of the steps (Fig. For the approximant samples which are crystalline (samples of group C : Approx-0, Approx-1 and Approx-2), the clusters do exist locally inside the cells, but the hierarchy (clusters of clusters) is non existant. The potential wells disappear, tunnelling occurs then from atoms to atoms. The hopping distances distribution is in this case a distribution more continuous than previously. Optical conductivity will show up no resonance peak, and the optical reflectivity curves will exhibit no step (Fig. The plateau goes on over the UV domain. Although, local order of approximant material is very close to the one of quasicrystals, the loss of quasicrystallinity is stronger than for the quasicrystalline samples where the Granularity granularity is around a nanometer. The content of the residual presence of the phase ( peak at 51°) which is an approximant of the AlCuFeB icosahedral phase in the AlCuFeB-1 sample is too small to have an important impact on the reflectivity curve which has already been altered by a smoothing due to local structural disorder. For samples whose structure is amorphous (Group D = AlCuFe-1), no cluster exists. The material is a dense random packing of hard spheres (atoms). The sample does not possess any hierarchy beyond local atomic distances : atoms are ordered over lengths inferior to two or three atomic distances. This leads to a continuous distribution of possible electronic jumps and to no frequencies resonance. It also leads to a progressive increase of the frequencies corresponding to the smallest distances. The plateau goes over the UV domain, presents no step and is continuously increasing. A study was performed to get the canonical icosahedral quasicrystalline, approximant and amorphous phases response in optical reflectivity over the UV domain. It is remarkable to realize that a net and easy to read differentiation of optical behaviour occurs according to very small structural "shifts" from a "good" quasicrystallinity. Indeed, loss of order such as the one noticeable by the discrete presence of diffuse diffusion background at the base of X-ray diffraction peaks or too small coherency lengths (due to the size of grains, or to the approximant structure) are sufficient to dramatically affect the UV optical reflectivity. Amorphous phases lead to an increase of the signal over this domain. The reflectivity measurement, and all the more its derivative curve, are thus very sensitive. The measurements can be performed quickly and cheaply : it could thus be used by manufacturers of quasicrystalline matter to test their samples quality. It can also help to make the difference between amorphous and quasicrystalline samples with small grains (nanometer range) as it is not possible to do so by looking only at X-ray diffraction diagrams. This is all the more important since one might expect similar sensitivities of other properties of quasicrystals. Indeed optical properties, like many other properties of the quasicrystals take their foundation on the peculiar waves interactions inside the structure. This work is a contribution to understand the relationship structure-properties of nanoscaled materials. The study stresses on why, as already mentioned in the introduction, quality of samples is of high relevance to characterize canonical properties of materials. This is for quasicrystals here, apparently even more true. V. Brien, A. Dauscher, P. Weisbecker, J. Ghanbaja and F. Machizaud, J. Cryst. Growth, 256