Manganese ferrite (MnFe2O4) and copper doped manganese ferrite (Mn0.75Cu0.25Fe2O4) soft materials were synthesized through solid-state sintering method. The phase purity and quality were confirmed from x-ray diffraction patterns. Then the samples were subjected to neutron diffraction experiment and the diffraction data were analyzed using FullProf software package. The surface morphology of the soft material samples was studied using a scanning electron microscope (SEM). Crystal parameters, crystallite parameters, occupancy at A and B sites of the spinel structure, magnetic moments of the atoms at various locations, symmetries, oxygen position parameters, bond lengths etc. were measured and compared with the reference data. In MnFe2O4, both octahedral (A) and tetrahedral (B) positions are shared by Mn 2+ and Fe 2+/3+ cations, here A site is predominantly occupied by Fe 2+ and B site is occupied by Mn at 0.825 occupancy. The Cu 2+ ions in Cu0.25Mn0.75Fe2O4 mostly occupy the B site. Copper mostly occupy the Octahedral (16d) sites. The length of the cubic lattice decreases with the increasing Copper content. The magnetic properties, i.e. A or B site magnetic moments, net magnetic moment etc. were measured using neutron diffraction analysis and compared with the bulk magnetic properties measured with VSM studies. Manganese ferrites (MnFe2O4) are soft ferrite materials that have properties like high saturation magnetization, high permeability, low coercivity (Hc), low magnetostriction, low anisotropy, high curie temperature (Tc), high electrical resistivity etc. Thus soft magnetic materials have wide use in computer memory devices, microwave devices, RF-coil fabrication, antennas, transformer cores, magnetic recording media etc. The polycrystalline samples of MnFe2O4 and Mn0.75Cu0.25Fe2O4 spinel oxides were prepared by conventional solid-state sintering method at the sample preparation laboratory of Institute of Nuclear Science and Technology, Atomic Energy Research Establishment (AERE), Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission (BAEC). High purity oxides of Fe2O3 (99.00%), Cu(II)O (99.00%), MnO2 (99.00%) Sigma-Aldrich, UK, were mixed thoroughly by maintaining the stoichiometric proportions using an agate mortar and pestle for 2h. Then the mixtures were ground for 6 h in a stainless-steel ball mill. To ensure fine mixing, a small amount of distilled water was used as a milling fluid. Then the mixture was dried using a magnetic heater in the air until it turned into powder. The mixture was then calcined at 1000°C for 12 hours in the air. The temperature was raised at a rate of 2°C per minute and after heating the cooling rate was 4°C per minute. Then the mixtures were mixed again in an agate mortar and pressed into pellets using a hydraulic press. Then the pellets were heated in a muffle furnace where the final firing temperature was 1050°C for MnFe2O4 and Mn0.75Cu0.25Fe2O4 were heated at a final temperature of 1100°C for 24 h. The temperature was raised at a rate of 2°C per minute and after heating, the cooling rate was 4°C per minute. To determine the phase purity and quality, the samples were subjected to X-ray diffraction experiment at CARS, University of Dhaka with Cu(Kα) radiation of wavelength 1.54178 Å in the span of 10°≤2θ≤70° with a step size of 0.02°. Both the diffraction patterns exhibited sharp peaks corresponding to the characteristic peaks of cubic spinel structure. Neutron diffraction analysis is a unique technique which can provide insights into the magnetic structure of the ferromagnetic, antiferromagnetic or paramagnetic materials. To investigate the magnetic structure along with the molecular structure, the samples were subjected to neutron diffraction experiment at Savar Neutron Diffractometer (SAND) which utilizes thermal neutron beam emerging from TRIGA Mark-II research reactor at Atomic Energy Research Establishment (AERE), Savar. The machine is a set of 15 3 He2 gas-filled neutron detectors, which can maneuver around the sample table from 2θ range of 5 ̊ to 115 ̊. The powder sample was kept in a Vanadium can (as Vanadium is transparent to thermal neutrons), on a rotating table. The neutron beam is monochromated using a set of silicon single crystal to a single wavelength beam of λ = 1.5656 Å. The readings of the fifteen parallel detectors are then averaged and noise from stray radiations are suppressed at a data accusation unit After the neutron diffraction experiment, the diffraction data were refined using Reitveld based refinement code FullProf. The structural symmetry, cell parameters, atomic position parameters, magnetic moments of different ions at different positions were measured using this code. After that, Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) experiment were done using an FEI Inspect S50 to study the grain size distribution as well as the surface properties of the materials. The images were taken at 5000 times magnification applying 12.50 kV potential difference for MnFe2O4 and 20.00 kV for Cu0.25Mn0.75Fe2O4. The X-ray diffraction patterns of the samples were yielded from a Rigaku X-ray diffractometer within a 2θ range of 10° to 70°. The XRD patterns show prominent peaks at the locations identical to that of spinel ferrites having Fd-3m crystal symmetry. The absence of non-identical peaks indicates the phase purity of the synthesized samples. The indexing of the XRD peaks was done with the software 'Chekcell', a small but elegant software that affirmed the assumed symmetry and provided a preliminary idea about the cell parameters The refined parameters are presented in table The Rietveld refined parameters from XRD patterns. The cation distribution of the spinel ferrites is sensitive to the observed and calculated intensity ratios of peaks at (220), (400) and (440) planes. This method selects ratios of pairs of intensities, where the relative integrated intensity of the XRD peaks can be calculated from the following formula where F is the structure factor, P is the multiplicity factor and Lp is the Lorentz polarization factor which in fact depends solely on Bragg's angle 2θ, as stated below Considering all possible cation distributions of Mn 2+ , Fe 2+ , Fe 3+ , Cu 2+ at tetrahedral and octahedral positions both the composition minimizing the agreement factor (R), yield the correct cation distribution. The cation distribution is presented below in table The crystallographic parameters, peak positions, half-width parameters, along with the observed and calculated intensities of the major peaks. Half The peak heights of the XRD patterns were measured using the WinPlotr software and then the ratios (observed) were calculated using equation 4 for the selected planes, which are presented below in the table The calculated cationic distributions of the samples and the ratios of intensities of (220), (440), (400) peaks. The I220/I440, I220/I400 ratios indicate the accuracy of the theorized cation distribution among the A and B sites. The angular positions of the peaks can be used to determine the cell parameter by Nelson-Riley (N-R) method The y-intercept of the linear regression of the cell parameter vs. FNR plot gives the exact value of the cell parameter. Figure The cell parameter can also be calculated theoretically from the cation-anion distances using the formula below, which can be calculated from the cationic compositions measured experimentally by any other means. If dA-O and dB-O are the average cation-anion bond lengths of A and B sites respectively, the relation between lattice parameter, a and the bond lengths can be expressed through the following formula, There is more than one type of atoms occupying the same position. So weighted mean values of the crystal/ionic radii calculated by R. D. Shanon The cell parameters determined by N-R method, theoretically calculated form ionic distances compared with the cell parameter, oxygen position parameter values calculated with the Rietveld method. The crystal radii of Mn 2+ , Cu 2+ , Fe 3+ cations at A site have coordination number 4 compared to these ions at site B having coordination number 6. The position of the O 2-anion in the facecentered cubic (fcc) lattice is referred to as a quantity called Oxygen position parameter or anion parameter, u. For ideal spinel structures, uideal is 0.375 Evidently, the value of u is larger than that of ideal spinel structure, because of the replacement of Fe 3+ with larger Mn 2+ ions and larger Cu +2 ions. The values of the tetrahedral and octahedral bond lengths (dAL and dBL), tetrahedral edge (dAE) and shared and unshared bond lengths (dBE and dUBE) can be calculated using the following formulae, (11) The hopping lengths, LA and LB between the magnetic ions located at A site and B site respectively can be calculated from the equations below, The bond lengths, angles and hopping lengths are listed in table Reduction of θ1, θ2 and θ5 are indicative of strengthening A-A, A-B interaction, while on the other hand increase in θ3, θ4 indicates strengthening of B-B interaction. These effects of super-exchange interactions between A-sites and B-sites ultimately decrease magnetization. In this case, it can be seen as the Cu 2+ was incorporated θ1, θ2 and θ5 increase and the other two angles got reduced. The changes in the lengths are presented in table The calculated values of the ionic distances and the bond angles along with the ideal values of the bond angles x dAL (Å) The cation-oxygen distances p,q,r,s, cationcation distances b, c, d, e, f and the interaction angles were calculated using the relations listed in table Table Bond Angles θ (°) ` Fig. The measurement of the accuracy of a Rietveld based fitting is represented by the 'Goodness of fit' parameters. The Rp, Rw, Re, Rf, RBragg and χ 2 are profile factor, weighted profile factor, expected weighted profile factor, crystallographic Rf factor, Bragg's R factor and the reduced Chi-square value respectively The magnetic properties of spinel ferrites largely depend on the cation distribution (the distributions of the substitutes in A or B position), which can be varied by synthesis method, annealing temperature, reactants etc. The magnetic hysteresis loops (M-H) are given in figure Here, Mw is the molecular weight of the sample and Ms is the saturation magnetization. It could be seen from figure (iii) that the doped sample had more grains in the range of 0-2 micrometer and 2-4 micrometer, while the undoped material had lower number of grains in 0-2 micrometer region but higher number of grains in 2-4 micrometer region. In this study, MnFe2O4 and Cu-doped MnFe2O4 were synthesized in the conventional solid-state sintering method. The XRD analysis confirms the single-phase formation of the samples, and the surface morphology study showed proper densification of the particles. Furthermore, various parameters were studied and compared by the Rietveld refinement of the XRD pattern and neutron diffraction analysis to observe the effect of doping in the samples. The observed net magnetic moment declined in both as Mn 2+ ion has larger magnetic moment compared to (Hc), Magnetic moment per unit formula (η) etc. were in accordance with the values investigated by L. A.