In this work, we report the first account of monolithically-fabricated vertical cavity surface emitting lasers (VCSELs) of densely-packed, orientation-controlled, atomically flat colloidal quantum wells (CQWs) using a self-assembly method and demonstrate single-mode lasing from a record thin colloidal gain medium with a film thickness of 7 nm under femtosecond optical excitation. We used specially engineered CQWs to demonstrate these hybrid CQW-VCSELs consisting of only a few layers to a single monolayer of CQWs and achieved the lasing from these thin gain media by thoroughly modeling and implementing a vertical cavity consisting of distributed Bragg reflectors with an additional dielectric layer for mode tuning. Accurate spectral and spatial alignment of the cavity mode with the CQW films was secured with the help of full electromagnetic computations. While overcoming the long-pending problem of limited electrical conductivity in thicker colloidal films, such ultra-thin colloidal gain media can help enabling fully electrically-driven colloidal lasers. Lasers based on solution-processed materials have attracted intensive scientific and technological interest owing to their exceptional advantages including ease of fabrication, low-cost synthesis and processability and precise control of emission wavelength enabling lasing readily in different colors. As a result, a wide range of solution-processed materials of different classes have been studied for lasing, including organic semiconductors, 1 perovskites 2 and semiconductor nanocrystals. Monolithic fabrication of ultra-thin cavity VCSEL provides opportunities for enhancing Q-factor and enabling single-mode lasing. Single-mode lasers purified from noise of other lasing modes are advantageous in practical applications and typically enable lower lasing thresholds compared to multimode lasers. In addition, monolithic CQW laser fabrication is crucial for enhancing the VCSEL performance because parasitic scattering in the cavity originating from multi-component setup is prevented along with the surface disruptions. Previously, CQW-VCSELs were fabricated by sandwiching drop-casted several-micrometer-thick CQW films between two mirrors resulting in bulky devices suffering from heat generation, exhibiting small Q factors, In this study, we demonstrate the single mode lasing by using femtosecond optical pumping pulses from precisely engineered monolithic VCSELs having dense ultrathin films of CQW monolayers obtained by self-assembly technique. Here, mode tuning films present in the monolithic VCSELs were designed to achieve high Q-factors as well as accurate spectral matching with the gain spectrum with the help of full electromagnetic simulations. Owing to the uniformity and thermal stability of our ultra-thin CQW films used in these devices, the top DBRs could be deposited at temperatures above 150 °C, which ensures the fabrication of high Q-factor VCSELs. We observed a lasing threshold of 112 μJ cm -2 owing to the resulting high Q-factor of ~760 for a device having only 7-nm-thick CQW layer, which is the thinnest lasing demonstration among all colloidal nanocrystals reported to date to the best of our knowledge. We were also able to deposit multiple CQW monolayers uniformly in a cavity using self-assembly method and demonstrated lasing with a lower threshold of 78 μJ cm -2 from a VCSEL with four CQW monolayers having total thickness of ∼28 nm. It is worth noting that the CQW films in our devices were as thin as those used for electrical operation of colloidal light-emitting diodes. Results and Discussion. CdSe/Cd0.34Zn0.66S core/giant alloyed hot-injection (HI) shell CQWs have been synthesized according to our recent recipe based on well-adjusted precursor and ligand concentrations. The optical gain properties of these CQWs were studied in our previous work, in which we showed the capability of amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) from bi-CQW layers with a thickness of only 14 nm. where LMC is the geometrical thickness of the microcavity, nl is the refractive index of low-index material, nh is the refractive index of high-index material (see the Supporting Information for measured refractive indices), and neff is the effective refractive index of the DBRs. taking LMC = 7 nm for a cavity with a monolayer of CQWs sandwiched between DBRs with TiO2/SiO2 bi-layers results in Leff = 1.3 μm. The transmittance of 11 bilayers DBRs with a length of 1.87 μm were measured to reach ~0.1% at λmax (Figure To achieve lasing in the cavity, the cavity resonant mode λres should be spectrally aligned with the peak of CQW gain λmax. Also, the optical field overlap Г with the gain medium should be maximized in order to achieve sufficient net modal gain given by g modal = Гg material -α, where g material is the material gain and α is the total modal loss. The Г-factor, and Q-factor as well as spectral behavior of the cavity were studied via numerical simulations based on finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method (see the Methods section). All device parameters were carefully analyzed and optimized prior to the device fabrication for achieving the best possible performance in our numerical calculations. As shown in Figure Adding a monolayer of CQWs with a thickness of Δt = 7 nm to the cavity redshifts the resonance wavelength by a relatively large amount of Δλres = +13 nm (Δνres = -11 THz) at νres = 493 THz. The shift Δνres = -νres Δt / teff is proportional to effective cavity length teff, which is found to be ~ 315 nm (Figure Considering the ultrathin cavity thickness and resulting large free spectral range, λres needs to be tuned to reside in the FWHM of CQW emission. To work around this problem, additional dielectric layers were incorporated between the mirrors, which provides us with the ability to tune λres while maintaining a high Г×Q product at the desired wavelength. We studied the effect of adding an extra layer of SiO2, Al2O3 and TiO2 inside the cavity containing different numbers of CQW layers. As shown in Figure Based on our computational results, we chose to deposit 30 nm of Al2O3 on top of a monolayer of CQWs to match λres with the peak emission of our CQWs. The simulated Q-factor of ~9,000 in this case shows a great potential for coupling the emission from CQW layer to the nanocavity, which can enhance the spontaneous emission due to the Purcell effect. Figure We fabricated four sets of VCSELs having one to four CQW monolayers in the cavity. To tune the resonant mode of each VCSEL within the FWHM of the CQW emission, an extra layer of Al2O3, pf which the thickness is optimized according to the number of CQW layers, was deposited. The CQW monolayers were deposited through our liquid-air interface CQW self-assembly method, which offers us the capability of depositing one CQW layer at a time with near-unity surface coverage and sub-nm surface roughness. Figure Figure By fitting the data with a linear function, we obtained a threshold pump energy density of ∼112 μJ cm -2 for the VCSEL having a monolayer of CQW layer (VCSEL1). The lasing threshold gradually decreases with the increasing number of CQW monolayers and reduces to 78 μJ cm The observed reduction in the lasing threshold with the increasing thickness of gain medium stems from the increased resonant mode overlap with the gain medium. Furthermore, in each of our VCSELs, most of the pump beam (more than 90%) was not absorbed by the ultra-thin CQW film, but rather was transmitted through or reflected off the device, which would also require higher pumping energy. By simply increasing the CQW film thickness, in addition to Г-factor enhancement, the pump beam absorption in the gain medium could be increased, thereby increasing the modal gain at the same pump power. All CQW-VCSELs exhibited relatively low lasing thresholds on the order of tens of μJ cm -2 which can be attributed to the spectral matching of the cavity mode and the maximized Г-and Q-factors. Furthermore, a key factor for this high performance is the exploitation of hot-injection shell (HIS) growth of CQWs, which simultaneously enables a near-unity photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY), reduces nonradiative channels, ensures smooth films, and enhances the stability. In this study, we fabricated monolithic CQW-VCSELs and demonstrated single-mode lasing using CQWs synthesized with our hot injection technique having near-unity PL quantum yield enable low threshold single-mode lasing from ultra-thin films of these CQWs. The demonstrated CQW films used in this work are sufficiently thin to possibly enable electrical carrier injection, given that they are combined with proper carrier-transporting layers. The findings of this work may pave the way for realization of ultra-thin electrically-driven colloidal laser devices, providing critical advantages including single-mode lasing and high electrical conduction. (37) Lova, P.; Megahd, H.; Stagnaro, P.; Alloisio, M.; Patrini, M.; Comoretto, D. Strategies for Dielectric Contrast Enhancement in 1D Planar Polymeric Photonic Crystals. Appl. Sci. 2020, 10 (12).