Employing first-principles density functional theory calculations and Wannierization of the low energy band structure, we analyze the electronic structure of undoped, infinite-layer nickelate compounds, NdNiO2, PrNiO2 and LaNiO2. Our study reveals important role of non-zero f -ness of Nd and Pr atoms, as opposed to f 0 occupancy of La. The non-zero f -ness becomes effective in lowering the energy of the rare-earth 5d hybridized axial orbital thereby enhancing the electron pockets and influencing the Fermi surface topology. The Fermi surface topology of NdNiO2 and PrNiO2 is strikingly similar, while differences are observed for LaNiO2. This difference shows up in computed doping dependent superconducting properties of the three compounds within a weak coupling theory, which finds two gap superconductivity for NdNiO2 and PrNiO2, and possibility of a single gap superconductivity for LaNiO2 with the strength of superconductivity suppressed by almost a factor of two, compared to Nd or Pr compound. Introduction.-Discovery of high temperature superconductivity in cuprates The first nickelate structure containing 2D NiO 2 planes that was synthesized is the infinite layer LaNiO 2 . In this communication, we probe this issue by computing the electronic structure of NdNiO 2 , PrNiO 2 and LaNiO 2 within the framework of density functional theory, probing the impact of structural and chemical changes on the electronic structure, on the active orbitals participating on the formation of Fermi surface and on superconductivity. The comparison and contrast between the three compounds, two of them with reported superconducting properties, Electronic Structure.-Fig. icant differences with the band structure of LaNiO 2 (cf Fig. As shown previously, Superconductivity:-The natural question is how does this materials specific electronic structure influence the superconducting (SC) state in this family. We extend our previous studies on spin-fluctuation mediated SC pairing symmetry and pairing strength to all three materials and as a function of doping. We consider a two-band Hubbard model with interaction Hamiltonian given by, where n iσ is the number density of the i th (=1,2) orbital, and spin σ/σ=↑ / ↓. U i are the intra-orbital interactions, and V is the inter-orbital interaction. For the above interaction, an effective SC potential Γ can be obtained by summing over the bubble and ladder diagrams c † α,σ (k) is the creation operator for the α-orbital with spin σ =↑ / ↓ at the wave vector k. Γ is the effective pairing tensor which can be decomposed into the singlet and triplet states. For NNO and also in PNO, the axial orbital assisted inter-orbital interaction V promotes an orbital-selective superconductivity, while the orbital selectivity is nearly lost in LNO due to the lack of sufficient contribution of axial orbital to the Fermi surface (FS). The expectation value on the right hand side is taken over the typical BCS ground state, which yields a self-consistent BCS gap equation in the second line. Here ν is the band index, and ξ ν (k) and φ ν α (k) are the eigenvalue and eigenvector of the two-band Wannier Hamiltonian, directly obtained from the DFT code. At T → 0 limit, and when the momenta are restricted to the FS, the tanh-function leads to a δ function. Therefore, we introduce the SC coupling constant λ → . Finally, we define the band dependent SC gap ∆ ν and pairing potential Γ νν as This is an eigenvalue equation of the pairing potential Γ νν (q = k-k ) with eigenvalue λ and eigenfunction ∆ ν (k). The k-dependence of ∆ ν (k) dictates the pairing symmetry for a given eigenvalue. While there are many solutions (as many as the k-grid), we consider only the highest eigenvalue since this pairing symmetry can be shown to have the lowest Free energy value in the SC state. The d x 2 -y 2 -wave gap gives a nodal quasi-particle DOS while the d z 2 -wave gap symmetry becomes node-less as it originates from the axial orbital which primarily contributes in the α and γ FS pockets, and has no contribution in k z = π/2. This finding corroborates the recent STM data on NNO. Further, as seen in Fig. The origin of decreasing strength of SC with doping can be traced back to the FS area and nesting strength. As seen from the orbital resolved DOS in Fig. To find out the reason behind this, we probe the 3D FS topology and the orbital weight distributions for the representative case of NNO in Fig. Our theory reproduces the right-hand side of the SC dome, as observed in NNO as well as in PNO, Note, our calculation and analysis does not include of effect of magnetism of 4f electrons. However, the fact that the difference and similarity of the three compounds have been brought out correctly, suggests the role of the f electrons, as identified in the present study, to be the dominant one.