Standoff chemical sensing of chemicals and toxic compounds is very desirable for actively monitoring residential, commercial, and industrial spaces. Analytes such as toxic industrial compounds (TIC), chemical warfare agents (CWAs), and environmental pollutants (EPs) can pose serious threats to civilians, warfighters, and the environment. We report on highly sensitive, robust, and inexpensive distributed standoff fiber optic chemical sensors (FOCSs). FOCSs are activated by analytes reaching a sensing region and inducing a change in its optical properties. The information of a spectral response is transmitted by a shift in transmission spectra probed by evanescent waves, corresponding to the detection of an analyte. However, there are many factors that play a role in the implementation and optimization of such fiber sensors. We find it beneficial to construct the theory of general optochemical waveguide sensors to guide the analysis. We apply it to a specific fiber platfom that is robust, broadband, multitarget, scalable, and compatible to texitle fibers and fabrics -a focus of this work. The good agreement between the predicted and measured spectra of FOCSs exposed to Ammonia (NH 3 ) lends support to the analysis. The experiment yields a 1ppm sensitivity, representing the current best in class. The use of NH 3 in the test serves as a representative for a larger set of aminebased TICs, CWAs, EPs, and other chemical species, targeted for wide-area distributed coverage and textile-compatible sensors. Point and standoff sensors are an established and growing part of our daily lives. Their advancement into distributed sensors is important to cover more sensing area to reach locations that may be difficult for human observers, and for which point detectors, even a network of point detectors, is insufficient. For example, in a home fire alarm network -an example of a network of point sensors -if one alarm fails to detect smoke or CO emissions, then the entire network fails to detect the onset of a fire. In contrast, a distributed sensor takes advantage of its length to increase sensitivity to small signals, i.e., low-concentration analyte. As long as the noise doesn't scale in the same way as the optical absorption along the fiber's length due to chemical absorption in the cladding, it is reasonable to expect that longer fibers will be sensitive to the lower concentrations for the same minimum detectable dose, assuming absorption all along the fiber's length. In addition to wider coverage and detecting smaller concentrations than that of a point detecter, a distributed detector like a FOCS is capable, in principle, of making spatially resolved measurements. Sensors also need to be more rugged, selective, flexible, inexpensive, and reversible. Sensors collect information to better understand any given system, e.g., for advanced medical diagnostics, atmospheric monitoring, automotive diagnostics, gas leaks, and so on Chemical sensors are a large subcategory of sensors that play a critical role in everyday state of affairs, from protecting homeowners from carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning to monitoring greenhouse gases such as methane ( CH 4 ) Optical fibers themselves are typically placed in the context of telecommunication technologies, but it is interesting to note that initial efforts were strongly focused on sensing devices rather than communications We report on polymer FOCSs coated with a cylindrical section of sensing dye whose colorimetric properties are measured by evanescent field spectrometry. The sensing fibers are constructed with a commercially available multi-mode polymer core wrapped in step-indexed cladding. They are robust, flexible, broadband, low-loss, scalable (to hundreds of meters), and compatible to textile fibers and fabrics which is of particular interest to us at present. To enable effective sensing, a small cylindrical section of the fiber's cladding is chemically etched and the exposed core is coated with a sensing dye. This dye region is the functional sensing region which allows the detection of target analytes, whether in the form of TICs, CWAs, EPs, or other toxic (even innocuous) compounds. A good FOCS should have good selectivity, robustness, reversibility and the ability to detect low concentrations of target analytes. A reversible sensor is one that is restorable to its initial state after a sensing event [14] -desirable, for example, in continuous standoff sensing and reporting. Other desirable characteristics include low cost, portability, safety, and scalability. Each gas sensor type usually bears some tradeoff between advantages and disadvantages under different circumstances, ultimately falling into its own niche. For example, metal-oxide gas sensors are a good option under high temperature environments, but they suffer from poor selectivity. On the other hand, conducting polymer gas sensors generally have good selectivity, but they suffer from poor stability We first introduce a general waveguide theory to set up a theoretical framework within which optical fibers fall into. Thereafter, we constrain the more general waveguide theory to dielectric cylindrical waveguides (optical fibers), and later our specific construction. Smaller diameter, so-called single-mode fibers, are analytically tractable, as they only admit one mode of light propagation. On the other hand, larger diameter, so-called multi-mode fibers, are much more analytically cumbersome, usually requiring numerical simulations or a challenging full-wave analysis. However, we prefer multi-mode fibers for FOCSs because they afford the low-loss broadband transmission that is more suited for chemical sensing of multiple targets. In order to help the analysis guide our design, we analyse the modes that exist in a multi-mode fiber and employ the weakly guiding approximation to ultimately simplify the effort necessary to examinethe spectral response of our broadband sensing fibers. Finally, we compare signiture features of our experimental results with those predicted by the corresponding model for validation and design guidance of further improvement. Before modelling the propagation of light through an optical fiber, we will first lay out a more general theory of light propagation through a general waveguide structure. A waveguide structure, in general, is one that guides waves (of any nature) along a preferred direction such that energy loss is minimized, such as optical fibers. So, it is therefore desirable to first generate a general theory of waveguides and then impose a set of constraints that correspond to cylindrical dielectric waveguide structures. This will allow us to finally produce a model for the propagation of light through an optical fiber Assuming time dependence of the form e iωt , and linear, isotropic, media (D ⃗ ⃗ = εE ⃗ and B ⃗ = μH ⃗ ⃗ ), taking the curl of the Ampere-Maxwell and Farady equations gives rise to the familiar Helmoltz wave equations: Let's take our preferred direction along the z-axis for the E ⃗ (x, y, z, t) and B ⃗ (x, y, z, t) fields as follows: It is convenient to separate operators and fields into components that are tranverse and parallel to the z-axis: E ⃗ = E ⃗ z + E ⃗ t (similarly for B ⃗ ) where E ⃗ z ≡ E z ẑ and E ⃗⃗⃗ t = (ẑ× E ⃗ ) × ẑ The Helmholtz equations paired with Dirichlet and Neumman boundary conditions give us the standard transverse electromagnetic (TEM), transverse electric (TE), and transverse magnetic (TM) modes. TEM waves are conveniently derivable from a potential such that they are plane waves with wavenumber k = ±√μεω 2 = ±vω, and one can recall that TEM waves are unphysical inside of conducting waveguides. Treating the Helmholtz equation as an eigenvalue problem with a wave function, call it ψ, the number of modes then become finite: which is solved for chosen neumman or dirichlet boundary conditions (TE or TM). A general solution to the Helmholtz eigenvalue problem will give rise to a respective orthogonal eigenspectrum. For notational convenience, take the eigenvalues (μεω 2 -k 2 ) ≡ γ λ 2 , and the corresponding solutions ψ λ , for λ ∈ N. Each wave solution ψ λ is called a mode. Now, from the Helmholtz equation, we also see the the eigenvalues must be positive, otherwise ψ λ would exhibit exponentially decaying features -clearly not wave modes. Thus, μεω 2 ≥ k 2 . Thus, we define the cutoff frequency, at which modes cease to exist: As optical fibers are waveguides, we now discuss the results of reducing general waveguide theory to that of optical fibers Here, following the convention and derivation of Jackson Thus, the propagation factor for the traveling wave goes as follows (note a different reference frame than in Ref. Here, we see that when i > i 0 , the refracted wave travels along the interface, and is attenuated in the x-direction by the decaying term exp {-k′ [( sin(i) Power is only transmitted along the z-direction; e.g., along the core of the optical fiber Other parameters of optical fibers are the number and behavior of modes within a given fiber. Since we are more interested in relatively thick fibers for easy in-and out-coupling of broadband lights in field and portable sensings, single-mode telecom fibers are excluded. To characterize such optical fibers, it is useful to understand approximately how many modes can propagate within a fiber. This can be done using phase space arguments. The number density in this phase space goes as follows: where θ max is the cutoff angle and δ ≡ ), and when δ ≪ 1, we can invoke the socalled weakly guiding approximation (kr√2δ is sometimes referred to as the "V parameter"). For example, if we take a radius of 500μm, n 1 ≈ 1.5, n 2 ≈ 1.49, and λ = .6μm, we get a number of modes on the order of 10 5 . This may appear to be rather large, but it is beneficial to the development of broad-band chemical sensing platforms and allows for multi-target identification by permitting analyses of complex spectral bands of chemical reactions over full ranges of functional wavelengths. There are two classes of optical fiber modes: meridonial rays and skew rays. Meridonial rays are those wich pass through the cylinders axis; i.e., nonvanishing intensity along the longitudinal axis. Skew rays, on the other hand, are those that do not pass through the cylinders axis, traveling along a helical trajectory; i.e., vanishing intensity along the longitudinal axis (fig. Figure These rays assume plane wave propagation. As we will see, the modes are not quite plane waves, but for our purposes, this is a satisfactory approximation in the weakly guiding regime. Under the boundary conditions of a cylindrical dielectric waveguide, the Helmholtz equations give us E ⃗ and B ⃗ field coupled transverse components: As the fields are coupled, we find the hybrid electric (HE) and hybrid magnetic (HM) modes with solutions as bessel functions respectively inside of the fiber: H z = A h * J m (γρ)e imφ , ρ < r We can next extend the framework of the analysis to model desirable properties in designing the FOCSs Figure Once the fiber is prepared, one end can be coupled to a light source and the other end can be coupled to a spectrometer for sensing applications. The process of detection is as follows (fig. 1. Light from a source enters the fiber, traveling with small attenuation until it reaches the sensing region. 2. Once the light reaches the sensing region, it interacts with the sensing dye and shifts its transmission spectra accordingly. Either a target analyte has reached the sensing region, or it has not. (a) If there are no analytes in the sensing dye region, then the chemical composition of the BTB-EC solution (and therefore real and complex refractive indices) remain constant, and our transmission spectra has some footprint corresponding to what we will call an initial state. (b) If instead analytes have interacted with the sensing dye region, then the sensing dye will undergo a chemical compositional (pH) change, leading to a physical coloration response, and therefore the transmission spectra of the light will shift from its initial state into a new state. 3. Lastly, we observe the spectrometer to monitor any shifts in transmission spectra. A clear shift from the initial state into our expected reaction state is a good indication of the presence of a target analyte. Through this process, and the description of this setup, we can begin to see the desirable characteristics of this sort of FOCS: safety, as there are no harmful or toxic components in the fiber or its sensitizing process; low cost, as PMMA fibers, dye solutions, and microspectrometers are relatively inexpensive; robust, as polymer fibers are flexible and strong, and the collective components of this setup are seen to be tolerant of many chemicals, fluids, electromagnetic radiation, temperature fluctuations, pressure fluctuations, etcetera; portability, as the whole setup is lightweight; responsive, as the information travels at the speed of light, and chemical diffusion is usually on the order of seconds; and scalable, as the fibers can range in length from millimeters to hundreds of meters The analysis on optical fiber theory showed that the weakly guided approximation to a dielectric multi-mode cylindrical fiber gives rise to near plane waves that vary transversely as J m (γρ) -a good approximation for the setup that we are studying. We have collected data (from ellipsometry experiments) for the real and complex components of the refractive index of a BTBbased sensing dye solution applied to an optical fiber before and after it was exposed to trace ammonia NH 3 gas. With the plane wave approximation, one can then perform an analysis on attenuation over a representative sample of wavelengths to predict the shift in transmission spectra as follows: E ⃗ ≅ E ⃗ 0 e ik ⃗ ⋅r = E ⃗ 0 e ikz = E ⃗ 0 e i ω c nz = E ⃗ 0 e i ω c n r z e -ω c n i z We see (fig. At the time of writing, we have confirmed a minimum detectable concentration of 1ppm The remaining characteristics that characterize this FOCS are selectivity and reversibility. FOCS are highly reversible as a function of analyte concentration exposure. When a detection event corresponds to small concentrations (∼1-500ppm), regeneration is usually on the order of a few seconds to minutes (fig. 