Lattice constants such as unit cell edge lengths and plane angles are important parameters of the periodic structures of crystal materials. Predicting crystal lattice constants has wide applications in crystal structure prediction and materials property prediction. Previous work has used machine learning models such as neural networks and support vector machines combined with composition features for lattice constant prediction and has achieved a maximum performance for cubic structures with an average R 2 of 0.82. Other models tailored for special materials family of a fixed form such as ABX 3 perovskites can achieve much higher performance due to the homogeneity of the structures. However, these models trained with small datasets are usually not applicable for generic lattice parameter prediction of materials with diverse composition. Herein, we report MLatticeABC, a random forest machine learning model with a new descriptor set for lattice unit cell edge length (a, b, c) prediction which achieves a R 2 score of 0.979 for lattice parameter a of cubic crystals and significant performance improvement for other crystal systems as well. Source code and trained models can be freely accessed at https://github.com/usccolumbia/MLatticeABC The periodic structures of crystal materials can be summarized by its space group and the parallelepiped unit cell as shown in Figure Computational prediction of lattice constants of crystal materials has wide applications in both materials property prediction and discovery Lattice prediction methods can also be classified by their machine learning models used. A variety of machine learning models have been applied for lattice constant prediction including conventional machine learning methods in the early stage such as linear regression A major difference among different lattice constant prediction studies is the chemical systems or materials families they focus on. The majority of the studies are focused on a special category of materials with fixed mole ratios, including the cubic perovskites ABX 3 On the other hand, few studies have been reported to predict lattice constants of generic crystal materials with varying mole ratios or different number of elements. In 2017, Takahashi et al. While choice of machine learning algorithms affect the prediction performance, it is found that the descriptors play a major role in lattice parameter prediction. Fundamentally, any factor that contributes to the change of lattice constants can be added to the descriptor set of the prediction model. A large number of descriptors have been used for lattice constant prediction even though some of them may be specific to the form of the chemical compositions. For perovskite lattice constant prediction, the following descriptors have been used: valence electron In this work, we focus on the lattice edge length (a, b, c) prediction problem for generic crystal materials. Compared to previous work, our datasets are much larger (10-100 times), enabling us to achieve high performance for generic lattice parameter prediction. Our model have achieve exceptionally high accuracy for cubic systems with R 2 reaching 0.979, of which the materials have a single edge length a as their lattice parameter. Cubic crystals consist of 18,325 or 14.63% of all the 125,278 crystals deposited in the Materials project database as of September 2020. Using a dataset with 18,325 samples of cubic crystals in Materials Project Our contributions can be summarized as follows: • We propose a new descriptor set for generic lattice constant a,b,c prediction of crystal materials. • We conduct extensive experiments with different combinations of descriptors and transfer learning strategies and evaluate and compare the performances of different machine learning algorithms. • Our experiments show that our MLatticeABC algorithm based on Random forest achieves state-of-the-art prediction performance in generic lattice edge length prediction. 2 Materials and Methods In this work, we focus on developing lattice constant prediction models from materials composition only with the goal for downstream crystal structure prediction In the baseline model for generic lattice constant prediction In this work, we start with the Magpie descriptors and the baseline descriptors in CryspNet 2.2 Machine learning models: Random forest(RF), deep neural networks(DNN) and Gaussian Process Regressors(GPR) In this study, we combine different descriptors with deep neural networks, Random Forest, and Gaussian process regressor to identify the best model for lattice constant prediction. We use the Random Forest The deep neural network as shown in Figure2 is composed of 5 fully connected layers with 249, 256, 128, 128, 64, and 1 nodes from the input layer to the output layer. The action functions for those layers are relu. After each layer except the last layer, there is a dropout layer with 0.2 as the drop rates. The learning rate is set as 0.002. The batch size is 100. Standard Gradient Descent (SGD) is used as the optimizer. The network parameters are optimized manually to achieve the best performance with reasonable amount of trial-and-error fine-tuning. As comparison, we also include Gaussian process regressor (GPR) models in our evaluation, which is a nonparametric, Bayesian algorithm for regression with several unique benefits: working well on small datasets and having the ability to provide uncertainty estimation on the predictions. We use the Scikit-learn implementation of the GPR with the WhiteKernel and RBF kernel. The noise level of the WhiteKernel is 1, the length scale of the RBF is 1. We evaluate model performance by splitting a whole dataset into 90% as training and 10% as testing and then train the model and make predictions. This process is repeated ten times to get the average performance scores. As a standard regression problem, the following three performance criteria have been used to compare the performance of different models, including the root mean square error (RMSE), mean absolute error (MAE), determination of coefficient (R 2 ). where a exp i denotes experimental lattice constant a/b/c of sample i; a pred i is the predicted lattice constant value of a/b/c for sample i. We use the Materials Project API to download the crystal lattice information of known inorganic materials deposited in the Materials Project database http://www.materialsproject.org. We observe that direct use of MPDataRetrievav.get_dataframe function with structure.lattice.a/b/c/alpha/beta/gamma leads to inconsistent dataset because these lattices are the primitive lattice parameters. However, for cubic crystals, about 13,000 of the crystals' primitives are smaller units with α/β/γ equal to 60 degree instead of 90 degree while the remaining 5000 or so cubic crystals have a cubic unit cell representation with 90 degrees for α/β/γ. To address this inconsistency issue, we instead download all the structural cif files of the crystals in the conventional_standard format, and read the lattice parameters from them. In total, we get 125278 materials on September 10,2020 from the Materials Project database, which we call it as MP dataset. These materials can be divided into seven groups by their crystal system types with corresponding sample numbers: Triclinic (15297), Monocinic ( To understand why the number of atoms in a material is so critical to the prediction of lattice edge length a for cubic systems, we plot the parity plot of a against the total atom number in Figure5. It shows that there is a strong correlation of the number of atoms in the unit cell and the lattice edge length a for cubic crystals. Due to the varying volume of atoms of different elements, for crystals with a specific lattice parameter a, the number of atoms also varies. We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate our model performance in predicting the a, b, c over all the crystal systems in the downloaded MP dataset using the same 10-repeats random cross-validation evaluation approach. The results are shown in Table2. It is found our RF model can achieve up to R 2 of 0.979 in lattice parameter a prediction for cubic materials using only composition as input. The performances over other crystal systems except Monoclinic are also good ranging from 0.77 to 0.892. In general, the higher the symmetry, the better the prediction performance. It is also interesting to find that the prediction performance over lattice b and c are all lower than those on lattice a with all R 2 scores are between 0.489 and 0.77. We also compare our model performance over all lattice systems with those of the baseline algorithm, cryspnet It is also known that crystals of different crystal/lattice systems have some special patterns in terms of their lattice parameters. Table3 shows the relationship of lattice parameters of the crystals. In previous work on generic lattice parameter prediction To gain further understanding of how descriptor combinations affect the model performance, we compare performance of different feature combinations using a set of ablation experiments. We evaluate the RF models only on the cubic system for simplicity. From Table Computational prediction of crystal unit cell lattice constants has wide applications in property investigation and crystal structure prediction. While previous studies have focused on models for specialized chemical systems with the same structure (a single space group) and identical anonymous formula and trained with small datasets, this study aims on developing a generic lattice constant predictor for crystal materials with more than 125,278 samples and 18,325 samples for the cubic system. We propose MLatticeABC, a random forest machine learning model with a new feature set combined with the standard composition features such as Magpie descriptors for effective lattice constant (edge length) prediction. Extensive standard and ablation experiments show that our random forest models with the new descriptors can achieve a high prediction performance with R 2 as high as 0.98 for the cubic system covering more than 18,000 samples. These machine learning models along with our easy-to-use open source code at https://github.com/usccolumbia/MLatticeABC can contribute to downstream tasks such as materials property prediction, materials screening, and crystal structure prediction. The data that support the findings of this study are openly available in Materials Project database GPR with Element_atom_no_stat + Enhanced Eagpie 0.921±0.012 0.500±0.009 0.836±0.058 DNN with Element_atom_no_stat + Enhanced Eagpie 0.954±0.007 0.336±0.038 0.642±0.041 RF with Element_atom_no_stat + Enhanced Eagpie 0.979±0.016 0.138±0.010 0.416±0.142