The orbital angular momentum (OAM) of photons presents a degree of freedom for enhancing the secure key rate of free-space quantum key distribution (QKD) through mode-division multiplexing (MDM). However, atmospheric turbulence can lead to substantial modal crosstalk, which is a long-standing challenge to MDM for free-space QKD. Here, we show that the digital generation of time-reversed wavefronts for multiple probe beams is an effective method for mitigating atmospheric turbulence. We experimentally characterize seven OAM modes after propagation through a 340-m outdoor free-space link and observe an average modal crosstalk as low as 13.2% by implementing real-time time reversal. The crosstalk can be further reduced to 3.4% when adopting a mode spacing ∆ of 2. We implement a classical MDM system as a proof-of-principle demonstration, and the bit error rate is reduced from 3.6 × 10 -3 to be less than 1.3 × 10 -7 through the use of time reversal. We also propose a practical and scalable scheme for high-speed, mode-multiplexed QKD through a turbulent link. The modal crosstalk can be further reduced by using faster equipment. Our method can be useful to various free-space applications that require crosstalk suppression. 100 200 300 400 1600 Distance (m) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Fidelity This work Threshold for security 150 m 340 m 1600 m FIG. 1. The previously reported mode fidelity measured in 150-[16], 340-[17], and 1600-m [23] links when using an OAM mode spacing ∆ = 1. The dashed line represents the fidelity threshold of 76.3% for secure QKD with seven-dimensional encoding. In recent decades, quantum key distribution (QKD) has attracted increasing interest because it can guarantee communication security based on fundamental laws of quantum mechanics Adaptive optics is the most common method for turbulence correction and has been widely adopted for astronomical imaging Time reversal is a well-established method for aberration cancelation and is also referred to as phase conjugation. Non-linear optical effects such as four-wave mixing are the standard method to realize time reversal Our time reversal experimental schematic is presented in Fig. Because of atmospheric turbulence and aberration of the telescope system, the OAM probe beams received by cam 1 at Alice's side exhibit clear distortions as shown in the top row of Fig. Ideally, a realization of time reversal can completely eliminate the aberration and achieve zero crosstalk. Here we attribute the nonzero crosstalk observed in our experiment to the following reasons. First, the operational bandwidth of our digital time reversal system is limited. The image transfer time from cam 1 to computer memory is 4 ms, the computation time for diffractive hologram generation is 1 ms, and the refresh time of SLM 2 is 5 ms, resulting in a total response time of approximately 10 ms and hence an operational bandwidth of 100 Hz. By contrast, the characteristic frequency of turbulence can be tens of to hundreds of hertz It should be noted that the data transfer rate of OAM communication is not limited by the SLM refresh rate but is decided by the modulation speed of the transmitter Based on the low crosstalk and high communication bandwidth of the system, here we propose a practical, scalable freespace QKD system with N -channel OAM multiplexing using time reversal for modal crosstalk suppression. The schematic of the proposed QKD system is shown in Fig. V. CONCLUSION In conclusion, we experimentally demonstrate effective modal crosstalk suppression in a 340-m free-space OAM communication link through the use of digital time reversal. The crosstalk induced by turbulence can be reduced from 37.0% to 13.2% with time reversal, and further down to 3.4% by using a mode spacing ∆ of 2. We believe that lower crosstalk can be reasonably achieved by using faster equipment in a straightforward manner. A proof-of-principle classical communication system is realized to show the feasibility of high-speed communication with OAM multiplexing. In addition, a practical and scalable scheme for free-space QKD with OAM multiplexing is also proposed and analyzed. Based upon the scalability of the experimental implementation and low crosstalk of the data, we anticipate that digital time reversal can be useful to numerous free-space quantum and classical applications that require modal crosstalk suppression. In the experiment, Bob uses a 780 nm laser (DL pro, Toptica) as light source and a phase-only SLM (Pluto 2, Holoeye) as SLM 1. The beam waist radius of the OAM modes before Bob's telescope is ω 0 = 0.7 mm. The telescope at Bob's side consists of a f = 35 mm lens (LA1027-B, Thorlabs) and a f = 500 mm lens (LA1380-AB, Thorlabs). The retroreflector (#49-672, Edmund Optics) is installed on a building roof, and the total round trip distance is 340 m. The telescope at Alice's side consists of a f = 11 mm lens (C220TMD-B, Thorlabs) and a f = 400 mm lens (LA1725-A, Thorlabs). Cam 1 (BFS-U3-04S2M-CS, FLIR) is used to acquire the image of received OAM modes. Alice uses Cuda C++ language on a desktop computer (CPU: Intel i7-9700K, GPU: Nvidia RTX 2070 Super) to perform off-axis holography analysis, compute the hologram (type-2 hologram in ref. In our experiment, the bit rate is limited by the bandwidth of intensity modulator, and the mode fidelity is partly limited by the operational bandwidth of the digital time reversal system. We use 20 Mbps on-off keying intensity modulation to realize a classical mode-division multiplexing system. Commercially available, state-of-the-art modulators can readily achieve a rate well above Gbps. The main advantage of using high-speed modulators is that the bit rate can be boosted by orders of magnitude. However, the electronic driver may not maintain signal integrity in high-speed applications. If signal waveforms are distorted severely at a high frequency, the consequent disadvantage is that the bit error rate will increase. We use a camera as the wavefront sensor, and the time needed to transfer one frame of image from the camera to the computer in our setup is approximately 4 ms. If a higher-speed wavefront sensor is available, the operational bandwidth of the entire time reversal system can be increased. The consequent advantage is that our system can compensate for faster turbulence in a longer link and also can allow for multiplexing more OAM modes. On the other hand, a high-speed wavefront sensor usually has a lower signal to noise ratio and a smaller pixel count. Therefore, the precision of wavefront sensing can be reduced. As a result, the mode fidelity of time-reversed modes might decrease. Furthermore, we use a phase-only liquid-crystal-on-silicon SLM with a refresh rate of approximately 200 Hz to digitally generate time-reversed modes. To achieve a higher refresh rate, one can use a digital micromirror device (DMD). The advantage of a DMD is that it can have a significantly higher refresh rate as large as 22 kHz It should be noted that the works in No. 7 and No. 8 report their results in terms of bit error rate rather than crosstalk. In addition, the artificial neural network used in these works requires data acquisition using a camera. Therefore, the communication speed is fundamentally limited by the camera image acquisition rate, which is on the order of kHz. Furthermore, since a high signal-to-noise ratio is needed for image processing, this method cannot be directly used in quantum communications operating at a single-photon level.