We study the many-body electronic structure of the stoichiometric and electron-doped trilayer nickelate Pr4Ni3O8 in comparison to that of the stoichiometric and hole-doped infinite layer nickelate NdNiO2 within the framework of density functional plus dynamical mean field theory, noting that Pr4Ni3O8 has the same nominal carrier concentration as NdNiO2 doped to a level of 1/3 holes/Ni. We find that the correlated Ni-3d shells of both of these low valence nickelates have similar many-body configurations with correlations dominated by the d x 2 -y 2 orbital. Additionally, when compared at the same nominal carrier concentration, the materials exhibit similar many-body electronic structures, self energies, and correlation strengths, but differ in Fermiology. Compared to cuprates, these materials are closer to the Mott-Hubbard regime due to their larger charge transfer energies. Moreover, doping involves the charge reservoir provided by the rare earth 5d electrons, as opposed to cuprates where it is realized via the oxygen 2p electrons. Understanding the physics and chemistry underlying the extraordinary properties of layered copper-oxide materials has been a challenge to researchers over the more than thirty years since the discovery of superconductivity in La 2-x Ba x CuO 4 Things took a dramatic turn in 2019 when superconductivity was found upon hole doping the infinite layer material NdNiO 2 Several recent theoretical studies of the infinite layer materials have highlighted the possible importance of the high-spin d 8 configuration Motivated by these differences, in this paper, we present a comparative density functional plus dynamical mean field theory (DFT+DMFT) virtual crystal approximation to vary the carrier concentrations so that we can compare the materials at the same doping. When compared at the same doping, we find that both have similar electronic structures, self energies, and mass enhancements, but there are significant differences in their Fermi surfaces that can be traced to their differing c-axis dispersions. The latter will be discussed below and is related to DFT+U findings of differences in their magnetic phase diagrams The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II further introduces the two materials and also the formalism used here. Section III presents the results obtained from density functional theory calculations, with Section IV presenting the DFT+DMFT self energies, spectral functions, orbital occupations, and multiplet occurrence probabilities. We offer some concluding thoughts in Section V. The NdNiO 2 crystal structure, shown in Fig. While there are three Ni atoms per formula unit, the two Ni atoms on the outer layers are equivalent by symmetry, so we refer to the two types as "inner" and "outer". There are also two types of Pr atoms, one which we call Pr1 in between individual NiO 2 layers but within the trilayer group, and one which we call Pr2 in between groups of three layers (i.e., in the Pr 2 O 2 block). In this paper, we perform fully charge self consistent DFT+DMFT Fig. The Nd/Pr-d-derived bands are mostly above the Fermi energy and weakly hybridized with the Ni-d bands, specifically d z 2 near Γ and d xz/yz near A (and M in the case of the trilayer compound), as extensively discussed in previous works Comparison of the left and right columns of Fig. Looking now in more detail at the Nd/Pr1-derived bands, we see that these bands are weakly hybridized with the Ni-d bands, the Nd/Pr1-d z 2 mainly with Ni-d z 2 and the Nd/Pr1-d xy mainly with Ni-d xz/yz . In both our DFT and DFT+DMFT calculations, both bands cross the Fermi energy in the d 9 case, but as carriers are removed the bands empty out. For d 8.67 , the Γ centered band is above the Fermi energy in both materials; for the d 8.67 infinite layer material, a small A centered pocket remains, but in the trilayer material the A/M -centered pocket disappears. The difference arises from the difference in c-axis dispersions, and as discussed below may be relevant to the low energy physics (i.e., charge/spin order). Fig. We quantify the strength of electronic correlations by the inverse quasiparticle renormalization Z -1 = 1 -∂ReΣ(ω → 0)/∂ω related, in the single-site DMFT approximation, to the quasiparticle mass enhancement as m /m = Z -1 . Results are shown in Table Fig. Fig. Table Table Interestingly, even though the total Ni-d occupancy is essentially independent of doping and the d x 2 -y 2 occupancy gets closer to half filling as electrons are removed, the d x 2 -y 2 self energy evolves with doping roughly as expected in a doped Mott-Hubbard material being largest at nominal d 9 and decreasing as carriers are removed. This finding is consistent with other 5 orbital DFT+DMFT studies The occurrence probabilities are different from those obtained in our previous work on NdNiO 2 In this paper, we presented DFT+DMFT studies of NdNiO Our study employed the DFT+DMFT method, with full charge self-consistency to properly account for the charge transfer between the Ni and the Nd/Pr ions; this is believed to correctly incorporate the physics of the long-ranged Coulomb interaction in moderating density inhomogenieties in solids Our study was based on treating correlation effects in a wide energy window; instabilities arising from very low energy physics is beyond the scope of our study. In our study, we found that the materials have very similar electronic properties on the broader energy scales when compared at the same doping level: from the point of view of basic strong correlation many-body physics, the two compounds may be studied interchangeably. Our calculations indicate that differences of physics should be attributed to low energy physics arising from differences in Fermiology. On the level of broad-band electronic structure we found, in agreement with previous work These results have implications for the downfolding of our model to a few band low energy model. The relatively low weight of oxygen states along with the presence of Nd-derived bands at the Fermi level means that, in contrast to the cuprate where there is a still not fully settled debate on the dynamical significance of oxygen states for the low energy physics, for the nickelate materials the question is whether the physics is of a one band Hubbard model plus a charge reservoir or whether a two band (Ni-d x 2 -y 2 and Ni-d z 2 ) Hubbard model plus reservoir is a more correct description. The results presented here favor the first interpretation but further investigation of this question is of interest. We found differences in the low energy physics, related in particular to the presence or absence of a rare-earth derived pocket near the A point of the Brillouin zone, and to the specifics of the van Hove singularities associated with the Ni-d x 2 -y 2 -derived bands. In particular the antibonding Fermi surface for the trilayer material ex-hibits a nesting vector near to the observed density wave vector. The nesting will lead to a peak in the susceptibility at the nesting vector, which will favor density wave ordering at or near this wavevector. On the other hand, the observed density wave state resembles that seen in La 2-x Sr x NiO 4 near x=1/3 which is due to real space diagonal stripes To conclude, we hope that our work will set the stage for a detailed comparison of experimental results on the two material families. Our results demonstrate the importance of making comparisons at the same doping level. For example, a recent resonant x-ray scattering study We perform the DMFT calculations using the TRIQS software library 1. Matsubara Self Energy and Mass Enhancement Fig. We obtain the quasiparticle mass enhancement directly from the Matsubara self energy to avoid error in the analytic continuation. The mass enhancement is given by: We determine Z by fitting a polynomial of fourth order to the lowest six points of the Matsubara self-energies and extrapolate Im[Σ(iω n → 0)], a procedure also used in previous work To investigate the effect of using projectors on CaCuO 2 , we run one-shot DFT+DMFT calculations on NdNiO 2 and CaCuO 2 using a wide energy window of -10 eV to 10 eV and use a 5 d orbital impurity model. We run both calculations on the stoichiometric (nominal d 9 ) materials. Table We examine the effect of changing the double counting correction by running a one-shot DFT+DMFT calculation on stoichiometric NdNiO 2 using the around mean field (AMF) double counting scheme and compare the results to those of the one-shot FLL scheme. Table TABLE IV. Occurrence probabilities of different Ni d valence states obtained from the impurity density matrix found in the fully charge self consistent calculations. For d 8 we further decompose the probabilities into low spin (LS; S = 0) and high spin (HS, S(S + 1) = 2). Other valence configurations occur with negligible probabilities.