We investigate the spin-valley polarization in MoTe2 monolayer on ( Transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) monolayers, MX 2 (M = Mo and W; X = S, Se, and Te), have engendered significant interest in two-dimensional materials for their unique structural and electronic properties Efforts have been devoted to the valley polarization in the TMD monolayers. One approach is to optically pump the electrons in the valleys using circularly polarized light. This approach makes use of the inherent property of the TMD monolayers that the right (left)handed circularly polarized light are coupled with the K (K ) valley The distinct difference in the valley polarization between the theoretical calculations and experiments may be associated with the difference in structural modeling of the heterostructures. Experimentally, the substratesurface is most likely the (001) surface In this paper, we investigate the effects of substratesurface reconstruction and orientation on the valley polarization in MoTe 2 /EuO by means of first-principles calculations. We find that surface reconstruction plays an important role in determing the interface structure that unlike the ideal EuO(111), there is no direct chemical bonding between the overlayer and the reconstructed surfaces. The valley polarization is strongly dependent on the details of the interface structure for MoTe 2 /EuO(111), which varies from less than 1 meV to about 40 meV. While for MoTe 2 /EuO(001), it is about 3 meV for all the considered configurations of the interface. Our density-functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package We begin by discussing the structural properties of the MoTe 2 /EuO(111) interface. Unlike the bulk phase, the ideal (111) surface of EuO is metallic as revealed by previous studies Figure We now turn to the MoTe 2 /EuO(111) heterostructures, for which the geometric models are shown in Fig. Figure The reconstructed surfaces do have substantial impact on the valleys of the MoTe 2 monolayer. In the two panels on the right side of Fig. Here v denotes the valence band, τ represents the valley index. The valley polarizations in our systems are dependent on the surface reconstruction of the substrate and the specific stacking between them. They are about 7.56 meV and 25.62 meV for MoTe 2 /Eu-octopolar-EuO(111) and MoTe 2 /O-octopolar-EuO(111), respectively. We have also examined the valley polarization for a different stacking, e.g., S2 in Fig We now discuss the valley polarization in MoTe 2 /EuO(001). We use a slab consists of fiveatomic layers to model EuO(001). One can see from Fig. Figure The valley polarization induced by the magnetic proximity effect can be understood by a low-energy effective model where ∆ denotes the band gap, λ the spin-orbit interaction strength, α M o the magnetic moment on Mo induced by the substrate and B v the effective Zeeman field for the valence band. σ and Ŝz represent the Pauli matrix and the spin operator, respectively. τ is the valley index. The effective Zeeman field for the valence band thus can be deduced by the valley polarization, ∆E valley for MoTe 2 /EuO(001) are insensitive to stacking. The estimated values of B v for this type of heterostructure is about 27 T, which is much smaller than those for MoTe 2 /ideal-EuO(111), but comparable to that for WSe 2 /EuS(001) In summary, we have investigated the structural and electronic structures of MoTe 2 /EuO by means of firstprinciples calculations. We have considered a number of surface reconstructions for the (111) surface of the substrate and find that they have substantial impact on the EuO(111) Substrate