Polynitrogen molecules represent the ultimate high energy-density materials as they have a huge potential chemical energy originating from their high enthalpy. However, synthesis and storage of such compounds remain a big challenge because of difficulties to find energy efficient synthetic routes and stabilization mechanisms. Compounds of metals with nitrogen represent promising candidates for realization of energetic polynitrogen compounds, which are also environmentally benign. Here we report the synthesis of polynitrogen planar N6 hexazine rings, stabilized in K2N6 compound, which was formed from K azide upon laser heating in a diamond anvil cell at high pressures in excess of 45 GPa and remains metastable down to 20 GPa. Synchrotron X-ray diffraction and Raman spectroscopy are used to identify this material, also exhibiting metallic luster, being all consistent with theoretically predicted structural, vibrational and electronic properties. The documented here N6 hexazine rings represent new highly energetic polynitrogens, which have a potential for future recovery and utilization. Nitrogen-rich compounds have been widely sought as the great potential candidates for extremely high-yield high-energy density materials (HEDM) As a demonstration of a tour de force, the molecular diatomic nitrogen has been shown to transform into an atomic solid with single-bonded crystalline structure with a cubic gauche (cg-N) structure first via theoretical prediction at about 50 GPa Various doping were thought for stabilization of N-rich compounds. Theoretical calculations predicted a number of high-pressure nitrogen-rich compounds with metals that form unusual low-bonded all-nitrogen groups as well as polymeric networks Alkali metals-nitrogen compounds were proposed to reduce the pressure of synthesis and to improve the compound stability and energy density of HEDMs as they are predicted to form a wealth of materials with various structures and compositions at high pressures They also documented the synthesis of Li diazenide LiN2 at lower pressures. In a more recent work, Bykov et al. The synchrotron X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Raman experiments in DAC are described in the Methods and Supplementary Information. Here, we focus on the experiments, where powdered KN3 azide without any pressure medium/reagent was investigated, which gives a preference for formation of compounds with this composition. Additional experiments, where molecular N2 was loaded together with KN3 azide, are used to investigate the room temperature compression and low-temperature decompression behavior via in situ Raman measurements. When compressed at room temperature, KN3 azide experiences phase transformations from I4/mcm to another structure at about 15 GPa In this phase the linear N3 azide groups are aligned parallel to each other unlike the low-pressure I4/mcm, where they are alternatively rotated by 90 with respect to each other. Our Raman data (Fig. Above 30 GPa, the Raman spectra show a broad band near 1900 cm -1 increasing intensity with pressure similar to that reported previously in NaN3 It is worth noting that KN3 is sensitive to the X-ray exposure as evidenced by a darkening of the sample (Fig. Considering the oxidation state of K as +1, each N6 ring must accommodate 2 electrons leading to an 8 π-electron system in N6 The Raman spectra change drastically upon the transformation as seen in Fig. The group theory predicts four A1g+ 2E2g +E1g Raman active modes of the hexazine rings and one E2g mode for K vibrations; no translation or rotation modes the hexazine rings is expected because there is only one ring in the unit cell. The lowest-frequency mode corresponds to E2g vibrations of K atoms in the xy plane. This assignment is supported by the fact that a similar mode of the isostructural Na2N6 compound (this will be presented elsewhere to the E1g out-of-plane deformation mode of the hexazine ring. This assignment is based on the frequency sequence of the deformation bands calculated in Ref. On unloading of K2N6 with hexazine rings at 78 K the Raman spectra show clear signs of deterioration of this compound at 22 GPa, where the characteristic bands become weaker and other broad bands at 400, 1800, 2100, and 2300 cm -1 increase in intensity (Fig. Laser heating to 2500 K of unexposed KN3 azide, first pressurized to 50 GPa and then unloaded at room temperature to 30 GPa, results in formation of a shiny material, which visually looks similar to P6/mmm K2N6 but is different in structure and composition judging from single-crystal XRD and Raman spectroscopy measurements (Fig. Previous experiments on various azides at high pressures showed the stability of the linear N3 -ion to at least 60 GPa judging from the vibrational spectroscopy These experiments show that the azide ion N3 -configuration becomes unstable at high pressures. Our high-pressure laser heating experiments revealed two new classes of compounds that become stable at these conditions. The structural and vibrational spectroscopy data provide concerted consistent data identifying their physical and chemical structure. Laser heating of KN3 azide at 30 GPa results in formation of an unexpected diazenide I4 1 /amd K3(N2)4 with a complex structure, which contains K atoms and elongated N2 dimers with different site symmetries, and a very large unit cell. It is interesting that this structure does not seem to reveal more efficient packing than azide as the specific volume of K3(N2)4 is very similar to that of KN3 azide (Fig. To create compounds with other than explored here polynitrogen species, reagent compositions must be varied in the synthesis, for example by providing an excess of nitrogen. Our preliminary experiments show that laser heating experiments in KN3 in N2 medium results in a wealth of new compounds with different composition and structure, which contain various polynitrogen species; these results will be presented elsewhere. In conclusions, our experiments show the azide group N3 is prompt for chemical destabilization under pressure evidenced by a loss of crystallinity of the compressed at 300 K sample, spontaneous emergence of extra Raman bands, and sensitivity to X-ray radiation. The reactions product is likely comprises chemically modified nitrogen species such as, for example, N2 dimers and/or square plane D2h N4 + 41 , however, lack of crystallinity does not allow to identify them. Depending on pressure of the synthesis, two new crystalline materials form upon the laser heating: hexazine ring bearing K2N6 above 45 GPa and unusual K3(N2)4 diazenide at 30 GPa. These compounds reveal a large metastability domain on unloading, however they are not stable at ambient conditions. The high-pressure synthesis of new polynitrides from azides has a lot of potential due to a reduced pressure of synthesis and a wealth of new compounds with a variety of chemical species and compositions that we documented here and others that need to be explored. The high-pressure high-temperature behavior of KN3 was studied on one sample intended for XRD measurements and another four samples for Raman measurements. A powder sample of potassium azide KN3 was placed in sample chambers of DAC (see Supplementary information) equipped with diamond anvils with the culets of 250-300 m diameter for single-crystal and powder diffraction XRD and Raman experiments. Re foil preindented to a thickness of 30 μm served as a gasket. Ruby chips were placed inside the sample chambers for pressure measurement. The XRD sample had no pressure-transmitting medium. All of the Raman samples were loaded with the nitrogen gas at high pressure of 0.15 GPa at room temperature. Raman samples #1 and #2 were quenched to below 2 GPa at room temperature while samples #3 and #4 were quenched to below 3 GPa at liquid nitrogen temperature using a continuous flow He/N2 cryostat. All samples were compressed up to the target pressures and laser-heated (λ = 1064 nm) using double-sided laserheating systems of the beamline GSECARS (APS, Argonne, USA) or ISSP (Hefei, China) (Supplementary Information). Laser heating of KN3 in the DAC was performed without any absorber by directly coupling near IR laser radiation with the sample. KN3 is a weak absorber at 50-60 GPa, however it can be coupled to the laser via grain boundaries and other defects, although care must be taken as it tends to run away once the temperature becomes higher than approximately 1000 K. Thus, the temperature at which the reported below reactivity is reported should be considered cautiously. The heated area becomes nontransparent; we performed XRD and Raman mapping of these areas where available. XRD measurements were performed at the beamline GSECARS (13IDD, APS, Argonne, USA). We used monochromatic X-ray beam (λ = 0.2952 Å) focused down to 3×3 μm 2 by a Kirkpatrick-Baez mirror system and diffraction patterns were collected on a Pilatus 1M detector (CdTe). For the single-crystal XRD measurements samples were rotated around a vertical ω-axis in a range ±35°. The diffraction images were collected with an angular step Δω = 0.5° and an exposure time of 1s or 2s/frame. For the details about the data analysis and structural solution, please see Supplementary Information. Raman spectra of the sample studied at GSECARS using XRD combined with laser heating were measured concomitantly using the GSECARS Raman system with the excitation wavelength of 532 nm in the spectral range of 10 to 4000 cm -1 with a 4 cm -1 spectral resolution. The Raman spectra of the laser heated at ISSP samples were examined with 532 and 660 nm excitation lines using a similar custom system coupled to a continuous flow cryostat (See Supplementary Information for more details). Bykov, M. et al. Fe-N system at high pressure reveals a compound featuring polymeric nitrogen chains. Nat Commun 9, 2756, doi:10.1038/s41467-018-05143-2 (2018). Diamond anvil cells (DAC) of BX90 type 1 equipped with Boehler-Almax type seats and conical diamond anvils 2 and of symmetric type DAC with standard-design seats and diamond anvils (Almax-EasyLab) were used for single-crystal/powder diffraction and Raman measurements, respectively. The double-sided laser-heating systems of the beamline GSECARS (APS, Sector 13, Argonne, USA) 3 features the flat top focal spot of 10 m in diameter. The sample temperature was measured radiometrically (gray body approximation). The thermal radiation was recorded with a Princeton grating spectrometer (300 mm focal length) combined with PIXIS and PiMAx CCD array detectors. The double-sided laser heating system at ISSP (Hefei) is combined with the Raman confocal system thus making concomitant Raman probing of the heating area very convenient Another similar Raman system coupled to a continuous flow He/N2 cryostat was used for Raman experiment, where the sample was investigated upon unloading at room and low (78 K) temperatures The full description of the confocal GSECARS Raman systems, which has been used concomitantly to XRD measurements, has been published elsewhere The unconstrained lattice determination from the single-crystal XRD dataset reveals the Icentered lattice with a = 5.425 (13) 3 Scientific Reports 5, doi:10.1038/srep14204 (2015).