Graphene is a promising substrate for future spintronics devices owing to its remarkable electronic mobility and low spin-orbit coupling. Hanle precession in spin valve devices is commonly used to evaluate the spin diffusion and spin lifetime properties. In this work, we demonstrate that this method is no longer accurate when the distance between inner and outer electrodes is smaller than six times the spin diffusion length, leading to errors as large as 50% for the calculations of the spin figures of merit of graphene. We suggest simple but efficient approaches to circumvent this limitation by addressing a revised version of the Hanle fit function. Complementarily, we provide clear guidelines for the design of four-terminal spin valves able to yield flawless estimations of the spin lifetime and the spin diffusion coefficient. The emergence of 2D materials offers new paths for the development of spintronic devices due to their high carrier mobility and low spin-orbit coupling Therefore, a voltage proportional to the spin accumulation (μ s ) under the detection electrode is probed with respect to the reference electrode (E 4 ). This potential difference V a = V (E 3 ) -V (E 4 ) is called the spin voltage. In Hanle experiments, the change of spin voltage as a function of the intensity of a perpendicular magnetic field (B ⊥ ) which induces precession of spin carriers, is measured. Routinely, experimental results are fitted with the solution of the modified Bloch equations describing diffusive transport in presence of spin precession, naturally leading to two figures of merit (FoMs) of the spin transport: the spin lifetime τ sf and the spin diffusion coefficient D s 1. No spin absorption (contact induced spin relaxation) at any of the contact electrodes, 2. A 1D infinite diffusive medium, 3. An infinite distance between inner (E 2 , E 3 ) and outer (E 1 , E 4 ) electrodes, 4. Zero-width electrodes, The contact-induced spin relaxation has been widely investigated In the light of results reported previously in the literature, it is clear that a great effort has been directed to obtain high quality tunnel barriers, free of pineholes as sumarized in Fig. [28] [37] [38] [34] [35] [36] [38] [3] [33] [40] [6] [39] [12] [4] [41] [15] [20] [31] [8] [42] [43] FIG. 2. Summary of a representative set of graphene-based spin-valves experiments reported in the literature (each bar corresponds to a single scientific publication), for which accurate information relative to the contact resistance, dimension and position is provided. The data range is delimited by the highest and lowest values reported in the corresponding paper. For each barrier material, results are chronologically sorted. Al2O3 (a) Probed contact resistance RcA for different tunnel barrier materials. The red dashed line corresponds to the lower limit for high quality contact suggested in ria that must be fulfilled by nominal spin valve devices. Moreover, an updated version of the solution of the modified classical fit function (derived from the solution of the 1D Bloch equations) is proposed in order to include the effect of the distance between electrodes. Even this work focuses exclusively on graphene as diffusive medium, our findings are applicable to any kind of pseudo-substrate with sufficiently high quality spin transport properties. In order to demonstrate the importance of the relative magnetic orientation of the outer contact electrodes, calculations have been performed based on data reported in applied (solid line). It is worth noting that the model reproduces the diffusive behaviour of the spin injection theory, with an exponential decay depending on the channel properties, leading to no signal far on the right side of the injector (E 2 ) We focus now on the effect of a spin Hanle experiment (B ⊥ = 0). The FoMS cannot be extracted by fitting Hanle spin precession data with the solution of the modified Bloch equation. Indeed, as shown in Fig. those two specific configurations probe the same signal as long as the separation distance is the same for the injection and the detection part of the device (i.e., E 1 -E 3 is identical to E 2 -E 4 ). The above observations highlight the importance to include the effect of the outer electrodes when the fifth hypothesis is not fulfilled and therefore when the distance E 2 -E 3 is no longer the only relevant quantity. In Fig. The channel length is set to 20 μm. For symmetry reasons, a variation of L 1 with fixed L 2 leads to the same conclusion. Calculations have been achieved using a spin lifetime of 3.2 ns and a spin diffusion coefficient of 200 cm 2 /s which are values typically of the order of those reported for graphene based spin experiements In order to correctly extract the spin diffusion length, we propose three methods, each of them with pros and cons. A first way is purely based on the fabrication process. The spin-valves device is designed in such a way that the outer electrodes do not influence the Hanle plot. It can be achieved by ensuring that the distance between the inner and outer FM electrodes is large enough (L sep > 6λ sf leads to less than 1% inaccuracy) or by using non-magnetic tunnel outer electrodes. The obvious downside of these approaches is the requirement of larger devices for the former or more involved nanofabrication processing for the latter (such as a shadow evaporation process with e the electron charge, N (E f ) the density of states at the Fermi-level In summary, we demonstrate that the distance between inner and outer electrodes of a spin valve device influences strongly the value of extracted spin FoMs when using a Hanle precession method. Our calculations reveal that a separation distance L sep > 6λ sf is mandatory to avoid the influence of outer electrodes. As this criterion has been hardly met in previous experimental reports, we anticipate that some conclusions concerning the benefits of particular fabrication processes or material choices might need to be revisited in the light of this work. Finally, we demonstrate that all-ferromagnetic spin-valves devices can still provide accurate FoMs if a modified version of the Hanle fit equation (Eq. 1) is used. Financial support by the ARC grant 13/18-08 for Concerted Research Actions, funded by the Wallonia-Brussels Federation, is gratefully acknowledged. E. F. gratefully acknowledges the fruitful discussions, shared with W. Keijers, B. Raes and J. Van de Vondel, which served as an inspiration for this work. (C4)