The constant increase in parallelism available on large-scale distributed computers poses major scalability challenges to many scientific applications. A common strategy to improve scalability is to express the algorithm in terms of independent tasks that can be executed concurrently on a runtime system. In this manuscript, we consider a generalization of this approach where task-level speculation is allowed. In this context, a probability is attached to each task which corresponds to the likelihood that the product of the task will be consumed as part of the calculation. We consider the problem of optimal resource allocation to each of the possible tasks so as too maximize the expected overall computational throughput. The power of this approach is demonstrated by analyzing its application to Parallel Trajectory Splicing, a massively-parallel long-time-dynamics method for atomistic simulations. As the scale of parallel computers constantly grows, it becomes increasingly difficult for application developers to maintain strong-scalability. For example, on the Summit supercomputer at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, on the order of 100 million operations need to be executed simultaneously in order to fully utilize all processing elements. As the number of processing elements is expected to steeply increase as we approach the exascale era 1 , it is paramount to develop novel strategies to maximize the amount of parallelism exposed by the applications. A now common programming model in scientific applications is task-based programming, where the execution of the application is factored into tasks of varying granularity that are then scheduled for execution using a runtime system This manuscript considers the problem of optimal resource allocation in a speculative task-execution setting where a task usefulness probability, i.e., a probability that the results of a speculatively executed task will be consumed as part of the calculation (hereby referred to as the task probability), can be explicitly computed or estimated. This is a rich problem as, in practice, task probabilities will often be conditioned on the current state of the application, and can therefore dynamically change as execution proceeds. Further, the run time of individual tasks is often much shorter than the run time of the application as a whole. As a result, as tasks complete, freeing-up previously allocated resources, new tasks have to quickly be identified to take their place. Finally, optimal allocation of resources to tasks (i.e., how much computing resources are dedicated to the execution of each given task) is not only dependent on the individual task probabilities, but is also tied to the distribution of task probabilities of all other tasks that are available for execution. In the following, we consider such a dynamic setting where tasks are assumed to be preemptable and restartable with a different resource allocation. It then becomes possible to periodically reevaluate the optimal allocation, pausing the execution of all running tasks, and reallocating resources as needed. This can either be done at fixed time intervals, when tasks complete, or when a change of context dictates. With each update, a newly derived optimal allocation can be executed, resuming paused tasks (with a potentially different resource allocation) as well as starting new ones if needed. This pausing and resuming of tasks allows for the optimal allocation to adapt to the dynamic variability of the system, maintaining an optimal (expected) throughput at all times. In the following, we present a generic analysis of this approach as well as a case study to a specific scientific application called Parallel Trajectory Splicing 10 , which is adapted to a setting where task probabilities can be explicitly estimated. Modern parallel computing architectures have complex memory hierarchies as well as heterogeneous processors. In order to achieve high performance on such architectures, programming models such as Legion 3 are organized into logical regions that expresses locality and independence of data and tasks. The instances of these logical regions can be assigned to specific memories and processors in the machine during run-time. Similar logical hierarchies are also introduced in OpenMP 5.0 11 , Chapel 12 , Charm++ 13 , etc. for task-based parallelism. These task-based systems are capable of dynamic load balancing for scheduling and mapping tasks for optimal performance on the underlying hardware. Locality-aware parallelism has been well studied in non-speculative systems, and only a select few speculative systems utilizing parallelism via thread-level speculation (TLS) Many resource allocation strategies have been explored in the context of load balancing to efficiently use the existing hardware. A naïve way to allocate resources is to base it on peak utilization. However, designing a resource allocation strategy based on worst-case needs is not a viable approach as it results in excessive resource estimates. Many static and dynamic approaches Many control-theory based techniques are also used for adaptive resource allocation that use standard feedback controllers with an auto-regressive prediction model to predict the resource allocation In any resource allocation problem Consider the problem of allocating resources between a (potentially infinite) number of candidate tasks in a speculative task execution setting on a machine containing N hardware slots on which tasks can be assigned (which can be nodes, cores, GPU, etc). Tasks can be run in parallel over a certain number of slots w i , in which case, task completion requires an expected time T (w i ). For simplicity, it is assumed that all tasks are computationally equivalent; however, a task-specific T α (w i ) can be introduced in the derivation below without additional complication. Each of the candidate tasks are assigned a probability p i of ultimately being used as part of the overall execution of the calculation, which is abstractly conceived as a workflow that progresses by consuming completed tasks. This probability can either be a rigorously derived value or a heuristic estimate. Note that each task can also be assigned a weight that reflects how much it would contribute to the calculation by scaling the corresponding p i accordingly to obtain an expected utility. In the following, however the p's will still be referred to as probabilities, for simplicity. To simplify and accelerate the allocation process (which is important in the context where probabilities are adjusted and resources re-allocated at a high rate), the resource assignment problem is solved in a continuous setting where the w i are real numbers instead of integers. This enables an extremely efficient solution scheme. These values can then be discretized after optimization is complete, yielding an approximate solution but at a greatly reduced computational cost. In what follows, it is assumed that the tasks are ordered by decreasing probability. The optimal allocation of resources consists of determining the number of tasks that should be executed, M (i.e., the M tasks with the highest probabilities are selected for execution) as well as the resources assigned to each task, w i . The objective function to be optimized is the instantaneous expected throughput from the M tasks that are selected for execution: where T (w i ) is the expected time to complete a task when provided w i resources. R(M, {w i }) measures the expected rate at which useful results are generated for a given allocation M, {w i }. The problem is constrained by requiring that the allocation fully utilizes available resources, so that M i w i = N . In pathological cases where there are more resources available than could possibly be used (N > M * w max , where w max is the maximum allocation which a single task can fully utilize, as will be defined below) N is replaced with M * w max . This constraint can be enforced by introducing a Lagrange multiplier λ to the objective function. Extremizing the Lagrangian with respect to w i and λ yields respectively, where the function F is defined F (w i ) := -T (w i )/T 2 (w i ). Therefore, given an explicit expression for T (w i ), one can invert the function F and obtain an explicit expression for w i : w i = F -1 (-λ/p i ), which depends only on the Lagrange multiplier λ and on the task probabilities p i . At a given value of M , the allocation problem is reduced to solving a 1D root-finding problem in λ, i w i = N , which yields the values of {w i } that maximizes the throughput for this value of M . Note that this formulation can yield w i = 0, so that considering the first M tasks in the optimization problem is not guaranteed to allocate resources to all of them. Finally, the optimal number of tasks to consider, M * , is taken to be the value which maximizes the expected throughput over all values of M . The allocation problem is therefore reduced to solving two embedded 1D problems, which can be done very efficiently. In practice, an explicit expression for T (w i ) is obtained by fitting to benchmark results. Benchmarks were carried out on dual sockets Intel Broadwell E5-2695V4 nodes. In section IV, an application to parallelized materials simulation is considered. For this work, a benchmark analysis of the molecular dynamics code LAMMPS As shown in Figure In the following, the potential benefits of optimal resource allocation in a speculative task execution setting are demonstrated by studying an existing scientific application called Parallel Trajectory Splicing, or ParSplice ParSplice works by concurrently and asynchronously generating many short "segments" of MD trajectory in such a way that they can later be spliced together to create a single state-to-state trajectory. Generating a "segment" involves creating an independent realization of the system's trajectory (by solving a stochastic differential equation) that is initialized in some assigned starting state and evolved through MD until a physics-motivated stopping condition is achieved, after which the final state visited by the trajectory (which may or may not be the same as the starting state) is noted. So, in short, a segment is composed of an initial and a final state, separated by some MD time (see Figure Because the individual segments are independently produced in parallel, ParSplice can offer a potential wall-clock speedup proportional to the number of MD instances. Achieving this ideal level of parallel efficiency however requires that every segment generated is eventually spliced into the state-to-state trajectory. Therefore, while the accuracy of a trajectory is ensured solely by the independent generation and splicing of segments according to the ParSplice prescriptions, the efficiency of ParSplice is a function of its ability to forecast ahead of the trajectory and assign segments to be generated in those states where they are most likely to be needed. As such, ParSplice follows the speculative execution paradigm discussed above: at any point in time, only one segment is strictly guaranteed to be spliced into the trajectory (a segment that begins in the state where the trajectory currently ends), but one can identify a much larger number of segments that could potentially be spliced in the future. Towards this goal, ParSplice develops a discrete time Markov Model (MM) on-the-fly from the previously generated segments and uses this model to assign starting states for new segments to be generated. The MM encodes the estimated probability that a segment generated from state i will end in state j. In actual simulations, the MM is usually empty at the beginning of the simulation and it is dynamically updated as more segments are generated. The original ParSplice method selects segments for execution through a procedure referred to as virtual end (VE) scheduling. VE accounts for completed but unspliced segments which are stored in the database as well as those "pending" segments which have been assigned to some computing resources, but have not yet been completed. The FIG. FIG. process of VE assigning the state in which the next segment should be generated is outlined in Figure 2) It then "virtually" splices from this database-prediction onto the end of the state-to-state trajectory until it runs out of segments to splice. 3) It assigns the next segment to be generated starting in the state where the state-to-state trajectory "virtually" ended. This process is then repeated for next segment state-assignment, and so on until a segment has been assigned to any idle MD instance. The word "virtual" is used to denote that this process is not actually manipulating segment endpoints or splicing onto the actual physical trajectory. This process is simply used as a means of forecasting where to assign the next segment and only segments that were actually completed can be spliced into the physical trajectory. In the present context, an important limitation of the VE procedure is that it samples from the ensemble of possible tasks according to their probabilities, but does not directly give access to the individual task probabilities themselves. In order to address this limitation, a new variant of ParSplice is proposed where instead the task probabilities are first explicitly estimated, and then tasks with the largest probabilities are selected for execution. This new variant is referred to as MaxP (maximum probability) scheduling. The derivation of MaxP is based on the formalism of discrete time Markov Chains, and is detailed explicitly in Appendix A. The general concept involves calculating the FIG. probability that particular segments will be spliced into the state-to-state trajectory over some finite time horizon, as an average over all paths that the spliced trajectory could take. These probabilities can be computed analytically or approximated via a computationally cheaper Monte Carlo approach. See Appendix A for details. The MaxP formulation provides a natural estimate of the task probabilities for each segment that could be generated, i.e, each potential task. It is important to note that the probabilities derived from the MaxP formalism are dependent both on the instantaneous content of the database and on the current end point of the trajectory, as it was the case for the VE variant. The probabilities therefore continually change as the simulation proceeds, which suggests that it might be advantageous to periodically re-adjust/recalculate the probabilities and re-assign resources to tasks so as to maintain an optimal expected throughput. Further, MD is inherently preemtable and restartable: the only information needed to checkpoint and restart a simulation is the list of the current positions and velocities of the atoms. Using this checkpoint, the simulation can be restarted with a different domain decomposition, and hence with a different w. The resource allocation approach discussed above is therefore directly applicable to ParSplice-MaxP. To gain a better intuition of the solutions resulting from different task probability distributions, and of the potential performance improvements that can be expected by allocating resources based on task probabilities, we first discuss results on various synthetic distributions. More specifically, we focus on the characterization of the instantaneous throughput obtained by optimizing the resource allocation as a function of the characteristics of the task probability distribution. Each of the following distributions were created by drawing random p i samples from a probability density until a given total p i = 1000 was reached. While this process resulted in each synthetic distribution containing a different number of potential tasks, the constrained value of 1000 ensures that the maximum expected throughput given infinite resources is identical for each distribution, and hence comparisons can be made easily. The probability densities from which the synthetic distributions were sampled belonged to one of two generic classes. The first was a delta distribution or composition of two delta distributions from which only particular values of p i could be sampled. Each composition of delta distributions contained a non-zero peak at p = 1, corresponding to having a certain number of tasks which are known to be essential (i.e p = 1), and another non-zero peak at lower p, corresponding to a certain number of speculative tasks which are assigned a generic probability. As one would expect to generally have a large number of speculative opportunities, and thus of speculative tasks, the magnitude of the peaks were weighted in favor of the lower probability by a 9:1 ratio. Sampling from these distributions yields a task probability distribution which exhibits a "step" from the p = 1 tasks to the speculative probability. In addition to a single delta distribution at p = 1, which generated a trivial distribution containing only p = 1 tasks, several composite distributions are analyzed with varying values for the lower-probability speculative tasks. The second class of probability densities were beta distributions, B(α, β). Adjusting the shape parameters α and β allows for the creation of a wide range of different distributions, as illustrated in Figure The most important question in practice is whether the effort of deriving and implementing a probability-aware optimal allocation scheme is worthwhile as compared to a naive approach which does not consider the probability of tasks. Such a naive scheme would assign resources in equal sized chunks corresponding to the maximal parallel efficiency, so as to maximize throughput in the non-speculative setting. It would only deviate from this chunk size if the resources available enabled all tasks to be run at maximum parallel efficiency and excess resources remained. In such a case, the constant chunk size allocated to each task would uniformly increase to fully utilize all available resources. Therefore, the naive allocation is to assign each task with w const = max(1, N/M ) resources to each task. In the following, it is shown that the increase in throughput due to optimal allocation can in fact be quite substantial. We first recognize from the blue curve in Figure Take for example the resource allocation of N = 10, 000 to a probability distribution characterized by p a = 1, p b = 0.01. The naive allocation distributes resources evenly across all possible tasks, producing an expected throughput of roughly 2.3. This is in stark contrast to the optimal allocation, which concentrates resources only to p a tasks. As a result, the optimal allocation executes fewer tasks, but does so yielding a higher expected throughput of roughly 16.8. The optimal allocation therefore results in a substantial boost in performance, producing nearly 7.3 times the expected throughput of the naive allocation. We note that the boost also affects only an intermediate range of values of N , as, in both the small and large N limits, the optimal and naive allocation are identical. The value of p b relates to the potential boost obtained as it affects the sampled task probability distribution in two key ways: 1) The smaller values of p b present steeper decays in the probability distributions as they cover a larger range in values. The naive allocation struggles to handle a large range in values as its allocation is uniform, meanwhile the optimal allocation is specifically tailored to the individual probabilities of each task. 2) Because the values (p a , p b ) are sampled in a 1:9 ratio, a smaller value of p b implies that more tasks will be sampled before reaching the p i = 1000, and thus the distribution of tasks will have a longer tail. This, again, is not handled well by the naive allocation as the high p = p a tasks will receive the constant w const = 1 allocation unless N is such that all tasks can be executed, at which point w will start to increase uniformly. The longer the tail in the distribution, the more resources are needed before the naive allocation will increase the uniform chunk size, and hence the throughput. These results illustrate the intuitive idea that ignoring the task probabilities and invoking a uniform allocation often involves running lower probability tasks with resources that could be better spent increasing the allocation to higher probability tasks. These two key features (steep decay and long tail) are particularly detrimental to the performance of the naive allocation scheme. Considering the task probability distributions sampled from the Beta probability density, one can see that this rule of thumb is upheld. Figure We see here again how the long tail and steep decay of the task probability distribution meant that the naive solution would allocate resources to low probability tasks that contribute little to the expected throughput. It is instead optimal to allocate additional resources to those higher probability tasks, running fewer tasks but generating a higher expected throughput. The maximum attainable boost one could possibly obtain can be determined by the following analysis. Consider a task probability distribution consisting of N a tasks of probability p a = 1 and N b tasks of probability p b = . The optimal allocation would divide resources among those N a tasks, ignoring the N b tasks. This would yield an expected throughput of N a /T (N/N a ). The naive allocation would spread resources among all tasks, yielding an expected throughput of N a /T (1) + N b /T (1) if N was sufficiently large such that N = N a + N b > w max N a . In the case where N b << 1 this expression would simplify and a trivial relation for the boost in expected throughput would result as the ratio T (1)/T (N/N a ). This expression is maximal when N/N a = w max . Thus, the maximum attainable boost one could obtain is equal to T (1)/T (w max ), which for our application was roughly 25. FIG. The assortment of synthetic distributions surveyed above shows a diverse range of optimal task allocations and the corresponding boost compared to the naive scheduling strategy. These task allocations are guaranteed to provide the greatest expected throughput for a given distribution, at the cost of increased code complexity. One may instead consider a simpler approximate solution where each executed task is provided the same allocation, but this allocation is allowed to differ from the naive strategy. Certainly this simplified scheme would be suboptimal, but it is unclear by how much. In the trivial case of constant probability, for example, the optimal allocation was a constant allocation. The same was true for the step distributions when resources are limited. In fact, it is often the case that a constant allocation can achieve a throughput close to that of the optimal allocation. Figures In order to assess the potential performance gains accessible with this new approach without the considerable time investment required to rewrite the ParSplice production code, we instead chose to make use of a simulator; a strategy which has proved beneficial ParSpliceSIM was used to compare the performance of the existing VE method to the newly developed MaxP method, which was then further enhanced to allow the periodic pausing of segments and reallocation of resources following the optimization procedure described above. The effect of these successive developments are shown on a range of different model systems to illustrate the expected gains in performance. As to separate the effect of the current work from that of intrinsic model uncertainty, it was assumed that the MM created on-the-fly by ParSplice would provide a sufficiently accurate representation of the dynamics, and was instead replaced with the actual underlying Markov Chain within the ParSpliceSIM. The metric of performance in evaluating the different methods is the amount of pseudo-MD spliced for a given wall clock time (WCT), which is a direct measure of the scientific value of a simulation. The following ParSpliceSIM results were generated using an assortment of Markov Chains with varying state connectivity. Each state within a particular Markov Chain was endowed with a ρ ii probability of not escaping the current state, and had an equally likely probability of transitioning to one of it's K neighbors (ρ ik = (1 -ρ ii )/K) with K defined by connectivity. Periodic boundaries were implemented to ensure each state within a particular Markov Chain had the same state connectivity. To mimic the environment of a true atomistic simulation, the number of states in a particular Markov Chain was set to 8000 such that the vast majority of state-space remained un-visited by the trajectory throughout the duration of the simulation. In order to evaluate the true potential of the developed methods, each simulation was provided a resource allotment N that was many times greater than the expected number of segments needed to escape ( n escape ) from a state. This is the regime of greatest interest as it is where speculation significantly affects the efficiency of ParSplice. When the resources are not greater than n escape all resources can be allocated to the task(s) of building in the current state and will be amortized with high probability. Prior to the current work, ParSplice attempted to best utilize those additional resources (those which were not likely to be needed in escaping the current state) to speculate on where the trajectory was likely to go next. The main purpose of this section is to assess whether further efficiency gains are possible by dynamically assigning resources based on expected utility. In what follows, each simulation was carried out with assigned ρ ii = 0.99, corresponding to n escape = 100, and a resource allotment of N = 5000. With an N being 50x greater than n escape ParSplice can trade-off resources in order to obtain an escape from the current state faster. This tradeoff would be beneficial in cases where speculation was futile, but could be poor in cases where accurate speculation were possible. To illustrate this effect, results are shown for three different Markov Chain toy models of increasing connectivity: 1D representing dynamics on a line, 3D representing dynamics on a cubic lattice, and fully-connected, where each state is connected to every other state. The greater the connectivity, the more difficult it is to speculate on the trajectory's future as the possible paths exhibit exponential branching. Conversely, when the connectivity is low speculation can be quite accurate. While these models of state connectivity are much simpler than what would be observed in actual applications they do however provide relevant information and general guidelines on the potential performance of the method in different scenarios. These three toy models present a good assortment for testing the new methods. The 1D model provides ratherpredictable dynamics for which speculation will be quite fruitful. The 3D model presents dynamics which are somewhat less predictable, and where effective forecasting will likely be limited to within a small neighborhood from the current state. Finally, speculation is futile for the fully-connected model where the number of branching paths is immense. Performance results for each of the toy models are shown in Figure The first thing to note in Figure Further improvement resulting from the ability to pause and reschedule segments can be substantial depending on the topology of the state space. As was discussed previously, the 1D toy model presents very limited connectivity, therefore corresponding to a system which is highly susceptible to speculation. As a result, the distribution of task probabilities will decay slowly, and the balance between running a few tasks very quickly and maximizing the overall task-completion throughput will be more heavily skewed toward throughput. This is seen from the 1D results in Figure The 3D model presents a slightly different picture as long-time speculation is somewhat difficult due to the increased connectivity, yet short-time speculation can still be profitable, thus this model requires a more delicate balance between throughput and execution time. This is seen from the 3D results in Figure Lastly, the fully-connected model is considered, for which speculation is futile and escaping from the current state as quickly as possible is the only sound strategy. As expected, the fully-connected results in Figure The resulting improvement of our derived methods, as compared to the existing VE scheduling method, showed a nearly 2.5x, 6x, and 20x boost in performance for 1D, 3D, and fully connected toy models, respectively. These ParSpliceSIM results can be better understood by analyzing the task probability distributions that are characteristic of each toy model. Figure Figure FIG. The question of when it is appropriate and necessary to pause and reallocate resources is not easy to quantify. In general, the user would want to do so whenever the task probability distribution substantially changes. In the example of ParSplice, this would certainly occur whenever the current state of trajectory changes as all tasks and probabilities are generated from the MCMaxP procedure and are thus conditional on starting in a particular state. The distribution could also change without the trajectory changing state, however, when unused segments which contain transitions are stored in the database and can contribute to the MCMaxP sampled trajectories. For this reason the ParSpliceSIM results were aggressively updated whenever a segment yielding a transition was returned to the database. The question becomes even more fuzzy for a real ParSplice simulation which develops it's statistical model on the fly. Any segment which changes the model in a substantial way will likely change the MCMaxP sampled trajectories and thus affect the sampled probability distribution. It is not easy to systematically catch changes of this type. A single segment will likely have a negligible effect on the model, but cannot be ignored outright as enough of these negligible changes can account for a significant effect. In addition, a segment which drastically changes the model but does so far from the current state of the trajectory will have little effect on the sampled task probability distribution and therefore does not warrant pausing and reallocating resources. In practice, it is pragmatic to periodically pause and update the allocation at some fixed interval, which is chosen so as to limit scheduling and pausing/restarting overhead. The advent of exascale computing platforms will be accompanied by a need for specially designed software and algorithms that are capable of utilizing the large availability of resources simultaneously. As maintaining strongscalability on such platforms will be quite difficult, the use of speculative task-based paradigms are promising; enabling higher concurrency and improved scaling. In this work, we derived the optimal allocation of resources for task execution in this speculative setting. The utility of this approach was then assessed on assortment of synthetic task probability distributions, comparing the expected throughput of our derived optimal allocation of resources to more FIG. naive allocation policies. While a uniform allocation of resources can often be found to produce a nearly optimal expected throughput, it was shown that determining the particular value for the constant allocation size is in practice just a difficult as computing and employing the optimal allocation. A dynamic setting was then considered where task probabilities were influenced by some underlying variable (state, context, time, etc.) and were therefore changing throughout the run-time of the application. This setting was explored by examining the effect of our derived methods applied to a specific scientific application, ParSplice, which operates in this domain. In order to implement our methods, we first had to design a new application-specific technique for accessing the speculative probability that potential tasks would be useful. This technique not only allowed for our derived methods to be implemented, but was also shown increase the performance of the scientific application. The potential gains in performance resulting from our derived methods were assessed through the use of a simulator. While the boost achieved varied with physical system (ranging from 2.5x to 20x), it was found to be greatest when the system of study was most complex; resulting in lower speculative task probabilities and a greater ability to leverage the trade-off between throughput and time. By considering the speculative task probabilities, the optimal balance could be struck to produce the maximum rate of expected throughput. This novel optimization scheme stands to improve performance of speculative task-based applications, particularly when run at large computational scales. acknowledge computing resources from the Los Alamos National Laboratory Institutional Computing (IC) program, and insightful discussions with David Aristoff and Mouad Ramil.