Energy loss of energetic ions in solid is crucial in many field, and accurate prediction of the ion stopping power is a long-time goal. Though great efforts have been made, it is still very difficult to find a universal prediction model to accurately calculate the ion stopping power in distinct target materials. Deep learning algorithm is a newly emerged method to solve multi-factors physical problems and can mine the deeply implicit relations among parameters, which make it a powerful tool in energy loss prediction. In this work, we developed an energy loss prediction model based on deep learning. When experimental data are available, our model can give predictions with an average absolute difference close to 5.7%, which is in the same level compared with other widely used programs e.g. SRIM. In the regime without experimental data, our model still can maintain a high performance, and has higher reliability compared with the existing models. The ion range of Au ions in SiC can be calculated with a relative error of 0.6∼25% for ions in the energy range of 700∼10'000 keV, which is much better than the results calculated by SRIM. Moreover, our model support the reciprocity conjecture of ion stopping power in solid proposed by P. Sigmund, which has been known for a long time but can hardly been proved by any of the existing stopping power models. This high-accuracy energy loss prediction model is very important for the research of ion-solid interaction mechanism and enormous relevant applications of energetic ions, such as in semiconductor fabrications, nuclear energy systems and the space facilities. In the past century, the energy loss of energetic ions in matter has been significant subject which received great attention, since this topic is important no matter for the scientific researches or industrial applications, including radiation damage, material analysis by using ion beams, nuclear physics, ion implantation and nano-device modification have been developed to calculate these values and simulate the ion transportation behavior in solids. Energy loss of energetic ions in solid is complicated: both the ion parameters and solid properties may affect the energy transfer process. Many researches have proved that the electronic stopping power is a complex function of collision parameters, including atomic number and mass for incident ion (Z 1 , M 1 ) and target material (Z 2 , M 1 ), along with the kinetic energy of incident ion (E in ). Besides, the contribution of other factors, such as binding energy, state of matter, electron structure, band gap and excitation energy, also have already been proved to be very important for the stopping process Deep Learning (DL) is a new computational method which is composed of multiple processing layers to represent data with multi-levels of abstraction In this letter, we demonstrated that DL provides a good breakthrough point to inroad nuclear technology and particle physics. The proposed Deep Learning based Electronic Stopping Power (DL-ESP) model can provide good accuracy, whose average relative absolute difference between predict and experimental results can reach 5.7%. More importantly, this model shows much higher accuracy at regime without experimental data than the existing models. Furthermore, DL-ESP model provides evidence of the so call reciprocity principle proposed by P. Sigmund To deploy DL-ESP, we used the experimental ion collision data collected by H. Paul and International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), which contain nearly all the published electronic stopping power data of different ion in solids, gases and compounds, since the 1990's Following previous studies, we assumed that the electronic stopping power (S e ) is only related with Z 1 , M 1 , Z 2 , M 2 and E in . According to our test, a 5 layer network with grid of 16×32×64×32×16 is good enough to give the required accuracy. All the DL-ESP model, including the generating, training and invoking of neural network, was built based on Keras Experiment data Training Predictions Since most of the experimental ion (except H and He) stopping power lack of low energy data, 12'800 boundary points were also included in training database, in order to maintain the accuracy of boundary at extreme low energy range. These points were generated by using LSS model, which is widely believed to be accurate enough for low-velocity ion through matter in which the unit of S e and E in is 10 -15 eVcm 2 /atom and keV. By using Eq. ( As shown in Table To verify the transferability of DL-ESP, we calculated the predicted S e for some experimental points which were excluded from the entire database, especially the data of mediumheavy ions, as shown in FIG. Moreover, it can be shown from TABLE I that the data of heavy ions only took a relatively small percentage of total database, so the accuracy of heavy ions need to be carefully verified. In fact, other calculation models, such as SRIM and MSTAR, also face the similar problem: it has been already discussed from other researchers that the electronic stopping cross section of some ultra-heavy ion, e.g. Au, is overestimated by SRIM when E in near 1000 keV/u as illustrated in FIG. It should also be noted that the high accuracy of SRIM is based on segment fitting functions for different mass and energy range, so it can provide well consistence with existing experimental results. However, for the regime that lack the support of data, the accuracy of these fitting functions becomes quite controversial, because they may neglect the influence of other potential factors. According to the discussion in Supplementary Material, the tiny difference between DL-ESP and DL-ESP-Simple reveals that DL network can indeed mining the inline relations deeply hiding in these experimental data, which could significantly enhance the transferability of this model. Therefore, though DL-ESP can hardly achieve higher overall accuracy than SRIM, its σ is a macroscopic evaluation of the entire database equally for each atom types and energy ranges. In other words, DL-ESP would possess excellent transferability since it would have similar accuracy for the conditions which are shortage of experimental data theoretically. FIG. This DL-ESP model can support Sigmund's conjecture, and a more detailed investigation about reciprocity theory is explored in the Supplementary Material. To further demonstrate the accuracy for DL-ESP, we systemically calculated the projected To minimize the influence of nuclear stopping power (S n ), the S n used in this work is also calculated by SRIM, so the difference exhibited in FIG. It can be shown in FIG. In 