Instantons, spacetime-localized quantum field tunneling events, are ubiquitous in correlated condensed matter and high energy systems. However, their direct observation through collisions with conventional particles has not been considered possible. We show how recent advances in circuit quantum electrodynamics, specifically, the realization of galvanic coupling of a transmon qubit to a high-impedance transmission line, allows the observation of inelastic collisions of single microwave photons with instantons (phase slips). We develop a formalism for calculating the photon-instanton cross section, which should be useful in other quantum field theoretical contexts. In particular, we show that the inelastic scattering probability can significantly exceed the effect of conventional Josephson quartic anharmonicity, and reach order-unity values. Introduction.-Instantons are time-localized solutions to a system's imaginary time equations of motion, describing quantum tunneling events. They typically bridge between symmetry-related configurations and carry nontrivial topological indexes Advances in the fabrication and control of superconducting circuits allow monitoring of the dynamics of single microwave photons. For example, recent experiments have exposed unusual relaxation dynamics in a uniform Josephson junction array, in which phase slips play an important role (a) The studied system: (a) The full circuit; (b) A simplified version. See the text for details. ushering in unprecedentedly strong correlations. We will show that a single photon propagating along the array may excite a phase slip at the transmon and inelastically convert into lower-frequency photons with a high probability, significantly larger than the conversion probability due to the usual Josephson quartic nonlinearity Model.-We concentrate on the setup realized in a recent experiments where φ n is in units of flux and we employ units where e = 1 and = 1, hence the flux quantum is Φ 0 = h/2e = π. The array spacing a will serve as the unit of length. The array is terminated by a transmon qubit is the phase shift. Here ω 0 = √ 8E J E C is the trasmon LC frequency and Γ 0 = 1/ZC 0 = 4E C /πz is its elastic broadening due to its coupling to the array, where Z = L/C g is the array wave impedance and Upon increasing E C /E J the transmon nonlinearity starts becoming significant. We will concentrate on the regime where E C /E J is still small, and furthermore, Γ 0 /ω 0 1 (i.e., E C /E J z), so the transmon resonance is well-defined Instanton calculation.-For a disconnected transmon [first two terms of Eq. ( ), or, in Fourier space, φ (0) 0 (ω) = ±π/iω cosh (πω/2ω 0 ) The classical action S 0 of the instanton, together with the contributions of Gaussian fluctuations around it, give rise to the transmon ground state charge dispersion λ 0 (half the width of the lowest Bloch band of the corresponding Mathieu equation We now incorporate the array to lowest order in Γ 0 /ω 0 . Expanding the imaginary time action around the classical isolated instanton solution [φ where the capacitance of mode The very last term contributes to higher orders in Γ 0 /ω 0 and will be neglected henceforth. The classical equations of motion for δφ k result in to leading order in k 1. Plugging this back into the action leading to a renormalization λ 0 → λ 0 e -k f 2 k /2 . For z > 1 instantons are relevant, resulting in an emergent scale, λ * ∼ λ 0 (λ 0 /ω 0 ) 1/(z-1) , below which instanton effects are nonperturbative Within the approximations we employ, the contribution of a single instanton to a multipoint correlation of the φ k is given by the corresponding classical solution [39], multiplied by λ 0 e -k f 2 k /2 /2. By the LSZ reduction formula with being the "form factor" of the instanton in the photon modes basis. Note that it is finite at the resonance frequency ω 0 but still peaked there. It rises toward low frequencies (assumed higher than λ * ); this reflects the fact that an instanton involves a shift of phases along the entire array, and hence couples well to low-k modes. Thus, processes in which a nearly resonant photon scatters into one nearly resonant photon and several low energy photons (whose number is controlled by z) will play an important role. Note also that f k diverges at higher odd multiples of ω 0 , which are nonlinear resonances broad-ened only at higher order in Γ 0 . In relevant experiments The probability of a process not involving photons with frequency ω k decreases when such photons are present, due to the increased probability of their emission or absorption. This is accounted for by the factor e Upon expressing the delta functions via their Fourier representations, the summations over N in,out and the ks can be recognized as the Taylor series of an exponent. All in all we find that Γ is the photon retarded self energy, whose imaginary part gives the total inelastic conversion (absorption minus emission) rate of energy ω into any photon combination. Using it, one may write down more refined rates; for example, the net rate of creation of photons at k due to processes involving an incoming photon at k is which accounts for processes in which photons at k, k are, respectively, absorbed-emitted, emitted-absorbed, (f) Ratio between the T = 0 on-resonance probabilities due to the instantons and due to the quatric nonlinearity, Eq. ( emitted-emitted, or absorbed-absorbed, with appropriate signs to obey an energy conservation sum rule, The last couple of equations are the central results of this work. To recap, they apply for any ω k , ω k between λ * and 3ω 0 , provided that λ * max(Γ 0 , T ) ω 0 and E C E J . The singleinstanton approximation further requires 2πΓ in k /∆ 1. Inelastic rate behavior.-We exemplify the parameter dependence of the inelastic rate in Fig. where Γ(x) is the gamma function Let us now turn to the scattering of nearly-resonant photons, ω k ≈ ω 0 , starting with T = 0. As the spectrum of inelastically-emitted photons in Fig. where λ 1 = -2 7 E J /E C λ 0 is the charge dispersion of the first excited level of an isolated transmon The charge dispersion λ 0 decreases fast with ω 0 , masking the corresponding increase in the number of possible decay channels contributing on-resonance [Fig. Finally, let us note that temperature suppresses coherent quantum phase slips (particularly for z > 1, when they are relevant As opposed to the instanton contribution, where f 2 k increases toward low energies [Eq. ( Conclusions.-In this work we have developed a general formalism for the study of instanton-particle collisions, and applied it to a recently-realized In this Supplemental Material we provide additional technical details and elaborate upon some of the derivations in the main text. In Sec. SI, we provide some intermediate steps in the derivation of the instanton inelastic rate which were omitted from the main text. In Sec. SII, we use a phenomenological "dual-cosine" approach to calculate the rate, and compare its results with those of the instanton approach. Finally, in Sec. SIII, we derive the inelastic rate due to the Josephson cosine quartic nonlinearity. The main result of the paper is the inelastic rate due to the photon-instanton interaction, Eqs. ( The Hamiltonian of an isolated Josephson junction where E C = 1/2C 0 , φ 0 and Q 0 are the flux and charge variables of the transmon, obeying the canonical commutation relations, and q g is its gate charge (which can be gauged away in the presence of an infinite transmission line, hence is ignored in later sections). This Hamiltonian may be solved exactly in the flux basis, where the energy of the mth level, or Bloch band, E m (q g ) = E m (q g ± 2) (m = 0, 1, • • • ), is given by the Mathieu characteristic values a ν (E J /2E C ) and b ν (E J /2E C ) and generally depends on q g . In the transmon limit, E J E C , the effect of charge offset is negligible, and ω 0 ≈ √ 8E J E C to leading order in E C /E J , which is also the resonance frequency which results from approximating the Josephson cosine potential in Eq. (S2) by a harmonic term, 2E J φ 2 0 . The lowest order correction may be calculated in perturbation theory due to the quartic term in the expansion of cos(2φ 0 ), and yields ω 0 ≈ √ 8E J E C -E C . We define the charge dispersion λ m as the half-bandwidth of the mth Bloch band, given by S4) The final form is the result of the WKB approximation [given also by Eq. (3) of the main text for m = 0]. In the imaginary-time path integral formalism it can be derived from the action of and quadratic fluctuations around the instanton solution, φ (0) 0 (τ ) = ±2 tan -1 (e ω0τ ), which interpolates between two adjacent minima of the cosine . The energy levels of an isolated transmon Em (m = 0, 1, • • • ) as function of the quasicharge qg in the first Brillouin zone -1 < qg < 1 in terms of the Mathieu characteristic values aν , bν B. The array modes and their effect on the instanton action In the presence of the array, a phase slip in the transmon perturbs the array modes; the corresponding leading contribution to the action is given by Eq. ( and the equations of motion are given by The solutions are of the form φ n ∝ sin(kn + δ k ). The equations for n ≥ 1 yield the dispersion relation The equation for n = 0 yields the phase shift: where Γ 0 = 1/ZC 0 = 4E C /πz is the elastic resonance broadening. The approximate form corresponds to Eq. ( Let us now return to E J E C , where instantons may appear. For ω 0 /Γ 0 1 we may expand the imaginary time dynamics around the classical isolated instanton solution, φ (0) 0 (τ ) = ±2 tan -1 (e ω0τ ) and φ (0) n>0 (τ ) = 0. We thus set φ n (τ ) = φ (0) n (τ ) + δφ n (τ ), and expand δφ n = k δφ k sin(kn + δ k ). To second order in δφ k we obtain the following action [Eq. ( where S 0 = 8E J /E C is the classical action of an isolated instanton and C k ≈ N C g /2 is the capacitance of mode k. The second row of Eq. (S8) yields subleading terms in Γ 0 /ω 0 (as can be verified by plugging into it the solution we obtain below) and will be neglected henceforth. Solving the equation of motion for δφ k (ω) and using the n = 0 part of Eq. (S6), we find in correspondence with Eq. ( We note that in both of the sums over k in Eq. (S10) we may approximate cos 2 (δ k ) ≈ 1, since the deviation of the cosine from 1 occurs only in a frequency range of order Γ 0 around the resonance, and hence contributes subleading terms in Γ 0 /ω 0 . Care must be taken in the evaluation of the first sum over k in Eq. (S10), since the argument does not decay for k ∼ π, and therefore we must account for terms of order ω k /2v, including the Jacobian dω k /dk = 1 -(ω k /2v) 2 . This is not the case for the second sum, where the summand decays rapidly outside the regime k π, and therefore we may drop all terms of order ω k /v. Overall, we find: where we have rewritten the ω integral as a k sum. We thus arrive at Eq. ( To calculate the inelastic rate, we need the elements of the T -matrix corresponding to all possible inelastic processes. According to the imaginary-frequency version of the Lehmann-Symanzik-Zimmermann (LSZ) reduction formula being the Green function of mode k. The 1/ √ 2C k ω k prefactors relate φ k to a † k and a k , the creation and annihilation of operators of mode k, respectively. We thus recover the first line of Eq. ( where, as mentioned above, the plus and minus signs correspond to instantons and anti-instantons, respectively. Plugging Eq. (S13) back into Eq. (S12) and taking the limits ω j → -iω kj , ω j → iω k j , one finds with which are Eqs. ( The T -matrix elements in Eq. (S14) allow us to calculate the inelastic rate using the Fermi golden rule. Before taking the squared absolute value, we have to sum over the contributions of instantons and anti-instantons in Eq. (S14). We see that the matrix elements vanish for odd N out + N in , and on the other hand are multiplied by 2 for even N out + N in ; this reflects the symmetry of the Lagrangian, Eq. (S1) upon flipping all the phases. Let us now consider a process in which a photon at mode k collides with photons at k 1 , k 2 , • • • , k Nin (so now there are N in + 1 incoming photons) to produce photons at k 1 , k 2 , • • • , k Nout , with odd N out + N in ≥ 3; by the Fermi golden rule, the rate of such a process is However, given a specific process, we note that we might add photons without changing the outcome. For instance, adding a single photon at mode k to both the incoming and outgoing photons would result in a process that is physically identical to the one without it, but with a T -matrix element multiplied by -f 2 k [cf. Eq. ( where the approximations are based on the smallness of f 2 k ∼ 1/N [see Eq. (S15)] in the thermodynamic limit (similar considerations relieve us from the need to explicitly treat cases where some of the photon modes in the forthcoming equations coincide). Multiplying Eq. (S16) by this factor for all possible k , as well as by the appropriate Bose-Einstein factors for the photons at and subtracting the contribution of processes in which the photon at k is emitted rather than absorbed, we recover Eq. ( where the sum is over odd N out + N in ≥ 3. We now move on to express Γ in k in terms of the retarded self energy Π R (ω), given by Eq. ( where we introduced the notation We recall that the sum involves only terms with odd N out + N in ≥ 3. We decompose it to two sums -one with odd N out and even N in , and the other with even N out and odd N in : We now plug this back to (S19) and combine the exponential factor outside of the integral with (S21). For the hyperbolic sine term we have: At low frequencies, one may approximate f 2 q ∼ 2∆/zω q [cf. Eq. (S15)]. The 1/ω q behavior leads to a logarithmic divergence of the sum over the modes, vq<ωc f 2 q ∼ (2/z) log(∆/2ω c ), since the first mode is located at ω q = ∆/2 (assuming open circuit boundary conditions at the far end of the line which is Eq. ( A similar procedure gives Γ in k |k , the net rate of creation of photons at k due to processes involving photons at k. Both k and k could correspond to either incoming or outgoing photons, and therefore Γ in k |k includes four terms. Let us start with the processes in which the photon at k is absorbed and the photon at k is emitted. Starting from Eq. (S18), we use the delta function with +ω k and separate out a factor f 2 k (1 + n B (ω k )) from the sum over the outgoing photons. We thus have Γ in (1) where this time the sum is restricted to even N out + N in ≥ 2. Repeating the same procedure as before, we find The integral in Eq. (S25) is very similar to the integral appearing in the self energy Π R (ω) [Eq. (S23)], but only accounts for absorption of a photon with energy ω kω k , whereas Π R (ω) accounts for both emission and absorption processes. However, the emission rate (which includes an exponential e -i(ω k -ω k )t ) is equal to the absorption rate times a factor e -(ω k -ω k )/T , as one may infer from the corresponding Bose-Einstein factors in Eq. (S18). Therefore, we find Γ in (1) The remaining three terms of Γ in k |k may be derived in a similar fashion. This leads to Eq. ( The rates Γ in k and Γ in k |k satisfy an energy conservation sum rule, which may be verified by integration by parts over t in Eq. (S23) for the self energies: To address limiting cases, it is useful to examine the behavior of Π R (ω) at low frequency, ω ω 0 . Here we may use f q ∼ 2∆/zω q for ω q ω 0 [cf. Eq. (S15)] in Eq. (S23) to obtain where Γ(x) is the gamma function Let us now examine different limiting cases for the inelastic rate for ω k comparable to ω 0 and at T = 0, where Eq. (S26) reduces to Γ in [extensions to finite T ω 0 are possible based on the general form of Eq. (S28)]. In the following, we assume Γ 0 /ω 0 → 0 and z > 1. When either |ω kω 0 | Γ 0 or ω 0 ω kω 0 Γ 0 , the main contribution to Eq. (S27) would come from a nearresonance photon at k . We may then approximate it as Γ in k = k Γ in k |k , and note that f 2 q ≈ ∆/π (λ 1 /λ 0 ) (Γ 0 /2)/[(ω 0ω q ) 2 + (Γ 0 /2) 2 ] near resonance [here we use the WKB expressions for λ m , cf. Eq. (S4)]. Furthermore, we may use Eq. (S28) for Π R (ω kω k ). In addition, we introduce a cutoff ω c [generally different than ω c (z)] which satisfies ω c , ω 0ω c Γ 0 as the lower summation limit, and evaluate the sum over k as an integral: (S30) This is equivalent to Eq. ( For |ω kω 0 | Γ 0 (k close to k 0 = ω 0 /v), we recognize that the leading ω k dependence comes from the Lorentzian prefactor. Therefore, we set ω k ≈ ω 0 in the integrand, and replace the lower and upper integration limits by 0 and ω 0 , respectively. Evaluation of the integral then leads to where 2 F 1 (a, b, c; x) is the hypergeometric function For ω 0 ω kω 0 Γ 0 we start again from Eq. (S30). The leading contribution to the integral comes from |ω kω 0 | Γ 0 . Therefore, we set ω k ≈ ω 0 in the power-law factor and extend the integration limits to ±∞. This yields: When ω 0 ω 0 -ω k Γ 0 , we return to Eq. (S27), drop the (Γ 0 ω q ) 2 term in the denominator of f 2 q , and approximate the sines as linear functions for both q = k, k [cf. Eq. (S15)]. We then use the low frequency approximation of Π R (ω kω k ) [Eq. (S28)], extend the lower integration limit to -∞, and approximate ω k /ω 0 ≈ 1. We then find Eqs. (S31), (S33), and (S33) are summarized by Eq. ( The instanton approach presented in the previous section accounts for the full imaginary time dynamics of the phases along the array during a phase slip. A common phenomenological approach is to approximate a phase slip as an instantaneous 2π shift of all the phases (Φ 0 = π shift of the fluxes) along the array. It has been successfully used in analyzing recent experiments on the system discussed In a Hamiltonian formalism, sudden phase slips could be accounted for by supplementing the quadratic Hamiltonian corresponding to the Lagrangian (S5) by a term [2, 3] where Q 0 = C 0 φ0 and Q n>0 = C g φn denote the charge operators along the array, a † q (a q ) is the creation (annihilation) operator of a single photon in the array mode q, and where Comparing with Eq. (S15) we can see that at low frequencies, ω q ω 0 , f P S q ≈ f q , whereas near resonance they differ; at k 0 = ω 0 /v we have f P S k0 /f k0 = π/4. The coefficient λ P S needs to be set by the value of a known observable. For the study of nearly-resonant photon scattering it is natural to choose it so that H P S reproduces the charge dispersion of the first excited level of an isolated transmon (z → ∞ limit of our system), whose free Hamiltonian is H 0 = ω 0 a † 0 a 0 . A phase slips operator corresponding to Eq. (S35) would be where ) and q g is the gate charge offset. The first-order correction in perturbation theory to the first excited level is E (1) 1 (q g ) = H P S z→∞ (q g ) 1 , and the half-width of the corresponding Bloch band is given by Within the WKB approximation in Eq. (S4) we have λ 1 = -2 7 E J /E C λ 0 , hence λ P S = -(4/π) 2 e π 2 √ E J /8E C λ 0 . Using the last form of Eq. (S35), it is straightforward to calculate the self energy of a photon at mode k to second order in λ P S as a sum of the contributions of the second-order self energies of each term in the sum over m (including cross terms) We see that the result is very similar to the instanton inelastic rate, Eq. ( Interestingly, although f P S q differs from f q , fq near resonance, and λ P S differs from λ 0 , the inelastic rates resulting from Eqs. (S26) and (S40) are similar. Indeed, for ω k , ω k ≈ ω 0 , when calculating Π P S R (ω kω k ) using Eq. (S23), only low-frequency modes contribute to the sum inside the exponent (see the discussion in Sec. SI E above). Similar considerations apply to the last line of Eq. (S39) in this regime, except for a relative factor e k (f P S k ) 2 -f 2 k , which is dominated by near resonance modes [at low frequencies f P S q ≈ f q ≈ fq , cf. Eqs. (S36), (S15), and (S11)]. Hence, collecting all the results of this section, the ratio of Eqs. (S40) and (S26) is Correspondingly, the ratio between the on-resonance instanton total inelastic rate [Eq. (S23)] and the dual cosine total inelastic rate [Eq. (S39)] is close to unity, as shown in Fig. In this section we give some additional details regarding the derivation of the quartic nonlinearity inelastic rate, given by Eq. ( k1,k2,k3,k4 where f where the three terms in the square brackets on the last line correspond to 1 → 3, 2 → 2 and 3 → 1 scattering, respectively. At T = 0 only the 1 → 3 process contributes, sin 2 (δ k1 ) ω k1 sin 2 (δ k2 ) ω k2 sin 2 (δ k3 ) ω k3 δ(ω kω k1ω k2ω k3 ), (S44) which is Eq. ( The inelastic rate may be evaluated explicitly for a nearly-resonant incoming photon, |ω kω 0 | Γ 0 (k close to k 0 = ω 0 /v). In this case the outgoing photons are all far from resonance. Hence, we may approximate the form factors inside the integrals by dropping the terms proportional to Γ 2 0 in the denominators. The form factor of the incoming photon may be approximated by a Lorentzian with width Γ 0 /2. The dominant part of the ω k dependence is captured by this Lorentzian, hence we replace ω k ≈ ω 0 inside the integrals. The inelastic rate then becomes with