We report a weighing metrology experiment of a single silica microsphere optically trapped and immersed in air. Based on fluctuations about thermal equilibrium, three different mass measurements are investigated, each arising from one of two principle methods. The first method is based on spectral analysis and enables simultaneous extraction of various system parameters. Additionally, the spectral method yields a mass measurement with systematic relative uncertainty of 3.0% in 3 s and statistical relative uncertainty of 0.9% across several trapping laser powers. Parameter values learned from the spectral method serve as input, or a calibration step, for the second method based on the equipartition theorem. The equipartition method gives two additional mass measurements with systematic and statistical relative uncertainties slightly larger than the ones obtained in the spectral method, but over a time interval 10 times shorter. Our mass estimates, which are obtained in a scenario of strong environmental coupling, have uncertainties comparable to ones obtained in force-driven metrology experiments with nanospheres in vacuum. Moreover, knowing the microsphere's mass accurately and precisely will enable air-based sensing applications. I. Optical trapping of nano-and micro-scale objects It is often desirable to monitor the trapped particle's position as a function of time, so a position-sensitive detector must be calibrated. Calibrating the detector usually requires knowledge of the trapped particle's mass In the second equipartition method, we compute the voltage signal and voltage-derivative signal variances from which we deduce the particle mass in two additional ways. Doing so requires a detector with sufficient resolution to observe the particle's instantaneous velocity, pioneered in Making precise and fast mass measurements in a system strongly coupled to the environment might have applications in scenarios where either the mass changes with time but temperature is fixed, for instance in heterogeneous nucleation This Article is organized as follows: first, we review the relevant physics and outline our PSD parameter estimation method in Section II. In Section III we show how the PSD parameters, along with the equipartition theorem, allow us to weigh the microsphere in three different ways. There, we also present the results which we further discussion in Section IV. Finally, we conclude with this work's significance in section V. The dynamics of the trapped microsphere along the x-axis may be modeled by the harmonically bound Langevin equation of motion where m = 4πρR 3 /3 is the mass of the microsphere with radius R and density ρ, γ = 6πηR is the Stokes friction coefficient, η is the viscosity of air, and k is the trap strength. The stochastic thermal force F (t) = gξ(t) is assumed to have the form of zero-mean ξ(t) = 0, deltacorrelated ξ(t)ξ(t ) = δ(t-t ) white noise with strength g = √ 2k B T γ (according to the fluctuation-dissipation theorem), and in which T is the air temperature, k B is Boltzmann's constant, and • denotes ensemble averages over realizations of ξ. Writing Eq. ( In our experiment, we record a unitless voltage signal V (t) = V -(t)/V + (0), where V -(t) is proportional to the difference in optical power delivered to the two ports of the balanced photodetector at time t and V + (0) is proportional to the total detection power at time t = 0. Normalizing the signal in this way accounts for small variations in detected power upon changing the trapping laser power. V (t) is proportional to the microsphere's position along the x-axis: x(t) = V (t)/β, where β is the calibration factor which we report in units of μm -1 . From such considerations, the theoretical (one-sided) PSD of our voltage signal is understood to be ( Multiple trials of experimental power spectra must be averaged together before we attempt to learn relevant physical parameters. We collect 10 trials of the voltage signal, each 0.3 seconds long, at a sampling rate of 50 MHz. In post-processing, the signal is low-pass filtered by averaging together non-overlapping blocks of 256 samples for improved spatial resolution. The new effective sampling rate is 195 kHz. Using Bartlett's method Once a set of trials is collected, we fit the experimental data ŜV to in which we have defined the column vector of free parameters θ = (a, b, c) T . In particular, the fit is done using the maximum likelihood estimation method First, note that each data point of an n-trial-averaged PSD is subject to gamma-distributed noise (the convolution of n exponential distributions) where Γ(n) = (n -1)! is the gamma function and S V,k is the mean value of the distribution. Then, the likelihood of measuring the entire data set data ŜV given a model Maximizing the likelihood ( ] is a constant with respect to the free parameters and thus inconsequential for the minimization, and n = 40 is the number of spectra averaged together in the experiment. Good starting values for the minimization can be calculated analytically and implemented numerically, a convenient feature which is not possible if one attempts to fit directly to eq. ( To measure the parameter fitting uncertainty and correlation, and inspired by the profile likelihood method The absolute residuals |P -P G | are bound below the 1% level. The 95 th percentile is bound below the 0.1% level (see Appendix D). The vector θ resulting from the fit is taken as the best-fit parameter set. The matrix Σ θ resulting from the fit provides the variance-covariance matrix of the fitted parameters: The uncertainty in parameter i is 1/2 and the correlation coefficient between parameters i and j is r i,j = [Σ θ ] i,j /(σ i σ j ), for i, j = a, b, c (see Appendix D) for a visualization) The fitting parameters θ may be used to deduce a more physical set of parameters: trap strength k, microsphere density ρ, and calibration constant β. Each of the physical parameters Θ = (k, ρ, β) T are a function of the fitting parameters and constant parameters R, T , and η. That is, Θ = Θ(φ), where we have defined the vector of independent variables φ = (θ, R, η, T ) T (explicit formulae in Appendix A). We now turn to the uncertainty analysis of the constant parameters. The microsphere radius is known to be R = 1.51 μm up to 3.0% uncertainty based on statistical analysis of ∼ 200 microspheres imaged with a scanning electron microscope In light of these observations, the variance-covariance matrix of fitting and constant parameters may be approximated in the block-diagonal form diag(Σ θ , σ 2 R , 0, 0) where the last two zeros reflect the small relative uncertainty in T and η compared to that in a, b, c, and R. The block diagonal form assumes correlation exists only between the fitted parameters. We calculate the variance-covariance matrix of the physical parameters in terms of the fitting and constant parameters via the error propagation equation We now understand how to estimate k, ρ, and β, including uncertainty and correlation, from an experimental voltage PSD ŜV . The results are presented in Fig. Upon learning PSD fitting parameters, presented in section II, it is straightforward to estimate the mass using the density and radius of the microsphere. However, the equipartition theorem, k B T = m ẋ2 = k x 2 , provides two additional possibilities. The three mass measurements written in terms of the augmented independent The benefit of m 2 and m 3 is that, once a PSD fit is used to calibrate the system, further data can be collected to estimate the variances V 2 and V 2 , which may be used to update the mass measurement in the case it changes with time. Of course, there is nothing to update if the mass is unchanging. Nonetheless, to make use of methods m 2 or m 3 , we must make an adequate estimate of the required variances. In Fig. For an uncorrelated voltage trace of length τ , the uncertainty in the variance estimate scales as τ -1/2 , which is a thermally-limited trend. However, at short times (τ < m/γ), the data is correlated due to the microsphere's dynamics and, at long times, slow drifts in the system tend to affect the signal's variance. One way to quantify those correlations and to determine the optimal time over which our measurements are thermally limited is performing an Allan-deviation stability analysis In Fig. mi , i = 1, 2, 3. The statistical uncertainty (or fluctuation), denoted σ stat. mi , is calculated as standard deviation across the 14 experiments at different laser powers. Measurement m 1 , which is based entirely on the PSD analysis, has the smallest relative error bars (σ sys. m1 / m1 = 3.0%) and the smallest relative statistical uncertainty (σ stat. m1 / m1 = 0.9%). Measurement m 2 , which supplements the PSD analysis by estimating the voltage-derivative variance, agrees well with m 1 , albeit with relative error bars at 4.1% and relative statistical fluctuations at 1.6%. The benefit of m 2 is that, once an initial PSD analysis is performed, parameters like mass (or temperature) can be subsequently updated 10 times faster than collecting data for additional PSD analysis. Measurement m 3 has the largest systematic and statistical relative uncertainties, 6.7% and 3.0% respectively. Furthermore, method m 3 displays additional systematic error because it deviates from m 1 and m 2 by nearly 10%. We speculate on the source of this uncertainty in the next section. For comparison, the mass according to the manufacturer values of density ρ Bangs = 2.0 g cm -3 (σ ρBangs /ρ Bangs = 20%) and our radius measurement R = 1.51 μm, (σ R /R = 2.9%) is m Bangs = 28.84 pg with an uncertainty of 22% which agrees within the uncertainty tolerance of all our mass measurements, despite the discrepancy of the mean values. The systematic bias in m 3 of Fig. where V 2 is the variance of the voltage signal observed in the time domain, PSD , which agrees with the discrepancy between m 3 and and the other measurements. The quantity ∆ V 2 can also be estimated by numerically integrating the observed noise spectrum. We find that the integral of the noise PSD in frequency band from 70 Hz to 170 Hz predicts the observed excess variance and hence also the bias in m 3 . The effects of low frequency noise resonances are suppressed when estimating V 2 . The reason is because, in general, S q (f ) = (2πf ) 2 S q (f ), so high frequency components of a signal have a quadratically larger weighting factor in the variance compared to low frequency noise. We find, by direct calculation on our data, ∆ V 2 ∼ 2%, which agrees with numeric integration of S noise V (f ) over all frequencies above 80 kHz. A recent experimental effort As a comparison, we present a summary of our physical parameter values and uncertainties in Table Most of the existing mass measurement methods are demonstrated in a high vacuum environment where the experimental goals often center around ground-state cooling or exceptionally sensitive force transduction. Additionally, the existing methods rely on forces external to the trap, often driving the system out of equilibrium and limiting their utility as environmental sensors. Our method has the advantages of speed in that between 10× and 100× less data is required compared to other methods; environmental coupling, which unlocks future sensing applications; and simplicity in that no additional experimental set up is required beyond trapping and monitoring. Disadvantages include the requirements of environmental coupling, enough spatiotemporal resolution to resolve the instantaneous velocity, and accurate knowledge of the particle radius. While an advantage for fu-ture applications, environmental coupling critically limits heating effects of the trapping laser and enables fast equilibration with the environment, so our method will face complications in vacuum-based experiments. Accurate heating/damping models and longer data traces could possibly overcome such concerns. Instantaneous velocity resolution enables our fastest measurement, m 2 , but can be much more difficult in a liquid environment, though certainly possible We have explored spectral and equipartition methods by which to measure an optically trapped microsphere's mass while in thermal equilibrium with air. With the former, we accurately extract physical parameters of trap strength k, microsphere density ρ, and detector calibration constant β with 3 seconds of data. The initial spectral calibration step also yields the mass m 1 with 3.0% uncertainty. The subsequent equipartition method m 2 achieves an uncertainty of 4.1% in 0.3 seconds. The work presented here demonstrates the sensitivity of optical tweezers in a scenario of strong environmental coupling, suggesting applications in air-based sensing. For example, single-site ice nucleation could be monitored in real time as a change in mass of the trapped particle. Alternatively, in a system of constant mass, one could first measure the mass using the spectral method and then use the equipartition method to measure changes in temperature within the trapping medium, which could be driven out of equilibrium with a temperature gradient to probe temperature-gradient-induced turbulence at small scales of space and time. The equipartition theorem may be challenged by nonequilibrium dynamics. However, in the hydrodynamic regime where thermodynamic state variables are relevant in the sense of quasi-equilibrium, we believe our method will be quite applicable. The small sensor size means the dynamics are fast to respond to changes in the environment (on the scale of m/γ ∼ 45 μs in this work). Even in the complete absence of thermal equilibrium, where the notion of temperature is no longer defined, our position and velocity data may be used to compute more general velocity structure functions when the simple variance appearing in the equipartition theorem is insufficient to write the Jacobians which are needed for error propagation. Our experiment is sketched in Fig. The forward beam is isolated with a second polarizing beamsplitter and its wave front is split with a Dshaped cut mirror (Thorlabs, model BBD05-E03). Each half of the split beam is directed into the two ports of a balanced photo detector (Thorlabs, model PDB120C, bandwidth DC-75 MHz), which provides a voltage proportional to the optical power imbalance in the two halves of the beam. The voltage signal is digitized (GaGe Razor 1622 Express CompuScope) and saved to disk for analysis. When a microsphere is trapped, the surrounding air causes it to undergo Brownian motion. As the microsphere deviates from the center of the trap, it scatters and deflects the trapping light and the resulting signal from the balanced detector is proportional to the displacement of the microsphere along the transverse direction perpendicular to the cut of the mirror. The forward beam's propagation direction is taken as the z-axis and its polarization as the y-axis. The cut mirror's edge is aligned to the y axis and measures the displacement of the particle along the x-axis. The entire setup is enclosed in a homemade multi-chamber acrylic box The Allan deviation, is the square-root of the Allan variance (two-sample variance) where A = T /τ is the number of independent length-τ blocks in a trial of total length T and q 2 (τ j ) is the j th bin-average of q 2 with M = rτ points. Next, we describe our method of extracting the experimental voltage PSD. The one-sided PSD calculated from a single trial for k = 0, 1, . . . , N/2. We have introduced the notation ŜV,k = ŜV (f k ). Additionally, w = w(t j ; N ) is a windowing function for a trial of size N and is a power correction for the windowing procedure. The factor 2/W N ensures Parseval's theorem k ŜV,k = V 2 . Note that if w(t j ; N ) = 1, then W N = T . We use the a Hamming window for which W N = 0.4194T in the continuum limit N → ∞ and r → 0. The choice of window was found to be inconsequential for parameter extraction except for small deviations at the lowest few trapping-laser powers, i.e., the over-damped oscillator regime. This observation appears to be in analogy with V j is proportional to the microsphere's position at time t j , and the microsphere is subject to a stochastic force F (t j ) ∝ ξ(t j ), where ξ(t j ) is a real-valued, Gaussian distributed, white noise random process with zero mean and delta-correlation. A single trial's PSD ŜV,k , then, is subject to fluctuations ∝ | ξ(f k )| 2 where ξ(f k ) is the discrete Fourier transform of the particular instance ξ(t) present in that trial. Since ξ(t) is Gaussian-distributed, ξ(f k ) is a complex number with real and imaginary parts independent and identically Gaussian distributed. is the sum of two squared Gaussian-distributed variables which is exponentially distributed It is desirable to suppress this intrinsic noise so that fitting experimental data yields precise parameters. The idea of Bartlett's method where it is understood that here the N appearing in Eq. ( Due to the PSD averaging, ŜV,k is Gamma distributed (the convolution of n exponential distributions) ) where Γ(n) = (n -1)! is the gamma function. The probability of measuring the model S V,k = S V (f k , θ) given the data ŜV is the product over k of Eq. (C13), i.e., Henceforth and in the main we simplify the notation and take ŜV (f k ) to denote the Bartlett PSD discussed here. Optimal parameters θ are found by maximizing Eq. (C14), or minimizing its negative-logarithm L( ŜV , θ) (Eq. ( The signal digitizer has 16 bits and a full-scale input range of 2 V (±1 V). However, the manufacturer reports an effective-number-of-bits of 11.7 (meaning 4.3 bits are polluted by electronic noise). The resolution of the digitizer is the voltage range allotted to the least significant bit (LSB): LSB = 2V /2 11.7 = 601 μV. The systematic uncertainty in the measured voltage V -due to digitization is estimated to be σ V-= 1 2 LSB. In the experiments reported on here, we need to resolve voltage variances. The smallest observed standard deviation is V 2 -1/2 = 0.02 V, so a worst-case estimate of the systematic uncertainty due to digitization is about 1.5%. Upon bin-averaging with M = 256 points, the standard deviation of a purely electronic-noise signal is found to be reduced by the expected factor M -1/2 = 1/16 (which we have verified with experimental data). Thus, the systematic uncertainty in voltage measurements due to this electronic noise is σ V-/ V 2 -1/2 = 0.09%, which is ignorable compared to other uncertainties. The above discussion considers only electronic noise of the detector and digitizer. However, uncertainty in a measured signal variance is much more significantly affected by laser noise, which includes pointing and power fluctuations. Pointing instability is inherent to the laser and also arises due to mechanical and electrical coupling through the the mirrors and control electronics. The significant resonance observed near 120 Hz in the laser-on noise spectrum (Fig. PSD | as well as the value predicted by integrating the noise spectrum in a band from 70 Hz to 170 Hz. On average, the systematic uncertainty in V 2 due to this excess variance is at about 10%, which seemingly explains the systematic over estimate of m 3 (which is proportional to V 2 ) compared to m 1 and m 2 . The voltage-derivative signal is insensitive to the presence of the 120 Hz resonance. Instead, the observed excess variance is well accounted for high frequency noise (above 80 kHz). Figure The PSD fitting parameters θ = (a, b, c) T and their associated variance-covariance matrix Σ θ are found by calculating Eq. (C14) in the vicinity of the optimal parameters (main text Fig. The optimal parameters generate a model S V around which the PSD data ŜV is scattered according to the gamma distribution (C13). Hence, distribution of ŜV /S V is also gamma-distributed, but with unit mean. In Fig. To fix the microsphere radius, we first took 10 scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of a sample of 3 μm diameter microspheres. An example image is shown in Fig. The Dynamic viscosity η as a function of temperature T is evaluated with the Sutherland model in which η = η = 18.3245 μPa when T = T = 296.15 K, and S = 110.4 K is called Sutherland's constant. S is roughly a measure of the mutual potential energy in a system of two air molecules in contact. Over such a small temperature range, viscosity is linear (inset of Fig. The variance-covariance matrix of the physical parameters is given by Σ Θ = J Θ Σ φ J T Θ . where Σ φ = diag(Σ θ , σ 2 R , σ 2 η , σ 2 T ) and the Jacobian J Θ is evaluated at θ using Eq. (A11) of the main text. Simmilarly, the variance-covariance matrix of the mass measurements if given by Σ m = J m Σ φ J T m where The uncertainty in any parameter is then given by the square root of the corresponding diagonal element of the appropriate variancecovariance matrix. Similarly, correlations between parameters are quantified in the off diagonal elements of the appropriate variance-covariance matrix. Correlations between physical parameters are expected because both the calibration constant and trap strength depend on the index of refraction of the microsphere, which is correlated with its density. It is correlations between the fitting parameters that we are careful to account for because they contribute to the uncertainties of derived parameters. 