A comprehensive thermochemical database is constructed based on high-throughput firstprinciples phonon calculations of over 3000 atomic structures in Ni, Fe, and Co alloys involving a total of 26 elements including Al, B, C, Cr, Cu, Hf, La, Mn, Mo, N, Nb, O, P, Re, Ru, S, Si, Ta, Ti, V, W, Y, and Zr, providing thermochemical data largely unavailable from existing experiments. The database can be employed to predict the equilibrium phase compositions and fractions at a given temperature and an overall chemical composition directly from first-principles by minimizing the chemical potential. It is applied to the additively manufactured nickel-based IN718 superalloy to analyze the phase evolution with temperature. In particular, we successfully predicted the formation of L10-FeNi, '-Ni3(Fe,Al), α-Cr, -Ni3(Nb,Mo), "-Ni3Nb , and η-Ni3Ti at low temperatures, γ'-Ni3Al, δ-Ni3Nb, "-Ni3Nb, α-Cr, and γ-Ni(Fe,Cr,Mo) at intermediate temperatures, and δ-Ni3Nb and γ-Ni(Fe,Cr,Mo) at high temperatures in IN718. These predictions are validated by EDS mapping of compositional distributions and corresponding identifications of phase distributions. The database is expected to be a valuable source for future thermodynamic analysis and microstructure prediction of alloys involving the 26 elements. With advances in both computational power and efficiency during the last two decades Here we make an attempt to build a comprehensive thermochemical database entirely based on DFT calculations. In particular, we obtained chemical potentials (often called Gibbs energies in the existing literature) of individual phases employing a quasi-harmonic phonon approach for the lattice contribution and Mermin statistics The present work was initially motivated by our desire to understand the thermodynamic equilibria among possible precipitate phases formed during heating and cooling cycles in additive manufacturing of IN718 alloys consisting of 10 elements (Ni, Cr, Fe, Nb, Mo, Ti, Al, Co, C, Cu). Due to the high-throughput nature of our calculations, we decided to drastically extend the database by considering 3281 compounds involving 26 elements, namely, Ni, Cr, Fe, Nb, Mo, Ti, Al, Co, C, Cu, B, Hf, La, Mn, N, O, P, Re, Ru, S, Si, Ta, V, W, Y, and Zr, which can potentially be widely applicable to a wide range of metallic alloys way beyond IN718. To facilitate the access to the database, we also develop a computational tool in python to predict the phase stability as a function of temperature. The thermodynamic database is applied to the additively manufactured (AM) nickel-based IN718 superalloy to analyze the phase evolution with temperature. The considered phases include the ordered, disordered, and solution structures that can be potentially relevant to phases observed from the T-T-T (time-temperature-transformation) diagrams For the dilute solution phases, the present calculations include fcc-based phases NiNM where N=31, 107, and 255 with M= Al, C, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Hf, Mn, Mo, Nb, Ni, Re, Si, Ta, Ti, and W. For the magnetic structures, we treat Co, Fe, and Ni as ferromagnetic. Antiferromagnetic states for Cr We automate the challenging high-throughput quasiharmonic calculations according to the procedure flowchart illustrated in Figure where E c is the 0 K total energy per molar volume V and a, b, c, and d as fitting parameters. When convergence criteria are not met, we iterate the calculations by progressively modifying the input settings such as the method to estimate the Fermi energy, the scheme for block iteration, and the mixing scheme in the electronic step, etc. Based on the analytical expressions, we search for the approximate range for the equilibrium volumes to set up phonon calculations that also checks for convergence and the existence of imaginary phonon modes. Finally, we compute the thermodynamic properties while those structures with significant amount of imaginary phonon modes are ignored. We employed the projector-augmented wave (PAW) method The default energy cutoff was determined by setting the VASP keyword "PREC=A" during lattice relaxation, using the  centered k-meshes together with a sampling density of ~1000 points/atom. We found that the energy threshold of 10 -6 eV is sufficient for the convergence of the electronic step, whereas it required an energy threshold of 10 -8 eV for the relaxation of cell shape and atomic positions. After relaxation, the energy cutoff of 520 eV together with the tetrahedron method with Blöchl corrections The criterion for convergence check using the Morse function in Eq. 1 was less than or equal to 10 -3 eV per atom. We calculate the phonon properties by building supercells based on the relaxed cell shape and atomic positions of the primitive unit cell according to the following matrix transformation where a, b, and c are the lattice vectors of the primitive unit cell, and A, B, and C represent the lattice vectors of the supercell. The values of i k (k=1-9) in Eq. 2 were determined by the criteria that the supercell contained ~128 atoms with a smallest possible aspect ratio. We compute the interatomic force constants using the VASP keyword "PREC=A" together with a 3 × 3 × 3  centered k-meshes. The thermodynamic properties were calculated using the YPHON package The chemical potential of a compound or a solution phase α is the same as its molar Gibbs free energy or Gibbs free energy per atom For instance, it was found that the electronic contribution could account more than 10% of the total heat capacity at 1000 K for Ni Eq. 4 where n represents the total number of components, and x i α is the atomic fraction of component i We first calculate all temperature-dependent thermodynamic properties at the seven fixed volumes based on Eq. 3 Inconel 718 (IN718) is a nickel-chromium-iron based superalloy In its solid state, IN718 alloy is generally a multiphase mixture of FCC (face centered cubic) solid solution gamma (γ) matrix with a number of precipitated phases, including γ ́(L12), γʺ (D022), δ (D0a), carbides etc The specimens came from prior research with the experimental procedures described in the work of Promoppatum et al. The transmission electron microscope (TEM) samples were prepared using an FEI Helios 660 focused ion beam (FIB) system. A thick protective amorphous carbon layer was deposited over the region of interest, and Ga+ ions (30kV then stepped down to 1kV to avoid ion beam damage to the sample surface) were used in the FIB to thin the samples to electron transparency for TEM imaging. The specimens were imaged in TEM directly after FIB sample preparation. Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) was performed at 200 kV in a FEI Talos F200X S/TEM, and EDS elemental maps of the sample surface were collected by using a SuperX EDS system under STEM mode with four detectors surrounding the sample. All the STEM images were captured by using a high angle annular dark field (HAADF) detector (Fischione) for Zcontrast imaging. The EDS elemental mapping in STEM mode was performed at 200 kV with acquisition times up to 10 minutes. The measurements were made at four selected positions at the specimen with resolutions at the scales of 1 m, 500 nm, 200 nm, and 40 nm, and the four HAADF images are provided in Figure To predict the spatial distributions of phases utilizing a combination of the DFT-derived thermochemical database and the EDS compositional data, we compare the chemical potential (molar Gibbs energy) of an individual phase with the so-called convex hull where T is temperature, μ α is the chemical potential of phase a, m is the number of phases, and f α is the phase fraction of α at the position (x, y). We minimize the local chemical potential μ(T) with respect to f α subject to the following conditions: where x i α is the elemental composition of phase α. The set of f α (T, x, y) that minimizes the local μ(T, x, y) represents the spatial distributions of phases at a given temperature T. The overall phase fraction (f ̅ α ) of a phase at a given temperature can be calculated as: Eq. 9 f ̅ α (T) = The above procedure has been implemented in Python 3 using the Anaconda numerical software distribution, which can directly read pixel values from graphical TEM elemental distribution maps. While the intragranular plate-shaped coherent γ" and spherical γ' precipitates are beneficial to the mechanical properties of IN718 The transformation of the intragranular γ" into the thermodynamically more stable δ reduces the yield strength of IN718 We predicted the phase fractions and their temperature dependence for the 1 m, 500 nm, 200 nm, and 40 nm EDS results using the DFT-derived database and they show similar results in terms of overall phase fraction as a function of temperature. In the following, we will mainly discuss the predicted results based on the 200 nm EDS data. It is predicted that the major phases (with phase fractions >1%) in the AM-fabricated IN718 are , ', ", , α-Cr, and C14 phases and the L10-FeNi and η-Ni3Ti phases. In principle, the γ phase in IN718 is a solid solution of Ni with 9 alloying elements. However, it is currently not realistic to deal with a 10-component random solid solution using DFT. We approximate the γ phase as a mechanical mixture of binary and ternary solutions through the special quasi-random structure (SQS) model. In particular, we obtain the temperature dependence of the γ phase through the phase fractions of the SQS structures of FeNi2, CrNi2, FeNi, FeNi3, Fe3Ni5, CrFeNi, FeMoNi3, and CrMoNi3 as listed in Table The list of phases formed up to 1500 K predicted from the 200 nm EDS compositional data are collected in Table For comparison, we also performed thermodynamic calculations (courtesy of Carpenter Inc.) using Thermo-Calc software The enthalpy of IN718 alloy as a function of temperature from the DFT database and the TCNI9 database is compared in Figure The entropy as a function of temperature from DFT and TCNI9 databases is presented in The sudden changes in entropy as a function of temperature from the DFT curve are either associated with order-disorder transitions, e.g. those around 680 K and 1310 K, or due to the fact that the S ̅ conf of the  solution phase is approximated as a linear mixture of the binary and ternary SQS structures at discrete compositions. At 684 K, the entropy from DFT coincides with that from the TCNI9 database. However, above 684 K, the entropy from the TCNI9 database is substantially higher than that from the DFT database while below 684 K, the entropy from the TCNI9 database is slightly lower than that from the DFT database. This discrepancy seems to be mostly due to the much larger entropy change associated with the order-disorder transition around 684 K from the TCNI9 database than the DFT database. Similar to the entropy calculation, we computed the heat capacity of IN718 by considering lattice and electronic contributions ( C ̅ P,vib+el , labeled as "DFT, w/o C conf " in Figure Eq. 11 C P (T) = C ̅ P,vib+el (T) + C conf (T) = ∑ f α C P,vib+el (T, α) + C conf (T) where C conf can be obtained from S ̅ conf given in Eq. 10: Eq. 12 C conf (T) = T dS ̅ conf (T) dT However, since the  phase was treated as a linear mixture of the binary and ternary SQS structures at discrete compositions, which may result in discontinuous changes in entropy, we cannot directly use Eq. 12 to calculate C conf . Instead, we employ the following two schemes to calculate C conf . The scheme#1 (labeled as "DFT, with linear C conf " in Figure Eq. 13 S ̅ conf (T) ≅ aT Eq. 14 C conf (T) = aT In scheme#2 (labeled as "DFT, with non-linear C conf " in Figure The DFT calculated heat capacities for IN718 are compared with those using the TCNI9 database in Figure [64], Brooks et al. [66] is used in Figure [73] and Yang et al. The present DFT database showed that the  phase is a combination of MoNi3 in D0a structure Ni with mostly Nb and some Mo whereas according to the TCNI9 the  phase is primarily Ni and Nb with minor Ti. The spatial distributions of the γ', bcc-Cr (α-Cr), and δ phases and the overall phase distributions (the  phase is plotted in cyan color) at 800 K from the DFT databases are shown in Figure Different from the TCNI9 database, the DFT results showed that the '-AlNi3 and -NbNi3 phases are stable in IN718 throughout the entire temperature range of 0-1500 K. However, the present DFT calculations fail to reproduce the solvus temperature ~1273 K of -NbNi3 from experiment This might be due to the neglect of the anharmonic contributions to the vibrational free energy at high temperature in our DFT and lattice dynamic calculations, or the relatively limited number of compositions considered in the analysis of solution phases containing Nb. The spatial distribution of the -NbNi3 phase, the α-Cr phase, and their overall phase distributions at 1200 K, and the Cr6Fe6Ni6 SQS phase, the -NbNi3 phase, the α-Cr phase, and their overall distributions at 1400 K are marked in Figure It was found that the ternary random structures are important in describing the disordered  phase at high temperatures. For example, the Cr6Fe6Ni6 SQS structure contributes 42% of the disordered  phase at 1400 K. At ~1120 K, the amount of -Cr phase starts to decrease significantly as temperature increases due to the increase of the Cr-contained ternary solutions. The results are in excellent agreement with the observation by Jia and Gu Experimentally, Bi et al. The predicted phase fractions for the individual phase are collected in Table and -MoNi3 (1%). Due to the imposition of the grain boundary constraint, the  phases have been mostly replaced by the " phase away from grain boundaries. In the temperature range between 800 -1000 K, the ordered L10 phase is not present, and the amount of the '-Ni3Fe phase decreases significantly. The disordered  phase is mainly a mixture of disordered FeNi, FeNi2, and FeNi3. When the temperature goes above 1200 K, the amount of -Cr starts to decrease significantly. The disordered  phase at 1400 K is mainly made of FeNi2, CrNi2, CrFeNi, and CrMoNi3, with fractions of 12%, 14%, 42%, and 7%, respectively. 