Thin films from the L VO 4 :Eu,Ca nanoparticles were successfully grown by pulsed laser deposition method on glass and silicon substrates for the first time. Morphology and thickness of the films depend on a type of substrate and a number of pulses. The films are of 27 -220 nm thickness and formed by very small particles (up to 20 nm) and also can contain single nanoparticles with dimensions 40 -60 nm and sometimes agglomerates of nanoparticles. Spectral properties of the samples have been investigated and discussed. The vanadate films deposited on the silicon substrates lead to appearance of antireflection properties in the visible range. Luminescence spectra of the investigated films consist of narrow lines caused by f-f transitions in the Eu 3+ ions. For the samples on glass substrates the wide bands of glass emission are also contributed to the spectra. The optimal experimental conditions those allowed to obtain films promising for applications as luminescent converters are considered. Development of composite films with oxide nanoparticles have attracted increased research interest in relation with their applications for optical material science needs, in particular, such materials are used for downshifting of short wavelength part of spectra of incident light to the rage of spectral sensitivity of silicon solar cells and for transformation of violet and blue LED radiation into white light Vanadate compounds are widely used matrices for luminescent rare earth (RE) ions dopants as they satisfy high efficiency of excitation of activator through the matrix. A wide range of possible applications of vanadate nanoparticles have attracted significant research efforts to development of new vanadate compositions with improved characteristics depending on requirements of various practical tasks Thin films of oxide phosphors can be prepared by various methods such as chemical vapor deposition, sol-gel deposition, spin-coating, reactive sputtering, molecular beam epitaxy, liquid phase epitaxy, etc. So, we suppose that application of the PLD method could satisfy a better preservation of enhanced optical properties of the vanadate nanoparticles in the films. The PLD process for the LaVO 4 compounds was only episodically reported previously The initial luminescent nanoparticles for targets preparation have L¡ 1-x Eu x VO 4 and L 1-x- y Eu x Ca y VO 4 compositions. They were synthesized from calculated stoichiometric amounts of La(NO 3 ) 3 , Eu(NO 3 ) 3 , NH 4 VO 3 , Ca(NO 3 ) 2 precursors by sol-gel method. Nitrate solutions of the corresponded metals with a precisely defined concentration were poured into chemical utensils due to the calculated ratios. The pH was adjusted to 7.0-8.0 by ammonia solution. Then, solution of ammonium metavanadate was added. The precipitate was dissolved with a solution of citric acid in the ratio of the starting materials. The solution was concentrated by slow evaporation at 80-90 o¢ before formation of a gel, from which then a fine-grained powder was made and was calcined for 5 hours at 680 o£ and carefully homogenized in an agate mortar. More details on sol-gel synthesis of the doped L¤VO 4 nanoparticles can be found in The synthesized nanoparticles were examined by XRD, SEM and spectroscopy methods. The obtained powders were grinded, homogenized and then pressed into tablets of 15 mm diameter and 2 -3 mm thickness. Deposition was carried out in vacuum camera using KrF excimer laser with £ gen = 248 nm, 10 Hertz pulse repetition and laser fluency of 2 J/cm 2 on the target. The substrates were chosen taking into account possible practical applications of the developed luminescent films. There are glass and silicon substrates. The latter are amorphous silicon plates those are used for production of silicon solar cells. The substrates (glass or silicon) were heated to 300 oC before and at the deposition. The microstructure of the samples was studied with a scanning electron microscope (SEM) JEOL JSM-7000F. Thin film metrology was carried out using a tabletop reflectometer (FTPadv, SENTECH Instruments GmbH) coupled to an optical microscope. Reflectance spectroscopy of the samples was performed using Perkin Elmer Lambda 950 spectrometer. The powder samples were pressed in sample holder and then spectra of diffuse reflection were measured. In the used mode, the monochromator is placed before the samples and all light reflected from the powder samples are collected by photometric sphere. Luminescence spectra excited with 325 nm laser were registered using ACTONi (500) monochromator with grating 150 grooves/mm (blaze @ 300 nm), slit on 50 micron and liquid N 2 -cooled CCD camera. The L¡ 1-x Eu x VO 4 films applied with 1000 and 2000 pulses on glass substrates have view of very light and simply light grey homogenous smoke on the glass, respectively (Fig. Comparing morphology of the films deposited on glass substrates with different number of pulses (1000 or 2000), we have not observed essential differences in character of distribution of the particles dependently on number of pulses. The last influences only density of the particles in the films. In despite of the films in their nanoscale structures contain the separated particles and their agglomerates homogenously distributed on the substrates' surfaces, at usual conditions (by eye) they are looking as complete films. The scrapers specially put on the film on glass substrate clearly demonstrates it (Fig. As it was shown in our previous papers, vanadate powders used here for deposition of the films consists of single nanoparticles with average dimensions of nanoparticles near 40 -60 nm. Thus, dimensions of the film-forming grains (particles) from 10 to 20 nm are smaller than sizes of the nanoparticles in targets. We suppose the evaporated under action of laser pulses part of the target was dispersed as small-particle aerosol. It achieves the substrate and forms the films. Instead of this, some nanoparticles and their agglomerates can leave the target and achieve the substrates in their initial forms. The L¡ 1-x Eu x VO 4 films applied with 1000 pulses on silicon substrates are also contain the separated particles and their agglomerates those are spread on the substrates' surfaces, but some of agglomerates can be larger compared to the films on glass substrates (Fig. Thicknesses of the grown films were estimated using optical thin film metrology method based on the interference patterns in the reflectivity spectrum of the layered sample. Interference effects occurred between the radiation reflected at the boundary and at the surface of the film were investigated with optical microscope and tabletop reflectometer. The light reflected from the sample is collected by pick-up optics connected to the camera adapter of a microscope. An optical fiber guides the light to the spectrometer and the spectrum is detected by a high performance photo diode array. The measured spectrum from a layered sample shows typical interference effects those depend on the thickness and the optical properties of the materials. Therefore the film thickness can be determined using optical constants (n and k) of film material and substrate This investigation has shown that the applied method estimates the deposited samples as films with the certain thicknesses of nanoscale dimensions (Table Comparing results of SEM study and optical metrology, we should conclude that in despite of higher thickness of films on glass substrates, they contain a lower density of agglomerated inclusions. Therefore, the PLD technology allows to obtain very thin films of good quality from the vanadate nanoparticles, especially if compare with such methods as sol-gel deposition, spincoating, reactive sputtering, and liquid phase epitaxy x Eu x VO 4 and L© 1-x-y Eu x Ca y VO 4 nanoparticles Antireflection properties of random nanostructures are well known for various natural objects Usually, production of silicon solar cells includes special antireflection coating of silicon plates with silicon nitride or titanium dioxide. Thus, the films of vanadate nanoparticles can also play role of antireflection coating on the silicon substrates. Luminescence spectra of the samples on silicon substrates consist of groups of narrow lines in the 575 -725 nm spectral range. Luminescence spectra of the samples on glass substrates consist of three wide bands at 420, 520 and 700 nm and the groups of narrow lines in the 575 -725 spectral range are observed on the background of the wideband emission. The narrow lines in the 575 -725 nm spectral range by their positions and intensity distributions should be assigned to electron transitions in the Eu 3+ ions. The wide bands at 420, 520 and 700 nm those are observed for the samples on glass substrates only can be caused by emission of glass substrate (Fig. The studied luminescent properties of the obtained films can help to find optimal synthesis conditions for possible practical applications of the films. For example, if we consider films on glass substrates for luminescent converting of violet or blue emission of LEDs, we should say that the obtained films are too thin to obtain of sufficient luminescent characteristics of films. The used experimental conditions of 1000 -2000 pulses are not enough for this application. From the other hand, the films on silicon substrates have demonstrated very good characteristics to be used as luminescent downshifters of the incident light by solar cells. They are characterized by high intensity of emission and high efficiency of transformation of light from near UV range to red and at the same time their high transparency in the visible range will not prevent penetration of solar light to working solar cells surfaces. Therefore, it is possible to preserve enhanced optical characteristics of vanadate nanoparticles under their deposition on various substrates. But, effective excitation of very thin films is possible only for samples on silicon substrates. Taking into account that used in this investigation substrates have not obtained special treatment those are usually used for obtaining of solar cells from silicon plates (metallization, electrodes application, antireflection coating, etc.), the additional investigation is needed to estimate possibility of the proposed films to improve spectral efficiency of the end devices. Thin films from the L¡VO 4 :Eu,Ca nanoparticles were successfully grown by pulsed laser deposition method on various glass and silicon substrates for the first time. Morphology and thickness of the films depend on a type of substrate and a number of pulses. The obtained films are characterized by thicknesses from 27 to 220 nm. The films are formed by very small particles (up to 20 nm) and also can contain single nanoparticles with dimensions 40 -60 nm and sometimes agglomerate of nanoparticles. Spectroscopy properties of the obtained samples have been investigated. The deposited vanadate films on silicon substrates have demonstrated antireflection properties as a result of laser-induced random nanostructured profile. Luminescence spectra of the investigated films consist of narrow lines caused by f-f transitions in the Eu 3+ ions. Intensity of the Eu 3+ emission is considerably higher for the films deposited on silicon substrates. For the samples on glass substrates the wide bands of glass emission are also contributed in the spectra. The used experimental conditions are not enough to obtain films on glass substrates with luminescent characteristics of the films sufficient for their applications, whereas the films deposited on silicon substrates have demonstrated promising antireflection and luminescent characteristics.