Topological stability is an important property for topological materials. However, the non-Hermitian effects may change this situation. Here, we investigate the robustness of edge states in the non-Hermitian Kitaev chain with imbalanced tunneling term and superconducting pairing term. By defining the similarity of Majorana zero modes (MZMs) and magnetic factor, the coalescing phase diagram of the MZMs and corresponding spin polarization phase diagram are provided. Because of the non-Hermitian coalescence effect and non-Hermitian suppression effect induced by the breakdown of sublattice symmetry and particle-hole symmetry, the system emergence very interesting phenomenons, such as defective MZMs, number-anomalous bulk-boundary correspondence, coalescing of many-body ground states, the magnetic phase crossover without gap closing. Those novel non-Hermitian effects offer fresh insights into MZMs and topological physics. As a prototype model of one-dimensional (1D) topological superconductors (SCs), Kitaev chain have been a hot spot in condensed matter physics since unpaired Majorana zero modes (MZMs) are predicted to exist at the ends of this chain when the system is in the topologically nontrivial phase Recently, non-Hermitian (NH) physics attracts lots of attention While, it is still an open question whether the topological robustness of MZMs can be changed by the NH effects in superconducting systems. Physically, an NH Kitaev chain can be obtained by setting the the chemical potential or hopping amplitude or SC paring to complex values, these choices may be realized by adding onsite particle gain/loss In this letter, we find that the breakdown of chiral symmetry and particle-hole (PH) symmetry can induce defective MZMs, which means one of the two localized edge states will disappear, referred to as number-anomalous of the MZMs. As a result, the conventional BBC is broken down, this indicates the NH effects break the robustness of the topological Majorana bound states. Here, the NH effects make difference are the coalescence effects and NH suppression effect. The coalescence effect means the similarity rate of two states γ = ψ 1 |ψ 2 changes from 0 to 1, i.e., two orthogonal states coalesce into one in a nonunitary way; For a target state ψ = α 1 |↑ + α 2 |↓ , the NH suppression effect means the NH parameters change the population of |↑ and |↓ in a non-unitary way. This paper is organized as follows. In Sec.II, we describe the model Hamiltonian and analyze its topological invariant. In Sec.III, we investigate the MZMs based on effective edge states Hamiltonian in the Majorana representation, and the number-anomalous BBC is revealed. In Sec.IV, we study the NH effects on the defective MZMs in spin language and show the phase crossover in the corresponding NH Ising model. Finally, we provide a summary and discussion in Sec.V. We introduce a 1D NH Kitaev model induced by the breakdown of chiral symmetry and particle-hole symmetry, the Hamiltonian is where c † j (c j ) is a fermionic creation (annihilation) operator on site j. As shown in Fig. Then, we rewrite H NH in the Bogoliubov-de Gennes formalism H NH = C † h BdG C where C and C † are column and row vectors containing all canonical operators then we can transform it to its Hermitian counterpart using a similarity transformation where the transform matrices are defined as and where the canonical operators are defined as and the scale factors of similar transformation are It is obvious that the operators satisfy the anticommutation relations {d i , d † j } = δ ij , {d i , d j } = {d † j , d † i } = 0 and H cp has the form of the 1D Hermitian Kitaev model. By the Fourier transform, We can write down the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian in the momentum space as where C and C † are column and row vectors containing all canonical operators, ), and the non-Hermitian matrix is where K ± = t(1 + e ±ik ), X ± = ∆ 0 (1e ±ik ). Diagonalizing h(k), we can get the energy dispersion which can't be affected by the non-Hermitian parameter β 1 , β 2 and is just the spectrum of β 1 = β 2 = 0. It should be noticed that there is no skin effect for the system Then, we investigate the topological properties of the NH Kitaev chain H NH . The fermion Hamiltonian in momentum space is divided into three parts, ĤNH = ĤNH,k>0 + ĤNH,k=0 + ĤNH,k=π . After diagonalizing the fermion Hamiltonian at the points k > 0, we have where α k are diagonalized quasi-particles operators and α ±k annihilate the ground state |G , i.e., α ±k |G = 0. Both α band has a positive energy at each point in momentum space k > 0. The Hamiltonian at k = 0 and where Based on the biorthogonal set, the right/left eigenstates and corresponding eigenvalues for the NH systems satisfy the relationship ĤNH To describe this topological structure of ĤNH , we define biorthogonal Z 2 topological invariant, where Here, Ψ R 0 denotes the ground state, ∆ 0 = t, and As a results, we have Then ω becomes topological invariant to characterize the universal properties of different topological phases, ω = 1 with (η k=0 , η k=π ) = (-1, -1) or (1, 1) represent two trivial SCs, and ω = -1 with (η k=0 , η k=π ) = (-1, 1) or (1, -1) represent two topological SCs, where there exist two MZMs located at two end of the 1D Kitaev chain. By introduce Majorana Fermion , the non-Hermitian Hamiltonian H NH can be written in Majorana-representation: where the coupling m 1 , m 2 , im 3 , im 4 between nearest neighbor sites are: As shown in Fig. To acquire the correspondence of topological number Z and the number of edge stats for the finite size chain C finite , we can investigate the analytic expression of edge states under the open boundary condition. We begin from the zero-mode eigenstates in the semi-infinite limit from the right or left boundary. In order to avoid confusion with the operators c j , c † j in H NH , we rewrite it's Hermitian counterpart H cp in Eq.( which is written as this is just the 1D Hermitian Kitaev model. Therefore, we can investigate the non-Hermitian properties of H NH based on its Hermitian counterpart H cp , with the definition of Majorana operators we rewrite the Hamiltonian H cp by Majorana operators, The lattice schematic diagram of H M cp is shown in Fig. Next, we try to acquire the analytic expression for the edge states. Firstly, we consider a very long wire, which means the Majorana edges modes have zero energy; We calculate their wave functions by using the Heisenberg equations of motion where ām , bm are the two Majorana operators at site n which were denoted by ān,A , ān,B and bn,A , bn,B above. We obtain the difference equations for these operators as for 2 ≤ m ≤ 2L -1, These difference equations can be solved exactly by using Z-transform methods. We introducing a power series where z is a complex variable. The function A(z) = Z[ā m ] is called the Z-transform of ām . Taking the Ztransform of the above difference equation and using properties such ā0 is a constant determined by boundary conditions, one can obtain a closed form expression for the Z-transform A(z), given by: This Z-transform has a unique inverse, which is the exact solution to the difference equation. Thus the obtained wave function is where The entire model is equivalent to two coupled SSH like chains containing both the hopping parameters i(∆ 0 -t) and i(∆ 0 + t), as shown in Fig. where we set ā0 When the region we considerate is μ 2 < 4(t 2 -∆ 2 0 ) predict an oscillatory exponential decay of the coefficients: e -n/2ζ for |ψ ā, where the decay length ζ is defined by So with the inverse similarity transformation based on Eq. ( where L = 2N is the length of the Majorana ladder, Ω m∈odd = e (β1-β2)/2 , Ω m∈even = e -(β1+β2)/2 . Similarly, we can get the left-vector Φ| of the zero mode edge states defined by Φ| H = Φ| E , or H † |Φ = E * |Φ . We can use the exchange te -β1 ↔ te β1 , ∆ 0 e β2 ↔ ∆ 0 e -β2 , Ω ↔ Ω -1 , for convenience, the left-vector for the right/left localized edges states can be expressed as where Next, taking ( ψ R NH , ψ R NH ) and ( Φ L NH , Φ R NH ) as the basis states, we construct the effective Hamiltonian of edge states for the finite-size Kitaev chain as where the elements of H edge are defined as h I,J = Φ I NH |H NH |ψ J NH and I, J = L, R. We have where σ y denotes the Pauli matrices acting on the subspace of two edge states and ξ is the coupling coefficient of them The energy of MZMs are E ± edge = ± |ξ| and in the thermodynamic limit (L → +∞) we have E ± edge → 0. Because the eigenstates of σ y is (1, i) and (1, -i), the eigenstates of H edge (i.e. the eigen wavefunction of edge states) are So far, we get the analytic solution of the non-Hermitian Majorana zero modes. Then, to describe the localization and the orthogonality of the two edge states, i.e., to investigate the bulk-boundary correspondence of the NH system, we define the similarity of the two edge states as γ M ≡ ψ -|ψ + = e -β1e β1 e β2e -β2 κ, n is a nonzero value independent of β 1 and β 2 . When β 1,2 = 0 we have γ M = 0, which means the two edge states |ψ ± are not orthogonal and no longer located at two ends of the chain respectively. The distributions of similarity γ M (β 1 , β 2 ) and corresponding eigen wavefunction are calculated numerically and are shown in Fig. Therefore, the number-anomalous BBC can be defined as In the Hermitian case (β 1 = β 2 = 0), we have γ M = 0, the number of MZMs is C finite = 2 and the typical BBC is acquired. While, in the NH cases (β 1,2 = 0), we have 0 < γ M ≤ 1, the MZMs becomes defective and we have 1 ≤ C finite ≤ 2. A special case is C finite = 1, which indicates the existence of a singular MZM. This phenomenon didn't occur in previous studies, neither in Hermitian nor in NH SC systems. There are two reasons for this observation: the breakdown of sublattice symmetry induced by β 1 and the breakdown of the particle-hole symmetry induced by β 2 . As shown in the Fig. Benefit from the mapping between Kitaev chain and spin chain, one can simulate the MZMs in the Ising language via a Jordan-Wigner transformation In the Hermitian case, it has been noted that the Kitaev model can be mapped to the Ising model via the Jordan-Wigner transformation, and the two MZMs can also be mapped to the two degenerate ground states of the Ising model. Similarly, we can transform the NH Kitaev model to NH Ising model in this way. The Hamiltonian H NH can be written in spin-representation as And H spin NH can also be transformed to a Hermitian Hamiltonian by the similarity transformation where the similarity transformation operator can be expressed as U = j ⊗ U j,A ⊗ U j,B , where The non-Hermitian effects on the two ground states in different limit cases (first collum). The spin configurations, magnetic factor χM, similarity rate γspin and magnetic phase are shown in collum 2-6, respectively. Therefore, the Hermitian counterpart of H NH in spinrepresentation can be expressed as where J x/y = t±∆ 0 and this is just the quantum XY spin chain and its extensions have been studied from many different perspectives. To characterize the properties of ground states, we calculate the magnetic factor when the system is in its ground state. Firstly, for simplicity and typicality, we consider the limit case μ = 0, t = ∆ 0 where H spin cp is exactly the Ising model without transverse field, the ground states of H spin cp are described as So the ground states of initial NH spin chain can be obtained completely under the inverse similarity transformation: In fact, U i act as a transverse field inner each site i. When we adjust β 1 and β 2 , the two ground states may construct different spin structure in the spin chain. Then, we define the similarity of the two ground states as After a tedious calculation, we can obtain (49) Therefore, γ spin will change with β 1 and β 2 . It is obvious that |G 1 NH and |G 2 NH are not always orthogonal. We study this phenomena in some limiting case: (1) when β 1 = 0, we have γ spin (0, β 2 ) = [tanh( Indeed, for spin systems with finite size, two ground states will coalesce when β 1 → 0(or β 2 → 0). While, two ground states can't coalesce in the thermodynamic limit L → ∞, due to tanh(β 1/2 ) < 1. Now, we take 4-spin systems as an example and show the coalescence phase diagram in Fig. The key point is the correspondence of single-particle and the many-body systems. We know that the relation of MZMs and the ground states of spin system is where |F is the many-body vacuum state in spinrepresentation, and it is also the many-body quantum state with occupied single particle states for E < 0 and empty single particle states for E ≥ 0. Therefore, the single-body wave function ψ shown in Eq.33 can't describe the many-body ground states absolutely, we must take |F into account. Indeed, the NH terms perturb the vacuum background also, even they do not change the energy of the states. To give a quantitative description for the spin configurations of the two ground states in the spin system, we define a magnetic factor as where a weighted sum of the spin of the n-th lattice is introduced. The introduce of the lattice number "n" can distinguish each site, so the magnetic factor χ M (β 1 , β 2 ) contains all spin information in each site. Then, we take the lattice size L = 4 as an example, and give the magnetic susceptibility and spin configurations of the many-body ground states |G It should be emphasized that the gap remains opened during the phase crossover. The non-Hermitian Hamiltonian H spin NH can be transformed to a Hermitian Hamiltonian by the similarity transformation as shown in Eq. We investigate the non-Hermitian effects on the Kitaev chain, whose hopping and superconductor paring strength are both imbalanced. The biorthogonal Z 2 topological invariant and Majorana edge states are given analytically, these two imbalanced NH terms can induce defective Majorana edge states, which means one of the two localized edge states will disappear due to the NH suppression effect. As a result, the typical bulkboundary correspondence is broken down. Besides, the defective edge states are mapped to the ground states of the non-Hermitian transverse field Ising model. With the definition of state-similarity and magnetic factor for the two ground states, the spin structure and the global phase diagrams are given, the FM-AFM crossover without gap closing is revealed. The novel non-Hermitian effects may provide a way to investigate MZMs and topological physics.