Electron-stimulated desorption (ESD) of cryosorbed molecules on surfaces is a process of relevance to fields as varied as vacuum dynamics in accelerators and astrochemistry. While desorption from such molecular systems induced by keV electrons and fast ions has been extensively studied, the sub-keV electron regime is comparatively little known. We measured and quantified electron-stimulated desorption from molecular ice systems (layers of N 2 , CO, CO 2 , Ar and H 2 O/D 2 O condensed at cryogenic temperatures) in the 150-2000 eV electron energy range. In this regime stopping power is no longer sufficient to explain the electron energy dependence of ESD yields. We introduce the notion of desorption-relevant depth, which characterizes the transition between two energy deposition regimes near the surface. We then apply this notion to the different systems, showing how ESD in the sub-keV regime can for example reveal the differences in species diffusion in crystalline and porous amorphous CO 2 ices. Electron-stimulated desorption (ESD) is one of the oldest phenomena observed in vacuum science and has long been studied in the view of mitigating its impact in the deterioration of vacuum Studies of DIET phenomena still have important applications today in vacuum dynamics, in accelerators where synchrotron radiation creates energetic photons and electrons hitting the chamber walls DIET phenomena also find applications in seemingly unrelated fields like astrochemistry. In cold and dense regions of the interstellar medium, where stars and planets are born, molecules condense from the gas phase or directly form on submicrometer-sized dust grains. These molecules and grains are exposed to irradiation from cosmic rays and stellar UV and X-rays, as well as from secondary photons and electrons of these primary sources. Non-thermal desorption induced by these various sources of energy regulate the exchanges between a) Electronic mail: dupuy@fhi-berlin.mpg.de the gas phase and the solid phase at the surface of grains (see e.g. refs. 11-15 and references therein). Experimental measurements providing absolute yields, but also a better fundamental understanding of non-thermal desorption processes, are necessary to the contexts where DIET phenomena are of relevance. The present study focuses on electron-stimulated desorption from molecular ices, i.e. on the high coverage regime where multiple layers of molecules are cryosorbed. We provide quantified data in the 150-2000 eV range, but we also aim to obtain more insights into some fundamental aspects of ESD, most notably to explain the electron energy dependence of desorption yields. The systems studied include molecules commonly found both in the residual gas of vacuum systems and at the surface of grains in the interstellar medium or other icy astrophysical objects (CO, CO 2 , H 2 O), as well as simpler molecular/atomic ices (N 2 , Ar) where the absence of irradiation-induced chemistry allows to study these more fundamental aspects of ESD. Measurements of desorption by fast charged particles are usually rationalized by assuming that the desorption yield is proportional to some power of the stopping power for the particle-target couple considered. The stopping power is a measure of the energy loss per unit distance of a fast charged particle going through a given target material. It depends on the mass, velocity and charge of the particle as well as on the properties of the material. Many experimental studies have been performed to determine the relation between desorption yields and stopping power for molecular ices (see e.g. refs. 16-20 and references therein). Most of these have been conducted with ions as projectiles, and sometimes with keV electrons. The electron energy dependence in the sub-keV regime has been comparatively little explored. Two studies to our knowledge report desorption yield curves as a function of electron energies in this range The Multisystem is a newly installed instrument at CERN. The main chamber of the system is an ultrahigh vacuum mu-metal chamber pumped by a turbomolecular pump and a NEG (Non-Evaporable Getter) cartridge. The base pressure achieved is 1 × 10 -10 mbar at room temperature and 2 × 10 -11 mbar at 13 K. A drawing of the chamber is shown in fig. The chamber is equipped with an electron gun (Kimball), with a theoretical electron energy range of 5 -2000 eV. The measurements were carried out in the 150 -2000 eV range. The beam was incident normal to the surface. A phosphorus screen in the lower part of the sample holder and two Faraday cups on the back were used to characterize the electron beam. For each energy, the beam was set in order to obtain a clean spot of about 0.1 cm 2 . The beam was checked to be gaussian with the Faraday cups. The exception was that for energies 1500 eV and more, the beam could no longer be focused tightly enough to obtain the same conditions. This resulted in larger and less well defined spots, which means measurements at these energies carry more uncertainty. The composition of the residual gas of the chamber was monitored using a quadrupole mass spectrometer (QMS, HiQuad), which is also used for the desorption measurements. In order to deposit condensed gas on the surface, an injection system is used. Gas from an injection manifold is brought into a closed, known volume where the pressure is measured by a capacitance gauge. A microleak valve is then used to let gas into the chamber through a dosing tube, which can be brought very close (∼0.2 mm) to the surface so that most of the injected gas sticks and the rest of the chamber is not contaminated. From the QMS signal observed during ice deposition and using the calibration derived below, we estimated the flux leaking out of the substrate region during deposition to be about 1% of the injected gas flux. The base pressure rises barely above 10 -10 mbar when injecting several hundred monolayers of ice. The investigated gases are N 2 , CO, Ar, CO 2 , and H 2 O, as well as some isotopes of these: 15 N 2 , 13 CO 2 and D 2 O. For H 2 O and D 2 O, the liquids in pyrex vials were degassed by several freezepump-thaw cycles and the vapour pressure above the liquid was let into the manifold for injection. The amount of gas deposited is controlled by monitoring the drop in pressure from the closed calibrated volume. The thickness of ice corresponding to this deposited amount can be calibrated using the temperature-programmed desorption (TPD) method within ∼ 10-20 % precision One particularity of the set-up is the use of a "molecule collector", designed in the spirit of the socalled "Feulner cap" due to ESD when irradiating the sample is increased. Based on measurements made inside and outside the collector for N 2 ESD, it is estimated that the collector brings an improvement of a factor of ∼ 8 to the signalto-noise ratio of the QMS signal. We wish to obtain the ESD yield, i.e. the number of ejected molecules or atoms per incident electron, as a function of electron energy for a number of systems. For this, a molecular ice is grown by the procedure explained previously. The cryomanipulator is then inserted in the molecule collector so that the cold substrate is in front of the electron gun. The surface is set at a bias voltage of +45 V to prevent secondary electrons from escaping the surface. The current read on the substrate when irradiating is therefore the incident electron current. The bias voltage had no influence on the ESD yields other than that due to the change of incident electron kinetic energy, which is taken into account. The ice is irradiated at a given electron energy for about 20-30 seconds, usually with a beam current of around 100 nA (flux of electron ∼ 6 × 10 11 e -.s -1 ), and the desorption signal of the relevant species is recorded on the QMS as an increase of partial pressure. Simultaneously, the substrate (incident beam) current is recorded with a Keithley picoammeter. The procedure is repeated on the same ice spot (since the molecular collector does not allow to move the sample) for a series of electron energies. We checked that the order in which points were measured did not influence the desorption yields measured. Once the data is recorded, the average value of the QMS current i QM S during irradiation for each energy is divided by the beam current Φ e -, then converted to an absolute ESD yield Y: The calibration of QMS current to ESD yield to derive the calibration factor k X for species X is made using the temperature-programmed desorption (TPD) technique. This calibration technique is described e.g. in ref. 15. It consists in assuming that the calibration factor k X between QMS current and desorption flux is also valid in a thermal desorption experiment such as TPD. Since the ice thickness deposition is calibrated (using TPD) we can deposit a known absolute number of molecules on the substrate and evaporate it in a TPD experiment. Then we have: where N 1M L X is the total number of molecules for 1 monolayer (ML = ∼ 10 15 mol.cm -2 × 2 cm 2 for all the gases considered here) and i T P D is the signal read on the QMS during the TPD experiment where exactly 1 ML is sublimated. For example, for N 2 we derived a value of k N2 = 1.05 × 10 -23 A.s. For species for which a TPD experiment is not possible (e.g. H 2 ), the calibration factor can be extrapolated from the one of another molecule by taking into account the relative sensitivity of the QMS to the two different species. This relative sensitivity is measured by injecting known pressures (using a calibrated gauge) of the respective gases in the chamber and measuring the corresponding QMS signals. The root-mean-squared noise of the QMS measurement is taken as a measurement uncertainty for the error bars in the subsequent figures. We thus consider that there is no uncertainty on the beam current measurement. This assumption can be wrong, in particular if there is reflection of electrons on the gold substrate and subsequent escape from the ice, which would lead to an underestimation of the true incident current. This point is also discussed later in the text. As for the absolute yield calibration, we estimate a ∼ 50 % uncertainty. Electron-stimulated desorption was studied and quantified between 150 and 2000 eV for five molecular ice systems: N 2 , CO, Ar, CO 2 and H 2 O (or D 2 O). The results for each of these systems will first be presented separately. Further interpretation of these results, in particular of the electron energy dependence, in the frame of the notion of desorption-relevant depth, will be made in the Discussion part. 1 5 N 2 ( l o w t h i c k n e s s ) Experiments were performed on both regular N 2 and isotopically labeled 15 N 2 . No differences were observed, and only the results for 15 N 2 will be presented here, except for one curve measured on 14 N 2 to substantiate the absence of difference between the isotopes. The only desorbing species observed was N 2 itself, although it is possible that very small amounts of N, N 3 or N 4 desorb as well On the upper panel of fig. Results for thinner ices are shown on the bottom panel of fig. On the figure is also shown a measurement of the secondary electron yield (SEY) of N 2 , taken from Kuzucan et al. The absolute ESD yield for N 2 reaches about 3.3 molecules/electron at the maximum. The yield at 1 keV is 1.6 molecules/electron, which compares very well with the value of 1.8 molecules/electron found in ref. The ESD yield for CO ices of different thicknesses and deposition temperatures are shown in fig. The ESD yield of solid argon as a function of electron energy and ice thickness is displayed in fig. Quantitatively, the yield of 4.5 Ar atoms/electron at 1 keV is in good agreement with previously reported results by Tratnik et al. Ellegaard et al. Solid carbon dioxide has a complex range of possible structures. CO 2 films can be crystalline or amorphous to various degrees depending on the conditions of preparation of the ice. The ice is amorphous when deposited at a temperature of 14 K (the base temperature of our set-up) and becomes gradually more and more crystalline for deposition temperatures up to 75 K or when it is annealed to such temperatures (above this temperature, under our experimental conditions, the ice starts to significantly sublimate) Experiments were done on both regular CO 2 and isotopically labeled The results for desorption of CO 2 are displayed in fig. The most abundant desorbing species is not the parent molecule CO 2 but a product of dissociation, CO. Also observed desorbing is O 2 , although the yield is lower. This is consistent with other studies of desorption from CO 2 , whether the ones with ions for VUV photons The ESD yield curve of H 2 O from water ice is shown in fig. We have also made experiments on D 2 O ice, and the results displayed in fig. On fig. Quantitative studies of water ESD In the electronic stopping regime -which concerns electrons and fast ions -particles interact with the electrons of a material and deposit energy mainly in the form of electronic excitations. This interaction is characterized by the stopping power, which is the amount of energy deposited by the particle in the material per unit distance traveled. Desorption induced by particles in the electronic regime is therefore assumed to be related to the stopping power of the particle-target pair. The underlying assumption here is that the desorption yield depends in some way on the amount of energy deposited at or "near" the surface, since desorption is a surface effect, and this amount of energy is by definition proportional to the stopping power. Indeed, the observed desorption yields as a function of particle energy -and therefore of stopping power -usually verify a power law, the dependence often being linear or quadratic Water ice has been explored on the broadest range of stopping power, and consistently exhibits a desorption yield proportional to the square of the stopping power These stopping power dependences, which have most often been measured for ion sputtering, remain true in the keV electron regime (which corresponds to a low stopping power regime relative to most of the studies made with ions). In the sub-keV regime, on the other hand, we start encountering discrepancies between stopping power and ESD yields. Existing measurements of stopping power at low electron energies Deviations at low energy originate from the fact that were computed using the parameters given in ref. 60 for N 2 ice and are plotted in fig. For incident fast charged particles that have a penetration depth (Λ e ) in the ice much greater than the desorption-relevant depth, the desorption yield is related (linearly or by a higher order relation depending on the dominant type of desorption mechanism) to the stopping power, as particles all deposit uniformly within the whole desorption-relevant depth region an amount of energy proportional to that stopping power. However, when the penetration depth becomes comparable to the desorption-relevant depth, this will no longer be the case. The other extreme would be the case of incident electrons depositing all of their energy very close to the surface. We would then expect the desorption yield to be proportional to the energy of the electron, rather than its energy loss per unit distance. These two different regimes are schematized in fig. The amount of deposited energy within the desorption-relevant depth region will reach a maximum for the intermediate of these two regimes. In fig. Argon ice provides useful demonstrations of the application of the notion of desorption-relevant depth. First, the above-mentioned low-energy linear regime is visible in the case of argon ice, where the transition between the two different regimes of energy deposition occurs at much higher electron energy than for the other ices. The ESD yield of a 500 ML Ar ice grown and irradiated at 14 K is presented on fig. A consequence of the existence of these two regimes is that the ESD yield curve in the transition regime is characteristic of the desorption-relevant depth of the considered system. Around the maximum of the curve, where the ESD yield starts to deviate from the stopping power, we have λ des ∼ Λ e and it is therefore possible to estimate the value of λ des , knowing the electron penetration depths. Hence for N 2 ice with a maximum around 250 eV we have λ des ∼ 10 ML (30 Å). In fig. This large intrinsic desorption-relevant depth is linked with the mechanisms of excitation transport in the ice, as mentioned previously. Desorption mechanisms and excitation transport in the case of rare-gas solids like argon have been extensively studied and are therefore well known. Rare gas solids host excitons that can migrate over large distances in the ice, with typical estimates in the 70 -500 ML range depending on the studies The variation of the observed exciton migration dis- tances in argon ice stems from its sensitivity to the presence of impurities and defects in the ice. To illustrate the influence of this on the desorption-relevant depth, and consequently on the ESD yields, we performed experiments where impurities of CO or N 2 were deliberately added to argon ice. The results are presented in fig. Let us now turn to the case of CO 2 ice. We recall that an interesting effect is observed in the desorption of CO and O 2 , with a variation of their desorption maxima depending on the ice structure (fig. Considering the interpretation of the ESD yield curves developed above, where the maximum characterizes the desorption-relevant depth, this means that for the porous amorphous ice, deeper layers are involved in the desorption of O 2 than for CO, and for CO than for CO 2 -but this is not the case for the crystalline ice. This is well explained by considering the desorption mechanisms of these different species, especially the weight of chemistry (in the sense of exothermic (re)formation of these species from CO 2 dissociation products, and desorption due to the excess energy). Desorption of CO 2 can involve chemistry but also more direct processes. Desorption of CO is similar: it can desorb directly by dissociation of CO 2 but also form and desorb from chemical processes. As for O 2 , the direct dissociation of CO 2 is not likely to yield it and therefore chemistry has to be involved in its formation and subsequent desorption. When the ice is porous and amorphous, radicals formed by dissociation of bulk CO 2 can reach the surface, react and enhance chemistry, which will affect the most, in order, O 2 , then CO, then CO 2 , considering the weight that chemistry should play in the formation and desorption of these three species. Note that diffusion is not necessarily thermal -the thermal diffusion of radicals in CO 2 ice is unknown but may be low at 14 K -but also non-thermal, due to the kinetic energy imparted to fragments upon dissociation. It is also possible that O 2 and CO formed in the bulk directly migrate to the surface, where they are subsequently desorbed by another excitation. These migration phenomena do not occur for crystalline CO 2 where bulk species cannot reach the surface (at least not at 14 K). The desorption of e.g. O 2 from CO 2 ice is therefore an example of a case where the desorption-relevant depth is dominated not by energy transport (in the form of secondary electron or electronic excitation migration, for example) but particle transport: migration of species from the bulk to the surface. It also provides a good illustration of the use that ESD yield curves can have as a probe, revealing the efficiency of migration to the surface for porous amorphous versus crystalline ice. We finish by discussing the approximate desorptionrelevant depth and the dominant type of transport setting this depth for the different molecular ices studied here. The desorption-relevant depth are estimated from the maximum of the ESD yield curves and the corresponding electron penetration depth. These only constitute rough estimations. The desorption-relevant depths are expressed here in MLs, and the approximate conversion from ML to Å is 1 ML ∼ 3 Å (the actual number depends on the ice density). We addressed above the question of the desorptionrelevant depth of argon ice, which is specific and different from the molecular ices as it hosts excitons. The desorption-relevant depth is λ des ∼ 100 ML and is affected by the presence of impurities, as demonstrated in the experiments presented in fig. For CO ice, there is a difference between SEY and ESD curves (fig. For H 2 O ice, experimental difficulties (high error bars, transitory behaviour of product desorption) obscure the conclusions that can be drawn. The ESD yield curves seem to have similar shapes within the experimental errors. We may have expected observations similar to CO 2 ice with maxima shifts due to diffusion in the porous structure. Instead the desorption of these species may be dominated by surface reactions, as emphasized in PSD studies We quantified the electron-stimulated desorption of neutral species for various molecular ice systems (N 2 , CO, CO 2 , H 2 O/D 2 O) and solid Ar, in the 150 -2000 eV electron energy range. Our results are in good agreement with the pre-existing quantified measurements of ESD on some of these systems, and expand to the desorption of species other than the parent molecule and the exploration of ice temperature and structure effects. These results are summarized in table I, which lists for the studied systems the desorbing species, the electron energy where the desorption yield is maximum, the corresponding maximum yield, as well as the abovediscussed values of the desorption-relevant depths and corresponding dominant sources of transport in the ice. This new data as well as the physical considerations developed in this article and summarized below should help a better modelling of ESD-related phenomena in the above-mentioned fields of e.g. vacuum dynamics in accelerators or astrochemistry. We showed that interpretation of the electron energy dependence of ESD in the sub-keV regime requires going beyond simple stopping power considerations. We introduce the notion of desorption-relevant depth, a quantity characterizing how transport of energy or particle from the bulk to the surface make layers below the surface contribute to desorption. This is illustrated in the specific case of Argon, where excitons allow for a particularly long transport range observed in the ice thickness dependence of the yield curve. For molecular ices, it also allows to evidence a difference of species migration to the surface in porous amorphous vs. crystalline phases, illustrated in the CO 2 ice case. In addition to bringing further fundamental understanding of the electron energy dependence of ESD, this study therefore also highlights the possible use of ESD as a probe of various phenomena (e.g. migration of electronic excitations or radicals and molecules) in systems like molecular ices. a