Simple, yet versatile, methods to functionalize graphene flakes with metal (oxide) nanoparticles are in demand, particularly for the development of advanced catalysts. Herein, based on light-induced electrochemistry, we report a laser-assisted, continuous, solution route for the simultaneous reduction and modification of graphene oxide with catalytic nanoparticles. Electrochemical graphene oxide (EGO) was used as starting material and electron-hole pair source due to its low degree of oxidation, which imparts structural integrity and an ability to withstand photo-degradation. Simply illuminating a solution stream containing EGO and metal salt (e.g. H2PtCl6 or RuCl3) with a 248 nm wavelength laser produced reduced EGO (rEGO, oxygen content 4.0 at.%) flakes, decorated with Pt (~2.0 nm) or RuO2 (~2.8 nm) nanoparticles. The RuO2-rEGO flakes exhibited superior catalytic activity for the oxygen evolution reaction, requiring a small overpotential of 225 mV to reach a current density of 10 mA cm -2 . The Pt-rEGO flakes (10.2 wt.% of Pt) shows enhanced mass activity for the hydrogen evolution reaction, and similar performance for oxygen reduction reaction compared to a commercial 20 wt.% Pt/C catalyst. This simple production method was also used to deposit PtPd alloy and MnOx nanoparticles on rEGO, demonstrating its versatility in synthesizing functional nanoparticle-modified graphene materials. The urgent need for sustainable and clean energy to reduce the usage of traditional fossil fuels has promoted enormous interest in the field of energy storage and conversion. Due to its high electrical conductivity and large specific surface area, the two-dimensional (2D) single atom thick graphene has been considered as a promising supporting material for developing advanced electrocatalysts. The use of laser technology to prepare nanomaterials has recently attracted increasing attention due to its simple and fast merits. Photodeposition of metal (oxide) nanoparticles on the surfaces of semiconductors (metal oxides or sulfides) has been thoroughly studied in the past few decades as indicated in a review paper published recently. Herein, in this work, we report a UV (248 nm) laser-induced continuous solution phase strategy for simultaneous reduction and modification of EGO with uniformly distributed ultrafine catalyst nanoparticles. In a typical experiment (Figure The optical bandgap of EGO and their fragments dispersed in water has been estimated by applying the Tauc plot Raman spectroscopy was used to characterize the quality of the graphene lattice and defect density of rEGO. The excitation laser (He-Ne; 633 nm) output power for recording the Raman spectra was limited to < 0.5 mW to avoid any laser-induced structure alteration. Figure The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) survey spectra collected with pristine EGO and rEGO after irradiation at a laser energy density of 568 mJ cm -2 reveal a significant decrease in oxygen content, from 24.0 at.% (EGO) to 4.0 at.% (rEGO) (Figure Due to the hydrophobic nature of graphene, the rEGO dispersion agglomerated and settled at the bottom of the water within 2 hours (Figure Metal salts of chloroplatinic acid (H2PtCl6) and ruthenium chloride (RuCl3) were selected as precursors for metal (Pt) and metal oxide (RuO2) nanoparticles, respectively. Figure Both the Raman spectrum and XRD pattern (Figure Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning transmission electron microscopy with high angle annular dark field (STEM-HAADF) were used to characterize the particle size and crystal structure of the RuO2-rEGO and Pt-rEGO composites. The TEM and STEM-HAADF images for both the RuO2-rEGO-250HT (heat-treated in air at 250 °C; Figure XPS was performed to investigate the oxidation state of the elements in the as-formed nanoparticles, and their coupling with the rEGO support. As shown in Figure In addition, although the C 1s signal is overlapped with that of Ru 3d3/2, three components can be deconvoluted as shown in Figure The laser-induced solution approach leads to deeply reduced rEGO modified with ultrafine catalyst nanoparticles in a single step, as demonstrated above using RuO2 and Pt as model materials. To further prove the versatility of this laser-assisted approach in deposition of various types of functional nanoparticles on the surface of rEGO sheets, PtPd alloy and MnOx nanoparticles have also been successfully deposited using H2PtCl6/Na2PdCl4 and MnCl2 as precursor metal salts, respectively. The corresponding TEM characterizations for PtPd/rEGO and MnOx/rEGO are available in Figure where hvb + and ecb -are photo-generated holes and electrons, respectively. The subsequent reduction of EGO by photo-generated electrons occurs following: For reductive photodeposition of metal (M) nanoparticles, the reduction of metal ions happens as: While for the oxidative photodeposition of metal oxide nanoparticles, the reaction could occur through: The excess photo-generated holes and electrons are consumed by the sacrificial electron donor (D) and acceptor (A), respectively, as follow: In an actual photodeposition process, the consumption of excess electrons leads to the reduction of protons to form H2 gas, while the consumption of excess holes could oxidize water to from O2. To demonstrate the applications of the as-prepared RuO2-rEGO and Pt-rEGO composites, their performances as electrocatalysts have been measured and evaluated. To obtain the intrinsic catalytic activities of the samples for OER, HER and ORR, the ohmic-drop correction was carried out to minimize the effects of solution resistance (Figure The comparison of linear sweep voltammograms (LSVs) (Figure The electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) of the catalysts has been estimated by measuring the double-layer capacitance as reported in the literature. In addition, the specific surface areas derived from nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherms (Figure RuO2 is known to be a very promising electrode material for supercapacitors due to its large specific capacitance (experimental values up to 720 F g -1 ) and good rate capability. Initially, the effect of annealing temperature on the electrochemical capacitance of the RuO2-rEGO composite was investigated (Figure For the Pt nanoparticle modified rEGO (Pt loading 10.2 ± 1.0 wt.%), the catalytic performances with respect to ORR and HER have been measured and compared with CM Pt/C (20 wt.%, HISPEC 3000, Johnson Matthey). indicating fast kinetics of ORR with Pt-rEGO catalyst. However, the diffusion-limited current density of ORR for Pt-rEGO (4.89 mA cm -2 ) is slightly smaller than that of CM Pt/C (5.36 mA cm -2 ). This is caused by retarded diffusion of dissolved O2 through the stacked graphene sheets. The Pt-rEGO exhibits superior catalytic activity for HER when compared with the CM Pt/C. The HER activity of Pt-rEGO was measured in N2 saturated 0.5 м H2SO4 electrolyte. Figure The RuO2 and Pt modified rEGO show superior catalytic activity for the water splitting processes (OER and HER) compared with the commercial catalysts and literature values, together with comparable ORR activity (see Table In summary, a simple, yet versatile, UV laser assisted method based on photo-induced redox processes has been demonstrated in this work for continuous solution reduction and modification of EGO with functional nanoparticles. The use of EGO with a lower degree of oxidation, and thus narrower bandgap, and better structural integrity compared with conventional CGO leads to deeply reduced rEGO with a low oxygen content of 4.0 at.%. Various types of ultrafine metal (oxide) nanoparticles (Pt, PtPd, RuO2, MnOx) have been uniformly deposited on the rEGO support simply by using different metal salts precursor solutions. The RuO2-rEGO composite with an average RuO2 particle size of 2.8 nm shows an extraordinary activity for OER. The overpotential required to reach the current density of 10 mA cm -2 is as small as 225 mV for the RuO2-rEGO-250HT catalyst, outperforming the majority of Ru based catalysts reported in the literature. The Pt-rEGO catalyst with a Pt loading of 10.2 wt.% exhibits enhanced performance for HER compared with the CM Pt/C catalyst with a Pt loading of 20 wt.%, leading to more than tripled mass activity. This versatile, simple and scalable method can be easily adapted for the synthesis of various types graphene based functional nanocomposites, for diverse applications beyond electrochemical energy storage and conversions, such as photocatalytic materials, biomedicine and biotechnology. 