Open-porous scaffolds of WE43 Mg alloy with a body-center cubic cell pattern were manufactured by laser powder bed fusion with different strut diameters. The geometry of the unit cells was adequately reproduced during additive manufacturing and the porosity within the struts was minimized. The microstructure of the scaffolds was modified by means of thermal solution and ageing heat treatments and was analysed in detail by means of X-ray microtomography, optical, scanning and transmission electron microscopy. Moreover, the corrosion rates and the mechanical properties of the scaffolds were measured as a function of the strut diameter and metallurgical condition. The microstructure of the as-printed scaffolds contained a mixture of Y-rich oxide particles and Rare Earth-rich intermetallic precipitates. The latter could be modified by heat treatments. The lowest corrosion rates of 2-3 mm/year were found in the as-printed and solution treated scaffolds and they could be reduced to ~0.1 mm/year by surface treatments using plasma electrolytic oxidation. The mechanical properties of the scaffolds improved with the strut diameter: the yield strength increased from 8 to 40 MPa and the elastic modulus improved from 0.2 to 0.8 GPa when the strut diameter increased from 275 μm to 800 μm. Nevertheless, the strength of the scaffolds without plasma electrolytic oxidation treatment decreased rapidly when immersed in simulated body fluid. In vitro biocompatibility tests showed surface treatments by plasma electrolytic oxidation were necessary to ensure cell proliferation in scaffolds with high surface-to-volume ratio. Critical-sized bone defects are defined as those that will not heal spontaneously within a patient's lifetime Among the biodegradable metals, Mg presents the best potential for bone implants because of its biocompatibility and osteopromotive properties which can stimulate new bone formation One further development in the application of Mg alloys for bone healing is the fabrication of porous scaffolds that can be loaded with the appropriate osteogenic cells and growth factors in order to accelerate the growth of the new tissue. Manufacturing of porous Mg scaffolds by means of powder metallurgy or laser machining was demonstrated in the past The PEO surface modification was also beneficial for increasing cell affinity and growth, which in turn resulted in better bone-scaffold integration Fast biodegradation is known to be on the main challenges with Mg implants because of the rapid release of hydrogen and the premature failure of the implants. This limitation may be even more critical for porous scaffolds manufactured by LPBF due to the enlarged surface area, complex geometry and metastable microstructure generated during rapid solidification. In fact, the microstructural features of WE43 Mg alloys manufactured by casting and LPBF show very different texture and precipitate distribution that can dramatically influence the mechanical properties and corrosion resistance Therefore, the objective of this investigation was to provide a deeper understanding of the effect of the scaffold geometry, microstructure and surface treatments on the mechanical properties, corrosion resistance and cytocompatibility of WE43 MG alloys scaffolds manufactured by LPBF. To this end, cubic scaffolds with three different strut and pore sizes were manufactured and the microstructure was modified by means of thermal treatments Mg alloy WE43 MEO (Meotec GmbH, Aachen, Germany) with a nominal composition of 1.4 -4.2 % Y, 2.5 -3.5 % Nd, <1 % (Al, Fe, Cu, Ni, Mn, Zn, Zr) and balance Mg (in wt%) was casted and powdered for powder metallurgical processing. The powder particle distribution was D10 = 29.1 μm, D50 = 45.8 μm and D90 = 64.4 μm Cubic open-porous scaffolds of 10×10×10 mm 3 based on a unit cell with a body-centered cubic structure (cylindrical struts join cube corners with adjacent corners as well as with adjacent cube centers) were designed with three different nominal strut diameters of 250 μm, 500 μm and 750 μm. They will be denominated hereafter small strut (SS), medium strut (MS) and large strut (LS) scaffolds, respectively (Table The approximate thickness of each printed layer was 30 μm. In addition, a bulk cylindrical sample of 8 mm in diameter and 30 mm in length was manufactured using the same processing parameters in order to prepare electro-polished samples for transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The as-printed scaffolds were etched in 50% concentrated phosphoric acid solution for 5 min to remove the excess material at the surface due to sintering process. The specimen surface of several scaffolds was modified by PEO using a phosphate-based electrolyte (Kermasorb ® ) to achieve a continuous surface coating with an average thickness of 9 ± 6 μm. More details about the LPBF process and the PEO surface modification can be found in Two different heat treatments were selected to investigate their influence on the microstructure, mechanical properties and corrosion resistance in comparison with the as-printed scaffolds. The first one, denominated T4, involved a solution treatment at 525°C for 8 h, followed by water quenching to create a supersaturated solid solution of the alloying elements into the Mg matrix. The second treatment, denominated T6, included an ageing step at 250°C for 16 h after the T4 treatment to additionally create a homogeneous dispersion of nm-sized precipitates. This treatment has been reported as to provide peak hardness for cast WE43 alloys Metallographic samples were prepared from the scaffolds by manually grinding with SiC abrasive paper 4000 grit, followed by mechanical polishing with diamond paste of 3 μm and afterwards of 0.25 μm using an alcohol-based lubricant to avoid oxidation. Two different etchants were applied on the polished surfaces: 5% nital was used to reveal laser scan tracks under the optical microscope (Olympus BX51) while a mixture of 75 ml ethylene glycol, 24 ml distilled water and 1% nitric acid was used to observe intermetallic phases under the scanning electron microscope (SEM). Electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) analysis was conducted at 30 kV and 0.69 nA probe current with a step size of 0.3 μm. The grain size and inverse pole figures were obtained by post processing the EBSD map with the software Oxford ® HKL Channel-5. TEM samples were prepared from two different routes. Thin plates of 200 μm thickness were cut parallel and perpendicular to the building direction from the cylindrical bulk specimen with a slow speed cutting blade. Discs of 3 mm in diameter were mechanically punched from these plates and manually polished down to ~80 μm. The thinned discs were twin jet polished with an etchant of 10.6 g lithium chloride, 22.32 g magnesium perchlorate, 200 ml 2-butoxy-ethanol and 1000 ml methanol at -40 °C and 95 V. For the microstructural analysis of aged scaffolds, TEM samples were prepared by focused ion beam milling in a FEI Helios NanoLab 600i dualbeam electron microscope down to electron transparency (<100 nm). TEM observation was carried out in a FEI Talos equipped with a field emission gun operating at 200kV. Both bright field (BF) images in TEM mode and high-angle annular dark field (HADDF) images in scanning-transmission electron microscopy (STEM) mode were acquired. Chemical composition mapping was performed under STEM mode with a SuperX EDX detector. The acquisition time was set between 30-60 min and data was analysed using Bruker QUANTAX software. Corrosion tests were carried out on scaffolds that were not protected by PEO surface modification to study the immediate influence of the alloy microstructure in different conditions on the degradation rates. The degradation medium was DMEM with high glucose (4500 mg/L glucose, phenol red, NaHCO3) and the degradation rate was determined by measuring the hydrogen release using an experimental set-up described in where K= 8.76 x 10 4 , ΔM is expressed in g, A in cm 2 , t is the immersion time in h, and ρ the density in g/cm 3 . The WE43 scaffolds with different strut diameters were examined by XCT before and after the degradation tests in a Phoenix Nanotom ® with a tungsten target and a filter of 0.2 mm Cu with slit collimator. The sample-focus distance was set to 25 mm and the detector-focus distance to 200 mm. Optimised operating parameters include 60 μA tube current, 120 kV tube voltage, 6.25 μm per pixel resolution and 1900 projections during rotation of the sample. The scan time to obtain the tomogram for each scaffold was about 2.5 hours. The strut diameter and pore size were determined from 3D tomograms using ImageJ ® , the latter using the intersection method (Fig. Compression tests of the cubic scaffolds (before and after degradation) were carried out using a Kammrath Weiss GmbH ® micromechanical testing machine at a crosshead speed of 0.6 mm/min up to a maximum engineering strain of 60%. Videos were recorded upon deformation using an optical microscope. One compression test was also performed in situ within the SEM, and secondary electron micrographs were taken at intervals of 1% strain. The mechanical properties of the porous scaffold were determined from the load and displacement data following the procedures indicated in ISO 13314:2011 for porous structures with porosity > 50%. The nominal stress S was determined from the load divided by the nominal cross-section of the scaffolds while the engineering strain e was calculated as the cross-head displacement of the mechanical testing machine divided by the initial height of the sample. Tests were carried out in PEO-modified scaffolds with different strut diameters in orientations parallel and normal to the building direction to assess the influence of these factors on the deformation and fracture mechanisms. In addition, the influence of the heat treatment and of the immersion in SBF on the mechanical properties was measured along the building direction in scaffolds without PEO surface treatment. L-929 mouse fibroblasts (LGC Standards, Wesel, Germany) were cultured in Minimum Essential Medium (MEM) supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum, penicillin/streptomycin (100U/ml each) at 37°C, 5 % CO2 and 95% humidity. RM-A, a polyurethane film containing 0.1 % Zinc diethyldithio-141 carbamate (ZDEC), was used as the positive control reference material for the indirect and direct assays. Toluene resisting plastic sheets were utilized as negative non-toxic controls for the direct assays. The extracts were obtained by incubating the samples in MEM with SBF at a ratio of 1 ml / 3 cm 2 for 72 h under the previously mentioned cell culture conditions. Cell culture medium without samples was used as the negative control extract. After incubation, the extracts were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 10 min. The supernatants were utilized for the indirect biocompatibility assays described below. L929 cells were seeded with 1 × 10 For the BrdU assay, a standard colorimetric test kit (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) was utilized according to the manufacturer's instructions. In brief, cells were labeled with BrdU under cell culture conditions and subsequently fixed at RT with FixDenat reagent. The cells were then incubated with anti-BrdU-peroxidase (POD) antibody and washed. Immune complexes were then detected via subsequent substrate reaction with added tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) and following colorimetric measurement via multiwell scanning spectrophotometer with filters for 450 and 690 nm reference wavelength, respectively. For the XTT assay, a standard test kit (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) was utilized according to the manufacturer's instructions. In brief, the electron-coupling reagent was mixed with XTT labeling reagent and 50 μL of this mixture was added to the cells. After incubation, the amount of substrate conversion was quantified by measuring the absorbance of 100 μL aliquots in a new 96 well plate via multiwell scanning spectrophotometer with filters for 450 and 650 nm reference wavelength, respectively. For the LDH assay, a standard test kit (BioVision, Milpitas, USA) was utilized according to the manufacturer's instructions. In brief, cell supernatant was incubated with LDH reaction mix for 30 min at RT. Absorbances were measured via multiwell scanning spectrophotometer with filters for 450 and 650 nm reference wavelength, respectively. 12 well plates were seeded with 2.4 × 10 5 cells in either 1 ml or 1.88 ml cell culture medium for surface-area to medium ratios of 5.65 or 3 cm 2 /ml, respectively. Cells were seeded directly on the surfaces of the test specimens and incubated under previously mentioned cell culture conditions for 24 h before performing direct assay procedures. For live-dead cell staining on the surfaces of the specimens, 60 ul Propidium iodide (PI) stock solution, consisting of Phosphate-Buffered Saline (PBS) supplied with 50 ug/ml PI were added for each ml of cell culture medium to each well. Additionally, 500 ul Fresh Fluorescein Diacetate (FDA) working solution, consisting of PBS supplied with 20 ug/ml FDA, which itself was in turn previously suspended in acetone stock solution at a concentration of 5mg/ml, were added for each ml of cell culture medium to each well. The wells were incubated for 3 min at RT. After sterilization by immersion in isopropanol for 5 min and subsequent drying on a sterile blanket underneath a laminar flow, the specimens were then rinsed in preheated PBS and immediately forwarded to upright red and green light fluorescence microscopy (Nikon Eclipse Ti-S/L100). Optical micrographs of the WE43 scaffolds with different strut diameter (SS, MS and LS) and surface -modified by PEO are shown in Fig. Videos S1 to S3 in the supplementary material show the XCT tomograms of the SS, MS and LS scaffolds at higher magnification. Two representative cross-sections perpendicular to the building direction are shown in Figs. The microstructures of the scaffolds with different strut diameter were analyzed and they were found to be equivalent. It should be noticed that the same processing parameters were used in all cases and the differences in strut diameter did not lead to noticeable microsutructural changes. The laser scan tracks delineated by the melt pool boundaries were clearly observed in the optical microscope after etching in nital (Fig. The microstructure of the ≈10 μm thick PEO modified surface layer is shown in the secondary electron (SE) image in Fig. Other group of precipitates was found above the melt pool boundary forming vertical bands (parallel to the building direction) either in the form of wavy fibrous lines (Fig. either long consecutive lines that sometimes contain nano porosity (Fig. Neither the grain size nor the texture was changed after the solution heat treatment, that was able to dissolve all the intermetallic precipitates (Fig. When In fact, the scaffolds in the T6 condition lost their integrity after 2 days in DMEM. The Mg mass loss, ∆M, as a function of time was determined from the XCT images and from the volume of hydrogen generated during the process. In the former case, it was possible to distinguish the Mg metal in the lattice (white) from the corrosion products (grey) (Fig. The compressive nominal stress S vs. engineering strain e curves of the scaffolds with different strut sizes (SS, MS, and LS) modified by PEO are plotted in Fig. The strength of the LS and MS scaffolds was significantly higher than that of the SS scaffolds and these differences should not be attributed to the density because they were still stronger when the nominal stress was divided by the relative density rr (calculated as 1 minus the porosity in Table This process continued by the progression of damage in successive rows, as shown in the SE images when the applied strain reached 30% and 54%. The deformation of the LS scaffold can be seen in the video S4 in the Supplementary Material and show the same crashing process characterized by the fracture of successive rows of cells in the scaffolds, by cracks parallel to the compression direction in the struts. On the contrary, the deformation of the SS scaffold in the video S5 in the Supplementary Material show that the crashing process was only active at the beginning of the deformation and was replaced by the propagation of a shear band through the scaffold, oriented at 45o with respect to the loading axis, leading to a strong reduction in the load bearing capacity. The WE43 Mg scaffolds manufactured by LPBF showed a strong basal texture along the building direction. Thus, the Mg basal planes are perpendicular to the building direction and basal slip -which is the dominant deformation mechanism in Mg-is not favoured under compression parallel or perpendicular to the building direction. Instead, deformation by extension twinning is likely to dominate plastic deformation when the scaffolds are compressed in the direction normal to the building direction while compression along the building axis should be mainly accommodated by pyramidal slip. However, the critical resolved shear stress for extension twinning is much lower than that for pyramidal slip, which can potentially lead to a strong anisotropy on the mechanical response The compressive nominal stress S (divided by the relative density, rr) vs. engineering strain e curves of the PEO-modified LS scaffolds deformed parallel (P) and normal (N) to the building direction are plotted in Fig. The effect of the heat treatments on the mechanical properties was analysed in the case of MS scaffolds which were not modified by PEO. The compressive nominal stress S vs. engineering strain e curves of three MS scaffolds in the as-printed, T4 and T6 conditions are plotted in Fig. The compressive S vs. e curves after different times immersed in DMEM solution are plotted in Figs. The rapid degradation of the mechanical properties with immersion time is obvious in all cases and led to reductions in the elastic modulus and in the strength of the scaffold. Degradation was particularly fast in the scaffold in the T6 condition, whose strength was below 10 MPa after two days of immersion in DMEM. The degradation of the mechanical properties of the scaffolds in the T4 and as-printed conditions was similar, in agreement with the corrosion rates in Fig. Different cell culture-based tests were conducted in the MS WE43 Mg scaffolds with and without PEO surface modification in the as-printed condition. Indirect tests were conducted on the extracts derived from the different groups, as shown in Fig. Significant differences between the negative control and both testing groups in comparison to the positive control group were present within the LDH test assay. With equivalent (WE43) and even diminished absorbance values (WE43 PEO), possibly due to assay interference, both experimental groups exhibited no signs of direct cell damage. This would present itself as spectrophotometrically measurable highly colored formazan, which is produced by the release of soluble cytosolic enzyme into the cell culture medium due to cell death and damage of the plasma membrane, respectively. With regard to cellular metabolic activity, both the XTT assay and BrdU assay showed equivalently elevated absorbance values for WE43 PEO specimens, therefore indicating cell proliferation. XTT quantifies cellular metabolic activity via colorimetric assay of added, extracellular tetrazolium salts, which are transformed into colored formazan derivatives via mitochondrial dehydrogenase, while BrDU detects the quantity of 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporated into cellular DNA during cell proliferation using an anti-BrdU antibody. While significantly different to the toxic positive control, both testing groups showed reduced activity when compared to the non-toxic negative control. In contrast to direct cell damage assessed by LDH, WE43 scaffolds without PEO surface modification showed significantly decreased metabolic activity in the XTT and BrdU assays, hereby indicating cytotoxic potential. However, WE43 scaffolds whose surface was modifed by PEO showed a significant increase in metabolic activity and cellular proliferation for both tests with means slightly exceeding or falling below the 70% threshold defined by the ISO 10993-5:2018 standard. Hence, cytotoxic potential based on indirect testing of extracts is not present after PEO surface modification is applied to the tested groups. In order to obtain a more complete picture of the biological interaction of WE43 Mg scaffolds, complementary direct testing by live dead stains was performed. In this study, live dead stains were performed using two different solid materials as references (RMA and TCC). Fig. While the appearance of pseudopodia and associated cell attachment can be scarcely assessed on the negative control, it can only be assumed within the PEO group and was therefore neglected in terms of further evaluation. In summary, WE43 Mg scaffolds surface treated by PEO display acceptable cell interaction with low cytotoxic potential expressed via indirect and direct cell culture testing. Results always approximated the reference values of the negative controls. The WE43 Mg alloy scaffolds show the typical microstructure of alloys manufactured by LPBF with clear traces of the layer by layer process under optical microscopy. EBSD results showed a bi-modal grain size distribution: small grains with random texture were found near the melt pool boundary while large grains had a strong basal texture parallel to the building direction (Fig. But the grain morphology below the last melt pool was very similar to the one depicted in Fig. In addition to the pre-existing Y-rich oxide particles, three precipitate structures are found throughout the specimens at, above and below the melt pool boundaries. Similar structures have been previously observed in alloys processed by rapid solidification. For instance, Gianoglio et al. Compared to the vertical structures of precipitates, the horizontal lines show lower fluctuations and wider spacing. They consist of either lines of round nano-precipitates or consecutive lines with nano-porosities (Fig. This process is repeated periodically along the heat flow direction, resulting in a relatively even horizontal line spacing. Grain size and texture of the scaffolds did not change during the heat treatments, but the precipitate structure was dramatically changed by the heat treatments. The solution heat treatment at 525 oC dissolved all the intermetallic precipitates in the Mg matrix which was only decorated by the oxide particles. Ageing at 250 oC during 16 hours leads to the formation of β' and β1, as in cast WE43 Mg alloys In an aqueous environment, Mg and its alloys react following the equations ( The Mg(OH)2 deposits on the Mg matrix and the corrosion product layer usually contains an inner MgO layer and an external Mg(OH)2 layer The corrosion rates of the MS scaffolds, depicted in Fig. The lowest corrosion rate was found in the as-printed scaffolds and this result was surprising. Although no clear explanation for this behaviour was found, several reasons can be responsible for this behaviour. The intermetallic precipitates in the as-printed condition are much smaller than those in the T6 condition (compare Figs. The main parameters that define the mechanical behaviour of the scaffolds according to the definitions in ISO 13314:2011 have been plotted as a function of the strut diameter in Fig. Overall, these results indicate that the mechanical properties of LPBF magnesium scaffolds should be improved to reach the strength of cortical bone for bone implant applications. This latter objective can be achieved through the optimization of the mechanical properties of the Mg alloys Indirect extract based assays (LDH, XTT and BrdU), as well as direct cell seeding and staining were performed as a part of this study in order to assess the interaction of WE43 Mg alloy scaffolds with basic cellular activity. The negative (blank medium for indirect and TCC for direct testing) and positive controls (RMA for direct and indirect testing) demonstrated the anticipated toxic and non-toxic reactions, thus validating the experimental procedure. Based on potential adverse effects caused by the release of substances during extract formation, both tested Mg scaffold groups showed no direct toxicity by means of LDH. Further assessment with regards to the metabolic state and proliferation of cells (XTT, BrdU) revealed, that the scaffolds whose surface was modified by PEO expressed significantly increased absorbance approximating the standardized 70% threshold, while the non modified group rather failed the testing. These results lie well within expectation and can be confirmed by previous works concerning the in-vitro assessment of Mg materials Similar observations were found for direct live/dead staining. While no viable cells were observed on the Mg scaffold without surface modification by PEO, only few dead cells were identified at all. The surface therefore seems to repel cell attachment, which is in line with the reported hydrogen gas evolution, hereby discouraging cells to adhere to the surface. In contrast, the WE43 Mg alloy scaffolds whose surface was modified by PEO showed adherent cell monolayers, very much comparable to the non-toxic negative control. The passivating ceramiclike surface not only seems to offer a suitable niche for adhering cells, but also throttled the release of degradation by-products and thus encouraged hardly any signs of cell impairment. Porous scaffolds of WE43 Mg alloy with a body-centered cubic cell pattern were manufactured by LPBF with different strut diameters in the range 250 μm to 750 μm. The microstructure was formed by a bimodal grain size distribution with large grains (12 ± 6.1 μm) and small equiaxed grains (2.1 ± 1.0 μm). The former presented a strong basal texture while the latter were randomly oriented. Irregular oxide particles containing Y were homogeneously distributed throughout the microstructure. Intermetallic precipitate rich in Nd, Gd and Y were found in the as-printed scaffolds forming three different types. In particular, banded structures parallel and perpendicular to the melt pool were formed as a result of segregation of the solute atoms during rapid solidification. The precipitate structures disappeared after a solution heat treatment at 525 °C for 8 h and globular β' and plate-shape β1 precipitates were formed at the grain boundaries and within the grains, respectively, after ageing at 250 oC for 16 h. Scaffolds without PEO surface treatment showed increased corrosion rates in DMEM, which exceeded the suggested corrosion rates of 500 μm/year required for biodegradable implants. The maximum corrosion rates were found in the scaffolds aged at 250 oC and were attributed to the galvanic corrosion induced by the intermetallic precipitates. The best corrosion rates were measured in the as-printed and solution treated scaffolds and were attributed to the small size of the precipitates in the former and to the lack of intermetallic precipitates in the latter. Nevertheless, surface treatments, such as PEO, significantly improve corrosion rates. The mechanical properties of the scaffold increased with the strut diameter due to the lower porosity and a change in the failure mechanisms. Scaffolds with an average strut diameter of 250 μm failed by the propagation of shear band at 45o with respect to the compression axis while those with thicker struts showed progressive failure of successive rows of cells in the scaffold. Heat treatments did not modify the mechanical properties, but the failure mechanisms of the strut changed from brittle failure to plastic collapse in the heat treated conditions. The elastic modulus and strength in compression of the scaffolds with the largest strut diameter were around 0.8 GPa and around 40 MPa, respectively, being within the range of spongy bone, but diminished when compared to those of cortical bone. Moreover, the modulus decreased quickly after immersion in DMEM and the degradation in mechanical properties followed the same trends observed in the corrosion rates. The corrosion resistance could meet the requirements of biodegradable metal implants by means of PEO surface treatments while the mechanical properties of the porous scaffolds can be improved to reach the strength of cortical bone by using different lattice designs and stronger Mg alloys. Biocompatibility tests demonstrated that WE43 Mg alloy scaffolds (with high surface to volume ratio) without PEO surface treatment expressed cytotoxic potential to a certain extent, namely when subjected directly to cells or culture media. In contrast, if the scaffolds were surface-treated by PEO, they exhibited ameliorated compatibility with cells by providing a favorable surface morphology for adherence and limited release of degradation by-products. Accordingly, cell culture testing by direct or indirect exposure rendered satisfactory results with no or only limited cytotoxic potential. Hence, applying suitable surface modifications seems mandatory when designing and manufacturing Mg scaffolds with large surface areas.