Mirrors are a subset of optical components essential for the success of current and future space missions. Most of the telescopes for space programs ranging from Earth Observation to Astrophysics and covering all the electromagnetic spectrum from X-rays to Far-Infrared are based on reflective optics. Mirrors operate in diverse and harsh environments that range from Low-Earth Orbit, to interplanetary orbits and the deep space. The operational life of space observatories spans from minutes (sounding rockets) to decades (large observatories), and the performance of the mirrors within the optical system is susceptible to degrade, which results in a transient optical efficiency of the instrument. The degradation that occurs in space environments depends on the operational life on the orbital properties of the space mission, and it reduces the total system throughput and hence compromises the science return. Therefore, the knowledge of potential degradation physical mechanisms, how they affect mirror performance, and how to prevent it, is of paramount importance to ensure the long-term success of space telescopes. In this review we report an overview on current mirror technology for space missions with a particular focus on the importance of degradation and radiation resistance of the coating materials. Particular detail will be given to degradation effects on mirrors for the far and extreme UV as in these ranges the degradation is enhanced by the strong absorption of most contaminants. The trend for the future space missions is the use of high-resolution, large bandwidth telescopes A mirror consists in a substrate and, most often, a coating. Substrates can be selected among a limited number of materials. Fundamental parameters are: i) Specific stiffness; ii) thermal stability, iii) space environmental resistance, iv) achievable surface quality, v) weight, and vi) financial aspects. Regarding the choice of mirror substrates, extensive work has been performed and reported Al or Al alloys, Be, Si, SiC, Zerodur®, nickel and fused silica have been used employed As mirror substrates not always provide the desired optical performance, the use of optical coatings to step it up is often required. Coatings has a major impact on the instrument optical performance. Even if mirrors are insensitive to chromatic aberrations, the need of large bandwidth impacts the coating design and the technologies to reach broadband reflective coatings with high reflectivity and low polarization sensitivity. In particular, while most mirrors used for space systems that operate from the ultraviolet (UV) to the infrared (IR) wavelength regions rely on coatings of Ag, Al, Au or Be, extreme regions such as X-Ray, extreme UV and far-IR require specific engineered designs comprising multilayers of different materials. The coating may include adhesion layers (between substrate and reflective layer), interdiffusion layers (between layers of different species) and protection or enhancement layers (on top of the reflective layer or multilayer). Dielectric mirror coatings can be used alone or in combination with metallic ones to prepare multilayer designs. Multilayers of metal-dielectric and all-dielectric films have been extensively used to prepare narrow band reflectors for several spectral bands Both mirror substrates and coatings materials, but also detector technologies and the telescope systems, are all involved in the success or failure of a space observatory. The extreme environment where they must operate implies severe issues in terms of stability and resistance. Common to all orbits is the degradation of materials by the hazardous space environment, whose importance in space technology is undeniable The main challenge in the assessment of degradation of materials in space is in the development and choice of the most representative ground testing and extrapolation to end of-life conditions for thermal cycle and for charged particles, AO, UV irradiation, and high-velocity impacts of microparticles. These tests have to account for the different environments in which the mirrors will operate, ranging from Low-Earth Orbit (LEO), to interplanetary orbits and deep space. Investigations on the behavior of optical materials and coatings in space environment had been reported in a large number of papers starting in the 1970's. Pre-launch acceptance testing and evaluation of mirrors coated for use in space are almost never performed on the actual flight mirror. Smaller witness mirrors, coated at the same time as the flight component, are used as test proxies for the spaceflight component. The intent of the acceptance testing generally aims at identifying any mirror surface quality problem before performing the qualification testing of the final and larger mirror, when recovery from a flaw can be costly. The use of tests samples to verify the performances of the whole mirror is even more important for complex optical coatings such as reflective multilayers For each of the key degradation sources (i.e. AO, UV radiation, thermal cycling, charged particles, telescope outgassing, space debris and dust several mitigation techniques and strategies have been proposed, most of them based on coatings. Coatings are in general a fundamental technology for space science and applications, and degradation and radiation issues have been extensively investigated since the beginning of space programs. In particular, coatings performing critical optical functions have been used in space instrument applications for NASA, ESA and the other international and national space agencies for more than 50 years. The performance of the first coatings launched into space had been observed to change with time. Starting from that, pre-flight testing in simulated space environments have been developed to verify spectral and efficiency performance, which desirably predict the changes observed in space. The effect of real or simulated space conditions on mirrors has been investigated during the last decades and in the following sections we will discuss the main results and developments reported in literature. The next subsections address the main degradation sources in space environment. A large emphasis is given to the far UV (FUV, λ in the 100-200 nm) and the extreme UV (EUV, λ in the 50-100 nm), due to the enhanced degradation that arises due to the strong absorption of most contaminants in these ranges compared to longer wavelengths. AO is the main atmospheric component in LEO up to altitudes of 700 km. It is a species with large harmful potential over many materials. The intrinsic reactive capacity of AO as a free radical of a very electronegative element adds to the strong relative velocity between the orbiting spacecraft and the thermal distribution of orbital AO, which strengthens oxygen capacity to react with and to sputter off the target material. It is also an indirect source of contamination, as its interaction with organic materials, such as polymers, may originate secondary volatile compounds which in turn might condensate on critical elements of the telescope, such as on optical surfaces. Optical surfaces are degraded in a level directly proportional to AO fluence. This, in turn, is determined by several factors, including While most of the oxide-based substrates are resistant to AO, bare metal surfaces and coatings may be vulnerable. The EOIM-III experiment tested the resistance of several optical materials to AO during the Space Shuttle mission 46 Herzig et al. Herzig et al. To reduce or eliminate atomic oxygen erosion of materials in space, the application of thin-film protective coatings made of durable materials is the most used approach Thermal cycling may cause mechanical defects that can grow and degrade the optical system performance on orbit. Thermal fluctuations may, for instance, induce mechanical stress that may lead to alterations in the figure of optics One example of an extreme temperature range test was the coating qualification of the oxideprotected Au-coated Be mirrors for JWST, in which witness samples were cryogenically cycled to down to 15 K four times and to 328 K one time Among others, R. K. Banyal et al. reported on thermal characteristics of a classical solar telescope primary mirror Research on coatings and thin films demonstrated that the instability of properties in optical film was attributed to the coating materials and their deposition process UV radiation comprises the spectral range of wavelengths between few nanometers up to 400 nm. The effects of high energy photons on mirrors are not strictly related to the reflectivity or morphological properties. The effects from these photons are not the determining factor contributing to radiation damage. However, chemical changes such as reduction and oxidation reactions can induce optical absorption in thin film layers, and UV photons can promote such reactions, changing the composition of the materials. For these reasons, space UV and ionizing radiation durability of materials must be considered. Importantly, the radiation effects are synergistic with other effects and must be considered together The first space optical coatings used for band-pass filters were constructed of thermallyevaporated soft materials such as ZnS and MgF2. Exposure to the space environment containing ionizing radiation, solar UV, atomic oxygen and high vacuum revealed the unstable operation of those coatings. In addition to humid-vacuum shifts in wavelength properties, filters, anti-reflective (AR) coatings and other coatings suffered radiation-induced transmission loss that was especially pronounced at short wavelengths. UV exposure may have effects on polymers and other materials used in lightweight mirror material in spacecraft applications. In this latter case, the effects of UV exposure need to be accounted for due to their potential impacts on the thermal management of a spacecraft and during application in composite mirror structures ZnS deposited by evaporation was a coating material used decades ago for its moderate FUV reflectance and its transparency above 400 nm. Hass et al. Fuqua at al. As previously mentioned, one of the main contamination sources in space mirrors originates from outgassing in the space vacuum environment. Due to the strong absorption of materials, particularly contaminants in the FUV range, space contamination mainly originated in the vehicle and instrument outgassing has been investigated by several authors and the FUV properties of most volatile spacecraft materials have been measured A strong manifestation of the concomitance between contamination in space and UV was observed after the first servicing mission on HST Regarding grazing-incidence mirrors, Osantowski calculated the sensitivity of mirror reflectance to a range of optical constants selected for generic contaminants, such as hydrocarbons An additional concern in space optics regards the degradation occurring on mirrors when they are exposed to charged particles and ions. During an inter-planetary journey, galactic cosmic rays background and Sun are the main sources of such particles and ions. Galactic Cosmic Rays (GCRs) are a continuous and isotropic flow of charged particles reaching the solar system from outside the heliosphere. They are approximately composed by 85% of protons, 14% of helium, and the residual 1% of heavy ions. The energy spectrum ranges from few MeV up to GeV with particles fluxes that decrease with increasing energy. Inside the heliosphere, GCRs decreases by a few %/Astronomic Unit (AU) with heliocentric distance (R) and the solar activity modifies the GCRs flux. As the solar activity undergoes the 11-year cycle, the GCRs flux varies with the maximum during solar minimum periods Around planets, the space environment is also affected by their magnetosphere, which interacts with charged particles present in the heliosphere. Moreover, albedo neutrons generated by GCRs interaction with the planet atmosphere decay into protons, giving an additional source of ions around planets. These particles are confined via magnetic mirroring and trapped preferably in some regions around the planets, forming radiation belts The spacecraft components need to be protected by highly penetrating radiation and particles encountered in the operational environment. In fact, highly energetic photons as well as MeV particles can easily penetrate mm thicknesses of materials, undergoing a deceleration in case of particles and, in general, producing secondary photon and particle emissions. By its nature, secondary particles have to be analyzed on a case-by-case basis through Monte-Carlo simulation in order to obtain global information that can be used during the design and testing procedures. For this reason, spacecraft requirements always include a total ionizing dose (TID) specification (expressed in krad), a value that corresponds to the total energy deposited in matter by ionizing radiation per unit of mass. By definition, TID is an integral dose, and therefore it takes into account the cumulative effect due to particles of different energies. The ground validation of the spacecraft components is then usually performed by evaluating the effect given by a specific TID, deposited via acceleration facilities. Although this approach is suitable for testing the radiation-hardness of an electronic component or investigating the degradation of the opto-mechanical properties of bulk materials, it becomes inappropriate for the optical coatings because the effects occurring in the thin films strongly depend on the proton energy and therefore the implantation depth of particles. Highenergy particles penetrate deeper in the optical components, in the order of tens of μm or more, interacting very little with the nanometric coatings and depositing all the energy in the substrate. In contrast, keV ions implants within the coatings with a profile highly dependent on their density, potentially inducing changes of their optical, structural and morphological properties. As a general rule, we can affirm that thin films in the nanometric scale are mostly affected by low energy particles, that implant in the coating itself, but not by MeV particles, which overcome the structure, eventually reaching the substrate. Experiments with MeV electrons and protons with typical fluences faced in the space environment (i.e. < 10 12 ions/cm 2 ) have proven negligible degradation effects on optical coatings having a total thickness lower than few microns in the visible-UV The investigation of the effects induced on optical mirrors by low-energy particles and ions are performed by using terrestrial facilities based on ion implanters and accelerators. However, simulation of the space environment exposure is extremely challenging since it is impossible to approach the irradiation conditions occurring in space. For example, while the exposure in space typically lasts for several years, a ground-based experiment needs high particle flux rates in order to reach the mission life-time expected fluences in a reasonable amount of time. Moreover, during the accelerating tests potential synergistic effects, not present in space, can arise, such as thermal effects related to the high flux and surface contaminations due to the contaminants present in the vacuum chamber In the case of low energy particles, damage depends on energy, flux and fluence. Low energy proton irradiations (< 500 keV) with fluences lower than 10 16 p/cm 2 [106] investigated the effect of 60-keV protons on Al protected with SiO2. These mirrors were measured from the near UV to the IR. Reflectance was monotonously degraded with proton dose (see Figure A particular case is instead that of ML stacks for the EUV. Several studies have demonstrated that protons and alpha particles with energy of few keV can already lead to dramatic degradation of performance with fluences in the order of 10 16 ions/cm 2 [108][109][114]. For example, Mo/Si structures with different capping-layers were irradiated by protons at 1 keV with fluences of 9•10 15 p/cm 2 and 36•10 15 p/cm 2 showing a change of the peak position and a degradation of the reflectance (Figure Recently, Al/Mo/B4C and Al/Mo/SiC were also irradiated with 1 keV and 100 keV protons with doses of 7.4•10 12 p/cm 2 and 9•10 15 p/cm 2 . The lowest dose was chosen in order to simulate the situation expected inside the High Resolution Imager (HRI) and Full Sun Imager (FSI) telescopes of Solar Orbiter mission, where the mechanical structure and the front filters drastically reduce the proton flux impinging on the multilayers. None of the irradiated structures showed appreciable changes of their performance, suggesting that at these fluences MLs can be considered stable. Dust (or meteoroids) and space debris are important sources of mirror degradation. In extreme conditions, meteoroids may cause a full spacecraft failure; one example of the latter was the Olympus communications spacecraft (ESA), in which the general failure of the satellite was attributed with a high probability to a Perseid meteoroid impact The experimental verification is often necessary to better understand the effect of high-velocity particles in optics. This can be performed in dedicated testing facilities, such as Heidelberg Dust Accelerator, in which particles of various materials can be accelerated to velocities up to 40km/s.[123] Heaney el al. [124] utilized the aforementioned facility to simulate the effect of the impacts of iron (1.2 μm diameter) and latex (0.75 μm diameter) to mimic inorganic-and organic-based meteoroids, at velocities of 2-20 km/s on an oxide-protected, Au-coated Be witness mirrors for the JWST. He found that both latex and iron particles had the ability to blast away the protective coating, creating craters in which the Be substrate was exposed. He reported ratios between the crater diameter and the incident particle kinetic energy of 0.09 μm/nJ for latex and of 0.07 μm/nJ for iron. Yet, most of the knowledge of the mass and velocity distribution of dust, composition, flux and the effect of impacts in space instrumentation has been gathered in the last decades from dedicated experiments in space, such as dust detectors onboard GALILEO and ULYSSES, or the cosmic dust analyzer (CDA) aboard the CASSINI Optical coated elements for space instrumentation are mainly optimized in terms of efficiency and required working spectral band. After fabrication, witness samples undergo a series of laboratory tests required by the space agencies in order to qualify the components. However, laboratory tests rarely reproduce the conditions in space, because the quality of the vacuum is not the same in space, some contaminants coming from the satellite itself are neglected, space environment is not always known precisely, the flux of particles and contaminants is lower in space than in accelerated tests. Moreover, very few experimental data are made available by the retesting of components in those few cases in which the optics have been collected after a flight. The results of the qualification tests are rarely published and made available to the scientific community, as they are perceived as small technical details and because there is not a reference scientific journal which offers a solid background in this field, as opposite of the case of the electronics components. On the other hand, both mirror substrates and coatings are a key component of space optics. Space mirrors must withstand a harsh environment, where servicing campaigns to clean or replace degraded optics are very limited or, most often, impossible. Mirrors must be able to keep acceptable performance through missions that may have a lifetime as long as decades. In fact, optical performance of the components strongly affects the scientific data outcomes, and their degradation can lead to a misinterpretation data due to an unknown change of the instrument radiometric response. In a more dramatic scenario, unpredicted mirror degradation may kill an expensive mission along with the strong expectations of the community for decades. Hence, space opticians need to predict the behavior of coatings and substrates at the specific orbit and space conditions and for the full mission lifetime. In order to accomplish this, more experimental data need to be collected and shared. The clear definition of testing procedures to assess the robustness of optical components against the operational environment is pivotal to gain this knowledge, and thus for preventing in-flight failures, to fabricate robust coatings, or simply to model their degradation. In-situ testing experiments in which simple optical systems are coupled to the mirror optics for efficiency measurement over time during a flight could be an advantage. This paper is intended to contribute to build of a background knowledge in the field. Attention has been devoted to the main sources of mirror degradation: atomic oxygen, thermal processes, ultraviolet radiation, outgassing and cross-contamination, charged particles, and space debris and dust. An effort has been made to cite and comment the main literature on the degradation effects of all these sources on mirrors all over the electromagnetic spectrum, with emphasis at short wavelengths. Available information combines space simulation in the lab and also the heritage of six decades of space optics. Despite the long literature on space mirrors and degradation/stability issues, significant improvements are still desired for future space observatories. The development of large size and broadband mirrors will come together with new materials and coating designs. Future low-orbit to deep-space exploration will need to keep solving new issues on degradation resistance of mirrors.