The phase transitions between the various polymorphs of FAPbI 3 (FAPI, FA = formamidinium CH(NH 2 ) + 2 ) are studied by anelastic, dielectric and X-ray diffraction measurements on samples pressed from δ-FAPI (2H phase) yellow powder. The samples become orange after application of as little as 0.2 GPa, which has been explained in terms of partial transformations to the other hexagonal polymorphs 4H and 6H. The phenomenon is discussed in the light of what is known about the stability of the various polymorphs of hybrid and inorganic perovskites ABX 3 with large A cations and hence large tolerance factor t. Remarkably, FAPI at room and higher temperature behaves like a perovskite with large t, while just below room temperature it behaves like a perovskite with small t. The kinetics of the transformations between the polymorphs is enhanced by small amounts of intercalated water. It seems therefore worthy to try improving the atomic diffusion and crystallization during synthesis, and hence the final photovoltaic performance, through controlled small amounts of water that should be thoroughly removed after a sufficiently homogeneous and smooth microstructure is achieved. The hybrid metalorganic and the inorganic halide perovskites, ABX 3 with A = organic cation or Cs + , B = Pb 2+ , Sn 2+ , X = I -, Br -, Cl -, have been the object of extensive investigations since it was demonstrated that they exhibit excellent photovoltaic performance and may enable the creation of solar cells The main effect of pressure in perovskites with rigid B-X bonds is promoting tilting of the BX 6 octahedra. This occurs in order to relieve the mismatch between the shrinking A-X framework and the rigid BX 6 octahedra, which is usually quantified by how much the Goldschmidt's tolerance factor, is less than 1. In fact, t = 1 for radii that perfectly fit the cubic perovskite; when t < 1 the BX 6 octahedra are too large to fit the A-X bonds and therefore, if they are also more rigid than the A-X bonds, they tilt without shrinking. In the hybrid perovskites, however, the H bonds between the A organic molecule and the X anions also play a role. Besides the well established role as catalyst of the degradation of the perovskite α phases into non-perovskite δ and final decomposition, a relative humidity (RH) of 30% has been found to generally improve the quality of films compared to the dry process We performed dielectric, anelastic and X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements on samples compacted from the yellow δ-FAPI powder. The powder was obtained following a procedure already reported The bars for the anelastic and discs for the dielectric measurements were obtained by pressing the FAPI powder for few minutes at maximum pressures of 0.2 and 0.62 GPa respectively in dies with section 40 × 6 mm 2 or 13 mm diameter and their thicknesses were between 0.5 and 1 mm. The complex Young's modulus E = E + iE versus temperature was measured in a high vacuum (HV) insert with base pressure < 10 -6 mbar, with the introduction of < 0.2 mbar He below room temperature for thermal exchange or in controlled H 2 O pressure. The FAPI thin bars were suspended on thermocouple wires and electrostatically excited on their flexural modes as described in Ref. 37. The real part of the complex Young's modulus is proportional to the square of the fundamental resonance frequency f of the first flexural mode as 38 where l, h, ρ are the sample's length, thickness and density. The elastic energy loss Q -1 = E /E was measured from the width of the resonance peaks or the free decay. The dielectric permittivity ε versus temperature was measured in a small closed volume, a modified Linkam cell, that does not allow HV tight conditions. Previous experience taught us that the standard purging procedure of few minutes with dry N 2 flux at 40 • C is totally ineffective in removing the water absorbed by FAPI. The XRD spectra were acquired in air at various stages of the anelastic and dielectric experiments and on freshly prepared discs, as described in more detail in the SI. The samples pressed from the yellow δ-FAPI were orange. The discs, with smaller surface and subjected to higher pressure, were of more uniform and intense color, while the bars presented lighter zones corresponding to regions where the initial thickness of the powder and therefore local pressure and final density were smaller (see Figs. Figure After further dielectric runs including a prolonged aging of 110 min at 430-440 K (not shown) the XRD reflections of the α phase were found more intense, but also some refections of PbI 2 started being detected (pattern 2). Even if taken within one day after a dielectric or anelastic experiment, the XRD spectra do not capture the status of the sample at the end of that experiment, as is clear from the near total transformation of these compacted samples from the α to the δ phase in only three days in presence of humidity (Fig. We pass to the description of the results of the anelastic spectra obtained during several temperature runs in HV conditions (10 -6 -10 -5 mbar or ∼ 10 -2 -10 -1 mbar He below room temperature). Figure The dielectric experiments suggested that the transition to the cubic black 3C phase was faster for the orange nH (n > 2) phases induced by pressure than for the yellow 2H phase, but In both cases the heating rate was 1.5 K/min. the above anelastic experiments on an orange sample did not show the sudden transition to 3C at ≤ 400 K. In order to check whether also the content of water has a role in the kinetics of these structural transitions, we prepared a new bar (FAPI #7) from yellow powder and heated it at 1.5 K/min in 7 mbar H 2 O (up to 445 K and then HV as usual; 7 mbar correspond to a relative humidity of 30% at room temperature). The comparison with the previous measurement on FAPI #5, completely dehydrated and heated in a vacuum of 10 -6 mbar at the same temperature rate, is presented in Fig. We will base our discussion of the present experimental results on the hexagonal phases that are intermediate between the well known δ phase and the cubic α phase and that have been observed in FAPI partially substituted with MA, Cs and Br. In the perovskite based polytypes, the reason why the 2H phase is more stable than 3C is that in the latter the A cation is too large for its cavity surrounded by eight BX 6 octahedra. The fact that pressure induces transitions to other polymorphs may be put in direct relationship with their smaller volumes per unit formula but a trend of the relative volumes of the hexagonal and cubic polymorphs of ABX 3 compounds cannot be deduced simply from geometrical considerations, since there are strong variations depending on the ion types. For example, among the inorganic lead halides it was found that CsCdBr 3 remains in the 2H phase up to 23 GPa, almost isotropically squeezed down to 65% of its original volume. In this context it is usual to introduce the concept of tolerance factor defined in Eq. ( The comparison between the dielectric measurement of the initially humid sample in a small closed volume (curve 1 of Fig. The interstitial water molecules certainly interfere with the H bonds between formamidinium molecules and I -anions, which contribute keeping the nH structures, and likely form H bonds with the I -ions, so weakening the Pb-I bonds and helping the rearrangement process of the PbI 6 octahedra. The role of interstitial water as catalyst has been demonstrated in MAPI and FAPI for the degradation transformations but may well exist for the reverse transformations at higher temperature. In addition, humidity promotes the crystallization of large grains of MAPI and FAPI films, It seems therefore worth to more accurately explore the role of small controlled amounts of water or humidity in the various phases of the powder or film preparations, in order to find the right balance for a complete formation of α phase with good microstructure but avoiding the decomposition into PbI 2 and organic constituents. Indeed, the dielectric experiments on FAPI #4 are made in presence of small uncontrolled amounts of water and the resulting XRD spectra contain no trace of PbI 2 after the first set of measurements (pattern 1 of Fig. We studied the phase transitions between the various polymorphs of FAPI by anelastic, dielectric and X-ray diffraction measurements on samples pressed from δ-FAPI (2H phase) yellow powder. The application of a pressure as low as 0.2 GPa changes the color to orange, which has been explained in terms of transformations to the other hexagonal polymorphs 4H and 6H, having smaller volumes. The stability of these intermediate hexagonal phases has been put in the broader perspective of the hybrid and inorganic perovskites ABX 3 with large A cations, or large tolerance factor. It appears that the several polymorphs of FAPI are rather close in free energy at room temperature and, remarkably, FAPI is susceptible to both the phenomena due to a large tolerance factor, namely the formation of the hexagonal phases of face-sharing octahedra, and small tolerance factor, with octahedral tilting just below room temperature. This structural susceptibility is certainly enhanced by the extremely large thermal expansion and is probably a cause for the contrasting observations on the effects of pressure, temperature and aging on the FAPI structure. In addition, it is observed that a small amount of water may enhance the kinetics of the transformations from the various polytypes to the cubic phase. Rather than to a surface effect of adsorbed H 2 O, as often assumed for the improved grain growth in films in moderately humid atmosphere, this effect is attributed to H 2 O intercalated in the bulk. The catalytic effect of water presents a similarity with the accomplishment of fast formation of α-FAPI with large grains from δ-FAPI films in presence of DMSO and other solvents, 62 but the highly polar H 2 O should be an even more effective solvent. This fact acquires particular interest in the light of the recent observation that the trapping of photocarriers, a major cause of reduction of the photovoltaic performance, occurs at specific types of grain boundaries, so that "managing structure and composition on the nanoscale will be essential for optimal performance of halide perovskite devices." Formamidine acetate (99%), HI (57 wt% in water), γ-butyrolactone (GBL 99%), PbI 2 (99%), and other solvents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and were used as received without further purification. We first describe the synthesis of the powders for samples FAPI #4 and 5. The preliminary synthesis of CH(NH 2 ) 2 I (FAI) was accomplished by reacting 50 mL hydroiodic acid (0.38 mol) and 25 g formamidine acetate (0.24 mol) in a 250 mL round bottomed flask at 0 • C for 6 h under N 2 atmosphere with stirring. The precipitates were recovered by reduced pressure evaporating the solutions at 65 • C for about 3 h. The product was washed with absolute ethyl alcohol and diethyl ether until the washings were colorless and finally dried at 60 Synthesis of FAPI δ phase: equimolar mixture (1.2 M) of prepared FAI and PbI 2 were dissolved under vigorous stirring in GBL at ∼ 50 • C until a clear solution was obtained; then a small amount of toluene was added to the solution at room temperature, the yellow precipitates were recovered by centrifugation, washed with toluene and dried under vacuum. For the synthesis of the powder for sample FAPI #7 a method in water was followed: 36 0.32 g of formamidine acetate (Aldrich) (3 mmol) were added to 2 mL of HI (aq solution 57% ACROS) (9 mmol), then 1.14 g of Pb(CH 3 CO 2 ) 2 •3H 2 O (CarloErbaReagents RP, 3 mmol) were added under stirring; the yellow suspension was put in a ultrasonic bath at room temperature for 10 min, then was filtered and washed with ethyl acetate and dried under vacuum first for 4 h at 50 • C and then at room temperature overnight, obtaining pure δ-FAPI according to the XRD analysis. The yellow powders of δ-FAPI were pressed at 5 tons in discs of 13 mm of diameter (0.62 GPa) and at 10 tons in bars with flat surface 40 × 6 mm 2 (0.2 GPa). The maximum pressure was reached gradually in about 2 min and kept for about 4 min. Figure X-ray diffraction measurements (XRD) were performed on a Panalytical Empyrean Diffractometer, using the K α fluorescence line of a Cuanode emitting tube as X-ray source. Bragg Brentano configuration was used as incident optical pathway (divergent slits) and a solid-state hybrid Pix'cel 3D detector, working in 1D linear mode, accomplished the detection. None of the samples for the dielectric and anelastic experiments was analyzed with Xrays just after pressing, in order to reduce as Figure XRD measurements were performed with fast data scans (0.5 s/point, overall measurement time 1.5 h.) in the 5 • -45 • angular range except for the slower scan of Fig. In the absence of literature on the 4H and 6H phases of pure FAPI, we compare our spectra with those simulated with VESTA [Momma, K.; Izumi, F. "VESTA 3 for threedimensional visualization of crystal, volumetric and morphology data" J. Appl. Cryst. 44, 1272 (2011)] using the Crystallographic Information Files (CIF) of FA 0.85 MA 0.15 PbI 3 from Refs. 15,16. Even though it is expected that the partial substitution of FA with MA reduces the cell volume, the spectra of the 2H phase simulated in this manner are practically identical with those of the δ ≡2H, suggesting that also the reflections of the 4H and 6H phases of the MA-substituted material are representative of those of pure FAPI. Figure It is possible that the difficulty of distinguishing clear reflections from additional phases in orange samples arises from their lower crystallinity with respect to the δ phase, as discussed for the α phase in the main text. 