When magnetic atoms are inserted inside a superconductor, the superconducting order is locally depleted as a result of the antagonistic nature of magnetism and superconductivity 1 . Thereby, distinctive spectral features, known as Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states, appear inside the superconducting gap 2-4 . The search for Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states in different materials is intense, as they can be used as building blocks to promote Majorana modes 5 suitable for topological quantum computing 6 . Here we report the first realization of Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states in graphene, a non-superconducting 2D material, and without the participation of magnetic atoms. We induce superconductivity in graphene by proximity effect 7-9 brought by adsorbing nanometer scale superconducting Pb islands. Using scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy we measure the superconducting proximity gap in graphene and we visualize Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states in graphene grain boundaries. Our results reveal the very special nature of those Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states, which extends more than 20 nm away from the grain boundaries. These observations provide the long sought experimental confirmation that graphene grain boundaries host local magnetic moments 10-14 and constitute the first observation of Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states in a chemically pure system. Superconducting (SC) order arises in many materials because of the formation of a coherent many-body state of electrons pairs with zero spin 15 . The addition or removal of one electron from this state, resulting in an unpaired electron, costs a small energy gap associated to the overhead of breaking a pair. Interactions that promote magnetism tend to destroy superconducting order in most materials. When perturbed with magnetic impurities, the superconducting order is depleted locally, which can give rise to the appearance of the ingap bound states known as Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) states 2-4 . The measurement of YSR states on Mn adatoms on a superconductor, by means of scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy (STM/STS), provided 16 the first direct observation of magnetism on an individual atom, as Anderson's theorem 1 precludes the existence of ingap states if time reversal symmetry is preserved. In-gap YSR states have now been observed in a variety of systems that integrate superconductors with magnetic moments in the form of molecules 17 , self-assembled 5 and artificial atomic chains 18 , magnetic islands 19,20 and also in proximity-induced superconducting molecular break junctions 21 . Current interest in YSR states is driven by their potential to induce a topological phase transition in the superconductor A priori, chemically pure graphene is far from being an optimal system to look for YSR states, as it lacks both superconductivity and magnetism. However, superconductivity can be induced in graphene via proximity effect We grow several layers of graphene on a SiC(000-1) substrate. In this system the rotational disorder of the graphene layers electronically decouples  bands leading to a stacking of essentially isolated graphene sheets We carry out STS of the electronic properties of graphene in the vicinity of the Pb islands to measure the strength of the superconducting proximity coupling. We acquire conductance dI/dV curves, which probe the energy-resolved local density of states (LDOS(E)) under the tip position, as a function of the distance to the Pb islands. Our base experimental temperatures are: Tsample=4K, way below the Pb superconducting Tc=7.2K, and Ttip=3K. To increase the energy resolution beyond the thermal limit, we acquire STS spectra using SC Pb tips Our STS dI/dV spectra (Fig. The spatial extension of these YSR states is much larger than the one reported by Menard et al in the case of magnetic dopants in two dimensional NbSe2 34 that in turn is much larger than the ones reported in 3D superconductors. Moreover, the YSR state features a 33 modulation along the direction rotated 30o with respect to the atomic lattice, see Fig. Further experimental evidence of the magnetic origin of the in-gap features observed at the GB can be obtained from STS carried out by increasing the temperature above the superconducting Tc, so that superconducting order is suppressed. This brings graphene to its normal phase. In this situation, both the gap and the sharp in-gap state completely disappear (see Fig. In order to determine the actual density of states (DOS), we have to carry out a numerical deconvolution of the dI/dV curves to remove the features that arise from the tip superconducting gap, see methods for details. The deconvoluted curves so obtained provide a faithful representation of the surface DOS having performed the measurements with a superconducting tip, and permit to address the energy of the YSR states inside the gap. The hallmark of YSR states are pairs of peaks with energy EB< symmetrically located around EF=0, but with asymmetric height, on account of their different electron-hole weight. In the case of the GB shown in Fig. dI/dV (arb. units) dI/dV (arb. units) dI/dV (arb. units) In general, the number of YSR states, and their binding energies, depend both on the internal structure of the magnetic impurity and on the strength of the exchange coupling J between the local spin and the surface electrons. Thereby, in other systems, for the same magnetic species placed in different adsorption sites of the surface of a conventional SC, different YSR spectra were also reported In order to provide a theoretical basis to this completely novel scenario, we model the GB using a Hubbard model plus a pairing BCS term We consider a GB between a zigzag and an armchair oriented ribbons, Fig. It is also informative to look at the density of states as a function to the distance to the GB, as shown in Figs. There are several features to highlight. First, the YSR peaks show an electron-hole asymmetry as observed experimentally, which can be related to the breakdown of the bipartite character of the GB, that leads to single-particle states without electron-hole symmetry. Second, the location in energy of the in-gap states depends on details of the interface, such as the strength of the interaction-induced exchange coupling, or the specific geometry of the GB, see methods and Extended Data Figs. 6-8 for details. We note that our calculations do not incorporate the effect of chemical reconstructions, but rather focus on the fundamental mechanism in which an interface-defect gives rise to YSR states. Finally, the emergence of flat bands and magnetism orientation interfaces are generic features of GBs, beyond the specific case considered here. This stems from the Berry phase mismatch between the orientations, that enforces the emergence of flat band states for a generic chiral interface 39 . Fig. To summarize, we have used Pb islands to induce superconductivity in graphene, exploiting GB as a source of local magnetic moments to realize, for the first time, YSR states in graphene. Importantly, our experiments provide an unequivocal proof of carbon magnetism at graphene GBs, as the emergence of in-gap state in the presence of superconductivity demonstrate the interaction with local magnetic moments. Finally, our results provide a starting point towards the exploration of exotic electronic phases involving both magnetism and superconductivity in graphene that, together with further proximity to strong spin-orbit coupling materials, may lead to the emergence of topological superconductivity at graphene GBs. All the preparation procedures and measurements were performed under UHV conditions. During the whole process -imaging pristine graphene sample => depositing Pb on it => and imaging it back-the sample was maintain in the same UHV system. The multilayer graphene substrate was grown on a 6H-SiC(000-1) sample (C face) following the method described in The graphene layer on the surface has 100-500 nm wide single-crystal domains of different crystallographic orientations 30 . On the surface, graphene GBs are naturally formed at the frontier between these pristine graphene domains with different crystallographic orientations. These boundary regions are usually seen as bright features in STM images (see GB outlined by arrows in Fig. In this system, the rotational disorder of the graphene layers electronically decouples  bands leading to a stacking of essentially isolated graphene sheets We induce superconductivity in graphene by the proximity coupling with adsorbed nanometer sized Pb islands. To measure the strength of the superconducting proximity coupling, we probe by STS the electronic properties of pristine graphene in the vicinity of the Pb islands. We show an example of such measurement in Extended Data Fig. Extended Data Fig. In order to increase the energy resolution beyond the thermal limit , where g exp (w) is the experimentally measured dI/dV and g th (w) is the theoretically expected dI/dV of the form g th (w) = ∂ ∂w ∫ dw ′ D tip (w + w ′ )D surface (w ′ )[1 -n tip (w + w ́)]n surface (w), where D tip is the density of states of the tip (which is known) and D surface the density of states of the surface. The density of states of the surface is computed by minimizing the functional S as δS δD surface = 0. The deconvoluted curves so obtained provide a faithful representation of the surface DOS having performed the measurements with a superconducting tip, and permit to address the energy of the YSR states inside the gap. Our theoretical model show that the location in energy of the in-gap states depends on details of the interface, such as the strength of the superconducting proximity coupling, the strength of the interaction-induced exchange coupling, or the specific geometry of the GB. To illustrate this, we show in Extended Data Figs. Our calculations show the robustness of our results, with the emergence of YSR states in graphene for various GB configurations, when interactions, and thus magnetism, are included. In the absence of interactions, a nearly flat band is located at the interface (Fig. 