Metal halide perovskite (MHP) optoelectronics may become a viable alternative to standard Sibased technologies, but the current lack of long-term stability precludes their commercial adoption. Exposure to standard operational stressors (light, temperature, bias, oxygen, and water) often instigate optical and electronic dynamics, calling for a systematic investigation into MHP photophysical processes and the development of quantitative models for their prediction. We resolve the moisture-driven light emission dynamics for both methylammonium lead tribromide and triiodide thin films as a function of relative humidity (rH). With the humidity and photoluminescence time series, we train recurrent neural networks and establish their ability to quantitatively predict the path of future light emission with <11% error over 12 hours. Together, our in situ rH-PL measurements and machine learning forecasting models provide a framework for the rational design of future stable perovskite devices and, thus, a faster transition towards commercial applications. Long-term stability remains the largest challenge facing the adoption of metal halide perovskite (MHP) optoelectronic devices, requiring an understanding of their fundamental material properties and the implementation of machine learning techniques that can predict their long-term performance. For example, incident light has been proven to rapidly increase PL intensity, indicating a reduction in trap states. Exposure to water can induce both chemical and structural changes in MHP materials that alter their optical and electronic behavior, requiring in situ measurement techniques with precise environmental control. Fundamental insight into MHP photophysics paired with the development of time series forecasting models will enable more rapid integration of renewable energy technologies into electric grids worldwide. Recent discussions of standard assessment protocols have explicitly called for the development of open MHP data repositories in order to build machine learning (ML) models that can identify meaningful stressors and predict degradation conditions. Here, we determine the impact of ambient moisture on light emission in both MAPbBr 3 and MAPbI 3 perovskites and build recurrent neural networks machine learning (ML) models to quantitatively predict their unique dynamics for 12+ hours. Using in situ PL, we measure the impact of relative humidity (rH) in both MHP compositions, finding that the I-containing material more easily adsorbs water, yet both halides exhibit moisture-driven PL enhancement. Multiple humidity cycles up to 70% rH reveal that the increase in PL intensity for pure-Br MHP is delayed (with respect to the increase in rH), establishing the existence of chemical reactions highly dependent on water partial pressure. Conversely, MAPbI 3 exhibits an abrupt spike in PL at ≈35% rH due to physisorption followed by quenching driven by the hydration phase transformation. The rH-cycling experiments establish negligible PL hysteresis for MAPbBr 3 , with the ≈15× larger values presented by MAPbI 3 underscoring the ease at which it adsorbs water. We then use our PL data to train Echo State Networks for each composition in order to predict future light emission with an average normalized root-mean-squared error (NRMSE) <11% for a 12-hour prediction window solely based on rH input. Finally, we use a Long Short-Term Memory network to demonstrate the ability of recurrent networks to forecast the convolution of cyclical and long-term PL trends, such as moisture-induced degradation due to humidity cycling. Our work provides an extensive overview of the relationship between humidity and charge carrier recombination in Br-and I-containing perovskites, outlining both standard experimental series that should be applied to all emerging MHP compositions. Moreover, we demonstrate how ML models for time series prediction can guide the search for material stability. We anticipate our paradigm to be expanded to assess the influence of the other stress factors, including their combined effects on material properties and, ultimately, photovoltaic device performance. Our paradigm to apply ML to predict the dynamic luminescent behavior of halide perovskites is depicted in Figure Below, we describe the experiments used to generate the rH-PL time series used to build the predictive models. First, we resolve the MAPbI 3 and MAPbBr 3 light emission dynamics at constant relative humidity levels, establishing the relationship between water adsorption and magnitude of radiative recombination (see Figure We use micro-PL measurements based on a confocal optical microscope to capture the light emission dynamics, controlling the sample environment with a programmed mass flow controller (MFC) that adjusts the ratio of dry and moist N 2 flowing through the microscopy chamber (Figure For all relative humidity (rH) conditions, the Br-containing sample exhibits PL intensity decay during the initial 15 min period under inert conditions (see Figure Higher water concentrations are required to alter the sample's luminescence, as indicated by the 59% rH measurement shown in Figure Finally, when the sample returns to inert conditions (rH < 50%), the PL dramatically increases. Starved of water, the chemical reactions at the sample surface stop, while the small amount of water temporarily remaining at the surface leads to increased radiative recombination. MAPbI 3 exhibits much greater sensitivity to water, revealed by modulated PL dynamics even at low humidity levels (19% rH -Figure all humid conditions, the spike in PL is followed by an immediate exponential decay. The reduction in the duration of the PL intensity surge with increasing moisture provides direct evidence of the narrow processing window for moisture-based passivation treatments of MAPbI 3 . The measurement at 41% rH (Figure Soaking the sample at 59% rH causes a slower light emission enhancement, but eventually raises the PL beyond their initial values due to passivating chemical reactions (Figure Together, the results for 19% (Figure Both I-and Br-based perovskites react similarly to water, beginning with the physisorption of H 2 O molecules passivating surface trap states and increasing overall radiative recombination. We attribute the decrease in radiative recombination to (i) the full coverage of the MAPbI 3 surface with water molecules creating new trap states (as discussed above) and (ii) the eventual formation of a monohydrate phase with band gap of 3.1 eV that cannot be excited with our 2.3 eV (532 nm) laser source used in our experiments. However, these changes are reversible, as evidenced by the increased PL signal after the film dries out (Figure The correspondence between relative humidity and light emission (Figure where water molecules drive the formation of monohydrate and then dihydrate compounds. We develop a series of recurrent neural network ML models to predict PL dynamics in halide perovskites. We use Echo State Networks (ESN), a type of recurrent neural network, to forecast the PL signal across multiple cycles, solely based on the recorded humidity during that period (see Supplementary Information for an extended overview of the training details). ESN are an ideal choice for time series prediction because they contain dynamic memory, allowing them to replicate the behavior of nonlinear systems. where y !"#$%&$' is the PL data from the experiments, y !"#$%&'#$ is the predicted PL from the trained network, and n is the number of samples in the dataset. Importantly, NRMSE is scaleinvariant, allowing comparison between all models. The NRMSE for the test set is only 10.5% and 7.4% for pure-Br and pure-I, respectively. These low error levels are measured over 12.2 h, for MAPbBr 3 and MAPbI 3 , respectively, only relying on humidity input and without periodically retraining the model. The ESN performance optimization relies on a grid search approach (Figure The MAPbBr 3 displays worse predictive performance, which is understandable given the sporadic behavior of the experimental data. The trajectory of the MAPbI 3 model is rarely, if ever, inversely correlated with the experimental data. The primary challenge for the model applied to MAPbI 3 lies in quantitatively predicting the full extent of the moisture-driven PL increases. We attribute this behavior to two causes: (i) substantial sample-to-sample variation in the intensity of PL enhancement and (ii) increases in PL emission for these humidity conditions are short-lived, leaving fewer data points in their vicinity. Further investigation is needed to understand the sample-to-sample variations, an issue with implications that extend beyond the rH-PL measurements detailed in this study. The spikes in light emission might be more accurately computed by (i) rebalancing the distribution of PL values with a combination of synthetic undersampling and oversampling While each trial is produced from the same set of experimental and simulated rH-PL data, the order is set by choosing unique random seeds. Figure After training for 20 cycles, the LSTM model achieved an NRMSE of 4.6% and 1.8% for train and test partitions, respectively (Figure Clarifying which fundamental properties exert the most influence over long-term material properties will lead to more targeted compositional engineering which, in turn, will accelerate the development of stable perovskite for optoelectronics. We resolved the moisture-induced luminescence dynamics in the archetypal MAPbBr 3 and MAPbI 3 compositions and demonstrated the ability of machine-learning models based on recurrent neural networks to forecast the time evolution of light emission hours into the future. Through constant humidity experiments, we established the vapor pressure thresholds for both transient PL escalation and diminution for each composition. We identified reversible and repeatable luminescence enhancement ≥6× for both halide species by in situ rH-PL cycling experiments. Our measurements reveal the impact of the halide species in dictating water ingress, with MAPbBr 3 showing insignificant rH-PL hysteresis, ≈15× less than MAPbI 3 . For the pure-I MHP, the extent of luminescence increase grows over subsequent cycles despite ongoing degradation at the sample surface. Importantly, our time-dependent PL allowed us to elucidate the existence of both physisorption and chemisorption events for MAPbI 3 perovskites. We then implemented recurrent neural networks to compile a predictive model for the rH-driven dynamics, using ESN to quantify the exact path of the PL dynamics yielding an error rate <11% over 12 hours of prediction. Finally, we demonstrated an LSTM network capable of predicting the long-term light emission trend of a MAPbI 3 sample degrading over 72 humidity cycles, reaching percentage errors of 4.6% and 1.8%, for train and test sets, respectively. The environmentally-controlled PL measurements presented here provide a robust framework applicable to any perovskite composition that can be extended to include other environmental stressors, such as temperature and bias, and material properties, such as crystal structure, light absorption, charge carrier lifetime, and electrical conductivity. Specifically, in situ X-ray diffraction (XRD), All of these techniques are contactless, allowing assessment of the perovskite material without the need to consider the role of interfaces due to the addition of metallic contacts. Our ML models could be extended to these measurements, where the accuracy of recurrent neural networks, such as ESN and LSTM, would be tested against different data features. Similar data transformations could be applied to other environmental stressors and material properties, identifying the primary factors governing the perovskite dynamic response. For example, aging tests considering elevated temperature (>50 °C) under varying moisture concentrations or different atmospheres (O 2 or N 2 ), as well as distinct light treatments, could be implemented and broaden to consider their combined effects in the perovskites' response. By measuring a wide array of material properties under identical operating conditions, the subtle but relevant relationships between material structure and optoelectronic properties may be observed and used to predict device behavior and performance. Thus, we foresee the implementation of ML-based diagnostic tools, where new thin-film perovskite compositions could be rapidly and accurately screened for long-term stability based on contactless measurements. Fabrication of thin films and devices: Cleaning of substrates: Before usage, pre-patterned FTO substrates (TEC 15, Yingkou company, 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm) and microscopic glass were cleaned by sonication first in 2% Mucasol solution (Schülke company) in water, and then acetone and isopropanol for 15 min, respectively. Then the substrates were cleaned for another 15 minutes using UV-ozone treatment before usage. Deposition of TiO 2 layer: Compact TiO 2 layer was deposited at 450 oC via spray pyrolysis where the sprayed solution is made of 0.48 ml of acetylacetone and 0.72 ml of titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) in 10.8 ml of ethanol for 24 substrates in an array of 4 columns by 6 rows. Mesoporous TiO 2 layer was deposited from a diluted TiO 2 paste (30 N-RD TiO 2 paste, Great Cell) at the concentration of 120 mg per ml of ethanol at the spin-coating speed of 4000 rpm for 10s. After that, the samples were annealed at 450 oC for 30 min. The solutions were prepared and deposited inside nitrogenfilled glove boxes. The samples were transferred into a thermal evaporator for the deposition of 80 nm gold at the vacuum of below 1×10 -6 bar. The device active area is 0.144 cm 2 determined by the shallow mask. The Wavelabs Sinus-70 LED class AAA solar simulator was used as the light source for the J-V scans. The light intensity of 100 mW cm -2 was calibrated with a Silicon reference cell from Fraunhofer ISE. A Keithley 2400 SMU, controlled by a measurement control program written in LabView, was used for the J-V scans with a scan rate of 50 mV/s. 18 solar cells of MAPbBr 3 and MAPbI 3 individually were fabricated. In Situ Photoluminescence: Photoluminescence (PL) measurements of neat perovskite films deposited on microscopic glass were performed with a confocal microscope using a 100x, 0.75 N.A. objective in reflection mode and a photomultiplier tube (PMT) for detection. For all PL experiments, a 532 nm power-tunable diode laser was used with power densities of 3,500 mW cm -2 and 14,000 mW cm -2 for MAPbBr 3 and MAPbI 3 , respectively. Prior to coupling the laser illumination into the microscope, we coarsely attenuated the power with absorptive neutral density filters, modulated the light at 150 Hz with an optical chopper, and cleaned up the background emission with a 40 nm wide (FWHM) bandpass filter centered at 550 nm. An additional 750 nm short pass filter was included for the measurements on MAPbI 3 , while a 546 nm short pass filter was added for MAPbBr 3 . A long pass filter blocks the reflected excitation source, leaving only the PL incident upon the PMT. Here, the long pass filter wavelengths, 750 nm for MAPbI 3 and 550 nm for MAPbBr 3 , were selected to provide the maximum range of spectrally-dependent measurements. The PMT was operated at 650 V and its output was recorded with a lock-in amplifier. In all instances, the sample ambience was controlled through the use of a custom-built environmental chamber. Scanning Electron Microscopy: The micrographs and energy-dispersive X-ray images were acquired with a Hitachi SU-70 FEG SEM operated at a 10 kV accelerating voltage with 6000× magnification. A 150-node echo state network (ESN) Long Short Term Memory predictions for simulated PL degradation: 