A ferromagnetic gyroscope (FG) is a ferromagnet whose angular momentum is dominated by electron spin polarization and that will precess under the action of an external torque, such as that due to a magnetic field. Here we model and analyze FG dynamics and sensitivity, focusing on practical schemes for experimental realization. In the case of a freely floating FG, we model the transition from dynamics dominated by libration in relatively high externally applied magnetic fields, to those dominated by precession at relatively low applied fields. Measurement of the libration frequency enables in situ measurement of the magnetic field and a technique to reduce the field below the threshold for which precession dominates the FG dynamics. We note that evidence of gyroscopic behavior is present even at magnetic fields much larger than the threshold field below which precession dominates. We also model the dynamics of an FG levitated above a type-I superconductor via the Meissner effect, and find that for FGs with dimensions larger than about 100 nm the observed precession frequency is reduced compared to that of a freely floating FG. This is akin to negative feedback that arises from the distortion of the field from the FG by the superconductor. Finally we assess the sensitivity of an FG levitated above a type-I superconductor to exotic spin-dependent interactions under practical experimental conditions, demonstrating the potential of FGs for tests of fundamental physics. Gyroscopes are valuable tools for metrology and navigation due to their sensitivity to rotations. For example, the Gravity Probe B space mission contained several spinning spheres made of fused quartz and coated with a layer of niobium Atoms, molecules, and nuclei, that can possess angular momentum due to their rotational motion as well as due to intrinsic spin, can act as gyroscopes In the present work we model the dynamics of a freely floating FG and the dynamics of an FG levitated above a perfect type-I superconductor (SC). We find that the response of an FG to external torques is considerably modified in the case of an FG levitated above an SC: the precession frequency can be reduced by orders of magnitude as compared to that for a freely floating FG. Taking this effect into account, we analyze the sensitivity of an FG levitated above an SC to torques from exotic fields Under conditions where the angular momentum of a ferromagnet is dominated by the intrinsic spin of the polarized electrons, an applied torque is predicted to cause gyroscopic precession of the ferromagnet Magnetization dynamics of the ferromagnet, including precession and nutation motions, have been observed in thin films using ferromagnetic resonance In the present work, we propose a strategy for a proofof-principle experiment aimed at observing FG precession, and analyze a concrete example of such an experiment involving a levitating sphere above a type-I SC. We model the behavior of an FG levitated above an SC and compare to the behavior of a freely floating FG. Qualitative and quantitative differences are observed in the precession dynamics of the FG in the two cases. In relation to tests of fundamental physics, FGs have recently been proposed as tools to measure general-relativistic precession As discussed in Ref. Let us reformulate the criterion L S for a ferromagnet to be in the precessing regime in the following way: the product of the moment of inertia I and the precession frequency Ω (that represents the classical rotational an-gular momentum of the system) should be smaller than the spin content of the ferromagnet where N is the number of polarized spins and is Planck's constant, such that each electron has an intrinsic spin of /2. Rephrasing (1) as a bound on frequency, we have or as a bound on the external magnetic field B applied on the ferromagnet, Here g is the Landé g-factor and μ B is the Bohr magneton. If the applied magnetic field B is smaller than B * , we expect the ferromagnet to be in the precessing regime. One of the key features of an FG is the fact that a torque on the electron spins generates macroscopic rotation of the ferromagnet. This behavior of an FG is closely related to the Barnett Constructing an FG by creating suitable conditions for a magnet to precess instead of tipping opens the possibility of a sensitive measurement device. For instance, by bringing a SQUID near the FG and measuring the change in magnetic flux as the FG precesses, the torques acting on the FG can be precisely measured To better understand the dynamics of an FG, we model a freely floating FG in space subjected to a constant magnetic field B, similar to the modelling in Ref. where g e is the electron g-factor, and γ is the gyromagnetic ratio. We consider a spherical FG with radius of 30 μm and 7 × 10 15 electron spins, identical to the microsphere used in the experiment described in Ref. that the threshold precession frequency Ω * described in Eq. ( where I = 2mr 2 /5 is the moment of inertia for a sphere of mass m and radius r. The frequency ω I plays the role of the nutation frequency in the zero magnetic field limit for the FG dynamics. The equations of motion for the ferromagnet are where we defined the following dimensionless vectors: the unit spin n ≡ S/S, the rotational angular momentum ≡ L/S, and the total angular momentum j = n + . Equations ( Solving for j(t) and n(t), Fig. To observe precession of a ferromagnetic gyroscope, we propose to work at an external magnetic field weaker than the threshold, below which precession dominates (at sufficiently low magnetic fields, the amplitude of nutation becomes relatively small so that the dynamics of the FG are dominated by the precession). Generally, in experiments, this will require both shielding and careful control of the external magnetic field. Fortunately, the ferromagnet itself can be used as a magnetometer even for fields larger than the threshold field for precession by measuring the libration frequency ω l . Oscillation of a ferromagnet at the libration frequency ω l was observed in soft ferromagnetic levitating particles Since the libration frequency ω l depends on the magnetic field, it can be used to measure and reduce the mag- Modelling the dynamics of an FG by Eqs. ( The SQUID pick-up loop measures the flux from the FG in the horizontal direction x. The middle line (dashed blue) is the sole frequency appearing in the spectrum of a "magnetic brick" (hypothetical ferromagnet with zero spin polarization but equivalent magnetization, see main text) with a radius of 30 μm in an external magnetic field. The red and green curves are the frequencies of a fully spin-polarized ferromagnet with the same radius, corresponding respectively to nutation and precession frequencies. As might be expected from Eq. ( netic field until precession dominates the dynamics. For a freely floating FG, as one reduces the magnetic field below the threshold field defined in Eq. ( As for the precession frequency, green curve in Fig. Above the threshold, the librational-mode frequency ω l can be observed and used to measure and control the magnetic field. Using this technique the magnetic field can be tuned below the threshold field where the FG dynamics clearly display precession and nutation, demonstrating the gyroscopic behavior of a ferromagnet and confirming experimentally the prediction of precession. In the next section we examine this experimental strategy in the context of a ferromagnetic microsphere levitating above a type-I SC. A promising avenue for experimental realization of an FG are optomechanical and magnetomechanical systems, for instance: a ferromagnet levitated by magnetic or electric fields. In particular, the motion, dynamics and stability of a magnetically levitated ferromagnet have been studied The image field B is a magnetic field emanating from the image dipole located at a vertical distance 2z (center to center) below the levitating FG, where z is the height of the FG above the SC plane. In SI units, where μ 0 is the permeability of free space, r is relative to the position of the image dipole r = rr image , r = (x, y, z) , μñ is the magnetic moment of the image dipole and μn is the magnetic moment of the levitating ferromanget Here we take the origin of the coordinate system to be on the SC plane. The image dipole has the same horizontal component of the magnetic moment as the FG, and opposite vertical component. To include B into the equations of motion in section II, we derive the Larmor frequency associated with this image dipole field so that Eq. ( Moreover, we include the ferromagnet center-of-mass equations of motion where p is the FG center-of-mass momentum, g is the gravitational acceleration, and the factor 1/2 is a consequence of the image dipole being not frozen in type-I SC, i.e., following the levitating dipole Modelling the levitating FG dynamics of the spin vector n and the center-of-mass motion, we recover the frequencies ω z and ω β experimentally observed in Ref. where n z0 is the initial vertical component of the FG magnetic moment, which is linked to the tilt angle β where n 0 is the unit spin vector and n z is the length of its vertical component, at the initial moment of the modelling. Such a vertical component of the magnetic moment and spin translates to a vertical component of the total angular momentum, since j = n + . The librational mode ω β corresponds to an oscillation between n z and z . The image field does not change j z = n z + z , thus as long as the mean value of z is not zero, precession occurs around the vertical axis, i.e. rotation of n in the horizontal plane ensues. In Fig. We can explain the appearance of ω xy in terms of the image dipole. The image dipole precesses with the FG so the component of the image field in the horizontal xy plane acting on the FG is constant in the rotating frame. On the other hand, the tilt of the FG with respect to the vertical axis changes the field acting on the FG due to the image dipole -the librational oscillation causes an oscillating field along z that induces FG precession. Since the librational oscillation frequency is fast compared to the precession frequency, effectively the FG is sensitive to the average field, such that bigger librational oscillation results in bigger effective field and faster precession. Note that the vertical component of the field appears due to the initial tilt angle of the FG magnetization axis out of the horizontal plane. Such a precession was not observed in a previous experiments as the ferromagnetic microsphere was not free to rotate in the horizontal plane, because of the SC's tilt out of the horizontal plane The above precession occurs due to the image field, while to use an FG to measure external torques we seek to observe the effect due to, for example, an external magnetic field. Therefore we introduce an external magnetic field B ext (B ext ≡ B), consequently adding μ∇ (B • n) to the right-hand-side of Eq (14); Eq. ( Since j z is a constant of motion, if the tilt angle β is initially zero (horizontal FG with respect to the SC surface), so that j z (t = 0) = 0, then the angular momentum associated with precession z = IΩ must be equal and opposite to s z = N sin β. Thus we have The magnitude of the image dipole field a distance z 0 above the SC surface is and its z-component is The effective magnetic field that the FG experiences is the vector sum of the external magnetic field B ext (taken to be along the z-axis) and B z , so the precession frequency Ω is now given by Solving for Ω we find Thus an FG levitated above an SC possesses an effectively reduced gyromagnetic ratio compared to the freely floating FG. The suppression of the effective gyromagnetic ratio due to the image field can be explained by a mechanism analogous to negative feedback The image field is typically much larger than B * ; hence precession can be observed in higher magnetic fields for an FG levitated over an SC compared to a freely floating FG. However, the precession frequency is smaller compared to a free FG. For a spherical FG with 30 micron radius, corresponding to the experiment of Ref. The ratio of a precession frequencies of an FG levitating above an SC [Eq. ( initial tilt angle with null B ext , and that with B ext and null initial tilt angle [in accordance with Eq. ( To observe ω l , and then precession, an external magnetic field should be introduced, and several modifications should be made to the experimental apparatus used in An FG is a correlated system of N electron spins that acts as a gyroscope with total spin ∼ N /2. Spin projections transverse to the FG's magnetization axis fluctuate rapidly due to interaction with the crystalline lattice while, unless acted upon by an external torque, the expectation value of the total spin vector S remains fixed due to angular momentum conservation. This behavior enables rapid averaging of quantum uncertainty, opening the possibility in principle of measuring torques on electron spins with a sensitivity many orders of magnitude beyond the present state-of-the-art Sensitivity estimates carried out in Refs. where v th is the mean thermal velocity of the residual gas atoms and m is their mass. The effect of the gas collisions on FG dynamics are reduced as compared to the freely floating FG by the "negative feedback" from the image dipole field, under the conditions considered here by a factor of ≈ 1/340, resulting in an uncertainty in the measured FG precession frequency of Other potential noise sources, such as thermal currents and blackbody radiation, were considered in Refs. The precession of the FG can be measured with a SQUID. For a SQUID with pick-up loop radius of ≈ 1 μm situated about a micron from an FG (such that the flux capture is maximal), the amplitude of the time-varying magnetic flux is Φ ≈ 10 -12 T • m 2 . Low-temperature SQUIDs have a flux sensitivity of δΦ 10 -21 T • m 2 / √ Hz Since the uncertainty in the measurement of precession due to gas collisions is far larger than that related to the SQUID measurement, requirements on the pick-up loop geometry and SQUID sensitivity are correspondingly relaxed. Estimates have shown that ∆Ω det appears to surpass the "standard quantum noise limit" As an example of the potential of FGs as tools for testing fundamental physics, we consider an experimental search for yet-to-be-discovered (exotic) spin-dependent interactions mediated by new bosons where (g e P ) 2 /(4π c) is the dimensionless pseudoscalar coupling constant between electrons, m e is the electron mass, S 1,2 are the electron spins, m is the mass of the hypothetical pseudoscalar boson, c is the speed of light, and r = rr is the separation between the electrons. One could search for spin precession induced by the pseudoscalar-mediated dipole-dipole interaction, Eq. ( An experiment using a one-micron-radius FG levitated above an SC would be sensitive to the region of parameter space bound from below by the dotted red line in Fig. The proposed experiment with the levitated FG assumes as a polarized spin source a 1-mm radius SmCo5 sphere positioned 1 mm away from the FG and an integration time of t = 10 6 s. spin-dependent interactions, which could open a window to beyond-the-Standard-Model physics. In summary, we present a roadmap for experimental realization of a ferromagnetic gyroscope (FG). In essence, an FG is a ferromagnet that precesses under the influence of external torques. Ferromagnetic gyroscopes can be used as a new types of magnetometers and gyroscopes, and we have shown that they can be particularly useful as tools for precision tests of fundamental physics. We model and explain the dynamics of a freely floating FG in space. We propose a strategy to experimentally realize an FG. The librational mode in the magnetization dynamics serves as a calibration tool for the applied magnetic field. This enables the magnetic field to be tuned such that the precession mode of an FG is observable. We also compare the dynamics of a freely floating FG to that of an FG levitated above a type-I superconductor. The effect of the SC is modelled using an image dipole field. We find that the SC has a significant effect on the FG dynamics: the image dipole field generates a "negative feedback" that effectively suppresses the gyromagnetic ratio as compared to the case of a freely floating FG. The effective magnetic field threshold below which precession motion is dominant is higher for the case of an SC compared to a freely floating FG [Eq. Might a magnet be a spinning top? Instead of pointing to one's north, wobble around it and nod by intrinsic spins cohort. Aye, at small enough magnetic field a spectrum splitting is revealed. A levitating sphere above cool plate modelled to show it in such state. Once a compass made to be a gyroscope with precision spree, for exotic fields it may test and basic laws of physics attest.