Pulsed laser deposition from a Nd:YAG laser was employed in production of hundreds of nanometer thick quasicrystalline Ti-Zr-Ni films on glass substrate. The influence of deposition temperature Ts on the structure, morphology and microstructure of the films across their thickness was investigated. The morphology and microstructure features were evaluated by X-ray diffraction and transmission electron microscopy techniques. The low deposition temperatures were found to produce films with nanometer sized grains embedded in an amorphous matrix. The grains exhibit quasicrystalline order. The higher deposition temperatures lead to films whose structure is not uniform all along the growth direction. The layer in contact with the substrate is a very thin amorphous layer. The main part of the film consists of crystallized columns. The columns have grown from a nano-crystallized layer where the size of crystallites increases with increasing thickness. Since the discovery of quasicrystals in 1984, research in the field developed extremely quickly and intensely. Quasicrystals were found to exhibit a very specific combination of interesting and unexpected physical and chemical properties In fact, such a technological constraint corresponds well to the constraints implied by an eventual energetic application like hydrogen storage. Indeed, the optimisation of solid batteries necessitates the optimisation of the surface/volume ratio of the constitutive material of the batteries. This fact gives hope that a possible industrial application may be found for the thermodynamically stable Ti-Zr-Ni icosahedral quasicrystalline phase that has been shown to store hydrogen in a reversible way Films were prepared on glass substrate under high vacuum in a stainless steel chamber. A pulsed Nd:YAG (Qantel, YG 571C) laser was used for the ablation process, working at the fundamental wavelength (1064 nm), a repetition rate of 10 Hz and pulse duration of 10 ns. The laser fluence used was 72 J/cm 2 . Experiments were performed at an initial pressure of 10 -7 -10 -8 mbar. The targets used for the pulsed laser deposition were obtained by cutting a Ti45Zr38Ni17 ingot and were installed on a rotating holder. The ingots were prepared by melting high purity metals in an induction furnace under helium atmosphere (Radio Frequency melting). Their chemical homogeneity and dispersion of phases were determined by electron probe microanalysis (EPMA). The desired substrate temperatures (Ts = 25, 100, 140, 160, 240 and 275 °C) were reached thanks to a small resistance located behind the substrate holder, and checked by a thermocouple. Typical deposition rates obtained were 1-8 Ǻ/s. More details on the set-up of the experiment can be found in Compositions of films were checked by EPMA and found to be equal to Ti41.5Zr 41.5Ni17 (atomic %, ± 1 at. %). The films were characterized by X-ray diffraction (CoKradiation, λ = 0.178897 nm). In case a texture was present in the film, we used a four-circles diffractometer. 22 scans were thus recorded at different χ and added in order to accumulate and vizualize all the possible Bragg reflections on a same pattern. These results were obtained with χ ranging from 0 to 55° assuring a φ rotation of the sample at 600 rotations per minute. In this way it is possible to visualize all the possible Bragg diffraction peaks in the range 30° ≤ 2θ ≤ 96°. TEM observations were carried out on a PHILIPS CM200 microscope operating at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. Cross-sections of the samples deposited at Ts =100 °C and 275 °C were prepared by ion milling with GATAN PIPS equipment samples that were mechanically pre-thinned and embedded. Four-circles X-ray diffractograms were obtained from the films respectively deposited at Ts = 25, 100, 140, 160, 240 and 275 °C and are given in Fig. A fair idea of the growth microstructure of the films for any used Ts can be deduced crossing observation of X-ray results with those of TEM results. X-ray diagrams show the structure of the films is progressively modified with increasing Ts (Fig. Pulsed laser deposition is therefore an efficient process for growing well adherent good quasicrystalline samples. Two techniques of investigation were necessary to fully characterize the samples and confrontation of both type of results (TEM and X-ray diffraction) successfully gave a fair idea of the structure, morphology and microstructure of the films across their thickness versus the substrate temperature. The substrate temperature was revealed to be a critical parameter determining the structure and microstructure of the films. The first stages of growth systematically adopt a nano-crystalline morphology that grows on an extremely thin amorphous layer. The increase of the size of the crystallites with thickness during the first stages condition the switch to a second columnar growth mode and occurs more easily the higher the substrate temperature Ts. The switch to the second growth mode is quicker, the higher the Ts. No increase of crystallites'size is observed with increasing thickness at low Ts and films are homogeneously constituted of nano-crystallites whose size also depends on Ts, being smaller at small Ts. The authors would like to thank Dr R. Ralani from GATAN for preparing the cross-section samples. 