The remarkable mechanical properties of high entropy alloys can be further improved by interstitial alloying. In this work we employ density functional theory calculations to study the solution energies of dilute carbon interstitial atoms in tetrahedral and octahedral sites in bcc HfNbTiVZr. Our results indicate that carbon interstitials in tetrahedral sites are unstable, and the preferred octahedral sites present a large spread in the energy of solution. The inclusion of carbon interstitials induces large structural relaxations with long-range effects. The effect of local chemical environment on the energy of solution is investigated by performing a local cluster expansion including studies of its correlation with the carbon atomic Voronoi volume. However, the spread in solution energetics can not be explained with a local environment analysis only pointing towards a complex, long-range influence of interstitial carbon in this alloy. In recent years high entropy alloys (HEA) have gathered a vast interest due to their mechanical properties. In particular, HEA consisting of refractory elements have possible applications as high performance materials at elevated temperatures. Near equimolar WTaMoNb and WTaMoNbV have displayed better mechanical properties at elevated temperatures than conventional Ni based superalloys The properties of refractory HEAs can be further improved by interstitial solution of other elements in the structure. For example, the incorporation of carbon atoms into HEA has been studied experimentally There are 6 octahedral sites and 12 tetrahedral sites per unit cell in the bcc structure. Octahedral sites are located at the center of the faces and mid-points of the edges of the unit cell. Octahedral sites are six-fold coordinated, and the octahedron is distorted with two atoms closer to the center than the other four atoms. Tetrahedral sites are located between the center of the faces and mid points of each edge. Figure In a HEA the nearest neighbor polyhedra around the interstices are distorted due to the relaxation effects caused by the presence of the multiple components Figure The DFT calculations are performed using the projector augmented wave method The solution energies ΔE #$% of C atoms are calculated as: where E(alloy + C)) and E(alloy) are the energies of the alloys with and without one C atom. E(C) is the energy of graphite per atom. Due to the inadequate description of Van der Waals interactions of the GGA approximation, there is a large overestimation of the energy difference between graphite and diamond The size mismatch and different element interactions give rise to considerable distortions in the relaxed system. The relaxation of the carbon free HEA HfNbTiVZr yields a lattice constant of 3.36 Å. Fazakas et al. reported a 3.40 Å lattice constant determined from theoretical calculations The initial energies of supercells with interstitial carbon placed in the carbon-free relaxed HEA, and the final energies after relaxing the supercells with the carbon atom for both tetrahedral and octahedral positions are shown in Figure Figure Figure Figure To investigate the effect of local chemical environment on the solution energies, we have studied its correlation with volume and local valence electron concentration (VEC). Figure E 5$% ≅ ε 89 n 89 + ε ;< n ;< + ε => n => + ε ? n ? + ε @A n @A (2) E 5$% ≅ ε 89 n 89 + ε ;< n ;< + ε => n => + ε ? n ? + ε @A n @A + ε ?$% V > (3) . Calculated versus predicted energies using on-site interactions obtained by a local cluster expansion. In this work we have calculated from first principles the energy and structural effects of solution of dilute carbon interstitials in HfNbTiVZr HEA and assessed the impact of local chemical environment on these energies by probing 720 tetrahedral sites and 360 octahedral sites. An excellent agreement between the pair distribution function from the SQS supercell and that from experimental neutron total scattering results has been obtained. We found that carbon atoms initially placed in tetrahedral positions are unstable and move to octahedral or other interstitial positions after relaxation. The solution energies of C in HfNbTiVZr with respect of HEA and graphite display a broad distribution, with an average value of -1.01 eV and a standard deviation 0.31 eV. Both, the average value and minimum value of -1.56 eV are significantly lower than the calculated solution energies of C in pure bcc Nb and V. The energies of solution were negative for all octahedral sites except one with Nb rich local environment. Among all environments that are rich in a single metal type, Ti-rich presents the most favorable sites for carbon interstitials. The introduction of carbon interstitials produces large distortions in the system that extend beyond the first and second nearest neighbors shells. The wide range of displacements found in the nearest neighbor shell, and the failure of the simple local cluster expansion approaches indicate that interaction with atoms beyond the first nearest neighbor shell are needed to understand the complex distribution of local solution energetics for this material system.