The internal luminescence quantum efficiency (Q i lum ) provides an excellent assessment of the optoelectronic quality of semiconductors. To determine Q i lum of perovskite films from the experimentally accessible external luminescence quantum efficiency ( Q e lum ) it is essential to account for photon recycling, and this requires knowledge of the photon escape probability (p ̅ e ). Here, we establish an analysis procedure based on a curve fitting model that accurately determines p ̅ e of perovskite films from photoluminescence (PL) spectra measured with a confocal microscope and an integrating sphere setup. We show that scattering-induced outcoupling of initially-trapped PL explains commonly observed red-shifted and broadened PL spectral shapes and leads to p ̅ e being more than 10% higher in absolute terms compared to earlier assumptions. Applying our model to CH3NH3PbI3 films with exceptionally high Q e lum up to 47.4% sets a real benchmark for Q i lum at 78.0 ± 0.5%, revealing there is beyond a factor of two more scope for reducing non-radiative recombination than previously thought. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has reached a certified 25.5%. where p̅ r = 1 -p̅ e -p̅ a is the probability for photon reabsorption in the perovskite and p̅ a is the probability for parasitic absorption within the charge transport layers or electrodes. Conceptual studies demonstrated that PR could contribute to enhance the V OC of a PSC (∆V OC PR ) by up to ~80 mV in the radiative limit and consequently the PCE by ~2% absolute. Abebe et al. (see Figure Therefore, accurate knowledge of p̅ e is paramount to determine Q i lum and thus the scope for minimizing non-radiative recombination in perovskite films as well as to estimate the potential ∆V OC PR of PSCs. Here, we reveal that it is key to account for PL that is initially trapped in guided modes, but coupled out before reabsorption upon scattering after some length of travel within the perovskite film. (determined by analyzing confocal PL measurements); 2) the total externally emitted PL spectrum E tot exp (λ) (measured with an integrating sphere (IS) setup); and 3) the corresponding Q e lum . We validate our model with Monte Carlo simulations and apply it to high-quality polycrystalline CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPI) films which exhibit exceptionally high Q e lum up to 47.4% without any additional passivation layer. We show that p̅ e of these films is more than 10% higher in absolute terms compared to earlier assumptions and set a real benchmark for Q i lum at 78.0 ± 0.5%. This means that there is at least a factor of two more scope for reducing nonradiative recombination in perovskite films than previously thought; there remains more room for material optimization. Our curve fitting model, provided as a user-friendly open-source Matlab app, can be easily employed by researchers to accurately determine Q i lum . We also make use of the scattering properties of perovskite films and propose a new procedure to analyze parasitic absorption in a layer stack. Finally, we discuss the implications of our results on the effect that PR has on enhancing the PCE of state-of-the-art PSCs and underline the importance of further reducing interfacial recombination and parasitic absorption losses on the way towards the radiative efficiency limit. It has been recently revealed that the PL spectrum of a perovskite film measured at a lateral distance r > 3 μm away from a small illumination spot (< 1 μm) already exhibits asymmetry and a small red-shift (Figure (1) The confocal setup used in this work detects only PL emitted within a limited field of view (FOV) (~3 μm radius) around a small illumination spot (~2 μm) (see Experimental Procedures and Figure (1) -( (3) are in between the values measured with setup (1) (peak at ~770.3 nm, FWHM of ~39.2 nm) and setup (2) (peak at ~786.2 nm, FWHM of ~50.7 nm). Firstly, this illustrative experiment reveals the significant contribution of scattered PL to the total front emission, which is therefore also detected by typically employed standard front collection PL setups. In Note S2 we provide a more in-depth analysis of the absolute photon flux (Figure Compared to solar cells based on the epitaxial grown mature semiconductor GaAs which has a near-atomically flat surface and an extremely low density of defects (~10 7 -10 8 cm -3 ), Note that for simplicity we assume a perfect back-reflector here and discuss the more general case of a film on glass in Note S4 and Figure It is important to stress that the discussed scattering is not to be mistaken with Lambertian light scattering like in textured silicon solar cells The curve fitting model introduced in this work fits PL spectra measured with an IS setup (E tot exp (λ)) with I(λ) and α(λ) determined from confocal PL measurements as input (see Note S3 and Figure The effective escape probability is simply the ratio of total externally emitted to total internally emitted photons ∫ I tot (λ) (7), where ∫ I tot ∫ I tot (λ) denote the probabilities for direct emission and scattering-induced outcoupling, respectively. With E tot exp (λ) measured experimentally, we need to derive I tot (λ). In steady-state, I tot (λ) is composed of initially-emitted and reemitted PL (I 0 (λ) and I PR (λ); events (1) and (2) in Figure E tot exp (λ) is a superposition of directly emitted PL (E d-tot (λ); events (A) and (Bi) in Figure and scattered PL (E s-tot (λ); events (Ci) in Figure p e-d (λ) accounts for the fact that photons that would otherwise directly escape the film (with probability p e-d ) are partially reabsorbed (compare Figure All remaining PL is initially trapped with probability (1 -p e-d ) and we consider the following to model the effect of scattering: a small fraction P s of trapped PL couples out after an average propagation distance z av within the film as visualized in Figure ∞ i=0 (11), which leads to the following final expression with fitting parameters a tot , p e-d , d eff , P s and z av . We emphasize that Equation (11) describes an 'average scattering' of PL either trapped in the perovskite film or substrate (compare Figure To validate our curve fitting model, we employ a Monte Carlo approach to simulate 'externallyobserved' PL spectra with all other parameters known. The Monte Carlo simulation (see Experimental Procedures and detailed description in Note S5) considers all radiative processes and subsequent event-chains illustrated in Figure and E s-tot sim (λ)). This way, we can fit E tot sim (λ) with Equation ( The values of Q i lum and p̅ e are reproduced with close to perfect agreement for a large range of fixed P s , while p̅ e_d and p̅ e_s are sensitive to its choice and agree best for the smallest possible P s (see related input parameters and fit results for various values of P s in Table These results corroborate four important aspects: (i) the proposed conception of PL emission (Figure ~58% of the total emission for the 260 nm-thick MAPI film (see upper panels in Figure We proceed in analyzing the effects of photon recycling by plotting the wavelength-dependence for the 260 nm-thick MAPI film in Figure Impressively, Q e lum (λ) already exceeds a value of 100% (250%) for λ ≳ 786 nm (830 nm) together with p r (λ) and p e (λ) approaching 0% and 100% in that spectral range, respectively. The underlying reasons are the exponential drop in absorption (compare Figures To discuss the implications of our results on PSCs, we calculate the potential ∆V OC PR via Equation ( (measured with an IS setup) of a 160 nm-thick MAPI film spin-coated either on a glass substrate, on the backside of an ITO-coated glass substrate or directly on top of ITO. We do not expect a strong effect of parasitic absorption on directly emitted PL (that is, p̅ e-d ) considering PL emitted within the bottom escape cone only propagates through the ITO layer once, which is expected to result in a relative absorption of only ~3.2% and no peak shift considering the Lambert-Beer law (Figure In this work, we establish a curve fitting model that allows accurate determination of the effective photon escape probability (p̅ e ) and thereby of the internal luminescence quantum efficiency (Q i lum ) of perovskite films. We reveal that it is of paramount importance to account for initially-trapped PL that scatters out of the films before being reabsorbed, confirming that the large variety of PL spectral shapes reported in the literature for perovskite films can be explained by simply considering light propagation and scattering. To date, not accounting for scattering has led to a significant underestimation of p̅ e by more than 10% in absolute terms and thus to an overestimation of Q i lum and the effect that PR has on enhancing the PCE of PSCs. Applying our model to CH3NH3PbI3 films with exceptionally high external luminescence quantum efficiencies up to 47.4% sets a real benchmark for Q i lum at 78.0 ± 0.5%, revealing there is beyond a factor of two more scope for minimizing non-radiative recombination in perovskite films than previously thought. Finally, we propose a new procedure to analyze parasitic absorption in a layer stack and highlight the importance of further enhancing Q i lum and minimizing parasitic absorption in complete PSCs. This work provides important new insights into the photophysics of perovskite films and establishes a novel method to accurately determine Q i lum that will help develop PSCs towards the radiative efficiency limit. CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPI) perovskite layers were prepared in dry air (<1% relative humidity) using a lead acetate trihydrate (Pb(OAc)2, Sigma Aldrich, 99.999%) precursor with the addition of hypophosphorous acid (HPA, Sigma Aldrich, 50wt% in H2O) Based upon previous work, an optimized stoichiometry y = MAI : Pb(OAc)2 = 2.99 was employed which yields stable and pin-hole free films with high Q e lum 38,39 . To fabricate MAPI films with thicknesses of 80/125 nm and 160/260 nm, precursor solutions with concentrations of 25 wt% and 40 wt% were spin-coated on cleaned (ultrasonic bath in acetone and isopropanol for 10 min) and oxygen plasma treated microscope slides (16x16 mm 2 ) at 2000/6000 rpm for 60 s, respectively. Directly after spin-coating, a flow of dry air was directed towards the samples for ~30 s before annealing them at 100 °C for 5 min. Triple-cation perovskite films (Cs0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17 The samples were excited by the spectrally filtered output of a pulsed supercontinuum laser source (Fianium WhiteLase SC400, 20 MHz repetition rate, ~10 ps pulse width). The excitation wavelength was 530 nm and measurements were performed at various intensities between ~0.4 W/cm 2 and ~4‧10 4 W/cm 2 to study the effect of intensity (and thus film temperature) on the PL spectral shape and Urbach Energy. The confocal spectra used for determining α(λ) and I(λ) (Figure For deriving confocal PL spectra as reported in this work, measurements were performed on ~200 spots on each sample for the respective laser intensity using a XYZ Nano-LP200 piezostage and subsequently the data was averaged, smoothed, fitted and extrapolated (see detailed procedure in Figures Integrating sphere measurements were carried out inside an integrating sphere (LabSphere, 15 cm diameter) in ambient air (relative humidity < 40%). For cross-check, measurements were performed at two different setups at Heidelberg University and KIT. A green laser (OBIS 532 nm CW LS 50 mW from Coherent or LD-515-10MG from Roithner Lasertechnik, respectively) was directed into the sphere through a small entrance port (4 mm diameter). An optical fiber was used to collect the emission from the exit port of the integrating sphere and transfer it to the spectrometer (QE65 Pro from Ocean Optics or AvaSpec-ULS2048x64TEC from Avantes, respectively). The spectral response of both setups was calibrated using a calibration lamp (HL-3plus-INT-Cal from Ocean Optics). All raw measured spectra were recalculated to give power spectrums using the integration time. The external luminescence quantum efficiency (Q e lum ) was determined using the method described by de Mello et al. The Monte Carlo code for simulating 'externally-observed' PL spectra has been deposited and is freely available at https://github.com/pfassl/FaMi-model. The code in the repository is associated with a GNU General Public License (GPL 3.0). The Monte Carlo approach is discussed in detail in Note S5 and visualized in Figure The curve fitting procedure was performed using the curve fitting toolbox in Matlab using the least squares method (lsqcurvefit). A user-friendly Matlab app for performing the fitting (based upon Equation ( The smoothed data and extrapolated fits only slightly deviate at very low PL intensities. Considering the smoothed data points around 700 nm and 860 nm are slightly affected by a limited signal-to-noise ratio, the smoothed + extrapolated fit dataset (red curve) is employed in the following to extract the absorption coefficient of MAPI films with different thickness with Equation (S9) or (S11) (see Figures Considering that the temperatures extracted from the integrating sphere measurements was found to be in the range ~305-315 K (note that in the studied intensity range of ~0.1-3 Sun the measured spectral shape is unchanged, see Figure ) -1) -1 (with fitting parameters c and E U ). The fits are extrapolated to 700 nm and 860 nm, respectively, in order to represent the data in that spectral range (see dotted lines) (compare Figure Measurements were performed for films with various thicknesses, at multiple spots and at various irradiation intensities. The results show that E U linearly scales with temperature, in line with recent results by Ledinsky et al. PL emission in semiconductor films: The following considerations are based on the detailed balance between absorption and emission The internal emission rate of photons within a semiconductor film (per unit volume, per energy interval dE) at energy E and temperature T is given by is the black body spectrum, n(E) is the refractive index, α(E, T) the absorption coefficient spectrum and ∆E F the quasi fermi level splitting of electrons and holes (V OC = q • ∆E F in an ideal solar cell). The approximation made in Equation ( For a homogeneous distribution of electrons and holes, which is a good approximation for perovskite thin films considering that the diffusion length typically extends the film thickness and charges are quickly redistributed by photon reabsoption where the only difference to Equation (S2) is that the absorption coefficient is replaced with the absorptance a(E, T). Note that we for simplicity, we omit the notation 'PL' in the rest of the manuscript such that I(λ) ≝ I PL (E, T) • ( A more rigorous calculation of p̅ e was performed by Rau et al. The escape probability p̅ e of isotropically emitted photons in a semiconductor film (into air) is the ratio of the externally emitted photon flux over the total internally emitted photon flux and can be written considering the absorptance a(E, T) and differences in refractive index via where d is the film thickness and n 2 (E) the refractive index of the absorber layer. The factor c is correlated to the étendue and equals 2π if emission is possible in all directions (for example, a film on a glass substrate) and π when emission is limited to the top hemisphere (for example, a solar cell with a perfect back reflector). Considering n(E) derived by Loeper et al. The absorptance a(E, T) of the active layer depends on the optical properties (that is, scattering, reflection etc.) and geometry of a film or multiple layer stack. For estimating the correlation between a(E) and α(E) (for simplicity, we omit noting the temperature T from here), typically two generic idealized scenarios are considered for solar cells: (i) Lambert-Beer-case: At normal incidence, the absorptance of a flat solar cell with a perfect backreflector (light propagates twice through the active layer) and negligible front reflectivity is expressed as considering the Lambert-Beer law with film thickness d. (ii) Lambertian-Light-Trapping: The absorptance in the limiting case of Lambertian light trapping (for example, valid for textured Si solar cells) is expressed as where n(E) is the refractive index of the film Given the rather smooth surface of typical spin-coated perovskite films (~10-40 nm Rq roughness), for simple analytical models the idealized Lambert-Beer-case is employed in many reports. However, especially for full solar cell stacks, interference effects must be considered in addition to accurately describe the absorptance over the whole energy range and for all incident angles, for example by employing the Transfer Matrix Method In the special case of normal incidence and detection which is limited to a very small field-of-view (FOV) (as approximately the case for the confocal microscope employed in this work), the absorptance can be expressed using the measured (normalized) external emission spectrum (E PL n (E) = E PL (E) E PL max ; see Figure with dimensionless scaling parameter b = E PL max • e ( ∆E F ) . In addition, the idealized Lambert-Beer-case (Equation (S5)) can be further 'improved' by considering the reflectivities at the front side (R f ) and back side (R b ) of the film Equating Equations (S8) and (S7) and solving for α(E) yields the following analytical expression for α(E): A further simplification can be made in case R f ≈ R b = R, which simplifies the above expressions to: and thus For most confocal PL measurements, a ~100 nm thick PMMA layer was spin-coated on the perovskite films to protect the films from moisture-and light-induced degradation. In that case, with n PMMA ≈ n Glass ≈ 1.5 (at ~530 nm), we used Equation (S11) with R = 0.1 to determine α(E). In case there is no PMMA film on top, we used Equation (S9) with R f = 0.2 and R b = 0.1. To obtain absolute values of α(E), we scale the data to high-resolution ellipsometry data for CH3NH3PbI3 films by Philips et al. In principle, the value of b , which is related to ∆E F (compare Equation (S7)), can be determined experimentally by absolute photoluminescence intensity measurements, which for example has been employed in some recent reports When fitting such experimentally measured absolute intensity PL spectra with Equation (S3) in order to obtain the shape of a(E) (as for example done by Braly et al. The processes depicted in Figure Initially absorbed and reabsorbed photons generate charge carriers which isotropically emit PL with internal spectrum I(λ) (compare Equations (S1) and (S2)) from fully radiative band-to-band transitions with probability Q i lum 45,70 . PL which is emitted within the narrow escape cone (θ c ⪅ 22.6°) would directly escape the film (events (A) and (Bi) in Figure (ii) PL escapes via the bottom escape cone; (iii) PL becomes trapped in the substrate mode; or (iv) PL remains trapped in the waveguide mode but under a different angle θ (not shown in Figure It is important to note that the PL spectral shape measured in an integrating sphere ( E tot exp (λ)) is independent of the value of Q i lum . This can be rationalized by analyzing the various contributions to the externally measured PL signal: any signals from directly escaping PL (events (A) and (Bi) in Figure with total direct escape probability p̅ e_d ) as well as scattered PL (events (Ci) in Figure ) -which determines the red-shift of the total external PL spectrumis always the same. This is in line with literature results However, the integrating sphere measurements in this work were performed at rather low intensity CW illumination (intensities around ~0.01-3 Sun) and we observe an unmodified E tot exp (λ) in intensity dependent measurements (Figure In order to validate the proposed conception of PL emission in a perovskite film as visualized in Figure (i) nabs photons are absorbed following initial laser excitation (event (0) in Figure Absorbed photons are either emitted with probability Q i lum and spectral shape of the internal PL spectrum I av (λ) (event (1) in Figure Reabsorbed photons are reemitted with probability Q i lum (events (2) in Figure Reemitted photons again either directly escape the film, are reabsorbed 'during escape' (see (iii)) or are initially trapped and subsequently scattered or reabsorbed (iv) and potentially reemitted again (v). The simulation runs until all emitted photons have either escaped the film by direct emission (with total probability p̅ e_d ) or scattering (with total probability p̅ e_s ), or are lost non-radiatively. Therefore, in case of TC perovskite the values for p̅ e should be taken with care as the effect of these bandgap variations on the overall p̅ e requires a more in-depth analysis, which is beyond the scope of the current work. Note that for the DC perovskite films no such variations in PL peak position are observed (Figure ) to experimental PL spectra of MAPI films with different thicknesses with I 0 fit (λ), I PR fit (λ) being highlighted in the upper panel and E tot fit (λ), E d-tot fit (λ) and E s-tot fit (λ) in the lower panel. The corresponding input parameters and fit results are summarized in Table 1 e = 25.4% relates to Q i lum = 18.9% and ∆V OC PR = 4.2 mV , revealing that the effect of PR on enhancing the PCE of state-of-the-art PSCs is still small. We analyze the dependence of ∆V OC PR on Q e lum as well as of the reduction in V OC due to non-radiative recombination ( ∆V OC nr = -kT q ln Q e lum ; compare Equation (1)) on Q i lum for various realistic values of p̅ e and p̅ a in Figures S27a and S27b, respectively. It shows that, considering the range of escape probabilities found in this study (p̅ e ~20-30%), ∆V OC PR is limited to values around ~30-40 mV even in case Q i lum d, film thickness; Rq, rms roughness (Figure S4); Q e-max lum , champion value of Q e lum Q i lum , calculated via Equation (3) with p̅ e and Q e-max lum as input; ∆V OC PR , calculated via Equation (4) assuming p̅ r = 1 -p̅ e ; M s = d z av , magnitude of scattering; a PR /a tot , fraction of recycled PL to the external emission; All other parameters, see Equations (7) and (12). a Intensity calculated as described in Note S7 b Experimental value measured in IS c Indirectly determined by fitting d PL measured by a front collection setup, Q e-max lum extrapolated from IS measurement e Assumption for the value of p̅ e used to determine Q i lum (see Note S3) The fixed input parameters for all simulations are Q i lum = 80% and d = 260 nm, while the varying values