The spin Hall effect in heavy-metal thin films is routinely employed to convert charge currents into transverse spin currents and can be used to exert torque on adjacent ferromagnets. Conversely, the inverse spin Hall effect is frequently used to detect spin currents by charge currents in spintronic devices up to the terahertz frequency range. Numerous techniques to measure the spin Hall effect or its inverse were introduced, most of which require extensive sample preparation by multi-step lithography. To enable rapid screening of materials in terms of charge-to-spin conversion, suitable high-throughput methods for measuring the spin Hall angle are required. Here, we compare two lithography-free techniques, terahertz emission spectroscopy and broadband ferromagnetic resonance, to standard harmonic Hall measurements and theoretical predictions using the binary-alloy series AuxPt1-x as benchmark system. Despite being highly complementary, we find that all three techniques yield a spin Hall angle with approximately the same x dependence, which is also consistent with first-principles calculations. Quantitative discrepancies are discussed in terms of magnetization orientation and interfacial spin-memory loss. The spin Hall effect The SHC of crystalline materials is experimentally 6,9-12 and theoretically The spin current originating from the SHE can be injected into an adjacent ferromagnetic (FM) layer where it gives rise to so-called field-like and damping-like spinorbit torques To quantify the SHA or the SHC experimentally, numerous techniques were developed, as detailed in the reviews of Refs. 3 and 4 and references therein. The various techniques can differ significantly, for example with respect to the driving perturbation, probed observable, magnetization and external-field geometry, use of either the direct or the inverse SHE and covered frequency range. On one hand, several ferromagnetic-resonance (FMR)-based techniques were used, such as (i) FMR spin pumping with subsequent detection of the inverse SHE (ISHE) Materials with large SHA can be tailored by alloying, In this article, we demonstrate that both TES and VNA-FMR are suitable techniques to quickly obtain quantitative measurements of the SHA of a metallic binary alloy series. Both methods do not require any post-deposition sample processing and feature data acquisition times on the timescale of minutes (TES) to hours (VNA-FMR). We compare the results from these two high-throughput methods to harmonic Hall response measurements, which utilize a single lithography step and serve as a reference. To benchmark our techniques, we use a series of Au-Pt binary alloys. Thin-film stacks of Au x Pt 1-x (3 nm)|CoFeB(3 nm)|Si(1.5 nm) were grown by dc unbalanced magnetron co-sputtering in a 2" sputtering system at room temperature. For TES and VNA-FMR experiments, the samples were not processed any further. For the harmonic Hall measurements, the samples were patterned with Hall cross devices with fourfold rotational symmetry and a line width of 16 μm by standard optical lithography and Ar-ion-beam milling. All samples were checked by X-ray diffraction, X-ray reflectivity, X-ray fluorescence and four-point dc conductivity measurements. The in-plane conductivities σ xx of the Au-Pt alloy layers are shown in Fig. In TES, a HM|FM bilayer under study is excited by a femtosecond laser pulse (Fig. Here, A is the pump-light absorptance, while the factor B captures the photon-to-spin-current conversion efficiency and the detector response function The spatial shape of the spin current in the HM layer is captured by the spin-current relaxation length λ s and the HM layer thickness t HM . According to transport theory based on the Boltzmann equation While the spin-to-charge-current conversion in Eq. ( where n 1 (ω) and n 2 (ω) are the refractive indices of air and the substrate, respectively, Z 0 = 377 Ω, and σ xx (z, ω) is the in-plane conductivity of the material at depth z. For simplicity, we take σ xx as constant across the film thickness and ignore the frequency dependence, because the frequencies used here are well below the Drude frequency of the material. The SHA relative to a reference sample can be obtained for all alloy stoichiometries when λ s is known. Here, we take λ s as the electron mean free path λ MF and use λ MF /σ zz = 0.3 × 10 -15 Ω m 2 where σ zz is the electrical conductivity of the HM perpendicular to the film plane. Note that θ SH of Eq. ( In VNA-FMR, we inductively detect microwave currents generated in HM|FM bilayers under the condition of FMR, which allows one to determine the SHC. The sample is placed face-down on a coplanar waveguide (CPW) (Fig. The first term on the right side of ( where we again assume σ xx ≈ σ zz . We note that Eq. ( Harmonic Hall voltage measurements are performed by injecting an ac current with amplitude I 0 at frequency ω/2π into the Hall crosses measuring the in-phase first harmonic and out-of-phase second harmonic Hall voltages simultaneously upon in-plane field rotation with a lock-in amplifier (Fig. The second-harmonic out-of-phase Hall voltage rms value V 2ω depends on the in-plane angle φ between current and magnetization (Fig. (5) Here, B eff = B ext +B sat is the effective field, B FL and B DL are the current-induced effective field amplitudes associated with the field-like (FL) and damping-like (DL) spinorbit torques. Equation ( where j HM0 is the current density amplitude in the heavymetal layer far away from the Hall voltage pickup lines. In this expression, effects of spin memory loss, spin backflow or spin transparency of the interface are neglected. Therefore, the SHA obtained by this formula is a strict lower bound to the true SHA of the HM layer. A correction factor of 1.45 for the inhomogeneous current flow in the Hall crosses was applied to the spin Hall angle, as suggested by a recent study on the influence of the aspect ratio of the Hall cross on the effective field determination. For the first-principles calculations, we employ the Kubo-Bastin linear response theory as implemented in the Munich SPR-KKR package. The longitudinal charge conductivity determined by the SPR-KKR package refers to bulk. Interface scattering is known to reduce the conductivity σ xx of thin films, which can be estimated via the Mayadas-Shatzkes (MS) model, 54 Here, σ xx0 is the bulk conductivity from the SPR-KKR calculation, t HM is the film thickness, D HM is the lateral grain size. For our material system, the electron mean-free path λ MF is calculated as λ MF /σ xx = 0.3 × 10 -15 Ω m 2 . A reasonable fit of the data is obtained with D HM ≈ 5 nm and both the specularity parameter p and the grain boundary reflectivity parameter r set to 0.5. Figures Concerning the VNA-FMR measurements, Fig. Finally, the SHA as determined by the HHR method is displayed in Fig. To better compare the outcome of the three methods, Figs. 3a and 3b display, respectively, the measured SHAs and SHCs scaled to the HHR results of the pure Pt film (x = 0). We find that the scaled SHAs vs Au fraction x show similar trends, in particular in terms of the position of the SHA maximum. All three results are also in reasonable agreement with a previous experiment on the Au-Pt system. While TES delivers SHA and SHC values relative to a reference HM (such as Pt), both VNA-FMR and HHR provide absolute values. The HHR SHA of the 3 nm pure Pt film (x = 0) is found to be θ Pt SH ≈ 0.11 ± 0.01, whereas the maximum SHA at x = 0.33 amounts to 0.20 ± 0.01. The x = 0 value of the SHA agrees very well with other recent measurements on Pt films with similar conductivities. Because spin backflow is typically only a small correction for the investigated all-metallic FM/Pt system with effective spin mixing conductances exceeding 10 19 m -2 for metallic magnets The SML 56 has been found to be strong in previous FMR-based experiments Because no absolute values for the SHA can be extracted from the TES measurements, no conclusion about a possible SML at THz frequencies can be drawn. A quantitative evaluation of SML between the different experimental geometries would be highly interesting but is left for future studies that concentrate on a single material system. In addition to this possible dependence of the SML on experimental geometry, further magnetization-direction dependent corrections to the SHA may exist. For instance, a potential spin-rotation at the interface 59 might depend on the geometry. All these corrections can, in addition, depend on the stoichiometry due to modifications of the film resistivities and the interfacial electronic structure matching. To gain more insight into the observed composition dependence of the measured SHA, Fig. Both techniques that provide quantitative results for the SHA and the SHC, the VNA-FMR method and the harmonic Hall response method, show smaller SHC than predicted by the SPR-KKR calculations. This trend may be explained by the already mentioned neglect of interfacial spin memory loss. Other effects that may reduce the spin current include interfacial spin transparency and interfacial spin-orbit coupling. Although an accurate determination of the internal SHA of a given material is of great fundamental interest, in high-throughput experiments, it is often sufficient to observe a trend in relative terms, rather than measuring absolute values. To date, studies on the SHE have mostly focused on elements and binary alloys and compounds. Therefore, we are only at the beginning of mapping out the SHE in ternary, quaternary and more complex alloys and compounds. For an efficient search for materials with large SHA or large SHC, high-throughput techniques for measuring these properties are necessary, and the two techniques presented here, VNA-FMR and THz emission spectroscopy, are now proven tools for future experimental work. This work was supported by the German research foundation (DFG) through project WE5386/4-1, through TRR227 "Ultrafast spin dynamics" (projects B02 and A05) and by the ERC through ERC CoG TERAMAG (grant no. 681917). were grown by magnetron sputtering at room temperature. For the THz emission experiments and for the inductive GHz measurements, we used polished fused silica substrates. Si wafers with a 50nm thermal oxide layer were used for the low-frequency harmonic Hall measurements. The Pt-Au alloys were made by magnetron co-sputtering from two elemental targets. All samples were exposed to a pure oxygen plasma via the Si source prior to deposition to clean the substrate surface. The Pt-Au stoichiometries were verified by x-ray fluorescence spectroscopy. For all samples, the film thicknesses and crystallographic phases were checked by x-ray reflectivity and diffraction measurements. For the THz emission spectroscopy and the inductive GHz measurements, the samples were not subjected to further processing. For the harmonic Hall measurements, the samples on Si|SiOx wafers were lithographically patterned into Hall crosses with an arm width of 16 μm and bonded into DIL-24 packages. During the lithographic processing, the films were heated to 90 • C for 20 min. No effect of the heating was seen in subsequent conductivity and x-ray diffraction measurements. The THz emission was driven with ultrashort laser pulses from a Ti:Sa oscillator with pulse duration of 10 fs, central wavelength of 800 nm, repetition rate of 80 MHz, and pulse energy of about 1 nJ. The THz transient was measured via electro-optic sampling 61 in a 1-mm-thick ZnTe (110) crystal with a weak copropagating 10-fs nearinfrared probe pulse from the same laser. The electrical conductivities of the AuPt alloy were obtained by THz transmission measurements as detailed in Refs. 44 and 62. A static magnetic field H is applied along the bilayer normal. FMR is excited by passing a microwave current of fixed frequency ω through the CPW while sweeping the magnitude of H. At each value of H, the complexvalued microwave transmission S 21 (H) through the CPW is recorded with the VNA. Experiments are repeated for 10 GHz ≤ ω/2π ≤ 40 GHz. For each ω, the obtained S 21 (H) spectra are fitted to where S 0 21 is the H-independent transmission through the CPW outside FMR conditions, A is a complex-valued scaling parameter, μ 0 M s = 1.05 T is the saturation magnetization and is the diagonal component of the Polder susceptibility tensor. with the impedance of the CPW Z 0 = 50 Ω. Due to the normalization by S 0 21 in Eq. ( For the determination of the spin Hall angle, the films were patterned into 4-fold rotationally symmetric Hall crosses with a conductor width of w = 16 μm and a length of l = 48 μm by optical lithography. Harmonic Hall voltage measurements were performed in a dual Halbach cylinder array with a rotating magnetic field up to 1.0 T (MultiMag, Magnetic Solutions Ltd.). An ac current density with an rms value of j rms = 2 × 10 10 A m -2 (I rms = 1.92 mA) and frequency ω/2π = 3219 Hz was injected into the Hall crosses and the in-phase first harmonic and out-of-phase second harmonic Hall voltages were recorded simultaneously upon in-plane field rotation with a Zurich Instruments MFLI multi-demodulator lock-in amplifier. The out-of-plane saturation component of the effective field B eff = B ext +B sat is B sat = B dem -B ani > 0. It was obtained together with the anomalous Hall resistance amplitude R A from Hall voltage measurements in a perpendicular magnetic field up to 2.2 T. The planar Hall amplitudes R P were obtained from the first harmonic V ω = R P I rms sin 2φ. The parasitic ANE component α I 0 yields an electric field E ANE = -α∇T ×m ∝ I 2 0 , where I 0 is the current amplitude. The prefactor α summarizes all geometrical parameters and the film electrical conductivity, heat conductivity, etc. that determine ∇T . The magnetization of the CoFeB film was determined by alternating gradient magnetometry to be M s = (1050 ± 50) kA/m. The parallel circuit model was applied to determine the current density flowing in the HM layer. The spin Hall conductivities were calculated within a fully relativistic multiple-scattering Green function framework using the Kubo-Bastin formalism 