Amino acids are essential to all life. However, our understanding of some aspects of their intrinsic structure, molecular chemistry, and electronic structure is still limited. In particular the nature of amino acids in their crystalline form, often essential to biological and medical processes, faces a lack of knowledge both from experimental and theoretical approaches. An important experimental technique that has provided a multitude of crucial insights into the chemistry and electronic structure of materials is X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. Whilst the interpretation of spectra of simple bulk inorganic materials is often routine, interpreting core level spectra of complex molecular systems is complicated to impossible without the help of theory. We have previously demonstrated the ability of density functional theory to calculate binding energies of simple amino acids, using ∆SCF implemented in a systematic basis set for both gas phase (multiwavelets) and solid state (plane waves) calculations. In this study, we use the same approach to successfully predict and rationalise the experimental core level spectra of phenylalanine (Phe), tyrosine (Tyr), tryptophan (Trp), and histidine (His) and gain an indepth understanding of their chemistry and electronic structure within the broader context of more than 20 related molecular systems. The insights gained from this study provide significant information on the nature of the aromatic amino acids and their conjugated side chains. Amino acids form the basis of peptides and proteins, which are fundamental building blocks of life, and they are of great scientific interest for a multitude of reasons, first and foremost due to their role in biology and related use in pharmacology and medicine. Their systematic nature also makes them perfect test systems to understand important aspects of the behaviour of molecular systems, including local and long-range structure and interactions, polymorphism, the three dimensional arrangement of proteins, and ionic behaviour and its tunability by the environment. Whilst the motivation to study amino acids is clear, experimental strategies are generally limited to structural techniques such as X-ray diffraction (XRD). A complementary technique, which can provide an additional level of information on chemical states and electronic structure not accessible to XRD, is X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Recently, we have started to explore the application of XPS to amino acids in their crystalline, powder form in combination with theoretical calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) In this work, the aromatic amino acids phenylalanine (Phe), tyrosine (Tyr), tryptophan (Trp) and histidine (His) are explored using both experiment and theory. The subgroup classification of amino acids usually includes Phe, Tyr and Trp in the aromatic group with Tyr also sometimes grouped with the polar amino acids. Due to the basic properties of His it is often classified as a polar amino acid. For completeness, we include all amino acids containing aromatic side chains here, independent of their polar nature. XPS experiments in the solid phase are compared to theoretical calculations based on DFT using the ∆SCF (self-consistent field) approach as implemented in systematic basis sets. Due to the complexity of the observed core level spectra and the apparent strong influence of not only nearest, but also next-nearest and even further removed neighbouring atoms, a molecular subspecies approach was followed to aid in the rationalisation and explanation of observed BE shifts, particularly for the C and N 1s core states. This is shown to be an extremely useful approach to gain a full and detailed understanding of the chemical and electronic structure of these important biological building blocks. A Combined Density Functional Theory and X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy Study of the Aromatic Amino Acids3 Density functional theory was used to calculate the core state BEs of Ala, Phe, Tyr, Trp, and His. The primary motivation is the calculation of solid state BEs to aid the interpretation of experimental spectra. However, the solid state BEs are influenced by a combination of factors including the presence of different functional groups, the molecular and crystal structure, and intermolecular interactions. Theory is essential to disentangle these competing effects. Initial crystal structures for Ala, Phe, Tyr, Trp and His were obtained from Refs. In order to aid interpretation of experimental spectra, the relative BE positions of contributing chemical environments are needed. Absolute BEs are not necessary for this approach, and DFT is more reliable for relative than absolute BEs. However, some recent work exists where DFT has been shown to accurately reproduce absolute BEs Solid state geometry optimisations and BE calculations using the ∆SCF approach were performed with the CASTEP plane-wave DFT code and 2 × 2 × 2 for Ala, Phe, Tyr and His, respectively, with Trp calculations performed at the Γ-point only. Geometry optimisations used the semi-empirical dispersion correction scheme of Grimme Gas phase BE calculations were performed using PBE only All geometry optimisations used the PBE functional and a force tolerance of 0.02 eV/Å. For solid state geometry optimisations the cell was also allowed to relax. For molecules extracted from the optimised crystals, only the H atoms were relaxed, with all other atoms frozen. In order to prevent collapse back to the zwitterionic state, an initial perturbation was applied to one of the H atoms. For all other gas phase calculations, all atoms were allowed to relax. All calculations were spin restricted and relativistic effects were neglected, since although these can have a significant effect when calculating absolute BEs (see e.g. Ref. Powders of the L-stereoisomers of all investigated amino acids were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Ala 99%, Phe 98%, Tyr 98%, Trp 98%, His 99%). Core level spectra were recorded on a Thermo Scientific K-Alpha+ XPS system with a monochromated, microfocused Al Kα X-ray source (hν = 1486.7 eV), which was operated a 6 mA emission current and 12 kV anode bias. The base pressure was 2×10 -9 mbar. All core level spectra were collected at a pass energy of 20 eV using an X-ray spot size of 400 μm. Samples were mounted on conducting carbon tape and a flood gun was employed to prevent sample charging. As amino acids are prone to suffer from radiation damage, samples were rastered and data collected at four points across the samples, which were then averaged to achieve the necessary signal statistics for peak fitting. All data were analysed using the Avantage software package. Differences in peak positions across the different measurement points were less than 50 meV for all core levels. For peak fit analysis, Shirley-type backgrounds and Voigt functions were used with both the full width at half maximum (FWHM) and Lorentzian/Gaussian (L/G) ratios refined. A Combined Density Functional Theory and X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy Study of the Aromatic Amino Acids6 In line with our previous work Whilst the calculated BE positions describe the experimental core level spectra very well, which will be discussed in detail in Section 3.3, it is not easy to intuitively rationalise the order and relative positions of the different constituents, in particular for the case of C 1s with its many chemical states. Therefore, a molecular subspecies approach was chosen to systematically explore core level energy changes with the removal or introduction of part of the amino acids and their functional groups. A Combined Density Functional Theory and X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy Study of the Aromatic Amino Acids7 Twenty-two additional small molecular systems were explored theoretically to aid our understanding of the core level spectra observed for the aromatic amino acids. Fig. In parallel to Phe being the simplest of the amino acids explored here, it also reduces to the simplest submolecule, benzene Whilst C β in (2) and ethylbenzene (3) and C α in (3) occur at the lowest BEs, this changes completely using the ∆SCF approach, where C α and C β move to the higher BE side of all other C atoms. In addition, a clear chemical shift between the CH 2 and CH 3 groups of the side chain for (3) is also apparent. In order to understand to what extent the shift in C β for ∆SCF is affected by the aromaticity of (2), we also compare with methylcyclohexane For Phe itself the C arom atoms including C 1 behave similarly to (1)-( Across the series from phenol (11) to 4-methylphenol (12) and 4-ethylphenol (13) a common feature is the spreading out of C arom BEs due to the presence of the hydroxyl group. Similarly to the equivalent series for Phe, there is a significant change in the electronic density (shown in the Supplementary Information) Figure As was the case for the subspecies molecules for Phe, C α and C β in ( As with Phe, there is also variation between Tyr conformers, where the results are again in line with calculations from Zhang et al. As with Phe and Tyr, and again in agreement with Zhang et al. To further test the influence of aromaticity, the BEs for In 1H-imidazole (31) the three C atoms all have considerably different BEs, including a clear distinction in C BE depending on the protonation of the neighbouring N atom in line with the previous observations for molecules ( To summarise the observations made to this point, the molecular subspecies approach is invaluable to rationalise and discuss the complex relative BE changes observed in the amino acids. A fascinating, if somewhat subjective, result from the combination of experiment and theory and the exploration of the molecular subspecies is that chemical intuition and the experience of a spectroscopist usually reflects the results given by Koopmans' theorem. The additional rearrangement of BE positions observed in ∆SCF is often surprising, resulting in our hypothesis that human brains are not best placed to compute final state effects ad hoc without the aid of DFT. Where experimental core level spectra exist in the literature, they are very similar to the data presented here, albeit often with lower energy resolution Figure Considering first the C 1s BEs, it is clear that PBE0-calculated values agree more closely with experiment. The main discrepancy is that for PBE calculations the BE of C is much closer to C α than for PBE0. In the worst case, Tyr, the difference between C and C α is 1 eV smaller than for the experimental BEs, A Combined Density Functional Theory and X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy Study of the Aromatic Amino Acids12 while the difference for PBE0-calculated BEs is much closer to experiment. This is clearly evident in Fig. His is the only amino acid included here for which high resolution solid state spectra have previously been reported In addition to the main photoionisation features all C 1s spectra include ππ * shake-up satellites at 6-7 eV above the main photoionisation peak at lowest BE with relative intensities of ≤3% compared to the aromatic contribution of the C 1s core level. This is in good agreement with observations made for many conjugated systems, including early studies of Phe, Tyr and Trp by Clark et al. In contrast to C 1s, where a considerable difference in PBE vs. PBE0-calculated BE values is observed, the N 1s BEs are not strongly affected by the functional. The calculated BEs are closer together than the experimental BEs, however the MAEs are in line with those for C 1s. Only Trp and His have more than one N atom and therefore only these two will be discussed in detail in this section. The BEs for the molecular subspecies series as well as gas phase amino acids are given in the Supplementary Information. For Trp, a big change in the difference between the BEs for N 1 and N 2 is observed when going from Koopmans' to ∆SCF for the gas phase calculations, but in both cases N 2 is at a higher BE, in agreement with calculations from Zhang et al. A Combined Density Functional Theory and X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy Study of the Aromatic Amino Acids13 The calculated N 1s BEs for Trp agree well with the experimentally observed values. In the experimental N 1s spectrum of Trp a higher intensity of the peak assigned to N 2 relative to N 1 is observed. This deviation from the 1:1 ratio of the two N components has been reported previously The N 1s BEs of His show a similar sensitivity to a range of factors as for Trp. Looking at the gas phase conformers, N 2 shows a consistently higher BE for ( Two previous experimental studies have reported N 1s spectra for His. To complete the set of core states present in the aromatic amino acids, the O 1s spectra are presented in the Supplementary Information. As with N 1s BEs, the calculated values are not affected by the functional, and the MAE between theory and experiment is also in line with N 1s. However, overall, these spectra do not provide much additional information beyond what has been discussed based on the C and N 1s results and only Tyr has more than one oxygen environment present in the solid state. In addition, O 1s has an intrinsically high lifetime width and small magnitude of chemical shifts, which in combination with the presence of surface states, limits its usefulness for the study of amino acids. This work presents the first detailed, systematic exploration of the core state energies of the four aromatic amino acids combining both high resolution XPS and state-of-the-art DFT. A ∆SCF approach, which we have successfully developed and applied to simpler amino acids previously, is extended to amino acids with aromatic side chains and proves robust in predicting the core levels observed in XPS and all contributing local chemical environments. More than 20 additional molecular subspecies are calculated to aid in the discussion and interpretation of the amino acid core states and underpin the assignments made in experimental spectra. This approach provides further understanding and rationalisation of the often complicated and surprising changes in binding energies observed in the calculations for the solid state amino acids. This work substantially improves our understanding of the aromatic amino acids and gives crucial insights into their intra-and intermolecular structure. Furthermore, it reemphasises the need to combine theory with experiment in order to obtain an accurate and robust picture of the local chemistry and electronic structure and forms the basis for future work on conjugated molecular systems in general. 