The long-sought goal of room temperature superconductivity has reportedly recently been realized in a carbonaceous sulfur hydride compound under high pressure, as reported by Snider et al In the Snider et al. paper as ξ = 2.3nm and state that H c (0) = 61.8T . However, as stated above, 61.8T is the upper critical field H c2 inferred from experiment and not the thermodynamic critical field H c that enters in Eq. (2). Eq. (2) yields λ(0) = 1.6nm (the quoted value of 3.8nm is a typo according to the authors Quite the contrary: if this material is a superconductor, it should be strongly type II, like other superconductors with short coherence length like the high temperature cuprate superconductors or magnesium diboride (M gB 2 ). The coherence length inferred from the critical field data is very short, 2.3nm. Within the conventional theory of superconductivity The curves of resistance versus temperature shown in Fig. This anomalous behavior becomes even clearer when considering Fig. For quantitative comparison let us consider M gB 2 , which, just like the hydrides under pressure, is universally believed to be a conventional superconductor. We also expect M gB 2 to be less strongly type II (smaller κ) than the material in the paper under consideration, as discussed above. Data for resistive transition in a field are given in ref. In contrast, consider the resistive transition shown in Fig. for carbonaceous sulfur hydride under pressure. Therefore, the broadening of the resistive transition in the case under consideration here is at least a factor of 50 smaller than expected. We say at least because we argued that this material is likely to be more strongly type II than M gB 2 , and the transition is at a much higher temperature. Consideration of other type II superconductors, both materials considered to be conventional Because the data for the resistive transition in a field of this material diverge from this established knowledge by a factor of at least 50 as shown above, we conclude that it is impossible that the data in Fig. What could be the origin of the extremely sharp transitions seen in Fig. If indeed the curve shown in Fig. In conclusion, unless or until the exceptional sharpness of the resistive transitions shown in this paper can be plausibly explained within the generally accepted conventional theory of superconductivity, the experimental evidence on high temperature hydride superconductivity that exists so far 