In recent years, charge transport in metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) has shifted into the focus of scientific research. In this context, systems with efficient through-space charge transport pathways resulting from -stacked conjugated linkers are of particular interest. In the current manuscript, we use density functional theory based simulations to provide a detailed understanding of such MOFs, which in the present case are derived from the prototypical Zn2(TTFTB) system. In particular we show that factors like the relative arrangement of neighboring linkers and the details of the structural conformations of the individual building blocks have a profound impact on band widths and charge transfer. Considering the helical stacking of individual tetrathiafulvalene (TTF) molecules around a screw axis as the dominant symmetry element in Zn2(TTFTB)-derived materials, the focus here is primarily on the impact of the relative rotation of neighboring molecules. Not unexpectedly, also changing the stacking distance in the helix plays a distinct role, especially for structures, which display large electronic couplings to start with. The presented results provide guidelines for achieving structures with improved electronic couplings. It is, however, also shown that structural defects (especially missing linkers) provide major obstacles to charge transport in the studied, essentially one-dimensional systems. This suggests that especially the sample quality is a decisive factor for ensuring efficient through-space charge transport in MOFs comprising stacked -systems. Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are porous, highly crystalline solids consisting of inorganic nodes connected by organic linkers. The impact of the packing motif of organic -systems on intermolecular electronic couplings (expressed via transfer integrals and band dispersions) has been thoroughly studied for organic semiconductors, OSCs. Crucial factors identified for these materials are the stacking distance of neighboring molecules (i.e., neighboring -systems) and the arrangement of neighboring molecules in terms of relative displacements and rotations. Materialswise, a particularly promising type of MOFs showing through-space charge-transport pathways are frameworks consisting of ligands based on tetrathiafulvalene (TTF). The starting point for this study is the stacking of the TTF cores of Zn2(TTFTB) For analyzing the impact of structural changes on the electronic properties of the TTF stacks, we construct several model systems: First, based on the relaxed structure of desolvated and dehydrated Zn2(TTFTB), we construct a helical model TTF stack by removing all atoms within the MOF structure apart from the TTF cores. The latter were then saturated by attaching H atoms. Subsequently, the positions of these H atoms were relaxed while keeping all other atomic positions fixed. This results in TTF molecules exhibiting the same geometry and stacking motif as in the MOF. In a similar way also the TTFTB model stack has been constructed: All atoms apart from the TTF core and the connected phenylene rings were removed. In essence, this means that the carboxyl groups have been removed from the linker in the MOF structure and replaced by H atoms. The positions of these H atoms then were relaxed in a subsequent step. The relaxed geometry is shown in the Supplementary Material. This molecule was then duplicated, and rotated by the respective rotation angle ((n/N)*360°) around the off-center rotation axis (with n being an integer between 1 and N-1). Then the molecule was shifted in z-direction by n*3.473 Å. This procedure was repeated N-1 times to generate the unit cell for the simulations. For example, for 3 repeat units (N=3) we have in total three TTF molecules per unit cell including the molecule at the bottom of the cell (n=0) and its replicas at n=1 and n=2. The lateral extent of the unit cell of the model system is the same as that observed experimentally for Zn2(TTFTB), while the extent of the unit cell in stacking direction amounts to N*3.473 Å.To verify the construction procedure we compared the electronic structure of the N=6 TTF model stack to the system extracted directly from the MOF structure. The identified differences are almost negligible (see Table Additionally, molecular dimers were designed in analogy to the construction described in the previous paragraph, but stopping at n=1. As these dimers were simulated using open boundary conditions, any value could be chosen for the rotation angle around the off-center rotation axis. This allowed us to calculate smooth evolutions of the dimer electronic couplings as a function of the relative rotation of neighboring molecules. Two additional MOFs are also considered in this work: One system is Cd2(TTFTB), which is reported to be isostructural to Zn2(TTFTB), but shows a higher electrical conductivity. Before considering the electronic band structure of Zn2(TTFTB) and how it is affected by changes in the structure of the TTF stack it is useful to consider, how through-space charge transport in porous materials can be described. As the situation for TTF stacks shown in Figure For investigating the structural and electronic properties of the MOFs, the periodic model systems, and the molecular dimers we employed dispersion corrected density functional theory, DFT, which in a recent review has been highlighted as a viable method for gaining an in-depth understanding of the electronic structure of MOFs. We employed the default tight basis sets of FHI-aims for periodic and molecular simulations. Further details on the employed basis functions are provided in the SI. For Zn2(TTFTB) the electronic band structure was also calculated with the hybrid functional HSE06 During the geometry optimizations all atomic positions were relaxed until the largest remaining force component on any atom was smaller than 0.01 eV/Å. For all MOF systems a 3x3x3 kpoint grid was used for sampling reciprocal space during the geometry relaxations. During the electronic structure calculations a 4x4x4 k-point grid was employed. For both grids the total energy is converged to within less than 1 meV. The smaller grid in the more time consuming geometry relaxations was used to speed up the calculations. For the periodic stacks, we used a 1x1x12 k-point grid, which is already converged even for the smallest system (with the largest reciprocal space vector along the stacking direction). The effective masses were calculated from the (inverse) curvature of the band structure at the top of the valence band in (001) direction to describe transport in the TTF stacking direction. Technically, the band curvature was determined by fitting a cosine function to the dispersion relation E(k) including the 10 kpoints closest to the valence band maximum with a spacing between neighboring k-points of 0.005 Å -1 . A cosine function was chosen for the fit to be consistent with the best suited tightbinding band model for the systems studied here (see below).The structures of the MOFs and the molecular systems were visualized using Ovito (version 3.2.1) As a first step, we analyze the electronic structure of Zn2(TTFTB), for which the frontier bands are shown in Figure As far as the A direction is concerned, one can identify a 6 times backfolded band, which is particularly well resolved for the valence band in Figure As a consequence of a single TTF molecule serving as "electronic" repeat unit, the electronic bands in A direction can be conveniently described by a tight-binding model with a single molecule per unit cell. This notion is confirmed by the data shown in Figure On more quantitative grounds, the valence band width, VBW, for the backfolded band amounts to 371 meV in the PBE calculations (400 meV when using the HSE06 functional), as indicated by the arrows in Figure Qualitatively, the two band structures are the same. The only apparent difference is a somewhat smaller band width of 303 meV in the model system (which amounts to ~ 82% of the band width of the actual MOF). This leads to a comparably small change in the effective mass at the valence band maximum VBM from 2.05 to 2.40 me (with me being the mass of a free electron). We attribute this difference to the overlap of the -orbitals of neighboring phenylenes in the H4TTFTB linkers in the actual MOF, which is not captured by the model system (see systems TTF and TTFTB in Table With a reliable model system at hand, we can now turn to studying the impact of changes in the structure of the TTF stacks on the electronic coupling: It has been shown for a variety of molecular dimers that the relative rotation of neighboring molecules has a tremendous effect on intermolecular electronic couplings. The resulting band structures are shown in the Supplementary Material. They reveal that the cofacial arrangement with 1 repeat unit exhibits the largest valence band width of 1337 meV, corresponding to a transfer integral between neighboring molecules of 334 meV (see data points in Figure For obtaining values at intermediate rotation angles we use the dimer model described in section 3. The transfer integrals between neighboring TTF molecules as a function of the rotation angle are then extracted via the fragment orbital method Overall, the evolution of the valence band widths of the relaxed stacks is comparable to that of the MOF-based TTF stacks, although the band widths are consistently smaller in the relexad case (with the exception of the N=8 system; see Figure To assess the role played by those tilts, we also studied two model systems in which the tilts do not occur. These systems are constructed by starting from a gas phase optimized TTF molecule either in boat conformation (actual minimum structure) or forced to be planar. In the stacks, these molecule are then aligned such that the central C=C bonds as well as all S atoms of each molecule are in a plane perpendicular to the screw axis. The infinitely extended stacks are then constructed following the procedure described in section 1.1. The results for these stacks are complemented by calculations for corresponding molecular dimers. As shown in Figure Therefore, for the structures with TTF molecules not twisted around their long and short molecular axes (i.e., for the data shown in Figure The origin of the zero-crossing (and, in fact, the entire evolution of the transfer integrals with rotation angle) can be explained by the shapes of the involved molecular orbitals. This is most straightforwardly seen by considering the bonding and antibonding linear combinations of the highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMOs) of the two TTF molecules in the dimer calculations. They can be derived from linear combinations of the HOMOs of indivifual TTF molecules and (for centrosymmetric systems) their splitting determines the magnitude of the transfer integral. For the cofacial arrangement of the molecules the antisymmetric linear combination of the TTF HOMOs is lowest in energy and the symmetric linear combination is highest (Figure This is exactly what one would expect considering the fully bonding nature of the hybrid orbital in the antisymmetric case (non-zero value of of the wavefunction between molecules or even a local maximum) and its fully antibonding nature in the symmetric case (vanishing wavefunction between the molecules). Upon increasing the rotation angle, the HOMO-1 gets increasingly destabilized and the HOMO gets increasingly stabilized, which reduces their energetic splitting and concommittantly the associated transfer integral. This can be understood by the appearance of antibonding contributions for the antisymmetric and bonding contributions for the symmetric linear combinations. At a rotation angle of 65° both linear combinations display equal amounts of bonding and antibonding regions. Consequently, the two orbitals are essentially isoenergetic, resulting in a vanishing transfer integral. Upon further increasing the rotation angle, the nature of the HOMO and HOMO-1 is switched, which explains the change in sign of the transfer integral. The stabilization of the originally antisymmetric linear combination of the molecular orbitals is maximized at a rotation angle of 95° and the trend reverses for systems with larger rotations. In passing we note that the reason for the much smaller HOMO to HOMO-1splitting at 180° compared to the cofacial situation (i.e. 0°) is the reduced spatial overlap of the molecules following from the screw axis not coinciding with the center of the TTF molecules (see Figure Finally, it should be noted that, of course, also the location of the screw axis relative to the center of the TTF molecules strongly impacts the wavefunction overlap between neighboring TTF molecules and, consequently, the effects discussed above. To quantify that, we calculated planar model dimers stacked right on top of each other with the screw axis connecting the centers of the planar molecules. The resulting evolutions of the band widths and transfer integrals are shown in the Supplementary Material. The data points for a rotation angle of 0° are the same as for the planar geometry in Figure The Notably, for the N=6 stacks, which directly mimicks the stacking of the TTF molecules in actual Zn2(TTFTB) MOF the increase of the valence band width for a reduction of the stacking distance by 0.1 Å amounts to only 33 meV (~11%). This is insofar relevant, as it has been reported that changing the stacking distance for TTFTB based MOFs results in massive changes in the measured electrical conductivities. A different approach for increasing the valence band width could be to increase the orbital overlap by exchanging TTF with Tetraselenafulvalene (C6H4Se4). In our calculations this results in an increase of the valence band width by a factor of almost 2 (from 371 meV to 641 meV). Considering that we observe only minor structural changes between the S-based Zn2(TTFTB) and the Se-based Zn2(TSFTB), we attribute that to the larger spatial extent of the pz-orbitals of Se, which result in an increased wave-function overlap. Still, also such chemical modifications do not change hole mobilities by orders of magnitude. An additional factor that would influence the mobility of holes would be changes in the vibrational properties of the MOF, which impact charge transport through dynamic disorder effects. There could, however, be several other explanations for the above mentioned differences between Zn2(TTFTB) and Cd2(TTFTB). First, one has to keep in mind that in A consequence of the flat electronic bands along reciprocal space directions perpendicular to the TTF stacks (see section 3.1) is that charge transport is essentially one-dimensional. It is well established for molecular semiconductors that transport in 1D systems is severely affected by either static or dynamic disorder. The static defect with the most dramatic consequences is a missing linker defect. We realized such a defect by removing one TTF linker from either the Zn2(TTFTB) unit cell or from the corresponding model stack (see Figure The magnitude of the change increases with increasing displacement, as shown in Figure Additional data on the impact of the other defects can be found in the Supplementary Material. As a consequence, charge transport is hindered within defective TTF stacks. Interestingly, for pair formation as well as for the displaced molecule defect the minimum transfer integral decreases almost linearly with the displacement, while the effective mass experiences a roughly quadratic increase. The latter is more pronounced in the displaced molecule case. The overall impact of these defects is, however, rather moderate (especially compared to the missing-linker case). For example, a lateral displacement of a TTF molecule by a rather sizable distance of Δx=0.3 Å leads to an increase of m* by a moderate 0.42 me (or 17%). In this context it, however, has to be considered that there are many other degrees of freedom that can result in molecular displacements, which change the effective masses and transfer integrals. Additionally, several defects might occur simultaneously, further worsening the situation. Nevertheless, the above considerations suggest that for changing the carrier mobilities by orders of magnitude, mere displacements of molecules will typically not be sufficient. Such massive changes in the transport properties will, thus, typically require more serious defects like missing linkers, as discussed earlier in this section. The present paper describes a variety of aspects concerning through-space charge transport in metal-organic frameworks in general and tetrathiafulvalene-based MOFs in particular. First, it is shown that the electronic band structure of the helical TTF stack contained in Zn2(TTFTB) largely determines the valence band structure of the entire MOF. In fact, we find that the electronic bands perpendicular to the TTF stacking direction are essentially flat. This highlights the negligible electronic coupling between neighboring stacks and establishes that Zn2(TTFTB) is a truly one-dimensional conductor. In the perfectly periodic MOF with six molecules in the crystallographic unit cell the valence band is backfolded six times (without any gaps at the point or at the Brillouin zone boundary). This suggests that the symmetry element relevant for the electronic structure of the MOF is the 6-fold screw axis parallel to the stacking direction. Therefore, a single TTF molecule acts as "electronic" repeat unit of the MOF with the consequence that the electronic parameter determining charge transport in Zn2(TTFTB) is the transfer integral between two neighboring TTF molecules. This permits the use of stacks with varying numbers of molecules in the crystallographic unit cell to study the impact of the relative rotation of the TTF molecules. It turns out that decreasing the rotation angle of neighboring TTF molecules compared to the parent Zn2(TTFTB) system significantly increases the valence band width, while increasing the rotation in a 4-TTF per unit cell stack yields a significantly reduced electronic coupling. The results are corroborated by simulations on TTF dimers, which also allow us to trace the observations back to the shapes of the hybrid orbitals determining the valence band. Additionally, we find that the actual value of the transfer integral is extremely sensitive to the specific conformation of the TTF molecules. For example, for stacks of flat TTF molecules the electronic coupling essentially disappears for the 60° rotation angles found in Zn2(TTFTB) and the associated transfer integral even changes sign at larger angles. Interestingly, changes in the relative rotation and molecular conformation of the TTF molecules have a more pronounced impact on the observed band width than "moderate" modifications in the stacking distance, which have been realized experimentally by replacing Zn by Cd atoms in the metal nodes of the MOFs. Thus, we hypothesize that the 2-orders of magnitude increase in the electrical conductivity of Cd2(TTFTB) compared to Zn2(TTFTB) As far as static defects are concerned, we have, thus, investigated several scenarios including diplaced molecules, molecular pairing along the stack, or misrotations of specific molecules. The impact of these defects turns out to be rather moderate. This, however, changes when considering also missing linker defects, where we find that due to the 1D nature of the TTF stacks such a missing linker is a massive obstacle for charge transport. This, is manifested, e.g., in an increase of the effective mass by a factor of ~10 compared to the perfectly ordered parent MOF. Overall, these results show that, on the one hand, there is still considerable room for improvement for through-space charge transport in MOFs through clever structural design. On the other hand, the 1D nature of systems like the ones discussed here makes their expected charge-transport properties particularly sensitive to structural imperfections and, thus, extremely dependent on sample quality. In addition to the density of states projected onto sub-systems of the MOF (as presented in the main text) we also considered the DOS projected onto individual species and the DOS resolved structure that has been obtained by relaxing the atomic positions of Zn2(TTFTB) without water (green). One can see that there are only slight differences in the geometric structure of the systems. Considering the electronic band structure of the valence band for this geometry we find a valence band width of 353 meV and a corresponding effective mass of 1.97 me. Both compare well to the 371 meV and 2.05 me obtained for the optimized Zn2(TTFTB) structure without water. The results for the fully relaxed atomic positions calculated including the water molecules are compared to the relaxed geometry of the system without water (right panel in Figure As outlined in the main manuscript also these phenyl rings contribute to the valence band. Thus, considering the electronic structure of the relaxed MOF with water we find that this system exhibits a larger band width of 411 meV (1.76 me) compared to the system without water (see Figure Considering that not solely states arising from the central TTF core contribute to the conduction band it is not surprising that a model stack consisting only of TTF molecules cannot reproduce the conduction bands of the actual MOF (see dashed line in Figure Interestingly, for the system with water (after relaxing the atomic positions), we find that the dispersion along KΓ and AL is significantly reduced (see Figure To investigate the influence of the position of the rotation axis on the evolution of the transfer integrals we considered a planar TTF dimer with the rotation axis placed in the center of the molecules. Varying the relative rotation angles of the two monomers with respect to this rotation axis results in the evolution shown in Figure Institute of Solid State Physics, NAWI Graz, Graz University of Technology, Petersgasse 16, 8010 Graz, Austria