Nitride perovskites are supposed to exhibit excellent properties as oxide analogues and may even have better performance in specific fields for their more covalent characters. However, till now, very limited nitride perovskites have been reported. In this work, a nitride perovskite LaMoN3 has been systematically studied by first-principles calculations. The most interesting physical property is its ferroelectric R3c phase, which can be stabilized under a moderate hydrostatic pressure (∼ 1.5 GPa) and probably remain meta-stable under the ambient condition. Its ferroelectric polarization is considerable large, 80.3 μC/cm 2 , driven by the nominal 4d 0 rule of Mo 6+ , and the covalent hybridization between Mo's 4d and N's 2p orbitals is very strong. Our calculation not only predicts a new ferroelectric material with prominent properties, but also encourages more studies on pressure engineering of functional nitrides. Oxides are important quantum materials, which host many exotic emergent physical properties like high-temperature superconductivity, colossal magnetoresistance, multiferroicity, etc. Thus, these oxide families have been extensively investigated in the past decades. Comparing with these widely studied oxides, nitrides have been much less explored. The crucial reasons are their high formation enthalpies and the low chemical potential of N 2 molecule 1 , which make stable nitrides not as common as oxides. Even though, nitrides remain highly valuable for their physical properties and promising applications. For example, the blue light-emitting diodes (LED) were based on nitrides Very recently, a stability map of inorganic ternary metal nitrides was constructed using the data-mined structure prediction algorithm Among these nitride perovskites, LaWN 3 was predicted to be ferroelectric with a spontaneous polarization ∼ 66 μC/cm 2 and a small band gap (LDA result: 0.81 eV) In this work, based on the first-principles calculations, we predict a pressure-induced structural transition of LaMoN 3 , from the non-polar non-perovskite C2/c phase to the ferroelectric perovskite R3c phase. And the ferroelectric properties of LaMoN 3 can be superior to those of LaWN 3 . Methods. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations are performed based on the projector augmented wave (PAW) pseudopotentials implemented in Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) The positive hydrostatic pressure is applied on LaMoN 3 with the stress tensor smaller than 0.1 GPa throughout our calculations. The enthalpy, which equals the Gibbs free energy at zero temperature, is used to identify the ground state. The dynamic stability of certain structures is verified by the vibrational properties using the density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) Enthalpy driven structural transition. As sketched in Fig. Referring to the Materials Project database To validate the correctness of our calculation, we first optimized the structure of C2/c phase. Our optimized lattice constants reach good agreements with previous studies [listed in Table Next, the hydrostatic pressure is applied to all phases. The volumes per formula as a function of pressure are plotted in Fig. The enthalpies under pressure are shown in Fig. Since the C2/c phase is non-perovskite which can not continuously change to the perovskite one, the phase transition between C2/c and R3c must be the first order one. Thus the R3c phase, synthesized under pressure, may be meta-stable at the ambient condition after the formation. More structural details of the C2/c phase at 0 GPa and R3c phase at 0/3 GPa can be found in Table Ferroelectricity & electronic structure. To explore the ferroelectricity of R3c phase, the spontaneous polarization and ferroelectric switching barrier are calculated, as shown in Fig. By analyzing the structural distortion, it is clear that such ferroelectric polarization originates from the displacement of Mo 6+ ion towards the diagonal direction of N 6 octahedron, as shown in Fig. The ferroelectric structure of LaMoN 3 is somewhat similar to BiFeO 3 which also owns the R3c structure The polarization is suppressed moderately by pressure, as shown in Fig. Another interesting result is that the polarization estimated using the point-charge model is slightly lower than the Berry phase one, as compared in Fig. The partially covalent characteristic of Mo-N bonds can also be evidenced in the electronic density of states (DOS), as shown in Fig. According to Fig. Last, the magnetism is also tested considering the fact that Mo's 4d orbitals are partially "occupied" in the shared manner. However, no net magnetic moment is found in our GGA calculation, even under pressure up to 40 GPa. Thus the R3c phase of LaMoN 3 is pure fer- roelectric, not multiferroic. Conclusion. In summary, the pressure-induced structural phase transition from the non-perovskite non-polar C2/c phase to the polar perovskite R3c phase in LaMoN 3 has been studied using first-principles calculations. Such a transition occurs at a moderate pressure less than 1.5 GPa, which is accessible in experiments. This polar structure remains the ground state up to high pressures, and is probably meta-stable at the ambient condition. The ferroelectric properties of LaMoN 3 is prominent, superior to LaWN 3 . The partially covalent bond between Mo and N ions are responsible for the ferroelectricity. Further experimental studies are encouraged to verify our prediction and find more functional nitrides.