This study analyses literature data to identify optimised print parameters and assesses the consolidation, microstructure and mechanical properties of Hastelloy-X printed by laser powder bed fusion. Effects of post annealing and hot isostatic pressing (HIP) on the microstructure and mechanical properties are also revealed. The susceptibility to the solidification cracking and the as-built microstructure such as precipitation and chemical segregation were predicted by the calculation of thermodynamics phase diagrams. The distribution of solidification cracks throughout the builds was quantified for the as-built, annealed and HIP condition. The assessment reveals variation of cracks towards the bottom, top and free surface of solid builds. This distribution of cracks is found to be associate with thermal gradient and thermal conductivity which were estimated by analytical thermal calculations. While the annealing and HIP both can alter the as-printed microstructure thanks to recovery and recrystallisation, the micro-cracks and pores were only successfully removed by HIP. In addition to the removal, recrystallisation and precipitation in HIP (stronger than in annealing), resulting in optimal mechanical properties including a substantial increase in elongation from 13% to 20%, significant improvement of ultimate tensile stress from 965 MPa to 1045 MPa with moderately high yield stress thanks to precipitation. Ni-based Hastelloy-X superalloy is widely used in high temperature applications such as aeroengines, for example combustors or fuel nozzles, which generally have complex internal geometries and therefore associated difficulties in fabrication. Additive manufacturing (commonly known as 3D printing) offers many advantages in manufacturing complex components, in particular with reduced lead time, cost and optimisation freedom. Laser powder bed fusion (LPBF) also commonly known as selective laser melting (SLM) is one of the most widely used techniques in additive manufacturing due to its versatility and reliability in fabricating intricate components. In LPBF, the powder is melted selectively according to a sliced 2D profile of a 3D part and then the powder platform is lowered by one layer thickness, repeated layer by layer until the completion of the 3D part Despite the significant potential of LPBF, steep thermal gradient and high cooling rates varying from about 10 4 ~10 6 K • s -1 It is reported that Hastelloy-X alloy is highly susceptible to cracking in LPBF As compared to the porosity, cracking is much more dependent on the solidification behaviour such as solidification gradient and the freezing range Therefore, minimising the chemical element segregation towards grain boundaries can lead to the reduction in hot cracking in the alloy In addition to the processing optimisation to improve the quality of AM Hastelloy-X, post-processing such as heat treatment and hot-isostatic pressing (HIP) Although the micro-crack is a great concern in AM Hastelloy-X, it has not been well characterised and investigated quatitatively, in particular throughout the builds, which limits the understanding of cracking mechanisms in the fabrication of parts by additive manufacturing. The printing conditions (such as temperature and thermal conductivity) is varied during LPBF from the bottom to the top and from the interior to free surface of a build In this present study, we carried out detailed quantitative examinations of microcracks, microstructure and mechanical behaviour of as-built and heat-treated (including HIPed) Hastelloy-X fabricated via LPBF. We identified a window of optimal printing parameters on the basis of literature review and further developed automated Python codes to quantify the spatial distribution of micro-cracks. Analytical estimates of thermal profile for different pre-heat temperatures and thermal conductivities were done to explain the spatial distribution observed by the crack quantification. The calculation of thermodynamics phase diagrams was also used to understand the mechanisms responsible for cracking in the alloy. In addition, the microstructure and mechanical properties of LPBF Hastellow-X before and after heat-treament (including hot isostatic pressing) were examined to provide in-depth discussions into the cracking mechanism and the influence of post-processing on mechanical properties of the alloy. The Hastelloy-X alloy powder was supplied by Northwest Institute for Nonferrous Metal Research. Fig. The fabrication of Hastelloy-X builds was done using an EOS M280 machine equipped with a Yb:YAG fiber laser source of 400 W power capacity, within an Ar protective atmosphere. The powder bed was preheated to 373 K before melting the powder. A meander scan strategy rastered with 16.5 o for each layer was employed and the build volume was 10 × 10 × 100 mm 3 . Previous studies on Hastelloy-X Heat treatments by annealing and hot-isostatic pressing (HIP) were carried out to study their effects on the process defects (such as porosity and cracks), microstructure and mechanical properties. The annealing was conducted in vacuum at 1450 K for 4 h, and then furnace-cooled while HIP was conducted at a hydrostatic pressure of 150 MPa, a temperature of 1450 K for 4 h, then slowly cooled in furnace at a cooling rate of about 12 °C × min -1 . Fig. Vicker's micro-hardness indentation was operated using FM100 with a load of 20 g and holding time of 15 s for each test. The indentation was repeated for more than 15 times for each specimen. Locations of micro-hardness tests for each polished surface are shown in Fig. Quasi-static mechanical tensile tests were done using a MTS Landmark test machine at room temperature with a nominal strain rate of 5 × 10 -4 s -1 . Dog-bone specimens (Fig. Optical microscopic observation was done using a Leica DM4000M microscope. OM samples were prepared by grinding with silicon carbide papers from 600 to 5000 grits, followed by mechanical polishing with Struers OP-S suspension containing 0.06 m particles. Polished samples were also examined by electron microscopy including electron back-scattered diffraction (EBSD), secondary electron imaging (SE), back-scattered imaging (BSE), and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) using a field emission JSM 7100F scanning electron microscope (SEM) with a voltage of 20 kV. EBSD scanning was operated with a step size of about 1 μm and map size of 500×500 m 2 , and the data analysis was performed using OIM Analysis (EDAX-TSL). Chemical etching for 5~7 seconds was done for SE scanning using a solution of 36% hydrochloric, 38% acetic and 65% nitric acid in a volumetric ratio of 3:2:2. The aspect ratio of grains (which were defined by a misorientation angle of 15 o ) was determined as the ratio of the major axis to the minor axis. Crack quantification is done on the basis of number of cracks found in OM micrographs. This study used a Python-based package originally developed by Griffiths et al. where N A is the number of cracks per unit area, and c is the half of the mean of crack length. The number density N A could be measured either by direct counting or by grid method, wherein the latter, two sets of perpendicular lines were generated automated to form the grid. The number of intersections between cracks and grid lines per unit length in the two orthogonal directions I and II is counted and labeled as P I and P II . The crack length per unit area L A is linked to the number density N A and the mean crack length 2c through L A ≈ 2cN A An example of image processing to quantify the densities of cracks is shown in Fig. 4 . The orginal OM image of an as-built specimen was converted to grayscale using (0.17 × Reds + 0.28 × Greens + 0.55 × Blues) to substantially increase the contrast (Fig. are shown in Fig. To avoid a mis-identification of cracks from pores or polished stain, a feature was identified to be a crack if the diagonal length of a square that enclosed the feature of interest was equal or longer than a length threshold (which was a length of cracks typically observed by OM, and was found to be 10 m). The crack shown in the inset of Fig. Thermal profile parameters such thermal gradient are influential to the formation of porosity and cracks. Carslaw et al. had developed where T 0 is the initial temperature of the powder bed, When the heat supply from the laser beam ceased after the duration τ, the temperature is given by: with t > τ and z > 0 Values of thermal conductivity and specific heat capacity at calculated temperatures used in calculation are listed in Table Scheil-Gulliver equation was used to predict the solidification range and solidification gradient that are the key parameters controling the solidification cracking Thermal profile are influential in the microstructure To estimate the change in thermal profile with varying the substrate temperature, three different initial temperatures (298 K, 373 K and 473 K) were used, by which to reflect the cold bed, pre-heated bed to 373 K, and bed temperature rise (to 473 K and even higer in practice) due to laser heating with proceeding of printing, respectively. Physical parameters in Table To estimate the influence of lower thermal conductivity to temperature distribution when print at the wall area of a build due to poor thermal conduction of adjacent powder, Fig. Fig. After annealing, the yield stress dropped substantially (by about 160 MPa), but the uniform elongation does not increase. HIP resulted in excellent combination between strength and ductility: a high yield stress (of about 530 MPa), the uniform elongation of 20 % (which is a significant increases from 13%) and an substantial increase in the ultimate tensile stress to be about 1000 MPa which was higher than that of the as-built condition. The micro-hardness of the different material conditions along building direction is presented in Fig. Comparing with the as-built one, the annealed condition showed a drastic decrease in hardness while HIPing exhibited hardness comparable to the as-built condition. In addition, the measurement of micro-hardness from the bottom of the build toward the top appears to show a small increase for all three conditions (i.e. as-built, annealed and HIP) but it was within the error ranges. The mechanical properties in present study as well as some reports in literature were detailed in Table The material was fabricated with an excellent consolidation with some minute defects (Figs The as-built specimen showed drastic variations in the crack density along the build direction with higher concentrations near the bottom and top layers. In addition, the density of cracks is much higher near the free surface compared with that towards the centre of the build (Fig. Fig. Scheil-Gulliver solidification curve of the Hastelloy-X investigated in this study is shown in Fig. The Hastelloy-X, investigated in this study, has a quite large solidification range of 270 K in comparison to 110 K of the MHX. Solidification gradient of the currently studied Hastelloy X is about 1054 K, while the MHX has a lower solidification gradient of 586 K. A lower absolute solidification gradient results in a higher resistance to solidification cracking Fig. M 23 C 6 formation was limited to grain boundaries, whereas σ was predicted to form both on the grain boundaries and in the grain interiors. Under both cooling conditions in annealling and HIP, σ and M 23 C 6 started to form at about 1076 K. However, the equilibrium property diagram, Fig. After passing 950 K, growth of all phases stoped in both cases. Cooling at a slower rate of 0.2 K/s in HIP allowed to reach a volume fraction of σ and M 23 C 6 of 0.17 and 0.01 respectively, approaching the thermodynamic maximum (Fig. The microstructure in the as-built, annealed and HIPed conditions is shown in Fig. suggesting recrystallisation might happen more significantly in HIP than in annealling, leading to more equiaxed grains in the HIPed condition. Fig. Hastelloy-X alloy is known to be susceptible to hot cracking (namely solidification cracking and ductility loss cracking) in LPBF SEM imaging did not find clear evidence of precipitates in as-built condition consistent with Harrison et al.'s findings The volume fractions of σ and carbides in the as-built would be very small and negligible. SEM imaging of 2D sections might not be able to reveal the small fraction of precipitates. Because no significant precipitates were seen in the as-built condition (Fig. Solidification cracking occurs at the terminal stage of solidification. Therefore, solidification cracks are often found at inter-dendritic regions and grain boundaries, explaining cracks in the as-built condition of the alloy were often seen at the boundaries between different cellular domains (Fig. The crack density distribution appears to be higher in the bottom, then decrease towards the middle, finally increase again in the top region of the build. As mentioned above (Section 3.1), higher cooling rates in the bottom part of a solid build than that towards the top of the build. Higher cooling rates cause faster and larger thermal contractions, inducing higher thermal stress that promote the formation of cracks in solidification. This probably explains the higher density of cracks observed in the bottom region in the as-built condition (Figs Post-processing treatments (such as annealing and HIP) are often used to enhance the mechanical properties via optimising microstructure and removing cracks. Such clustering of cracks observed in the as-built condition should remain unchanged during annealing without hot isostatic pressing as it was confirmed by Fig. Due to rapid cooling and high thermal gradient in additive manufacturing, materials fabricated by AM are reported to have different microstructure and higher mechanical extended the uniform deformation before necking, hence increase the ductility of the HIPed alloy (Fig. This study identified optimized print parameters from literature data analysis. 