Macroscopic fibers of carbon nanotubes (CNT) have emerged as an ideal architecture to exploit the exceptional properties of CNT building blocks in applications ranging from energy storage to reinforcement in structural composites. Controlled synthesis and scalability are amongst the most pressing challenges to further materialize the potential of CNT fibers. This work shows that under floating catalyst chemical vapor conditions in the direct spinning method, used both in research and industry, the ceramic reactor tube plays an unsuspected active role in CNT growth, leading for example to doubling of reaction yield when mullite (Al 4+2x Si 2-2x O 10-x (x ≈ 0.4)) is used instead of alumina (Al 2 O 3 ), but without affecting CNT morphology in terms of number of layers, purity or degree of graphitization. This behaviour has been confirmed for different carbon sources and when growing either predominantly single-walled or multi-walled CNTs by adjusting promotor concentration. Analysis of large Si-based impurities occasionally found in CNT fiber fabric samples, attributed to reactor tube fragments that end up trapped in the porous fibers, indicate that the role of the reactor tube is in catalyzing the thermal decomposition of hydrocarbons, which subsequently react with floating Fe catalyst nanoparticles and produce extrusion of the CNTs and formation of an aerogel. Reactor gas analysis confirms that extensive thermal decomposition of the carbon source occurs in the absence of Fe catalyst particles, and that the concentration of different carbon species (e.g. carbon dioxide and ethylene) is sensitive to the reactor tube type. These finding open new avenues for controlled synthesis of CNT fibers by decoupling precursor decomposition from CNT extrusion at the catalyst particle. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are extraordinary building blocks due to their exceptional combination of mechanical, electrical and thermal properties along the tube axis. They can be produced in large quantities as a highly graphitic material with a well defined structure, in some cases with molecular composition control in terms of number of layers, diameter of nanotubes and chiral angle. Their assembly into fibers and further arrays (yarns, tows, fabrics) has unlocked numerous applications in diverse fields, including electrodes for energy storage This has been possible through the development of fiber spinning processes that can reproducibly produce uniform highly controlled materials. An example is the direct spinning method, whereby an aerogel of CNTs is produced by floating catalyst chemical vapor deposition (FC-CVD) and directly drawn out of a reactor and wound continuously as a macroscopic fiber There have been substantial efforts to understand the key parameters during synthesis and spinning that control CNT fiber structure and resulting properties. The process shares some features of conventional substrate-based CVD growth of CNT, both being based on catalytic decomposition of a carbon source and extrusion as a CNT from a transition metal catalyst particle, typically in a reducing (H 2 ) atmosphere. In the case of traditional substrate growth of CNTs by CVD, control over CNT type, quality and yield depend strongly on the presence and choice of a MO x support layer. The MO x acts as a barrier for catalyst diffusion but has also influence on the catalyst particle size/shape and catalytic activity On the other hand, FC-CVD is conducted at higher temperature (> 1000 oC) under conditions leading to the formation of catalyst nanoparticles "floating" in the gas phase, and which are assumed to entirely produce the decomposition of the carbon source and formation of carbon nanotubes A prevalent assumption in CNT growth by FC-CVD is that the ceramic reactor tube, typically alumina, mullite or silica, plays no active role in the reaction and simply act as reaction vessels. However, here we show that the ceramic tube that hosts the FC-CVD plays an unsuspected active role in the FC-CVD reaction through carbon precursor decomposition. While it does not change CNT morphology, which remains controlled by the S/C ratio, it can double reaction yield when mullite (Al 4+2x Si 2-2x O 10-x (x ≈ 0.4)) is used instead of alumina (Al 2 O 3 ), for example. Analysis of Si-based impurities, occasionally found in CNT fiber samples and presumed to detach from the reactor tube, helps understand general aspects of the reaction mechanism. We have produced continuous CNT fibers in reactor tubes with different contents of SiO 2 . In our typical set-up mullite (62.6% Al 2 O 3 , 35.2% SiO 2 , 2.2% others) is used as a reactor tube, leading to the formation of a dark aerogel of CNTs that can be continuously spun for hours (Figure To investigate intermediate SiO 2 compositions we performed an additional experiment in which a mullite inner tube was gradually introduced from the top of the reactor into the alumina reactor tube, until the bottom of the inner mullite tube was in the region of 1250 • C, as schematically shown in Figure In order to shed light into the effect of the reactor tube on the reaction conditions, we studied the chemical composition of gases at the reactor outlet by performing chromatography measurements on gas samples extracted from the reactor when using mullite or alumina tubes. Reference measurements also included gas samples produced in the absence of Fe catalyst but with the same injection of the remaining precursors. At present, the experimental protocol used (see experimental section) only enables gas extraction from the lower part of the reactor, which can contain substantial nitrogen gas purposely introduced to replace hydrogen at the reactor exit for safety reasons, but which does not take part in the reaction. As a consequence, only relative concentrations of different species can be analyzed based on the chromatography data (Figure Interestingly, the analysis of the gases at the outlet of both reactor tubes reveals extensive thermal decomposition of the carbon source (1-butanol) irrespective of the presence of catalyst. CO 2 and C 1 -C 3 hydrocarbons (methane, ethane, ethylene, acetylene) are found in all conditions studied, together with minor amounts of carbonyl sulphide. Benzene, propene and propyne are also observed in small quantities. These results are in agreement with thermal decomposition studies of n-butanol reported in the literature In spite of the substantial change in reaction conversion the type and morphology of the constituent CNTs are not significantly affected by the choice of reactor tube. The Raman spectra for samples produced in the different reactor tubes, but with the same precursor composition, presented in Figure Thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA) (Figure Electron microscopic analysis of samples produced in mullite and alumina tubes, respectively, while only being qualitative, also confirms the observations discussed above. Scanning electron micrographs (Figure The preceding discussion leaves no doubt that the reactor tube plays an active role in the synthesis of CNTs in the direct fiber process. As a result of reactions at the reactor tube wall and of the SiO 2 in the tube itself (vide infra), Si-containing impurities are occasionally found in CNT fibers. They are scarce, mostly found on samples collected for long times (> 30 min) produced in heavily used reactor tubes and when inspecting the samples with methods that probe large sample volumes and/or are sensitive to Si-containing compounds, hence why they had been undetected so far. In fact, their presence in our CNT fiber samples has been elucidated after analysis of combined data obtained using different characterization techniques over several years. Some degree of analysis of these particles is instructive in trying to understand the role of the mullite reactor tube in the CNT growth process. Figure Another evidence of Si-containing impurities in CNT fibers is found in X-ray diffraction patterns from fibers grown in mullite, our standard reactor tube. Yet, the associated features can only occasionally be resolved and only when using synchrotron radiation in transmission mode, which probes a large sample volume with a high intensity beam. An example is presented in Figure The 2D wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAXS) pattern (Figure Note that the Si-containing particles discussed above give rise to sharp X-ray diffraction (XRD) peaks and thus large crystal sizes (> 120 nm). We take this observation as indicative that these impurities correspond to fragments of the reactor tube that detach during fiber spinning, particularly during stringing, and attach to the porous CNT fiber structure at its exit of the reactor. These fragments originate from the inside wall of the reactor tube and thus correspond to the materials that is exposed to the reaction and the highly reducing atmosphere, hence its composition is different from that of mullite. Further analysis of these impurities is problematic because of the difficulty in locating them, since they are not associated to the catalyst or the CNTs. Conventional analysis of samples by either SEM or TEM has not revealed the presence of Si-based nanoparticles after years of studying these CNT fibers, which explains why, to our knowledge, there are no previous reports suggesting the presence of Si-based impurities after CNT growth by CVD in mullite or quartz. SiO 2 particles on graphene grown by CVD on Cu in hydrogen in a quartz tube have indeed been observed In order to gain more insight into the structure of Si-containing impurities in the fibers we subjected a CNT fiber sample to ultrasonication in acetone, a known procedure to selectively remove extraneous materials from CNT fibers while preserving their CNT network structure Extensive analysis of impurities showed mainly C-or Fe-based particles, as expected, but some evidence of Si-based particles was also present. Figure The results presented above demonstrate that SiO 2 in the reactor tubes plays an active role in CVD reaction, increasing yield of CNTs but without affecting composition. They also show that some SiO 2 reacts with carbon, leading to the formation of SiC, but very importantly, there is no evidence that Si associates with the Fe-based catalyst or is even present near the catalyst in CNT fibers. While these results might be surprising in the context of CNT growth, they are fully consistent with observations in hydrocarbon heterogeneous catalysis, where SiO 2 and aluminosilicates are known to catalyze multiple reactions, including cracking of hydrocarbons. Referred to as examples of inorganic solid acids, aluminosilicates are amongst the most studied catalysts in hydrocarbon reactions, most notably, because of their widespread use in oil refining-related reactions. Extensive reviews can be found elsewhere We note that mullite also assists CNT fiber growth when using CH 4 as a C precursor But to gain more insight into the extent to which the reactor tube can take part in the catalytic decomposition of C-precursors, we have calculated the approximate total surface of Fe catalyst nanoparticles relative to that of the reactor tube. Under the assumption that the residence time in the reactor is dictated by the carrier gas velocity and that the carried gas behaves as an ideal gas, we find that the ratio of surfaces can be expressed as (see SOM) Where ṁFe is the mass flow rate of Fe injected in the reactor, r reactor is the radius of the reactor tube (3.5cm), r Fe the average Fe catalyst particle radius (4.5nm), ρ Fe the density of Fe and f H 2 the flow rate of the H 2 carrier gas. For typical CNT fiber spinning parameters used in laboratory settings the rate comes out as 0.05. This be initially surprising considering that the radius of the particles is much smaller than that of the reactor tube, but note that the mass flow rate is very low (less than 3μg/s) and hence the concentration of Fe particles is extremely small, which makes the two surfaces of similar order of magnitude. Very importantly, we have observed gradual roughening of the surface of the reactor tube after its regular use over months. Such roughening occurs through repetitive use in a highly reducing atmosphere (containing H 2 and CH 4 ), causing partial reduction and re-oxidation (on cooling) of mullite This work shows that the ceramic reactor tube used in FC-CVD synthesis of CNT fibers plays an active role in the reaction by assisting in the decomposition of the n-butanol carbon source. Using a mullite reactor leads to higher reaction yields, i.e. a higher fiber mass linear density, compared to alumina. This is consistent with their established catalytic activity for the decomposition of hydrocarbons. In spite of the key contribution of the reactor tube to the synthesis of CNT fibers, the morphology of the CNTs in terms of degree of graphitization and number of layers remains unaffected by the choice of reactor tube and is instead controlled by the ratio of promoter to carbon source. Si-based impurities are occasionaly observed in CNT fibers using different techniques. Their structure suggests that they correspond to reactor tube fragments that detach from the main tube and end up trapped in the porous CNT fibers. All evidence suggests that Si does not associate with the Fe catalyst nor take direct part in the extrusion of graphitic carbon at the catalyst particle surface. A main corollary of these results is the possibility to decouple hydrocarbon decomposition from catalytic growth, which could greatly help increase reaction yield and bring new opportunities for molecular control.This requires, amongst other advances, determining more precisely the catalytic decomposition route of different C sources and separating contributions from the Fe catalyst particles and the reactor tube to this process. The gas near the outlet of the reactor tube was sampled by extracting a volume of gas from inside the lower part of the reactor tube into Tedlar bags using a manual pump. The gas samples were then analyzed with a gas chromatograph (Agilent 7820 GC) coupled to a mass spectrometer (Agilent 5977B MSD). The gas was injected through an automatic valve into a CarbonPLOT column (30 m x 0.32 mm) using He as carrier gas with a split ratio of 1:20. The mass spectra were obtained by electronic impact with a single quadruple analyzer and an extractor ion source. The identification of the peaks was performed using the NIST Mass Spectral Search Program.