We performed the first-principles calculation on common thermoelectric semiconductors Bi2Te3, Bi2Se3, SiGe, and PbTe in bulk three-dimension (3D) and two-dimension (2D). We found that miniaturization of materials does not generally increase the thermoelectric figure of merit (ZT ) according to the Hicks and Dresselhaus (HD) theory. For example, ZT values of 2D PbTe (0.32) and 2D SiGe (0.04) are smaller than their 3D counterparts (0.49 and 0.09, respectively). Meanwhile, the ZT values of 2D Bi2Te3 (0.57) and 2D Bi2Se3 (0.43) are larger than the bulks (0.54 and 0.18, respectively), which agree with HD theory. The HD theory breakdown occurs because the band gap and band flatness of the materials change upon dimensional reduction. We found that flat bands give a larger electrical conductivity (σ) and electronic thermal conductivity (κ el ) in 3D materials, and smaller values in 2D materials. In all cases, maximum ZT values increase proportionally with the band gap and saturate for the band gap above 10 kBT . The 2D Bi2Te3 and Bi2Se3 obtain a higher ZT due to the flat corrugated bands and narrow peaks in their DOS. Meanwhile, the 2D PbTe violates HD theory due to the flatter bands it exhibits, while 2D SiGe possesses a small gap Dirac-cone band. Thermoelectric (TE) materials are useful for generating electricity from waste heat without any moving parts. Despite decades of research in this field, TE efficiency remains low and stagnant at 10%. This efficiency corresponds to a dimensionless figure of merit (ZT ) that equals to unity, which is defined as where S is the Seebeck coefficient, σ is the electric conductivity, κ el is the electronic thermal conductivity, κ ph is the phonon thermal conductivity, and T is the effective temperature. High electric conductivity is needed to obtain a high ZT value, but increasing it also increases the thermal conductivity, following the Wiedemann-Franz law κ el = σLT , where L is the Lorenz number. This proportionality reduces ZT value. It is hard to achieve a ZT value over unity due to this relation. Another factor that reduces the ZT further is the fact that metals exhibit a low Seebeck coefficient, while insulators have the opposite characteristics. Thus good TE materials usually come from semiconductor materials. There exists a range of band gaps One way to push ZT value beyond unity is through the miniaturization of materials as initially proposed by Hicks and Dresselhaus (HD) With recent advances in crystal growing of 2D materials, it is possible to have one or few atoms-thick 2D materials that satisfy small confinement lengths. Moreover, HD theory simply assumes parabolic bands that retain the same band gaps and band flatness as the dimension changes. In reality, these quantities strongly depend on the geometry and the dimension of the materials, and as a result, they will affect TE transport. In this paper, we investigate several common semiconductors TE to check the limitation of the HD theory. We investigate the 3D and the 2D structures of Bi 2 Te 3 , Bi 2 Se 3 , PbTe and SiGe. The TE properties were calculated by using the first-principles calculation and the Boltzmann transport equation. Additionally, these results can be compared with a simple two-band model to understand the dependence of TE properties on dimensionality, band gap, and band flatness. While the bulk states of these materials are considered as good TE materials, the TE properties of the 2D structures remain in early-stage research. The single quintuple layer (QL) of Bi 2 Te 3 and Bi 2 Se 3 have been experimentally fabricated through exfoliation Our results show that dimension reduction changes the band gaps and the flatness of the band. From the analysis of the two-band model, we show that the band flatness keeps the Seebeck coefficient intact and reduces the σ and κ el values in 2D materials, while in 3D materials, it increases σ and κ el due to the different density of states. Overall, the maximum ZT values increase proportionally with band gap and saturate when band gap above 10 k B T in both the 2D and 3D materials. As a result, 2D PbTe, which exhibits relatively flat bands, and 2D SiGe, which has a low band gap, have a low ZT value, and violate HD theory. On the other hand, Bi 2 Te 3 and Bi 2 Se 3 agrees with HD theory because of their flat corrugated bands We used Quantum Espresso The semi-classical Boltzmann equations encoded in the BoltzTraP program was used to evaluate the transport properties The phase groups of the materials that we used are as follow, R3m for Bi 2 Te 3 and Bi 2 Se 3 , Fm3m for PbTe, and F43m for SiGe. As for the 2-dimensional structures, the quintuple layer (QL) of Bi 2 Te 3 and Bi 2 Se 3 , and (001) surface layer of PbTe and SiGe were used. In this study we only investigated a single layer of each materials. All of the structures are presented in Fig. The results of our structure optimization are shown in Table . 3 of Supplementary Material. The error between our results and the experiment values are less than 2 %. A further reduction in error could be obtained by using tighter convergence criteria. Bulk Bi 2 Te 3 and Bi 2 Se 3 both have the same hexagonal close-packed (HCP) crystal structure. Bulk PbTe has a NaCl face-centered cubic crystal structure. The surface of PbTe in (001) direction possesses a similar lattice constant with the bulk structure, although it is stated in The calculated electronic band structures of each material are shown in Fig. The band gap values of each material are presented in Table The calculated Seebeck coefficients as a function of chemical potential at 300 K are shown in Fig. The properties of all materials are isotropic. The chemical potential is related to the carrier concentration. Increasing the chemical potential or carrier concentration way above the gap will decrease the Seebeck coefficient. The single QL of Bi 2 Te 3 and Bi 2 Se 3 have a higher Seebeck coefficient compared to the bulk properties. On the contrary, the bulk properties of SiGe and PbTe have a much higher Seebeck coefficient than the 2D counterparts. Single QL of Bi 2 Te 3 achieved the highest Seebeck coefficient for the 2D materials and PbTe exhibits the highest Seebeck coefficient for the 3D materials, with a value of 1610 μV/K and 1375 μV/K respectively. The second row of Fig. The calculated electronic thermal conductivities are shown in the third row of Fig. The ZT values are shown in the last row of Fig. The band flatness and the band gap are changed upon dimensional reduction, as seen in Fig. From this simple model, we can see that band flatness gives a positive enhancement to the TE properties in 3D material while it has a detrimental effect on 2D material. Changing the band flatness will only affect the Kane band in CB, thus we only plot ZT max vs band gap ∆ for n-doped only (Fig. In general, the maximum ZT value (ZT max ) increases proportionally with the band gap in both the 3D and 2D materials. The maximum ZT values increase as the band gap widens up to a certain threshold value, which is around 10k B T or 0.25 eV at room temperature, and become saturated beyond this value. The optimum band gap that we obtain is the same as the previous works From our two band model, we can explain the first-principles calculation results. The 2D PbTe has a low ZT value because it possesses flat bands near its band edge, while 2D SiGe has a low band gap resulting in a low ZT . On the other hand, Bi 2 Te 3 and Bi 2 Se 3 bands are corrugated near the Fermi level and are not classified as the flat band as described by the The inset gives the band dispersions on α = 0.1 and α = 1.0 Kane model, so the results from our model cannot be used to describe these materials. The Corrugated flat band has multiple Fermi pockets that, in effect, enhance the Seebeck coefficients Our continuum model is not able to explain the effect of narrow band width on TE properties. According to the previous works The optimized chemical potential and its associated carrier concentration are given in Table . 4. After obtaining the optimized chemical potentials, we calculate the temperaturedependent relaxation time and phonon thermal conductivity on those chemical potentials. The relaxation times of each material on various temperatures are obtained using the same method to get the value in Table In room temperature, all of the relaxation times are in the order of fs. The ZT value of a single QL Bi 2 Te 3 is bigger on low temperature (< 300K), and the value drops beyond the room temperature like its bulk counterpart. The single QL Bi 2 Se 3 showcase a better ZT value on all temperature ranges except on > 800K. For PbTe and SiGe, we can see that the bulk ZT values are higher than 2D values on all temperature range. None of the materials reaches a ZT value much higher than unity, the highest 2D ZT value is achieved by Bi 2 Te 3 in low temperature regime (around 0.88 at 200K) and Bi 2 Se 3 in high temperature regime (around 0.9 at 800K). The highest bulk ZT value is achieved by Bi 2 Se 3 on 800K (around 0.93). In conclusion, we have calculated the thermoelectric properties of the bulk and the 2D structures of Bi 2 Te 3 , Bi 2 Se 3 , PbTe, and SiGe. We used temperature-dependent relaxation time approximation to obtain the transport properties. The single QL of Bi 2 Te 3 and Bi 2 Se 3 exhibits a higher ZT than its bulk due to their corrugated flat band, which agree with HD theory. However, PbTe and SiGe violate the HD theory. From the two-band model analysis, 2D PbTe and SiGe have lower ZT than 3D counterparts because 2D PbTe has flat bands and 2D SiGe has a low band gap. We note that these low ZT occur even when the DOS of 2D materials are higher than 3D. The fact that HD theory is nonuniversal requires a deeper analysis of which material or geometry performs the best at a given dimension. The figure of merits on all materials, except Bi 2 Te 3 , increase as the temperature increases. The single QL of Bi 2 Te 3 has a higher ZT value below room temperature, while the single QL of Bi 2 Se 3 has a higher ZT value on temperature range below 800K. PbTe and SiGe monolayers have lower ZT values on all temperature ranges than their bulk. Better results might be achieved when one can manipulate the relaxation mechanisms to reduce phonon thermal conductivity and to increase electrical conductivity for the bulk and the 2D structures. where ∆ is the band gap and α is the non-parabolicity factor. The value of α = 0 corresponds to a parabolic band. The transport properties from Boltzmann's transport theory under relaxation time approximation (RTA) , for each band, are given by, where L i is the TE integral and is defined as, where μ is the Fermi energy, f (E) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution, and τ (E) is the transport distribution function (TDF). The explicit form of TDF with constant relaxation time approximation (CRTA) is τ (E) = v 2 x (E)τ (E)D(E) and has a different form on each band dispersion and dimension. The TDF that are used in the calculations are: The DOS of each band dispersions and dimensions can be written as, where Θ is the Heaviside function. Defining the dimensionless quantity as plus letting x = ǫ -η, the TE integral then become: where H i,c (η), F i,v (η), I i,c (η), J i,v (η) are defined as: Only F i,v (η) can be solved analytically out of the four integrals. The analytic results for these integrals are: with We can obtain thermoelectric properties by plugging eq. ( κ 2d e,c = while the transports from the valence have the form of: Looking at the transport quantities from eq. ( The 3D formulation retains the same relation as above, and the transports equations are the same as the 2D formulation, differing only in the transport magnitude: For the two-band model, the total transport properties are: Phonon thermal conductivity is defined as κ ph = r k κ 0 e,v in the equations above. We use r k = 1 in all our calculations. Each transport properties from multiple bands can be written as the summation of the kernel integrals, with n as the total number of bands, ) (e) Bi 2 Te 3 2D Γ M K Γ (f) Bi 2 Se 3 2D Γ X M Γ