An analytical theory of nonuniformly doped or shaped PN-junction diodes submitted to largesignals at high frequencies is presented. The resulting expressions can be useful to evaluate the performance of semiconductor device modeling software. The transverse averaging technique is employed to reduce the three-dimensional charge carrier transport equations into the quasi-onedimensional form, with all physical quantities averaged out over the longitudinally-varying cross section. Although, it is assumed an axial symmetry, this approach gives rise to useful analytic expressions for the static current-voltage characteristics, the diffusion conductance, and diffusion capacitance as a function of the signal amplitude and the cross section non-uniformity. Depending on the application, different levels of device modeling are used to predict the behavior of electronic circuits. For circuits with many devices, compact models are required to reduce the simulation time. For circuit building blocks with a few devices, physical models may be used to get further insight. Physics-based modeling requires more computer resources, but it has the advantage of being valid at a wider operating range, and offers easier to interpret parameters The transverse averaging technique (TAT) allows the general three-dimensional (3D) equations of semiconductor electronics to be converted into the so-called quasi-one-dimensional (quasi-1D) form. The quasi-1D equations involve all the physical scalar quantities (potential, charge density, etc.) and longitudinal components of the vector quantities (electric field, current density, etc.) in the form averaged over the longitudinally-varying cross section S(z) and dependent only on the longitudinal coordinate z Besides, the average one-dimensional equations also include the contour integrals along interface lines which take into account the proper boundary conditions between different domains of the semiconductor structure. Such equations are completely equivalent to the initial three-dimensional equations and in this respect are accurate except that they deal with physical quantities averaged over the cross section of a nonuniform semiconductor structure. This paper is devoted to the generalization of the large-signal and high-frequency theory of the charge carrier transport developed previously for uniform PN-junctions The initial equations for derivation of the quasi-1D drift-diffusion equations of the nonuniform PN-junctions are the three-dimensional continuity equations and the current density expressions • for electrons with the normal components of currents that obey the following surface-recombination boundary conditions and Here p n , n p and p, n are the equilibrium and nonequilibrium densities of minority carriers in the n-and p-regions, D p(n) , μ p(n) and τ p(n) are the diffusion constant, mobility, and lifetime for holes (electrons). Integration of Eqs. ( Here p s , n s are the nonequilibrium minority-carrier volume densities taken at surface points of the structure, and s p(n) is the surface recombination velocity for holes (electrons). Here the average quantities Ēz , jpz , and p are introduced For axially-symmetrical structures with S(z) = πa 2 (z), we have so that the contour integrals in Eqs. ( By substituting expressions ( Similarly, from the initial equations ( All the average quantities μp(n) , Dp(n) , and τp(n) will be considered as phenomenologically given parameters with dropping the bar sign over them for simplicity. Quasi-one-dimensional equations ( Not having a specific knowledge of surface properties, we shall assume that D ps p s = D p p and D ns n s = D n n. Then, from equations where is the diffusion length for holes (electrons). The additional last term involving ∂ ln S/∂z ≡ S ′ (z)/S(z) takes into account the cross-sectional nonuniformity. In general case, the voltage applied to the PN-junction consists of the DC bias voltage V 0 and the AC harmonic signal V ∼ cos ωt: Nonlinearity of electronic processes in the PN-junction produces the frequency harmonics kω so that solutions of Eqs. ( Real values of ∆p(z, t) and ∆n(z, t) are provided with the following relations for the complex amplitudes: ∆p k = ∆p * -k and ∆n k = ∆n * -k . Substitution of the required solutions ( where As an analytical approximation to a mesa-like structure, the special case of exponential change of the cross section S(z) = S 0 exp(2αz) is considered, Eqs. ( Representing the desired solution in the form of e -λz , we obtain the following characteristic equation for Eqs. ( The complex roots of Eq. ( where we have introduced the following notations: • for holes injected into the n-region • for electrons injected into the p-region (z ≤ -W p ) The general solutions of equations ( • for electrons injected into the p-region In accordance with notations (24) and (25), always Re Λ ± pk = a α pk A α p ± αL p > 0 and Re Λ ± nk = a α nk A α n ± αL n > 0 so that for the PN-diodes with thick bases we can assume C - pk = 0 and C + nk = 0, which eliminates the necessity for boundary conditions on ohmic contacts. Taking into account formulas ( These expressions provide ∆p(z, t) → 0 as z → ∞ and ∆n(z, t) → 0 as z → -∞ because of Re Λ + pk > 0 and Re Λ - nk > 0. The constants C + pk and C - nk appearing in Eqs. ( where for the applied voltage v(t) of the form (15) we have introduced the function Substitution of expressions ( By using the orthogonality property of harmonics in expansions (33) it is easy to get the desired constants where F k is the Fourier amplitude of the kth harmonic for the function f (t) given by formula (32), that is Substitution of the function (32) into formula (35) gives where we have used the modified Bessel functions of the first kind of order k (k = 0, ±1, ±2, . . .) having the following integral representation (see formula 8.431.5 in Ref. This function depends on βV ∼ , where V ∼ is an amplitude of the signal applied to the PN-junction and β = q/κT . Thus, with allowing for Eq. (34) the general solutions (28) and (29) of the diffusion equations ( These expressions allow us to obtain the spectral composition of the current flowing through the external circuit connected to the PN-diode. The initial equation to derive an expression for the diode current is the law of total current conservation: following from Maxwell's equation ∇× H = j p + j n + ǫ ∂E/∂t. The transverse averaging technique applied to Eq. ( The similar equation outside the semiconductor, where currents are absent and ∇ • (ǫ o E o ) = 0, has the following form: where S o is an effective localization area of the fringe outside field E o such that usually S o ≪ S and ǫ o < ǫ. The addition of Eqs. ( If a semiconductor surface contains traps with the charge density ρ s , there are the following boundary conditions on the contour L(z) In this case, two contour integrals in Eq. ( The quantity in brackets of Eq. ( Here we have used expressions ( Restricting our consideration to the PN-diodes with low injection, we can assume Ēz = 0 in neutral parts of the pand n-regions Neglecting recombination processes inside the PN-junction, which is true if Substitution of relation (49) into Eq. ( where ∆p = p -p n and ∆n = n -n p are the excess concentrations of injected carriers determined by formulas (39) and (40). Inserting these formulas into expression (50), we finally obtain the spectral representation for the external circuit current: Here, the hole and electron contributions into the saturation current of a thick PN-junction are defined, as it is generally accepted where Expression (51) contains all the spectral components of the external circuit current including the DC current for k = 0 and the AC current for k = ± 1 which are of most interest for our further consideration. The term in series (51) numbered by k = 0 corresponds to the DC current J 0 , which by using (36) can be written in the form of the static current-voltage characteristic: Here we have introduced the saturation current for a nonuniform diode and, in accordance with expressions (24) and (25) for k = 0, have used the following notation: For the uniform p -n-junction (with α = 0) we have r α p0 = r α n0 = 1 and S n = S p = S 0 so that the static current-voltage characteristic retains the form (53) with the usual saturation current where as before superscript 0 marks the cross-sectional uniformity (when α = 0 and S 0 = constant). The modified Bessel function I 0 (βV ∼ ) appearing in Eq. ( The first harmonic of the external current in the general expression (51) corresponds to terms numbered by k = ± 1 and equals where ω) . The quantities Λ + p1 , Λ - n1 , and F 1 are respectively defined by formulas (24), (25), and (37) for k = 1. Expressions (15) with V ∼ = 2V 1 (ω) and (57) allow one to introduce the dynamic admittance of the PN-diode as a function of frequency: The dynamic (diffusion) conductance G d and the dynamic (diffusion) capacitance C d are defined in a customary way Here we have introduced the new quantities: and, in accordance with Eqs. ( Formulas ( For the static characteristic of form (53), the differential conductance (64) depends on both the bias voltage V 0 and the signal amplitude V ∼ : Formulas ( composed of the modified Bessel functions I 0 and I 1 and introduced before in paper From Eqs. ( After substituting (67) into Eqs. ( where, following to paper The quantities G d0 and C d0 appearing in Eqs. ( An essential simplification of Eqs. (68)-( where the newly introduced quantities (marked with superscript 0) correspond, as before, to the cross-sectionally uniform structures (with α = 0 and S 0 = constant). Substitution of Eqs. ( Here we have defined the frequency-dependent factors: where For the uniform PN-junction (with α = 0) from Eqs. (79) and (80) it follows that so that expressions (77) and ( The dependence on the signal amplitude V ∼ for the diffusion conductance G d (V ∼ ) and capacitance C d (V ∼ ) appearing in Eqs. ( The frequency dependence of the diffusion conductance G d (ω) and capacitance C d (ω) is produced by the functions r α p1 (ω) and q α p1 (ω). These functions are defined by Eqs. ( Two curves 1 corresponding to the uniform junction (αL p = 0) are fully the same as those shown in Fig. At low frequencies such that ωτ p ≪ 1 and a α p1 (ω) ≃ a α p1 (0) = 1, the functions r α p1 (ω) and q α p1 (ω) take constant values FIG. Then, the factors (79) and (80) become frequency-independent and equal to The dependence of the low-frequency factors (83) and (84) on the nonuniformity parameter αL p is shown in Fig. ). The dashed curves in Fig. In conclusion, it is pertinent to note that the initial differential equations ( whose solution is (see formula 8.494.9 in Ref. The paper has demonstrated how to derive the explicit analytic form for the current-voltage characteristics of the PN-junctions with nonuniformity in the cross section and doping impurity distribution by applying the transverse averaging technique (TAT). Application of the TAT to the three-dimensional transport equations of semiconductor electronics has converted them into the quasi-1D diffusion equations ( Application of the spectral approach to the quasi-1D diffusion transport equations for the nonuniform PN-junctions under the action of arbitrary signal amplitude V ∼ has given rise to changes in both the static current-voltage characteristic J 0 (V 0 ) and the dynamic characteristics -the diffusion conductance G d (ω) and capacitance C d (ω), as compared with the conventional theory of uniform junctions The large-signal effects on the static and dynamic characteristics have proved to be completely identical to those obtained theoretically and corroborated experimentally for the uniform PN-junctions in our previous papers The influence of the cross-sectional nonuniformity on the static current-voltage characteristic (53) is exhibited in terms of the saturation current (54). The similar influence on the diffusion conductance G d (ω) and capacitance C d (ω) is demonstrated by the novel formulas (68)-( Until now, large-signal and high-frequency were treated separately to the best of our knowledge. This study may also have an impact in the understanding of distortion in high frequency circuits. Further applications, limitations of the model, carrier storage effects are the focus of further work.