Band convergence is an effective strategy to improve the thermoelectric performance of complex bandstructure thermoelectric materials. Half-Heuslers are good candidates for band convergence studies because they have multiple bands near the valence bad edge that can be converged through various band engineering approaches providing power factor improvement opportunities. Theoretical calculations to identify the outcome of band convergence employ various approximations for the carrier scattering relaxation times (the most common being the constant relaxation time approximation) due to the high computational complexity involved in extracting them accurately. Here, we compare the outcome of strain-induced band convergence under two such scattering scenarios: i) the most commonly used constant relaxation time approximation and ii) energy dependent inter-and intra-valley scattering considerations for the half-Heuslers NbCoSn and TiCoSb. We show that the outcome of band convergence on the power factor depends on the carrier scattering assumptions, as well as the temperature. For both materials examined, band convergence improves the power factor. For NbCoSn, however, band convergence becomes more beneficial as temperature increases, under both scattering relaxation time assumptions. In the case of TiCoSb, on the other hand, constant relaxation time considerations also indicate that the relative power factor improvement increases with temperature, but under the energy dependent scattering time considerations, 2 the relative improvement weakens with temperature. This indicates that the scattering details need to be accurately considered in band convergence studies to predict more accurate trends. Thermoelectric materials are capable of direct conversion of thermal energy into electricity and vice versa. They have drawn interest as an environment-friendly and highly reliable energy conversion technology where σ is the electrical conductivity, S is the Seebeck coefficient, T is the temperature and κ is the thermal conductivity of the material. To obtain a high ZT, a high electrical conductivity, a high Seebeck coefficient, i.e. a high power factor (σS 2 ), and a low thermal conductivity κ is needed, however, simultaneous optimization of these parameters is difficult due to their complex inter-dependencies. Bandstructure engineering approaches such as 'band-convergence' also known as 'band-alignment', can overcome these inter-dependencies and improve the power factor (PF) They are also known to have good thermal and mechanical stability, large scale reproducibility, and made out of relatively inexpensive, non-toxic elements. One of the most commonly used theoretical approaches for obtaining thermoelectric properties of materials is applying the Boltzmann transport theory in the relaxation time approximation using detailed material bandstructures obtained from ab initio density functional theory (DFT) In this work we study the effect of considering different scattering time scenarios on the strain-induced band-convergence for two Co-based half-Heuslers, NbCoSn and TiCoSb. We consider constant (τ C ), and energy dependent inter-and intra-valley scattering (τ IIV ) relaxation time approximations, and quantify the relative power factor improvements that each predict at different temperatures and strain levels. We finally stress the importance of accurate treatment of scattering in arriving to useful predictions. Boltzmann Transport Theory: Thermoelectric coefficients are calculated using the Boltzmann transport formalism within the relaxation time approximation (RTA). We describe the material properties using bandstructures obtained from DFT calculations. The thermoelectric coefficients, electrical conductivity σ αβ (T, E F ) and Seebeck coefficient S αβ (T, E F ) tensors, can be written as where f(E, E F , T) is the fermi distribution function at a given temperature T and a chemical potential level E F and e is the charge of an electron. Ξ αβ (E) is the transport distribution (TD) function, which is given by: Ξ αβ (E) = ∑ τ i,k (E)v α (i, k)v β (i, k) δ(E -E i,k ) where i and k represent the band index and the k-point, respectively. τ i,k (E) is the electron relaxation time and v α (i, k) (α = {x, y, z}) represents the α th component of the group velocity v(i, k), which can be derived from the gradient of the bands in the bandstructure as: Ab initio electronic structure calculations: Ab initio DFT calculations were performed for the Co-based HHs, NbCoSn and TiCoSb with the QUANTUM ESPRESSO package Ry was adopted for self-consistency. For transport property calculations, a 15x15x15 Monkhorst-Pack k-point sampling was used for the primitive unit cell with three atoms. Calculations using denser k-points were carried out to confirm the convergence of the results. Relaxation time approximation: By applying the Boltzmann transport theory using the DFT extracted bandstructures, we examine the influence of the nature of scattering times on the power factor for various temperatures and upon strain-induced band-convergence. We consider: i) the commonly employed constant relaxation time (τ i = τ C ) and ii) scattering proportional to total density of states, allowing both inter-and intra-band scattering (τ i (E) = τ IIV ∝ 1/ ∑ DOS i (E) ). To obtain a general understanding about these two scattering scenarios, we first analyse them using a simple parabolic band model. Since under the parabolic band approximation, the velocity and density of states of each band is v i (E) = (2E/m i ) 1/2 , and DOS i (E) = 2 1/2 m i 3/2 N i E 1/2 /(π 2 ħ 3 ), respectively, the TD function given in Eq.4 for valence bands is reduced to: where Under the constant relaxation time approximation, τ i (E) = τ C , where τ C is a constant. Therefore, the TD function relation given by Eq. ( This indicates that under a constant relaxation time, aligning a band of any mass will increase the TD function, resulting finally in an increased conductivity, with the larger masses resulting in larger improvements, a common scenario seen in most band-alignment theory literature. The magnitude and sign of the Seebeck coefficient are related to an asymmetry of the electron transport around the Fermi level In the case of inter-and intra-band scattering (τ IIV (E)) that we consider next, carriers are allowed to scatter elastically to the total density of states available at the energy under consideration, without any selection rules, i.e. both intra and inter-band (with inter and intra-valley in multi-valley materials) scattering is al- ). The TD functions relation given by Eq. ( From Eq. ( Temperature dependent carrier relaxation time: When performing temperature dependent studies, and evaluating the trends under increasing temperature, the Fermi distribution broadens, which allows the occupation of more states, however, to satisfy charge neutrality the Fermi level will shift towards the bandgap, increasing the Seebeck coefficient. If one compares at the same Fermi level position, rather than carrier density, however, the conductivity increases, while not many changes are observed in the Seebeck coefficient. On the other hand, temperature increases the population of phonons, which increase carrier-phonon scattering. In the most common acoustic deformation potential scattering scenario, under the equipartition approximation, the scattering rate increases linearly with temperature. Thus, we account for the increase in carrier scattering with increase in temperature by scaling the relaxation times by 1/T. We refer to this as 'T-normalized relaxation time'. In the case of the constant relaxation time, we take τ C = 10 -14 s at 300 K, and linearly scale for other temperatures as τ C = 10 -14 ( 300 T ) s, to account for deviations from room temperature In the case of energy dependent relaxation time, temperature scaling is implemented as τ IIV ∝ 1/ ∑ DOS i (E) i (300/T). Figure However, when we take into account the increase in carrier scattering by normalizing the carrier scattering time by 300/T, the power factor difference almost disappears, and only modest differences exist between temperatures for both scattering scenarios. This illustrates that it is important to take increased carrier scattering into consideration when comparing thermoelectric parameters at different temperatures. (Note that it is often the case in experiments to observe that the power factor changes with temperature. That is because those are performed at a constant density, rather than a constant Fermi level position, which would have shifted the two lines compared to each other). Band convergence can be achieved using a variety of methods including applying strain In Fig. We now examine the thermoelectric coefficients of NbCoSn under strain, for three different temperatures 300K, 600K, and 900K (Fig. With increasing temperature, the conductivity for non-degenerate Fermi levels increases, while it decreases for higher Fermi levels. The opposite effect is seen in the Seebeck coefficient where its values decrease for non-degenerate conditions and increase for highly degenerate Fermi values (right versus left regions of the sub-figures). Also, the gradients of conductivity and Seebeck coefficient curves are reducing with increasing temperature. The combined effect is that with increasing temperature the power factor improves for all compressive strain value, which tend to align the bands, with the improvements at 5% compressive strain to increase from 3% to 13% to 21% at temperatures of 300 K, 600 K, and 900 K, respectively. Note that the absolute PF values do not necessarily increase with temperature, it is the relative increase between the unstrained and strained cases that increases. Next, we examine the behavior of NbCoSn under the energy dependent τ IIV scattering for the three temperatures of interest, 300 K, 600 K, and 900 K (Fig. The larger improvements compared to the τ C case, originate from the changes in the curvature of the bands in addition to the reduced band separation. The bands that are brought closer to the band edge to be aligned as well as the bands already at the band edge become lighter in the process in NbCoSn Next, we apply strain to TiCoSb in the same way. The smaller energy separation ΔE between bands at L and Γ points (see Fig. Figure We now examine the case where the relaxation time in TiCoSb is energy dependent (τ IIV ). Figure In summary, as seen in Fig. In this work we have used strain to align the bands near the valence band edge of the p-type Co-based half-Heuslers NbCoSn and TiCoSb for thermoelectric power factor improvements. Using the Boltzmann transport equation under the relaxation time approximation, we explored the band alignment effect on the power factor under two different scattering conditions (as the detail scattering physics of half-Heuslers are still not known): i) the constant relaxation time approximation -as is in the literature, ii) scattering rates depending on energy, proportional to the density of final states, with both inter-and intra-band\ inter-and intra-valley scattering considerations. We showed that the outcome of band alignment can be different in each of the different scattering cases and at different temperatures for these materials. It depends on the nature of the bandstructure, particularly on how the curvatures change with band convergence and the relative separations between bands to begin with. When benefits of broadening of ∂f(E, E_F, T))/∂E overcome negative contributions from increased carrier scattering with temperature, we see increasing improvements in the PF with temperature. For NbCoSn, band convergence using strain is more beneficial in higher temperatures in both scattering scenarios, while for TiCoSb higher temperatures are only beneficial under a constant rate of scattering. Our work stresses the importance of more accurate theoretical treatment of carrier relaxation times and their temperature dependences. 