Inverse Faraday effect (IFE) in superconductors is proposed, where a static magnetization is generated under the influence of a circularly polarized microwave field. Classical modeling of the IFE explicitly provides superconducting gyration coefficient in terms of its complex conductivity. IFE is then considered as a source of nonlinearity and gyrotropy even at a low-power microwave regime giving rise to a spectrum of phenomena and applications. Microwave-induced gyroelectric conductivity, Hall effect, microwave birefringence, flux quantization and vortex state are predicted and quantitatively analyzed. Peculiar microwave birefringence in gyrotropic superconductors due to radical response of superelectrons has been highlighted. Introduction-Nonlinear microwave response of superconducting structures is a core subject not only in probing the physics of superconductivity The electrodynamic response of a superconductor is considered in the Two-Fluid model. The equation of motion for superelectrons and normal electrons under the influence of electric field E(r, t) and its associated magnetic field B(r, t) can be phenomenologically described by the London equations where m is the mass of an electron, e is charge of an electron, Γ = 1 τ is the inverse of momentum relaxation time for normal electrons and v s and v n are the superelectron and average normal electron velocities, respectively. We consider a circularly polarized plane electromagnetic field with pumping frequency, ω p , traveling normal to the surface of a semi-infinite superconductor, i.e. at z = 0, in the following form where x, y, z are Cartesian unit vectors, 0 < ω p < 2∆, ∆ being a superconducting energy gap, and α p and β p are the propagation loss and the propagation constant, respectively. The low-frequency propagation characteristics can be derived based on the Two-Fluid model When the circularly polarized wave interacts with the ensemble of free superelectrons and normal electrons, its angular momentum generates local circulating supercurrent and normal current in the superconductor that produces arXiv:2011.13983v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 27 Nov 2020 a magnetic field parallel to the microwave field opposing in the direction. This is a manifestation of the IFE where high-intensity circularly polarized light generates DC magnetization in matter, a theoretical prediction by L. Pitaevskii in 1961 where L s = r s × p s is the magnetic moment of superelectrons and L n = r n × p n is the magnetic moment of normal electrons in terms of their momenta p s and p n , respectively. For intermediate temperature range, 0 < T < T c , both superelectrons with density number n s (T ) and normal electrons with density number n n (T ) coexist in the form of where s is an empirical exponent, i.e. s = 4 for low-temperature superconductors and s = 2 for hightemperature superconductors and n is the total number density where the gyration coefficient γ(ω p , T ) is Eq. ( . This fact is signified by the gyration coefficient, γ(ω p , T ), reminiscent to magnetogyration coefficients in magneto-optic materials where we consider the magnetization profile dictated by microwave radiation in the xy plane to be considered by an arbitrary function f (x, y). The induced DC magnetic vector potential, A ind , can also be defined as At temperatures much lower than the critical temperature, the microwave field propagates in low-loss regime penetrating the superconductor sample and the strength of DC magnetization decreases exponentially. Although the strength of DC magnetization is more pronounced at lower frequency, i.e. M DC ∝ ω -3 , but lower the frequency leads to a larger radiation area in the order of λ 2 , where λ is the free-space wavelength of the microwave field. In type I superconductor, a magnetic field is screened until the critical field H c is reached. In the case of microwave-induced DC magnetization, the critical field H c is reached where the superposition of DC magnetization and the applied microwave field amplitude H o = B o μ o adds up to the critical field. Then there is a critical electric field, E c , where the superconducting phase is thermodynamically unstable, and that can be written as where η o is the free space characteristic impedance. Gyroelectric Conductivity and Hall Effect-The microwave-induced DC magnetization breaks the directional symmetry making a superconductor a gyrotropic material represented by a conductivity tensor, the so-called gyroelectric conductivity. Referring to the London model, one can can find the gyroelectric conductivity tensor, σ, relating the total current density J to the applied weak electric field E, i.e. J = σE. Considering Ẽ = x Ẽx + y Ẽy + z Ẽz z, with angular frequency ω, the gyroelectric conductivity tensor can be written as where and the microwave-induced cyclotron angular frequency is Note that the cyclotron frequency should be smaller than the gap frequency, otherwise the energy of the microwaveinduced magnetic moments is larger than cooper pair binding energy leading to suppressed superconductivity. Therefore, IFE is pronounced in the regime where the microwave pump and signal frequencies are smaller than the cyclotron and gap frequencies and the field amplitudes are smaller than the critical electric field. The gyroelectric conductivity can be tracked down due to the contribution of microwave-induced magnetization to the longitudinal conductivities, σ xx = σ yy = σ s + σ n through the cyclotron frequency ω c . Gyroelectric conductivity also leads to the Hall effect where the microwave-induced magnetization causes a DC electric field to develop across the superconducting wire perpendicular to the direction of microwave propagation, i.e. z direction where the microwave field decay has not been considered therefore, the length should be chosen less than the inverse of the field attenuation constant, i.e. l z < α -1 p . The Hall resistance shows the contribution from both superelectrons and normal-electrons in the superconducting wires and well into the superconducting state the Hall resistance will be where λ L is the London penetration depth. Eq. ( . This result conforms the linear dependency of the Hall resistance to the microwave-induced DC magnetization while the longitudinal resistance is unaffected by the microwave signal. Gyroelectric Birefringence-Another feature of the gyroelectric conductivity in superconductor is the microwave birefringence. According to Maxwell's equations, the conductivity tensor, Eq. ( Note that the superconductor's relative permittivity consists of a large negative real part where the electromagnetic field is weak with frequency significantly smaller than its gap frequency and below its critical temperature. Now, if a weak linearly-polarized wave with a frequency of ω < ω c is lunched to the superconductor along the z axis copropagating with the microwave pump field with frequency ω p , it experiences birefringence leading to polarization rotation. If the permittivity tensor is diagonalized in the coordinate system with orthogonal unit vectors e ± = 1 √ 2 (x ± iy), then the linearly-polarized wave has two normal propagation modes with relative permittivities ( xx ± xy ) -i( xx ∓ xy ) while z axis acts as the uniaxial optical symmetry. The weak signal entering the gyrotropic superconductor decomposes in to the slow component with the complex propagation constants of and the fast component having the following complex propagation constant of where k o = 2π λo = ω c is the free space wavenumber in terms of wavelength λ o and c as the speed of light. The dependence of the real and imaginary parts of the relative permittivity on the microwave induced magnetization leads to linear birefringence (Cotton-Mouton effect) and a circular birefringence (Faraday effect), respectively where the approximation is valid for T < T c . Eq. ( where Φ o is the flux quantum, n represents a winding number of the macroscopic wavefunction. The left-hand side of equation ( , that is defined as the ratio of its penetration depth λ to its coherence length ξ. In the mixed state, the magnetic flux penetrates type II superconductor starting at lower criti- ) in the form of triangular array of vortices until reaches its upper critical field In order to derive the type II superconductor to its mixed states by the microwave-induced IFE, we need to satisfy the inequality relation for the electric field amplitude as By turning on/off the microwave field and controlling the pump frequency and its amplitude one can dynamically generate and tune vortices in the superconductors without applying magnetic field. They offer novel applications to control superconductivity in a dynamic and fully controllable fashion that is solely enabled by a microwave polarization degree of freedom. New readout electronics for superconducting qubits and cavity QED circuits can be envisioned where a train of linearly and circularly polarized microwave pulses can potentially control the timing of qubit initialization, computation and measurement.