Germanene, a two-dimensional honeycomb germanium crystal, is grown at graphene/Ag (111) and hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN)/Ag(111) interfaces by segregating germanium atoms. A simple annealing process in N2 or H2/Ar at ambient pressure leads to the formation of germanene, indicating that an ultrahigh-vacuum condition is not necessary. The grown germanene is stable in air and uniform over the entire area covered with a van der Waals (vdW) material. As an important finding, it is necessary to use a vdW material as a cap layer for the present germanene growth method since the use of an Al2O3 cap layer resulted in no germanene formation. The present study also proved that Raman spectroscopy in air is a powerful tool for characterizing germanene at the interfaces, which is concluded by multiple analyses including first-principles density functional theory calculations. The direct growth of h-BN-capped germanene on Ag(111), which is demonstrated in the present study, is considered to be a promising technique for the fabrication of future germanene-based electronic devices. Two-dimensional honeycomb lattices of group IV (group 14) elements, such as silicene, Xenes have been grown on various crystal surfaces. Germanene has been grown on Ag(111), As one approach, we conceived the direct growth of Xenes at interfaces. The oxidation of a Xene should be prevented by placing it at an interface that provides a spatial separation between Xenes and oxidizing substances in air. A material with excellent gas barrier properties is required to form such an interface. In this paper, we report a novel method of growing germanene at interfaces between van der Waals (vdW) materials and Ag (111). Since vdW materials, such as graphene and hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), have excellent gas barrier properties, Figure The detected sulfur was thought to be mainly derived from impurities adsorbed on the Ag surface before the transfer of graphene. Figure Bulk Ge has only one peak at 300 cm -1 (Figure The experimentally observed phonon for the in-plane mode of germanene was ~ 45 cm -1 lower than that of bulk Ge. It seems that the experimentally observed germanene peaks are redshifted from the freestanding germanene peaks since the calculated phonon energies of bulk Ge and the in-plane mode in freestanding germanene are almost the same (Figure To consider the redshift, we first examined the effect of strain on freestanding germanene. Figure Figure Figure To consider the aforementioned blueshift, we compared the Raman results with the offspecular HREEL spectrum of germanene on Ag(111) as shown in Figure Figure In addition, an h-BN cap layer is beneficial for the fabrication of germanene-based devices. As Tao et al. reported for the fabrication of silicene FETs, We have uniformly grown large-area germanene at a vdW material/Ag(111) interface by the segregation growth of germanane. A simple annealing process in N2 or H2/Ar at ambient pressure led to the formation of germanene, indicating that a UHV condition is not necessary. Owing to the chemical protection by the top vdW material, the grown germanene at the interface is stable in air. We found that it is necessary to use a vdW material as a cap layer for the present germanene growth method since the use of an Al2O3 cap layer resulted in the absence of germanene formation. We also proved that Raman spectroscopy in air is a powerful tool for characterizing germanene at an interface. The direct growth of h-BN-capped germanene is considered to be a promising technique for the fabrication of future germanene-based FETs. Ag deposition: A Ge(111) surface was chemically cleaned by dipping in diluted HF for 1 ~ 3 min, then rinsed in deionized water, and dried by blowing N2. Subsequently, a Ag thin film of 70 nm thickness was deposited at RT by an e-beam evaporator (RDEC Co., with the Ltd., RDEB-1206K). The deposition rate was 0.4 Å s -1 . The deposited Ag film was aligned with the (111) crystal direction by solid-phase epitaxy on Ge(111). The typical growth process was as follows: (i) increasing the temperature from RT to 1000 oC in Ar; (ii) H2 annealing at 1000 oC for 100 min; (iii) graphene growth at 1000 oC by introducing methane with H2 and Ar for 90 min; (iv) cooling to RT in H2/Ar. Details of the growth can be found elsewhere. Details are given elsewhere. Growth of germanene at the vdW material/Ag(111) interface: Germanane was grown at the vdW material/Ag(111) interface by annealing using a commercial rapid annealing furnace (Ulvac, RTA-6) under N2 or H2/Ar flow. The typical annealing sequence used was as follows: (i) increasing the temperature from RT to 250 oC in 2 min; (ii) annealing at 250 oC for 10 min; (iii) increasing the temperature from 250 to 550 oC in 2 min; (iv) annealing at 550 oC for 10 min; (v) natural cooling to RT. The role of the annealing in (ii) is to promote the crystallization of Ag(111). Since the segregation of Ge by heating at 250 oC was negligible (Figure Characterization: A commercial Raman microscope (Horiba, LabRam HR Evolution) with an excitation wavelength of 458 nm in a backscattering geometry was used for obtaining Raman spectra in air. Angle-resolved XPS (ULVAC-PHI, Quantera SXM) was used for surface elemental analyses. Charge correction was performed by shifting all peaks to the position of C 1s at 285.0 eV. In situ growth and measurement of germanene/Ag(111): We used UHV surface analysis system consisting of two chambers. One chamber was equipped with evaporators of silver and boron, a sample heater, and AES and RHEED equipment. The other chamber contained HREELS equipment and was connected to the first chamber with a load-lock system. The sample temperature was monitored using an optical pyrometer without calibration. Computational calculations: We adopted QUANTUM ESPRESSO 6.5 code, The surface germanene was modeled with a Ag(111) (7 × 7)-unit four-layer slab supercell divided by an approximately 2-nm-thick vacuum layer. Ag atoms in the first layer, which were in contact with germanene, were movable, while the other Ag atoms were fixed at bulk positions. Direct growth method of germanene at interfaces between vdW materials and Ag( To examine the layer number of germanene, we performed cross-sectional high-angle annular dark field (HAADF)-STEM for the annealed graphene/Ag(111)/Ge(111) sample at 550 oC. Figure To detect germanene, we perormed HAADF-STEM and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) analysis with the limited scanning area in the green rectangle in Figure The layer number was named as 1 ~ 10 from the interface side to Ag (111) bulk side of the sample. Figure 