For a long-term forecast of the average air temperature in a metro tunnel and surrounding soil, heat balance conditions are modeled in a system that includes two parallel tunnels, a near-tunnels underground space, the earth's surface and atmospheric air with seasonal temperature variation. It is assumed that the air in the tunnels is well mixed, and the thermal effect of ventilation is taken into account by replacing the air in the tunnels with atmospheric air. The system of heat balance equations is solved numerically by the finite element method. A numerical analysis of the influences of the model parameters on the average temperature in the tunnels and surrounding soil is carried out. The dimensions of the soil region with an elevated temperature, located between the tunnels, are estimated. Among the public transport systems in urban areas, the subway is one of the most advanced due to its high throughput, low operating costs and the area of premises for maintenance Apparently, the main difficulty in calculating the temperature in the tunnel is to adequately take into account the heterogeneity of the soil and the heat transfer by turbulent air flows in the tunnel, caused by the movement of trains and ventilation. In some studies, the tunnel temperature was calculated analytically with some significant simplifications of the problem. For example, in Analytical methods provide an exact solution to the problems, but the simplifications adopted in this case significantly limit the practical application of results. There are many studies devoted to the numerical modeling of the heat and moisture production and transfer in tunnels. We mention some of these works. In Recently, the program STESS In this paper, we propose a new model for the long-term forecast of the thermal regime of the tunnel and surrounding soil, taking into account heat generation and mechanical ventilation of the tunnel. It seems that a detailed long-term prediction of the temperature fields in the tunnel and in the surrounding soil is hardly possible. However, it is possible to predict the evolution of the average temperature, calculated over the tunnel volume, using average (effective) values of parameters. Given that most underground transportion systems use two parallel tunnels for the trains traffic between the stations, we consider a system of two parallel tunnels in general position, located at a shallow depth. The shallow depth of the tunnels requires taking into account the heat exchange between the atmospheric air and the ground surface. Strong anisotropy of the temper-ature field and the influence of the earth's surface distinguish our approach from most papers (see, for example, The initial boundary value problem for the heat equation in the soil surrounding the tunnel is solved by the finite element method, which allows one to take into account the heterogeneity of the soil composition. For the average air temperature in the tunnel, a simple heat balance equation is written. To demonstrate the capabilities of the heat balance model, we simulate the thermal regime of a typical section of a transport tunnel, varying the values of the model parameters in fairly wide intervals that overlap their real values. Based on the simulation results, we estimate the volume of soil with elevated remperature ("the heat reservoir" Consider a subway system with two parallel circular single-track tunnels of radius R t , the distance between the centers of which is D t and which are at a depth of H t from the earth's surface. Assuming for simplicity that the structure and composition of the soil around each tunnel is approximately the same, the thermal field in the vicinity of the tunnels can be considered symmetrical with respect to the vertical plane passing through the middle of the distance between the tunnels. By virtue of this assumption, all calculations will be performed for only one tunnel. Thus, the computational domain G shown in Figure The heat transfer equation inside G where C g is the volumetric heat capacity and λ g is the heat conductivity coefficient of the soil. The boundary conditions where n is the external normal to the domain boundary. α t and α a are the heat exchange coefficients of tunnel air -ground and ambient (atmospheric) air -ground, respectively. T t (t) and T a (t) are the temperature of tunnel air and ambient air, respectively. T g is the constant temperature at the bottom of domain G. Thus, the model assumes convective heat transfer on the tunnel wall Γ t and on the surface of the earth Γ a , a constant temperature in the depth of the soil Γ g , and zero heat flux through the boundary sections Γ 0 . The distance R d should be taken large enough so that the temperature distortion near the tunnel due to temperature T g is small enough. Zero flux through the section of Γ 0 located between the tunnels follows from the symmetry of the temperature field, and the flux through the other section of Γ 0 has little effect on the temperature near the tunnel and is putted to zero for simplicity. The initial temperature T 0 is set for the soil in the domain The temperature of the ambient air in this problem is represented by a given function of time, T a (t), which can be obtained, in particular, from the weather archive for a given location. Thermophysical soil parameters are also input data for the problem. In contrast, the average temperature of the air in the tunnel, T t (t), is an unknown function of time, which needs to be determined as a result of solving the problem. We believe that three factors play a major role in assessing long-term trends in average tunnel air temperature: heat generation by various sources in the tunnel, ventilation using ambient air, and heat transfer between the air in the tunnel and the surrounding soil. These factors are described by the following quantities. Heat production in the tunnel will be described by a time-dependent function q(t), which is the average power of the heat sources over daily working time of the subway per 1 m of the tunnel length. The greatest amount of heat in the tunnel is generated during acceleration and braking of trains Therefore, for long-term forecasting, the planned changes in traffic intensity can be taken into account when developing the function q(t). Accurate modeling of airflows in a tunnel, generated by ventilation, train movements and other causes, is a very difficult task. However, we assume that for long-term assessment of average temperature it is sufficient to estimate the gross effect of ventilation on air temperature. We imagine this gross effect as a replacement per unit time of a certain volume of air in a tunnel with temperature T t by the same volume of outdoor air with temperature T a . This process can be characterized by function v(t) = ∆V (t)/V 0 , where V 0 is the volume of the tunnel segment and ∆V is the volume of the air replaced by ventilation per unit time. Using these quantities, the heat balance equation for the air in the tunnel can be written as follows where C a is the volumetric (isobaric) heat capacity of air, S t is the tunnel cross-sectional area. The last term in the formula The initial condition for Eq. ( Equations ( In order to solve system (1)-( FEM is widely used in scientific and engineering calculations, and there is an extensive literature on the basics and applications of this method. For our purpose, it is sufficient to use FEM in its simplest form. Therefore, here we can outline the main points of the application of the method without referring to the special literature. In this work, we consider the temperature T g at the boundary sectionΓ g to be constant. Therefore, it is convenient to make a replacement In this case, the equations and boundary conditions will retain their form, and the boundary condition (5) will become zero Discretization of the equation ( For clarity, the figure shows a mesh with 30 nodes on the circle Γ t . In the calculations below, a finer mesh with 90 nodes on Γ t was used. The nodes of the triangular mesh are denoted by P i , i = 1, 2, . . . , N P ; O i is the neighborhood of the node P i , i.e. the union of all triangles in which point P i is the vertex. For each node P i , we define a linear finite element -a piecewise linear continuous function ψ i (x, y) such that it is linear in each triangle of the grid, is equal to 1 at point P i , and is equal to zero outside O i . The function ψ i can be imagined as a pyramid with base O i , triangular lateral faces and the top at point P i . Multiplying the equation ( we obtain the equality The integral on the right-hand side of this equality is transformed using Green's formula: Here the last integral is taken over the domain boundary Γ. Note that the flow n • λ g ∇U at the border sections Γ 0 , Γ t and Γ a is determined by the boundary conditions (2)-( The finite element approximation U (f ) of function U is defined as The functions U and U (f ) coincide at the nodes of the grid, and inside each triangle the function U (f ) is a linear interpolation of the values of the function U at the vertices of the triangle. Replacing U in the equation (11) by U (f ) , we obtain a system of ordinary differential equations for U i (t), i = 1, 2, . . . , N e . The number of equations N e is equal to the number of grid nodes N p minus the number of nodes lying on the section of the boundary Γ g , on which the values of U i are specified by the boundary condition (10). In matrix form, the ODE system can be written as where U (t) = (U 1 (t), U 2 (t), . . . , U Ne (t)) T is the column-vector of unknowns. Elements of N e ×N e matrices M and L are independent of time and calculated by the formulas where b ij denotes the contribution of the boundary integral to the matrix element L ij . b ij can be nonzero only if the nodes P i and P j lie on the boundary Γ a or Γ t and are calculated using the boundary conditions. Also, the component F i of the vector F can be nonzero only if P i lies on Γ a or Γ t and is calculated from the integral over the corresponding segment of the boundary using the boundary conditions (2) -( Using the approximation (12), we transform the integral in (8) in a finite sum over the grid points belonging to Γ t and rewrite Eq. ( We assume that the grid points are uniformly distributed over the circle Γ t and ∆φ is the central angle between adjacent points. Combining equations ( The model parameters are divided into geometrical parameters that determine the location and dimensions of tunnels, and thermophysical parameters of soil and air. For the geometric parameters, we took values close to the typical values for the metro in Russia. Thermophysical parameters of the soil, heat capacity and thermal conductivity coefficient are considered constant, i.e. the soil is assumed to be homogeneous. Note that in FEM it is easy to take into account soil heterogeneity using coordinates-dependent values in the formulas As the temperature of ambient air, T a (t), we used the average daily temperature in the city of Moscow for 1981-2010, presented by the Hydrometeorological Center of Russia (http://meteoinfo.ru). A graph of this temperature is shown in Figure Although the problem solution quickly enough, for the first few years, "forgets" the initial temperature distribution ( However, their amplitude decreases rapidly with increasing depth, and the "phase shift" between temperature variations in the soil and in the ambient air increases. In Figure It should be noted that in all calculations with constant or cyclical parameters, a more or less prolonged transition period is observed, during which the temperature comes into dynamic equilibrium with the soil and the ambient air. We will assume that the transition period ends when the maximum temperature difference in successive years becomes less than 0.1 • C. All further results were obtained for the equilibrium state, i.e. after the end of the transition period. Heat generation and ventilation generally affect the air temperature in the tunnel. Heat generation tends to raise the air temperature and balance it with the ground temperature. Ventilation lowers the average temperature of the air in the tunnel and gives it the shape of a seasonal change in the temperature of the ambient air T a (t). Both of these trends are clearly visible in the results of the calculations presented in Figure Figure At each value of parameter q, the maximum average air temperature in the tunnel is set in the absence of ventilation (v = 0 -the uppermost curve on each panel). With an increase in the ventilation rate v, the average temperature in the tunnel decreases and the temperature modulation in the tunnel by the temperature T a is more and more manifested. However, this modulation weakens with increasing q. The duration of the transition period also depends on the parameters q and v in different ways. It grows with increasing q and decreases with increasing v. In particular, in the presented results, the largest transition period at 23 years is observed at q = 60 W/m, v = 0, and the smallest at 6 years at q = 20 W/m, v = 0.3 h -1 . Notice that such values of the transition period agree with duration of "Dynamic Expansion Stage od Soil Heat Reservoir", reported in Despite the fact that in our examples we consider the soil to be homogeneous, the established dynamically equilibrium temperature distribution in the soil is not obtained isotropic. The reason for this is the boundary conditions of the model, of which the presence of the second tunnel and heat exchange through the earth's surface have the main influence on the distortion of the temperature distribution. We will show some details of the temperature distribution in the soil using a calculation example for q = 60 W/m, v = 0.2 h -1 . In this case, the difference in average daily temeratures in the tunnel during the year is about three degrees (figure this difference is about 17 degrees. As it follows from figure Figure In the downward direction, the temperature gradually decreases to the natural soil temperature regardless of the season, and at about y = -10 (7 meters under the tunnel at a depth of about 25 meters) the seasonal temperature difference becomes negligible. x, m In the horizontal direction (along the x-axis, Figure Thus, a sufficiently stable high temperature "core" of the heat reservoir is formed in the area between the tunnels. The seasonal difference in the soil temperature becomes negligible at about y = 10, which corresponds to 7 meters from the tunnel wall in the horizontal direction opposite the central plane between the tunnels. According to the definition of the heat reservoir in The vertical size of this reservoir along the cenral line between the tunnels can be estimated using Figure This means that the upper boundary of the heat reservoir crosses the centerline at about y = 4 (which corresponds to 11 meters below the earth's surface) and is located lower than the bondary above the tunnels. In conclusion, we proposed and analyzed a mathematical model for predicting the average daily temperature in the metro tunnel and the surrounding soil over a long period, which can reach several decades. In our model, we focused on three main factors that, in our opinion, play an important role in the formation of the thermal regime in the metro tunnel: • heat generation, • heat exchange with adjacent soil, and • mechanical ventilation. The finite element method used to solve our mathematical model allows us to take into account the geological features of the soil by creating an adaptive spatial grid and using variable soil parameters. Time-dependent heat production and ventilation rates allow the model to take into account daily and seasonal cycles, as well as trends in metro operation and development. The main simplifying assumption of the model, which allows the temperature to be calculated over long time intervals, is the assumption of ideal air mixing in the tunnel. This assumption allows us to avoid difficult calculations of air flows in the tunnel and to treat ventilation as a simple replacement of air in the tunnel with atmospheric air. In addition, we do not take into account the effect of moisture on the thermal properties of air and soil, however, taking into account moisture is not a fundamental difficulty and, as we believe, will not qualitatively change the results of calculations. Numerical calculations presented in the work demonstrate the influence of various factors on the average temperature in the tunnel and in the surrounding soil. It is shown that the steady-state average annual temperature of the tunnel is directly proportional to the power of heat sources and inversely proportional to the ventilation rate. We also demonstrate the applicability of proposed model to estimate the position and dimensions of the heat reservoir The results of calculations using the proposed model, taking into account specific circumstances, can be useful both in the design of new metro lines and in the development of existing lines or correction of their operating mode. The Authors declare that there is no conflict of interest. 