Periodic configurations have dominated the design of phononic and elastic-acoustic metamaterial structures for the past decades. Unlike periodic crystals, quasicrystals lack translational symmetry but are unrestricted in rotational symmetries, which leads to largely unexplored mechanical and dynamic properties. We investigate a family of continuous elastic quasicrystals with different rotational symmetry orders that are directly enforced through a design procedure in reciprocal space. Their mechanical properties are investigated as a function of symmetry order and filling fraction. Results indicate that higher order symmetries, such as 8-, 10-and 14fold, allow for high equivalent stiffness characteristics that interpolate those of the constituent material while maintaining high levels of isotropy for all filling fractions. Thus, quasiperiodic composites exhibit more uniform strain energy distributions when compared to periodic hexagonal configurations. Similarly, nearly-isotropic wave propagation is observed over a broader range of frequencies. Spectral contents are also investigated by enforcing rotational symmetry constraints in a wedge-type unit cell, which allows for the estimation of band gaps that are confirmed in frequency response computations. The investigations presented herein open avenues for the general exploration of the properties of quasiperiodic media, with potentials for novel architectured material designs that expand the opportunities provided by periodic media. Quasiperiodic crytals, or shortly quasicrystals, are aperiodic structures with well-defined diffraction patterns exhibiting a set of sharp peaks, that are incompatible with translational symmetry, but still render long-range order In the context of architectured materials, a common goal is to design lightweight structures with high mechanical performance, that its, high stiffness with low mass density (or porosity) Motivated by these contributions, we investigate the mechanical and dynamical properties of two-dimensional (2D) continuous elastic quasicrystals. The considered configurations consist of two-material composites, whereby the material distribution is defined by a design approach in the reciprocal space, or wavenumber domain The paper is organized as follows: following this introduction, Section II outlines the strategy employed for the design of rotationally symmetric continuous quasicrystals. The numerical results for mechanical and dynamical properties are presented in Section III and Section IV, respectively. Finally, Section V summarizes the main findings of this work and outlines possible future research directions. Two-dimensional periodic and quasiperiodic composites are designed by means of a rational strategy that assigns specified characteristics of their reciprocal space k = [k x , k y ] ∈ R where δ is the delta function, which locates the wavenumber k n of each peak, which is This approach produces periodic crystals (i.e., structures with crystallographic point group symmetry), including 1D bilayer (N = 2), square (N = 4) and hexagonal (N = 6) patterns, as well as quasicrystals with N -fold rotational symmetry orders, as illustrated in Fig. A binary physical material distribution is obtained by applying a threshold to the continuum field φ(r) from Eq. ( We consider a 2D elastic domain in plane strain conditions, comprised of two constituent materials of high contrasting properties, i.e. ρ 1 = 10ρ 0 and elastic modulus E 1 = 10E 0 . Unitary out-of-plane thickness and equal Poisson's ratio ν = 0.33 for the two phases are considered for simplicity. Assuming linear elastic behavior, the domains are discretized within the COMSOL Multiphysics ® environment. The models where formulated using linear 2D shell elements with internal interpolation features, and considering meshes comprising 10 elements per wavelength a, where a = 2π/k R is the fundamental wavelength corresponding to the circle of radius k R wherein the Bragg peaks of the material distributions are assigned. This discretization is found to properly describe the relevant mechanical and dynamical behavior considered in this paper. For the dynamic results, a normalized frequency Ω = ωa/c L is employed throughout, where c L = E avg /ρ avg is the longitudinal wave speed corresponding to averaged properties, i.e. ρ avg = (ρ 0 + ρ 1 )/2 and E avg = 2E 0 E 1 /(E 0 + E 1 ). The effective mechanical properties of the quasiperiodic composites are investigated by using the standard mechanics approach (SMA) 58 also known as averaging theory is computed and employed to further characterize the considered class of bi-material composites. Results for effective mechanical properties ( Ēx , Ḡx , νx and ̄ Z ) for various periodic (4-and 6-fold) and quasiperiodic (8-, 10and 14-fold) composites are shown in Figure Another important factor characterizing mechanical performance is the total strain energy (SE) given by a stress-strain integral within the domain, i.e. w Ω = (1/Ω) Ω (σ : ε)dΩ. For example, in energy-related applications, a configuration that stores more energy for the same volume fraction is considered a better harvester with promising applications in artificial muscles and soft robotics The wave propagation characteristics of the different composites are investigated through transient time domain simulations. The static behavior observed in the previous section is expected to shape the wave propagation of the composites at low frequen- The colors correspondent to zones with low (blue), medium (green) and high (red) strain energy density in J/m 3 , the correspondent percentage of the domain with these strain energy density levels are depicted below each case. The value inserted in the black rectangle corresponds to the total stored strain energy in J. All the results were computed for vf = 0.50 and only a quarter of the domain (first quadrant) is shown due to symmetric nature of the patterns. cies (i.e., isotropic wave propagation). By increasing the excitation frequency, the periodic crystals (4-fold and 6-fold) exhibit higher directionality (i.e, wave motion occurs along preferential directions), while the quasiperiodic composites in general retain a higher degree of isotropy in their wave behavior. The simulations were performed using an omnidirectional excitation at the center of the domain, consisting of a small circle of radius r = 0.2a where radial forces were applied according to a band limited 5-cycle sine-burst excitation. The resulting displacement field u(x, y, t) = u(x, y, t) x + v(x, y, t) y is also represented in reciprocal space through a 3D Fourier transform Û(κ x , κ y , ω) = Û (κ x , κ y , ω) κ x + V (κ x , κ y , ω) κ y . At low frequencies, the longitudinal (P) and shear (S) branches are non-dispersive, and the components of the reduced elastic tensor can be related to the longitudinal and shear wave velocities (see details in B). With the the wave velocities cL and cS , the iso-frequency contours in reciprocal space for longitudinal waves κL = ω/c L and for shear waves κS = ω/c S can be estimated. This procedure is used to further validate the mechanical properties estimated in the previous section through the standard mechanics approach. Simulation results for for all configurations and three different excitation frequencies Ω I ≈ 0.08, Ω II ≈ 0.24 and Ω III ≈ 0.40 are summarized in Fig. The spectral properties of the quasiperiodic composites are investigated next with the goal of evaluating the existence of band gaps. As previously mentioned, Bloch's theorem cannot be directly applied in quasiperiodic media due to the lack of translational symmetry. Although some works rely on periodic approximants where n is the order of cyclic periodicity that assumes integer and finite values such that n ∈ [-N/2, ..., 0, ..., +N/2] for even N and n ∈ [-(N -1)/2, ..., 0, ..., +(N -1)/2] for odd N . Through variation of n, the eigenfrequencies representing the modes of a complete circular domain with free boundary conditions at the outer edges are obtained at a reduced computational cost. However, radial boundaries introduce defect modes that contaminate the band gaps. Since band gaps are characterized by low modal densities, their presence can be effectively highlighted by representing the density of states (DOS) Figure We investigated a family of quasiperiodic elastic domains with different rotational symmetry orders that are directly enforced through a design procedure in reciprocal space. Although lacking translational symmetry, the higher order rotational symmetry of quasiperiodic domains results in higher isotropic behavior when compared to periodic crystals. Indeed, results indicate that quasiperiodic composites provide an interpolation between the properties of two constituent materials with high equivalent stiffness and high isotropy for all volume fractions. Furthermore, such isotropy is also noticed in terms of their dynamic behavior, where omnidirectional wave propagation is observed at low frequencies, and retained to a certain degree also for higher frequencies. While the low-frequency wave behavior agrees with estimates obtained through equivalent homogenized properties, a rigorous characterization of the wave propagation behavior of quasiperiodic media for arbitrary frequencies is still an open question to be explored in future works. The main limitation is associated with their lack of translational symmetry which precludes Bloch's theorem to be applied. In that regard, dynamic homogenization techniques may play an important role in future studies on the dynamics of quasiperiodic domains where σij is the average stress, σ ij is the local stress, t i is the traction on the RVE boundary and x i is the local coordinates of the RVE boundary. For a linear elastic orthotropic model in plane strain behavior, only some components of the elastic tensor are required to describe the stress-strain relation, which is reduced to (B3) By applying three independent displacement loads over the RVE as shown in Fig. 