It is widely believed that topological superconductivity, a hitherto elusive phase of quantum matter, can be achieved by inducing superconductivity in topological materials. In search of such topological superconductors, certain topological insulators (like, Bi 2 Se 3 ) were successfully turned into superconductors by metal-ion (Cu, Pd, Sr, Nb etc. ) intercalation. Superconductivity could be induced in topological materials through applying pressure as well. for example, a pressureinduced superconducting phase was found in the topological insulator Bi 2 Se 3 . However, in all such cases, no conclusive signature of topological superconductivity was found. In this review, we will discuss about another novel way of inducing superconductivity in a non-superconducting topological material -by creating a mesoscopic interface on the material with a non-superconducting, normal metallic tip where the mesoscopic interface becomes superconducting. Such a phase is now known as a tip-induced superconducting (TISC) phase. This was first seen in 2014 on Cd 3 As 2 at IISER Mohali, India. Following that, a large number of other topological materials were shown to display TISC. Since the TISC phase emerges only at a confined region under a mesoscopic point contact, traditional bulk tools for characterizing superconductivity cannot be employed to detect/confirm such a phase. On the other hand, such a point contact geometry is ideal for probing the possible existence of a temperature and magnetic field dependent superconducting energy gap and a temperature and magnetic field dependent critical current. We will review the details of the experimental signatures that can be used to prove the existence of superconductivity even when the "text-book" tests for detecting superconductivity cannot be performed. Then, we will review different systems where a TISC phase could be realized. Superconductivity is a phenomenon where a material loses its resistance completely below a certain critical temperature. Superconductivity was discovered in 1911 when mercury showed immeasurably small resistance below 4.2 K. Later on, in 1933, perfect diamagnetism was also shown to be a generic property of superconductivity. After mercury, many other elemental metals were shown to superconduct at liquid helium temperatures. Niobium In general, the superconducting ground state is described by the Bogoliubov-DeGennes Hamiltonian. The positive and negative energy eigenstates of the Bogoliubov-DeGennes Hamiltonian in superconductors appear in pairs. When the superconducting condensate is formed, the negative-energy eigenstates remain fully occupied. This enables one to define various topological numbers (e.g., the Chern number) for the occupied states, as it is done in insulators with non-trivial band structure topology. Non-zero topological numbers can exist along with a fully formed superconducting energy gap in the bulk of the superconductor. Due to topological restrictions, gap-less "Majorana" modes may also appear in the surface of such superconductors, thereby making the surface effectively "gap-less". Such a superconductor is categorized as a topological superconductor. It has been widely believed that one way of achieving achieving topological superconductivity could be simply doping charge carriers through metal intercalation in materials with topologically non-trivial band structure. Significant success in terms of making topological materials through controlled doping of topological materials could be achieved. For example, topological insulators like Bi 2 Se 3 became superconducting upon intercalation with ions of certain metals like Cu, Sr and Nb. It has also been found that at the required doping level for superconductivity (∼ 2 × 10 20 cm -3 ) in such doped topological systems, the topological surface states are still well separated in the momentum space from the bulk states. Therefore, it is expected that the surface may also become superconducting due to the proximity of the bulk superconductor thereby giving rise to a 2D topological superconducting phase on the surface. However, experimental confirmation of the same remained an unattained goal. Most of the spectroscopic measurements indicated that such induced superconducting phases appear to be conventional BCS like. In case of Nb-Bi 2 Se 3 deviation from BCS-like behavior was found, but no clear signature of Majorana zero modes were found. Another promising way of inducing superconductivity in a topological material could be through applying pressure. A pressure-induced superconducting phase was found in Bi 2 Se 3 even in absence of any doping. However, this superconducting phase was also found to be BCS-like. In Sr-Bi 2 Se 3 , an interesting pressure-induced superconducting phase was found. The ambient superconductivity of this system was first seen to disappear with applying pressure and emerge again at higher pressures. The high-pressure re-entrant superconducting phase was found show a significantly higher T c compared to the T c of the ambient superconducting phase. The re-entrant phase showed strong signatures of unconventional supercon-ductivity, but again, from the experimental data, it was not possible to conclude whether the superconducting phase would satisfy the criteria of a topological superconductor. In this review, we will discuss about another novel way of inducing superconductivity in a topological material. In 2014, while performing point contact spectroscopy experiments on Cd 3 As 2 , the researchers at IISER Mohali, India found that mesoscopic point contacts between Cd 3 As 2 and sharp tips of metallic silver (Ag) showed superconductivity-like features. By performing point contact spectroscopy in various regimes of mesoscopic transport, the researchers successfully showed that the phase was indeed superconducting Since the TISC phase emerges only at a confined region under a mesoscopic point contact, traditional bulk tools for characterizing superconductivity cannot be employed. In such a confined geometry neither a zero resistance state can be directly measured, nor sufficient magnetic signal can be obtained to detect the existence of perfect diamagnetism. However, such a point contact geometry is ideal for probing the other standard hallmark signatures of superconductivity, like the existence of a temperature and magnetic field dependent superconducting energy gap and a temperature and magnetic field dependent critical current. We will review the details of the experimental signatures that can be used to prove the existence of superconductivity even when the text-book tests cannot be performed. Then, we will review different systems where a TISC phase could be realized. We will also discuss the knowledge that is gained on the nature of superconductivity in TISC realized on various systems. Before discussing TISC, it is important to give an overview a special transport spectroscopic technique called point contact spectroscopy. This discussion will help us understand the logical sequence that is exploited to establish the existence of TISC unambiguously. A point contact between two different materials can be formed in a number of ways. Perhaps, the most common method of making a point contact involves slowly moving a sharp metallic tip towards the surface of a sample until a light "ohmic" contact is established. This method is popularly known as the "needle-anvil" A point contact spectroscopy experiment involves formation of a micro-constriction between two materials and then analyzing the I -V characteristics across the constriction to extract information about the Fermi surface properties of the materials. Ultimately, the non-linearities, if any, in the I -V characteristics provide the desired spectroscopic informa- The "soft" point-contact: Using small In-flake or drop of Ag-paste is used to make a soft point-contact on the sample. tion. The signature of such non-linearities can be seen in the derivatives of a I -V curve, i.e., a dI/dV vs. V spectrum. Such a spectrum can be obtained by digitally differentiating a I -V curve. However, in doing so, the calculated spectra can be noisy. The most common technique for directly obtaining dI/dV vs. V spectrum for a point contact is a lock-in amplifier based modulation technique(See Fig2 ). In this technique, a small dc current (I dc ) is coupled with a small amplitude, low frequency ac current (I ac cosωt) (I dc >> I ac ) and is then passed through the point contact. The corresponding dc potential drop across the contact is simultaneously recorded. The dc current is supplied through a dc current source while the ac current is provided through a Lock-in amplifier system by utilizing a voltage to current converter. The dc current is swept in small steps while the ac current is kept fixed (i.e. the frequency and amplitude is kept constant). Usually the frequency of applied ac current is in the range of a few Hz to a few kHz. Application of frequency in multiples of line frequency must be avoided and use of noise filters is recommended to minimize noise level. The dc potential drop across the point contact is recorded using a voltmeter (or a digital multimeter) and the differential conductance/resistance is determined from the ac output voltage that is measured by the lock-in amplifier. The lock-in amplifier signal locked at the first harmonic is proportional to dV /dI and the second harmonic is proportional to FIG. (d 2 V/dI 2 ) and so on. This can be easily seen by expressing the output voltage as Taylor series expansion. In general, electronic transport through a point contact depends on the type of the materials forming the point contact. Since the charge carriers need to be transported through narrow constrictions, the dimensions of the constriction also plays a prominent role in such transport. Depending on how large or small a point contact is in comparison to the characteristic length scales of the charge carriers (e.g., the electronic mean free path l) transport through a point contact can happen in different mesoscopic regimes as discussed below. a. The extreme quantum regime: When the diameter of a point contact (a) is comparable to or of the order of few de Broglie wavelengths of the electron, the electronic transport happens in the so-called "quantum regime". Here, the electrons conduct through quantized conduction channels each of which contributes one conductance quantum to the total point contact conductance. To understand this in simple terms, one may use simple example of an hourglass (an hourglass consists of two pear shaped glass bulbs connected to each other at the apex with a minute passage between them ). Consider a hourglass where each sand grain is identical(spheres of same radius). Suppose the passage at the apex has the same diameter as of the sand grains then, only one sand grain can pass through the passage at a time. This is same as electrons passing through a single conduction channel and contributes single conductance quantum, since only one electron is passing through a section at a time. Now if the diameter of passage is doubled then at a time, at most, only two sand grains can pass through( and conductance quantum number is 2). Similarly if the diameter is tripled then at an instant at the most 3 sand grains can pass( quantum number =3) and so on. This mimics the flow of electrons through quantized conduction channels. It can be easily seen that if the diameter of the passage was sufficiently large then all of the sand grains could pass at the same time and reducing the diameter only served to impose resistance to flow of sand through the passage. With the maximal resistance is imposed when there is only one conduction channel. Though this argument sounds classical in nature, this helps understand the origin of Sharvin's resistance for electron conduction through narrow constrictions. The conductance is equal to N.G 0 for N conductance channels. The conductance quantization is observed as conductance steps in conductance vs. contact diameter plots. b. The ballistic regime: The transport of electrons through individual conduction channels is ballistic in nature. That means, the electrons are transported without any scattering. In general, how far the ballistic transport is carried out depends on one of the characteristic length scales, the elastic mean free path of charge carriers and the dimensions of the medium through which the charge carriers travel. For metallic point contacts ballistic transport is favored whenever the contact diameter a is much smaller than elastic mean free path of the electrons(λ de-Broglie << a << l e ). Due to large mean free path and smaller contact diameter the electrons statistically do not undergo any scattering inside the contact region and travel ballistically. In other words, the collisions of the electrons occur far away from the contact region causing a dissipation-less current to flow through the contact. Absence of dissipation in a ballistic point contact makes point contact spectroscopy a powerful spectroscopic probe. A dc bias across a point contact in the ballistic regime is used by the electron accelerate to a high kinetic energy within the contact region. At such high energies it can then excite elementary excitations like the phonons in a metal, magnons in a magnet or more complex entities like the Bogoliubuons in superconductors. Such excitations, in turn, cause the electron to get scattered thereby giving rise to non-linearities in the I -V characteristics. That is the basis of energy resolved point contact spectroscopy. With single crystalline samples, point contact spectroscopy can also be used as a momentum-resolved spectroscopic probe. With superconducting point contacts, spin-resolved information can also be extracted. We will discuss this in more detail later. In the ballistic regime, the point contact resistance is purely given by Sharvin's resistance formula d. The Thermal regime: For electrons travelling through a contact with contact diameter greater than the inelastic mean free path of electrons (a << l e , l in ), one enters the thermal regime of transport. In this regime, the electrons feel a drift due to applied voltage bias and move through the contact however, the motion is disordered and inelastic collisions occur within the contact region. This results in dissipation of energy in form of heat and leads to heating of the contact. The temperature at the centre of the contact is maximum and is given by , where T bath is the bath temperature and L is the Lorenz number. Due to heating of contact the energy resolved information is lost and makes it unsuitable for performing energy resolved spectroscopy. In this case, Maxwell considered the point contact as a circular opening (orifice) of diameter 2a through which a current flows as a potential is applied across the contact. By taking appropriate approximations he showed that the maximum contribution to the point contact (Maxwell's) resistance R M = ρ/2a comes from the centre of the point contact, where ρ is the resistivity of the material. This resistance is usually known as the spreading resistance and is associated with the spread of current as it moves away from the orifice. By measuring the Maxwell's resistance (R M (V ) one actually measures the temperature dependent resistivity of the material. e. The intermediate regime: Depending on the mean free path and contact diameter, it is possible to enter an intermediate regime of transport where the contact diameter is such that both Sharvin's resistance and Maxwell's resistance components of the total resistance become comparable. The total resistance of the contact is given by the Wexler's formula , Γ is a slowly varying function of the order of unity. For point contacts between a normal metal and a superconductor, the electronic transport in the ballistic regime is dominated by a quantum process called Andreev reflection. In order to understand the process, let us consider the density of states of a conventional superconductor with energy in a so-called semiconductor model. In fig. ]dE where, N(0) is the density of states at the Fermi level and v F is the Fermi velocity. A(E) and B(E) can be easily calculated by matching the boundary conditions for a delta function potential with wave functions that satisfy the Bogoliubov-deGennes (BdG) equations. where, ∆(x) represents the superconducting energy gap, μ is the chemical potential, f(x,t) and g(x,t) are the elements of column vector ψ describing one type of BCS quasiparticle states. For constant μ(x), ∆(x) and V(x) we can use the following trial solutions For energies greater than 0, we have Now if the wave functions inside the normal metal and superconductor is represented by ψ N and ψ S respectively, it is possible to obtain the Andreev reflection A(E) and normal reflection B(E) probabilities(provided in table below). Recently, Point contact Andreev reflection(PCAR) technique has proved to be one of the widely used, efficient and reliable spectroscopic tool with a tremendous capability to investigate electronic properties of a variety of materials. In the previous section we have undergo Andreev reflection due to unavailability of accessible states in the opposite spin band(Fig. The steps followed to extract the absolution value of spin polarization of Fermi level are: 1) start with calculation of BTK current for zero spin polarization (I BT Ku and for a fully(100%) spin polarized case(IBT Kp). 2) Then calculate the current for an intermediate spin polarized(P t ) case by interpolating the current value between I BT Ku and I BT Kp by following the relation I total = I BT Ku (1-P t )+ P t I BT Kp . 3)one just needs to take a derivative of I total with respect to applied bias V to get the modified Andreev reflection spectrum having signatures of spin polarization in the ferromagnet. Once again we emphasize that for fitting of such a spectrum under the modified BTK formalism The PCAR spectra obtained for point contact between normal metals and conventional superconductors are usually in good agreement with the BTK theory. However, the same cannot be said for certain point-contacts between a) normal metals and unconventional superconductors and, b) superconductors and ferromagnets where the experimentally obtained spectra is found to be broadened from the theoretical simulation. It is believed that this broadening occurs due to shortening of quasiparticle lifetime resulting due to inelastic scattering of charge carriers near the contact region. This warrants incorporation of this effect into the BTK formalism. The broadening is taken care of by including the inelastic term Γ = h τ in the Boguliobov de Gennes equations where, τ is the quasiparticle lifetime. The inclusion of the broadening parameter modifies the BdG equations which are The trial wavefunction now contains a decaying term e -Γt/h and the pair occupation probabilities get modified to resulting in modification of Andreev and Normal reflection probabilities. Hence, Γ is incorporated in the BTK model as an additional fitting parameter to take care of broadening in the Andreev reflection spectrum. (The modified DOS at energy E is given by Point contact spectroscopy exploits the characteristic properties of ballistic point contact between two materials to obtain energy, momentum and spin resolved spectroscopic information. In the previous sections we have discussed that the Andreev reflection spectrum is analyzed under the BTK model where it is assumed that the two materials( a superconductor and normal metal) form a ballistic interface. Earlier we have seen that a conventional PCAR spectrum exhibits only two peaks at ± ∆ e respectively and beyond this voltage only smooth decay of DOS is observed. The maximum zero bias enhancement in differential conductance of a factor of 2 is possible only at zero temperature and for a completely transparent barrier (Z). However, in practice certain additional features are observed in the conductance spectrum such as multiple dip and peak structures, anomalous large zero bias enhancement etc. Previously these additional features were attributed to exotic physical phenomena such as proximity induced, energy gap signature, inter-grain Josephson effect, unconventional pairing, presence of multiple order parameters, Andreev bound states etc. These explanations were system specific but the observation of these structures in wide variety of materials indicated towards the possibility of a more general explanation. A series of PCAR measurements performed by sheet et. al. on several combinations between metal and elemental superconductors where these dip structures in differential conductance spectrum were repeatedly observed. Moreover, these dip structures showed systematic dependence on temperature and applied magnetic field. Analysis of these structures on wide number of point contacts helped the author to scrutinize the previous explanations. For example, absence of these dips in contacts between a ferromagnet and superconductor was earlier thought to be confirmation of proximity induced superconductivity resulting in dip structures, however, sheet et. al. observed that the dip structures appeared consistently for point contacts between superconductors and other non magnetic metals. Similarly, the hypothesis that the dip structures appear due to inter-grain Josephson junction was ruled out due to repeated observation of such structures in single crystalline superconductors. These dip structures are not bias specific and were observed to appear at various bias values though always symmetric about the zero bias. The systematic evolution of dip structures with temperature and magnetic field confirmed that these structures are unambiguously related to superconductivity. The dips were also observed to evolve with the contact diameter. The dips were observed to diminish with increasing contact resistance i.e for decrease in point contact size for various combinations of metals, superconductors and ferromagnets forming point contact. These experiments revealed a clear correlation between dip structures and contact resistance or contact size. These results ultimately led to the development of a theoretical model that includes the role of critical current. The model distinguishes between different type of spectra that are commonly observed in superconducting point contacts. The distinction is made on the basis of contact diameter and the electronic mean free path. This has been discussed previously in section titled " Different regimes of point-contact transport". We briefly revisit the salient features of this model here. The transport through a point contact is classified primarily three different regimes on the basis of contact diameter and mean free path of electrons. On one extreme we have the ballistic limit, where the contact diameter is much smaller than the elastic mean free path so that, statistically speaking, there is absence of scattering within the point contact regime. This allows the electrons to travel ballistically within the contact. Therefore only structures correponding to AR namely the Andreev peaks appear in the differential conductance spectrum. In this case the resistance in contact arise purely due to Sharvin's contribution to resistance. On the other extreme we have the thermal limit, where the contact diameter is much larger than the inelastic mean free path. Hence, in this limit all scattering mechanism take place within the contact region resulting in dissipation of energy in form of heat. In this limit the bulk resistivity of metal plays key role in deciding the contact resistance and is given by Maxwell's resistance formula. In this limit, the differential conductance spectra exhibit two dip structures symmetric about the zero voltage bias. If the contact diameter is larger than the elastic mean free path but smaller than inelastic mean free path, then one reach the intermediate state where both of the structures discussed above appear simultaneously in the differential conductance spectrum. The contact resistance in this case has contribution from both the Sharvin's and Maxwell's resistance. A look at the I-V characteristics shows a sharp change in slope at bias corresponding to the critical current of the superconductor. The dips in differential conductance spectrum appear at the exact same value of bias corresponding to the sharp change in slope in I-V. Moreover, when the current corresponding to the critical current of the superconductor flows through the contact, the resistance of superconductor increases sharply to attain the normal state value resulting in huge zero bias enhancement in normalized differential conductance. Hence it is clear from these above discussion that the dip structures in differential conductance spectrum correspond to the critical current of the superconducting point contact. In this analysis of point contact spectra, the effect of contact heating on critical current is neglected as it arise due to contribution from Maxwell resistance. This assumption works well for contacts where R M /R S is small. For contacts where R M /R S >> 1, a significant heat dissipation occurs at contact and the effective temperature rises rapidly with applied bias. The heat dissipation at low temperatures may drive the superconductor into normal state at current values lower than the critical current of superconductor. It is possible in principle to think of a situation where for a contact in ballistic limit, the critical current is reached at smaller voltage values (∼ ∆/e). For this case, feature associated with Andreev reflection is not observed since they are supposed to occur in voltage range ±2∆/e and one gets a spectrum with only sharp dips. This possibility might be seen in superconductors having low critical current densities or while working at temperatures close to T C where critical current is small. So far, we have looked at the hallmark signatures of superconductivity that appear in transport spectroscopy of a superconducting material in a point contact geometry. We have classified the different types of spectra that are obtained for such a contact into broadly into three categories on basis of contact diameter and mean free length namely 1) Ballistic regime, 2) Intermediate regime and 3) Thermal regime. We have also understood the origin of the spectroscopic features appearing in spectra obtained in these regimes. In the following sections we describe how to characterize a point contact exhibiting TISC. With the understanding of the characteristics features that are obtained in the different transport regimes of point contact spectroscopy involving superconductors, it was possible to detect tiny volumes of superconducting phases that appeared only under the point contacts made with a normal metal on certain complex quantum materials, specially those with definite topological features. Such phase was named as tip-induced superconductivity (TISC) by the Indian group that discovered the TISC phase on Cd 3 As 2 for the first time. Following that, a lrge number of groups around the world realized TISC phases in a number of materials -surprisingly, almost all of them are also known to display characteristics topological properties. Here we provide a review of such experiments. A. How to detect TISC with confidence? Since a TISC phase appears only under a point contact, the volume fraction of the superconducting phase, thus, is extremely small. In such a situation, the conventional transport and magnetization measurements technique that are used for detection of superconductivity fail. The total resistance of a typical point contact setup can be understood by a simple model where the resistance of various components such as the resistance of the tip(R T ip ), sample(R Sample ) and the point contact(R P C ) are connected in series to form the total resistance(R T otal )(See FIG Here, one may note that even for a superconducting point contact, even when the re-FIG. A point contact interface exhibiting TISC phase is very small. The contact diameter is usually ∼ 100nm. Consequently, in conventional magnetization measurements, it becomes impossible to detect a tiny Meissner state that might emerge under the point contact. Such measurement would, in principle, be possible using a nano-SQUID mounted on a tip used to induce TISC. Therefore, it is important to go beyond the conventional tools to detect TISC. Here we discuss certain experiments exploiting the point-contact geometry and the characteristic experimental signatures that could provide unambiguous evidence of superconductivity, if present, in TISC suspects. To note, while any one or two of these features may not definitively confirm TISC, all of these collectively provide conclusive signature of superconductivity. microwave radiation Though the above tests indicate that the point contact is indeed superconducting, it is important to look at the behaviour of materials forming contact at high pressures. Since PCAR relies on formation of contact of a sharp tip with a sample, the tip can apply few GPa of mechanical pressure on the sample. It is known that certain materials exhibit superconducting behavior on application of pressure. For such cases due to application of local mechanical pressure by tip, superconductivity is induced in the sample. This is however not TISC but is pressure induced superconductivity. Hence, it is important to determine whether the particular sample material exhibits pressure induced superconductivity in bulk form and whether the tip can exert pressure corresponding to this value. Now that we have discussed the prerequisites and salient features obtained for a system exhibiting tip induced superconductivity, it is time to discuss a few examples where this effect has been observed. In this section we start with the experimental discovery of TISC, we discuss the results in detail and then move on to other systems where TISC phase could be realized. meV Since there is an indication that the point contact is superconducting, it is imperative to look at how the resistance of the contact changes with temperature. A clear transition from high resistance state to a lower resistance was observed(shown in fig. The broadening could be the result due to large inelastic broadening Moving on to the variation of ballistic point-contact spectra with temperature, it was found that the position of Andreev peaks in the conductance spectra did not show any significant shift with increase in temperature. The peaks survive upto 13 K above which, the spectra become flat due to thermal broadening. This observation is strikingly similar to the pseudo-gap feature observed in case of the cuprates where the peaks in (dI/dV) N did not shift with temperature However, in the latter case a systematic temperature dependence of spectra features was observed unlike in the case of Cd 3 As 2 . b. Concave curvature of H-T phase diagram: As we have discussed before, the variation of R-T curves with applied magnetic field(Fig. c. Zero Bias Conductance Peak(ZBCP:) Upon further investigation of the nature of superconductivity and associated gap amplitude via magnetic field dependence of a ballistic spectrum it was found that the gap features show systematic evolution with magnetic field. The extrapolation of this dependence indicated that the gap vanishes around 45 kG implying that the pseudo-gap in this case is a precursor phase to the superconducting state. For the Cd 3 As 2 /Ag point-contacts, all the differential conductance spectra obtained in the ballistic regime of transport showed a peak structure(for large overall signal) at V=0. For Such pronounced ZBCP(Fig. The authors were able to fit the low-bias portion of the intermediate spectra with the BTK thory. This indicated that the order parameter symmetry in the new superconducting phase emerging at Cd 3 As 2 /Ag point contact has a mixed angular momentum symmetry with a strong s-wave component. Moreover, the analysis of the observed ZBCP also provides strong indication towards the possibility of s+p-wave type of symmetry in this new superconducting phase The investigation of superconducting systems in complex systems such as topologically non-trivial systems like Cd 3 As 2 A systematic, smooth evolution of ZBCP with magnetic field for type I ( prominent ZBCP without splitting obtained for Nb/Cd 3 As 2 ) spectra and type II ( ZBCP with splitting obtained for Nb/Cd 3 As 2 for a different barrier strength) spectra is presented in fig. Type I spectra loses its prominent spectral features -the induced gap structure at 5 meV and the ZBCP at an applied magnetic field of 2.4 T (fig. The temperature dependence of AR spectra of type I and type II also confirmed the relation between ZBCP and its splitting(see fig. Though Cd 3 As 2 is not a bulk superconductor, the presented observations and results strongly indicate the presence of unconventional order parameter in mesoscopic contacts of Cd 3 As 2 and hence unconventional superconductivity. However, to establish the exact nature of order parameter symmetry and the underlying pairing mechanism it is necessary to perform further theoretical modeling & analysis as well as additional experimental investigations such as planar tunnelling, high-pressure measurements etc. The point-contacts on Cd 3 As 2 with other metallic non superconducting tips such as Platinum(Pt) and Gold(Au) also ex- 2. TISC in Weyl semimetals (TaAs,TaP etc.) The discovery of Weyl semimetals Weyl fermions were first shown by Hermann Weyl to emerge as solutions to the relativistic Dirac equation In the subsequent section, the emergence of a tip-induced superconducting phase in mesoscopic contacts between silver (Ag) and a Weyl semimetal is discussed in detail pertaining to transport and magneto transport measurements in various regimes of mesoscopic transport. The experimental data obtained for Ag/TaAs point contacts were fitted under the modified BTK formalism that includes spin polarization as a fitting parameter. The experiments and fitting pointed towards indicated the coexistence of superconductivity and high transport spin polarization and hence indicated a flow of spin polarized super-current through TaAs point contacts. The TISC phase obtained in TaAs system did not show the possibility of an unconventional pairing mechanism, the spectra obtained in the ballistic or intermediate regime of transport did not show any zero-bias conductance peak or any features resembling the pseudo-gap. This is in clear contrast to the TISC phase obtained on the 3D Dirac semimetal Cd 3 As 2 . The unique co-existence of superconductivity and high transport spin polarization in TaAs point contacts makes it an interesting candidate for spintronic applications. Point contact spectroscopy was performed on single crystals of TaAs using elemental silver (Ag) tip. Fig. With application of field and increase in magnitude, as expected for materials exhibiting superconductivity, the transition temperature kept decreasing with increasing magnetic field. Though the above data hinted at existence of a superconducting phase in Ag/TaAs point contacts, additional data is required to in support of the superconducting phase. In this regard, the existence of superconductivity must be established by driving the point contact into the other regimes of transport where features related to AR can be observed. The presence of TISC phase was confirmed for Ag/TaAs point contact in the intermediate and ballistic regimes of mesoscopic transport. In fig. The maximum sup Now we focus on the variation of differential conductance spectra with applied magnetic field. The gap structure( double conductance peak in the differential conductance spectrum), as expected, decreases with increasing magnetic field. In the case of a point contact where the contact diameter is large enough to accommodate any vortices, the fitting of AR spectra becomes non-trivial. Moreover, since at present an exact theory describing the TISC remains to be unproven, the presented data cannot be analyzed to confirm whether vortices can enter the point contact region nor if multiple vortices can exist there. All of the field dependent spectra were analysed and fitted under the BTK theory with inclusion of spin polarization. On the basis of analysis and fitting, ∆ vs. H plot was constructed(fig. The spectra obtained for Ag/TaAs point contacts, when compared to the expected spectra for a simple elemental superconductor, showed a significant suppression of AR. It is known that the presence of spin polarized surface states causes suppression of Andreev Reflection Such spectra can be fitted within the BTK formalism-modified to include finite transport spin polarization Apart from the temperature and field dependent evolution of the contact resistance, a field-angle dependent study of the point contact resistance of a ballistic contact was also explored. Here, the resistance of the contact was measured while the direction of magnetic field is rotated using a 3-axis vector magnet with respect to the direction of injected current. A bias voltage of 13 mV, corresponding to the normal state of TISC, was applied across the contact and magnetic field was rotated. A large anisotropy in the magneto-resistance was observed which kept increasing with the increse in applied field strength(fig. The TISC phase has also been recently achieved on another weyl semimetal TaP 3. TISC in nodal semimetals(ZrSiS, TaAs 2 NbAs 2 etc.) ZrSiS: ZrSiS is an abundant, non-toxic and highly stable material with a bandstructure that hosts several Dirac cones forming a Fermi surface with diamond shaped line of Dirac nodes In the following section we present and discuss in detail, the emergence of a superconducting phase induced upon forming a contact between elemental silver (Ag) on crystalline ZrSiS. The Ag/ZrSiS point contacts showed a transition from normal resistance state to the superconducting state at 7.5 K with a superconducting energy gap determined from PCS to be approximately 1 meV. ZrSiS exhibits a liner band dispersion over a large energy range resulting in a robust topological character against perturbation effects such as carrier doping, variation in stoichiometry etc. and hence superconductivity in ZrSiS point contacts is an important discovery. Moreover, this implies that the topological properties of ZrSiS cannot be destroyed due to proximity to metallic tip forming the point contact and result in emergence of a superconducting phase i.e. the superconducting phase did not emerge at the expense of the topological nature of ZrSiS. Considering the facts presented above ZrSiS makes a promising candidate for realising topological superconductor. fields. A clear systematic evolution of superconducting transition temperature with applied magnetic field was observed. The authors observed that the transition temperature systematically decreased with increasing magnetic field, which is an exact behaviour expected for a superconductor. As discussed in previous sections, we remind you that though the overall resistance is zero for a bulk superconductor, in a point contact geometry the resistance is always finite. This is evident from the R-T data and corresponding differential conductance spectrum obtained for Pb/Ag point contact, presented in Fig. 2)Systematic temperature dependence of dI/dV spectra: In Fig. Therefore, in this review article, we discussed point contact Andreev reflection spectroscopy in different regimes of transport. We highlighted how such features can be used to detect and confirm the existence of a superconducting phase, called tip-induced superconductivity (TISC), that appears only under a mesoscopic point contact between two nonsuperconducting materials, most of the times one of these being a topologically non-trivial system. Table showing Andreev and normal reflection probabilities for an unpolarized system. 3D Dirac semimetals, in general, are known to be stable compounds due to symmetry protected surface states. Another key feature of these materials is that the Dirac points exist close to the topological phase boundaries, as a result by breaking certain symmetries they can be driven into further exotic states such as topological insulators, Weyl semimetals and topological superconductors. However, until the year 2014, this idea was not realized practically. In 2014, Dr. Goutam Sheet's group began working on a II-V semiconductor Cd 3 As 2 . The existence of a stable 3D topological semimetallic phase in Cd 3 As 2 was previously confirmed by Angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES)