The origin and the evolution of the universe are concealed in the evanescent diffuse extragalactic background radiation (DEBRA). To reveal these signals, the development of innovative ultrasensitive bolometers operating in the gigahertz band is required. Here, we review the design and experimental realization of two bias-current-tunable sensors based on one dimensional fully superconducting Josephson junctions: the nanoscale transition edge sensor (nano-TES) and the Josephson escape sensor (JES). In particular, we cover the theoretical basis of the sensors operation, the device fabrication, their experimental electronic and thermal characterization, and the deduced detection performance. Indeed, the nano-TES promises a state-of-the-art noise equivalent power (NEP) of about 5 × 10 -20 W/ √ Hz, while the JES is expected to show an unprecedented NEP of the order of 10 -25 W/ √ Hz. Therefore, the nano-TES and JES are strong candidates to push radio astronomy to the next level. The universe is permeated by radiation extending over almost all the electromagnetic spectrum, the so-called diffuse extragalactic background radiation (DEBRA) State-of-the-art GHz/THz detectors for astronomy are the transition edge sensors (TESs) Despite the high sensitivity, all these innovative bolometers do not fulfill the strict requirements for being employed in ultra-sensitive space telescopes. In fact, materials, fabrication procedures and structures need to be extensively tested to survive the extreme stress (vibrations, acceleration, radiation, etc.) typical of space missions. Instead, we review recent developments of superconducting radiation sensor based on a structure that shares many technological aspects with the already employed TESs and KIDs. Indeed, the nanoscale transition edge sensor (nano-TES) This review is organized as follows. Section II covers the theoretical bases of the nano-TES and JES highlighting their structure and operating principle. Section III introduces the thermal and electrical model employed to calculate the performance of the sensors, such as noise equivalent power and response time. Section IV describes the experimental realization of the nano-TES and the JES. In particular, the nano-fabrication, the thermal, spectral and electronic transport measurements are shown. Section V reports the sensing performance deduced from the experimental data. Finally, Sec. VI resumes the results and opens to new applications for the nano-TES and the JES detectors. The sensors presented in this Review, i.e., the nano-TES The electronic transport properties of a 1D-JJ can be described through the overdamped resistively shunted junction (RSJ) model where e is the electron charge, R N is the normal-state resistance, is the reduced Planck constant and I C is the critical current. The thermal noise generated by the shunt resistor (R N ) is given by δI th (t)δI th (t ) = K B T R N δ(t -t ), where k B is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature. Within the RSJ model, the transition of the junction to the resistive state is attributed to 2π phase-slip events For a 1D-JJ composed of a superconducting nanowire, the escape energy barrier can be written as Indeed, the effective WP profile strongly depends on both bias current (I) through the junction and Josephson energy E J = Φ 0 I C /2π where I C,0 is the zero-temperature critical current and I μ (x) is the modified Bessel function with imaginary argument Thus, the current dependent resistance versus temperature characteristics [R(T )] of the 1D-JJ can be evaluated by calculating the current derivative of the voltage drop Figure From each R(T ) curve we can define two temperatures related to the superconductor-to-normal-state transition: the effective critical temperature (T C ) and the escape temperature (T e ), as shown in Fig. The behavior of superconducting bolometers strongly depends on the predominant heat exchange mechanisms occurring in their active region. The thermal model describing all the main thermal exchange mechanisms occurring in A is the same for the nano-TES and the JES, as schematically shown in Fig. T C (0), T e (0)], that are the maximum operating temperatures. Therefore, heat exchange with lattice phonons (P e-ph ) is the predominant thermal relaxation channel in the active region. In the TES operation, A is always kept almost in the normal-state thus yielding an electron-phonon coupling where V A is the nanowire volume, and Σ A is its electron-phonon coupling constant. On the contrary, since the JES operates at T e (I), the latter can be substantially smaller than T C depending on I [see Fig. where ∆ A is the superconducting energy gap in A, thus showing an exponential suppression with respect to the normal-state at very low temperatures. As a consequence, the performance of a JES radiation detector are expected to be considerably better than that of a nano-TES operating at the same temperature. The transition to the normal-state driven by radiation absorption generates Joule heating in A, thus rising T A and creating thermal instability. For TES bolometers, this issue is solved by a biasing circuit implementing the so-called negative electrothermal feedback (NETF). Similarly, the nano-TES and the JES could be biased with the circuitry shown in Fig In the next sections, we will show all the relations describing the principal figures of merit for the nano-TES and the JES bolometers. The noise equivalent power (NEP) represents the minimum power that can be detected above the noise level. Thus, the NEP is the most important figure of merit for a nano-TES bolometer. Taking into account the equivalent circuit shown in Fig. where N EP T F N,nano-T ES is associated with the thermal fluctuations, N EP Jo is due to the Johnson noise, while N EP R S arises from the shunt resistor. For a nano-TES operating at T A T C , the thermal fluctuations limited N EP takes the form [49] where Υ = n/(2n + 1) accounts for the temperature gradient between the quasiparticles in A and all the other thermal sinks (with n = 5 for pure and n = 4, 6 for dirty metals), and G th,nano-T ES is the thermal conductance of all heat losses. Since T C T C,B , the main thermalization channel for A is the electron-phonon coupling (P e-ph ). Furthermore, the 1D-JJ is always kept in the partially dissipative state (at R N /2) for the nano-TES operation. So, the electron-phonon coupling of a normal-metal diffusive thin film (P e-ph,n , see Eq. 6) is employed The Johnson noise is originated by the electronic transport through A when the nano-TES is in the normal-state and takes the form where V is the voltage drop, f is the signal bandwidth, α = dR dT T R is the electrothermal parameter accounting for the sharpness of the phase transition from the superconducting to the normal-state where L 0 = α/n is the loop gain. Since the shunting resistor needs to satisfy R sh R A , the contribution of N EP sh is usually negligible compared to Johnson noise. Indeed, in superconducting bolometers, the thermal fluctuations contribution dominates over N EP Jo and N EP R S . Thus, we can consider N EP tot = N EP T F N,nano-T ES . The time response of the detector can be calculated by solving the time dependent energy balance equation that takes into account all the exchange mechanisms after radiation absorption where C e,nano-T ES is the electron heat capacitance. The latter is written where γ A is the Sommerfeld coefficient of the active region. We note that τ nano-T ES is the intrinsic recovery time of A. This term does not take into account the Joule heating due to the current flowing through the sensor in the dissipative state. By considering the circuitry implementing the NETF [see Fig. For τ ef f << τ nano-T ES , i.e., when the pulse recovery time is much shorter than the intrinsic time constant of A, the overheating into the active region is decreased, thus compensating for the initial temperature variation and avoiding the dissipation through the substrate. The JES operates at T e (I), that is fully in the superconducting state. Since the current injection does not change the energy gap of the active region (∆ A ∼ const), only the effective critical temperature of A changes with I, while the intrinsic values of critical temperature (T i C ) is unaffected. As a consequence, all figures of merit of a JES are calculated deeply in the superconducting state, thus ensuring high sensitivity. In full analogy with the nano-TES, the thermal fluctuations are the limiting factor for the sensitivity of a JES bolometer. The related contribution to the NEP reads where G th,JES is the thermal conductance in the superconducting state. The latter takes the form [50] where the first term refers to the electron-phonon scattering, while the second term stems from the recombination processes. In Eq. 17, ς(5) is the Riemann zeta function, ∆ = ∆ A /k B T is the normalized energy gap of A, h = h/k B T represents exchange field (0 in this case), We note that the thermal conductance for a JES is exponentially damped compared to the nano-TES, due to the operation in the superconducting state. Thus, we expect the JES to be extremely more sensitive than the nano-TES, that is N EP T F N,JES N EP T F N,nano-T ES . The JES speed in given by the relaxation half-time (τ 1/2 ), which reads where τ JES is the JES intrinsic thermal time constant. The latter is calculated by substituting the JES parameters in Eq. 13, thus considering C e,JES and G th,JES in deep superconducting operation. The electron heat capacitance needs to be calculated at the current-dependent escape temperature [T e (I)], thus in the superconducting state, and takes the form where Θ Damp is the low temperature exponential suppression with respect to the normal metal value. The suppression is written Finally, the electronic heat capacitance is given by The nano-TES and JES are experimentally realized and tested thanks to two different device architectures: an auxiliary device and the proper nano-sensor. On the one hand, the auxiliary device was employed to determine the superconducting energy gap and the thermal properties of the material composing the one-dimensional active region. On the other hand, the measurements performed on the proper nanosensor provided dependence of the R(T ) characteristics on the bias current. Both devices were fabricated during the same evaporation process, ensuring the homogeneity of the properties of A. In particular, they were fabricated by electron-beam lithography (EBL) and 3-angles shadow mask evaporation onto a silicon wafer covered with 300 nm of thermally grown SiO 2 . The evaporation was performed in an ultra-high vacuum electron-beam evaporator with a base pressure of about 10 -11 Torr. The first step was the evaporation of a 13-nm-thick Al layer at an angle of -40 • and then oxidized by exposition to 200 mTorr of O 2 for 5 minutes to obtain the tunnel probes of the auxiliary device. In a second step, the Al/Cu bilayer (t Al = 10.5 nm and t Cu = 15 nm) forming the active region is evaporated at an angle of 0 • . Finally, a second 40-nm-thick Al film was evaporated at an angle of +40 • to obtain the lateral electrodes. The false-color scanning electron microscope (SEM) picture of a typical auxiliary device is shown in Fig. Figure For T < 0.4T C , the energy gap of a superconductor follows ∆(T ) = ∆ 0 , where ∆ 0 is its zero-temperature value 23 μeV pointing towards a critical temperature T C,A 150 mK. We now focus on the heat exchange properties of the active region. The schematic representation of the experimental setup employed is shown in Fig. The geometry of the device guarantees that the electronic temperature of the lateral superconducting electrodes and the tunnel probes are equal to the phonon bath temperature (T bath ). By contrast, the quasiparticles temperature of the active region is the fundamental thermal variable in the experiment. Since T A T C,B for all the measurements, the lateral banks serve as perfect Andreev mirrors (P A-B = 0). Therefore, the power injected by the heater (P h ) relaxes only via electron-phonon interaction P e-ph and out-diffuses through the tunnel junction acting as thermometer (P t ). The resulting quasi-equilibrium thermal exchange model is as schematically represented in Fig. where R t = 11.6 kΩ is the normal-state tunnel resistance of the thermometer, and is the Fermi-Dirac distribution of the active region and the superconducting probe, respectively. Above, the normalized density of states of the superconducting probe takes the form Figure By solving Eq. 22, it is possible to fit the experimental values of T A as a function of P h . This simple model is in good agreement with the data, as shown by the black line in Fig. Since the fit provides P e-ph P t , the presence of the thermometer tunnel barrier has a negligible impact on the determination of Σ A . Furthermore, the electronic temperature in A varies for distances of the order of the electron-phonon coherence length l e-ph = D A τ e-ph 180 μm The realization of a typical 1D-JJ is shown by the scanning electron micrograph displayed in Fig. The resistance R vs temperature characteristics and of the Al banks were obtained by conventional four-wire lowfrequency lock-in technique at 13.33 Hz in a filtered He 3 -He 4 dry dilution refrigerator. The current was generated by applying a voltage (V ac ) to a load resistor (R L ) of impedance larger than the device resistance (R L = 100 kΩ R), as shown in Fig. To prove that the Al/Cu bilayer can be considered a uniform superconductor, we need to demonstrate that it respects the Cooper limit 220 nm, where N Al = 2.15 × 10 47 J -1 m -3 and N Cu = 1.56 × 10 47 J -1 m -3 are the density of states at the Fermi level of Al and Cu, respectively. Therefore, the bilayer shows a constant pairing potential along the out-of-plane axis, since the Cooper pairs coherence length is much larger than its thickness (ξ a t = t Al + t Cu = 25.5 nm). Furthermore, ξ A w = 100 nm. So, the active region is one dimensional with respect to the superconducting coherence length. In addition, the London penetration depth for the magnetic field of A can be calculated from λ L,A = ( wt A R N )/(πμ 0 l∆ A,0 ) 970 nm, where μ 0 is the magnetic permeability of vacuum. Since λ L,A t, w, A is 1D with respect to the London penetration depth, too. The magnetic field generated at the wire surface by the maximum possible bias current is B I,max = μ 0 I C,0 /(2πt) 5 μT. This value is orders of magnitude lower than the critical magnetic field of A. So, the self generated magnetic field does not affect the properties of the device. Furthermore, the superconducting properties of the Al/Cu bilayer dominate the behavior of A. In fact, the energy gap expected for a non-superconducting Al/Cu bilayer as originated by lateral proximity effect is E g 3 D A /l 2 5 μeV The device in Fig. Despite the R(T ) curves shift towards low temperatures by increasing the bias current, the active region electronic temperature (T A ) at the middle of the superconducting-to-dissipative-state transition under current injection does not coincide with T bath . In fact, Joule dissipation (for R = 0) causes the quasiparticles overheating in A yielding T A > T bath . Therefore, the operation of the sensor as a nano-TES is not possible without the additional shunting resistor [see Fig. From the R vs T curves we can specify the current-dependent escape temperature [T e (I)]. The values of T e are shown in Fig. Here, we show the deduced performance of the 1D-JJ based bolometers operated both as nano-TES (at T C ) and JES (at T e ). To this end, the experimental data (∆, thermal and transport properties of A) showed in Sec. IV are substituted in the theoretical models presented in Sec. III. The thermal fluctuations between the electrons and phonons in the active region are the limiting factor for the noise equivalent power of a nano-TES Table 5.2 × 10 -20 W/ √ Hz) is lower than that of sample 2, since it can be operated at lower temperature (T C,1 < T C,2 ) and its thermal losses are reduced (G th,1 6.7×10 -15 W/K and G th,2 9.3×10 -15 W/K). This sensitivity is one order of magnitude better than state-of-the-art transition edge sensors The intrinsic time constant of the 1D-JJ (τ ) can be calculated from Eq. 13. Here, the heat capacitance is given by Eq. 14 taking the value C e,1 = 4 × 10 -20 J/K and C e,2 = 4.2 × 10 -20 J/K for sample 1 and 2, respectively, where the Sommerfeld coefficient of the active region is calculated as the average of the two components The presence of the bias circuit producing the NETF speeds up the response of a nano-TES bolometer. In fact, effective detector time constant becomes τ 1 10 ns for sample 1 and τ 2 200 ns for sample 2. The difference between the two devices arises from the values of the electrothermal parameter (α 1 2742 and α 2 121, respectively), as shown by Eq. 15. It is interesting to note that, in principle, the nano-TES is fully tunable through the current injection. In fact, the critical temperature, i.e., the temperature giving R(T C ) = R N /2, can be varied by I, as shown in Fig. Also for the JES, the noise equivalent power is limited by thermal fluctuations between the electron and phonon systems in A As expected, N EP T F N,JES can be in situ finely controlled by tuning I. In particular, it decreases monotonically by increasing the amplitude of bias current, as shown in Fig. The JES time constant (τ 1/2 ) can be calculated by the combination of Eqs. 13 and 18. As for the TES, it is proportional to the ratio between the electron heat capacitance and the electron-phonon heat conductance in A The tunability of the JES properties allows to choose between moderate sensitivity/fast response and extreme sensitivity/slow response by simply varying the bias current within the same structure. As a consequence, the same bolometer could fulfill the requirements of different applications. This paper reviews a new class of superconducting bolometers The 1D-JJ is theoretically analyzed from an electronic and thermal transport point of view. In particular, the current dependence of the resistance versus temperature characteristics and of the electro-phonon thermalization are predicted. Furthermore, the equations of the main figures of merit of a bolometer, such as the noise equivalent power and response time are calculated both in the nano-TES and JES operations. A complete series of electronic and thermal experiments allowed extracting all the parameters of the device active region, such as the current-dependent R(T ) characteristics, the density of states and the electron-phonon thermal relaxation. These data allow determining the detection performance of bolometers based on the nano-TES and the JES. The nano-TES reaches a total noise equivalent power of about 5 × 10 -20 W/ √ Hz limited by thermal fluctuations, that is one order of magnitude better than state-of-the-art conventional transition edge sensors The JES showed the possibility of in situ tuning the sensitivity by changing the biasing current. The thermal fluctuation limitation to NEP can be lowered down to the unprecedented value of ∼ 1 × 10 -25 W/ √ Hz. On the contrary, the sensing speed decreases significantly (up to about 100 ms), due to the poor thermalization of the active region when operated fully in the superconducting state. The nano-TES and the JES are expected to have a strong impact on radio astronomy 