The spin-1/2 model system with antiferromagnetic (AF) couplings on a J1-J2 checkerboard lattice, known as the planar pyrochlore model, is strongly frustrated and associated with a two-to-one dimensional crossover. Using the Projected Entangled Simplex States tensor network ansatz, we identify a large number of nearly degenerate states in the frustrated region (J1 < J2). Specifically, we find the long-sought crossed-dimer valence bond solid (VBS) state to be the ground state at J1 ≲ J2, while various 1D AF correlated states take over the rest. We verify the stability of the VBS state against nematic perturbation. The corresponding bosonic picture provides an intuitive understanding of the low-energy physics. Particularly, it predicts weaker VBS states in the easyplane limit, which we confirm numerically. Our results clarify the most essential ground state properties of this interesting system and demonstrate the usefulness of bosonic picture in dealing with frustrated magnetism. Determining the many-body ground states and classifying the phase transitions in strongly correlated systems are two central quests of condensed matter physics. For these purposes, physicists are interested in the lowdimensional frustrated systems which defeat long-range orders and exhibit exotic paramagnetic ground states, such as the quantum valence bond solid (VBS) The antiferromagnetic (AF) spin-1/2 Heisenberg model on a two-dimensional (2D) checkerboard lattice, FIG. where S i is the spin operator on site i, J 1,2 are the exchange couplings between the spins with the nearest neighbors (NN) and the next nearest neighbors (NNN), respectively. Note that in the easy-plane limit (XYlimit) of the model, each bond energy J 1,2 S i • S j in the Hamiltonian with the Heisenberg limit is simply replaced by J 1,2 (S x i S x j + S y i S y j ). At J 1 ≫ J 2 , the system has a ground state with 2D AF correlation along J 1 bonds (cf: red bands in Fig. AF correlated chains along the J 2 (blue) bonds weakly coupled by geometric frustrated J 1 interaction, drastically incompatible with the 2D limit. The corresponding ground state is believed to be a sliding Luttinger liquid This frustrated system with the dimensional crossover feature has attracted tremendous studies using different techniques One should, however, be cautious about detailed results from the tensor network methods Here, using a recent developed tensor network ansatz, i.e., the projected entangled simplex states (PESS) We first use a 2 × 2 (with a J 2 bond as one lattice spacing) PESS Figure . 2(a) shows nearly identical energy for different states at J 2 > J 1 found in our calculation. Particularly, we find direct evidence of a CD-VBS state To better understand these states, we find it is very helpful to employ a bosonic picture. Using the fully down-spin polarized state as a reference, the local spin state can be represented by a hard-core boson, b † with b For example, in our AF checkerboard lattice, the lack of global magnetization implies that our bosonic system Spin picture Bosonic picture should generally be half-filled, making them easily stuck into some sort of local charge order. The larger J 2 b † i b j dictates an alternating charge order along the J 2 direction for low-energy states, such that each boson has a chance to extend its orbital to lower its kinetic energy. Next, the smaller J 1 b † i b j would similarly prefers to leak into as many empty J 1 -neighbors as possible. We now demonstrate that this framework provides a very intuitive understanding of the low-energy states of the systems. First, it is easy to understand the nearly identical energies of the 1D AF correlated states in Fig. The near degeneracy between the CD-VBS and SCC states is not expected to persist in the J 1 → 0 limit, where the pure 1D solution is exactly known One can examine the stability of the CD-VBS state by lowering the energy of the stripy SCC state in Fig. Upon careful examination of these nearly degenerate states, we found that SCC states suffer more from the effective J 1 repulsion, as demonstrated by the red bonds in Fig. Our results above can provide useful insights to some of the real materials. For example, the pyrochlore material GeCu 2 O 4 Generally, the emergence of VBS like states appears to be a generic feature in the strongly frustrated region in many models. Our above bosonic analysis on the emergence of BCC-type VBS state points out a natural mechanism to explain such a rather generic trend. Typically, AF spin systems correspond to half-filled hardcore bosonic system, which easily get jammed into a local charge correlated structure. In the absence of strong frustration, the larger size of site-centered orbitals would benefit more from the kinetic energy and thus tend to be the dominant ground states. On the other hand, in the presence of strong frustration, bond-centered orbitals, having more space to maneuver collectively, are able to partially avoid the energy cost of the frustration and thus can eventually take over. In the 2D checkerboard lattice, another VBS state named P-VBS is known to appear in the 2D dominant (J 1 ≳ J 2 ) region (Fig. As a side note, in the XY -limit between J c and J c ′ [Fig. In summary, using PESS, a novel tensor network method, we demonstrate a large number of nearly degenerate states in the checkerboard AF system, related to the lower dimensional decoupling featured in this model, which implies additional phase transitions. Particularly in the 1D-dominant frustrated region, our calculation produces the long-sought CD-VBS state, which becomes the ground state at J 2 ≳ J 1 and then loses to the 1D AF correlated states at J 2 ≫ J 1 . We verify the stability of the VBS state via the introduction of a nematic background and find it resilient against a finite strength of nematicity. A simple understanding of our results can be provided by a bosonic picture. The picture also suggests that the CD-VBS state benefits from the charge repulsion (the S z S z ) effect, which we confirm by realizing a weaker CD-VBS state in the XY -limit of the model. Our results resolve a long-standing debate in the active field of quantum frustrated magnetism and showcase the rich phenomena near quantum phase transition in strongly correlated systems. [49] S.-H. We use a recent developed tensor network ground state wave-function ansatz, i.e., the projected entangled simplex states (PESS) FIG. The tensor network wave-function in the thermodynamic limit is constructed by repeating the translational invariant building blocks, i.e., unit cells in both horizontal and vertical directions in 2D. The numbers of the local ingredients T , S, and λ in one unit cell are usually not independent due to the geometric structures. For a checkerboard lattice, it is reasonable to choose a unit cell with 4n local tensors T , 2n core tensors S, and 8n bond vectors λ, with n is an integer. where H p is the local Hamiltonian with spin operator S i on i (i = A, B, C, D) (Fig. Using the tensor network state |Ψ⟩ with convergent T , S, and λ, the physical properties, e.g., bond energy, can be calculated through where O is any local operator. We evaluate it using a real space coarse-graining procedure known as the corner transfer matrix renormalization group (CTMRG) We first use a √ 2 × √ 2 unit cell with four local tensors T (n = 1) with different virtual bond dimension D form the tensors and set the time interval δτ = 0.02J -1 . The comparison between the PESS results (with and without FU) of the Heisenberg interaction on the checkerboard lattice and previous results from other methods are listed in Table At J 1 = 1, J 2 = 0, the model reduces to a 2D Heisenberg model, the ground state energy at D = 4 in our PESS calculation is already consistent with the Density Matrix Renormalization Group (DMRG) At J 1 = 0, the simplex tensor S is a direct tensor product of two iTEBD Schmidt matrices λ of the two independent directions: where S ′ ij,kl is the reshaped matrix form of the simplex tensor S ijkl . Thus the simplex tensor can be constructed by two independent Schmidt matrices perpendicular with each other. In principle, increasing the virtual bond dimension D (or Schmidt rank χ in 1D) can improve the results for any tensor network method. However, the choice of an ansatz following the geometric structure of the system can efficiently improve the calculation even at small D. With PESS on a checkerboard lattice, we obtain benchmark results of the ground state energies with small D and better results can be obtained through either FU or further increasing D. For the results shown in the main text, we use D = 4 with an 2 × 2 unit cell (n = 2 with eight local tensors) to compare the energies of different degenerate ground states (Fig. For the weakly coupled 1D AF SCC states, the different patterns are based on different local correlations along J 1 directions, not on the spin magnetic orders. To show this, we calculate the average magnetization on each site ⟩ of the SCC state at finite J 2 /J 1 and compare the results with those from the purely 1D Heisenberg chain at different D [Fig. With a 2 × 2 PESS unit cell, we obtain three SCC states with the "stripe" state has a √ 2 × √ 2 structure, while the "Néel*" and "zigzag" states have a 2 × 2 period. In fact, one can easily verify that these are the only SCC states within a 2 × 2 unit cell. More nearly degenerate SCC states might be found with larger PESS unit cell. We push the unit cell limit to a 4 × 4 structure with 32 local tensors inside and find more nearly degenerate SCC states, indeed. Figure The nearly degenerating behavior of the BCC/SCC-type states found in the main text also exists in the XY -limit. As shown in Fig. In the nearly degenerate BCC/SCC-type phase, both the Néel* and the zigzag correlated states have a 2 × 2 structure. We used (2 × 2) SCC and (2 × 2) ′ SCC to distinguish these two SCC states. For the SCC states with a 4 × 4 structure, another seven different correlated states appear. Here, we show that all the SCC states can be further classified by a combined nesting vector, i.e. [x, y] ≡ [(x, π), (π, y)] (π stands for the bosons occupied on every other lattice spacing), representing the repeating patterns of the vertical (horizontal) lines of bosons in the horizontal (vertical) directions. For example, the surprising zigzag state is labeled as [0, π] (abbr. of [(0, π), (π, π)]) with the vertical lines of bosons repeat themselves every lattice spacing horizontally and horizontal lines repeat every other lattice spacing vertically (Fig. We have shown that the nearly degenerate ground states can be interpreted by the bosonic picture. In all the SCC states, the bosons are occupied every other sites in the horizontal or vertical orbital directions (two J 2 bond directions). Meanwhile, there are two different types of J 1 bonds for each boson with equal probability: one is connect to a hole, the other is connect to another boson. In the BCC state, the crossed-dimer configuration is formed by two bosons in different orbital direction moving into the same plaquette with J 2 interactions. In this configuration, there are also two different types of J 1 bonds: one is the bonds inside the crossed-dimer plaquette, the other is those in between different crossed-dimer plaquette. Thus, the bond asymmetry is also appear in each J 1 direction. To further illustrate the efficiency of the bosonic interpretation, we discuss the higher energy states. For a SCC state, moving a boson to a hole, either through J 1 or J 2 bond will generate a configuration with two bosons connected by a J 2 bond [Fig. At J 2 ∼ J 1 , we find a meta-stable CDW state in the XY -limit. To illustrate the difference between the Heisenberg and the XY -limit, we start from a classical Néel configuration and evolve the state iteratively for both limits. Figure The CDW state in the XY -limit can be understood in the bosonic picture. In the J 1 ≳ J 2 region, the kinetic hopping along the J 1 and J 2 bond directions give opposite sizes of the same configuration with bosons occupied in the neighbor sites along J 1 directions in the wave-function (Fig. In the P-VBS state region, the plaquettes may sit either on the squares with or without J 2 bonds. The energies of both cases are lower than those of AF ordered configuration and the J 2 -direction BCC/SCC-type configurations. In Néel configuration, the system is evolved upto 4000 times and the energy is calculated at every ten steps. The energy ranges shown in both the Heisenberg and the XY cases are taken as 0.08J1. (a) In the Heisenberg limit, the state goes monotonous to the ground state, a P-VBS state (thin blue line). (b) In the XY -limit, before ended at the P-VBS state (the solid thin red line), the state first evolves to a meta-stable CDW state (dashed thin red line). the isotropic limit (J ′ 1 /J 1 = 1) and at J 2 ∼ J 1 , the PESS calculation favors the plaquette configurations on the squares with J 2 bonds. Figure Different experimental measurements on the pyrochlore material GeCu 2 O 4 results in controversial results. For example, both 1D AF correlation 