The microelectronics industry is pushing the fundamental limit on the physical size of individual elements to produce faster and more powerful integrated chips. These chips have nanoscale features that dissipate power resulting in nanoscale hotspots leading to device failures. To understand the reliability impact of the hotspots, the device needs to be tested under the actual operating conditions. Therefore, the development of high-resolution thermometry techniques is required to understand the heat dissipation processes during the device operation. Recently, several thermometry techniques have been proposed, such as radiation thermometry, thermocouple based contact thermometry, scanning thermal microscopy (SThM), scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and transition based threshold thermometers. However, most of these techniques have limitations including the need for extensive calibration, perturbation of the actual device temperature, low throughput, and the use of ultra-high vacuum. Here, we present a facile technique, which uses a thin film contact thermometer based on the phase change material Ge 2 Sb 2 T e 5 , to precisely map thermal contours from the nanoscale to the microscale. Ge 2 Sb 2 T e 5 undergoes a crystalline transition at T g with large changes in its electric conductivity, optical reflectivity and density. Using this approach, we map the surface temperature of a nanowire and an embedded micro-heater on the same chip where the scales of the temperature contours differ by three orders of magnitude. The spatial resolution can be as high as 20 nanometers thanks to the continuous nature of the thin film. The fundamental understanding of thermal dissipation in an integrated chip Here a novel technique, which uses a phase change material to map the temperature of an operational microelectronic device, is presented. It requires minimal effort in temperature calibration and the temperature contour can be mapped using both contact and non-contact modes such as AFM, SEM or optical microscopes To demonstrate the versatility and practicality of this technique, a recording head from a commercial hard disk drive is used. The head of the hard disk drive provides a unique platform for such studies as it has several embedded heat sources, which differ in heated area by three orders of magnitude Note that the nano-heater has a temperature coefficient of resistance (TCR) of 0.003/K, which is used to measure the average surface temperature. In this paper, it is quantitatively demonstrated that the temperature measured from the phase change temperature contour (PCTC) technique agrees well with the measured average surface temperature and the thermal simulation for both the micro-heater and the nano-heater. To demonstrate the technique, we first characterize the Joule heating of the nano-heater inside the head of the hard disk drives. The head surface is coated with a 22 nm thick layer of Ge 2 Sb 2 T e 5 thin film. The nano-heater is biased using a current source, across which the measured voltage drop is used to estimate the resistance increase of the nano-heater due to the dissipated Joule heat (Figure The amorphous Ge 2 Sb 2 T e 5 is a chalcogenide phase change material that crystallizes at T g ∼ 149 • C for a dwell time of 5 minutes. This crystallization is accompanied by an increase in density and volume reduction, where AFM topography measurement shows as a reduction in the film height. Figures where, T g is the calibrated Ge 2 Sb 2 T e 5 crystalline transition temperature for the dwell time of 300 seconds during which the nano-heater is powered on, P o is the nano-heater power at which the final transition boundary is measured, and P i is the previous power with P i < P o in the nano-heater. to develop. The temperature (T i ) at time t i is given by: where, k B is the Boltzmann constant, E A ∼ 2.6 eV is the activation energy Ge 2 Sb 2 T e 5 transition, T g ∼ 149 • C is the calibrated crystallization temperature at dwell time t cal =300 sec. It is worth noting that the temperatures of isotherms corresponding to shorter dwell times (t i < t cal ) are higher than T g . Figure To demonstrate the versatility of the PCTC technique, we now characterize the Joule heating of a much larger micro-heater embedded in the head of the hard disk drive. The temperature contour of the micro-heater is three orders of magnitude larger than that of the nano-heater embedded in the same chip (as shown in Figure Precise and relatively simple temperature calibration is a key advantage of the PCTC method compared to other techniques that require extensive temperature calibration. To calibrate the crystallization temperature T g of the phase change material Ge 2 Sb 2 T e 5 , we rely on a pronounced structural property change at the phase change condition (Figure The uncertainty in the temperature derived from this PCTC technique is primarily due to the fact that the crystallization rate of the phase change material does not have a large abrupt jump at a single temperature (as in a first order phase transition). As a result, the full temperature history of the sample, not just the last power used, can influence the size of the observed contour (see Supplementary section 5). For both the nano-heater and the micro-heater, the estimated temperature step is kept at 10 K, which leads to a slight under-prediction of the temperature by around 2 K at the 149 • C crystallization condition. It is noteworthy that in most other high resolution temperature mapping techniques, the application is limited to the large scale devices. Here we demonstrated the thermal measurements of the two heaters that produced thermal contours with dimensions that differ by three orders of magnitude, while maintaining sub 20 nm resolution in both cases. This technique is extremely versatile and does not require the use of expensive microscopes like STEM. At the microscale, even an inexpensive optical microscope can be used to map the temperature of the hotspots or heat sources in operating microelectronics devices. Finally, the limitations of the presented PCTC technique are discussed. Although the technique is versatile and can be used for nanoscale to microscale spatial heat sources with minimal calibration challenges, it has two main limitations. First, the areal contour represents the isotherm at T g , and to extract the temperature gradient one needs to perform mapping for at least two different power levels or track the phase change with time. Secondly, the technique is limited to a device temperature higher than the crystallization temperature of the deposited phase change material. In our case, Ge 2 Sb 2 T e 5 crystallizes at temperature of 149 • C for the dwell time of 5 minutes is used. Both embedded heaters are able to reach temperatures higher than this T g . For other systems where reaching a similar temperature would be difficult or impossible, the issue could be overcome by choosing a different composition or phase change materials with lower T g To summarize, we introduce a versatile phase-change-material-based temperature mapping technique for operational microelectronic devices that can spatially resolve temperature from nanoscale to microscale dimensions. It can be used to characterize surface temperatures with neglectable temperature interference due to the deposited measurement film and with minimal calibration. A thorough understanding of the heat dissipation in various nanoscale devices, such as the aforementioned nano-heater, may lead to more efficient and powerful integrated chips, and hence holds great economic value to the industry. The microelectronic device is held on a metal fixture with electrical pins. The components inside the device such as the heaters are powered by Keithley 2602 SYSTEM SourceMeter, which is controlled by a Python script. A 22 nm thin film of Ge2Sb2Te5 is sputtered on the surface of the device. The topography change or the reflectivity change of the thin film due to the heaters are measured by Digital Instruments Dimension 3100 AFM or an optical microscope respectively. In the temperature calibration of the Ge2Sb2Te5, a silicon wafer with a photolithography defined 22 nm thick Ge2Sb2Te5 layer is heated in a customized copper chamber, where the temperature is measured by a type-K thermocouple. The thickness of the layer is also measured by the AFM. Thermal simulations of the micro-heater and nano-heater devices in Figure 