A macroscopically nominal flat surface is rough at the nanoscale level and consists of nanoasperities. Therefore, the frictional properties of the macroscale-level rough surface are determined by the mechanical behaviors of nanoasperity contact pairs under shear. In this work, we first used molecular dynamics simulations to study the non-adhesive shear between single contact pairs. Subsequently, to estimate the friction coefficient of rough surfaces, we implemented the frictional behavior of a single contact pair into a Greenwood-Williamson-type statistical model. By employing the present multiscale approach, we used the size, rate, and orientation effects, which originated from nanoscale dislocation plasticity, to determine the dependence of the macroscale friction coefficient on system parameters, such as the surface roughness and separation, loading velocity, and direction. Our model predicts an unconventional dependence of the friction coefficient on the normal contact load, which has been observed in nanoscale frictional tests. Therefore, this model represents one step toward understanding some of the relevant macroscopic phenomena of surface friction at the nanoscale level. orientation, statistical model. The empirical mathematical summary of Amonton's first (friction force is proportional to the applied normal load) and second (friction force is independent of the apparent contact area) friction laws is the relation F = μN, where F is the friction force, N is the applied normal load, and μ is the coefficient of friction (COF). Even though Amonton's law works well for dry friction problems in traditional engineering, the reason for this remains unclear for quite a long time. In Bowden and Tabor's work Much attention has been dedicated to studying the linear dependence parameter k between the real contact area A and the normal load N. The Greenwood-Williamson (GW) statistical model Examples include using the simplified elliptic model It should be noted that the framework discussed above based on k and τ only attributes the frictional process to the flattened asperities (Figure , where T i , N i , and ⟨ ⟩ represent the tangential force of an asperity, normal force of an asperity, and the combined average, respectively. This simple interpretation of the COF is essentially consistent with the averaging method in statistical mechanics: express the macroscopic quantities of the system at thermal equilibrium as a statistical average of microscopic functions over the canonical ensemble. Furthermore, in statistical mechanics, such a combined average can be replaced by a time average over the simulation period if, in the simulation, the fraction of time that the system spends in each state satisfies the Boltzmann distribution. For our friction problem, we assume that the rough surfaces are sufficiently large such that all pair configurations are equally likely to be found. Therefore, we can replace the combined average by the time average of a simulation where all plowing asperity configurations are covered. Such a simulation can be the plowing of a single asperity, as shown in Figure where the deformable asperity (colored in blue) is fixed at the bottom, and the rigid asperity (colored in gray) moves rightwards under a constant velocity V. This simulation will contain, for example, all six configurations shown in Figure where t cont represents the contact time, that is, the time duration between the instances the two asperities form contact and lose contact. Using the above idea, Mulvihill et al. To the best of our knowledge, the connection between single asperity plowing responses at the atomistic scale and the rough surface frictional property is missing. Herein, we perform a multiscale study. For the small length scale (i.e., asperity scale), we study in detail the single asperity response during the whole plowing process by performing MD simulations. The effects of interference depth, asperity size, sliding velocity, and crystal orientation are considered. For the large length scale (surface length scale), the single asperity response is utilized to predict the COF during surface sliding through a GW-type statistical modeling. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the methodology and model description. Next, the MD simulation results of single asperity plowing are discussed in Section 3. Section 4 focuses on the prediction of the COF based on statistical modeling. A discussion and concluding remarks are given in Section 5. The effects of crystalline orientation and numerical fitting of the asperity responses are discussed in Appendices A and B, respectively. The large-scale atomic/molecular massively parallel simulator The radius R of the hemisphere varies from 5a to 50a, with a representing the lattice constant of 3.615 Å. The lengths of the substrate are 4R in the x and y directions (i.e., l x and l y ), and the thickness l z is 0.8R. The size of the substrate is large enough such that no dislocations can reach the lateral and bottom boundaries during the entire plowing process. Plowing is conducted in a displacement controlled manner by moving the upper rigid asperity of the same size along the y direction under a constant velocity V, while the bottom of the substrate is fixed. The interference/plowing depth is chosen as h = α • R. The interaction between asperities is simulated by a repulsive potential with a force of magnitude Here, K is a constant that is related to the effective stiffness of the rigid asperity indenter, and is set to 10 eV/Å 3 , R is the radius of the indenter, and ri is the distance from the ith atom to the center of the rigid asperity (Figure a being the lattice constant) with the different interference depth h (i.e., the asperity overlap). A canonical ensemble NVT (constant number of atoms, volume and temperature) is imposed where a Nose ́-Hoover thermostat is used to maintain the system at a constant average temperature of 0.01 K, so that thermal effects are effectively eliminated. This allows us to focus solely on the effect of the plowing depth and loading velocity on the asperity plasticity. In the analysis, dislocation tracking is performed using the dislocation extraction algorithm (DXA) During the asperity plowing process, the normal (along the z direction) and tangential (along the y direction) interaction forces between the asperities are recorded. The tangential force, opposite to the sliding direction, and the compression load along the z direction are defined as positive. These forces, Fy and Fz, are averaged over the whole plowing process, as explained in Eq. ( Here, t0 and t1 are the moments when the asperities come in contact and lose contact, respectively. For asperities of different sizes, normalized forces are also introduced as follows: where E is the Young's modulus of copper and is assumed to be 120 GPa in this study. In this section, we focus on the single asperity mechanical response under different conditions, such as the interference depth, asperity size, and plowing velocity. The mechanical response of the asperity is then analyzed based on the evolution of the dislocation microstructure and atomic deformation. The effect of the interference depth on the mechanical response of the asperity was studied during the single asperity plowing process. The deformable asperity is orientated as The interference depth h is normalized by the asperity radius R: α = h/R, and the dimensionless overlap α is in the range from 0.05 to 0.8. In Figure for α = 0.05; the tangential force exhibits anti-symmetry across the entire plowing distance. The main reason is that the contact interface is essentially frictionless, and there is not enough plasticity generated in the deformable asperity. The deformation process is mostly elastic, which has an antisymmetric feature for the tangential force. The dislocation microstructures at peak forces are also shown in Figure We now discuss the effect of the asperity size on its mechanical behavior under plowing for a plowing depth α = 0.5. As shown in Figure The total length of dislocations can be calculated using DXA (4). Figure The physical interpretation of this phenomenon is that for the same dimensionless plowing depth , the average strength of a "statistical asperity ensemble" (i.e., the average strength of asperities with all possible contact configurations) becomes size independent. If one defines the friction coefficient as the ratio of the tangential strength to the normal strength, in our simulation system, the friction coefficient exhibits size-dependent behaviors when the asperity size is smaller than 7.2 nm (20a). Hereafter, we decide to only consider large asperities because for them, the effect of size is not important, and this enables the study of other features/aspects, such as surface roughness and loading velocity in a cleaner manner. Subsequently, we focus on the effect of the plowing velocity on the mechanical responses of the asperity. The normal and tangential forces for different velocities are shown in Figure 1) With increasing plowing velocity, the dislocation microstructure becomes denser, as confirmed by the evolution of the dislocation density in Figure dislocation nucleation and dislocation propagation; the dominant mechanism depends on the external loading rate 2) The material pile up at the right side of the asperity grows with increasing plowing velocity. This is caused by massive dislocation nucleation in the asperity and subsequent dislocation annihilation at the surface. The shear stress distribution in the asperity caused by plowing has a high value front ahead of the rigid asperity (Ref. In the previous section, we focused on the mechanical response of a single asperity under different loading conditions. In this section, we aim to utilize the single asperity response to predict the rough surface response. Macroscopic rough surfaces consist of various asperities of different heights, and the surface property, such as COF, is the integrand of all asperity pairs. The GW-type model Here, σ is the standard deviation of the asperity heights. The distance between the asperity peak on the rigid wavy and the mean asperity height of the deformation surface is d, which is determined by the normal force that puts two surfaces into contact before sliding. A larger normal force results in a smaller d. To obtain the macroscopic contact forces (i.e., the normal and tangential forces), we assume that all asperities deform independently. The plowing/interference depth for an asperity of height z is z-d when z > d; therefore, for the macroscopic contact with N0 asperities on each surface and the total normalized (normalized by ER 2 shown in Eq. ( By substituting the single asperity response in the above equations, the COF can then be calculated by F ts F ns ⁄ or F ts * F ns * ⁄ , where the macroscopic normalized tangential and normal forces are F ts * = F ts N 0 ⁄ and F ns * = F ns N 0 ⁄ , respectively. Here, we note that our study is multiscale in the sense that the mechanical response on the asperity level is integrated to obtain the mechanical response of the surface level. It can be seen that the statistical model requires a single asperity response to be a function of the asperity height z (alternatively α, since α = (zd)/R); therefore, we have carried out a large number of simulations to fit the functional forms for single asperity responses. Details can be found in Appendix B. Because the single asperity responses also strongly depend on the crystal orientation, we have also studied the orientation effect. Details can be found in Appendix A. Overall, the functional forms are fitted for three different loading velocities (when the crystal orientations were the same), for different crystal orientations (under the same loading velocity). This enables us to study the effect of loading (sliding) velocity and crystal orientation on the friction coefficient using a statistical model. As shown in Figure separation distance d: a smaller d results in larger forces. It can also be seen that both forces depend on the surface roughness (which is defined as σ/R): a rougher surface will lead to larger forces. Furthermore, in the inset, we show the sensitivity of the forces with respect to d. It can be clearly seen that the tangential force is more sensitive to d than the normal force. In Figure In this study, we used a GW-type friction model to create a multiscale model for obtaining MD simulations are performed to investigate the non-adhesive plowing of a single asperity. The effects of interference depth, asperity size, relative plowing velocity, and crystal orientation are discussed as follows: 1) the friction forces (frictional strength) are size dependent, and the friction coefficient increases with increasing asperity size. However, it becomes insensitive to the asperity size when the asperity is larger than a critical size (radius R > ~7.2 nm); (2) we find a critical plowing velocity below which the asperity responses exhibit weak velocity dependence; (3) when the plowing direction is parallel to the crystal close-packed plane, it is easy to plow the asperity. Using the statistical model, we studied the frictional behavior of rough surfaces. The salient conclusions are as follows: 1. Smaller surface separation d yields a higher COF, which contradicts Amonton's law, but is consistent with nanoscale experimental observations. 2. The COF increases with the increasing surface roughness. When the surface is rougher, the COF is more sensitive to d. 3. A higher sliding velocity results in a higher COF. At the same time, the dependence on the sliding velocity strongly relies on the surface separation distance d, which can be incorporated into the rate and state friction framework. The crystal orientation has a clear influence on the COF; when the atomic close-packed surface is parallel to the sliding direction, the COF is smaller. sizes with different interference depths will move under the same sliding velocities. Thus, in order to obtain the surface response, it is necessary to quantitatively pre-acquire the mechanical responses of asperity pairs. In this appendix, we aim to provide fitting formulas for the asperity mechanical response-based analysis in the above subsections. As shown in Figure Similarly, the time-averaged normalized average forces in the asperities of the other three orientations at a plowing velocity of 36 m/s are also fitted in the same way, and the fitting parameters are summarized in Table 