High temperature superconducting dynamos are capable of low loss contactless pumping large dc currents into superconducting magnet coils. We present a mathematical model of such devices and use it for computing the two-dimensional loop currents and electric fields induced by a dynamo rotor-mounted permanent magnet in a thin superconducting stator strip. Two numerical methods for thin film superconductivity problems, the mixed finite element method and the fast Fourier transform based method, are employed and compared. We find voltages generated in the stator under open circuit conditions and losses in the stator. It is shown that if the length of a permanent magnet is comparable to or smaller than the strip width, the one-dimensional model employed in the previous works can be inaccurate. HE high temperature superconducting (HTS) dynamo proposed in Two types of mathematical models have been employed for numerical simulations. Models of the first type use a simplified lumped circuit-type description of the HTS dynamo conductor stator, the sheet current density in such models depends on only one spacial variable. A comparison of various numerical methods derived for this one-dimensional (1D) mathematical model was presented in Unlike the previous works, here we solve the 2D superconducting film eddy current problem in the film plane and compute the loop currents induced in the stator strip by the moving PM of a finite length. We calculate also the electric field and use it to estimate the main characteristic of a dynamo, the averaged voltage generated in the stator under the open circuit condition. Our results are compared to those obtained using the 1D model. Let a uniformly magnetized PM having a rectangular prism shape be attached to the HTS dynamo rotor rotating counter clockwise around the x -axis, see Fig. where 0  is the permeability of vacuum, r is the matrix of rotation. We neglect the stator strip thickness and present the strip as the 2D domain where 2a and 2b are the strip width and length, respectively, s z R d =+, and d is the air gap. We assume the supercon- ducting film is characterized by the power current-voltage relation between the component of the electric field tangential to the film, e , and the sheet current density j : Vm -1 , the power n is a given constant, c j is the critical sheet current density. By the Faraday law is the Green function. In addition, the sheet current density should satisfy the conditions 0 in , 0 where ν is a normal to the boundary S  of S . Equations ( We note also that due to in , S i.e. Numerical solution of 2D thin film problems in superconductivity can be obtained for a formulation in terms of the stream (magnetization) function using the finite Fourier series To circumvent this difficulty a mixed variational formulation for thin film problems, written in terms of two variables, the electric field and the magnetization function, has been derived Completely different numerical method, using the method of lines for integration in time and the fast Fourier transform (FFT) based approximation in space, has been proposed for thin film magnetization problems in The latter is true for a rectangular film, the dynamo stator, considered in our work. Using the 2D HTS dynamo model we compare these two numerical methods, the mixed finite element method Let us replace the curl-conforming electric field e by an auxiliary divergence-conforming variable q setting , x y y x q e q e = = -. Then   = -  eq and, using (4), ( Multiplying this equation by a sufficiently smooth function ()  r satisfying |0 S   = , integrating and using Green's theorem, we arrive at the variational equation , where ( , ) d S =  f g f g r is the scalar product of two vector functions, similarly for the scalar case, and the bilinear form The simplest approximation of the mixed variational formulation ( uses the nonconforming piecewise linear elements for g (linear in each triangular element and continuous in the middle of its edges) with the piecewise constant vectorial elements for q . Here m is the time layer number and m  is the time step. We note that this scheme has the second order approximation in time; that is the only difference with , where i is the iteration number and and an over-relaxation to accellerate convergence. We refer to Extending the sheet current density j and magnetization function by zero outside the film domain S in the plane Taking Fourier transform and noting that where where the unknown shift C is determined by the integral condition d0 out S g =  r . If g for time t is known, the sheet current density is determined using To integrate The problem can be formulated as follows: find z h in out S such that equation ( Initial approximation to this problem solution is based on assignment to out S a high constant resistivity out  to suppress the appearance of stray currents in this domain. Using such an approximation alone is known to be not fully satisfactory: if the artificial resistivity out  is not sufficiently large, the stray current appears, if it is high the problem becomes stiff and its integration in time slows down. Hence it is better to choose a moderately high out . The role of out  in this scheme is twofold: it provides a good initial approximation for further iterations and, as showed our numerical experiments, is also necessary to suppress the stray current in a very narrow layer near the film boundary S  . For practical implementation of this scheme a regular xy NN  grid should be defined in a rectangular computation domain containing and several times larger than the strip domain S . Values of all variables are defined at the grid nodes; the continuous Fourier transform and its inverse are replaced by their discrete analogs on this grid and computed using the FFT algorithm. The 2D curl operators f  and  f are computed in the Fourier space with the Gaussian smoothing to suppress high frequency oscillations. As in All numerical simulations in our work were done in Matlab R2020a on a PC with the Intel (R) Core (TM) i7-4770 CPU@ 3,40 Hz and 16 GB RAM. We solved the 2D HTS dynamo problem with the same parameters as in the 1D problem in In the 1D model, for estimating the induced voltage an "active zone length" is introduced and assumed, somewhat arbitrary, equal to the PM length, 2u . Our 2D model accounts for the real PM length. The considered part of the stator should be long enough to include the area of any singificant current density and electric field; our simulations (see below) showed that for this PM the chosen stator length is sufficient. We assumed the open circuit condition and zero initial sheet current density. For the mixed method the iterations were performed till their convergence with the relative tolerance To compare the two methods, for each of them we performed simulation of two cycles of rotor revolution using several meshes. Meshes for the mixed method where nonuniform (refined in the subdomain {( , x y x a y a  containing the significant electric field area). The computation times per cycle and the mean voltage, which is the most important characteristic of a superconducting dynamo, are presented in Table The mixed method also needs no extended computation domain and allows using a nonuniform mesh. For finer grids the FFT based method quickly leads to a stiff ODE system and the computation time increases (Table The calculated averaged voltages (see Fig. Simulated distributions of the electric field component x e and sheet current density j for three characteristic positions of the rotor during its second turn are presented in Figures Local loss can cause thermal instabilities, appearance and propagation of normal zones (see Pt =  e j r (Fig. This paper was already prepared for submission when there appeared a preprint with a similar HTS dynamo model by Ghabeli, Pardo and Kapolka, "3D modeling of a superconducting dynamo-type flux pump" Two numerical methods, the mixed finite element method The 1D model of an HTS dynamo A movie showing the simulated evolving distribution of the electric field is available as https://www.math.bgu.ac.il/~leonid/FEM_Ex_movie.avi