We have used a neon focused-ion-beam to fabricate both nanoscale Nb Dayem bridges and NbN phase-slip nanowires located at the short-circuited end of quarter-wavelength coplanar waveguide resonators. The Dayem bridge devices show fluxtunability and intrinsic quality factor exceeding 10,000 at 300 mK up to local fields of at least 60 mT. The NbN nanowires show signatures of incoherent quantum tunnelling of flux at 300 mK. Superconducting nanowires with cross-sectional dimensions comparable to or less than the coherence length display nonlinear transport characteristics which can be exploited in quantum and classical electronics applications. The Dayem bridge For quantum device applications it is critical that dissipative loss mechanisms at non-zero frequencies (which, for example, suppress the T1 coherence lifetime) are minimised. The technological challenge is therefore to fabricate superconducting nanowires with widths a few tens of nanometres without significantly increasing the dissipative loss rate above that of the unpatterned film. Focused-ion-beams (FIB) are widely used for nanofabrication of superconductors Here we demonstrate the use of neon-FIB milling for fabrication of superconducting nanowires. We have created nanoscale superconducting loops containing either (a) Dayem bridges in Nb films or (b) phase-slip nanowires (operating here in the incoherent regime) in disordered NbN films. These nanowires are embedded within quarter-wavelength superconducting coplanar waveguide (CPW) resonators so measurements of the resonant frequency and quality factor enable, respectively, the nonlinear properties of and losses in the nanowires to be extracted. The impedance Zin seen at the input to a transmission line of length l which is terminated by a load impedance ZL that is not equal to the characteristic impedance Z0 of the line is given by where  is the frequency and c is the phase velocity. At resonance the imaginary part of Zin is zero. Hence, modulation of the load inductance ZL results in tuning of the resonant frequency of the transmission line. A DC-SQUID has flux-tunable inductance given by where Ic is the SQUID critical current at zero flux,  is the applied flux and 0 is the flux quantum. In the case of a SQUID-terminated transmission line the load impedance ZL is i2Lk. If the Josephson junctions of the SQUID are replaced by two parallel superconducting nanowires then the form of the flux-modulation of the total inductive load is modified. In the case of a highly disordered superconductor such as niobium nitride there is a large nonlinear kinetic inductance which varies with DC current, I, as Therefore the total kinetic inductance of the combined loopnanowire system is given by where I*1 and I*2 are the current scales which characterise the nonlinearity of the nanowires and the wider part of the loop respectively. These current scales are related to the transport critical current and so are related to each other by geometric factor. Since I =  / Lk, the flux-dependence of the total kinetic inductance can be calculated. A GFIS source Films were grown by d.c. magnetron sputtering from a Nb target onto silicon (in the case of Nb) or c-axis oriented sapphire (in the case of NbN) substrates. For Nb deposition the sputter atmosphere is 100% argon, whereas for NbN deposition it is 50% argon -50% nitrogen. The film thickness is ~50 nm for the Nb films and ~10 nm for NbN; the smaller thickness for NbN was chosen because the phase fluctuations leading to quantum phase-slip are enhanced in thinner films. The larger-scale features of our devices were fabricated by electron-beam lithography and reactive ion etching in SF6. At this stage an r.f. feedline and quarter-wavelength CPW Nanowires were fabricated by FIB milling the precursor microwires to the desired width using a 15-kV Ne beam with a current of ~2 pA. A dose of ≈2 nCμm -2 was sufficient to clear the 50-nm Nb film, while a dose of 1 nCμm -2 was used for the NbN devices. Ion milling on resistive or insulating substrates results in the build-up of positive charge on devices. This charge repels the incoming beam and can limit resolution. Charging effects during neon milling were mitigated by connecting the sample to a copper electrode via aluminium wire bonds. This was found to be particularly important for the NbN samples due to the high normal-state resistivity of niobium nitride thin films together with the insulating sapphire substrate. The sputter yield using the Ne beam was sufficient to fabricate nanowires in less than a minute; the short time was important to avoid charging-induced drift. Measurements were performed in a 3 He cryostat at a temperature T ≈ 300 mK using an r.f. vector network analyser. Magnetic field was applied using a superconducting solenoid and a precision current source. In Fig. In Fig. Fig. The magnetic-field dependence of the spectral response of this device is shown in Fig. The dashed line in Fig. We used neon FIB to fabricate nanowires of width less than 50 nm which exhibit nonlinear quantum effects whilst maintaining low loss. The field resilience of the Nb Dayem bridges (shown here up to a perpendicular local field of 60 mT) suggests that they may be useful for application as a readout technology for spin qubits This work is supported by EPSRC (grant references EP/H005544/1, EP/K024701/1, EP/L015242/1 and EP/P510270/1).