A normal-diffusion theory for heat transfer in many-body systems via carriers of thermal photons is developed. The thermal conductivity tensor is rigorously derived from fluctuational electrodynamics as a coefficient of diffusion term for the first time. In addition, a convection-like heat transfer behavior is revealed in systems of asymmetric distribution of particles, indicating violation of Fourier's law for such system. Considering the central role of thermal conductivity in heat transfer, this work paves a way for understanding, analysis and manipulation of heat transfer in nanoparticle system via thermal photons with many-body interactions. Heat transfer via thermal photons at subwavelength separation distance (or near-field) can surpass by several orders of magnitude the heat flux exchanged between two blackbodies due to photon tunneling Though the lack of a rigorous foundation of normal-diffusion theory, the kinetic theory for thermal photons were applied to calculate the photonic (radiative) thermal conductivity in manybody system In this letter, a normal-diffusion theory for heat transfer in many-body system is established rigorously based on fluctuational electrodynamics formulation. Both uniform and non-uniform distribution of particles are considered. A first-order term is discovered to appear in the governing equation for system with asymmetric distribution of particles, which reveals a convection-like heat transfer behavior of thermal photons. The photonic thermal conductivity tensor is derived naturally as the coefficient of the diffusion term. To start the analysis, a many-body system in thermal non-equilibrium, composed of nanoparticles of different temperature exchanging energy only with thermal photons, is considered, which is depicted in Fig. where the subscript i denotes the i-th particle (located at i r ) exchanging heat with particle P (located at P r ,) as shown in Fig. [J] is the internal energy of the particle, P C [J/K] is the particle heat capacity, iP U  is the photonic thermal conductance between particle i and P, defined as where iP Q  [W] is the net exchanged heat flux between i and P, P i i l =rr is the separation distance between particle i and the particle P, i T and TP are the temperature of particle i and particle is the transferred photonic heat flux by particle i at T to particle P, where ( ) iP  is the near-field transmission coefficient between particle i and P, which can be calculated based on coupled dipole approach for small particles as considering both the contributions of electric and magnetic polarizations of particles, where k is the wave vector,  and H  are the electric and magnetic polarizability (can be obtained from the extinction cross section with the help of the first order Lorenz-Mie coefficients are the Green's functions in many particles system. For particle made of dielectrics, the magnetic polarization is very weak and its contribution can be neglected, Eq. ( Assuming the temperature distribution is locally continuous in the system, the temperature of the i-th particle ( i T ) can be approximated from TP as ( ) is a unit vector pointing from particle P to particle i. According to Eqs. ( Omitting the high order terms and substitute Eq. ( Consider a virtual cell with volume Vcell occupied by the particle P (sketched in Fig. where non-loc [J/m 3 ] are the continuum-scale physical parameters, the symbol h stands for a heat transfer coefficient vector accounting for asymmetric transfer process (called here asymmetrical photonic heat transfer coefficient, APHTC), K stands for the thermal conductivity tensor of thermal photons accounting for diffusion transfer process, S is the volumetric heat source and E is the energy density. . Substituting of Eq. ( to Eq. ( where the APHTC vector loc  h and the photonic thermal conductivity tensor loc K are defined respectively as ( ) ( , ( )) ( ) ( ) Equation ( where the APHTC vector loc h is given as r e e e rr r r e e r r e e rr . ( Note that the obtained governing equation (Eq. ( The obtained divergence-form normal-diffusion equation (Eq. ( The derivation indicates that heat transfer in many-body system via thermal photons not only contains a diffusion process, but also a convection process. The latter shows the heat transfer has a preferential direction, caused by the asymmetric distribution of particles in the system. From the derivation, the thermal conductivity tensor of thermal photons ( loc K ) is revealed naturally as the coefficient of the diffusion term, and which is the only parameter characterize the heat transfer process for uniform (isotropic) distributed particulate systems (where loc 0 = h ), demonstrating the validity of Fourier's law for the diffusion process. However, if loc 0  h , only the thermal conductivity loc K is insufficient to characterize both the diffusion and convection-type heat transfer processes, indicating the violation of the Fourier's law. In the following, we apply the developed normal-diffusion theory to analyze the steady-state heat transfer in 1D, 2D and 3D nanoparticle networks in vacuum. The calculated temperature field distribution based on the normal-diffusion theory are verified by comparison with the results solved directly from the exact fluctuational electrodynamics formulation Firstly, photonic heat transfer in one-dimensional linear chains of uniform distribution of particles are considered. The left and right end of the chains are connected to hot (at 400 K) and cold reservoir (at 300 K), respectively, as shown in the inset of Fig. Structure information of the particle chains and optical properties of the materials considered in this work are consistent with that of the Refs. Finally, the normal-diffusion theory is applied to 2D and 3D nanoparticle systems, to demonstrate the derived Eq. ( The material of the nanoparticles is SiC and the radius is 100 nm. The photonic thermal conductivity is evaluated at system temperature 300 K. The photonic thermal conductivity of 1D linear chains is also shown for reference. From computational resources consideration, the calculations are performed for systems of the size of 1000 nanoparticles. As shown in Fig. The results illustrate the possibility of designing the photonic thermal conductivity by structure optimization. In summary, a normal-diffusion theory for heat transfer in nanoparticle systems via thermal photons is developed. Interestingly, a first-order term appears in the normal-diffusion equation for the system with asymmetrical distribution of particles, which reveals a convection-like heat transfer behavior, indicating violation of Fourier's law for such system. The photonic thermal conductivity tensor is derived as the coefficient of diffusion term and a new formula (Eq. ( The support of this work by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51976045) is gratefully acknowledged. i T . It is noted that iP U  is a function of i T , TP and i l . In the following, the governing equation with ARHTC vector and photonic thermal conductivity tensor depending only on TP (local parameters) is derived. By using Taylor expansion of , () ii lT  to the second order at TP, iP U  can be rewritten as