Shearing activities in FCC-architected materials were identified. • Significant strengthening and stabilisation induced polygrain-like Architected materials built on ordered arrangements of internal structures are lightweight and excellent at bearing load and absorbing impact energy, enabling their wide applications in the fields of aerospace, automobiles, medical devices, packaging and infrastructures A transformative approach of designing new extraordinary damage tolerant architected materials (coined meta-crystals) was recently proposed to successfully translate the metallurgical grain boundary hardening mechanisms in crystalline materials to eliminate the post-yield collapse in lattice materials by designing polygrain-like structures Moreover, our previous study interestingly showed that the yield strength of meta-crystals increases with a reduction in the size of meta-grains, and such a correlation can be described by an empirical model that is similar to the Hall-Petch relationship found for polycrystalline metal Therefore, this study will investigate the role of boundary coherency on the transmission of shear bands across meta-grains, providing insights into the boundary strengthening in architected materials. In particular, the study examines if there was a correlation between the type of boundary and strength of meta-crystals. In this study, shear band systems in differently orientated lattice structures inspired by a facecentred-cubic (FCC) crystal were studied and identified. In particular, buckling analysis was done to explain and predict the shearing activities in single-grain-like meta-crystals. Subsequently, meta-crystals (mimicking polygrains) containing numbers of meta-grains ranging from one to sixty-four were designed and tested to study the shear band propagation in orientated lattice meso-structures and transmission across meta-grain boundaries. The role of boundary and its coherency on shearing activities, yield strength and hardening are revealed and discussed. A cubic unit cell with dimension of 5 × 5 × 5mm 3 (shown in Fig. Whereas, in the right meta-grain, the unit cell was rotated by the same magnitude in the same sequence, but in the anti-clockwise rotation direction (Fig. The designed meta-crystal models were fabricated using Fused Deposition Modelling (FDM) 3D printer (Ultimaker 2) with polylactic acid (PLA) filament obtained from RS components. Some main printing parameters were given as followings: layer thickness of 0.1mm, printing speed of 30mm • s -1 , nozzle travel speed of 120mm • s -1 , nozzle diameter of 0.4mm , printing temperature of 210°C and build plate temperature of 60°C. The build direction was parallel to the Z-axis shown in Fig. Compression tests were carried out by a 100kN Zwick testing machine at a strain rate of 0.001s -1 at room temperature. Lubricant (dry molybdenum disulphide) was used to minimise the effect of friction between lattices and compression plates. The loading direction was parallel to the Z-axis shown in Fig. Images of the front face of the meta-crystal (parallel to global X-Z plane shown in Fig. The series of captured images during the deformation were analysed by Digital Image Correlation (DIC) via a commercial software DaVis with following settings: image size of 6000 × 4000 pixels, subset size of 101 × 101 pixels and a step size of 25 pixels. The mechanical properties of the base material were obtained by uniaxial tensile test on specimens designed according to ISO 527 standard. Specimens were fabricated by FDM using the same printing parameters as the meta-crystals. Average elastic modulus E s and yield stress σ y_s of the base material were calculated from three tensile stress-strain curves, giving E s = 1190.4MPa and σ y_s = 47.6MPa. To understand the deformation behaviours of lattices under loading, we performed force analyses on the struts of FCC unit cells orientated to different directions with respect to the loading direction. Fig. ] struts belong to a group of 0〉 struts, (c) force resolution applied on strut. Finite Element Analysis (FEA) was carried out to study the deformation behaviour of internal architected struts in single meta-crystals using Abaqus/Standard to assist DIC analyses. Two simplified lattice models, namely FCC45 and FCC60, are designed for FEA with dimensions of 25 × 15 × 7.42mm 3 , in which FCC unit cell with side length of 5mm was used (Fig. Lattice frame structure for boundary is comprised by rectangular units with dimensions of 3.57 × 3.71mm 2 (Fig. Two rigid plates, namely top and bottom plate, were created and meshed by R3D4 rigid elements with seeds size of 2mm. Tie constraints were applied for top and bottom lattice nodes that are in contact with the top and bottom plates, respectively (Fig. The stress-strain responses of single meta-crystals with different orientations regarding to loading directions are shown in Fig. To acquire in-depth understanding on the activation of these shearing systems in the metacrystals, critical force for buckling of individual struts (Fig. 0〉 struts with S = 14.14 which is smaller than S c . Thus, 〈1 0 0〉 struts should tend to buckle first, leading to shear band formation along directions on planes perpendicular to 〈1 0 0〉 in the FCC-inspired meta-crystals. Moreover, critical buckling forces along global Z-axis for [0 1 0] and [1 0 0] struts (Fig. In contrast to very well-defined shear activities in FCC30 (Fig. ] struts were highly rotated, forming a localisation of deformation along {2 0 0}〈0 1 1〉 shear band that is consistent with the shear band observation from DIC analyses (Fig. The effect of meta-grain boundary is initially revealed by comparing two meta-crystals containing one and two meta-grains individually, i.e. single meta-crystal and bi-meta-crystal, respectively (Fig. Interestingly, however, the measured yield strength and the firstly reached peak strength of the bi-meta-crystal was slightly higher than that of the single meta-crystal, highlighting the role of the boundary separating the two meta-grains. In addition, although both meta-crystals show softening behaviour after reaching the yield stress, the post-yield collapse in the bi-meta-crystal was much less severe. The hardening rate (measured by the variation of flow stress ∆σ over a strain range ∆ε = 0.01 ) was calculated to quantify the improvement in stabilising the deformation behaviour of meta-crystals (Fig. for the single meta-crystal wass almost double than that (18.3MPa) of the bi-meta-crystal, suggesting the stress drop was much less severe in the bi-meta-crystal. In addition, Fig. at ε = 0.3) was quantified and plotted against to demonstrate the effect of meta-grain boundaries on the strain hardening of meta-crystals. It was found that σ ε=0.3 = 8 + 43 √d well described the link between σ ε=0.3 and the size of meta-grain. k = 43 higher than ratio 14.46 for normalised yield strength suggests that meta-grains boundaries were even more influential in plastic deformation (Fig. The propagation and spatial distribution of shear bands were studied using DIC analyses to understand the role of meta-grain boundaries on the behaviours of meta-crystals during plastic deformation. Fig. For polygrain alloys, it is suggested that the coherency of lattice at grain boundaries is one of the governing factors in the slip transmission, and hence the strengthening induced by grain boundaries The boundary connectivity depends on the types of boundary (namely tilt and twist types). According to the lattice orientation relationship used in the design of meta-crystals in this study, boundaries in the presented meta-crystals can be classified into three groups: group-1 (parallel to Y-Z plane), group-2 (parallel to X-Y plane) and group-3 (parallel to X-Z plane), where group-1 and -2 were of the tilt type and group-3 was of the twist type (Fig. This study investigated the underlying mechanisms responsible for the shear band behaviour and hardening in architected polygrain-like materials (i.e meta-crystals). Buckling of individual struts was analysed to explain the occurrence of shear bands in two identified systems, i.e. {0 2 2}〈1 0 0〉 and {2 0 0}〈0 1 1〉 of FCC meta-crystals. The obtained understanding (including the identification of shear band systems) provides high confidence in predicting and controlling the shear bands and damage in polygrain-like meta-crystals. Focus was made to reveal the underlying mechanisms responsible for the strengthening of meta-crystals containing polygrain-like domains (i.e. meta-grains). Specifically, the enhanced stability and strength of meta-crystals during plastic deformation is mainly due to the strength of meta-grain boundary that is associated with the boundary coherency. Similar to the role of coherency at grain boundaries in polycrystalline alloys, higher coherency results in better supported struts in architected polygrain-like meta-crystals, inducing higher yield strength. In particular, a higher number of total struts connecting to boundaries leads to higher strength. In addition to the influential role of boundary coherency, the effectiveness in changing the propagation of shear bands thanks to the lattice misorientation across meta-grain boundaries. Both the strengthened meta-grain boundaries and the misorientation make the boundaries obstacles to the propagation of shear bands. Meta-grain boundaries can stop, shorten and deflect shear bands during post-yielding deformation. It is worth noting that the yield strength was measured at strain offset of 0.2% at which the first shear band already happens and experiences the stopping effect of meta-grain boundaries on the shear band propagation, explaining the increase in macroscopically measured yield strength with decreasing the metagrain size. An architected tilt type of boundaries induced higher hardening than an architected twist one, highlighting that different coherency of meta-grain boundaries results in different degrees of hardening. This implies that high strength architected materials can be designed without reducing the size of meta-grains, but via engineering the coherency similar to the grain engineering approach in metallurgy.