Nanoparticles occur in various environments as a consequence of man-made processes, which raises concerns about their impact on the environment and human health. To allow for proper risk assessment, a precise and statistically relevant analysis of particle characteristics (such as e.g. size, shape and composition) is required that would greatly benefit from automated image analysis procedures. While deep learning shows impressive results in object detection tasks, its applicability is limited by the amount of representative, experimentally collected and manually annotated training data. Here, we present an elegant, flexible and versatile method to bypass this costly and tedious data acquisition process. We show that using a rendering software allows to generate realistic, synthetic training data to train a state-of-the art deep neural network. Using this approach, we derive a segmentation accuracy that is comparable to man-made annotations for toxicologically relevant metal-oxide nanoparticle ensembles which we chose as examples. Our study paves the way towards the use of deep learning for automated, high-throughput particle detection in a variety of imaging techniques such as microscopies and spectroscopies, for a wide variety of studies and applications, including the detection of plastic micro-and nanoparticles. Nanoparticles are omnipresent in our daily lifes. They can be found in products ranging from cosmetics, textiles and foods, and are important in various technological fields such as energy, electronics, medicine and many more. Several approaches have been proposed for automated nanoparticle detection using traditional algorithms as well as machine learning techniques. With the recent advancements in machine learning and mainly deep learning To overcome the aforementioned data limitations, we have developed a semi-automated data synthesis scheme using an open-source rendering software. Particularly, we use Blender Our goal is to extract statistical information on nanoparticle morphology with respect to size, shape and distribution from high resolution microscopy images acquired with electron-or ion microscopes. However, to guide particle segmentation by deep CNNs, a representative amount of training data is required. This is in general a true limitation due to the fact that microscopy image data is usually not available in sufficiently large amounts to be suitable for robust CNN training purposes. Moreover, we want to overcome the manual image annotation process which is very time-consuming and error-prone. Here, we propose a novel workflow that overcomes the data problem for the deep learning based analysis of particle images. The workflow relies on a very limited number of real reference images, e.g. out of electron or ion microscopes, which serve as a blue print for the semi-automated photo-realistic synthetic data generation using a rendering software e.g. such as Blender. The proposed nanoparticle segmentation workflow is composed of the steps shown in Fig. The starting point of the segmentation workflow is the acquisition of a limited number of high resolution HIM images of TiO 2 nanoparticles, spread on a (100) silicon wafer. Fig. With a sufficient amount of realistic synthetic data, a deep CNN can be properly trained on the nanoparticle segmentation task. In our workflow, we use the so called U-Net We used the aforementioned semi-automated data generation scheme to generate synthetic microscope images such as the HIM images of SiO 2 , TiO 2 and silver nanoparticles of varying overall morphology. A comprehensive set of real HIM images Figure The real SiO 2 particles essentially show a very regular, spherical shape, which was also considered in the corresponding synthetic SiO 2 simulations (see Supplementary Fig. To assess the similarity between the real and synthetic HIM nanoparticle images, we analyzed the SiO 2 and TiO 2 data sets using the t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding Since the U-Net was trained on synthetic data only (Fig. For both particle types (SiO 2 and TiO 2 ), the non-expert group (P1-P4) as well as the experts (P5-P7) consistently selected models that provided almost perfect segmentation results on the validation image (SiO 2 -F1 mean (SD): 0.92 (0.01); TiO 2 -F1 mean (SD): 0.93 (0.004)). However, the models selected by the 'analytical' approach demonstrate marginally more accurate segmentation performances (SiO 2 -F1 mean (SD): 0.93 (0.001); TiO 2 -F1 mean (SD): 0.93 (0.001)). A qualitative (visual) comparison between the two approaches is displayed in Fig. Finally, after the model selection, the best model is used for the segmentation of all remaining real HIM images (Fig Fig. Due to the human-comparable segmentation accuracy of the U-Net sim , it is possible to derive various features of real-world Figure In summary, we propose a segmentation workflow for complex nanoparticles in high resolution microscopic images which relies on deep learning in combination with a semi-automated synthetic data generation pipeline based on photo-realistic rendering. With this approach an unlimited number of realistic synthetic images can be created with its respective error-free ground truth labels which subsequently can be used to effectively train a deep CNN. The so trained CNN can subsequently be used to accurately segment nanoparticles in microscope images. We have demonstrated the applicability of the workflow on experimental HIM data sets of SiO 2 and TiO 2 nanoparticles spread on a silicon (100) wafer surface. We showed that the segmentation accuracy of a state-of-the art deep CNN trained only on synthetic data was comparable to segmentations carried out by microscopy experts. Moreover, we have demonstrated quantitative and statistical analysis of microscopy imaged nanoparticles based on the automated deep learning CNN segmentation. We are confident that the method presented in this work has the potential to solve the training data bottleneck and the annotation problem for automated image analysis approaches and paves the way towards a wider use of deep learning in a variety of microscopy applications. It permits the implementation of automated high-throughput particle segmentation and characterization methods for all sorts of applications based on microscopic images. This can be particularly relevant for studies related to nano-toxicology and other fields such as nano-and bio-medicine, consumer product efficacy testing, and anti-counterfeiting. The time-consuming, costly and error-prone process of acquiring and manually annotating a representative amount of real data in order to use the power of deep learning is overcome by the proposed approach. Yet, the semi-automated data generation procedure still relies on human input (i.e. for the design of all relevant 3D scene parameters, template particles, shaders etc.) in order to achieve photo-realistic renders. However, with the recent achievements in differentiable rendering SiO 2 nanoparticles with two different diameters and food grade TiO 2 nanoparticles (E171) with a size distribution of 20 to 240 nm, both deposited on silicon chips (reference AGAR: G3390-10), have been obtained from the "Laboratoire National de métrologie et d'Essais". The Polyvinylpyrrolidon (PVP)-coated Ag nanowires (PL-AgW50-10mg) with an average diameter of 40-50 nm and a length of up to 50 μm have been purchased from PlasmaChem GmbH (Berlin, Germany). A stable suspension was obtained by using a standard protocol For the synthetic data generation (Fig. In summary, for each particle type (SiO 2 , TiO 2 and Ag) 180 corresponding scenes were generated with their respective synthetic photo-realistic images and labels. The automated process of generating the particle scenes, rendering the photorealistic images and the labels, as well as the post-processing amounted to approximately 3.5 hours for the SiO 2 particles, 5.5 hours for the TiO 2 type and 16 hours for the Ag images. In this context, a Nvidia GeForce GTX 1070 graphics processing unit (GPU) supported the scene renderings while the scene building process was performed by an Intel Xeon W-2102 central processing unit (CPU). The significant increase in time for the Ag images is caused by sophisticated Blender build-in postprocessing edge enhancement algorithms in order to achieve accurate contour lines for the virtual objects, especially for the Ag nanowire images (see Supplementary Fig. Prior to the training of the deep CNN, common data augmentation strategies are applied in order to improve the model performance Figure 