Fully relativistic density-functional-theory calculations of Bi(111) thin films are analyzed to revisit interpretations made about their electronic structure and the corresponding extrapolations to explain that of macroscopic samples. Our calculated band structure of a 39-bilayer film (∼ 15 nm) reproduces satisfactorily three independent measurements obtained for macroscopic samples and shows that ∼9-nm films are thick enough to describe the band structure of Bi(111) within experimental resolution. Our results indicate that the two split surface-state metallic branches along the ΓM direction do not overlap with the bulk band at the zone boundary but lie within the A7-distortion-induced conduction-valence band gap. We show that (1) neither the existence of the metallic surface states nor their observed splitting is related to inversion asymmetry and (2) the spin texture observed in such states cannot be attached to the lifting of the Kramers degeneracy. Thus, such splitting is not of the Rashba-type. We hence provide grounds to identify the large splitting of the metallic branches as a m j = ±1/2-m j = ±3/2 splitting. We also propose that the spin texture observed for the metallic branches may only occur because the essentially unaltered strong covalent bonds retained by Bi(111) surface atoms cannot afford magnetic polarization. Moreover, we emphasize that degeneracy at the M -point of the SBZ of Bi(111) -implied by the translational symmetry of the surface and apparently not satisfied under the assumption that the two split metallic branches are two singlets of opposite magnetic quantum number-is satisfied irrespectively of the presence of inversion symmetry centers, even if not detectable by measurements. We also show that the magnetic-moment discontinuity at M -also implied by the same assumption-does not exist, which also explain why the measured spin-polarization of the metallic branches vanishes near M . Furthermore, we investigate the Rashba effect on the band structure of Bi(111) due to three different types of structural/electronic perturbations to reveal the actual lifting of the Kramers degeneracy. We discuss that depending on the magnitude of the perturbation imposed on a film, the magnitude of the splitting and the localization of the Rashba-split states may change dramatically. The singular properties and applications of Bismuth sprouting since 1911 make it one of the most remarkable and enlightening elements of the periodic table: It is the heaviest nonradioactive element. It has the lowest thermal conductivity after mercury and is the element with largest diamagnetism. Bi allowed an "early" discovery of the Seebeck, the de Hass-van Alphen, the Shubnikov-de Haas, and the Nernst effects, all of which are inherently present in all metals but were more challenging to observe. Bismuth was in fact the first metal whose Fermi surface was experimentally identified The interest in Bi has revived at various research fronts. Of particular interest to the present investigation is that its surfaces are declared to be much better conductors than the bulk. The remarkable electronic properties of Bi are tightly related to its crystal structure, the so-called A7 or αAs structure, which has the space group R3m. The primitive cell of the A7 structure is a rhombohedron that contains two atoms. The A7 structure largely resembles a simple cubic structure (SC) with a slight distortion along the body diagonal: the so-called A7 distortion. In bulk Bi, each atom has three equidistant nearest-neighbor atoms and three equidistant next-nearest neighbors, slightly further away. This structure thus renders A7-materials as composed by bilayers (BLs) stacked perpendicular the c-axis or trigonal axis (see Fig. C. Current state of knowledge of the geometric and electronic structure of Bi(111) As a result of the A7 distortion, bulk Bi can be considered as formed by puckered bilayers perpendicular to the trigonal axis (see Figures The first investigation of the low-index Bi surfaces was performed by Jona in 1967 via low-energy electron spectroscopy. In order to understand the electronic structure of Bi(111), it is useful to define and distinguish between the A7-distortion pseudogap and the spin-orbit pseudogaps. The A7distortion pseudogap is around the Fermi level (E F ) and separated the conduction and valence bands. Its existence (though not its magnitude) is independent of the SOC, inasmuch as it is the A7-pseudogap what makes all A7 materials semimetals. On the other hand, Bi(111) has also SOC pseudogaps, which are known to lie inside the valence band (unlike those of arsenic, The spin-orbit pseudogaps predicted by Golin's calculations and their implications on the existence of surface states inside them was the focus of several surface photoemission experiments. Jezequel et al. Soon after the work of Jezequel et al., Patthey et al. An important difference between the measurements of Hengsberger et al. and earlier ones is that the latter focused on finding surface states within the spin-orbit pseudogaps, whereas Hengsberger's et al. scanned for surface states in the A7-distortion pseudogap. The twodimensional Fermi surface near Γ was later investigated by Ast and Höchst. D. Current state of knowledge about the two surface-state metallic branches of Bi(111) Some doubts have been cast upon the reliability of Hengsberger's et al. measurements close to M. The latter is known as the Kramers degeneracy Naturally, because the spin and angular momentum are no longer good quantum numbers, the Rashba-type splitting breaks the magnetic quantum number degeneracy ±|m j | rather than the "spin degeneracy." Figure Coming back to Bi(111), it was initially concluded that the two metallic surface-states branches result from the removal of the spin (magnetic-quantum-number) degeneracy. In addition to the above-mentioned time-reversal symmetry -which guarantees that all states must be doubly degenerate at Γ-the two metallic branches are also expected to be degenerate at the M-point because of the two-dimensional translational symmetry of the surface. The latter exists irrespectively of whether or not there is an inversion-symmetry center. Specifically, on the surface layer (or any other layer below) there are six equivalent directions (Fig. Otherwise, we have to ask ourselves: Why is there is a concern about the behavior of the metallic surface states at zone edge? and How is the splitting or degeneracy at M relevant to the origin of the two metallic bands measured at M? Spin-resolved ARPES (SARPES) measurements have shown that the two metallic branches display opposite magnetic-quantum-number polarization in thin-films. Because of the considerations exposed in the above introduction, we believe it is timely to revise the current interpretation of the electronic band structure of Bi(111) and, in particular, of its metallic surface-state branches. We shall see that all experimental measurements and previous computational results can be explained coherently and straightforwardly. In this work, we shall address four main issues: (1) What is the origin and character of the splitting of the two metallic branches? (2) What exactly is the role of the time-reversal, inversion and translation symmetry in shaping the band structure of Bi(111)? (3) How is the splitting or degeneracy at M relevant to the origin of the two metallic bands measured at M? and (4) How does the Rashba splitting look like in Bi(111)? Can we tune it? The rest of the manuscript is organized as follows: Section II describes the computational details of our investigation. Section III summarizes our results concerning the geometric structure of bulk Bi and Bi(111) films for various thicknesses and the effect of the H-adsorption perturbation. Section IV contains our results for the band structure of Bi(111) for various thicknesses and examines the various aspects related to the electronic structure of Bi(111) that we have discussed above, including the effect of H adsorption. Section V describes the Rashba splitting of the two metallic branches of Bi(111) achieved by three different perturbations and analyzes how the magnitude of the perturbation correlates with that of the Rashba splitting and with the spatial localization of the surface states. Section VI analyzes the density of electronic states as a function of thickness to resolve quantitatively whether the concentration of charge carriers is localized at the surface is sufficiently high to dominate the transport properties for thin films. Section VII discusses the implications of our results. Finally, Section VIII summarizes our main results and the conclusions drawn from them. Our investigation is based on fully relativistic periodic-supercell DFT calculations of the electronic structure of bulk Bi and Bi(111). Our calculations are performed within the local density approximation (LDA). For the exchange and correlation terms, we use the Ceperley and Alder 51 functional. The generalized gradient approximation with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof 52 functionals was also applied to obtain the structural properties of bulk Bi and used for comparison with the LDA functional. The electron-ion interaction is treated within the pseudo-potential (PP) approach. We have used the both rhombohedral and hexagonal unit cells of Bi (which contain two and six atoms per unit cell, respectively) to describe the bulk, and the hexagonal one 8 to describe the Bi(111) surface. The Bi(111) surface was modeled with a slab having on atom per layer (1×1 in-plane periodicity) and 39 bilayers. In the calculations involving the surface, a vacuum layer of 14 Å separate the periodic images of the slab to avoid interaction between them. For integrations over the Brilloiun zone, that of the bulk (in the hexagonal representation) and surface were sampled by 2592 and 432 irreducible k-points, respectively, which are selected while ignoring inversion symmetry. The integrations use a Gaussian broadening with a smearing parameter of 0.1 eV. The Kohn-Sham orbitals were expanded in a plane-wave basis set with a maximum kinetic energy of 163 eV. The kinetic energy for the augmentation of charges is cut off at 265.4 eV. The positions of all atoms in the slab were optimized until the forces on each atom and each direction was smaller than 6×10 -3 eV/ Å. For this purpose, the conjugate-gradient algorithm has been applied. The total energy for each ionic configuration sampled within the relaxation process was convergent up to 2×10 -5 eV. Bi show that (1) semicore d -electrons of Bi influence these properties negligibly; (2) the generalized gradient approximation using the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof 52 functional does not outperform LDA since significantly overestimates the length of the basis vectors and thus nearest-neighbor distances and the supercell volume; (3) denser k-point grids to sample the bulk Brillouin zone do not yield variations in the electronic properties of bulk Bi; (4) doubling the energy cutoff for plane waves does not affect the electronic properties of bulk Bi. For the calculations concerning the Bi(111) surface, we consider slabs of various thicknesses, with inversion symmetry and without it. The inversion symmetry of a relaxed Bi(111) slab is broken by ( (3) an intra-bilayer perturbation -achieved by increasing by 0.1 Å the distance between the two layers forming the first bilayer of one side of the slab. The XCrySDen software 57 is used to obtain a schematic representation of the structure of the bulk Bi and Bi(111). A. Structure of Bi(111) The Bi(111) surface is a triangular lattice (see Fig. In this subsection, we present the results for H/Bi(111), which clearly is an inversion asymmetric film. We limit ourselves to investigate a hydrogen monolayer (ML) adsorbed atop on one side of a Bi(111) film of (a) 6 BLs, a thickness which in the absence of H is insufficient to recover bulk-like d ij and d jk , and (b) 10 and 12 BLs, thickness which in the absence of H are sufficient to recover bulk-like d ij and d jk . These calculations are performed in order to analyze whether H-adsorption can be expected to help model the geometric structure of a semi-infinite Bi(111) slab. Namely, as mentioned in Section I C, it has been assumed in previous DFT calculations that it is possible to simulate the Bi(111) surface of a semi-infinite system by using a film of 10 BLs with a monolayer of atop H placed ∼2 Å away from one side of the Bi film, the H-host surface. The first aspect that calls the attention is that a monolayer of atop H has been fixed at a particular (and arbitrary) distance from the surface, ∼ 2 Å. 1. The effect of structural relaxation on the metallic states of Bi(111) It is worth to mention first that the metallic surface states along ΓM are quite insensitive to the relaxation of the structure, as long as the inversion symmetry is preserved. Namely, the electronic structure of a relaxed film does not differ significantly from that of a bulkterminated film. Also, if the inversion symmetry of a Bi(111) film is broken by hydrogen adsorption on one of its surfaces, the electronic structure of the metallic states energy does not depend on whether the system is relaxed or not. Specifically, the band structure of H/Bi(111) in which H is placed 2 Å away from the Bi surface and the forces arising upon adsorption are not relaxed (as in Ref. 12) is not significantly different from that in which H is 1.86 Å away from Bi surface after a full relaxation of the forces. In contrast, we shall see later the noticeable differences between the metallic surface states of an inversion-symmetric clean film and those of an inversion-asymmetric slab in which even minor perturbations break the inversion symmetry. 2. Ab initio projected band-structure of bulk Bi: The A7-distortion and SOC surface states The effect of the SOC on the electronic structure of bulk Bi has long been known from ab initio calculations through the early work of Golin, (see Fig. In contrast, the pair of metallic surface-state branches (denoting that it is not a single band) around E F appear within the "A7-distortion" gap and regardless of whether or not the SOC is taken into account. In other words, the origin of both the conduction-valence band gap and the metallic surface-state branch(es) does not lie in the SOC. Note that for this inversion-symmetric film of up to 15.5 nm, with and without SOC, the branches are at least doubly degenerate. Importantly, at least for inversion-symmetric films, the two Kramers degenerate bands composing each metallic branch are primarily localized on opposite sides of the film. Thus, the SOC alone does not lift the Kramers degeneracy anywhere inside the SBZ. Namely, although the metallic branches appear separated all along ΓM , each metallic branch in Fig. Figure Note in Fig. Namely, even for ultra-thin films, it has been argued that the observations are rather surface resonances that result from the hybridization of the metallic surface state with quantum well states Importantly, there is good agreement between our calculations for inversion-symmetric films and the ARPES measurements of Hengsberger et al. We have seen that the two degenerate bands of each branch are localized on the opposite surfaces of the slab. However, only one of them is investigated experimentally. In order to understand the effect of the SOC and the inversion symmetry on the band-structure of Bi(111) films, and compare with experimental observations, we show in Fig. As expected from available measurements and previous calculations, Let us now consider the effect of the SOC in a slab without inversion symmetry. the same with and without inversion symmetry. In addition, can see that, without inversion symmetry, the metallic branches display extra splittings. In the absence of the SOC, the branches resulting from the extra splitting are still doubly degenerate. Hence inversion asymmetry alone does not lift the Kramers degeneracy either. However, with broken symmetry and once the SOC is included, the obtained splitting finally lifts the Kramers degeneracy and reveals the four states composing the two metallic branches. That is indeed the lifting of the Kramers degeneracy, the spin or Rashba splitting. Still, Kramers pairs are on opposite sides of the slab. Therefore, once again, the splitting found for the top bilayer bears no relation to the lack of inversion symmetry or the lifting of the Kramers degeneracy (Rashba effect). Importantly, Fig. We have seen that the Kramers degeneracy is not lifted by the SOC alone and hence the observed splitting between the metallic bands is not of the Rashba type. The question is, what is then the origin of the splitting? Ast and Höchst have proposed strong surface relaxations to explain the origin of the metallic surface states of Bi(111), but it has long been clear that these are not dramatic. It is true though that the splitting is enhanced along the ΓM direction by the spin-orbit coupling. However, around the M-point, the delocalized character of these states plays an important role, Still, what does the SOC split then? We propose that the splitting does not lift the Kramers degeneracy and yet it is caused by the SOC, and mainly around Γ, because it is a m j = ±1/2-m j = ±3/2 splitting, as described in Fig. The states shown in Fig. However, it would be necessary to project the wavefunction onto the eigenfunctions of the J 2 and J z operators to obtain their main total-angular-momentum and magnetic-quantumnumber character, which is a computational task that we could not afford. Nonetheless, by analyzing the splittings of the bulk bands along ΓT and ΓKX occurring upon inclusion of the SOC (Fig. This includes the pair surface-state metallic bands. Thus, the surface states derived from these three major bands (j = 1/2, m j = ±1/2-and m j = ±3/2), which do not overlap with anything else, might acquire a relatively pure j, m j character. The m j = ±1/2-m j = ±3/2 splitting is known in semiconductors physics as the splitting between the light-hole (LH) and heavy hole (HH) branches (the LH-HH splitting), in reference to the effective masses attached to carriers because of their dispersion. Up to now, we have just provided similarities between the two split metallic branches of Bi(111) and the LH-HH splitting found in bulk semiconductors, suggesting that high-and low-energy branches have a m j = ±1/2 and m j = ±3/2 character, respectively. However, we now turn to the local magnetic moment of the two metallic branches of Bi(111), which can gauge the m j = ±1/2 and m j = ±3/2 character of the two metallic branches of Bi(111). The total magnetic moment is zero for both branches because of the Kramers degeneracy, but we can focus on only one of two degenerate bands of each metallic branch, say, that with positive magnetization. Namely, we will apply that for a quantization axis parallel to the normal to the surface (z), states with a predominant m j = +1/2-character must have a larger contribution to the in-plane magnetization than states with a predominant m j = +3/2-character. We use the m y magnetization because it dominates the in-plane magnetization all along ΓM . Indeed, as shown in Figure 6. Origin of the spin polarization of the two metallic bands along the ΓM Spin-resolved ARPES measurements for ultra-thin films have shown that the two metallic branches display opposite magnetic-quantum-number polarization in thin-films. So far, we have shown that the splitting at M between the two metallic bands lying on a single side of a film is not in conflict with the translational symmetry in inversion-symmetric or inversion-asymmetric films because, as we have seen, (1) the splitting found on a single side of a film does not correspond to the lifting of the Kramers degeneracy and (2) the two-fold degeneracy at M is guaranteed for inversion-symmetric and even asymmetric films. There could be, however, a subtle issue with the splitting at M for thin films. Namely, spin-resolved ARPES measurements on ultra-thin films (7 BLs) have shown that the two metallic branches display opposite magnetic-quantum-number polarization and this has been confirmed by DFT calculations. On the other hand, as mentioned in subsection I D, SARPES measurements on Bi(111) ultra-thin films also show that the measured net spin polarization of each metallic band vanishes near M. Namely, both spin-up and spin-down intensities are detected and become comparable at k-points near M. Figure As expected from experiment, the high-and low-energy branches have opposite magneticmoment polarization. As shown in the figure, the top bilayer hosts mainly the the highenergy band H1 and the low-energy band L2. Also, for the most part along the ΓM line, the high-energy band H1 has "up" polarization (Fig. Regarding the observed evanescence of the spin polarization near M, Despite the splitting at M between the two metallic bands lying on a single side of a film is not in conflict with the translational symmetry in inversion-symmetric or inversionasymmetric films, it is interesting to look into the evolution of gap ∆E as a function of thickness, in order to address the issue of whether the metallic branches meet or not for inversion-symmetric films. Fig. We have not pursued a fully relativistic calculation for N B ∼72 BLs for several reasons. First of all, it is unfortunately an extremely demanding calculation. But more importantly, we have shown already that the key aspects to understand ARPES measurements of Bi(111) metallic bands is not buried in their behavior at the M point. Nevertheless, the thickness at which the two states become essentially decoupled may have still a physical significance, particularly if such thickness is finite, as suggested by the extrapolation in Fig. We have found, at least for calculations without SOC, that there might be indeed a crossover thickness between the ultra-thin regime -in which the two sides of the film are coupled-and a possible regime in which they are not coupled, which in turn might determine the behavior of the metallic bands. Preliminary calculations without SOC for N B = 39 and 78 BLs, show that for inversion-asymmetric slabs, if the two sides are separated by 15.5 nm or less, the metallic branches split and the Kramers pair of each branch live on opposite sides of the film coupled (as we have seen in all the above discussion) but, if the two sides are 31 nm apart and are thus nearly degenerate, the Kramers pair of each metallic branch live on the same side of the film. Therefore, in order to fully understand the band structure of macroscopic samples it remains to see whether the SOC reallocates each Kramers pair on opposite sides of the slab or not and whether it increases the splitting of the metallic branches (as it does around Γ) or leaves it unaffected. Moreover, if the two bands composing each Kramers pair are located on opposite sides of the film only for films as thin as 15 nm or less, then the entanglement of the Kramers pair may only exists in this regime. As mentioned in subsection I D, previous investigations of the electronic structure have resorted to place a monolayer of atomic hydrogen on one side of a thin (11 BLs) Bi(111) slab with the aim of imposing a degeneracy at M, In order to investigate whether adsorbing hydrogen on one side of a film is meaningful to simulate the band structure of the (111) surface of macroscopic samples surface of an inversion-symmetric film of 39 BLs (equivalent to ∼15.5 nm, the thickest slab we tackled). Our results show that breaking the inversion symmetry by H adsorption does not help to converge the dispersion of the metallic branches along ΓM . On the contrary, it makes it worse. It causes that the two bands reach the M at a much lower energy than the convergent range. That indeed predicts that the two metallic branches of a macroscopic slab indeed overlap with the bulk band. Moreover, H-passivation for films of 12 BLs or less perturbs the dispersion at regions where the bands of the corresponding inversion-symmetric clean slabs were already converged (i.e regions that are no longer affected by an increase of the thickness). Specifically, by comparing the dispersion of slabs of 7 and 27 BLs (Fig. In turn, H on a 6-BL film (Fig. Then, for a clean 12-BL film, both hole-pockets are well converged and everything within the first three fifths of ΓM . Upon H-passivation, however, the small hole-pocket is shrunken and the diameter of the bigger pocket is also slightly shrunken from the left side. For a clean 21-bilayer slab, the convergence is perfect up to the resolution of the figure within the first four fifths of the ΓM yet, even at that thickness, the effect of H does not completely vanish within the latter segment. More importantly, our calculations shows that the band structure of 12 BLs adsorbed on one side by H also strongly deviates from experimental results, particularly from the midpoint of ΓM to M. We have shown that the origin of the observed splitting between the two metallic branches corresponds to the lifting of the m j = ±1/2-m j = ±3/2 degeneracy by the SOC. This does not mean that the Rashba splitting is not possible but that it is just not intrinsic to Bi(111) or to surfaces per se. In this section we shall discuss the Rashba splitting of the two metallic branches of Bi(111) produced by three different perturbations to the inversion symmetry. To test the true Rashba-type splitting and compare with experiments on ultrathin films, There are several remarks that ought to be done about the effect of these perturbations. Namely, note that (1) although both of the above structural perturbations clearly break inversion symmetry, they do not empty the metallic states of the perturbed surface and thus does not affect significantly the metallic bands of the other side; (2) comparison between the metallic bands of the unperturbed surface of the inversion-asymmetric slab and those of the surface of the inversion-symmetric slab (see e.g Fig. (1) the Kramers pair of each measured band is primarily localized on the other side and (2) near M -i.e., the only small region where the two Kramers pairs could be detected one a single side of the film (see subsection IV 7), the Rashba splitting is too small to be resolved with the available resolution. In fact, that explains the measurements in Refs. 14,33: two states of opposite spin polarization are detected at the same energy (within experimental resolution). Importantly as well, an experiment performed on the unperturbed surface of a film bearing such kind of perturbations on the other side would not be able to (1) distinguish whether the sample has inversion symmetry or not, certainly not based on the splitting at M and (2) detect the Rashba splitting. In other words, the splitting of the metallic branches is not of the Rashba type neither far from M (as proposed in Ref. 33) nor close to it. Moreover, it is erroneous to attach inversion symmetry to systems in which the degeneracy at M is not seen. Remarkably, the earliest DFT work to understand the band structure of Bi(111) of clean macroscopic samples 7 obtained -not an intrinsic lifting of the spin degeneracy of the states of Bi(111)-but the strong Rashba splitting, specific to the depletion of the metallic surface states on the "H-host" surface of ultra-thin films, of the only metallic surface-state Kramers pair that remains occupied after H adsorption (which is situated on the "clean" surface of H/Bi(111)). Indeed, unlike the doubly-degenerate metallic bands of the clean and inversionsymmetric Bi(111), the only two occupied metallic bands (see Fig. Thus, adsorption of H in Refs. This way of producing Rashba splitting is not alien to those used in semiconductors. The charge depletion of the H-host surface creates a scenario similar to, for example, that in which an inversion charge-density layer is created on the surface of semiconductors by an external electric fields As shown in Fig. Bi around E F comes from states around Γ. For this reason the interpretation of ARPES measurements of the metallic surface states around this area is a delicate issue. Namely, even X-rays of ∼ 20 eV kick electrons into the vacuum that mostly come from layers as deep as ∼1nm and probably deeper. For example, while ARPES measurements have been able to detect many electronic bands from Bi(111) ultrathin films, Despite the above reservations, based on ARPES measurements have suggested that the carrier concentration (holes) at the surface -created by the presence of the metallic surface states-could be high enough so as to dominate the transport properties of films whose thickness is less than ∼ 30 nm (∼ 70-80 BLs) -even if only the Fermi surface elements around Γ are taken into account. Still, one could think that the carrier concentration of the topmost bilayer could dominate the transport properties of thin films only if they are thinner than ∼6nm (15 BLs). In fact, yet another reason to think that the carrier concentration at the surface could dominate the transport properties of ultrathin films might be that the energy of the high-energy metallic branch approaches the Fermi level as the thickness decreases below ∼6nm (15 BLs), as suggested in Fig. of the carriers are localized in the six inner bilayers of the film. The reason why most carriers are not in the surface layer and are detectable by ARPES is that the contribution from subsurface layers is much larger than that from bulk-like atoms. In fact, knowing from the analysis of the geometric structure that bulk-like atoms are found as deep as in the fifth bilayer, one can estimate from Fig. Our results have shown that the association between the spin-orbit coupling and various observations in Bi(111) has been based on uncertain and unproved premises. Jezequel, for example, first acknowledged that the existence of the surface states is, as in all covalentlybonded materials, only due to the abrupt termination of the (periodic) crystal potential but at the same time highlighted that the energy range of the surface states is necessarily governed by the SOC. It has been alleged and accepted that there are two energetically distinct branches and not one is because these two branches result from a strong spin or Rashba-type splitting, i.e., from lifting the spin (or Kramers) degeneracy that occurs in the absence of inversion centers. But more importantly, although the splitting is dramatically enhanced for short wavelengths by the SOC, it is patently questionable that it is of the Rashba-type in the light of the experimental evidence and all computational studies so far. As Rashba pointed out, it is only in the absence of inversion centers in a crystal that the SOC splits the electronic bands that otherwise would be doubly degenerated (Kramers degeneracy). The SOC-driven Rashba-type splitting for surface states was first reported for the spderived surface states of Au(111) that are found around the Fermi level. That the metallic bands of inversion-symmetric films are doubly degenerate and primarily localized on opposite sides of the film is a known Therefore, neither the time-reversal, the translational or the inversion symmetry requires that these two observed metallic branches meet at M for inversion-symmetric and even for certain inversion-asymmetric slabs, as we showed in section V. Thus, although the coupling between the two sides of the film indeed enhances the splitting of the bands at M (see Fig. The computational manoeuvre that followed, to apparently satisfy the translational symmetry condition, was to actually break the symmetry by adsorbing a monolayer of H on one side of the slab. More problematic is the claim that, the supposedly spin-split states along the ΓM become non-spin polarized because of the overlap with the bulk band. may not be an adequate to describe this measurements. Specifically, although we may choose to ignore that grown films and sharply cleaved surfaces have two surfaces, the symmetries shaping the band-structure apply not only to one surface or the surface that is studied experimentally but to both surfaces. Thus, in order to understand the implication of such symmetries (or lack of them) on the observations, we have to keep in mind both surfaces. For example, for thin-films with inversion symmetry considering the two sides of the film is essential to understand how the translation symmetry is fulfilled even in the two metallic branches do not meet at M. Moreover, it is important to be certain whether or not one has achieved Rashba splitting. For example, if it is not Rashba splitting, as in the case of the Bi(111) films in Ref. 14,33 the magnetic-moment polarization may simply vanish, i.e., the Kramers degenerate bands cancel each other's spin polarization. In turn, if it is Rashba splitting, then the spin polarization should be preserved, as it is expected for topological insulators. The efforts to explain the observed splitting at the M point for macroscopic samples and supported ultra-thin films are prodigious. However, if the bands are found to split at M, that is taken as an indication that the degeneracy is not broken. That, in turn, means that inversion symmetry is preserved and, therefore, the splitting is not of the Rashba type. So much so indeed that it has been acknowledged that near M, but only near M, the splitting is not of the Rashba type. Nevertheless, we have shown that experiments and calculations coherently complement each other to reveal that all measurements of the metallic bands along ΓM are likely a m j = ±1/2-m j = ±3/2 splitting but certianly not a Rashba splitting. We have shown that pristine single Bi crystals and supported ultra-thin films may actually display a tiny Rashba splitting because of weak inversion asymmetries. So, if ARPES experiments do not find that the bands meet at M, it does not means that the inversion symmetry is preserved. It just means that the Rashba-split pair of each band is not being measured. In other words, it means that what is being measured is not the Rashba splitting. The Rashba splitting has not yet been resolved experimentally on Bi(111), not even in thin films supported on Si(111) Finally, the magnitude of the Rashba splitting depends on the strength and nature of the external perturbation; its magnitude in Bi does not have a well-defined value for each k-point as that of the m j = ±3/2 -m j = ±1/2-splitting, yet it remains to understand whether it is limited by the m j = ±3/2 -m j = ±1/2-splitting. We present fully relativistic density-functional-theory calculations of the electronic structure of Bi(111) films to revisit of the interpretation of the metallic surface states of Bi(111) and some of the unresolved issues around thin films and their limit to macroscopic samples. We investigate the spin-orbit pseudogaps and surface states in the valence band of the projected band-structure of bulk Bi and obtain for the first time some of the actual spin-orbit surface states from first principles. The evolution of the electronic band structure as a function of thickness indicates that calculations for films as thick as ∼9 nm reproduce fairly well the measured band-structure of macroscopic samples within experimental resolution. Our first-principles calculations show that the metallic surface states near the zone edge (the M point) are not resonances in the sense that they do not overlap with the bulk band at the zone boundary. They lie strictly inside the A7-distortion conduction-valence band gap, which at M is at least 3 times wider than predicted by tight-binding calculations and do not meet at M for films of 15.5 nm. Thus, our results attest available measurements of the metallic surface-state bands on a single surface of a macroscopic sample. 