Half-Heusler compounds have emerged as promising thermoelectric materials that offer huge compositional space to tune their thermoelectric performance. A class of stable half Heusler compounds formed from elements of three specific groups in the periodic table viz. X p X 1-p Y q Y 1-q Z r Z 1-r (with X, X = Ti, Zr, Hf, Y, Y = Ni, Pd, Pt and Z, Z = Ge, Sn, Pb and p, q, r = 0, 0.25, 0.75 and 1) via various stoichimetric isoelectronic elemental substitution at the X, Y and Z sites respectively is investigated. Intelligent filters are employed at each step of our high throughput density functional theory calculations to filter compounds with improved figure of merit. While confirming several known results, the calculations also reveal unknown pathways to improve the thermoelectric performance of the compound class. The 50% X as well as Z site substitution of the parent Heusler individually are found to marginally enhance the power factor for both the p-and n-type doping, while leading to considerable enhancement in the figure of merit (by ∼24 %) specifically due to lowering of the lattice thermal conductivity because of increase in lattice disorder in approximately the same cell volume. Furthermore, the present study confirms the experimental scenario that Y site substitution does not lead to enhancement of the powerfactor because of the breaking of band degeneracies at the high symmetry points. This work will serve as a consolidated cost effective guideline for experimentalist working with this compound class on enhancing the powerfactor and figure of merit of the compositions. One of the promising alternative to meet the ever increasing energy demands of the modern world is the large scale deployment of energy efficient thermoelectric devices, which can convert a temperature gradient into an electric voltage Half Heuslers (HH) are intermetallic ternary compounds (with formula unit XYZ), where X and Y are transition or rare earth metal, while Z is a p-block element. They comprise one of the most promising, earth abundant and environment friendly class of thermoelectric material offering a huge chemical space to tune the transport coefficients Naturally, many different chemical substitutions as well as dopings have been tried in the past leading to the increase in the zT 35-38 upto 1.5, which is so far the highest reported value in this class In this article, the effect of compositional variation via isoelectronic substitution is studied on the stability, electronic and trans-Fig. port properties of semiconducting X p X 1-p Y q Y 1-q Z r Z 1-r (X, X = Ti, Zr, Hf; Y, Y = Ni, Pd, Pt and Z, Z = Ge, Sn, Pb) HH compositions is explored, where p, q, and r are the different concentrations of elemental isoelectronic substitution at the X, Y and Z sites respectively. The purpose of this work is to identify compound(s) that satisfy the simultaneous requisite criteria of high power factor and low thermal conductivity, so that it may act as a semiconducting basis for further chemical doping. High throughput density functional theory (DFT) In order to examine the stability of the compositions, the formation energy of the compounds is calculated as; and Z with a, b and c numbers of atoms respectively. The electronic transport coefficients i.e. the thermopower (S) and electronic conductivity (σ ) are calculated from the semiclassical Boltzmann theory The phonon band structure is calculated using the finite displacement method as implemented in the phonopy dV ) are extracted from the harmonic phonon band dispersion using python based extensions to phonopy-VASP. For calculating the γ and γ i , the lattice is subjected to strains of ± 2 %. Finally, we use the Asen-Palmer modified version of the Debye Callaway theory 61 parameterized for solids The compositional space attempted in this work is enormous i.e. X p X 1-p Y q Y 1-q Z r Z 1-r (where X, X = Ti, Zr, Hf; Y, Y = Ni, Pd, Pt and Z, Z = Ge, Sn, Pb and p, q, and r = 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1). In order to reduce the number of compositions judicially without elimininating the vital ones, an intelligent screening policy is adopted. As the first step, the electronic structure of all the 27 parent compounds (i.e. those with one element occupying one site to attain the formula XYZ with X = Ti, Zr, Hf; Y = Ni, Pd, Pt, and Z= Ge, Sn, Pb) is computationally evaluated. The computed band gap of the parent compounds show wide variation i.e. from 0.35 to 1.12 eV (see supplimentary information for details). The compounds are preliminarily screened on the basis of their electronic band gap and number of valley degeneracy at the conduction band minimum (CBm) and valence band maximum (VBM), non toxicity and earth abundancy of the elemental constituents (as discussed in details in section 3.4.1). After careful evaluation of the band structure ZrNiSn, TiNiSn and HfNiSn are selected with earth abundant and non toxic Ni and Sn occupying the Y and Z sites. The different stoichiometries (with varying p) for the composition X p X 1-p NiSn, with X, X = Ti, Zr, Hf, is considered as the second step (as discussed in details in section 3.4.2). Once the stoichiometry and the composition for the X site substitution are identified on the basis of their high power factor and low lattice thermal conductivity, they are kept fixed for the subsequent Y site substitution. Thus, for the Y site substitution, the stoichiometry and the composition at the Y site is varried, but the previously identified compositions at the X site and the elemental composition at Z site is kept unchanged (as discussed in section 3.4.3 and 3.4.4). Finally, the same procedure is carried out for the Z site substitution, retaining the composition and stoichiometry for the X and Y site. The entire worflow is depicted schematically in Fig. For the sake of computational brevity, substitutions have been restricted to achieve three different stoichiometries apart from the parental compositions, viz. p/q/r = 0.25, 0.5, 0.75 to achieve the compositions X p X 1-p Y q Y 1-q Z r Z 1-r . The primitive cell (space group 216, F 43m) is considered for calculating the electronic structure and transport coefficients of the parental HH compositions (with lattice parameter ranging from ∼ 4.0 -4.5 Ådepending upon the variation in the compositional space). The conventional cubic lattice of XYZ (space group F 43m) has 12 atoms (i.e. 4 X, 4 Y and 4 Z atoms) in the lattice (with the lattice parameter varying from ∼ 5.9 -6.4 Å). This particular lattice (i.e. 4 X, 4 Y, and 4 Z atoms per f.u) is used as the base structure to identify the ground state structure for the substitutions p/q/r = 0.25, 0.75 at different X, Y and Z site substituted cases, via an iterative scanning strategy. It is to be noted that such substitutions do not break the symmetry of the conventional cubic structure (cf. Fig. The formation energy (E f ) of the compositions is calculated for all pristine compounds and their substituted counterparts using eqn. 1. The formation energy of the 50% substituted compounds were found to be generally in between the formation energy of their pristine parents with only one exception of the Y site substitution with ZrNi 0.5 Pt 0.5 Sn, whereby the formation energy of the substituted compound is found to lower than both its parent counterpart. However, all the half-Heusler parent and the substituted compounds for the above mentioned compositions and stoichiometries are found to have negative formation energy, as shown in Fig. The electronic band structure (eBS) of the compounds may be analysed in terms of the several factors as has been enumerated below (as demonstrated in the schematics of Fig. • Orbital degeneracy, N o , which is the number of bands converging at the VBM or CBm at the same K point). • K point degeneracy, N k , which is the degeneracy of equivalent valleys due to the high symmetry point in the Brillouin zone (i.e. N k = 1 for Γ point and N K = 3 for the X point). • Valley/tip degeneracy N E , which is the number of tips lying at the same energy level for all different K points. • Band/total degeneracy, N v , which is derived from all these degeneracies collectively for a given high symmetry point. Using these notations, the eBS of the parent as well as the substituted compounds are analysed in the following. The primitive cell of the XYZ parent compounds, containing three atoms (one of each species) per unit cell, is considered for performing the eBS calculation. The eBS is plotted along high symmetry path W-L-Γ-X-W-K of the irreducible first Brillouin zone (as shown in Fig. The effect of spin orbit coupling (soc) on the eBS is also explored for these compounds, which is however, found to have very minor effect (see supplimentary information for details). Thus, as revealed from the preliminary band structure analysis, no particular parent XYZ compound is found to be superior or inferior to the other as per as its thermoelectric application is concerned, since they all have narrow band gap with same features in the eBS. Therefore, for the X site substitution, all the three elements viz. Ti, Zr, and Hf are selected for isoelectronic substitution, while the elemental composition for Y (=Ni) and Z (=Sn) site is kept fixed keeping the non toxicity and earth abundancy in account. It is to be noted here that the selected compositions viz. TiNiSn, ZrNiSn and HfNiSn are also the most studied n-type Heusler compounds. Thus, the compositions with X p X 1-p NiSn, with X, X = Ti, Zr, Hf, are explored for the X site substitutions as discussed in the succeeding section. The eBS of X p X 1-p NiSn compositions with X, X = Ti, Zr, Hf is analysed for different stoichiometries viz. p = 0.25, 0.5, 0.75. As discussed earlier, the symmetry of the structure of all compositions with p = 0.25 and p = 0.75 i.e. X 0.25 X 0.75 NiSn and X 0.75 X 0.25 NiSn is found to be identical to the conventional parent lattice. The corresponding band structure of the representative compounds is included in the supplimentary information. These substitutions result in a direct band gap semiconductor, with the CBm lying above the VBM at the Γ point. The p = 0.5 case, on the other hand, has increased number of valley and band degeneracies as compared to the parent as well as the substituted ones with p = 0.25, 0.75 stoichiometries for all compositional variation. As has been discussed in details in the supporting information, the electronic transport properties of the p = 0.5 case is only marginally higher than those of p = 0.25, 0.75. However, major favorable variation in κ l is expected for p = 0.5 as compared to p = 0.25, 0.75 empirically as is also verfied by our DFT results (as explained in details in the section S5.1 of the supporting information). Thus, the eBS of the p = 0.5 is analysed hereby in details. For p = 0.5, all compositions are found to have a direct band gap at the Γ point in the range of ∼ 0.40 -0.45 eV, with another energy degenerate band pocket forming at the M point, where two bands merge (see Fig. For the Y site substitution, the eBS of the compositions Ti 0.5 Zr 0.5 Y q Y 1-q Sn for Y, Y = Ni, Pd, Pt is explored for q = 0.25, 0.5, 0.75. However, in order to highlight the adverse effect of Y site substitution alone, the eBS of the composition ZrNi 0.5 Pd 0.5 Sn (as shown in Fig. In order to explore the reason behind the splitting of the degenerate bands at the M point, which is observed uniquely only for the Y site substitution, the local symmetry around the substituted atom in the tetragonal structure is investigated. As for instance, the local symmetry surrounding the Pd atom at the center of the tetragonal ZrNi 0.5 Pd 0.5 Sn crystal is found to be broken because of the pesence of two different atoms as the first nearest neighbor (leading to different bond lengths arising from the Pd-Sn and the Pd-Zr). However, such a situation does not arise for X site or Z site substitution, where the substituted atom sitting at the center always has the same atom as its first nearest neighbor and for its second nearest neighbor. Therefore, the local symmetry is retained for the X site as well as the Z site substitution (see supplementary Fig. For the Z site substitution, the eBS of the compositions Ti 0.5 Zr 0.5 NiZ r Z 1-r for Z, Z = Ge, Sn, Sb is analysed for r = 0.25, 0.5, 0.75. However, in order to highlight the sole effect of Z site substitution, the eBS of the composition ZrNiGe 0.5 Sn 0.5 (as shown in Fig. The eBS of Ti 0.5 Zr 0.5 NiGe 0.5 Sn 0.5 is plotted in Fig. Overall, the X, Z and X-Z co-site substitution lead to an increase in band degeneracy in the CBm, which offers additional band effective masses with corresponding band degeneracies (N v ) at the high symmetry points. High degeneracy N v within the degenerate energy window of transport can improve the Seebeck coefficient while retaining the high mobility by maintaining low scattering. All these effects may collectively enhance the power factor significantly. But in order to inspect the combined scenario, the transport properties of the representative cases are calculated using the semi classical Boltzmann transport equation. Table ), the electronic (zT el ) and total figure of merit (zT total ), for the electron chemical potential μ (eV) where their maximum value is attained for the n-type and p-type doping at 700 K. Finally, the transport properties of all the filtered compositions viz. X 0.5 X 0.5 NiSn and X 0.5 X 0.5 NiZ 0.5 Z 0.5 for X, X = Ti, Zr, Hf and Z, Z = Ge, Sn are calculated. Few of the representative ones are hereby discussed. The Seebeck coefficient (S)and power factor scaled by the relaxation time ( S 2 σ τ ) are plotted as a function of chemical potential (μ) of electrons and holes in Fig. The Asen-Palmer modified version of the Debye Callaway theory parametrized for solid (see section S4 and S5 of supplementary information for details) is used to model the phonon lifetimes for the normal as well as the Umklapp scattering processes by including the contributions stemming from the transverse acoustic (TA and TA ) and the longitudinal acoustic (LA) phonon modes (from their respective mode group velocities (v i ), Grüneisen parameter (γ i ) and Debye temperatures (θ i ) for i =TA, TA , LA modes. The corresponding plots for the phonon spectrum, group velocity and Grüneisen parameter is included as supplementary material. The corresponding lattice thermal conductivity (κ l = ∑ κ i , for i =TA, TA , LA) is calculated from the corresponding values of the v i , γ i , θ i etc, which are given in table 3. The κ l of the compounds with high power factors viz. the parent Table Band Index ZrNiSn X-site Y-site Z-site co-site (ZrNiSn), X-site (Ti 0.5 Zr 0.5 NiSn), Z-site (ZrNiGe 0.5 Sn 0.5 ) and cosite (Ti 0.5 Zr 0.5 NiGe 0.5 Sn 0.5 ) substituted compounds are only presented for the sake of brevity (see Fig. The dimensionless figure of merit of a thermoelectric material (zT ) can be written as the sum of the electronic and lattice fig- (where τ is choosen to be 10 -14 s)), and κ l is calculated using the Debye Callaway formalism as discussed before. The zT for X-, Y-, Z-and cosubstituted ZrNiSn is also given in table. 1. Pertaining to its lowest power factor, the zT of the Y-site subsituted ZrNi 0.5 Pd 0.5 Sn is found to be the lowest, which show a reduction of 65 % (n-type) and 52% (p-type) in the zT as compared to the parent compound. The zT of X-site substituted Ti 0.5 Zr 0.5 NiSn and Z-site substituted ZrNiGe 0.5 Sn 0.5 is found to comparable for both p-as well as ntype doping. This is found to be approximately 24 % (for ntype) and 20 % (for p-type) higher than the parent ZrNiSn, which stems from the low κ l of the substituted compounds. Pertaining to its lowest κ l , the co-site substituted Ti 0.5 Zr 0.5 NiGe 0.5 Sn 0.5 shows comparable zT as X and Z site substituted compounds, inspite of comparatively lower power factor for the p-type doping. The structural, electronic and transport properties of 18 valence electron count based X p X 1-p Y q Y 1-q Z r Z 1-r (where X, X = Ti, Zr, Hf; Y, Y = Ni, Pd, Pt and Z, Z = Ge, Sn, Pb and p, q, and r = 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1) half-Heusler compounds is investigated using the high throughput first-principles density functional theory calculations. An intelligent scanning strategy is adapted. As the first step, the electronic structure of all the parent compounds is explored in terms of parameters such as the band degeneracy, valley degeneracy, band gap etc, which are generally the most important parameters for improving the power factor. The parent compounds viz. TiNiSn, ZrNiSn and HfNiSn are selected, whereby the Y and Z elements are kept fixed because of their non-toxicity and earth abundance. Subsequently, the elemental composition at the X site is varied as X p X 1-p NiSn with X, X = Ti, Zr, Hf for different stoichiometries viz. p = 0.25, 0.5, 0.75. All the substituted compounds are found to have negative formation energy, which is calculated by the static energy calculations. From the υ s ] of the transverse acoustic (i = TA/TA ) and longitudinal acoustic (i = LA) branches. v i and γ i are calculated from the maximum group velocity and Grüneisen parameter attained by the phonon modes near the Γ point. v s is calculated from v TA , v TA , and v LA using the expression v 3 . Finally, the κ l is calculated using the Debye Callaway formalism and the corresponding value at 300 K is enlisted for few selective compunds viz. the parent (ZrNiSn), X-site (Ti 0.5 Zr 0.5 NiSn), Z-site (ZrNiGe 0.5 Sn 0.5 ) and co-site (Ti 0.5 Zr 0.5 NiGe 0.5 Sn 0.5 ) substituted compounds. band engineering perspective, all these combinations are found to have similar electronic structure as long as the stoichiometries are retained. However, the among the different stoichiometries, the X 0.5 X 0.5 NiSn are found to have higher band and valley degeneracies, indicating improvement in power factor. Thus, Ti 0.5 Zr 0.5 NiSn is chosen as the representative case from the X site substituted compositions (because of the earth abundance of the elements) for proceeding to subsequent substitutions. As the next step, the electronic structure of the Y site substituted compositions viz. Ti 0.5 Zr 0.5 Y q Y 1-q Sn for Y, Y = Ni, Pd, Pt is explored for q = 0.25, 0.5, 0.75. However, all the Y site substitutions led to breaking of the degeneracy of the bands and hence, are not found to be effective for improvising the electronic power factor of the compounds. Subsequently, the electronic structure of the Z site substituted compositions viz. Ti 0.5 Zr 0.5 NiZ r Z 1-r for Z, Z = Ge, Sn, Sb with r = 0.25, 0.5, 0.75 is explored. Our results reveal that the X site and Z site doping may be independently opted for improving the power factor, while the X and Z co-site doping may lead to lowering in power factor for the p-type material. As the last step, the lattice thermal conductivity of these representative compounds is calculated using the Asen Palmer modified version of Debye Callaway theory parameterized for solid. The substituted compounds are found to have κ l reduced by atleast ∼ 60 %, which is due to the intoduction of mass disorder in the same lattice volume. Finally, the zT of X-site substituted Ti 0.5 Zr 0.5 NiSn and Z-site substituted ZrNiGe 0.5 Sn 0.5 (being comparable for both p-as well as n-type doping) is found to be approximately 24 % (for n-type) and 20 % (for p-type) higher than the parent ZrNiSn, which stems from the low κ l of the substituted compounds. However, the co-site substituted composition (Ti 0.5 Zr 0.5 NiGe 0.5 Sn 0.5 ), is found to have comparable zT for both the p-as well as n-type doping, which is preferential for its device application. In summary, DFT calculations are performed to explore the thermoelectric properties of the X, Y and Z substituted half Heusler compounds without restricting the compositions to any prior biases or conclusions from the previous literature. The calculations confirm several known facts as well as reveal several unknown ones. Exemplarily, the Y site substitution is generally avoided experimentally (if at all, there are only few reports of very minute doping at the Y site, which has improved the zT ). This study confirms the scenario and reveals the predicament behind such substitution. However, the Z site substitution, leads to enhancement of the powerfactor, which is comparable to the scenario of X site substitution. However, the Z site substitution has not been hitherto explored thoroughly, which may provide further scope in tuning the zT of these compounds. Thus, this study may serve as a consolidated blue print for experimentalist working with similar compositions for enhancing the powerfactor and zT of the compositions. 1-11 J o u r n a l N a me , [ y e a r ] , [ v o l . ] ,