A finite-size normal conductor, proximity-coupled to a superconductor has been predicted to exhibit a so-called minigap, in which quasiparticle excitations are prohibited. Here, we report on the direct observation of such a minigap in ballistic graphene, coupled to superconducting MoRe leads. The minigap is probed by finite bias spectroscopy through a weakly coupled junction in the graphene region and its value is given by the dimensions of the device. Besides the minigap, we observe a distinct peak in the differential resistance, which we attribute to weakly coupled Andreev bound states (ABS) located near the superconductor-graphene interface. For weak magnetic fields, the phase accumulated in the normal-conducting region shifts the ABS in quantitative agreement with predictions from tight-binding calculations based on the Bogolioubov-de Gennes equation as well as with an analytical semiclassical model. Superconductivity is an intriguing quantum state of matter where electrons pair up into Cooper pairs which in turn condense and form a collective many-body ground state Depending on the current applied, the superconductorgraphene-superconductor (SGS) junction can be operated in different regimes. This is highlighted in Fig. As in Ref. Next we focus on the energy scale of the observed minigap. When operating the device slightly above I c , we have an effective SN junction that allows via the measurement of the differential conductance to probe the density of states (DOS), including the minigap of the partly proximitized graphene (region A only, see illustration in Fig. In Fig. In Fig. To elucidate the origin of the B-field dependence of the observed resistance peak (i.e., the weakly coupled ABS) we simulate a graphene SN junction. We consider a 2 μm wide graphene stripe, which is superconducting for x < 0, normal conducting for x > 0 and features open boundary conditions on both sides (x < 0 and x > 100 nm) to describe an extended quantum system. Our simulation is based on a third-nearest neighbor tight binding de- scription of graphene using the Bogolioubov-de Gennes equation where we choose E F = 170 meV (electrons) in the region without top gate (region A), and -30 meV (holes) under the top gate (region B). We find the same qualitative behavior for different potential configurations, as long as |n B | |n A |. To make the size of our system manageable, we rescale spatial coordinates by a factor of ten while keeping the band structure the same. Inside the superconductor, ∆(x) = ∆ 0 = 1.2 meV. In the normal conducting region, we include the magnetic field by a Peierl's phase, while keeping B = 0 in the superconducting part of the sample due to the Meissner effect. We include a randomly correlated disorder potential with an amplitude V 2 = 20 meV ( V = 0) and correlation length of 20 nm to average over details of the potential landscape. We calculate eigenstates of the cavity around ε = 0 (Fig. reminiscent of degenerate perturbation theory with a zero-field splitting γ given by the disorder. For magnetic fields αB γ the magnetic field dependence of ε A (B) becomes approximately linear, ε A (B) ≈ ε 0 -αB, with a slope of -α. To obtain an analytical estimate for α, we consider a semiclassical picture where the second term is due to the enclosed magnetic flux. The value of φ C drops out when determining α as we bring the above equation into the form Inserting the geometry at hand, with a ≈ 1 2 (2.6 μm × 60 nm) and A ≈ 2W = 5.2 μm yields α sem = a v F /( A Φ 0 ) ≈ 4.2 meV/T, in close agreement with an average over 145 disorder realizations for our numerical model, α num ≈ (4 ± 1) meV/T and also with the experimental value α exp = (3.3 ± 0.4) meV/T (extracted from the dashed line in Fig. For larger magnetic fields, our calculations do not reproduce the sharp, teeth-like features and oscillating patterns of experiment. Instead, we find multiple avoided crossings between states converging towards ε A /∆ = 0. We conjecture that the experimental features are related to vortices that can tunnel in the type-II superconductor, which are not included in our model. They would cause the local magnetic field to deviate from the external one -as corroborated by the hysteresis and asymmetry in B field observed in experiment. Furthermore, the penetration depth is dependent on the applied magnetic field, which has an influence on the trajectory lengths. To describe these effects at high magnetic fields, a selfconsistent calculation would be required. In conclusion, we have shown the first observation of a minigap in a ballistic system by transport experiments. The minigap arises to due proximity coupling of ballistic graphene to superconducting leads. We can reproduce the evolution of the Andreev bound states with a full simulation of the experimental geometry as well as with a semiclassical model. Using a model system based on the Bogolioubov-de Gennes equation and experimental parameters such as the device geometry we can repro-duce ABS that couple weakly to the normal part of the graphene system. The magnetic field dependence of its energy agrees well with experiment, and with an analytical estimate based on Andreev orbits. Our work demonstrates that graphene offers a highly interesting playground for testing theoretical predictions made for Andreev billards 