Ba2CaMoO6 was synthesized by solid state method. The crystal structure adopts cubic Fm-3m space group at room temperature with lattice parameters of 8.378231(5) Å. Upon cooling, Ba2CaMoO6 was determined to have a structural phase transition to tetragonal I4/m (a=5.905763(6) Å and c=8.38817(1) Å) around 200 K. The phase transition was probed structurally by synchrotron and neutron diffraction and thermodynamically by specific heat and differential scanning calorimetry measurement. This structural phase transition will deepens our understanding of the perovskite family especially the formation of perovskites that break corner sharing networks. Perovskites became intensively studied after the discovery of dielectric and ferroelectric properties in the perovskite BaTiO3. In perovskites the Goldschmidt tolerance factor (τ) where rA, rB, and rX are the ionic radii of A, B, and X respectively, can be used to predict if the structure will undergo structural distortions from the cubic phase to accommodate the differing sizes in the cation. Ideal cubic perovskite structures usually have τ in range 0.9-1. In the case of a relatively large A-site cation and relatively small B-site cation, the tolerance factor becomes larger than 1 and the BO6 octahedra are face-sharing or edge-sharing instead of corner-sharing and a hexagonal perovskite is formed. Conversely, when the tolerance factor is in the range 0.7-0.9, distortion of BO6 octahedra leads to cooperative octahedral tilting (COT) that accommodates for a small A-site cation. Even smaller tolerance factors results in the stabilization of the LiNbO3 structure type. In Ba2CaMoO6, the tolerance factor is calculated to be 0.98 implying that it maybe cubic at all temperatures. However, in other perovskites, such as the aforementioned NCOT perovskite, Sr3WO6, as well as K3WO3F3, Rb3WO3F3, K3AlF6, Rb2KCrF6, Rb2KGaF6, and CsInCl3 all possess relatively high tolerance factors of 0.94, 0.96, 0.95, 0.95, 0.93, 0.92, and 1.0 respectively. probed below 300 K. Furthermore, the transition temperature from cubic to cooperative tilting was found to be around 200 K by heat capacity and differential scanning calorimetry. To probe for the presence of a phase transition below room temperature powder XRD was collected at room temperature, 100 K and 12 K. As can be seen in the insets of Figure The synchrotron room temperature data does not contain additional low intensity super structure peaks, which are indicative of NCOT structures, relative to the pattern expected for the cubic structure. In the related compound, Ba2CaWO6, a second-order phase transition from the high temperature was also observed ~220 K and was proposed to be a transition from the high temperature cubic structure, Fm-3m, to a tetragonal structure, I4/m, Low temperature synchrotron and neutron data were refined independently due to differences in temperatures. Rietveld refinement of the 100 K synchrotron data gave a χ 2 of 3.38 and the 10 K neutron gave a χ 2 of 2.12 when refining to the I4/m structure. It is noted that there is a small negative displacement parameter for molybdenum in the synchrotron data, however it is considered small enough that it is not significant and could be set to zero without changing the overall refinment. A decrease in the unit cell volume of 0.3067 Å 3 is seen between the 100 K and the 10 K data as expected upon cooling. The I4/m structure (Figure where R0 is the bond valence parameter and dij is the bond length between atoms i and j, shows a small deviation from the expected oxidation state for Ba 2+ and Mo 6+ , but Ca 2+ consistently shows approximately 0.6 higher than expected value for all refined temperatures. The distortion index, D, is a measure of the refined deviation of the cuboctahedra and octahedra of the refined A and B-sites respectively and is given by, where n is the number of bonds defining the polyhedra and davg is the average bond length in the polyhedra. Given the similarities in the refined bond lengths it can be seen that the distortion indices are low for all cation sites in the low temperature structures. Given the symmetry of A and B-sites in the cubic structure, the polyhedra cannot deviate from ideal and thus have a distortion index of zero. Overall, bond lengths, bond valence sums, and distortion indices indicate that the propose room and low temperature structures of Ba2CaMoO6 are reasonable. In this study we found that Ba2CaMoO6 does not adopt a NCOT structure between 10 K and 300 K but instead adopts the same cooperative octahedral tilted structure, I4/m, below the transition temperature of 200 K as also seen in the tungsten analog. Above the transition temperature, it adopts the cubic perovskite structure. This indicates that having a difference of B and Bʹ in the expected range of 0.50 and 0.66 Å and/or a small ΔIR of counter ions may play a significant role in the formation of NCOT compounds. Additional, studies to isolate these parameters from one another are underway. It should be noted that to date no known NCOT oxide with Mo 6+ on the B′ has been observed and thus the role of the covalency of the Bʹ-site in the formation of NCOT compounds is also still under investigation. ground in an agate mortar and pestle for approximately 20 minutes. The sample was heated in an open alumina crucible for 24 hours at 1073 K followed by several additional heatings at 1373 K for 12 hours, with intermediate manual grinding between each heating. The purity of the sample was probed after each heating using a Rigaku Miniflex powder x-ray diffractometer equipped with a copper source (λ=1.54 Å) and a variable slit aperture. Synthetic attempts with oxides in place of the carbonates resulted in secondary phases.