The 3 heating modes are utilized to make ZrN powders have 3 different levels of the electric current density at the same temperature during spark plasma sintering (SPS). The constitutive equation of sintering for SPS is applied to the experimental porosity evolution of ZrN from three SPS modes, and this showed high electric current density increase the electric current assisted deformability value of ZrN pellets, resulting in a reduction of the flow stress. The electric current flow enhances the dislocation motion, which was experimentally proved and analyzed by modified Williamson-Hall equation applying to X-ray diffraction results, and the mechanical strength test of ZrN pellets. Densification of the powders like metal and ceramic can be occurred by three mechanisms: sintering, particle rearrangement, and plastic deformation Electroplastic theory shows that the electron flow helps the dislocation motion through lattice structure, resulting in the reduction of flow stress required for the deformation of solid material (meaning fully dense material) Back to SPS, EPE can easily explain the large plastic deformation of the particle itself under electric current In the previous report In this study, the effect of electric current flow on material's deformability (A ECAD ) and dislocation density during ZrN densification process were elucidated by special 3 SPS modes experiments enabling the deconvolution of the electric current effects from the thermal contribution. ZrN powders (FCC, Fm3m) produced by Sigma-Aldrich with an average particle size of 2 μm were employed. The sintering experiments were carried out using the SPS device manufactured by SPS Syntex Inc., (Dr. Sinter SPSS-515, USA) with a graphite (EDM-4, Poco Graphite, Inc., TX, USA)) tooling setup. As shown in Fig. For the deconvolution of electric current effect from the thermal effect, the exact temperature of the sample in SPS should be measured. Due to the high sintering temperature (1600 °C), the pyrometer was preferred as a temperature detecting and PID (proportionalintegral-derivative) controlling device ZrN TC ZrN Pyro TT    (1) Where T ZrN_Pyro and T_ ZrN_TC are the temperatures (in °C) measured for ZrN by the pyrometer and by the thermocouple, respectively. By this method, instead of 1600 oC obtained from a pyrometer, 1717 oC obtained by Eq. ( Because the processing conditions and measured sample temperature were same for the 3 processing modes during SPS, the electric current is the only factor to affect the densification behavior of ZrN powders. The total electric current values recorded by the SPS system (I t ) are not identical to the amount of the electric current (I s ) passing through the samples during SPS. I s value is clear for the high J (100% of I t ) and the insulation modes (0% of I t ). However, for the normal J mode I s is not the same as I t , and is mainly affected by the electrical and thermal properties of the graphite die set. An electro-thermal model based on the finite element code COMSOL TM has been developed within the framework of the present studies to estimate the I s during the normal J mode. The properties of the materials considered and the detailed boundary conditions of the FEM simulations have been previously described where I s is electric current passing through the samples (A), A cross-section is cross-sectional area of the full density sample (cm 2 ), R is particle radius (cm), S is average area of contacts between two particles (cm 2 ), and Z is coordination number. With I s obtained from the FEM simulation and SPS experiment, J OL was estimated for all 3 SPS modes as shown in Fig. In the present study, the constitutive equation of the continuum theory of sintering for SPS taking into account the electric current effects based on the electroplasticity theory Where  is the densification rate (1/s), G is the shear modulus (MPa), d is the grain size (m), p is the grain size exponent, T is the absolute temperature (K), b is the Burgers vector (m), Q is the creep activation energy (KJ/mol), and R is the gas constant (J/molK), θ is the porosity, z  is the Z-axis applied stress (MPa), m is the strain rate sensitivity, A 0 is the creep parameter (Pa•s/K), β is electric current effect coefficient, ω is electric current sensitivity, t 0 , t f is the starting and final time for SPS respectively (s), and λ is electrical resistivity of the powder (Ωcm). Here, A 0 is specified by: Where k is the Boltzmann's constant (J/K), A cr is the material's creep constant, and D 0 is the diffusion constant (cm 2 /s). TD (1/s) and A ECAD (1/s) indicating the thermal deformability and electric current assisted deformability of the powders the constitutive equation for SPS can be simply written as The relative density lower than 92% the holding stage was chosen for finding the constitutive parameters for the 3 SPS modes to prevent the possibility of the grain growth effects influencing on the densification mechanism In the constitutive equation for SPS, 4 parameters (m, A TD , β, and ω) in Eq. ( At first, m value of used ZrN powders was experimentally obtained by SPS with two different pressure (20 MPa and 30 MPa) at the same temperature (1500 °C) (Fig. Where 1  and 2  are the densification rate for 20MPa and 30MPa case at specified porosity (θ = 0.225, 0.25 and 0.275). Averaged m value of ZrN is 0.504. Larger m value compared with microsized ZrN powders (m = 0.22 Secondly, with m value from the first step, A TD is only one fitting parameter and is 10042.88 (1/s) by applying constitutive equation for SPS to porosity evolution curve from the insulation mode (Black curve and asterisk symbols in Fig. Lastly, with m and A TD values by previous two steps, and obtained J OL by Eq. ( The m value means the pressure sensitivity of the material in the power law creep behavior X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Bruker D-8 diffractometer, MA, USA), utilizing CuKα radiation at room temperature was investigated to ZrN pellets from 3 SPS modes (Fig. In summary, the 3 SPS modes experiments with different electric current density and fitting by constitutive equation for SPS demonstrated that the electric current can influence the deformability of the powders during the sintering. Reduced dislocation density by increasing electric current density based on XRD analysis, also supported by the mechanical strength and microstructural characterization, strongly indicate that electron affects the dislocation motion.