Hybrid superconductor-semiconductor heterostructures are promising platforms for realizing topological superconductors and exploring Majorana bound states physics. Motivated by recent experimental progress, we theoretically study how magnetic insulators offer an alternative to the use of external magnetic fields for reaching the topological regime. We consider different setups, where: (1) the magnetic insulator induces an exchange field in the superconductor, which leads to a splitting in the semiconductor by proximity effect, and (2) the magnetic insulator acts as a spin-filter tunnel barrier between the superconductor and the semiconductor. We show that the spin splitting in the superconductor alone cannot induce a topological transition in the semiconductor. To overcome this limitation, we propose to use a spin-filter barrier that enhances the magnetic exchange and provides a mechanism for a topological phase transition. Moreover, the spin-dependent tunneling introduces a strong dependence on the band alignment, which can be crucial in quantum-confined systems. This mechanism opens up a route towards networks of topological wires with fewer constraints on device geometry compared to previous devices that require external magnetic fields. Topological superconductivity has been predicted to appear in one-dimensional spin-orbit coupled semiconductors proximitized by an s-wave superconductor. In these systems, an external magnetic field causes the gap to close. In the presence of a strong spin-orbit interaction, the gap reopens, leading to a topological phase where V Z is the Zeeman energy, μ the semiconductor chemical potential, and ∆ the superconducting pairing amplitude. In the topological phase, the system behaves as a spinless p-wave superconductor and Majorana bound states appear at the edges of the system. These states have been proposed to be used for topological quantum computation Magnetic materials are alternatives to the use of external magnetic fields. This idea was discussed by some early works in the field, where magnetic insulators (MIs) were used to induce a spin splitting by means of stray fields Developments in the fabrication technology have enabled the integration of thin layers of the MI EuS in the hybrid Sm-Sc InAs-Al nanowires with excellent interface quality In experiments with ferromagnetic hybrid nanowires, spectroscopic measurements have shown the onset of a zero-bias conductance peak which has been interpreted as a signature of localized Majorana bound states at their ends In these devices, however, the induced exchange field in the Sm is weak and short range FIG. In this paper, we provide a theory for the combined superconductivity and magnetic proximity effect in Sc-MI-Sm and MI-Sc-Sm heterostructures, as illustrated in Fig. A MI layer can induce several effects in the Sm-Sc device, depending on the heterostructure layout, as shown in Fig. One of the effects of the MI layer is the induction of an exchange field in both the Sm and the Sc. This is due to the microscopic scattering interaction between the electrons and the localized magnetic moments in the MI. We can describe the effect of the interface through a Heisenberg-like term H int = -J d 3 r S MI • S, which describes the coupling between the spin density of the metals S and the localized spins in the insulator, S MI . The coupling strength J is related to the exchange integral between the localized orbitals and the free electron. This coupling strength is in principle different for the conduction band electrons of the MI and the electrons in the proximitized material In this work we disregard the induced exchange field in the Sm as experimental evidence suggests that it is small in the tested devices If the MI considered is a magnetic semiconductor like EuS, the conduction band is not accessible at low temperatures. The modest band gap can be used to fabricate spin filter tunnel barriers, using thin films, that allows spin-dependent tunneling through it when placed between two metallic regions In the following, we compare the two different situations represented in Fig. To simplify the treatment, we consider a translationinvariant system along the longitudinal direction, z, consisting of a single-channel Sm coupled to a Sc. The complete Hamiltonian of the system reads ( The Sm is described by where we use the spinors c pz = (c pz↑ , c pz↓ ) and c pzσ is the electron annihilation operator in the Sm, while α x is the spin-orbit coupling strength. The bare Hamiltonian for the Sc is given by where a npz is the electron annihilation operator for the mode n in the Sc and ξ npz = We neglect the possible superconductive interband coupling and we assume singlet pairing in the parent superconductor gap matrix ∆ npz = ∆ 0,npz σ 0 . As anticipated, our Sc model features a homogeneous exchange field V Sc = V z e z induced by the nearby MI, which we consider to be aligned to the wire. A crucial information is the distribution of the transverse modes in the Sc, ε n , which strongly depends on the device geometry. The energy separation between transverse modes can range from a value larger than the superconducting gap for very thin Sc film to zero for a bulk superconductor, where the modes above the gap form a continuum. The Sc and Sm regions are coupled through a spindependent, momentum conserving, tunneling Hamiltonian where the hopping matrix T npz describes the electron tunneling processes taking place at the interfaces between the two materials. We write T npz in the basis of Pauli matrices T npz = t 0,npz σ 0 + i t i,npz σ i . In the following, we set t x,npz = t y,npz = 0 as they are negligible for a uniformly polarized MI layer. Moreover, we consider only the case of real and positive t 0,npz and t z,npz . This is justified as we are assuming that spin-orbit coupling is absent in the Sc. An extended derivation with all the terms can be found in Appendix A 3. The bare Sc retarded Green's function in the basis of time-reversed pairs reads: where the τ i are the Pauli matrices in the particle-hole space. In this work we ignore any back action of the Sm on the Sc as the electron density in the Sm is orders of magnitude smaller than the one in the Sc. The retarded Green's function of the Sm reads npz describes the coupling to the Sc. This allows us to write a low-energy effective model for the Sm. Since we focus on the the quantum phase transition characterized by the gap closing, we work with the effective Hamiltonian H eff = H Sm + H0 where the induced Hamiltonian is H0 = Σ(ω = 0). We can split the effective Hamiltonian into three different contributions: with ∆(p z ) = ∆0 (p z )σ 0 + i ∆i (p z )σ i . These three terms describe the shift in the chemical potential, the induced exchange field and the induced superconducting gap matrix in the Sm. The explicit forms of these contributions are where we have divided the induced Zeeman term into two contributions Ṽz = Ṽ (1) z . The first one is proportional to the splitting in the parent Sc A. Semiconductor symmetrically coupled to a spin-split superconductor In this section, we show that the combined superconducting and exchange proximity effects induced by the coupling to a spin-split Sc cannot induce, alone, a topological transition in the Sm. We consider a system like the one sketched in Fig. Taking the ratio of Eqs. ( so the induced gap polarization ratio in the Sm is the same as in the Sc. The gap polarization ratio V Sc /∆ 0 has to be less than unity in the parent Sc, otherwise superconductivity is suppressed in the whole device. In the case of a large homogeneous Sc, this ratio is limited by the stricter Chandrasekhar-Clogston bound, which dictates that a finite superconducting gap can only be maintained if We consider now the case of a spin-asymmetric tunneling between the Sc and the Sm, taken as momentum independent for simplicity and described by T = t 0 σ 0 + t z σ z . As Eqs. ( We first analyze the contribution of an isolated Sc mode to the effective Hamiltonian, as the ones from the different modes add up. The behavior of the induced term in the effective Hamiltonian is illustrated in Fig. (1) z and V (2) z sum constructively for μ Sc > ε n . Both Ṽz and ∆0 decay for |ξ n,0 | → ∞, leading to the existence of an optimal regime where both the induced exchange field and superconducting pairing are maximal and Ṽz / ∆0 > 1. This is the ideal region for searching for topological superconductivity. In general, a spin-dependent component t i in the tunneling matrix enhances the collinear component in the exchange field Ṽi , suppressing the non collinear components in Ṽ and the superconducting gap in the Sm. From Eqs. ( In contrast to Ṽ (1) z , the second contribution Ṽ z to the induced exchange field in the semiconductor is totally independent of the spin polarization in the parent superconductor. This term depends solely on the spin-asymmetric component of the tunneling Hamiltonian. Moreover, Ṽ z has an energy dependence ∼ ξ -1 , with a sign that depends on the relative position of the mode to the Sc Fermi energy. Since ∆0 and Ṽ (1) z dominates as the energy difference between the Sm and Sc modes increases. This contribution exhibits a sign change, which leads to a cancellation of Ṽ (2) z in the limit of small energy separation between modes. However, in thin Scs, the transverse modes can exhibit a large energy separation because of quantum confinement effects. This result suggests that there are two different mechanisms that can drive the system to the topological phase. First, the spin-dependent tunneling enhances the induced gap-polarization ratio of spin-split superconductor. Alternatively, the spin-dependent tunneling combined with the quantum confinement in the Sc can lead to the appearance of the topological phase in regimes where, otherwise, the phase diagram would be globally trivial. If the separation between transverse modes in the Sc is large enough, the contribution of the mode closest to the chemical potential dominates over the other ones. We can visualize this system like two coupled one-dimensional wires, where one features both spin splitting and superconductivity while the other features only spin-orbit coupling. In the rest of this section, we set the energy of the bottom of the single Sc band to zero, ε 0 = 0, as it only causes a shift of the energy scale. In this way μ Sc = -ξ 0,pz=0 . The topological transition can occur when the induced exchange field is larger than the induced gap. In this specific case, both the spin splitting and the superconducting pairing are inherited by the parent Sc, while the effective chemical potential is the sum of the bare nanowire electrochemical potential and the renormalization term induced by the proximity effect. To identify the critical lines, we impose the condition Ṽ 2 z = (μ Sm + μ) 2 + ∆2 0 . To simplify the calculation, we take the limit ∆ 0 → 0 as the chemical potential of the Sc is usually much bigger than the gap parameter. In this way, we find the analytical conditions This result allows us to identify the regions in the parameter space where the topological phases exist. The same result can be obtained by calculating analytically the Pfaffian invariant of this system, as shown in Appendix C. An illustration of the phase diagram of this simple system is shown in Fig. The size of the topological region depends on the product μ Sm μ Sc , as shown in Eqs. In a more realistic scenario, the Sc features many transverse modes. In this case, Eqs. ( z have a Lorentzian shape with a full width at half maximum Γ = ∆ 2 0 -V 2 z . We can use Γ as a reference to distinguish between discrete modes, δε Γ, and a continuum distribution of modes, δε Γ, where δε is the average separation of modes. Indeed, if the average energy separation between the transverse modes is δε Γ, the resonance peaks do not overlap entirely and the resonance peaks of V (2) z do not completely cancel out. In this case, the net exchange field experienced in the Sm will be due to the sum of the contribution of each transverse mode. To provide a clearer picture, we consider the case where the band structure of the Sc can be described by perfectly equidistant transverse modes. In this case, δε is the relative separation between the Sc modes. This approximation recovers the continuum limit for a 2D system, where we expect a constant density of transverse modes g m = (δε) -1 . We also define δμ Sc as the relative position of the Fermi energy in the Sc from the middle of the band. We proceed by summing up the modes contributions following Eqs. ( By varying the chemical potential in the Sc, as the subbands cross the Fermi energy we see an alternation of trivial regions (gray background) and regions where topological superconductivity can appear by tuning μ Sm (white background). This behavior is more clearly illustrated by the topological invariant and the effective gap, shown in Fig. The observation of an alternation of topological and trivial phases while varying δμ Sc is consistent with Fig. z cause an oscillation between topologically trivial and nontrivial phases while varying the chemical potential in the Sc. 1/∆ 0 corresponds to a large Sc where the effect of quantum confinement becomes completely negligible. This behavior can be realized if the average separation of the transverse modes is such that δε Γ. In this limit, the contributions from each mode overlap leading to a globally trivial or topological phase, depending on the polarization of the spin-filter barrier t z /t 0 . A quantitative criterion can be obtained by integrating Eqs. ( We note that the spin-dependent tunneling leads to an enhancement of the induced exchange field, while reducing the induced superconducting gap. This effect can be used to bring the induced gap polarization ratio above one, closing the gap at p z = 0 and inducing a quantum phase transition to the topological phase. Therefore, the spin-asymmetric tunneling provides a way to overcome the limitation of Eq. ( We assume that the chemical potential in the Sm is tuned such that μSm = -μ. In this section, we discuss the applicability of the spin tunneling mechanism for generating topological superconductivity to the case of EuS-Al-InAs platforms. EuS is a magnetic semiconductor with an optical bandgap of E g = 1.65 eV, which can be effectively tuned by quantum confinement and, therefore, it depends on the film thickness As discussed in the previous section, the behavior of the system is strongly dependent on the band structure of the Sc, which is controlled by the dimension of the Al region. If a wide Al shell is used, the transverse modes of the nanowire will be densely distributed in the energy spectrum. In this case, Ṽ z vanishes and topological superconductivity can only be induced using the spinasymmetric tunneling to enhance Ṽ z and suppress ∆0 , Eq. ( To check if the ferromagnetic hybrid nanowire is in this regime, we can estimate the average mode separation by a simple particle in a box model δε , where L Sc refers to the largest dimension of the cross section of the Sc shell. Assuming that Γ ∼ 100 μeV, which is in line with the experimental measurements of Al-EuS heterostructures Previous measurements performed on EuS-Al heterostructures have shown a polarization of around 50% of the gap Estimating the optimal magnetic barrier length to achieve this polarization is a complicated task as strong spin-polarized band bending is expected at the interfaces. As the barrier gets thicker, we expect a stronger polarization, but at the same time, the coupling between the two systems gets strongly suppressed. Therefore, the optimal barrier length would be determined by the trade-off between a strongly polarizing thick barrier, which, however, suffers low transparency, and a thin transparent barrier with low polarization. The introduction of MI in 2DEG is more challenging as the geometry and fabrication constraints make the introduction of Sc-Sm, MI-Sm, and MI-Sc interfaces at the same time particularly complicated. The use of MI as a spin-filter tunnel barrier simplifies the design of topological quantum devices by eliminating the need of the Sc-Sm interface. Using this new operating principle, the geometry sketched in Fig. Finally, we note that both nanowires Sc shell and Sc layers in 2DEG systems are around 5 nm thick, so we can already expect a measurable effect of quantum confinement in this direction. For this reason, we expect that the resonance effect discussed previously can be measured by scaling down the width of the devices. In this work, we have demonstrated that a spin-split superconductor cannot induce, alone, topological superconductivity in a spin-orbit coupled semiconductor by the combined superconducting and magnetic proximity effect. This is in contradiction with the hypothesis that an exchange field in the superconductor can induce a topological transition in the semiconductor. We have shown how a spin-filter tunnel barrier, provided by a thin magnetic insulating layer between the semiconductor and the superconductor, can be used to overcome this limitation. The spin-dependent tunneling suppresses the induced superconducting pairing potential while enhancing the spin splitting, thus providing a way to bring the system to the topological phase. In the case of a distribution of discrete modes in the superconductor, the phase diagram exhibits an alternation of trivial and topological regions as a function of the chemical potential of the superconductor due to a change on the sign in the contributions to the exchange field. The total induced exchange field strongly depends on the relative energy difference between the closest levels to the Fermi energy in the superconductor. While this mechanism is unlikely to explain the results in Ref. Note added. Recently, several independent papers on the same subject have been made publicly available as preprints. The result concerning the impossibility of topological phases by superconductor-mediated exchange field has been extended to generic systems in terms of a more general requirement about the minimal Zeeman field required for a topological phase transition The ferromagnetic hybrid nanowire physics has been explored using a self-consistent treatment of a diffusive superconductor in Ref. where ijk is the Levi-Civita symbol. We can see that the presence of transverse components in the tunneling matrices causes a reduction of both the induced exchange field and superconducting pairing potential. However, if these amplitudes are complex, a non trivial resonance contribution can appear in the Ṽ (2) i term enhancing the induced exchange field. Moreover, when complex amplitudes are present the induced gap can show interference effects due to the coupling between the various Sc bands induced by the Sm.