Fast discrimination between quantum states of superconducting artificial atoms is an important ingredient for quantum information processing. In circuit quantum electrodynamics, increasing the signal field amplitude in the readout resonator, dispersively coupled to the artificial atom, improves the signal-to-noise ratio and increases the measurement strength. Here we employ this effect over two orders of magnitude in readout power, made possible by the unique combination of a dimer Josephson junction array amplifier with a large dynamic range, and the fact that the readout of our granular aluminum fluxonium artificial atom remained quantum-non-demolition (QND) at relatively large photon numbers in the readout resonator, up to n = 110. Using Bayesian inference, this allows us to detect quantum jumps faster than the readout resonator response time 2/κ, where κ is the bandwidth of the readout resonator. Quantum jumps -transitions between discrete energy levels of a quantum system -have been measured over the last two decades in various physical systems The speed of quantum-non-demolition (QND) readout in circuit quantum electrodynamics By performing a continuous measurement and benefiting from the remarkable insensitivity to n of a granular Aluminum (grAl) fluxonium During the continuous measurement of a qubit coupled to a readout resonator, schematically shown in Fig. Our experimental setup is shown in Fig. In Fig. versus the integration time τ , where α |g ,|e are the pointer states, σ |g ,|e are the corresponding variances, and φ eg is the phase difference between the pointer states, η = 0.6 ± 0.1 is the quantum effeciency (see appendix A). Following Eq.( H ∈{g,e,f} Here, P H (t + τ ) is the conditional probability for each fluxonium state hypothesis H ∈ {g,e,f}, given that pointer state phases φ t+τ and φ t were measured at times t + τ and t, respectively. Equation ( A typical detection sequence for quantum jumps between the |e , |g , and |f fluxonium states using the recursive Bayesian filter of Eq.( In Fig. In Fig. In summary, by exploiting the increasing SNR with n we demonstrate a decrease of the artificial atom's state detection time. This is achieved by monitoring the transient trajectories in the IQ plane of the readout resonator response, triggered by quantum jumps between the three lowest energy states of the artificial atom. We show that quantum states can be discriminated by using a recursive Bayesian filter before the resonator reaches its steady state. In our case the Bayesian filter is applied in postprocessing. However, one can imagine using more sophisticated filtering, and potentially running it in real time by hardware encoding on a FPGA-based instrument Here φ t is the measured phase at time t, φ H is the phase of the respective steady state, and C H = 1±0.2 an empirical coefficient accounting for the resonator nonlinearity and for the term e i(ω drive -ω H )τ in Eq.(C1). Both pointer state evolution (Eq.(C1)) and exponential phase evolution (Eq.(C2)) showed similar results when used for the Bayesian filtering, and in this work we utilized the simpler Eq.(C2) to calculate the expected phase φ calc t+τ for Eq.(3). The measurement setup is shown in Fig. 