Pairing correlation of Cooper pair is a fundamental property of multi-fermion interacting systems. For nucleons, two modes of the Cooper-pair coupling may exist, namely of S12 = 0 with L12 = 0 (spin-singlet s-wave) and S12 = 1 with L12 = 1 (spin-triplet p-wave). In nuclear physics, it has been an open question whether the spin-singlet or spin-triplet coupling is dominant, as well as how to measure their role. We investigate a relation between the magnetic-dipole (M1) excitation of nuclei and the pairing modes within the framework of relativistic nuclear energy-density functional (RNEDF). The pairing correlations are taken into account by the relativistic Hartree-Bogoliubov (RHB) model in the ground state, and the relativistic quasi-particle random-phase approximation (RQRPA) is employed to describe M1 transitions. We have shown that M1 excitation properties display a sensitivity on the pairing model involved in the calculations. The systematic evaluation of M1 transitions together with the accurate experimental data enables us to discern the pairing properties in finite nuclei. Pairing correlation is a fundamental property of multifermion interacting systems. In the original Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) picture In atomic nuclei, the nuclear Cooper pair has been interpreted as a consequence of the residual interaction The pairing interaction plays an essential role to determine the binding energy, which shows so-called odd-even staggering behaviour relevant to the pairing gap energy. For its evaluation, theoretical models of the attractive force in the SS-pairing channel have been utilized In our recent studies In this work, we investigate the isovector (IV) M1 excitation focusing on its pairing-mode sensitivity, i.e. the role of the SS and ST pairing channels. Our theoretical framework is based on the RNEDF theory In the next section, the theoretical and numerical details are presented. Our main results and discussions are presented in sec. III. Finally in sec. IV, we summarize this work. In this work, the spherical symmetry is assumed, and we employ the CGS-Gauss system of units. Parameters in this work are fixed as the same in ref. The DD-PC1 Lagrangian includes the isoscalar-scalar, isoscalar-vector, and isovector-vector channels, where their derivative terms are also employed for a quantitative description of the nuclear density distribution The IV-PV term, on the other side, gives a finite contribution only in the RQRPA solution of the 1 + states in the SP format including the spin ŝν and orbital angular momentum lν with ν = 0 or ±1. The IV g coefficients are given as g s 2 .586, and g (N) s = -3.826. For simplicity, we neglect the quenching effect on g coefficients for all the positive QRPA eigenvalues, ω i > 0. Note that, in this work, we neglect the effect of the mesonexchange current as well as the couplings to complex configurations For the particle-particle channel, with the nonrelativistic approximation similarly in ref. where d is the relative distance, d = |r 2 -r 1 |, and Pσ is the spin-exchange operator. For its parameters, the first option in this work is the "D1S" pairing interaction For the S 12 = 0 part of S1P, on the other side, it is tuned to reproduce the same two-neutron separation energy of 42 Ca obtained with the D1S pairing. Since the 42 Ca nucleus can be well approximated as the doubly-magic 40 Ca core plus two valence neutrons, the gap of binding energies of 40 Ca and 42 Ca, namely the two-neutron separation energy S 2n , is a suitable reference for the effective pairing strength. The S1P parameters are given as μ i = (0.82006, 1.4665) fm, W i = (-1144, 68.92) MeV, B i = (864.5, -108.716) MeV, H i = (-1277, 158.645) MeV, and M i = (864.5, -90.071) MeV for i = (a, b), respectively. Note that the present S1P parameterization is just one tool of Gaussian pairing. Even if one employs it for the Gogny-HFB calculations First, we verify how the two pairing interactions, D1S and S1P, describe the ground state properties. In Fig. The results show that the two pairing models are of the same quality in the description of the GS properties. We have also checked the consistency of the D1S and S1P pairing models in the Sn and Pb isotopes. The respective results are separately summarized in the Appendix, whereas we focus on the Ca isotopes in the following sections. Figure In the next step, we explore the sensitivity of the M1 excitation properties on the pairing potential involved. In Fig. Figure where k = 0 and 1. Consistently to the strength distribution in Fig. There is a connection between the m k values and the GS structure. In Fig. We mention the generalized rule of energy-weighted summation by Hinohara no-pairing one. In Fig. Figure Notice that the pairing-model sensitivity shown in the present results is independent of the M1-quenching effect. The quenching factors on g s and g l may change the B(M1) height by the constant ratio, but commonly for the D1S and S1P-pairing cases. Namely, even if we employ these quenching factors, the difference between the D1S and S1P-pairing results cannot be cancelled. Summarizing this work, we have investigated the pairing-mode sensitivity of the IV-M1 excitation. Within the RNEDF framework, the relativistic Hartree-Bogoliubov model and relativistic QRPA are employed, using the density-dependent point-coupling interaction. The effects of the spin-singlet and spin-triplet pairing channels have been considered. It is shown that the M1excitation energy and strength display a sizable sensitivity to the spin-singlet and spin-triplet pairing interactions involved, while at the ground-state level they provide the results with the same quality. The strong attractive pairing in the ST channel has not been validated in the present study. The accurate measurement of the M1 excitation in open-shell nuclei can provide further information to determine the effect of the SS and STpairing modes inside finite nuclei. In parallel, we note that further developments of calculation are on demand to account for the effects of nuclear deformation as well as the couplings to higher-order configurations for the M1 excitation. Even though it is independent of our main conclusion and thus neglected in this work, checking the M1-quenching effect on the observables is also one future task, including the modification of gyromagnetic factors as g -→ ηg. Sensitivity of the other observables than the M1 response may provide complementary information on the pairing modes inside nuclei. Those include, e.g., the Gamow-Teller transitions, electric-multipole excitations, moment of inertia with deformation, etc. We aim to account for these topics in forthcoming studies. 