We propose a universal scheme for the construction of a device for arbitrary to arbitrary polarization transformation, which consists of two quarter-wave plates and two Faraday rotators. Using this device, one can continuously change the retardance and the rotation angle simply by changing the magnetic fields in each Faraday rotator. In many practical applications the ability to observe and control polarization is critical, as polarization is one of the basic characteristics of transverse light waves Retarders are usually made from birefringent materials. Fresnel rhombs Although half-wave and quarter-wave plates clearly dominate in practice, retarders of any desired retardation can be designed and successfully applied. Tuning the retardance is a valuable feature because in some practical settings one may need a half-wave plate, while in others a quarter-wave plate is required. Tunable retardance can be achieved by liquid-crystals A polarization rotator may employ Faraday rotation or birefringence. The Faraday rotator consists of a magnetoactive material that is put inside a powerful magnet Wave plates and rotators are basic building blocks for polarization manipulation. Indeed, every reversible polarization transformation, (a reversible change in the polarization vector from any initial state to any final state) can be achieved using a composition of a retarder and a rotator In this paper we attempt to solve this problem by substituting mechanical rotations of the plates with variation of magnetic fields. The device we propose is a modified version of Simon-Mukunda's controller and consists of two quarter-wave plates and two rotators. In this setting we can perform fast and continuous variation of the polarization vector simply by changing the magnetic fields in each Faraday rotator. The Jones matrix that describes a rotator with rotation angle θ is while the Jones matrix that represents a retarder is Here φ is the phase shift between the two orthogonal polarization components of the light wave. The most widely-used retarders are the half-wave plate (φ = π) and the quarter-wave plate (φ = π/2) Consider now a single polarizing birefringent plate of phase shift φ, whose fast axis is rotated to an angle of θ relative to the vertical axis (azimuth angle). In a 2dimensional rectangular coordinate system whose axes are aligned with the horizontal and the vertical directions, the Jones matrix is given by If behind this plate one places another plate with azimuth angle θ + α/2, the resulting Jones matrix is given by the As can be seen from Eq. ( product that represents a Jones rotator matrix (up to an unimportant phase of π) A general scheme of a device capable of arbitrary polarization transformations is the Simon-Mukunda polarization controller ( Because the unit matrix can be written as we obtain J = J θ3 (π/2)J θ2 (π)J θ1 (π/2)J θ1 (π/2)J θ1 (-π/2). ( Next we use that to simplify Eq. ( Next we make use of Eq. ( to get the final expression of the Jones matrix: where the rotator angle is α = 2(θ 1 -θ 2 ). Therefore the Simon-Mukunda polarization controller can be constructed as combination of two quarter-wave plates along with a rotator between them. This device would operate in a similar way as the one before: the first quarter-wave plate turns the input elliptical polarization into a linear polarization vector, which is then rotated by the rotator element, and is finally transformed into the required elliptical output polarization by the second quarter-wave plate. In the special case when the two quarter-wave plates are oriented such that their fast optical axes are perpendicular to each other (cf. Eq. 11) (θ 1 = θ 3 = π/4) we obtain a retarder with retardation 2α If the two quarter-wave plates are achromatic (for example as in Based on the fact that combining an arbitrary rotator with an arbitrary retarder allows to achieve any polarization transformation or The proposed optical device, illustrated schematically in Fig. where B is the external magnetic field, L is the magnetooptical element length, and V (λ) is Verdet's constant. We do the most common calculation involving the Terbium Gallium Garnet (TGG) crystal, as this crystal yields a high Verdet constant. So far, the dispersion of Verdet's constant for the TGG crystal has been extensively studied where E = 4.45 • 10 7 rad • nm 2 T • m and λ 0 = 257.5 nm is the wavelength, often close to the Terbium ion's 4f-5d transition wavelength. In the range of 400 -1100 nm, excluding 470 -500 nm (absorption window In conclusion, we have suggested two useful polarization manipulation devices. The first device is the modified Simon-Mukunda polarization controller, which in contrast to the traditional controller is constructed as a combination of two quarter-wave plates and a Faraday rotator between them. Our second device for arbitrary to arbitrary polarization transformation is composed of two Faraday rotators and two quarter-wave plates, where the retardance and the rotation can be continuously modified merely by changing the magnetic fields of the two Faraday rotators. Because they use Faraday rotation, the suggested schemes are non-reciprocal. We hope the proposed methods for polarization control would be cost-effective and useful in any scientific laboratory.