These lecture notes contain a brief practical introduction to doing density functional theory calculations for crystals using the open source Quantum Espresso software. The level is aimed at graduate students who are studying condensed matter or solid state physics, either theoretical or experimental. Any material on earth, whether in crystals, amorphous solids, molecules or yourself, consists of nothing else than a bunch of atoms, ions and electrons bound together by electric forces. All these possible forms of matter can be explained by virtue of one simple equation: the many-particle Schrödinger equation, Here Φ(r; t) is the many-body wavefunction for N particles, where each particle has its own mass m i , charge Z i and position r i . The only interaction is the Coulomb interaction e 2 /r. Despite its apparent simplicity, Eq. ( The first approximation arises from the physical problem we want to study: the ground state of a collection of interacting ions and electrons. Because even the lightest ion is more than a thousand times heavier than an electron, we will forget about the dynamics of the ions all-together. This is known as the Born-Oppenheimer approximation. We then write the time-independent Schrödinger equation for a collection of N electrons subject to the electric potential created by the fixed ions, where r i are the positions of the electrons. The potential V (r i ) is created by the charged ions, where R is the (static) positions of the ions and Z j their charge. Note that the above Hamiltonian -the left hand side of Eq. ( The electronic density is obtained by integrating out all electron degrees of freedom except one, ( The total potential energy V is just given by the integral over the potential V (r) times the density, V = d 3 rV (r)n(r). (5) Assume we found a solution of Eq. ( A functional is nothing else than a function whose input is another function; in this case the functional F takes as input the electric potential generated by the ions and outputs the ground state energy based on Eq. ( Hohenberg and Kohn Formally known as a Legendre transform (in the same way you go from the Hamiltonian to the Lagrangian formulation of classical mechanics), we can change the functional of Eq. 7 to depend on the density n(r) rather than the potential V (r). This is the Hohenberg-Kohn theorem: there exists a universal functional of electronic density, F[n(r)], such that for the correct density n(r) it provides the ground state energy of Eq. ( Knowing this functional, for any given potential V (r) we minimize the right hand side by checking all possible electronic density distributions. There are only two minor problems. We don't know what this functional looks like. And even if we did, we don't know how to find the right electronic density. The unknown functional F[n(r)] should describe the kinetic and interaction energy of a system described by Eq. 2. Even though we cannot find its exact shape, we can look at its shape in some limiting cases that we can solve. We know that a free homogeneous electron gas with density n has a ground state energy of For a slowly varying electronic density, we can approximate the kinetic energy contribution to the full functional F[n(r)] as the energy of Eq. ( Furthermore, we know from perturbation theory that the lowest order energy contribution from Coulomb interactions is given by the Hartree term, It is natural to write out the full functional as containing the homogeneous electron gas term and the Hartree term. The remaining terms, though still unknown, should be small. This unknown part is conventionally called the exchange-correlation potential E xc [n(r)]. The full Hohenberg-Kohn functional, including the potential energy, is thus We will later discuss some general choices of exchange-correlation functionals in Sec. 2.2. We replaced an intractable problem (solving Eq. ( Because the correct density minimizes the functional, we can find the functional by setting it's derivative to zero, Using the functional Eq. ( The idea of Kohn and Sham The Kohn-Sham equation is the single-particle Schrödinger equation with the potential given by Eq. ( We solve these equations numerically, which is tractable because it's just a linear differential equation. The electronic density is obtained by occupying the N solutions ψ i (r) with the lowest energy, Now the electronic density obtained this way can be used to calculate a new Kohn-Sham potential following Eq. We have reached the end-goal: using the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, with an appropriate choice of functional, we use the Kohn-Sham equations to find the ground state energy and electronic density of a system of interacting electrons and ions. This combination of approximations and techniques is called density functional theory (DFT). Despite is sometimes shaky assumptions, DFT turned out to be a resounding success. A large majority of crystalline materials, many molecules and molecular structures have been explained using DFT. Walter Kohn -the man who was involved in both the Hohenberg-Kohn theory and the Kohn-Sham equations -received the Nobel Prize for DFT in 1998. Mainly because of this success, I assume, you want to learn DFT in this ToolBoX. However, let me briefly shed some clouds over DFT's success. • A major limitation of DFT is that it is impossible to tell you the size of the errors that exist due to the assumptions. If you get a self-consistent solution, that is nice, but only a comparison with the experimental system will tell you whether it is a good solution. • The electronic properties of many materials can be described using band theory, meaning for every quasimomentum k we have a set of energies n (k). The solutions of the Kohn-Sham equation Eq. ( • As a corollary to the previous limitation: when using DFT for an insulator or semiconductor, you can also compute the Kohn-Sham energy gap between the highest occupied and lowest unoccupied state. This is not the actual gap of the semiconductor or insulator. In practice, it turns out that DFT typically underestimates the real gap. • Note that even if we had the exact functional, solving the corresponding Kohn-Sham equations would not give you the exact solution for the ground state energy. • Because the Kohn-Sham equations describe non-interacting electrons, many materials with strong correlations cannot be described using DFT. In general, this is true for materials with partially filled d or f -orbitals; or materials with localized electrons. In particular, applying DFT to the class of high-temperature superconductors such as cuprates, pnictides, and heavy fermions is relatively unsuccessful. • Materials with ground state degeneracy -for example in the case of spontaneous symmetry breaking -are known to be difficult to compute using DFT. • There is some subtlety involved in choosing the right functional. Commonly, functionals become widely accepted because of a good overlap with experiments. A good book to learn more about the theoretical side of DFT is Ref. DFT as introduced in the last section is a numerical technique -there are no analytical expansions or solutions. And like many modern numerical techniques, it is better to use an existing developed code than to write your own. There are numerous DFT software packages, both open source and payed. In this section we will outline the most important choices we need to make in order to start running some code. The core of any code consists of computing the solutions to the Kohn-Sham equation. Because this is a linear differential equation, we need to choose a basis over which we can expand the Kohn-Sham equation. In this way, we transformed the continuum differential equation into a matrix equation, for which there are many known techniques for diagonalizing it. The two most popular choices of basis are plane waves (PW) and Gaussian type orbitals (GTO). If you are interested in the structure of molecules, the most logical basis set is GTO where you take a certain set of polynomials multiplied by a Gaussian envelope, to make sure the electronic density remains close to the ions. For crystals, on the other hand, the most logical basis set is plane waves ψ(k) = e ik•r in a box with periodic boundary conditions. Because this course is aimed at condensed matter physicists, we will use a plane-wave code. A full list of existing DFT codes, with their preferred basis set, is maintained on Wikipedia In Sec. 1.3 we introduced some basic ideas regarding the precise shape of the functional. We separated the kinetic energy of a noninteracting gas and the Hartree-Fock interaction energy from the exchange-correlation functional. Here we will discuss in more detail some possible exchange-correlation functionals that have been proposed, without any attempt at being encyclopedic. It is known -see for example the textbook A natural next step is to have a functional that not only depends on the density n(r) but also on its derivative ∇n(r). Such functionals are known as generalized gradient approximations (GGA). Are we ready to start computing? Well, not yet. If we are interested in doing DFT for a crystal, we would give our code the size of the unit cell, the type of atoms and their positions. For example, silicon has an fcc crystal structure with two atoms per unit cell. Silicon itself is element number 14, which means there are 28 electrons per unit cell. However, both physically and numerically it is nonsensical to include all 28 electrons in our calculation. Physically speaking, the electronic configuration of silicon is Ne 3s2 3p2. The core electrons, given by the electronic configuration of neon, are completely irrelevant in the physics of binding a silicon crystal. Numerically, the fact that a bare atomic core has a diverging potential 1/r creates a lot problems. Both these problems can be solved by putting a pseudopotential at the position of the silicon atoms. A pseudopotential is a smeared-out potential that includes the charge of the physically irrelevant core electrons, that is therefore more numerically stable than the diverging 1/r potential of a bare atomic core. Using a pseu-dopotential for silicon, for example, means you now do DFT with only the four outermost electrons, known as the valence electrons. Like with the choice of functional, there are many different ways to compute a pseudopotential. In fact, most pseudopotentials are tailored to work with certain functionals, so in these notes we will use pseudopotentials that work well with the PBE functional. Now we are ready to select a DFT implementation. In these notes we will use the open-source plane-wave DFT code Quantum ESPRESSO (http://www.quantum-espresso.org/). Its development was started in Trieste, Italy, but has by now many contributors from all around the world. If you ever use Quantum ESPRESSO scientifically, make sure you explicitly acknowledge the code and cite their original journal publications Our first task is to install Quantum ESPRESSO on your own computer. The simulations we will do in these lecture notes are light enough that they can be done on a standard laptop. The full source package of Quantum ESPRESSO can be downloaded from https://www.quantum-espresso.org/download If you are comfortable doing so, you can install Quantum ESPRESSO using the source package. Otherwise, on the above webpage you will also find links for stable binaries for typical platforms such as Windows. For Mac OS X I recommend using MacPorts (https: //www.macports.org/), which has a port called quantum-espresso. It automatically takes care of dependencies, such as OpenMPI and Fortran libraries. We will use the pseudopotential libraries collected by Materials Cloud, 1. Go to the website https://www.materialscloud.org/, and navigate to the Discover page using the top menu. 2. Click on Standard solid-state pseudopotentials (SSSP). 3. You will see a periodic table (see Fig. 4. Once you downloaded the library, look into the folder. You will see files with names like Si.pbe-n-rrkjus_psl.1.0.0.UPF and C.pbe-n-kjpaw_psl.1.0.0.UPF. These are the pseudopotentials for silicon and carbon, respectively. Directly after that, you can see that these pseudopotentials are computed for the PBE functional. Figure Silicon is one of the most abundant materials on earth, and one of the most used in modern technology. It is therefore logical that we start with silicon as the first material we are going to study. To start off, create a folder where we will do all of our calculations, with three subfolders: silicon, out and pseudo. Then move the pseudopotential file for silicon that we downloaded from Materials Cloud into the pseudo directory. Quantum ESPRESSO works with input files. These are text-only files that contain all the parameters that you want to give to your code. We will now build together an input file for computing the ground state of a silicon crystal. Note that all possible parameters are summarized in the file INPUT_PW.txt or INPUT_PW.html that came with the source package. So let's get coding! Open your favorite plain text editor, and create a new file called silicon.scf.in. The input file we will create is structured with cards, of the form &NAME ... /. The first card named CONTROL describes calculation parameters. pseudo_dir = ' ../ pseudo / ' tprnfor = . true . verbosity = ' high ' / • calculation decides what calculation we will do. Choose 'scf', which is short for self-consistent field calculation. It is the default option of Quantum ESPRESSO. In the scf-mode, the self-consistent loop described in Sec. 1 is done to find the ground state energy and the electronic density. • prefix is the name of your set of calculations. This allows you to later use the output of this calculation in further calculations, for example to obtain the band structure. • outdir is the directory where all the detailed output files will be put, in files of the form prefix.xml and prefix.save, with the exception of the command line output. • pseudo_dir is the directory where you put the pseudopotentials. • The last two flags are optional. We set tprnfor true, which means the code will calculate and output the forces acting on the ions. This is a useful way to check that your proposed crystal structure is stable. We also set verbosity to high, which means the output file will contain a lot of extra information, such as the calculated symmetry representations of the crystal. I can really advise to run both with high and low verbosity and to compare the output files. The next card describes the system we are studying. What kind of lattice, how many atoms, and what are the cut-offs for our plane wave basis. • ibrav selects the type of Bravais unit cell. In the case of silicon, we choose 2, which is the number for face-centered cubic (fcc). In this crystal structure, the lattice vectors are a 1 = a/2(-1, 0, 1); a 2 = a/2(0, 1, 1); where a is the lattice constant given in celldm • nat is the total number of atoms per unit cell, ntyp is the total number of different atoms per unit cell. In fcc silicon, there is only one type (silicon) but two atoms per unit cell. • occupations tells the code how to occupy the computed Kohn-Sham states. fixed means we just occupy all the states below the Fermi level and empty all the states above. Choose this option for insulators; however, for metals (such as graphene in the next section) we need a different option. • Recall that Quantum ESPRESSO uses a plane-wave basis to describe the wavefunctions. We should tell the system how many plane waves should be included in the calculation. This is characterized by a kinetic energy cut-off ecutwfc, which implies that we take all the plane waves with momenta such that h2 |k| 2 2m ≤ ecutwfc. The parameter is given in Rydberg units (1 Ry = 13.606 eV). On the Materials Cloud website, see Fig. • The code not only stores the plane waves of the electronic states, but also directly the density distribution. Therefore a second cut-off is necessary, ecutrho. Because density scales as the square of wavefunctions, and the kinetic energy scales as the square of the momentum, we need to include a density cut-off at least four times ecutwfc. For our case, exactly four times suffices. • The card &ELECTRONS allows us to tell the system how to solve the Kohn-Sham equation. In our case, we just use the default values. However, we need to include the card! The third part of the input contains explicit information about the atoms: their pseudopotentials and positions. • Below the line ATOMIC_SPECIES you list all the types of atoms that exist in your unit cell. In our case, it is just silicon. For each type of atom, you give its name (Si), its atomic mass in units of u (28.086), and the relevant pseudopotential file name. • After ATOMIC_POSITIONS you list the positions of all the atoms. The flag alat means the positions are given in cartesian coordinates in units of the lattice parameter a (celldm(1)). Alternatively, one can use angstrom (cartesian coordinates in Angstrom) or crystal (multiples of the primitive lattice vectors). Here we have a silicon atom at the origin, and a second silicon atom at a( 1 4 , 1 4 , 1 4 ). In the final part of the input we tell the code at which momentum points we will do the calculation. The simplest option is to choose the flag automatic, which generates a Monkhorst-Pack grid Congratulations, you have now written your first DFT input file! To run it, simply use the following command on the command line: pw.x -in silicon.scf.in > silicon.scf.out The program pw.x is the main component of Quantum ESPRESSO. It takes the input file silicon.scf.in and does the self-consistent calculation of the ground state energy and density. On most modern computers, it should not take longer than a few seconds for a system as simple as silicon. The heavy part of the output is sent to the output directory ../out/. The human-readable part is saved in the file silicon.scf.out. Let's read through it together. The beginning of the output file lists the properties of this calculation, many of them were given by your input file. Some of them were implicit, yet properly picked up. For example, on line 45 you can see that the program will use the PBE exchange-correlation functional. On line 39 we read that we are going to use 4 Kohn-Sham states, with spin degeneracy this corresponds to 8 electrons per unit cell. After that follows properties of the crystal structure, including its symmetries, and the list of momentum points in our grid. Just before the actual calculation starts, the program estimates the amount of memory needed for this calculation, in the line Estimated max dynamical RAM per process. This might be useful to know for more complicated crystal structures, but for silicon this poses no problems. Between the lines Self-consistent Calculation and End of self-consistent calculation the self-consistent DFT loop is iterated until we have reached convergence. After this, the file contains for each momentum point the resulting energies of the Kohn-Sham states. This is directly followed by: highest occupied level ( ev ) : 6 . 2506 ! total energy = -22 . 83862400 Ry This is the main output of a DFT calculation: the ground state energy. For clarity, the code also includes the energy of the highest occupied level. This is not exactly the same as the Fermi level, because there might be occupied states with a higher energy at momentum points that were not included in your momentum grid. 3.2 Homework: Find the lattice constant and bulk modulus of silicon a. The ground state energy by itself is not a measurable quantity. However, one of the ideas of DFT is that we can find the lattice constant of a crystal by calculating the ground state energy as a function of the input lattice constant, E 0 (a). The predicted actual lattice constant is where this function is minimal. So can you predict with your DFT code the lattice constant of silicon? Hint: Write a code that automatically generates input files with different values of the lattice constant a. Then extract the total energy for every value of a. b. In the previous exercise you calculated the function E 0 (a). The change of energy under uniform compression is characterized by the bulk modulus. What is the value of the bulk modulus you calculated? Strictly speaking, the Kohn-Sham energies do not correspond to anything physical. However, it turns out that they are a pretty good approximation to the electron band energies of weakly interacting materials. Therefore it is instructive to calculate the Kohn-Sham energies for many points in the Brillouin zone, to get a sense of silicons band structure. A calculation of the bands can only be done after you finished a self-consistent field calculation with the same parameters . This is because the bands calculation takes the electronic density (and thus the Kohn-Sham potential) obtained in an scf calculation, and recomputes the Kohn-Sham energies for a new set of chosen momentum points. A good starting point for the bands calculation input file is therefore to copy the scf input file to a new file called silicon.bands.in. If you want to write your own bands file from scratch, make sure it has the same prefix as the previous self-consistent field calculation. At three points, we will change this new input file. First, we need to tell the code that we want to calculate the band structure, so replace the calculation line with this: calculation = ' bands ' For an insulator or semiconductor like silicon, the default setting is that only occupied bands will be computed. If we are interested in the band gap, we also need to calculate the unoccupied bands. To achieve this, add to the &SYSTEM card a line that says we want to calculate 8 bands: The final change we need is to the momentum point grid. A customary way to visualize a bandstructure is to choose a path in the Brillouin zone and compute the bands along this path. This can be done by the command tpiba_b, which means that the K_POINTS are in units of 2π/a. The subscript _b indicates that we can define a path for a bandstructure calculated. For a path L -Γ -X -W -Γ, we replace the old K_POINTS card by K_POINTS tpiba_b # tpiba_b = k -points in units of 2pi /a , in format for band calculation # number of k -points ( use high -symmetry points only ) 5 # kx , ky , kz , n . of points between this and next one 0 . 5 0 . 5 0 . 5 20 0 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 0 30 0 . 0 0 . 0 1 . 0 30 0 . 0 1 . 0 1 . 0 30 0 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 0 0 Notice that here we added some comment lines (the one starting with #). These will be ignored by the code, and can be useful for our own understanding of the input files. Here, the comments explain us that we have a path with 5 momentum points, and that we have 20 momentum points in between L and Γ, and so forth. We can run the bands calculation with this command, pw.x -in silicon.bands.in > silicon.bands.out It might take a few seconds longer than the scf calculation, because we have more momentum points. The output file silicon.bands.out starts out with listing the parameters of the calculation. After the line Band Structure Calculation it will calculate the Kohn-Sham energies of each desired momentum point. At the end of the calculation, you will find lines looking like this: End of band structure calculation k = 0 . 5000 0 . 5000 0 . 5000 ( 754 PWs ) bands ( ev ) : - It signals the end of the calculation, and then it will list for each momentum point all the Kohn-Sham energies in eV. The momentum points themselves are given in units of 2π a where a is the lattice constant (celldm(1)). The Quantum ESPRESSO code itself comes with a set of post-processing tools, one of them allows you to plot the band-structure thus calculated. You can also import the output file into your favorite tool (Python, Mathematica, Matlab, GNUplot) and plot it there. The resulting band-structure is shown in Fig. The band gap calculated using this code is about 0.8 eV, significantly smaller than the actual band gap in silicon of about 1.1 eV. This is common among DFT calculations of semiconductors. On the other hand, many qualitative features -including the fact that silicon has an indirect band gap -are reproduced with our simple calculation! Congratulations, you have successfully predicted the properties of a material, purely from first principles! To get comfortable with this technique, try some other three-dimensional semiconductors, and calculate their lattice constant and band-structure. 1. First try other zincblende structures like C-diamond, β-SiC, and GaAs. 4 Example 2: Graphene The study of silicon in the previous section allows you to calculate crystal and electronic band structures of any three-dimensional semiconductor. In the remainder of these notes, we will switch gears and introduce a few new concepts: we discuss how to deal with metals, with two-dimensional materials, and how we can optimize the structure within a unit cell, and how to have more complicated unit cells. Graphene is a perfect material to do this. It is, as you know, a two-dimensional semi-metal with a hexagonal unit cell. As with the silicon, we need to write input files for a self-consistent calculation first. Make a new folder graphene and start an input file named graphene.scf.in. The first card, &CONTROL, is the same as in the silicon case but with only the prefix changed to graphene. The &SYSTEM card will have some significant changes. Let's write it out in its full totality, • In the standard DFT implementation, we have periodic boundary conditions in all three direction. The command assume_isolated = '2D' ensures that there is no periodicity (neither in the charge density nor in the Coulomb interactions) in the z-direction. • Graphene has an hexagonal lattice, which has ibrav = 4. The lattice vectors are given by a 1 = a(1, 0, 0); a 2 = a(-1 2 , √ 3 2 , 0); a 3 = a(0, 0, c/a), where as before a =celldm(1) in Bohr, and c/a =celldm(3) is the ratio between the horizontal and vertical lattice size. The value for celldm(3) should be such that, for our 2d set-up in graphene, the vertical unit cell size should be large than the cut-off of the pseudopotentials -in this case at least 20 Bohr. • In the case of a metal or semimetal, just computing the occupied Kohn-Sham energies is very numerically unstable. Tiny changes can lead to different shapes of the Fermi surface. It is therefore necessary to smear the occupations of the Kohn-Sham states, which is ensured by setting occupations = 'smearing'. We then also need to set which type of smearing we will use; here we opted for Marzari-Vanderbilt (mv) smearing • Notice we changed the wavefunction and density cut-offs. The last part of the input file tells us where the carbon atoms are going to be, and our choice of momentum points. The only subtleties are in the placement of the carbon atoms, see Fig. As before, the bands calculation can now be run by the command The resulting band-structure, with the characteristic Dirac cone at the Fermi level, can be seen in Fig. The third and final material that allows us to learn some new features of DFT is monolayer WSe 2 . In-plane it has a honeycomb lattice structure, with on one sublattice the W atoms, and on the other sublattice two Se atoms, displaced in the positive/negative z-direction, as shown in Fig. In a relaxation calculation, the DFT code not only computes the ground state energy but also the derivative of the energy with respect to atomic displacements. This corresponds to the forces acting on each atom. If your initial guess of atomic positions is not stable, there will be nonzero forces. The code will suggest a new set of atomic positions based on the direction of those forces. By repeating this until you have no more forces acting on the atoms, you have relaxed the structure and minimized the ground state energy. We will use this feature to calculate the position of the Se atoms in monolayer WSe 2 . As before, we start by making a new folder wse2 with in there an input file, which we will call wse2.relax.in. We will calculate the position of the Se atoms, using a relax calculation. The first card of the input file therefore contains the lines calculation = ' relax ' prefix = ' wse2 ' In the &CONTROL card we can also include a force convergence threshold forc_conv_thr, which determines how close to zero we want the final forces to be. In our simple calculation we only need to use the default value, so we do not need include it in our input file. The remainder of the input file looks like this: • In the &SYSTEM card, we reverted back to fixed occupations since WSe 2 is a semiconductor. Notice how we changed the cut-offs and the number of atoms and types of atoms. • Because we are interested in the atomic positions, it is worthwhile to write out the lattice vectors and the initial atomic positions explicitly in units of Angstrom. We can Because Scalar-Relativistic implies no spin-orbit coupling, we need to find a new pseudopotential that is fully relativistic! Many different types of pseudopotentials can be downloaded from the Quantum ESPRESSO website. Go to https://www.quantum-espresso. org/pseudopotentials/ps-library/, and download a full relativistic ultra-soft pseudopotential (USPP) for tungsten (W) that works with the PBE functional. After that, update the line in the input files where you give the pseudopotential: Finally, the amount of valence electron per W is 14 and per Se is 6, meaning the code computes 26 electrons. If you want also to see the conduction bands, I suggest putting nbnd = 32 or higher. As before, run the scf first, followed by a bands calculation. You can check in the output files that the number of Kohn-Sham energies is now equal to the number of electrons. Before we included spin-orbit coupling, the spin degeneracy meant we just needed half the amount of Kohn-Sham energies. The final band structure is shown in Fig. Luckily, there are many online courses available that are more in-depth than this short ToolBox. • The Materials Cloud webpage also contains a set of lectures, including notes, exercises and videos, on how to do DFT with Quantum ESPRESSO. You can find them here: https://www.materialscloud.org/learn/. • Many universities have their classes on density functional theory online, for example MIT has https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/materials-science-and-engineering/3-320-atomistic-comput labs/sections There is a small subtlety included in this equation: the kinetic component of the functional T [n(r)] should not be the one obtained for the free homogeneous noninteracting electron gas of Eq. (10), but the one for a noninteracting gas subject to the Kohn-Sham potential. & CONTROL calculation = ' scf ' prefix = ' silicon ' outdir = ' ../ out / '