The effects of pressure on the superconducting properties of a Bi-based layered superconductor La2O2Bi3Ag0.6Sn0.4S6, which possesses a four-layer-type conducting layer, have been studied through the electrical resistance and magnetic susceptibility measurements. The crystal structure under pressure was examined using synchrotron X-ray diffraction at SPring-8. In the low-pressure regime, bulk superconductivity with a transition temperature Tc of ~ 4.5 K was induced by pressure, which was achieved by in-plane chemical pressure effect owing to the compression of the tetragonal structure. In the high-pressure regime above 6.4 GPa, a structural symmetry lowering was observed, and superconducting transitions with a Tc ~ 8 K were observed. Our results suggest the possible commonality on the factor essential for Tc in Bi-based superconductors with twolayer-type and four-layer-type conducting layers. Since the discovery of BiS2-based layered superconductors Bi4O4S3 and La(O,F)BiS2 in 2012 The target phase of this study is La2O2Bi3Ag0.6Sn0.4S6, whose basic crystal structure can be regarded as the stacking of La2O2Bi2S4 and M2S2 (M = Bi0.5Ag0.3Sn0.2) A polycrystalline sample of La2O2Bi3Ag0.6Sn0.4S6 was prepared by solid-state reaction. Powders of La2S3 (99.9%), Bi2O3 (99.999%), Ag2O (99%up), Bi (99.999%), Sn (99.9%), and S (99.9999%) were mixed by mortar and pestle in air, pressed into a pellet, sealed in an evacuated quartz tube, and heated at 720 °C for 15 h. The obtained sample was ground, mixed, pelletized, and annealed under the same condition as the first sintering. The sample quality was comparable to that reported in Ref. Electrical resistance measurements were performed at ambient pressure and high pressures using a standard four-probe method on a Physical Property Measurement System (Quantum Design: PPMS). A diamond anvil cell (DAC) with boron-doped diamond electrodes was used for the high-pressure measurements The crystal structure investigation was performed using synchrotron X-ray at the beamline BL10XU of SPring-8 under the proposal (No.: 2020A2051). The powder sample was loaded into a sample hole drilled in a SUS gasket together with a pressure medium, He gas. The samples were compressed to the pressures of interest using single crystal diamond anvils with 600 and 400 μm culet. Pressure was determined by wavelength shift of the ruby R1 fluorescence line To investigate the pressure evolution of Tc, the electrical resistance was measured on DAC. Figure Investigation of the temperature dependence of the magnetic susceptibility is useful to obtain information about Tc and bulk nature of the superconductivity under high pressures. Figure To discuss the evolution of superconductivity under pressures from structural point of view, we have performed SXRD experiments under high pressures. Figure In this study, we have investigated the effects of pressure on the superconducting properties of a polycrystalline sample of La2O2Bi3Ag0.6Sn0.4S6 through the electrical resistance measurements on a DAC and the magnetic susceptibility measurements on a piston cylinder cell. The crystal structure under pressure was examined using SXRD and Rietveld refinement for the tetragonal phase. In the low-pressure regime below 2.4 GPa, bulk superconductivity with a transition temperature Tc of ~ 4.5 K was induced by pressure, which was achieved by compression of the tetragonal structure. In the high-pressure regime above 6.4 GPa, a structural symmetry lowering was observed. In the high-pressure regime, superconducting transitions with a Tc ~ 8 K were observed. Through structural refinements, we found that the in-plane chemical pressure is essential for the improvement of the superconducting properties in the tetragonal phase. Furthermore, even in the tetragonal phase, both BiS2 and MS layers show dramatic structural change under pressures. The jump of Tc accompanied with a structural phase transition by applying pressure is similar to that observed in two-layer-type BiS2-based systems. Therefore, there should be a commonality on the factor essential for Tc in Bi-based (two-layer-type and four-layer-type) superconductors. 