All-optical binary convolution with a photonic spiking vertical-cavity surface-emitting laser (VCSEL) neuron is proposed and demonstrated experimentally for the first time. Optical inputs, extracted from digital images and temporally encoded using rectangular pulses, are injected in the VCSEL neuron which delivers the convolution result in the number of fast (<100 ps long) spikes fired. Experimental and numerical results show that binary convolution is achieved successfully with a single spiking VCSEL neuron and that all-optical binary convolution can be used to calculate image gradient magnitudes to detect edge features and separate vertical and horizontal components in source images. We also show that this all-optical spiking binary convolution system is robust to noise and can operate with high-resolution images. Additionally, the proposed system offers important advantages such as ultrafast speed, high energy efficiency and simple hardware implementation, highlighting the potentials of spiking photonic VCSEL neurons for high-speed neuromorphic image processing systems and future photonic spiking convolutional neural networks. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have seen tremendous success in many applications, such as speech and image recognition Photonics is considered a highly promising candidate for future neural network implementations given the unique advantages it provides such as high speed, wide bandwidth and low power consumption In this work, we propose an all-optical binary convolution system using a single vertical-cavity surface-emitting laser (VCSEL) operating as a spiking optical neuron; hence dramatically reducing hardware requirements. In our approach, temporal encoding is used instead of spatial encoding, thus crucially helping to reduce (optical) hardware complexity. In our all-optical binary convolution technique, results are represented by the number of fast (<100 ps long) spiking responses delivered by the optical spiking VCSEL neuron. This has unique advantages in terms of robustness to noise and high precision. Additionally, VCSELs have unique inherent advantages, such as high energy efficiency, high speed modulation capability, low bias currents, easy packaging and highly integrable structures In this work, we use a VCSEL-based photonic approach for binary convolution to demonstrate image gradient magnitude calculation. This delivers an essential portion of the image edge detection functionality used by computer vision and image recognition systems. Here, a single VCSEL system is developed to solely perform a convolution operation, hence no VCSEL-based CNN architecture, capable of providing learning and classification capabilities, is discussed in this work. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 is devoted to the experimental setup of this work for the demonstration of all-optical binary convolution with a spiking VCSEL neuron and the theoretical model used to predict the response of the system. In Section 3, convolutional results are analyzed before the full calculation of image gradient magnitudes is performed both experimentally and theoretically. Finally, Section 4 summarizes the conclusions of this work. We present here the experimental arrangement and the theoretical model of the all-optical binary convolution system based on a photonic spiking VCSEL neuron. In this work we set a source digital image and a kernel as the two inputs of the convolution system. The value of any one pixel in the source image or kernel is limited to 0 or 1. Figure We use an extension of the well-known spin-flip model (SFM) to model the operation of the VCSEL acting as a spiking optical neuron. In our formulation we add extra terms to the model's equations to account for the source image and kernel inputs. The rate equations can be described as follows where the subscripts x , y represent the XP and YP modes of the VCSEL, respectively. E x,y is the slowly varying complex amplitude of the field in the XP and YP modes. N is the total carrier inversion between conduction and valence bands. n is the difference between carrier inversions with opposite spins. k denotes the field decay rate. γ a and γ p are the linear dichroism and the birefringence rate, respectively. α is the linewidth enhancement factor. γ N is the decay rate of N. γ s is the spinflip rate. μ represents the normalized pump current. k inj is the injected strength and, E injx1 and E injx2 indicate respectively the source image and kernel inputs. Δω x is defined as Δω x = ω injx -ω 0 , where ω injx is the angular frequency of the externally injected light in the XP mode, ω 0 = (ω x + ω y )/2 is the center frequency between the XP and YP modes with ω x = ω 0 + αγ a -γ p and ω y = ω 0 -αγ a + γ p . The frequency detuning between the externally injected signal and the XP mode is set as: Δf x = f injx -f x . Hence, in Eq. ( where β sp is the strength of the spontaneous emission and, ξ 1 and ξ 2 are independent complex Gaussian white noise terms of zero mean and a unit variance. We numerically solve Eqs. ( In this section, we firstly provide an experimental proof-of-concept demonstration of all-optical binary convolution with a spiking VCSEL neuron. We then calculate the image gradient magnitudes from a basic "Square" source image and a complex "Horse head" source image by means of all-optical binary convolution. Simulation results on the binary convolution and the calculation of image gradient magnitudes are also presented using a "Horse" source image from the latest version of the Berkeley Segmentation Data Set Figure Figure In this section, image gradient magnitude, critical to image edge detection, is calculated using our approach based a single spiking VCSEL neuron and optical binary convolution. The image gradient magnitude G(x) of a given pixel x is calculated using the following equations Four binary convolutions, i.e. B(x) ⊗ B X,Y ± , are used in G X (x) and is the N-bit local binary pattern descriptor of a pixel x . i x is the central pixel intensity and i p is the intensity of the p -th neighbour of x in the source pattern. The comparison operator is defined as: where T x = The range of the local binary pattern descriptor of a pixel is presented in gray color in Fig. The 3 rd neighbour is i3 =255, hence, s (i3, ix)=0. B(x) can be therefore calculated for the red-highlighted pixel in Fig. For the red-highlighted pixel x in Fig. In Eqs. ( We studied experimentally the response of the VCSEL neuron under the injection of the "Square" source image and kernel operators included in Figs. To further investigate our experimental system, we focused on demonstrating the achievement of gradient maps from a complex source image using the all-optical binary convolution of this work, as seen in Fig. In this section, binary convolution based on a single VCSEL neuron is performed numerically. The robustness of the system to perform alloptical binary convolution under noisy inputs and for larger kernels is investigated. Finally, the calculation of image gradient magnitudes with our photonic approach using a single VCSEL neuron is presented numerically using the 'Horse' image from the latest version of the Berkeley Segmentation Data Set The binary convolution example given in Fig. Figure In this work, we proposed and investigated experimentally and numerically an all-optical binary convolution system using a VCSEL operating as a photonic spiking neuron. The inputs (image and kernel) are encoded temporally using fast rectangular pulses (1.5 ns-long) and optically injected into the VCSEL neuron. The latter's optical output directly provides the results of the convolution in the number of (sub-ns long) spikes fired. In addition to performing all-optical binary convolution, we demonstrated experimentally and numerically the ability of the proposed system to calculate the image gradient magnitudes from digital source images. This feature was successfully used to identify key edge features from a source image as well as its separate horizontal and vertical components. Furthermore, we investigated numerically the robustness of the proposed VCSEL-based convolutional system to input noise. This simple system, using a single commercially-available VCSEL operating at the key telecom wavelength of 1300 nm, offers a novel photonic solution to binary convolution with the advantage of being highly energy efficient and hardware friendly. This opens exciting prospects for a new photonic spiking platform for future optical binary spiking CNNs. Furthermore, the high-speed, low cost and neuronal functionalities of these photonic spiking systems hold promise for numerous processing tasks expanding into fields such as computer vision and artificial intelligence.