It is well known that the critical temperature of multi-gap superconducting 3D heterostructures at atomic limit (HAL) made of a superlattice of atomic layers with an electron spectrum made of several quantum subbands can be amplified by a shape resonance driven by the contact exchange interaction between different gaps. The TC amplification is achieved tuning the Fermi level near the singular nodal point at a Lifshitz transition for opening a neck. Recently high interest has been addressed to the breaking of inversion symmetry which leads to a linear-in-momentum spin-orbit induced spin splitting, universally referred to as Rashba spin-orbit coupling (RSOC) also in 3D layered metals. However the physics of multi-gap superconductivity near unconventional Lifshitz transitions in 3D HAL with RSOC, being in a non-BCS regime, is not known. The key result of this work getting the superconducting gaps by Bogoliubov theory and the 3D electron wave functions by solution of the Dirac equation is the feasibility of tuning multi-gap superconductivity by suitably matching the spin-orbit length with the 3D superlattice period. It is found that the presence of the RSOC amplifies both the k dependent anisotropic gap function and the critical temperature when the Fermi energy is tuned near the circular nodal line. Our results suggest a method to effectively vary the effect of RSOC on macroscopic superconductor condensates via the tuning of the superlattice modulation parameter in a way potentially relevant for spintronics functionalities in several existing experimental platforms and tunable materials needed for quantum devices for quantum computing. It is known that the structure inversion asymmetry (SIA) which stems from the inversion asymmetry of the confining potential in a 2D electron gas induces a spinorbit band splitting with states of different helicity Recently, experimental evidence that the strength of spin-orbit interaction is correlated with quasi 2D super-conductivity in the (111) LaAlO 3 / SrTiO 3 interface has been reported The theoretical studies of superconductivity coexisting with spin-orbit coupling have been limited to a 2D superconducting layer and to a single band metal In fact, in multi-gap superconductivity, it is no longer possible to neglect the key role of quantum configuration interaction between superconducting gaps as, for exam-ple, the BEC-BCS crossover gap at Lifshitz transitions near a band edge and other gaps in the BCS limit far from band edges The main results of this work is the theoretical description of multi-gap superconductivity We consider a 3D superlattice of metallic layers of thickness L separated by spacers of thickness W and overall periodicity d. Our aim is to show that the interplay between the Rashba spin-orbit coupling (RSOC) and superlattice structure allows for a fine tuning of the critical temperature. To appreciate this point, consider the energy splitting due to the RSOC and the corresponding difference of the Fermi momenta of the two spin eigenstates. This difference introduces a typical SOC length scale l SOC , which may be compared with the modulation of the superlattice d. In a bulk system l SOC can be compared only with the Fermi wavelength, which is typically of the order of 0.1 nm. In contrast in a superlattice, the modulation is of the order of tens of nm, which matches the order of magnitude of the RSOC. The RSOC energy is linear in the wave vector ∼ αk, with the constant α ∼ 0.01 eV nm. By defining l SOC = 2π 2 / (αm), m being the electron mass, one estimates l SOC ∼ 10 nm. As a result the tuning of the RSOC may be achieved via the variation of the modulation of the superlattice structure. The layout of the paper is the following. In the next section, we introduce the model Hamiltonian of a 3D layered superconductor in the presence of RSOC. In section III we study the normal phase paying special attention to the topology of the Fermi surface and to the associated features in the single-particle density of states (DOS). In section IV we turn our attention to the superconducting phase where we derive the superconducting gap equation and discuss its numerical solution in the multi-band case. Finally, in section V we state our conclusions. The Hamiltonian of the system under study reads where H 0 is the single-particle contribution, which includes the RSOC In the above equation, p = -i ∇ is the usual momentum operator and p its projection in the xy plane. V (z) = V (z + d) is the periodic potential modeling the superlattice structure where d = L + W and V is a positive constant. The single-particle Hamiltonian H 0 has solutions of the form where the wave vector components k = (k x , k y , k z ) ≡ k , k z label plane waves in the xy plane of area A and the Bloch functions φ nkz (z) along the z axis, n being a subband index. The functions φ nkz (z) and the corresponding eigenvalues are obtained by imposing the continuity of the wave function and its first derivative at the discontinuity points of the potential where the phase factor is required by Bloch's theorem. Finally the effect of the RSOC is encoded in the spinors where θ is the angle which defines the direction of the wave vector in the plane As a result the single-particle energies read As for the second contribution to the Hamiltonian in Eq.( where Ψ α (r) is the annihilation fermion field operator and summation over the repeated spin indices (α, β) is understood. Before considering the superconducting phase in section IV, it is useful to analyze first in the next section the effects of the RSOC in the normal phase and in particular on the density of states. To this end, we first consider a simplified tight-binding model and then we turn our attention to the model defined in Eq.( For the following discussion it is useful to introduce two dimensionless parameters: the Lifshitz parameter defined as and the rescaled Lifshitz parameter where μ is the chemical potential which at zero temperature coincides with the Fermi energy, E 2 is the band edge energy of the second subband in the absence of RSOC, ω 0 is the cut-off and ∆E RSOC is the energy shift due to the RSOC. In the presence of a RSOC, the trend of the DOS can be understood by considering the evolution of the Fermi surface. In this context we will limit our analysis to a twoband system obtained by taking the two lowest subbands. The starting point is the single-particle energy dispersion ( where for simplicity we adopt units such that = 1. For both the first and second subband, the energy dispersion along the z axis, which is numerically solved as shown below, can be fitted in terms of a tight-binding model. In particular, for odd n the agreement is obtained with a two-harmonic expansion, while for n even the agreement is obtained with a three-harmonic expansion. All this can be combined with the observation that, for the purpose of the subsequent discussion, we do not need to specify the precise form of the dispersion along the z-axis, but for the fact the ε nkz increases (for n odd) or decreases (for n even) monotonically between k z = 0 and k z = π/d and, furthermore, is an even function with respect to k z -→ -k z , for both even and odd n. Hence, in order to illustrate the key features of the DOS, we start our analysis with a simplified expression of ε nkz , namely: for the second subband. To simplify the notation in the following discussion, the parameters of the in-plane dispersion in Eq. For the sake of definiteness we assume that the minimum energy for the z axis is zero and the maximum is ε z , i.e., ε 2n+1,0 = 0 and ε 2n+1,π/d = ε z for the odd subbands, while we have ε 2n,0 = ε z and ε 2n,π/d = 0 for the even subbands. Hence from from which we start our discussion. It is useful to distinguish three separate regimes for the Fermi energy: Let us examine them in detail. When selecting the sign in Eq.( 1 st (l = -1) For n odd at . Hence the isoenergetic curve, when rotated around the k z axis generates a corrugated cylinder wider in k z = 0 and narrower in k z = ±π/d. For n even we have a diametrically opposite situation, i.e., we still have a corrugated cylinder which, however, is narrower in k z = 0 and wider in k z = ±π/d (Fig. Let us consider next the case λ = -1. Since μ > ε nkz , the radicand is always greater than k 0 , and, therefore, the only allowed sign is the positive one: For n odd at k z = 0, one has k (0, -1) Hence, also in this case, the isoenergetic curve, when rotated around the k z axis generates a corrugated cylinder, which is bigger than the previous one. For n even at k z = 0 one has k (0, -1 Hence, also in this case, the isoenergetic curve, when rotated around the k z axis generates a corrugated cylinder, with opposite curvature compared to the case of odd n (Fig. Let us begin again by considering first the helicity λ = 1. Clearly the only sign allowed is the positive one. One notices that exactly at μ = ε z one has k (π/d, 1) = 0, which implies a Lifshitz transition for the Fermi surface. For the energies in this regime we see that not all the values of k z are allowed. The maximum For odd n, the isoenergetic curve starts at a point (0, k * z ) on the k z axis and ends at a point k (0, 1), 0 in the k axis. The Fermi surface has a fuse-like shape (Fig. For even n, the isoenergetic curve starts at a point (0, k * z ) on the k z axis and ends at a point k (π/d, 1), π/d on the k axis. In this case, for Fermi surfaces, we obtain half of a spindle that has the tip in (0, 0) and reaches the maximum diameter in k z = π/d (Fig. In this regime the case for helicity λ = -1 is more complex. The positive sign is of course allowed. The branch with the positive sign starts at the point (k (π/d, -1), π/d) and ends at the point (k (0, -1), 0) for odd n, while per even n the positive sign starts at the point (k (0, -1), 0) and ends at the point (k (π/d, -1), π/d). In both cases these curves generate corrugated cylinders by rotation around k z (Fig. However this branch is only allowed for a restricted range of k z values, i.e. (k * z , π/d) which is the complementary range with respect to that allowed for the other helicity. Hence in this regime of energies the helicity λ = 1 does not exist for the range (k * z , π/d), when the helicityλ = -1 develops another branch exactly in this range. As a result the Fermi surface for the λ = -1 gets a apple-like shape with the poles pushed inwards. This is due to the fact that the points where the phase velocity vanishes are no longer isolated points, but due to the rotation around k z they form circles with finite measure. In this regime there is only the helicity λ = -1, which however has two branches: If k 2 0 + μ -ε z = 0 then both branches start at the same point (k 0 , π/d) for odd n ((k 0 , 0) for even n) and from there depart ending at the points (k 0 + k 2 0 + μ, 0) and (k 0 -k 2 0 + μ, 0) for odd n ((k 0 + k 2 0 + μ, π/d) and (k 0 -k 2 0 + μ, π/d) for even n) in the k axis, respectively. This is the case when the singularity in the phase velocity, which in the absence of RSOC is at the isolated point (0, π/d) for odd n or (π/d, 0) for even n, becomes a finite-measure manifold and develops a van Hove singularity in the DOS (Fig. Then the two branches end on the k axis. The Fermi surface generated by these curves has a torus-like shape. In regime IIIb) instead, the two branches remain disconnected from each other. The Fermi surface has an external and internal part and has a torus-like shape, with the toruses of neighboring zones touching each other (Fig. Our aim is to evaluate the density of states (DOS) in order to compare it with the detailed calculations made with the more realistic periodic potential model. Therefore, we derive the analytical DOS expression for both helicity values, λ = ±1: where x = k ∓k 0 for λ = ∓1 and θ(x) is the Heaviside step function. Let us analyze the integral defined in the Eq.( The DOS expression can be computed with Mathematica by using the built-in Heaviside function and numerical integration command. In 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.41, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8 and t = 1. The partial and the total DOS are reported as a function of the rescaled Lifshitz parameter defined in the Eq.( The black curve corresponds to the case when there is no spin-orbit present. Clearly, the value η R = 1 (in units of t) marks the point of the band edge for the dispersion along the z axis. The spin-orbit interaction develops a van Hove singularity exactly at this point. This behavior, as we will see below, appears in agreement with the more realistic model. This point, η R = 2t/∆E z2 , corresponds to the singularity in the two-dimensional Rashba model at the bottom of the lower band with helicity λ = -1. In the 3D case the singularity appears at the edge of the band due to the motion along z. Fig. (3), also, shows that as k 0 increases, N -increases while N + decreases, in the sum this involves a change only in the proximity of the van Hove singularity. More precisely, while at the Lifshitz transition the partial densities combine to yield a strong change in the DOS, at high energies they compensate, so that the total DOS coincides with the total DOS in the absence of RSOC. This means that in the high-energy limit the parameters of the normal phase and, as we will see below, of the superconducting phase do not depend on k 0 , in accordance with the work of Gorkov and Rashba After the analysis of the simplified tight-binding model, we study the properties of the normal phase starting from the solution of the model of Eq.( For the numerical solution of the normal phase the chosen parameters are: the barrier V = 0.5 eV, the thicknesses of the metallic and insulating layers L = 23 Å, W = 7 Å, respectively, with total periodicity d = 30 Å, the effective masses m = m z = m e , the cut-off energy ω 0 = 30 meV and the coupling constant g = 0.4. According to the works where α SO is a dimensionless parameter which describes the strenght of the Rashba momentum in units of the inverse lattice spacing along the z direction. Similarly to what has been done for the tight-binding model, we carry out the analysis of the evolution of Fermi surfaces for ε 2kz obtained numerically by distinguishing for each of the listed regimes three distinct cases: ∆E z2 ∆E RSOC , where ∆E z2 = ε 2kz,max -ε 2kz,min is the bandwidth of the dispersion along the axis of confinement z in the presence of a potential of the form Kronig-Penney, while in this case ∆E RSOC = E 0 = -(mα 2 )/(2 2 ) is the energy shift due to the RSOC. The model parameters are chosen so that ∆E z2 is of the same order of magnitude as the cut-off energy. This study concerns a two-band system, where the first subband has a s-symmetry, while the second one has psymmetry. The results are shown in the Fig.( color that varies with θ in panels (c) and (d) of Fig. In particular, for λ = 1 it varies from red to purple, while for λ = -1 it varies from purple to red. We highlight the three regimes analyzed previously and a change in symmetry in passing from the first to the second subband. Such a change, for the first subband, occurs at the point Γ, origin of the first Brillouin zone (IBZ), while, in the second subband, it occurs at the point Z, edge of the IBZ in the z direction. As the Rashba coupling changes (∆E z ∆E RSOC ), only a flattening of the contour lines and Fermi surfaces is observed to the left and a shift to the right of the singular points. The lat-ter are the points where the phase velocity vanishes and which generate, for rotation around the k z axis, circles whose radius increases with α SO . The energy in which this van Hove unusual singularity occurs is indicated in the figure with η L and in the literature it is called neck opening energy. We can note that for the bands with positive helicity η L is independent of the value of α SO , while for the bands with negative helicity it varies as the RSOC varies. What can be seen from the graphs in the Fig.( Finally, note that, for the values of the normalized band-edge energy, from this point on, we report the results in terms of the rescaled Lifshitz parameter (Eq.( In the normal phase for a two-band system we plot the total density of the states (DOS) and the partial DOS as the Rashba coupling changes (∆E z ∆E RSOC ) and compare it with the case without RSOC (Fig. In the case of positive helicity the DOS trend is that of a sloped step, very similar to the trend observed in the absence of RSOC, while in the case of negative helicity we can observe a peak in the density of the states and a shift of the latter towards the left as the parameter α SO increases. This confirms what has been commented for the figures In a generic 3D system with free-electron like dispersion relation, the DOS behaves as the square root of energy, whereas in a quantum layer (2D) the DOS is constant and so that it jumps sharply every time a new quantum number from a new layer takes over. In present case, the DOS shows almost a 2D -like behavior for the first subband. In fact, this is nearly pure 2D subbands with a negligible transversal hopping between the layers. Instead, at the bottom of the second subband appears a sharp step due to contribution of the partial density of states of the second subband to the total density of states. The total energy dispersion of the second subband, ∆E z2 determines the energy separation between the top and the band edge energy for the second subband. In the energy range η 2edge < η < η 2top (where η 2edge and η 2top are, respectively, the Lifshitz parameter at the edge and at the top of the second subband), the electronic structure is like that of an anisotropic 3D electron gas, while the 2D character appears at higher energy η > η 2top . The observed Rashba shift can be understood by considering the simplified model previously introduced. In the absence of RSOC the vanishing of the energy gradient occurs in an isolated point and, therefore, there are no singularities in the DOS. In contrast in the presence of RSOC, the energy gradient vanishes at finite values of the absolute values in-plane momentum, k , therefore we have singular points distributed on circumferences that generate van Hove peaks in the DOS. As the RSOC increases, the energy at which van Hove peaks occur moves to the left, but, as underlined in the discussion of the tight-binding model, the difference in energy between the band edge and the maximum DOS value remains constant and equal to the dispersion along z. The shape of the Fermi surface is crucial for understanding the electronic properties of metals. As first noticed by Lifshitz the simplest way to observe such an electronic topological transition, also known as Lifshitz transition, is by tuning the Fermi level to the singular point in the band structure where the change of topology takes place. This requires considerable variations of the electron density. A quantum critical point appears in the proximity of a Lifshitz transition with typical quantum criticalities and possible quantum tricritical behavior in itinerant electron systems. There are two types of Lifschitz transition: type I, the appearing of a new detached Fermi surface region or appearing or disappearing of a new Fermi surface (FS) spot, and type II, the disrupting or the neck-collapsing-type of Lifschitz transition with a change of dimensionality that can be induced by orbital symmetry breaking in lightly hole doped bands. In the Fig. However, the analysis made in this section highlights some surprising results, the first is that there is a change in symmetry of the evolution of the FS topology in passing from the first to the second subband. The second is that in the proximity of a type II Lifshitz transition we have a curve of critical points and no longer an isolated point, a fact which explains the appearance of a very pronounced peak in DOS values. The radius of this curve increases with the intensity of the RSOC and this is reflected in an increase and at the same time a true right shift of the DOS maximum. In this situation, the variation in the Fermi surface (FS) topology is absolutely non-trivial. Clearly, we want to see how the above features of the electron spectrum and DOS are reflected in the properties of the superconducting phase. Therefore, after having analysed in detail the structure of the FS and the DOS in the normal phase, we turn, in the next section, to the study of the superconducting phase. To investigate how the shape of the Fermi surface and the behavior of the DOS manifest in the superconducting properties of the system with RSOC, we first derive the equations for computing the energy gap. The approach used is the one originally introduced by D. Innocenti et al. The field operators of Eq.( where χ α with α =↑, ↓ are the usual spinors associated to the quantization of the spin along the z axis. This is a legitimate expression for the field operators since the functions ψ nkα (r) are the eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian H 0 obtained by setting α = 0 in Eq.( and the interaction term can be written as: with the overlap integrals defined by The integrals in Eq.( where the matrix element of the change of basis is equal to U α,λ (k) = χ † α •η λ θ k . As a result, the four operator products that appear in the expansion of the right hand side of Eq.( where we have defined and similarly for M λ2,λ3 θ k 2, -θ k 3, . Since the φ n,kz are Bloch wavefunctions, the integral ( where the effective potential reads U n1,λ1;n2,λ2 n3,λ3;n4,λ4 (k 1 , k 2 ; K) = U 0 I n1,k1;n2,-k1+K n3,-k2+K;n4,k2 Equation ( Following the standard Gor'kov approach at finite temperature, we introduce the Matsubara imaginary time operators a n,k,λ (τ ) that follow the imaginary time evolution equation -∂ τ a n,k,λ (τ ) = [a n,k,λ (τ ), H]. In terms of these operators the normal [G n,λ (k, τ -τ )] and the anomalous [F † n,λ (k, τ -τ ) and F † n,λ (k, τ -τ )] Green's functions are defined as where T τ denotes the imaginary-time ordering operator. By using a mean-field approach, we arrive, after a lenghty algebra, to the self-consistent gap equation: where ∆ n,λ (k) is defined as and the quasiparticle energy is and the pairing potential reads U n,λ;l,ν (k, q) ≡ U n,λ;n,λ l,ν;l,ν (k, q; 0) -U n,λ;n,λ l,ν;l,ν (-k, q; 0) with the overlap integral The matrix elements defined in the Eq.( While in the Fig. The integral equation Then, the self-consistent equation for ∆ n (k z ) can be cast in the form where it is understood that the wave vector q appearing in the last term is q = (q x , q y , q z ). The solution of Eq.( The integration extrema, ε ,min and ε ,max , are computed by introducing the contact interaction energy cutoff in the sense that the condition ε ,min < ε < ε ,max implies the inequality |ε + ε l,qz -μ| < ω 0 . It is worth to point out that g ν (ε ) cannot be formulated as a single analytical function but it has to be defined with a piecewise expression that reflects the topology change of the Fermi Surface when switching from one regime to another (see sections III.A, III.B, and III.C). In fact, the expression defining the partial density of states is: where the double sum has been transformed in a integral in polar coordinates in the last line. This leads to the following expression for g ν (ε ): where k 0 is defined as in the discussion preceding Eq.( The Eq.( The results of the numerical computations for the gaps are shown in the Fig. √ μ being the DOS at the Fermi level for a homogeneous system (no RSOC, no peridodic potential along z). In the numerical simulation we assume that g is a constant, so as the chemical potential changes both g 3D and U 0 are continuously recalculated. We emphasize that, in order to have the full gap, i.e. ∆ λn (k), we must also consider the dependence on the phase factor and on the helicity, for this purpose we keep in mind the Fig. The Fig. In particular, it can be observed that ∆ 1 has a minimum when the chemical potential is near the bottom of the second subband. The partial DOS relative to the first subband, both for λ = 1 and for λ = -1, does not change as the chemical potential changes, therefore, the presence of such a pronounced minimum may be due to the existence of a Fano-type antiresonance in superconducting gaps. An antiresonance can be due to an interband exchange term that generates interference effects between the wave functions of a single particle by coupling in a non-trivial way the parameters of the superconducting phase relating to different bands. Both the depth and the position of the minimum in the ∆ 1 depend on this term. A minimum in ∆ 1 appears below the band edge where the DOS of the second subband changes abruptly and the Fermi surfaces, as seen above, are in a Lifshitz transition of the first type. That is, the partial filling of the second subband is reflected in the appearance of two new threedimensional (3D) Fermi surfaces, one for each helicity. As for the gap of the second subband (∆ 2 ), the Fig. ∆ 2 reaches the maximum corresponding to the maximum of the partial DOS relative to the second subband and to a negative helicity, i.e. when the chemical potential is near the unusual van Hove singularity, in which the Fermi surfaces changes topology passing from a 3D to a two-dimensional (2D) geometry. As the Rashba parameter α SO varies, as seen previously, the radius of the circumference of the singular points that characterizes the Fermi surface in a Lifshitz transition of the type II (3D-2D ETT) increases, and, as shows the Fig. It can also be noted that in the high energy limit the values of the gaps are to a good approximation close to the BCS limit, i.e. in the high energy limit the gaps no longer depend on α In Fig.( For values of the Lifshitz parameter close to the van Hove singularity, for the second subband and for a helicity λ = -1 (the only one present) we plot the corresponding FS highlighting the dependence of ∆ 2 from k z with three different colors. In proximity of the unusual van Hove singularity the gap is not constant in k z since the partial filling of the second subband causes the weight of ε l,qz in the Eq.( By solving the Eq.( In the Fig. In the panel B of Fig. Furthermore, it is possible to observe that the value of α SO for which ∆E RSOC = ∆E z2 = ω 0 i.e. α SO = 0.41 marks the boundary between two distinct situations: if α SO < 0.41 the maximum of T C grows slowly, while if α SO > 0.41 it grows faster and faster. All this is highlighted in the Fig. We observe that the gap ratio differs from the constant value 3.5 foreseen by the BCS theory when the rescaled Lifshitz parameter is closed to 0 < η R < 1. In particular, the 2∆ 1 /T C ratio for the first subband reaches a minimum, lower than the value predicted by BCS theory, when the rescaled Lifshitz parameter is approximately equal to zero. That is, when ∆ 1 is in an antiresonance regime and the system is close to a Lifshitz transition of the first type. The 2∆ 1 /T C ratio reaches a maximum value for η R ≈ 1, when the superconducting parameter ∆ 1 is in a resonance regime, this occurs close to the type II Lifshitz transition. Regarding to the gap ratio for the second subband, 2∆ 2 /T C , we observe a significant deviation from the value predicted by the BCS theory in a range of values of the rescaled Lifshitz parameter equal to 0 < η < 1. In particular, when the system is in an antiresonance regime 2∆ 2 /T C diverges, while when ∆ 2 is in a resonance regime it shows a maximum. By contrast, such a maximum is not present in the absence of the RSOC as the bottom panel of Fig. We see in Fig. Further work is in progress to study the cooperative role of contact and retarded interactions in anisotropic superconductivity related with the anisotropic k-space pairing in the Fermi surface topology at unconventional Lifshitz transitions. As we have just seen, the Fig. In the BCS theory, the isotope coefficient has a constant value as the chemical potential changes equal to 0.5, in our case instead we can notice a considerable deviation from this value when the rescaled Lifshitz parameter is in the range 0 < η R < 1 (for this range of values, the behavior of the γ parameter is that typical of the Fano antiresonance), that is, when the system is close to a Lifshitz transition. These deviations from the BCS theory increase as the Rashba coupling, α SO , increases, therefore there exists an unconventional dependence of the critical temperature on the cut-off energy unlike what is proposed in the BCS theory. In the high-energy limit, the gap ratio and the isotope coefficient tend to the values predicted by the BCS theory, so we are dealing with two BCS-like condensates. In Fig. These results confirm that in correspondence with the van Hove singularity there is an amplification of the characteristic parameters of the superconductive phase which becomes more and more evident when the Rashba coupling exceeds a limit value of 0.4. The works The aim of this work has been to investigate theoretically and numerically the electronic structure and the superconducting properties of a nano-structured superlattice of quantum layers in the presence of RSOC. We have described the unconventional Lifshitz transition in a 3D superlattice of metallic layers characterized by the length of the circular nodal line increasing with RSOC in the negative helicity states of the spin-orbit split electron spectrum. Here we have provided the description of the tuning the multigap Bogoliubov superconductivity near the bottom of the upper subband with negative helicity shifted by the RSOC. Our theory overcomes the limitations present so far due to common BCS approximations used in previous theoretical works on superconductivity in presence of spin-orbit interactions which mostly describe superconductivity only at very high Fermi energy. The work in Re. The issue of superconducting fluctuations in a multiband and multigap configuration deserves a comment at this point. Whereas amplitude and phase fluctuations of the order parameter are in general detrimental and a source of large suppression of the (otherwise enhanced) critical temperature in low dimensional and/or strongly coupled superconductors, their effect can be reduced by the recently proposed mechanism The coexistence of at least one large Fermi surface and at least one small Fermi surface appearing or disappearing with small changes in the chemical potential is the key ingredient for the shape resonance idea in superconducting gaps 