The diode operation of OLEDs is characterized by the creation of a conductive space charge region in an insulating neutral dielectric region under the voltage application. It contrasts with the semiconductor diodes, where an insulating space charge region is created in a conductive charge neutral region. We proposed a heterojunction theory based on the quasi-conductor concept to give a unified view, which gave a modified Mott-Schottky equation for OLEDs (Org. Electron. 61, 10 (2018)). Based on this theory, we proposed a new mobility evaluation method using modulus spectroscopy and reported an in-situ simultaneous evaluation of mobilities and carrier densities of carrier transporting materials in a practical OLED configuration (Jpn.J.Appl.Phys. 59(7), 071005 (2020)). However, there were invalid handlings of the boundary conditions. We carefully reconsider the connection of the electric fields through the insulating and conductive regions based on the Dynamic Modulus Plot (DMP) analysis. It is proposed that the density of the accumulated carriers is governed by the fixed interface charges rather than the Activation of Localized Carrier Source (ALCS). Despite the errors in the previous derivation, the revised theory also gave luckily the same expression of mobility as a result, to ensure the validity of the quantitative estimation in the previous report. It had been known that crystals of organic materials were able to become semiconductors since the 1940s Among the various functional elements, a diode is the most basic active circuit element that exhibits a rectifying characteristic. When a diode is made from semiconductors by sandwiching them between metal electrodes, the device acts as a variable capacitor in the reverse bias region. The capacitor stores real charges as immobile ions in the depletion layer. On the other hand, organic multi-layered devices also act as variable capacitors in the reverse bias region, which has been investigated in detail by the displacement current measurement and Impedance spectroscopy We analyzed the carrier accumulation by using the Poisson equation and the continuity equation in a dielectric material and obtained the modified Mott-Schottky equation that gave a quantitative relationship between the static carrier density of the accumulation layer, the applied voltage, and the thickness of the accumulation layer we reported an evaluation of the mobility and the carrier density from practical OLEDs. From the Dynamic Modulus Plot (DMP) analysis, it was shown that the density of the accumulated carriers was reciprocally proportional to the accumulation layer thickness and therefore the carrier density per area was independent of the accumulation layer thickness. At the same time, it was independent of the neighboring insulating layer thickness also. From these results, we assumed that the accumulated carriers were supplied from a definite external finite carrier source, which was named as Activation of Localized Carrier Source (ALCS) model, with pending the discussion about the physical picture When solving the Poisson equation and the continuity equation, we assumed the abrupt distribution approximation of the space charge density distribution similar to the Schottky contact of the semiconductors. Under the assumption of the ALCS model, the constant accumulated carrier density at the full-accumulated state can be explained by assuming that all ALCS states are ionized. However, the ALCS dynamics has no way to keep the accumulated carrier density during accumulation to be the same as that at the fullaccumulated state. The quasiconductors have no intrinsic carrier density value unlike semiconductors, the carrier density during the accumulation cannot be determined a priori. The derivation in ref. We start the discussion by summarizing the concept of the quasiconductor, the difference between the semiconductor devices and the organic multi-layered electronic devices. The electronic structure of semiconductors has a band structure. The atomic orbitals not only overlap between neighboring atoms, but also have continuation among distant atoms due to the periodicity of the crystal structure, and the charges are delocalized as the Bloch state. In the case of impurity semiconductors, the dopants are ionized. At the same time, the free charges delocalize in the crystal and become carriers, giving the semiconductor a finite conductivity. The number of immobile ions and mobile carriers is balanced, making the semiconductors a charge neutral state. When electrodes are provided, a Schottky junction is formed to exclude the mobile charges in the semiconductor, leaving a region of immobile ions. The space charge potential created by the immobile ions prevents the movement of the carriers through the space charge region and switches-off the conduction Quasiconductors can be defined as dielectrics with an external carrier source and finite mobility from another point of view The space charge distribution in quasiconductors is described by the Poisson equation and the continuity equation so that the drift current and the diffusion current are balanced. (1) With q the elementary charge,  the permittivity, =qN the conductivity,  the mobility, N the carrier density, and D the diffusion coefficient. For one dimensional coordinate, the following equation is obtained after integration of eq. ( This equation has general solutions as Here, φ 0 (x) are the solutions satisfying ∇φ 0 (x) = 0. A is redefined as A = qN 0 /ε. D and μ are interrelated by the Einstein relation, 1 = qD/μkT. In general, this value can be larger than 1 2. The relaxation frequency of the accumulated layer above the full accumulation voltage does not depend on the applied voltage. 3. The relaxation frequency is reciprocally proportional to the thickness of the accumulation layer. The first shows the following. Under a non-uniform electric field, the space charges are essentially localized in a region of about the Debye length. A typical carrier density in OLED is about 10 16 /cm 3 and the Debye length becomes about 30 nm, which is the same order of magnitude as the layer thickness in a typical OLED, and thus the Debye shielding effect is expected to appear. However, the semi-circle of the Cole-Cole plot in the accumulation region is a proper circle, indicating that the carrier density in the accumulation layer is highly homogeneous Here, m and n are the numerical constants that are determined from the boundary conditions. If the Debye length is sufficiently larger than the organic layer, the abrupt distribution approximation that is popular in the analysis of semiconductor junction is effective for those devices The second shows the following. We have already mentioned that OLEDs have a capacitor structure. When a voltage is applied to the capacitor, polarization occurs in the dielectric layers and real charges appear on the electrode surfaces. The first feature shows that there is no carrier localized region in the accumulation layer. The relaxation frequency is proportional to the carrier density. Therefore, the additional storage of real charges to the capacitor in this voltage range does not take place in the organic layer, even though the accumulated layer works as an electrode. The additional storage of real charges must take place on the cathode metal surface. The third shows the following. The volumetric carrier density is reciprocally proportional to the thickness of the accumulation layer, and therefore the areal carrier density that is the integration over the thickness is constant with respect to the thickness. Here, if the origin of the accumulated carriers is due to injection from the electrode, then the accumulated carrier density will be dominated by the height of the energy barrier at the injection interface. Since the injection efficiency becomes independent of the layer thickness in such case, the thicker the layer, the more carriers are injected, and the volumetric density rather than the areal density will remain the same. The constant areal density indicates that there is some mechanism to limit the amount of carrier injection. These three characteristics cannot be consistent with the simple capacitor model of a dielectric layer sandwiched by two metal electrodes, where real charges accumulate at the surface of the electrode metals. To account for these features, we proposed the ALCS mechanism And the direction of the total electric field is always from the cathode to the HT/ET interface at the boundary between the accumulated and the not-yet-accumulated region, which is given from the potential connection condition in the discussion below. If φ II (0) is non-zero (i.e., takes a finite negative value), real charges flowing from the space charge region to x=0 will appear. Since the flow of real charge continues as long as the not-yet-accumulated polarization region exists, the partially accumulated state cannot be taken. Therefore, φ II (0) = 0 is required for the partially accumulated region to exist. In other words, from the beginning to the end of the accumulation, it is a kind of critical state, where the inflow of diffusion current and the counterflow of drift current are balanced. The thickness of the accumulated region is the internal state quantity and the potential at both ends of the layer is the conserved quantity of the critical state. The boundary conditions are φ I (-l) = V, φ I (0) = φ II (0) = 0, φ II (d) = φ III (d), φ III (t) = 0, and E II (d) = E III (d). Here, l is the thickness of the ET layer, t and d are the thicknesses of the HT layer and the accumulated region. Then, the potentials in ET (I), the accumulated region (II), and the not-yet-accumulated region (III) are written as follows. In region I, In region II, In region III, Because φ II (0) = φ III (t) = 0, the following relationship holds. There appear surface charges at the cathode to compensate for the discontinuity of the electric field at the HT/cathode interface. From the Gauss theorem, the electric field at the HT/ET interface satisfies the next equations. Here, σ s is the fixed interface charges at the HT/ET interface. The permittivity of the ET, ε 2 is distinguished from that of the HT, ε 1 , here. We define the full accumulation voltage V f , where the thickness of the accumulated region coincides with t. We obtain the accumulation equation equivalent to the Mott-Schottky equation as Because the thickness of the accumulated region is zero at the accumulation voltage, V a -V f = σ s l/ε 2 . It is shown that the areal carrier density is twice the amount of the fixed interface charges at the HT/ET interface, which is independent of the accumulation layer thickness as in Fig. It is as if the localized states activate the carries in the layer, even though the ALCS model itself is wrong. The carrier accumulation by the localized states can be considered to occupy the same position of carrier doping by the impurity doping in semiconductors as has been pointed out in ref. From the obtained N 0 , the mobility equation is given Here, f is the relaxation frequency of the fully accumulated HT layer that is read from the Modulus spectrum. ε 1 and  are the permittivity and the conductivity of the layer. Equations ( Above the full accumulation voltage, the carrier density is independent of the applied voltage. At the same time, their distribution is homogeneous. Therefore, the coefficient of the quadratic term of the potential in layer II keeps the same value as eq. ( The boundary conditions at HT/ET interface, eq. ( φ I (x) = E(t -x). ( where  is the areal density of the charges accumulated at the cathode surface that are the stored real charges in the capacitor as in Fig. It is shown that the electric field in layer II is not shielded by the mobile carriers. The diffusion current surpasses the drift current. The relaxation frequency of the accumulation layer keeps its value above the builtin potential until the relaxation peak of the other layer overlaps. In other words, the accumulation layer works as a regulating valve of carrier density. However, the current density in this voltage region obeys the Shockley equation with an ideality factor of 1.5 to 2 Careful theoretical investigations will be necessary to make a consistent transport model. Finally, we point out one possibility of the nature of the accumulation. It is reported that the spontaneous polarization correlates with the molecular dipole moment in many molecules In the previous article The Modulus spectroscopy revealed that the carrier dynamics of OLEDs was quite different from that of the semiconductor diodes having a Schottky junction. It was shown that the roles of carriers in conductive and insulating states were switched in the organic devices and the semiconductor devices. The static behavior of carriers in organics as dielectrics has been overlooked. The polarization of each layer has a significant impact on the operation of multi-layered devices. We focus on the polarization dynamics of carrier accumulation and have shown that the carrier distribution is cleverly controlled through polarizations of the constituent layers. We derived a Mott-Schottky-equivalent equation by solving the Poisson equation and the continuity equation. Surprisingly, the equation can be approximated by the same capacitor equation derived in the previous article, even though the calculation is revised. 