Guided-wave plasmonic circuits are promising platforms for sensing, interconnection, and quantum applications in the sub-diffraction regime. Nonetheless, the lossconfinement trade-off remains a collective bottleneck for plasmonic-enhanced optical processes. Here, we report a unique plasmonic waveguide that can alleviate such tradeoff and improve the efficiencies of plasmonic-based emission, light-matter-interaction, and detection simultaneously. Through different bias configurations, record experimental attributes such as normalized Purcell factor approaching 10 4 , 10-dB amplitude modulation with <1 dB insertion loss and fJ-level switching energy, and photodetection sensitivity and internal quantum efficiency of -54 dBm and 6.4 % respectively can be realized within the same amorphous-based plasmonic structure. The ability to support multiple optoelectronic phenomena while providing performance gains over existing plasmonic and dielectric counterparts offers a clear path towards reconfigurable, monolithic plasmonic circuits. Unrestricted by the diffraction limit, plasmonic structures can enable stronger modal confinement to enhance optical processes and miniaturize photonic circuits. 1-3 However, practical utilization of plasmonic components is commonly hindered by the intrinsic metal absorption, which becomes increasingly severe with field confinement. In this work, we demonstrate a coupled hybrid plasmonic waveguide (CHPW) that can alleviate the loss-confinement trade-off (Figure Contrary to coupled-mode plasmonic structures that are designed with strictly enforced structural, material, and modal symmetries, The highly tunable characteristics of the CHPW architecture in turn enables previously unattainable functional versatility. First, in its low-loss state, CHPW can maintain a modest Q-factor without sacrificing V ef f . Recently, normalized CHPW Purcell factor up 6507 has been demonstrated, To illustrate the capability of the CHPW as a device platform, we fabricated and characterized CHPW micro-ring resonators, modulators, and photodetectors on a single chip. The devices are demonstrated using identical material stack (Si/Al/SiO 2 /Si) and layer thicknesses (185 nm/10 nm/20 nm/220 nm) for the first time, with an 10 nm ITO layer added for the modulators. Note that ITO can also be included in other devices in the future if the as-deposited carrier density can be sufficiently low (see Supplementary Section 2). With exception of the Si-on-insulator substrate, all of the waveguide layers consisted of amorphous materials deposited through sputtering and evaporation (see Methods). Nonetheless, as will be shown below, CHPW can offer experimental performance gain for every device despite the monolithic nature and amorphous-based active layers. A scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of a single-mode, 200 nm wide CHPW is shown in Figure The combination of minimal propagation loss and strong field localization in turn enables significant enhancement in the Purcell factor of CHPW micro-ring resonators (Figure For an all-pass CHPW resonator with Si bus and radius of 2.05 μm, the loaded Q is measured to be 2,283 at room temperature and increases to 3,276 at 35 • C (Figure In Supplementary Section 6, it is shown that both the CHPW sensitivity and IQE are the highest for plasmonic Schottky photodetectors reported to-date, with the latter approaching the performance previously only attainable through graphene-enhanced internal photoemis-sion. The ability for CHPW to better capitalize on the plasmonically enhanced LMI for active functionalities is demonstrated through CHPW modulators as shown in Figure Note that the energy-efficiency of these proof-of-concept CHPW modulators are only limited by the properties of the MOS oxide layer. By replacing the 20 nm sputtered SiO 2 with 5 nm sputtered TiO 2 , the static voltage requirement is reduced by 50 % (Figure Overall, CHPW provides the lowest IL as well as the highest optical figure-of-merit (ER/IL) and speed to-date. In conclusion, we report the first experimental demonstration of a plasmonic waveguide architecture that not only alleviates the plasmonic loss-confinement trade-off, but is also capable of simultaneously utilizing multiple device physics to enable electrically-driven functionalities using a single structure. Based on an unique class of asymmetrically-coupled supermode, our amorphous-based CHPW devices demonstrated record Purcell factor for plasmonic micro-rings, record quantum efficiency and sensitivity for guided-wave Schottky detectors at λ = 1.55μm, as well as record ER-IL ratio for plasmonic modulators based on ENZ effect. The ability to be simultaneously optimized for multiple passive and active functionalities is not observed in other plasmonic or dielectric waveguide platforms. Such demonstration provides a direct path towards the realization of monolithic plasmonic circuitry, one that has reconfigurable functional elements, experiences smaller inter-component coupling loss, and enables reduced fabrication complexity and cost. Thermal measurement was performed using a custom copper stage with thermoelectric coolers, where temperature was controlled using the Keithley 2510-AT Autotuning TEC source meter through electrical feedback from a 10kΩ thermistor. To measure the optoelectronic bandwidth of the CHPW modulators up to 6 GHz, RF signal was generated by the NI PXIe-5673E RF vector signal generator (VSG) with 6 dBm peak-to-peak amplitude and a rectangular shape. A bias-tee set before the input of the RF probe was used to combine the RF signal with DC offset from a Keithley 2604B source meter. The resulting amplitude modulated optical signal was captured via a New Focus 1454 18.5 ps Vis-IR photodetector and amplified with an AMF 00101000-55 amplifier before being fed into the NI PXIe-5663E vector signal analyzer (VSA) for analysis. Similarly, the electrical bandwidth of the CHPW photodetector was quantified using the NI VSG and VSA. On the input side, the VSG stimulus was amplified and drives a Fujitsu LiNbO 3 Mach-Zehnder modulator, generating intensity-modulated optical signals up to 6 GHz. On the output side, the photocurent was collected with a Cascade Infinity probe and amplified before feeding into the VSA. In order to subtract coherent electrical input-output crosstalk, measurements with laser beam turned off were also performed. For measurement between 6 GHz and 26 GHz, the same set-up with Keysight M9375A 26.5 GHz 6-port Vector Network Analyzer and AMF-4F-060180 amplifier were used. 