Realizing high-performance nanoelectronics requires control of materials at the nanoscale. Methods to produce high quality epitaxial graphene (EG) nanostructures on silicon carbide are known. The next step is to grow Van der Waals semiconductors on top of EG nanostructures. Hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) is a wide bandgap semiconductor with a honeycomb lattice structure that matches that of graphene, making it ideally suited for graphene-based nanoelectronics. Here, we describe the preparation and characterization of multilayer h-BN grown epitaxially on EG using a migration-enhanced metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy process. As a result of the lateral epitaxial deposition (LED) mechanism, the grown h-BN/EG heterostructures have highly ordered epitaxial interfaces, as desired in order to preserve the transport properties of pristine graphene. Atomic scale structural and energetic details of the observed row-by-row, growth mechanism of the 2D epitaxial h-BN film are analyzed through first-principles simulations, demonstrating one-dimensional nucleationfree-energy-barrierless growth. This industrially relevant LED process can be applied to a wide variety of van der Waals materials. Conventional atomic layer depostion is a cyclic processes involving two different precursor molecules in the gas phase that are alternately introduced on a surface, and in which each cycle deposites exactly one atomic layer on top of the film. In contrast, in the migration-enhanced Lateral Epitaxial Deposition (LED) mechanism that we propose here, each cycle "knits" one row of atoms to the edge of the growing multilayer film. The process presented here demonsrtates that the method produces high quality BN-graphene interfaces, and provides a clear path towards further improvement. The LED process proceeds in a MOVPE growth chamber in which the TEB and NH 3 volatile molecules, that are the precursors for the h-BN films, are introduced to the extremely hot EG on SiC wafer. Contrary to most CVD processes used to grow h-BN the key steps here are the sequential introduction of the chemicals and the rest time between two injections. A growth cycle consists of first a pulsed injection of TEB that is transported in a flow of hydrogen carrier gas, followed by a purge, followed by a similar sequence for the injection of NH 3 (see Methods for details and Ref. 33). In this process, the TEB and NH 3 precursors alternatively decompose on the hot EG surface, thereby providing active boron then nitrogen atoms to form the h-BN layers. In the following, we present properties of the h-BN films grown on EG on the (0001) Si-face and the (0001) C-face of 4H-SiC and on natural EG nanostructures on both the Si-and C-faces. We demonstrate that the h-BN films consists of 2D sp 2 layers and that the first h-BN layers are in epitaxy with epigraphene. Figures This stacking order continues throughout the film and particularly at the critically important h-BN/EG interface (Fig. Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDX) in Fig. These results are confirmed by Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy (EELS), see Fig. The h-BN layer spacing, observed in HR-TEM in Fig. Figure Raman spectroscopy spectra presented in Fig. The h-BN deposition was repeated on EG samples that were deliberately grown with incomplete graphene layers, to produce EG nanoribbon-like structures on both Si-and C-faces, without resorting to lithographic pattering (Fig. The h-BN dielectric quality was tested in a simple 2-probe transport measurement by measuring the I-V characteristic from graphene to a top-gate evaporated on h-BN/EG. The area of the 1 μm 2 gate is largely compatible with the size of nanoelectronics devices, providing a good indication of the h-BN property in a functional device. The resistance of the h-BN film, measured perpendicularly to the stack, is of the order of 8 GΩ, and breakdown was observed above 165 V (see Fig. Turning to the growth process, Fig. Growth dynamics on the surface of the EG can therefore be understood in the following way, as depicted in Fig. We emphasize that the lateral growth process described above is not limited to monolayers but applies to multilayers as well, giving rise to the uniform multilayers observed in Fig. More systematic studies of different growth conditions and growth rate for fine tuning of the processes will follow in further experiments, in particular by iteratively adjusting the boron precursor flow rate. Systematic optimization for specific applications is routine in all deposition processes. The optimization of the many parameters can be efficiently guided by simulations that provide insight into the processes, as demonstrated below. In particular, the observed hexagonal grains with dendritic edges (Fig. To explore the structural evolution and energetics of the atomic-scale mechanisms underlying the h-BN film growth processes, we performed first-principles density-functional theory (DFT) simulations; for details see Methods and SI. To this end, we modeled the graphene surface by a periodically replicated supercell (6x12 hexagons comprising 144 C atoms, with an energy optimized interatomic distance d C-C = 1.425 Å) on which we adsorbed a partial strip of h-BN; see the configuration of h-BN/graphene in Fig. To simulate the growth of the h-BN film we focus on two growth modes: (I) where, subsequent to thermal decomposition of the incident (alternating) TEB and NH 3 precursors on the graphene T > 1500K heated surface, we consider low fluxes (LF) of B (boron) and N (nitrogen) atoms arriving (through low-barrier thermal diffusion (see SI) on the bare graphene surface) to the vicinity of the h-BN growth front, and (II) where for each of the growth cycles we consider (alternating) high-fluxes (HF) of B and N atoms impinge on the h-BN film growth-front. For our model system each growth cycle entails impingement of 6 B atoms followed by 6 N atoms, resulting, under optimal growth conditions, in the formation of 6 new h-BN hexagons after each cycle. In simulations of the LF mode, we divide (in each cycle) the approach of the 6 B atoms into three stages (two B atoms in each stage, 2B+2B+2B), with the system allowed to structurally and energetically relax to the lowest energy configuration after each stage of 2B atoms diffusion-andattachment to the film edge. A similar consecutive impingement-followed-by-relaxation procedure is used for the subsequent 6 N (2N+2N+2N) atoms, completing the growth cycle. LF growth, resulting in perfect hexagonal order at the additional freshly grown h-BN film edge, is shown in the a-b-c sequence in Fig. Interestingly, bondings of B and N atoms is found to occur only at the edge (growth-front) of the h-BN film (see Fig. It is instructive to contrast the above LF results with those obtained from a simulation of the HF growth mode; also termed "inconsecutive" process. Starting from the same initial state we observe at the end of the first (6B+6N) cycle (see Fig. We conclude by commenting on the 1D row-by-row growth model In summary, a potentially industrially scalable MOVPE-based lateral epitaxial deposition process has been developed to produce high quality h-BN epitaxial films on EG. The crystalline quality and uniformity of the films and the clean epitaxial h-BN/EG interface were verified using a comprehensive suite of surface probes (SEM, HR-TEM, HR-XRD, XPS, EDX, EELS, LEED, Raman spectroscopy). For short growth time, incomplete coverage reveals that the first h-BN layers have large grains that are rotationally aligned to the SiC substrate. First-principles DFT simulations have uncovered a 1D nucleation-free-energy-barrierless growth mechanism of the epitaxial h-BN film. Atomic-scale details of the row-by-row growth are calculated illustrating the role of atomic-scale relaxation processes at the 2D film growth-front, in correlation with the perfection of structural ordering of the grown h-BN film that indicates the needed control over the fluxes of the constituents (B and N) in the LED process. The observed uniform thickness and high crystalline quality over large area offer potential for improved reliability and performance in graphene-based nanoelectronics compared to traditional LED methods. Furthermore, since the extent of the prepatterned EG devices are typically less than 100 nm in nanoelectronics, the device edges are ideally suited as nucleation sites to intitiate the line-by-line knitting film-growth, that can be completed in less than 1000 cycles. In an optimized LED process, the cycle time can be optimized further. The h-BN/epigraphene/SiC heterostructure produced here presents the added advantage to be grown on a commercial single crystal semiconductor in an industrial reactor with 3x2-inch wafer capability. Moreover, the processes can be further expanded by growing an epitaxial graphene layer on top of the BN layers, using CVD. Epigraphene was produced on commercial chemical mechanical polished (CMP) insulating 4H-SiC substrates (from CREE). Complete few layer graphene films as well as incomplete monolayer graphene domains separated by buffer layer areas were grown on the silicon terminated face (SiC-(0001)), as shown in Fig. Migration enhanced metal organic vapor phase deposition process was applied for h-BN growth using an Aixtron close coupled showerhead 3x2" MOVPE reactor. Prior to growth, the chamber was heated to 1270°C in hydrogen environment at 85 mbar. A triethylboron (TEB) preflow (5-10 s) preceded the alternate introduction of TEB and ammonia (NH 3 ) to nucleate and grow h-BN layers. A cycle consists of first a pulsed injection of TEB (1-3 s), where the total carrier gas flow rate was maintained at 20 SLPM with a TEB flow rate of 60 μmol/min. This is followed by a 1-3 s purge of the volatile components. Then NH 3 is introduced for 3-6 s (flow rate: 1.35 SLPM, carrier gas: 20 SLPM), followed by a 1-3 s purge similarly to a standard ALD process. The cycle is repeated for full coverage. h-BN films were grown with thicknesses ranging from about 1 to 50 nm. The growth rate in the c-axis direction was 5 nm/h as determined by AFM (scratch profile). The growth rate on EG was about 1/3 of that observed on sapphire (15 nm/h), The first-principles electronic structure calculations were performed with the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP). A plane-wave basis with a kinetic energy cutoff of 400 eV, projector augmented wave (PAW) pseudopotentials method In simulation of the h-BN film growth process, for both the low-flux (consecutive) and highflux (inconsecutive) modes, the adsorbed B or N atoms were initially located (adsorbed) on the bare graphene surface at a distance up to 5 Å from any atom of the h-BN film growth-front, to ensure no direct initial bonding to the film. The attachment of the atoms to the film-growth front occurred in the course of (unconstrained) DFT energy minimization of the total system. The Raman spectrum after h-BN growth (black) displays a large peak at 1370 cm -1 that is ascribed to the h-BN E 2g due to the absence of a D peak in the as-grown EG. (For this spectrum, the disordered top h-BN layers are mechanically removed) Inset: Lorentizan fit of the peak at 1370 cm -1 (FWHM=47.3 cm -1 ). Schematic of the formation of the epitaxial 2D heterostructure using the lateral ALD process. The process cyclically injects TEB then ammonia. In the depicted TEB phase of the cycle, TEB (1) decomposes on the hot epigraphene surface liberating ethane (2) that escapes. The free, highly mobile boron atom (3) skids on the epigraphene to an awaiting nitrogen atom at the edge of the growing film (4). The process terminates when all nitrogen sites are passivated, and is ready for the second half of the cycle where the remaining TEB and ethane are purged (5) and ammonia is introduced (6) to add a fresh row of nitrogen to the boron saturated edge by the analogous decomposition process. enlarged view taken normal to the growing film edge, illustrating the weak coupling between the h-BN film and the graphene substrate. In (b) we depict the optimal configurations resulting from exposure of the initial configuration (in a) to a low flux (LF) of B atoms. The small flux is modeled via the consecutive adsorption of boron atoms (2B atoms at each adsorption stage), with the system allowed to relaxed to the energy-optimal configuration after each adsorption step (for a detailed view of the system after each of the three consecutive B-adsorption steps see Fig. (c) The consecutive adsorption of nitrogen atoms (low flux) results in the formation of an added row of perfect h-BN to the growing film. Five out of six of the N atoms at the bottom edge of the freshly grown hexagon row are anchored to the graphene surface. (d-g) An inconsecutive growth process, corresponding to high flux, HF, of arriving boron atoms followed by HF of impinging nitrogen atoms; that is, in each B/N cycle all the boron, as well as all the subsequent nitrogen atoms, arrive (essentially) simultaneously to the growing edge of the h-BN film (with no, or incomplete at best, intervening structural relaxations taking place at the growth front, see initial configuration in a followed by the configurations in d), resulting in defective growth of the film (see configuration e). The subsequent HF adsorption cycle yield a disordered film edge (see g). In order to confirm that the peaks come from the h-BN film, background HR-XRD scans were taken prior to h-BN growth, and no peak is observed for monolayer graphene. Graphene peaks are only observed for few layer graphene due to the small graphene cross section. HR-XRD spectra acquired from granular h-BN films showed a significantly reduced h-BN peak, confirming that the pleated morphology observed in Fig. Continuous h-BN films with pleated surface morphology grow on graphitized regions of both the SiC silicon and carbon faces, as shown in Fig. The weak interlayer interaction allows the sheets to slide with respect to each other to accommodate this strain without cracking, forming pleats. The pleats often radiate with tri-fold symmetry (see Fig. For thicker h-BN films (>20nm or so), clusters do not decorate step edges, as shown in Fig. Raman spectroscopy is widely used to quantify disorder in graphene. To determine the damage caused by processing, a monolayer graphene on the Si face was measured before and after the h-BN deposition as follows. After the deposition, the h-BN layer was mechanically exfoliated to expose the underlying graphene layer so that its Raman spectrum can be measured. As shown in Fig. The energy barrier of B atom diffusion on the graphene is 0.06 eV (gamma-point only) The adsorption energy of N atom on the graphene(6x12) is 4.13 eV (gamma-point only) The energy barrier of N atom diffusion on the graphene is 0.97 eV (gamma-point only) The adsorption energy of B atom on the graphene(6x12) is 1.16 eV (6x6x1 k-points) The energy barrier of B atom diffusion on the graphene is 0.10 eV (6x6x1 k-points) The adsorption energy of N atom on the graphene(6x12) is 3.64 eV (6x6x1 k-points) The energy barrier of N atom diffusion on the graphene is 0.75 eV (6x6x1 k-points) The adsorption energy of n B atoms on the graphene area of the g/h-BN system is given by : E !" g/hBN + nB = E g/hBN + nE B -E g/hBN + nB , where E(g/hBN) is the energy of the g/h-BN system-that is, partial h-BN strip adsorbed on the graphene (g) surface and E(B) is the energy of a gas-phase B atom, and E(g/hBN + nB) is the energy of the g/h-BN system with n B atoms adsorbed on the graphene area. For the B atoms that are adsorbed on the graphene surface (away from the partial h-BN strip) we can approximate E !" (g/hBN + nB) as E !" (g + nB), that is we can take E !" (g/hBN + nB) ≅ E !" (g + nB), where E !" (g + nB) is calculated as follows: E !" (g + nB) = E(g) + nE(B) -E(g + nB). As a result: In the following we will write E !" (g + nB) as E !" (nB]) for simplicity E !! nB ≅ E g/hBN + nE B -E g/hBN + nB . The energy of the g/h-BN system with n B atoms adsorbed on the graphene area is then E(g/hBN + nB) ≅ E(g/hBN) + nE(B) -E !" (nB) The binding energy of n B atoms on the h-BN edge of the system is E ! (nB) = E(g/hBN + nB) -E(g/hBN/nB) Using Eq. ( 