Synthesis of graphene with reduced use of chemical reagents is essential for manufacturing scale-up and to control its structure and properties. In this paper, we report on a novel chemical-free mechanism of graphene exfoliation from graphite using laser impulse. Our experimental setup consists of a graphite slab irradiated with an Nd:YAG laser of wavelength 532 nm and 10 ns pulse width. The results show the formation of graphene layers with conformational morphology from electron microscopy and Raman spectra. Based on the experimental results, we develop a simulation set up within the framework of the molecular dynamics that supplies the laser-induced electromagnetic energies to atoms in the graphite slab. We investigate the influence of different laser fluence on the exfoliation process of graphene. The variations in inter-layer interaction energy and inter-layer distance are the confirmative measures for the possible graphene layer formation. The simulation results confirm the exfoliation of a single layer graphene sheet for the laser power ranging from 100 × 10 to 2000 × 10 J/nm 2 . With an increase of laser fluence from 2000 × 10 to 4000 × 10 J/nm 2 , there is an increase in the graphene yield via the layer-after-layer exfoliation. The bridging bond dynamics between the successive graphene layers govern the possibility of second-layer exfoliation. The experimental and simulation observations are useful and promising for producing chemical-free graphene on a large scale for industrial and commercial applications. Graphene is a two-dimensional allotrope of carbon, having several applications in various fields and technologies Chemical routes promise for the production of large scale graphene. Epitaxial growth of graphene Mechanical exfoliation is a well-developed technique for large scale production of graphene, making it the current state of the art fabrication process. For example, graphene is peeled from graphite using a three-roll milling machine Recent studies have shown the advantage of laser-based exfoliation and similar mechanisms of synthesis. Lasers for industry scale processing are available in the range of IR to deep UV with broad variation in the laser pulse-width (even femtoseconds) and high amount of laser beam fluences without use of an external converging lens. Ultrafast laser ablation studies give the initial understanding of laser-driven exfoliation The incorporation of electromagnetic fields of the laser into the classical molecular dynamics force fields is successful in simulating the molecular trajectories under strong laser fields In this work, we considered a graphite slab irradiated with laser. The laser-induced forces are estimated from the fundamental behavior of charged particles in electromagnetic fields. A molecular dynamics model is setup using the charge based potential and the electromagnetic fields are subjected as a force to the atoms. Various quantities like inter-layer energy, interlayer distance, bridging bond dynamics are utilized to understand the exfoliation process. An experimental setup is also developed for the initial observation of graphene exfoliation. Figure A square-shaped graphite slab of length (l) 5 nm and thickness (h) 2 nm is considered. Seven graphene layers were stacked with ABA sequence, where A and B corresponds to the repetitive atomic arrangement in the first layer L and second layer L , respectively (as shown in Figure Force F on atom i is calculated using the first-order spatial derivative of the inter-atomic potential (U)defined over a system of atoms where r is the position vector of atom i. We have employed Charge Optimized Many-Body (COMB) potential to determine the atomic configuration as well as point charges associated with each atom. For further details about the COMB potential, refer to the original literature Force F on atomi is approximated to the Lorentz force acting on the atom having charge q moving with velocity v in a background electromagnetic field described by electric field E(r , t) and magnetic field B(r , t), that is, where E(r , t) and B(r , t) are primarily due to lasing and secondarily due to the atomic charge distribution that evolves the long-range dynamics. Laser properties are introduced in terms of laser power L , laser pulse-width τ and laser wavelength λ. The laser beam is incident on the area Γ (shaded region in Figure where E and B are the amplitudes of fields in an electromagnetic wave, μ is the magnetic permittivity of the graphite slab. Relationship between B and E can be obtained from Maxwell's equation as and assume that electric and magnetic fields of a monochromatic wave have identical phase exp ikk • r -iωt with amplitudes E and B , where k and ω are the wavenumber and frequency of the laser. k is the unit vector representing the incident wave direction. Substituting the expressions for the fields into Eq. ( Putting back Eq. ( By knowing the electric field amplitude E from Eq. ( where ζ is a unit step function that defines the number of waves over a pulse-width. ζ is zero for t -1/ν is less than 0. The time variation of B is identical to Eq. ( However, such systems are computationally expensive in finding the dynamical charges, which are involved in the effective laser force fields. Moreover, the application of time variation of electromagnetic fields in Eq. ( To investigate the microstructures and surface morphology of the as-synthesized graphene The 2D peak position is found at 2692 cm -1 , which is in agreement with earlier reports From the literature, the ratio of intensity of 2D peak to G peak is two. The peak frequency is matching with the reports, whereas it differed with the intensity. The intensity of the 2D peak represents the number of layers in graphene. If a multi-layer graphene is considered, the intensity of the 2D peak is reduced. This represents that, from our experiment, we achieved a multi-layer graphene. Fine-tuned control on the laser fluence and laser pulse width can achieve single-layer to multi-layer graphene sheets. To verify the controllability on the graphene exfoliation and to have a better understanding of the exfoliation process, we proceed to perform simulations. Note that the power of irradiation used in the experiments is quite high but the beam diameter is large (about 9.5 mm), and it may require further focusing of the beam to achieve controllable energy density for exfoliating a single graphene layer. There exists a strong possibility to exfoliate a single graphene sheet with lower laser powers and pulse width. The employed laser properties in simulations are tabulated in Table The variation of binding energy and interlayer distance is given at laser fluence 1000 × 10 J/nm 2 . There is an increase in the slope of the interlayer distance variation with the increase in laser fluence from 100 to 1000 × 10 J/nm 2 , which indicates the speed-up in the process of exfoliation. For 2000 × 10 J/nm 2 laser fluence, the separation is initiated at The simulation indicates graphene exfoliation at laser fluences greater than or equal to 100 × 10 J/nm 2 , which is confirmed by the calculations of interlayer binding energy and distance of separation. Because of the electromagnetic force field, these layers start moving away from the rest of the slab. With the increase in force, the displacement and velocity of the atoms are also increasing. We have used the displacement or the distance of separation to explain the exfoliation process. The remaining quantity like the velocity of atoms is also utilized to analyze the exfoliation process in terms of temperature. To analyze the spatial and temporal distribution of temperature in L , the atoms in that layer are divided into several rectangular bins along the y-direction and the temperature of these bins was computed at each time step. Another observation from the atomic snapshots is that there is a second layer lift-off identified from Figure In this study, we performed both simulations and experiments to exfoliate the graphene from a graphite slab. Spectroscopic results indicate the existence of several layered graphene sheets. We set up a simulation scheme within the framework of the molecular dynamics to replicate the laser-induced irradiation process. We model the laser irradiation-induced force on the atoms. With these forces, atoms also developed higher temperature by gaining kinetic 