We present a rigorous theoretical framework for designing full-space spatial power dividers using metagratings. In our study, the current restrictions of spatial power dividing platforms such as reflection-only performance, operating at normal incidence, and small reflection/refraction angles have been totally relaxed. A modal expansion analysis based on Floquet-Bloch (FB) theorem is established so that a discrete set of spatial harmonics is considered in both reflection and transmission sides of a compound metallic grating in which the unknown coefficients are calculated by applying proper boundary conditions. By eliminating the unwanted scattering harmonics, the proposed metagrating has the ability to realize different functionalities from perfect anomalous refraction to reflection-transmission spatial power dividing, without resorting to full-wave numerical optimizations. The numerical simulations confirm well the theoretical predictions. Our findings not only offer possibilities to realize arbitrary spatial power dividers but also reveal a simple alternative for beamforming array antennas. T HE quest for manipulating the trajectories of electro- magnetic (EM) waves has led various researchers to revisit the traditional methodologies in optics community. For several years, the particular problem of coupling an incoming beam into a certain reflection or transmission mode has been approached by means of local phase gradient designs The concept of metagrating has been recently reported by Alu et. al In this letter, we present an end-to-end analytical scheme based on FB theorem to design reflection-transmission spatial power dividers by means of compound metallic gratings. The structure is engineered so that it can realized both symmetric and asymmetric scattering functionalities. To verify the versatility of this systematic approach, four illustrative examples on perfect anomalous refraction and spatial power dividing have been presented, demonstrating that the numerical simulations are in an excellent agreement with our theoretical predictions. Without loss of generality, a 2D configuration (∂/∂y=0) is studied comprising periodic pairs of dissimilar grooves with the lattice constant L x . As shown in Fig. m Y m,I R m e -jkz,mz e -jkx,mx H y tot,I = e jkz,0z e -jkx,0x + m R m e -jkz,mz e -jkx,mx in which, x,m , and k x,m =k 0 sin θ + 2mπ/L x denote the wave admittance and the wavenumbers along z and x directions for mth mode, respectively. Time harmonic dependency of e jωt is assumed and suppressed. For operating frequencies less than , each groove can be modelled by a parallel-plate guiding system carrying single TEM propagating mode along forward and backward directions, i.e., Y grv1,up A -e -jkz,grv1,up(z+h1) H y tot,grv1,up = A + e jkz,grv1,up(z+h1) + A -e -jkz,grv1,up(z+h1) ( E x tot,grv1,down = -Y grv1,down B + e jk z,grv1,down (z+h1) + (7) Y grv1,down B -e -jk z,grv1,down (z+h1) H y tot,grv1,down = B + e jk z,grv1,down (z+h1) + B -e -jk z,grv1,down (z+h1) for the first groove, and Y grv2,up C -e -jkz,grv2,up(z+h2) H y tot,grv2,up = C + e jkz,grv2,up(z+h2) + C -e -jkz,grv2,up(z+h2) (10) H y tot,grv2,down = D + e jk z,grv2,down (z+h2) + D -e -jk z,grv2,down (z+h2) (12) for the second groove. Here, +,superscripts indicate the forward and backward waves propagating inside the grooves, respectively, and k z,grv i,up(down) =k 0 ε up(down) r and Y grvi,up(down) = k z,grvi,up(down) /ωε 0 ε up(down) r . To find the unknown coefficients, we should impose the configuration's boundary conditions: continuity of the tangential electric and magnetic fields over the groove aperture at z = 0, -H, -h 1 (first groove), and -h 2 (second groove) and vanishing the tangential electric fields on any PEC interface at z = 0 and z = -H. After some algebraic manipulations and using the orthogonality of exponential terms in each period, we have: ±Y grv1,down Y m,I M + m,grv1 e ±jk z,grv1,down (-H+h1) M - m,grv1 -w grv1 L e ±jk z,grv1,down (-H+h1) (18) Here, the up/bottom signs correspond to the up/bottom indices in the left-hand side of equation, and After solving Eq. ( The presented analysis can be simply extended to metagratings consisting of more than two grooves in each period. For the sake of briefness, the details are not given here. In accordance with the FB theorem, the reflected and transmitted waves consist of a superposition of spatial harmonics departing at angles Any power coupling between the spatial harmonics must be allowed by the FB theorem, i.e., the diffraction modes of interest should not be evanescent so that they can contribute to the far-field scattering. For instance, let us consider a metagrating with the structural parameters up r1 = 2, GHz) making only three m = 0, ±1 spatial harmonics propagative. The desired inhomogeneity along inside the grooves can be simply realized through drilling holes in a homogeneous host dielectric In this section, we follow the theoretical scheme described in the previous section to find the best structural parameters, without requiring even a single optimization in a full-wave solver. Without loss of generality, we assume that all spatial harmonics except m = 0, ±1 are evanescent in both reflection Fig. Though being essential in various beamforming applications, a few studies have contributed to address configurations producing multiple beams with adjustable power ratio levels. However, the previous proposals are based on local designs and have been restricted to reflection scenarios and normal illuminations, require local amplitude modulation, possess limited efficiencies especially at near grazing angles due to the phase gradient nature, and also, lacks front-to-end analytical designs In summary, this letter was aimed at presenting an end-toend analytical scheme for designing full-space spatial power dividers through engineering the diffraction modes of a compound metallic grating. In our study, the restrictions of the previous proposals such as reflection-only performance, operating upon normal illuminations, and small beam deflection angles have been relaxed. In an excellent accordance with the numerical results, our theoretical study illustrates that the designed metagrating can serve to realize different functionalities from perfect anomalous refraction to full-space spatial power dividing, without even one 3D full-wave optimization.