Artificially engineered topological superconductivity has emerged as a viable route to create Majorana modes, exotic quasiparticles which have raised great expectations for storing and manipulating information in topological quantum computational schemes. The essential ingredients for their realization are spin non-degenerate metallic states proximitized to an s-wave superconductor. In this context, proximity-induced superconductivity in materials with a sizable spin-orbit coupling has been heavily investigated in recent years. Although there is convincing evidence that superconductivity may indeed be induced, it has been difficult to elucidate its topological nature. In this work, we systematically engineer an artificial topological superconductor by progressively introducing superconductivity (Nb) into metals with strong spinorbital coupling (Pt) and 3D topological surface states (Bi2Te3). Through a longitudinal study of the character of superconducting vortices within s-wave superconducting Nb and proximitycoupled Nb/Pt and Nb/Bi2Te3, we detect the emergence of a zero-bias peak that is directly linked to the presence of topological surface states. Supported by a detailed theoretical model, our results are rationalized in terms of competing energy trends which are found to impose an upper limit to the size of the minigap separating Majorana and trivial modes, its size being ultimately linked to fundamental materials properties. In the field of condensed matter physics, Majorana fermion (MF) is an emergent fractionallycharged quasiparticle that obeys non-Abelian exchange statistics In the case of TIs, the Dirac, spin-split bands on the surface allows to avoid the complications related to the presence of degenerate time-reversed pairs seen in the strongly SOC systems. Proximity-induced superconductivity in prototypical 3D TIs such as Bi2Se3 and Bi2Te3 has been studied by scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and quantum transport measurements each of which reveal indirect yet tantalizing glimpses indicating the presence of MFs Additionally, the unambiguous detection of MF signatures is severely complicated by the presence of Caroli-de-Gennes-Matricon (CdGM) states, low-energy excitations emerging within vortex cores of type-II superconductors which are characterized by a discrete energy spectrum with the lowest state emerging at about E = ±∆ 2 /EF, with ∆ being the superconducting energy gap and EF the Fermi level In this work, we report a longitudinal study that examines the materials issues that are endemic to the observation of MF in vortex cores of TIs by fabricating an artificial topological superconductor. Starting from superconducting Nb (110) films showing "clean" vortices, i.e. vortices without Caroli-de-Gennes-Matricon state, we progressively introduce strong spin-orbit coupling and topological states by proximitizing Pt and, finally, bulk-insulating Bi2Te3 films, respectively. By directly comparing the detailed spectroscopic characterization performed on all heterostructures, we reveal materials-dependent signatures through which MFs emerge only in the Bi2Te3 case. Backed up by theoretical simulations, our results provide compelling experimental evidence that the details of the underlying TI are not the impediment to the clear observation of topological superconductivity hosting Majorana modes but rather due to the existence of competing energy trends directly linked to fundamental materials properties and that set an upper limit to the maximum size of the induced minigap in the vortices. In Figure To create a superconducting condensate in a material characterized by strong SOC, a thin Pt film has been directly deposited onto Nb to induce superconductivity by the proximity effect. A crosssectional TEM image of the resulting heterostructure is reported in Figure Finally, to scrutinize the effect of a topologically non-trivial band structure on proximity-induced superconductivity, thin films of the prototypical topological insulators Bi2Te3 have been grown onto the same Nb underlayers. It is worth stressing that, contrary to previous reports where unconventional superconductors such as BSCCO Being prototypical TIs narrow gap semiconductors (37), a precise spectroscopic characterization is crucial to precisely locate the Fermi level with respect to the bulk valence and conduction bands. Indeed, doping effects have been shown to shift the Fermi level well-inside the bulk bands already at moderate defect concentrations The superconducting properties of the heterostructures have been investigated by STS measurements performed at cryogenic temperatures. Figure The different Cooper pairing mechanisms among the heterostructures are schematically illustrated in Figure The impact of the different electronic and spin-textures onto the properties of the superconducting condensates has been experimentally probed by spectroscopic measurements acquired with magnetic fields applied perpendicular to the sample surface. In agreement with expectations for type-II superconductors, superconducting vortices appear in all heterostructures, i.e. Nb, Pt/Nb, and Bi2Te3/Nb, with the vortex density progressively increasing with increasing magnetic field strength (see Figure To understand the physics contained within the vortex in proximity-coupled s-wave SC-3D timereversal invariant topological insulators (STI) system, we diagonalize a 3D TI Hamiltonian proximity-coupled to an s-wave superconductor (see Supplementary Information for detail). In our model, we consider two different cases of the penetration depth (λ) of magnetic field: the "thin-flux" limit and the "thick-flux" limit The "thick-flux" condition is obviously fulfilled in our Bi2Te3/Nb samples, being that the thickness of the TI film (~ 5 nm) is much smaller than the Nb penetration depth (~ 40nm (70)), creating the best possible experimental conditions for the detection of Majorana modes. In our system, the zero-bias peak emerging inside vortices may be directly linked to the topological states, which are the only states present at the Fermi level in our bulk-insulating Bi2Te3 films. The spatial mapping is also consistent with theoretical predictions suggesting a local density of states distribution of Majorana modes that resembles a Y shape (see Fig. The emergence of proximity-induced superconductivity in bulk-insulating Bi2Te3 demonstrates that topological Dirac states can be effectively driven into Cooper pairs. Our results provide compelling experimental evidence that the creation of a superconducting condensate onto the surface of TIs does not require the presence of bulk states 