Radiative cooling is a passive cooling technology that offers great promises to reduce space cooling cost, combat the urban island effect and alleviate the global warming. To achieve passive daytime radiative cooling, current state-of-the-art solutions often utilize complicated multilayer structures or a reflective metal layer, limiting their applications in many fields. Attempts have been made to achieve passive daytime radiative cooling with single-layer paints, but they often require a thick coating or show partial daytime cooling. In this work, we experimentally demonstrate remarkable full daytime sub-ambient cooling performance with both BaSO4 nanoparticle films and BaSO4 nanocomposite paints. BaSO4 has a high electron bandgap for low solar absorptance and phonon resonance at 9 μm for high sky window emissivity. With an appropriate particle size and a broad particle size distribution, BaSO4 nanoparticle film reaches an ultra-high solar reflectance of 97.6% and high sky window emissivity of 0.96. During field tests, BaSO4 film stays more than 4.5°C below ambient temperature or achieves average cooling power of 117 W/m 2 . BaSO4-acrylic paint is developed with 60% volume concentration to enhance the reliability in outdoor applications, achieving solar reflectance of 98.1% and sky window emissivity of 0.95. Field tests indicate similar cooling performance to the BaSO4 films. Overall, our BaSO4-acrylic paint shows standard figure of merit of 0.77 which is among the highest of radiative cooling solutions, while providing great reliability, the convenient paint form, ease of use and the compatibility with commercial paint fabrication process. Radiative cooling has shown great promises to reduce the cost of space cooling in both residential and commercial applications. 1 Contrary to active cooling which requires electricity to drive a refrigeration cycle, radiative cooling utilizes the atmospheric transparent window (the "sky window") to emit thermal radiation directly to the deep sky without consuming any energy. 2 Its passive nature has the potential to reduce the urban island effect and alleviate the global warming. If the thermal emission through the sky window exceeds the solar absorption, the surface can maintain cooler than ambient even under direct sunlight. Early studies of radiative cooling paints lasted for decades, but none of the paints achieved full daytime radiative cooling. [2][3][4][5][6] thin layer of TiO2 on aluminum substrate, but the high solar reflectance should primarily come from the metal substrate rather than the paint itself. In this work, we experimentally demonstrate full daytime sub-ambient cooling with BaSO4 nanoparticle film and BaSO4-acrylic paints. We choose BaSO4 due to its high electron bandgap for low solar absorptance and phonon resonance at 9 μm for high sky window emissivity. By adopting an appropriate particle size and a broad particle size distribution, we achieve a high solar reflectance of 97.6% and a high sky window emissivity of 0.96 with BaSO4 nanoparticle film. Field tests indicate surface temperature more than 4.5°C below ambient temperature or average cooling power of 117 W/m 2 , among the highest cooling power reported. To enhance the reliability of the coating, BaSO4-acrylic paint is developed with 60% volume concentration. The high filler concentration and the broad particle size distribution are added to compensate the low refractive index of BaSO4 compared to TiO2, leading to solar reflectance of 98.1% and sky window emissivity of 0.95. During field tests, the BaSO4 paint yields similarly high cooling performance. Our BaSO4-acrylic paint shows standard figure of merit of 0.77 which is among the highest of radiative cooling solutions, while providing great reliability, the convenient paint form, ease of use and the compatibility with commercial paint fabrication process. The results were also included in a provisional patent filed on October 3, 2018 and a non-provisional international patent application (PCT/US2019/054566) filed on October 3, 2019 and published on April 9, 2020. A key challenge to adopt BaSO4 as a filler material in polymer matrix is the low refractive index of BaSO4 compared to that of TiO2. To enable strong scattering in the composite, we adopted a particle volume concentration of 60%, which is considerably higher than those in commercial paints. Additionally, the broad particle size distribution contributes to the solar reflectance. where εε SSSSSS is the sky window emissivity, RR SSSSSSSSSS is the solar reflectance, and rr is the ratio of the solar irradiation power over the blackbody emissive power through the sky window. With surface temperature of 300 K and rr set as 10, our BaSO4 film and BaSO4 paint reach the standard RC of 0.72 and 0.77, respectively, which are higher than state-of-the-art radiative cooling solutions as 0.32 To demonstrate the reliability of our BaSO4 paint, we conducted abrasion test, outdoor weathering and viscosity characterizations. The abrasion tests were performed according to ASTM D4060 with a Taber Abraser Research Model, and the results are shown in Figure A BaSO4 particle film of 150 μm thickness was fabricated on a silicon wafer. 400 nm BaSO4 particles, deionized water and ethanol were mixed with a mass ratio of 2:1:1 and coated on the substrate until fully dried. The average particle size was chosen as 400 nm to reflect both visible and near infrared range of the solar irradiation. To fabricate the BaSO4-acrylic nanocomposite paint, Dimethylformamide and BaSO4 nanoparticles (400 nm diameter, US Research Nanomaterials) were mixed and ultra-sonicated for 15 minutes with a Fisherbrand Model 505 Sonic Dismembrator. The mixture was degassed to remove air bubbles introduced during the ultra-sonication process. Acrylic (Elvacite 2028 from Lucite International) was then slowly added and mixed until fully dissolved. The mixture was poured into a mold to be left fully dried overnight, resulting in a free-standing layer with a thickness of 400 μm to eliminate the substrate effect on the overall coating performance. A series of thinner coatings of the BaSO4 film and paint were also prepared with film applicators (BYK Film Applicator) to study the effect of coating thickness. The dry film thickness was measured with a coordinate measuring machine (Brown&Sharp MicroXcel PFX). The solar reflectance from 250 nm to 2.5 μm was measured with a Perkin Elmer Lambda 950 UV-Vis-NIR spectrometer with an integrating sphere. A certified Spectralon diffuse reflectance standard was used, and the solar reflectance was calculated based on the AM 1.5 solar spectrum. There are two field testing setups made for cooling performance characterization on a building roof, as shown in Figure The Monte Carlo simulations were performed according to the modified Lorentz-Mie theory The supporting information includes Supplementary Note 1, 2, 3, Figure 