The structural degrees of freedom of a solid material are the various distortions most straightforwardly activated by external stimuli such as temperature, or pressure, or adsorption. One of the most successful design strategies in materials chemistry involves controlling these individual distortions to produce useful collective functional responses. In a ferroelectric such as lead titanate, for example, the key degree of freedom involves asymmetric displacements of Pb 2+ cations; it is by coupling these together that the system as a whole interacts with external electric fields. Collective rotations of the polyhedral units in oxide ceramics are another commonly exploited distortion, driving anomalous behaviour such as negative thermal expansionthe counterintuitive phenomenon of volume contraction on heating. An exciting development in the field has been to exploit the interplay between different distortion types: generating polarisation by combining two different polyhedral rotations, for example. In this way, degrees of freedom act as geometric 'elements' that can themselves be combined to engineer materials with new and interesting properties. Just as the discovery of new chemical elements quite obviously diversified chemical space, so we might expect that identifying new and different types of structural degrees of freedom to be an important strategy for developing new kinds of functional materials. In this context, the broad family of molecular frameworks is emerging as an extraordinarily fertile source of new and unanticipated distortion types, the vast majority of which have no parallel in the established families of conventional solid-state chemistry. Framework materials are solids whose structures are assembled from two fundamental components: nodes and linkers. Quite simply, linkers join the nodes together to form scaffolding-like networks that extend from the atomic to the macroscopic scale. These structures usually contain cavities, which can also accommodate additional ions for charge balance. In the well-established systems-such as lead titanate-node, linker, and extra-framework ions are all individual atoms (Ti, O, and Pb, respectively). But in molecular frameworks, at least one of these components is a molecule. In this Account, we survey the unconventional degrees of freedom introduced through the simple act of replacing atoms by molecules. Our motivation is to understand the role these new distortions play (or might be expected to play) in different materials properties. The various degrees of freedom themselves-unconventional rotational, translational, orientational, and conformational states-are summarised and described in the context of relevant experimental examples. The much-improved prospect for generating emergent functionalities by combining these new distortion types is then discussed. We highlight a number of directions for future research-including the design and application of hierarchically structured phases of matter intermediate to solids and liquid-crystals-which serve to highlight the extraordinary possibilities for this nascent field. Framework materials are a broad and important family of solids that include zeolites, perovskites, metal-organic frameworks (MOFs), and coordination polymers (CPs). Historically, the task of developing functional framework materials has focussed heavily on purely inorganic systems, such as oxide ceramics. The flip-side of this coin is that open framework structures tend to be more flexible. Molecules can be incorporated within an A m BX n framework on any one or combination of the A-, B-, and X-sites. A topical example of molecular substitution on the A-site is that of the organic halide perovskites such as MAPbI 3 , fa-mous for their photovoltaic performance. The scope for compositional variation of the B-site is normally system dependent. By way of example, molecular perovskites generally comprise univalent A and X species, which thus requires B to be a divalent octahedral species. As a result, molecular perovskites are frequently based on first-row transition metals-rather than molecular ions-as these satisfy both the charge and geometry requirements. Arguably the best studied type of structural degree of freedom in conventional framework materials is that of tilt distortions. In perovskites, these are the 'octahedral tilts' famously categorised by Glazer, An important distinction between atomic and molecular Xsite linkers is that, loosely speaking, the former requires neighbouring [BX 2n ] polyhedra to rotate in opposite directions but the latter lifts any such constraint. The transition between open and dense states is driven by a collective tilt mode of large multi-centre nodes, facilitated by extreme flexing of polyphenyl X-site linkers [Fig. Molecular linkers also enable new low-energy deformations involving collective translations that are impossible in inorganic frameworks. An obvious difference between inorganic and molecular species is the aspherical symmetry of the latter. This distinction can be exploited in the search for non-centrosymmetric structures. Curie's principle states that a crystal will adopt the common symmetry subgroup of the point symmetries of its components. Hence, non-centrosymmetric structures can be designed by judicious choice of components with specific symmetries. Several properties of molecular perovskites depend on orientational order and disorder of the A-site molecule. For example, the dynamics of the methylammonium cations in the photovoltaic material MAPbI 3 affects exciton lifetimes, which is crucial for its performance in solar cells [Fig. As the structural complexity of molecular components increases, so too does their capacity for internal degrees of freedom. A simple example is the conformational state (dihedral angle) of the methylammonium cation, which may influence exciton recombination rates in MAPbI 3 . An appealing variation on this theme is the exploitation of conformational order/disorder transitions in the design of barocalorics, for which the high-profile example is [NPr 4 ]Mn[N(CN) 2 ] 3 . For each of the types of degree of freedom and various applications discussed above, there is obvious need and scope for developing clear strategies for chemical control and performance optimisation. This is actually an enormous challenge, given the chemical and structural diversity of the broad family of molecular frameworks. There will also be many other degrees of freedom not covered in this brief Account that are nonetheless worthy of exploration. Examples include the twist-modes of paddlewheel units, 138 protonation states of organic linkers, 139 binding modes, Just as the manganites have assumed a special role in device physics because they combine many interacting degrees of freedom-charge, spin, lattice, and orbital-so is it the case that we expect the interplay of degrees of freedom in molecular frameworks to provide a rich source of future discoveries. Already there are key signs: an obvious example is the complex interplay of framework distortions and molecular reorientations in the exciton physics of MAPbI 3 . A necessary consequence of the larger physical separa-tion between transition-metal centres in magnetic molecular frameworks is a reduced energy scale associated with collective magnetic order. And while examples of strong 148 and unconventional 149 magnetism can be found amongst this broader family of materials, one expects that conventional inorganic or intermetallic systems will always have the upper hand in this regard. Nevertheless the orientational degrees of freedom of e.g. A-site cations can behave as pseudospins that, in favourable cases, interact in a manner analogous to various types of magnetic exchange with strengths ∼100 K. andrew.goodwin@chem.ox.ac.uk