Effective quantum information processing is tantamount in part to the minimization the quantum resources needed by quantum logic gates. Here, we propose an optimization of an n-controlled-qubit Fredkin gate with a maximum of 2n + 1 two-qubit gates and 2n single-qudit gates by exploiting auxiliary Hilbert spaces. The number of logic gates required improves on earlier results on simulating arbitrary n-qubit Fredkin gates. In particular, the optimal result for one-controlled-qubit Fredkin gate (which requires three qutrit-qubit partial-swap gates) breaks the theoretical nonconstructive lower bound of five two-qubit gates. Furthermore, using an additional spatial-mode degree of freedom, we design a possible architecture to implement a polarization-encoded Fredkin gate with linear optical elements. The realization of a fully scalable universal programmable quantum computer with currently available technology, albeit promising, remains a major challenge in the field of quantum information science The implementation of elementary multiqubit gates is an important milestone on the way to a scalable quantum computer. Multiqubit conditional gates such as Fredkin (controlled-swap) and Toffoli (controlled-controlled-NOT) gates are crucial for certain practical quantum information-processing applications ranging from quan-tum error correction Utilizing linear optics, an auxiliary entangled pair of photons, and two-qubit and single-qubit gates, a variety of decomposition-based three-qubit Fredkin gates have been proposed In this study, we further reduce the cost of a threequbit Fredkin gate from five two-qubit gates to three fundamental qutrit-qubit gates (referred to as partial-swap gates) by introducing auxiliary Hilbert spaces (with three levels). We expand the qutrit (three-level) design to a qudit design (more than three levels) and propose a low-cost quantum circuit for implementing an n-controlled-qubit Fredkin gate that requires only 2n + 1 two-qubit gates and 2n single-qudit gates. In addition, using linear optical elements and a single-photon source, we construct a postselected partial-swap gate with a success probability of 1/2 without the assistance of any auxiliary photons. Based on our proposed gate circuit and the linear optical architecture of the partial-swap gate, a low-cost photonic Fredkin gate is thus achieved. Our schemes have the following favorable features: (a) the cost of a one-controlled-qubit Fredkin gate is three partial-swap gates, which beats a five-CNOT-gate construction with a higher-dimensional ancilla A. Synthesis of a three-qubit Fredkin gate using qutrits Our proposal for the implementation of the simplified three-qubit Fredkin gate is shown in Fig. where the coefficients α i (i = 1, 2 First, the control qubit c encounters a single-qutrit gate X A , which moves the computational state |0 to the third-level auxiliary state |2 , thereby resulting in Next, three qutrit-qubit partial-swap gates are applied to c and t 2 , c and t 1 , and c and t 2 in succession, and these operations exchange information between c and t 2 (and between c and t 1 ) depending on whether c is a 0 or a 1 entry, i.e., the partial-swap (p-swap) gate performs the transformations Therefore, the three partial-swap gates change |φ 1 to Finally, the X A gate is applied again to reshape the original computational qubits (the state |2 returns back to |0 ), thereby yielding Based on Eqs. ( In the previous subsection, we construct Fredkin gates for the three-qubit case. However, our optimization technique is generic and is also suitable for the multiple-qubit case (i.e., for a system with more than three qubits). Inspired by the work of Lanyon et al. As shown in Fig. We now consider a photonic implementation of the three-qubit Fredkin gate with linear optics. The proposed setup for implementing a linear optical partial-swap gate is shown in Fig. First, the polarizing beam splitter PBS 1 transmits H u (brown, emitted from mode u) and H d (black, emitted from mode d) for the first photon into mode 1 and mode 1, and reflects V d (black, emitted from mode d) for the first photon into mode 2. PBS 2 then transmits (reflects) the H-(V -) polarized component of the second photon from mode t into mode 4 (mode 3). Next, the photons in modes 1, 2, 3, and 4 pass through HWP 45 • , HWP 45 • , HWP 67.5 • , and HWP 22.5 • , respectively. Here, HWP 45 • represents a half-wave plate oriented at 45 • , which induces a bit-flip operation |H ↔ |V . In addition, HWP 22.5 • , set to 22.5 • , induces HWP 67.5 • , set to 67.5 • , results in The operations described above change |ψ 0 to The photons in modes 2 and 3 (1 , 1, and 4) are subsequently combined at PBS 3 (PBS 4 ), and go through HWP 67.5 • (HWP 22.5 • ). These operations transform |ψ 1 into Finally, the photons emitted from modes 5 (6) and 8 ( Table In the case of the construction of the three-photon Fredkin gate (see Fig. Here, After the three partial-swap gates (depicted in Fig. Next, as shown in Fig. Finally, the minus signs in Eq. ( The optical implementation of an n-controlled-qubit Fredkin gate with a success probability of 1/2 4n+1 is depicted in Fig. In summary, we propose an alternative optimization of Fredkin gates using auxiliary states and partial-swap operations. Our scheme decreases the cost of a onecontrolled-qubit Fredkin gate from the theoretical lower bound of five two-qubit gates We also investigate linear optical implementations of Fredkin gates with the aid of a spatial degree of freedom. Without resorting to additional ancillary photons, we design a partial-swap gate with a success probability of 1/2, which beats the CNOT gate, which has a success probability of 1/9 Our optical implementation may be useful for univer-sal quantum computing with linear optics. The dominate imperfections for linear optical quantum computing are photon loss, detector inefficiency, and phase errors Following Sec. IIA, we encode the computational qubit with a polarization of the single photon in mode, i.e., |0 ≡ |H d (black in Fig. Based on Eqs. ( Next, we demonstrate the three-photon Fredkin gate presented in Fig. where H u (V d ) represents an H-(V -) polarized photon emitted from the mode u (d). After photons c and t 2 pass through the first partialswap gate, we obtain two desired states, Finally, the minus signs in Eq. (A.29) can be corrected by applying an HWP 0 • s to mode 11 (A.4) Eqs. (A.1) and (A.2) realize a partial-swap gate, and Eqs. (A.3) and (A.4) can also realize a partial-swap gate if a phase