Porous structured Au colloids have been prepared from bulk nanoporous Au by means of an element dissociation method. The microscopic techniques (scanning electron microscope and atomic force microscope), UV-Vis spectroscopy and zone diffusion method have been employed to study their morphology, optical property and anti-microbial activity against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacterial strains, respectively. It is shown that the porous structured Au colloidal suspension exhibit excellent optical and antimicrobial properties. The noticeable features present in the optical studies are two Plasmon resonance peaks at 477 and 546 nm with overlapping of these peaks at a wavelength of 520 nm. The morphology studies by SEM and AFM indicate that the Au colloids are rod shaped with an assembly of skeletal pore and ligament structure. The analysis of the antimicrobial activity testing reveals that the porous structured Au colloids have greater inhibitory effect against the tested Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacterial strains. The R & D activity on nanoporous metals such as nanoporous Au for biomedical application is progressing recently due to their special properties in different aspects nanoporous Au has the ability to disturb bacterial growth simply through indirect interactions between the walls of bacteria and the surface of nanoporous Au without diffusing through the Bacterial cell walls One of the current research interests lie mainly on developing porous structured Au colloidal antimicrobial agents with long term preventing anti bacterial features. The present article reports the morphology, optical property and antimicrobial activity of porous structured Au colloids against various gram positive and gram negative bacterial strains. `3 The Au dissociation The antimicrobial activity testing of porous structured Au colloidal solution was performed against different Gram-positive strains such as Bacillus subtilis, Micrococcus luteus, Staphylococcus aureus and Gram-negative strains such as Escherichia coli, Proteus vulgaris, Shigella flexneri. The Agar well diffusion method Depending upon the availability of strains, the medium was calculated and suspended in 200 mL of `4 ultra-pure water in a 500 mL conical flask, stirred, boiled to dissolve and then autoclaved in 15 lbs at 121oC for 15 min The solidified nutrient agar in the Petri plates were inoculated by dispensing the inoculum using sterilized cotton swabs and spread evenly onto the solidified agar medium. Standard wells were created in each plate with the help of a sterile well-borer of 8 mm diameter. The Au colloids in various concentrations were then poured into each well. All the plates with extract loaded wells were incubated at 37oC for 24 h and the antibacterial activity was assessed by measuring the diameter of the inhibition zone formed around the well. Tetracycline (50 μg) was used as positive control. To gain further insight in to the morphology of Au colloidal particles, the SEM and AFM micrographs depicted in Fig. that the intrinsic hierarchical nanostructures influence to the optical properties in nanoporous Au, the aspect ratio value of 1.3 determined from the present microscopy studies has been compared with the models. The matching aspect ratio R value obtained from the linear relation  = (53.7*R -42.29)  m +495.14 for the longer wavelength 546 nm in the absorption band yields 1.32 Based on the results discussed above, we are led to conclude that the origin of the two Plasmon resonance peaks obtained in the present study are largely due to the presence of nm scaled hierarchical structures in the rod shaped Au colloids. discussed above indicate that the rod shaped porous structured Au colloids have the ability to kill infected microbial cells (cf. Figs. 2), 6) and Table Now we try to understand the underlying mechanisms that involved in the dysfunction of the bacterial activity in the presence of the suspended porous structured Au colloids. According to the cyclic voltammetry results summarised in Fig. These frozen positive charges in the dispersed Au colloids disturb the cell membrane by the mode of electrostatic interaction between Au 3+ ions and negatively charged cell membrane. As the interaction of bacterial cell with positively charged Au surfaces become more effective, these charged species synergistically exerts antimicrobial effect by altering membrane stability, initiate cell damage and kill the infected bacteria. Highly dispersed porous structured Au solution has been successfully synthesized by an electrochemical dissociation method and its morphology, optical properties and antimicrobial activity were studied. The origin of two Plasmon resonance peaks observed at 477 and 546 nm and their overlap at 520 nm might be due to the presence of nanometer scaled hierarchical 