We report a robust fabrication method for patterning free-standing Pt nanowires for the use as thermal anemometry probes for small-scale turbulence measurements. Using e-beam lithography, high aspect ratio Pt nanowires (~300 nm width, ~70 μm length, ~100 nm thickness) were patterned on the surface of oxidized silicon (Si) wafers. Combining wet etching processes with dry etching processes, these Pt nanowires have been successfully released free-standing between two silicon dioxide (SiO2) beams supported on Si cantilevers. Moreover, the unique design of the bridge holding the device allowed to release the device gently without damaging the Pt nanowires. The total fabrication time was minimized by restricting the use of e-beam lithography to the patterning of the Pt nanowires while standard photolithography was employed for other parts of the devices. We demonstrate that the fabricated sensors are suitable for turbulence measurements when operated in a constant-current mode. A robust calibration between output voltage and fluid velocity was established over the velocity range from 0.5 m s -1 to 5 m s -1 in an SF6 atmosphere at a pressure of 2 bar and a temperature of 21°C. The sensing signal from the nanowires showed negligible drift over a period of several hours. Moreover, we confirmed that the nanowires are able to withstand high dynamic pressures by testing them in air at room temperature velocities up to 55 m s -1 . Even today, fully resolved measurements of flow velocities in highly turbulent flows remain highly challenging. The difficulty is best illustrated by considering the non-dimensional Reynolds number (Re), which measures turbulence intensity by relating the magnitudes of inertial and viscous forces acting in the flow. Accessing high Re flows experimentally is important from a practical perspective as many engineering applications, such as the boundary layers on the hulls of ships and planes or flow problems in wind farms, fall into this regime. Moreover, measurements in high Re flows are also highly relevant to foster and to validate our theoretical understanding of turbulence. A hallmark of turbulence is the fact that 'eddying motions', i.e. seemingly random velocity fluctuations, across a wide range of scales contribute to the evolution of the flow. The range of spatial scales with Re as L/η ∼ Re Especially in cases where flow structures are advected past the probe by a strong mean flow, such as in investigations of turbulent boundary layers, frequency requirements can reach orders of 100 kHz To date, the best resolution and bandwidth characteristics for measuring turbulent velocity fluctuations are achieved using 'hotwire anemometry' (HWA), which is a proven technique with a long history The effective sensor size in HWA is given by the length (l) of the wire. However, l cannot be decreased arbitrarily. This is because a shorter wire length also increases the portion of the heat that leaves the wire via end-conduction, which is unwanted and detrimental to the measurement. This issue can only be overcome if shorter wires are also made thinner. Traditionally a minimum aspect ratio l/d ≤ 200 has been used Pushing beyond this limit has proven very difficult despite significant efforts. For example, Willmarth & Sharma produced wires with the length of 50 μm using a Wollaston wire of 0.5 μm in diameter More recently, the development of the nanoscale thermal anemometry probe, termed NSTAP In terms of sensor size the NSTAP remains the state of the art to date. The production process of the NSTAP combines standard photolithography with a series of dry-etching and wet-etching processes. The sensing element consists of a Pt wire, which is approximately 100 nm thick, while its width is still 1 μm. The latter is a limitation of the photolithography process but in part also a choice in order to enhance the convective heat transfer from the wire We tested this in the Variable Density Turbulence Tunnel (VDTT) with pressurized SF6 as working fluid as well as in an air flow with velocities up to 55 m s -1 without damaging the wires. Figure An e-beam lithography (EBL) system operating at 100 kV (Raith EBPG 5150, Raith GmbH, Germany) was used to pattern Pt nanowires on the surface of oxidized Si wafers (Figure For the electrical connection to the Pt nanowire, Pt micropatterns (termed Pt connections) were fabricated by combining standard photolithography with a lift-off process (Figure Prior to the backside patterning of the wafer, its frontside was covered with a PR layer (Figure Figure As a result, the SiO2 under the PR line was etched, thus leaving the free-standing PR line with the Pt nanowire stuck to it (Figures Figure Figure Thanks to special design of the device holding bridge (Figure Free-standing Pt nanowires 13 With our mask design, each 4-inch wafer contains 150 devices. Typical yields in the trial fabrication processes performed so far were about 50% -70% (~70 -100 functional devices per wafer). A limiting factor for the fabrication yield was the manual handling of the selfreleased devices by tweezers after dry-etching. We believe that the fabrication yield can be increased further by improving the device handling and by further optimizing the fabrication process steps, especially regarding the uniformity of the dry-etching steps over the entire wafer. Additionally, it should be mentioned that also even thinner wires with widths of 200 nm and 100 nm were successfully produced with this process. However, in these cases the fabrication Free-standing Pt nanowires 14 yield was impractically low and the wires turned out to be not robust enough. We therefore did not pursue the production of wires thinner than 300 nm further. A typical initial cold resistance for the nanowire is 820Ω, but this value was seen to drop significantly when the wire was first heated up. Annealing the nanowire with incrementally increasing currents up to ~1 mA reduced the resistance to Rw ≈ 740Ω, and this value was found to be stable over repeated heating cycles with comparable currents. The annealing was performed in the actual experiment with a weak flow of either air or SF6 gas. While the cold resistance appeared stable after shorter times already, we typically annealed over several hours in order to avoid any spurious drift in the subsequent tests. By measuring the wire resistance in a temperature controlled environment we determined the temperature coefficient of resistivity to be α20°C = 0.0021 K -1 . The nanowires were operated in a bridge circuit (see figure The Taylor Reynolds number was Reλ = 990 and the viscous length scale η ~ 63 μm. Generally the spectra agree very closely between the two sensors which also manifests in the fact that the velocity variances (i.e. the integral of the spectra) differ only by about 1%, which is on the order of the discrepancy expected as the probes are not located in the exact same location. The collapse of the spectra up to a frequency f ~1 kHz is in particular remarkable since the reference was operated in a constant temperature mode, which offers superior temporal resolution characteristics to the constant current mode employed to operate our wire here. The slightly elevated noise level at very high frequencies on the order of 10 kHz for our nanowire is also a result of the rather basic circuitry and components employed for these first tests. Further, there were no issues operating the wires at pressures up to 15 bar in SF6 , at which the gas density is more than 1/10 th that of water at room temperature. To test whether the wires also perform well in other fluids and at larger flow speeds, we additionally operated the wire in air at room temperature. In this case the flow was generated by pressurized air exiting a nozzle. Also here, the data can be very well represented by a monotonically increasing fourth-order polynomial across the full range of 5 m s -1 ≤ V ≤ 55 m s -1 . The wire was able to withstand the dynamic pressure at the highest velocities without any problems (Figure In summary, we report a robust fabrication method, combining e-beam lithography with wet etching and dry etching processes, for patterning free-standing Pt nanowires used as thermal anemometer probes for turbulence measurements. With precise control of the dry etching processes, Pt nanowires (~300 nm width, ~100 nm thickness) with a length of 70 μm have been successfully released free-standing between two SiO2 beams that are supported on Si cantilevers. A critical aspect is the design of the holding bridge, which ensures a safe and gentle release of the device without damaging the wires. Further, limiting the use of e-beam lithography to the patterning of the Pt nanowires renders the process cost and time efficient. These benefits far outweigh the additional complication arising from the resulting need to align e-beam and optical lithography patterns with high accuracy. The operational tests have confirmed that the wires are suitable for turbulence measurements in different working media and at a high dynamic pressures. Further characterizations and developments regarding the circuitry, in particular the implementation of a CTA capable of handling the relatively high wire resistances, are necessary to exploit the full potential. However, it is already clear that the nanowire design presented here holds a lot of promise regarding several aspects: (i) A more slender wire allows to use shorter wire lengths without being compromised by end-conduction effects; (ii) Smaller sensing elements are expected to improve the frequency response of the anemometer even if the wire is operated in a constant temperature mode 26 ; (iii) Due to its very small thermal inertia, the wires can yield sufficient frequency resolution for many flow cases even when operated in constantcurrent mode, as our preliminary results here prove. This eliminates the need for a feedback loop, thereby simplifying the circuitry significantly; (iv) The quasi circular shape of the sensing element is expected to avoid an unwanted pitch sensitivity of the sensor. We aim to explore and quantify these benefits in the future in an effort to push the limits for highly resolved high Re turbulence measurements. Conventional (100) 4-inch Si wafers (385 μm thick, Okmetic, Finland) with a thick thermal oxide layer of approximately 2 μm were prepared by wet thermal oxidation (Figure Prior to the e-beam writing, positive resist (NANO TM 950PMMA Series Resists in Chlorobenzene, MicroChem, US) was spin-coated over the surface of the oxidized Si wafers at 2500 rpm for 45 s, followed by baking at 165°C for 2 min. Subsequently, an e-beam lithography (EBL) system with a 100-kV (Raith EBPG 5150, Raith GmbH, Germany) was used to write the nanowire pattern into the resist layer. The written wafers then developed in a developer solution (MIBK-IPA mixture) in 90 s, followed by rinsing with deionized (DI) water using a quick dump rinser and spin-drying with nitrogen (N2). A titanium (Ti) layer of ~13 nm and a platinum (Pt) layer of ~100 nm were sputtered over the patterned wafers using an ion-beam sputtering system (home-built T'COathy system, MESA+, NanoLab) A positive photoresist (PR) layer (OiR 907-17i, Fujifilm, Japan) was spin-coated over the wafer surface at 4000 rpm for 45 s, followed by baking at 95°C for 1 min. A photo-mask made of quartz containing inverted chromium (Cr) patterns connected to the patterned Pt nanowires was fabricated in-house by using a mask-making system (DWL 2000 Laser Lithography System, Heidelberg Instruments, Germany). The exposure process was performed by using a mask alignment system (EVG620, EV Group, Austria) for 5 s at an intensity of 12 mW cm -2 in hard contact mode. Thereafter, the wafers were post-baked at 120°C for 1 min, followed by developing in a OPD4246 solution for 1 min, rinsing with DI water, and drying with N2. A Ti layer of ~6 nm and a Pt layer of ~100 nm were sputtered over the patterned wafers using the T'COathy system. The lift-off process was conducted in acetone with sonication, followed by rinsing the wafers with DI water. After spin-drying with N2, the fabrication of Pt connections to the Pt nanowires was completed (Figure The patterned surface of the oxidized Si wafers was covered with a PR layer (OiR 908-35, Fujifilm, Japan) by spin-coating at 2000 rpm for 45 s, followed by baking at 95°C for 3 min (Figure After removing the PR layer in acetone, cleaning with DI water and drying with N2 gas, the backside of the wafers was spin-coated with a PR layer (OiR 908-35, Fujifilm, Japan) at 2000 rpm for 45 s, followed by baking at 95°C for 3 min. A photo-mask containing a Cr pattern of the device base was used for the exposure process, which was performed by using the mask alignment EVG620 system for 15 s at an intensity of 12 mW cm -2 in hard contact mode. The alignment with the frontside Pt structures was performed using the bottom alignment with cross-hair mode. Thereafter, the wafers were post-baked at 120°C for 1 min, followed by developing in the OPD4246 solution for 3 min, rinsing with DI water, and drying with N2. Subsequently, the wafers were baked at 120°C for 10 min to harden the remaining PR areas for further backside etching of the Si (Figure Subsequently, the wafers were flipped and their frontside was spin-coated with a positive PR layer (OiR 907-17i, Fujifilm, Japan) at 4000 rpm for 45 s, followed by baking at 95°C for 1 min. A photo-mask containing Cr pattern of support cantilevers was used for the exposure process was performed by using the mask alignment EVG620 system for 5 s at an intensity of 12 mW cm -2 in hard contact mode. The wafers were then post-baked at 120°C for 1 min, followed by developing in the OPD4246 solution for 1 min, rinsing with DI water, and drying with N2. Subsequently, the wafers were baked at 120°C for 10 min to harden the PR layer (Figure The patterned wafers were then immersed in the BHF solution for 30 min to remove the unprotected SiO2 layer completely. Since the PR line covering the Pt nanowire at the tip of the cantilevers has a small width of approximately 3 μm, etching in the BHF solution for 30 min resulted in a complete removal of SiO2 under the PR line and Ti under the Pt nanowire. As a result, the PR line with the Pt nanowire stuck to it got released in this step (Figure The wafers were then etched in the SPTS Pegasus system using the fine-etching process with 90 cycles (Figure To remove the PR covered the Pt nanowire, oxygen (O2) plasma etching was performed in a parallel plate reactive ion etching system (home-built TEtske system, MESA+, NanoLab) at Free-standing Pt nanowires 21 wafer-level, 10 mTorr, and 25 W for 20 min. A low power etching was used in order to not break the Pt nanowire during the etching of PR (Figure For the final patterning of the cantilevers and for releasing the devices, the wafers were put in a gas phase Xactix XeF2 E1 system (etching time per cycle: 30 s, temperate: 35°C, pressure: 3000 mTorr), so that the Si was isotropically etched by xenon difluoride (XeF2, etching rate of ~1 μm) (Figure For the electrical connection, the fabricated device was mounted on the prongs of a commercial probe holder (Dantec Dynamics A/S, Denmark) using a silver conductive glue (Figure To operate the nanowire, we used a constant current anemometer (CCA) circuit as sketched in Free-standing Pt nanowires The resistance Rp is chosen such that the bridge is balanced at working conditions. The bridge voltage is then proportional to small differences in Rw that come about as the time varying cooling by the flow changes the wire temperature slightly. Amplified by a factor K = 100 via an instrumentation amplifier, the bridge voltage Eb is recorded as the output parameter of the CCA using an analogue-digital converter (ADC). A calibration and additional signal processing (e.g. filtering) as required finally yield the desired measurement of the fluctuating fluid velocity. The nanowire was tested in the VDTT in Göttingen described elsewhere The grid turbulent motion in the fluid such that the fluid velocity v(t) at the hotwire location fluctuates in time around its mean V. For the present set of measurements, the VDTT was operated at a pressure p = 2 bar with SF6 at a temperature of 21°C as the working medium. The overheat ratio was set to a = 1.24 and the wire current was iw = 0.622 mA.