While phase-change materials (PCMs) composed of chalcogenide have different crystallization mechanisms (CM), such as nucleation-dominated Ge2Sb2Te5 (GST) and growth-dominated GeTe (GT), revealing the essential reason of CM as well as the tuned properties is still a long-standing issue. Here, we remarkably find the distinct stability of Te-terminated ( Grain refinement (GR) is a general approach to alter material properties GR is always achieved by general thermodynamic or kinetic strategies From the kinetic perspective, some impurities replace lattice positions and act as solute drag, such as Sc x-(Sb2Te3)x On the other hand, while vacancy has attracted much attention because of its effect on metal-insulator transition To shed light on these issues, we at first analyze the distinct stability of TTBs in various PCMs using molecular orbital (MO) theory combined with first principle calculations. Experimentally, to verify the prediction of MO theory, we compare the GB features of the crystal-crystal and crytalamorphous interfaces in both GST and GT. To manifest fewer vacancies in small grains, we study C-doped GST (C-GST), which has excellent device performance MO explains the stability of TTB. Our work starts by investigating the stability of TTB in PCMs using the molecular orbital (MO) theory. MO theory uses a linear combination of atomic orbitals to represent molecular orbitals resulting from bonds between atoms, which are divided into bonding, antibonding, and non-bonding types. Figures We find the different optimal cation/anion ratio for the three systems as their outermost orbitals are full filled. The optimal ratio is Sb2Te3 (ST), GeTe (GT), and (GeTe)1- x-(Sb2Te3)x, such as Ge2Sb2Te5 (GST). It is noted that ST exists lone-pair electrons and forms non-bonding. In GT, the lone-pair p electrons of Te atoms fills the empty p orbital of Ge atom, which makes Ge-Te interaction stronger than Sb-Te interaction. Because of equal cationic and anionic positions in rock-salt structure, it is suggested that the content show the average COHP of all interactions within the cutoff of 3.6 Å in the no-vacancy model (bulk, blue), random-vacancy model (bulk, red), and two-dimension phases with exposed TTB (green). (j)-(l), the relative stability of the phase with exposed TTB compared with the phase with random vacancy. Whether the optimal cation/anion ratio is one or not determines the stability of TTBs: it is stable in two-dimension Sb2Te3 and Ge2Sb2Te5 phases, while it is unstable in twodimension Ge-Te (formula Ge4Te5). of random vacancy is 16.67% for ST, zero for GT, and 10% for GST, which agrees with experimental result To verify the MO theory, we analyze the partial density of states (pDOS) and crystal orbital Hamilton population (COHP), as shown in Fig. Figures As vacancy gathering, we further investigate the stability of TTB comparing with the random vacancy model, as shown in Fig. In the following, we reveal the essential reason why different crystallization mechanisms exist in PCMs. It is empirically believed that a growth-dominated system has much lower nucleation rate. However, figure Figure Figure On the other hand, more TBs have formed in C-GST, whose boundaries are marked by red lines in Fig. Distorted local environment destabilizes boundary. In this section, we provide the evidence of distorted local environment destabilizing boundary. We focus on TB, which stores low enthalpy and refine grain by forming stable nanotwins To explain the large GSF, we analyse the bonding by calculating the charge density differences (CDDs) of the perfect, sf and tf structures, as shown in Fig. Charge transport influenced by TTB. In traditional semiconductors, planar defects often hinder charge transport. In short, we find that G-point charge distribution has twodimension characteristic. Boundary thus hinders charge transport in the vertical direction and increases resistance. The high resistance in the phase-change working area enhances the heat efficiency against the heat loss in other circuit part. It is a key to achieve ultrafast speed by providing enough heat at short time, because actual circuit has threshold voltage, such as 2.5V in 40nm node. Previous work shown the decreased resistance as grain becomes larger during cycling operations in C-GST In summary, we predict the optimal composition of various PCMs according to the MO theory. This quantum effect results in the distinct stability of TTB, which determines the boundary-related properties, such as distinct crystallization mechanisms, alterable inner vacancy concentration, and CTP. We predict that it exists a critical grain size of no inner vacancy, 4.7 nm for GST and 2.6 nm for ST, which is manifested by the absence of cubic-to-hexagonal transition in C-GST of small grains and minimized inner vacancy. These findings declare that we can improve device performance by the tunable boundary, such as via composition design or doping impurity. On the other hand, chalcogenide is used to fabricate lots of two-dimensional materials First-principle calculations. First-principle calculations are carried out using VASP package. ACOM-TEM works by comparing the electron diffraction pattern collected from each scanning position with the simulated patterns calculated from a given template structure of all possible orientation maps For each scanning position, the collected diffraction pattern matches with full set of templated patterns via structure rotation, and the best fit result is the most probable crystal orientation. A color map is constructed to represent the whole crystal orientations of each part in the sample, as shown in TBs can be detected by ACOM-TEM, as shown in Fig. where Va is atomic volume (~27 Å 3 herein), Sa is atomic area in the (111) plane (~15.6 Å 2 herein), and R is grain size. Figure Steinhardt's order parameter is defined in the following, A radial cutoff function fij is introduced to smooth the boundary: The exponents in fij were set to r1 = 3. The order parameter ql dot is defined based on the bond order correlation Cij between neighboring atoms, first introduced by Frenkel and coworkers. 