In this work, we investigated the electronic structure and the quantum capacitance of the functionalized MoS2 monolayer. The functionalizations have been done by using different ad-atom adsorption on MoS2 monolayer. Density functional theory calculations are performed to obtain an accurate electronic structure of ad-atom doped MoS2 monolayer with a varying degree of doping concentration. The quantum capacitance of the systems was subsequently estimated. A marked quantum capacitance above 200 μF/cm 2 has been observed. Our calculations show that the quantum capacitance of MoS2 monolayer is significantly enhanced with substitutional doping of Mo with transition metal ad-atoms. The microscopic origin of such enhancement in quantum capacitance in this system has been analyzed. Our DFT-based calculation shows that generation of new electronic states at the proximity of the band-edge and the shift of Fermi level caused by the ad-atom adsorption results in a very high quantum capacitance in the system. The creation of adequate energy from sustainable energy sources, bypassing the utilization of fossil fuels, is one of the greatest challenges to stifle the weather change. Large-scale generation of green energy from sustainable power sources is, therefore, highly essential in the current situation. On the other hand, technology needs to be developed that can efficiently convert and store the generated energy. Batteries, fuel cells, and supercapacitors are the essential technological devices that help to convert and store energy. Of these, supercapacitors have received the most attention in recent times due to its high power density, long lifetime, good stability, and their possible applications over a wide temperature range In 2007, Soon and Lohz investigated the double-layer electrochemical capacitance of nano-walled MoS 2 film using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and have shown that edge-aligned MoS 2 thin films can act as a supercapacitor at various current frequencies, which can be compared to a carbon nanotube array electrode. They also have found that ion diffusion at slow scanning speeds results in Faradaic capacitance, which greatly improves the capacitance Structural optimization and subsequently the electronic structure information of different functionalized systems are obtained by using first-principle density functional theory calculations as implemented in the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package VASP) The total capacitance, C T of an electrical double-layer capacitor (EDLC) is expressed as where C Q and C D are quantum capacitance and doublelayer capacitance. The quantum capacitance of materials is defined as the rate of variation of excessive charges (ions) over the change in applied potential Therefore, when the density of states (DOS) is known, the C Q of a channel at a finite temperature T can be calculated as Here, φ, e, and k are chemical potential, charge of an electron, and the Boltzmann constant respectively. The equation ( The substitutional doping on MoS 2 can be done by selecting atoms from groups in the periodic table The Stability of doped MoS 2 structures has been examined by estimating average adsorption energy E ad using the equation where E tot is the total energy of the functionalized MoS 2 unit cell, E M oS2 is the total energy of pristine MoS 2 in the same unit cell, E at is the per atom energy of the adatom and n represents the number of ad-atoms present in the unit cell. The adsorption energies for various functionalized MoS 2 are listed in the We first investigated the effect of substitutional doping of sulfur in the MoS 2 . N, As, Sb, and Se from the group-V, F, and Cl from group-VII are considered to replace on S atom in the unit cell. The atom projected density of states for S atom substituted with group-V ad-atoms are shown in Fig. Accumulation of DOS near the fermi energy enhanced the C Q value of the functionalized systems. We have calculated 139 μF/cm Since the presence of vacancy defect can significantly alter the electronic structure of the materials, we, therefore, introduced a vacancy defect in monolayer MoS 2 . The investigation has been carried out to understand the change in the electronic structure and subsequently the quantum capacitance of the system. Defected monolayer MoS 2 systems were modeled by removing a different number of S and Mo atoms from the 3 × 3 supercell. We have considered three different S vacancy concentrations by removing one, two, and three S atoms out of 18 S atoms in the unit cell respectively; ie with 5.5 %, 11%, and 16.5% S vacancy configurations. In the case of Mo vacancy, we could only investigate 11.5% vacancy defect configuration, as we found that the structure becomes unstable upon a further increment of the vacancy concentrations. Optimized unit cell structure of the Mo vacancy defected structure is shown in Fig. 