Cubic Pm-3n Nb3Sn0.92 superconductor (Tc ~ 16 K) was found to exhibit tetragonal instabilities at the superconducting state (T = 10 K). These instabilities are manifested through the appearance of reflections which are forbidden in the Pm-3n symmetry but are compatible with the P42/mmc structure which is observed in the Nb3Sn1-x system for higher Sn content at temperatures lower than ~ 43 K. Nevertheless, the low-temperature structure of Nb3Sn0.92 remains metrically fully cubic, as concluded from single crystal synchrotron radiation diffraction experiments. Subsequent application of external pressure amplifies the observed instabilities with a resulting pseudo-cubictetragonal transformation at P = 3 GPa at 10 K and this transition is energy driven, as concluded from ab initio calculations. The electronic structures of the corresponding phases are virtually identical and, therefore, the pseudo-cubictetragonal transformation does not influence significantly the underlying electronic interactions. Consequently, no anomalies in the behavior of the critical temperature, Tc, are expected at this pressure. However, anomalies in the upper critical field are anticipated during this transition, in analogy to the corresponding behavior observed during the cubic-tetragonal transformation in Nb3Sn1-x induced by increase in Sn content. Therefore targeted changes in composition could be used to enhance upper critical field of Nb3Sn1-x for specific extreme conditions of temperature and pressure. Superconductivity in Nb3Sn was discovered in 1954 with a reported onset of superconducting critical temperature, Tc, of 18 K The Nb3Sn system features region of compositional homogeneity due to possible deficiency of Sn sites with a resulting stoichiometry range of 0.18 ≤ β ≤ 0.25 (Nb1-βSnβ compositional representation) The Tc is reported to vary rather smoothly as a function of β Since no apparent anomaly in Tc is observed at the cubic-tetragonal phase boundary point (β = 0.245) the differences in corresponding electronic structures should be rather negligible with no resulting significant impact on the underlying electron-electron coupling. However, anomaly in the upper critical field is observed around this transition point Along with compositional tuning high pressure (HP) is yet another mean to influence the observed structural and physical properties of this phase. Indeed, application of HP induces increase in the temperature of the cubic-tetragonal transformation, TM Two single crystals of Nb3Sn with a typical size of 20x20x20 μm 3 were extracted from a commercial sample (Goodfellow, 99.9% starting purity of raw metals). Initially, the first Nb3Sn crystal was compressed at room-temperature (RT) up to 7 GPa in order to obtain reference data for the subsequent LT measurements. For RT studies the crystal was loaded in a diamond anvil cell (DAC) with 600 μm culets. Rhenium gasket with a 300 μm hole and initial pre-indented thickness of 90 μm was used as a sample chamber. Second crystal was compressed at 10 K up to 11 GPa in order to study structural and phase behavior of Nb3Sn in superconducting regime. For this experiment crystal was loaded in a LT-DAC (600 μm culets) and contained in a stainless-steel gasket (300 μm hole, 95 μm thickness). In-house developed He-flow cryostat was used to achieve and control LT. For both experiments He gas was used as a pressure-transmitting medium since it preserves excellent hydrostaticity up to at least 50 GPa Angle-resolved single crystal diffraction data were collected at the ID27 High Pressure Beamline at the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF, Grenoble, France). The wavelength of synchrotron radiation was set to 0.3738 Å and beam was focused down to 3x3 μm 2 . During data collection DACs were oscillated in a 70o range with a 1o step and raw data were recorded on a Mar165 CCD detector. Subsequently data were reduced and experimental slices of the reciprocal space generated with CrysAlisPro suite Nb3Sn in order to elucidate electronic contributions to the corresponding transformation. Calculations were performed with a Wien2k 18.2 package Both crystals were found to be deficient in Sn, as concluded from single crystal data analysis. The corresponding occupancies on Sn sites were refined as a function of pressure for all the data points and were found to remain constant within an error range for two samples. The resulting compositions, which correspond to the averaged occupancies, are Nb3Sn0.90(2) (β = 0.231 in Nb1-βSnβ representation, crystal used for RT compression) and Nb3Sn0.92(1) (β = 0.235, LT compression at 10 K). The corresponding Tcs were obtained from the Eq. 1 and are equal to 15.5 and 16.4 K for crystals studied at RT and LT, respectively. The values of βs which are smaller than 0.245 indicate that both crystals should adapt cubic Pm-3n symmetry at all the temperature range, i.e. no LT transitions to tetragonal structures should occur. Indeed, RT single crystal diffraction data of the Nb3Sn0.90 sample are fully compatible with the expected cubic Pm-3n structural arrangement up to the highest studied pressure of 7 GPa. Similarly, at RT and ambient pressure the Nb3Sn0.92 crystal exhibits only features expected for the cubic Nb3Sn structure (Fig. where V0 is the zero pressure volume, B0 is the bulk modulus and B 0 ′ is its first pressure derivative. The tetragonal Nb3Sn0.92 phase was found to be slightly softer (B0 = 121(10) GPa) than the corresponding cubic modification at RT (B0 = 148(12) GPa, Fig. The observed P-dependent structural changes in Nb3Sn0.92 at 10 K and 3 GPa are rather subtle and the corresponding phases are expected to feature similar nature of electronic interactions. Indeed, the DOS graphs for the corresponding cubic and tetragonal modifications are virtually identical (Fig. From the presented structural data the following T-P phase diagram of Nb3Sn1-x (x = 0.1 for RT compression and x = 0.08 for compression at 10 K) can be constructed (Fig. Cubic Pm-3n modification of Nb3Sn0.92 (β = 0.235) was found to exhibit tetragonal instabilities under superconducting conditions, although the corresponding crystal structure remains metrically cubic. At 10 K this pseudo-cubic phase undergoes a P-induced symmetry lowering towards a tetragonal P42/mmc structure at P = 3 GPa. Electronic structures of the corresponding cubic and tetragonal modifications are virtually identical, as concluded from ab initio calculations based on experimental data, which indicates that this transition should not influence underlying electronic interactions. This is in agreement with the observed superconductive behavior in the Nb3Sn1-x system which does not show anomalies in Tc upon the Pm-3n -P42/mmc transition as a function of x. The observed pseudo-cubictetragonal transition in Nb3Sn0.92 was found to be energy driven, i.e. corresponding structural relaxation as a function of P results in lowering of total energy of the system. No deviations from the cubic Pm-3n symmetry were observed at RT for the studied Nb3Sn1-x samples. Observed rich structural behavior in the Nb3Sn1-x system opens additional ways to influence corresponding superconductive properties. Namely, variable stoichiometry / composition could be used to tailor response of this system, e.g. values of the upper critical field, for specific extreme conditions of temperature and pressure. At the same time this work calls for further research on the Nb3Sn1-x system for a larger range of x and in a wider T-P domain. Notably, more information on the HT cubic -LT pseudo-cubic transition is needed to complement the existing phase diagram and to establish possible correlations with a cubictetragonal transition observed in this system around 43 K for a higher Sn content.