Domain wall motion along ferrimagnets is evaluated using micromagnetic simulations and a collective-coordinates model, both considering two sublattices with independent parameters. Analytical expressions are derived for strips on top of either a heavy metal or a substrate with negligible interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction. The work focuses its findings in this latter case, with a field-driven domain wall motion depicting precessional dynamics which become rigid at the angular momentum compensation temperature, and a current-driven dynamics presenting more complex behavior, depending on the polarization factors for each sublattice. Importantly, our analyses provide also novel interpretation of recent evidence on current-driven domain wall motion, where walls move either along or against the current depending on temperature. Besides, our approach is able to substantiate the large non-adiabatic effective parameters found for these systems. Recent studies where T C is the Curie temperature of the FiM, M 0 s,i are the magnetization of each SL at zero temperature, and a i are certain exponents. Magnetizations of both FM SLs are equal at the temperature of magnetization compensation T M , and this temperature can differ from T A due to distinct Landé factors g i for each SL. Two different structures have been proposed to hold such fast dynamics. FiM strips grown on top of a heavy metal (HM), shown in FIG. Most of these experimental results have been interpreted in terms of effective models, which describe FiMs as effective FMs. Within these models, the effective gyromagnetic ratio γ i and Gilbert damping parameter α i diverge at T A . The system is described using two unit vectors m i , (i = 1, 2) accounting for the local orientation of the magnetization of each SL, as shown in FIG. In this reduced version, B z and J x are the model inputs, and v and ω st are its outputs. To distinguish between the effect of STTs and SOTs, the terms J F iM , standing for the current through the FiM, in the former case, and J HM , representing the current through the HM, in the latter, will be used instead of J x . Details of the model are in the appendices A to D and elsewhere. The parameters involved in these expressions are largely used in the literature: the net magnetization M = M s,1 -M s,2 , M s,i (i = 1, 2) being the saturation magnetization for each SL, γ i = g i μ B h are the gyromagnetic ratios, μ B and h being respecitvely the Bohr magneton and the Plank constant, s i = M s,i γ i are the SL angular momenta, δ s = s 1 -s 2 is the net angular momentum, p i are the spin conversion factors, 71 MA m ,a 1 = 0.5, and a 2 = 0.76 have been considered. Landé factors for each SL are g 1 = 2.2 and g 2 = 2. Accordingly, the compensation temperature and the temperature of angular momentum compensation can be estimated as T M = 241.5K and T A = 305K, respectively. Besides, the following values have been taken for both SLs: Gilbert damping constants are α i = 0.02, [13] The following parameters are specific for CDDWM simulations. This section has been included to give some completeness to the work, since most findings concerning systems dominated by spin-orbit torques have already been published by our group. The above equation, not included in our previous works, constitutes a closed-form expression that summarizes DW dynamics in these systems. According to this result, the v st saturate as the electric current is increased, except at T A (δ s vanishes), where the v st linearly increase with J HM because DW magnetic moments keep aligned with the electric current. DW terminal velocities maximize at this temperature, so that More intriguing is the case of the second FiM structure shown in FIG. This expression recalls the Walker field for FMs, This expression is fully consistent with that of FMs. When (P 1 = P 2 ), J W does not diverge in general, even at T A , due to the adiabatic STT contributions. Rather low electric currents promote DW precessional behavior. J W is of the order of one ten of GA m 2 around T A for the set of parameters used. More interestingly, CDDWM can take place in either the same or the opposite direction of the electric current depending on temperature. All this is depicted in FIG. Previous analysis demonstrates that precessional regimes dominate DW motion in FiMs grown on substrates with no iDMI in most practical situations. Within this regime v and ω st can be estimated from ( - The expressions present linear relationships between inputs and outputs. As a first outcome, these results prove that FDDWM shows v maxima approximately when the net angular momentum vanishes, i.e., at T A , as evidenced by other authors. The second conclusion that can be extracted from ( Dependence of as functions of the longitudinal current J x at different temperatures in the case (p 1 = p 2 ). Depending on temperature, CDDWM runs in the same or the opposite direction to the electric current. The inset presents J W (in log scale) as a function of temperature. the TSLM as: While the effective α is a weighted value of the α i for each SL, and so, rather close to the latter values, the value β diverges if the spin polarizations for each SL are quite close. This accounts for the large β needed to explain CDDWM in FiMs from the perspective of effective models. With the TSLM, general expressions for the DW mobility over the full temperature range can also be obtained. Mobilities are defined as the ratios between v and the inputs B z and J F iM . Despite being both stimuli simultaneously applied in that experimental work, constant mobilities can be separately studied and analyzed, due to the linear character of the system, as . Importantly, this parameter changes sign depending on temperature. Accordingly, CDDWM reverses around a temperature in the vicinity of T A , i.e., DW motion takes place in the same or the opposite direction to the electric current depending on temperature. This is shown in FIG. To conclude, the present analysis highlights the capabilities of the TSLM to explain very recent evidence on DW motion in FiM strips. Two different structures have been considered. In the case of FiMs grown on top of a HM, where SOTs dominate the CDDWM, a brief review of the relevant features of these dynamics is made. In these first structures, v st present maxima when net angular momenta vanishes at T A . The second structure, where FiMs are grown on a substrate with no iDMI, is characterized by richer DW dynamics. Precession dominates such dynamics in most practical situations. In particular, the angular momentum compensation results in v maximizing around T A for the FDDWM. Besides, CDDWM presents adiabatic and non-adiabatic contributions. The adiabatic term results from the different spin polarizations Appendix C. Derivation of the simplified collective coordinate model (CCM) for the TSLM The minimization of the whole functional including σ m and σ D goes through the calculation of its derivatives with respect to q, q, and ψ i and ψi (more details can be found in the literature μ 0 (N y -N x ) M 2 s,1 sin 2ψ 1 + M 2 s,2 sin 2ψ 2 + 2M s,1 M s,2 sin (ψ 1 + ψ 2 ) + + π 2 Now it is time to apply the approximations mentioned in the main text, that is, for the antiferromagnetic (ferromagnetic) case. Only the antiferromagnetic case will be considered here (the ferromagnetic one can be straightforwardly derived). In this case, (C.1) and (C.4) can be rewritten as: q ∆ (α 1 s 1 + α 2 s 2 ) + Qδ s ψ = = -(β 1 p 1 + β 2 p 2 ) J F iM ∆ + QM B z -Q π 2 (q 1 + q 2 ) cos ψ J HM t F iM , (C.5) M ∆ , M = M s,1 -M s 2 being the net saturation magnetization. These definitions are consistent with the equivalent expressions for pure ferromagnets.