Topological superconductors represent one of the key hosts of Majorana-based topological quantum computing. Typical scenarios for one-dimensional topological superconductivity assume a broken gauge symmetry associated to a superconducting state. However, no interacting one-dimensional many-body system is known to spontaneously break gauge symmetries. Here, we show that zero modes emerge in a many-body system without gauge symmetry breaking and in the absence of superconducting order. In particular, we demonstrate that Majorana zero modes of the symmetry-broken superconducting state are continuously connected to these zero-mode excitations, demonstrating that zero-bias anomalies may emerge in the absence of gauge symmetry breaking. We demonstrate that these many-body zero modes share the robustness features of the Majorana zero modes of symmetry-broken topological superconductors. We introduce a bosonization formalism to analyze these excitations and show that a ground state analogous to a topological superconducting state can be analytically found in a certain limit. Our results demonstrate that robust Majorana-like zero modes may appear in a many-body systems without gauge symmetry breaking, thus introducing a family of protected excitations with no single-particle analogs. Superconductivity in topological quantum materials has become one of the most fertile topics in modern condensed matter physics Majorana bound states and unconventional superconductors in general rely on a single-particle description of the effective excitations. In particular, conventional proposals for Majorana bound states in topological superconductors rely on explicitly broken gauge symmetry which is associated with the existence of a non-zero superfluid order parameter In this scenario, the existence of Majorana bound states in the presence of particle-particle interactions has been established in terms of a renormalization of the single-particle mean-field parameters However, the scenario for systems lacking symmetry breaking is distinctively different In this work, we demonstrate that robust zero modes appear in a 1D many-body model without gauge symmetry breaking. The model we focus on would give rise to a topological superconductor at the mean-field level if the gauge symmetry were explicitly broken. We demonstrate that no such gauge symmetry breaking is required for the emergence of Majorana-like zero modes, establishing a peculiar paradigm of topological quantum manybody excitations with no single-particle analog. Despite their fundamental differences to Majorana zero modes, we demonstrate that these two types of many-body excitations share many properties, including robustness to perturbations and disorder. Our manuscript is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the many-body model, highlighting the emergence of zero-mode resonances. In Sec. III, we demonstrate the robustness of the zero modes to a variety of perturbations. In Sec. IV, we show the connection between these resonant zero modes and Majorana bound states. In Sec. V, we demonstrate the emergence of the edge modes from a continuum bosonization formalism. Section VI summarizes our results and Appendices A-C discuss some technical details such as critical points, Green's functions, and persistent current in a ring. We study a 1D chain of L spinless fermions with interactions between the neighboring sites as illustrated in Fig. where t is the strength of the particle hopping between neighboring sites, ĉ † j and ĉj are the fermionic creation and annihilation operators at site j, respectively, μ is the chemical potential, and V is the strength of the interactions between the fermions. Such a system can be mapped onto a spin-1/2 anisotropic XXZ chain in a longitudinal field using the Jordan-Wigner transformation, resulting in where {ŝ α j } α=x,y,z denote the spin-1/2 operators for site j. This model is integrable by the means of the Bethe ansatz Treated within the mean-field approximation such a model gives rise to the well-known Kitaev model described by the Hamiltonian where the superconducting order parameter ∆ j is determined self-consistently as ∆ j = V ĉj ĉj+1 . The Kitaev model spontaneously breaks the gauge symmetry which is present in the original model The local density of states, or the spectral function, of the chain is defined as where |Ψ 0 is the ground state with energy E 0 and |Ψ m are all the eigenstates of the system corresponding to energies E m . The spectral function can be evaluated using exact diagonalization of the Hamiltonian for the short chains or using a kernel polynomial method with matrix product states (KPM-MPS) The nature of the above-found edge modes can be studied by inspecting the scaling properties of the peak splitting. From the series expression in Eq. ( , where E 0 (N ) is the energy of the ground state in the subspace with N particles and N 0 is the number of particles in the global ground state of the system. Thus the peak splitting ω p appears to be equal to [E 0 (N 0 + 1) + E 0 (N 0 -1)]/2 -E 0 and its dependence of the chain length L is shown in Fig. A paradigmatic property of topological states in general, and Majorana bound states in particular, is their robustness towards perturbations in the Hamiltonian. To this end we study robustness of the peaks with respect to perturbations that break the integrability of the model. We consider three different types of perturbations: second-neighbor hopping, second-neighbor interactions, and on-site disorder. These perturbations are described by the following Hamiltonians, respectively: where t , V are the parameters controlling the second neighbor hopping and interactions, respectively, and u j is the on-site potential which is a random number with amplitude W in the range [-W, W ]. The distributions of local density of states for these types of perturbations are shown in the Fig. So far we have focused on the quantum disordered state, showing that the interacting gapless gas shows topological excitations sharing the robust properties of Majorana zero modes. While such similarity is suggestive, a stronger insight in the relation between the two can be obtained by demonstrating that the two types of excitations can be smoothly connected. In this section we demonstrate that the Majorana-like zero modes can be transformed into true Majorana bound states by performing an adiabatic connection between the two. For this purpose we introduce a parametric family of Hamiltonians which smoothly transform from the interacting chain to a topological superconductor with gauge symmetry breaking by changing of the parameter s. In particular, for s = 0 Eq. ( The spectral function at the edge of the chain as a function of the parameter s is shown in Fig. We would like to emphasize that the connection between the Majorana-like modes here and the symmetry broken Majorana zero modes in topological superconductors has some important consequences. In particular, the Majorana-like modes here will also appear as a zero-bias anomaly in non-superconducting states, similar to Majorana zero modes. In this way, both modes would have similar signatures when probed with scanning tunnel microscopy, appearing as a zero-bias anomaly localized at the edge. These states will however coexist with a gapless background of edge excitations in the bulk. Finally, it is worth mentioning that due to the gapless nature of the bulk excitations, information decoherence in these Majorana-like modes can be different than in conventional Majorana bound states The equivalence between the zero modes of the interacting model and conventional Majorana zero modes can be further emphasized by studying a heterojunction between the interacting model and a topological (trivial) superconductor. The model Hamiltonian of such heterojunction has the following form: where ∆ and μ are the order parameter and chemical potential in the topological superconductor, respectively. Here |μ | < 2t corresponds to the topological superconductor and |μ | > 2t to the trivial one. The local density of states of this system is shown in Figs. In order to show that the peaks exist for an arbitrarily weak attractive interaction we employ bosonization technique for continuous analogue of the model, described by the following Hamiltonian: where ψ † and ψ are the fermionic creation and annihilation operators, m is the mass of the fermion, k F is the Fermi momentum, g is the interaction parameter, ρ = ψ † ψ is the density operator and : . . . : denotes the normal ordering of the operator. Here we impose zero boundary conditions ψ(0) = ψ(L) = 0. Following Ref. Zero boundary conditions for ψ(x) are equivalent to periodic ones for ψR (x) and, hence, the latter field can be straightforwardly bosonized. The Hamiltonian expressed in terms of ψR has the following form: where v F = k F /m, ρR = ψ † R ψ R and we have replaced the quadratic dispersion by a linear one in the vicinity of the Fermi surface. The bosonization expression for the field ψR (x) reads where k = πj/L, j is a positive integer, bk and b † k are the canonical bosonic operators. We also introduce a regularization parameter a and all the expressions are to be understood in the limit a → +0. In terms of the bosonic operators the Hamiltonian is expressed as follows: This Hamiltonian can be easily diagonalized by the Bogoliubov transform bk = bk cosh φ + b † k sinh φ, tanh 2φ = g 2πv F (16) We note that the Bogoliubov transform can be performed only if |g| < 2πv F , otherwise the Hamiltonian ( The local density of states of such a wire is given by the following expression: and Here, in the right hand side of Eqs. ( To summarize, we have demonstrated the emergence of zero-bias modes at the edges of a 1D chain of attractively interacting fermions. We have demonstrated that these modes are adiabatically connected to conventional Majorana zero modes of a topological superconductor, yet with the striking difference that they emerge in a situation without gauge symmetry breaking. These many-body zero modes are found to exist at arbitrarily weak attractive interaction and are robust to perturbations which break the integrability of the model, including long-range hopping, interactions, and disorder. In particular, we have demonstrated that these zero-mode resonances can be rationalized both with lattice quantum many-body formalism based on tensor networks, and with a continuum low energy model based on bosonization. Our results put forward a new type of protected zero modes in a purely many-body limit, with no singleparticle analog, providing a stepping stone towards the exploration of topological modes in generic quantum disordered many-body systems. where F (t) = e i Ĥct F e -i Ĥct and φ(x, t) = e i Ĥct φ(x)e -i Ĥct . After a long but straightforward calculations one obtains: ; (B3) where c = cosh 2φ, s = sinh 2φ and ṽF = v 2 F -g 2 /(2π) 2 . Finally, the expression for the local density of states reads as: We close up the chain into a ring with a weak link and pierce it with a magnetic flux. The Hamiltonian of such a system reads as: 