Thermoelectric (TE) air cooling is a solid-state technology that has the potential to replace conventional vapor compression-based air conditioning. In this paper, we present a detailed system-level modeling for thermoelectric air conditioning system with position-dependent (graded) and constant material properties. Strategies for design optimization of the system are provided in terms of cost-performance trade-off. Realistic convection heat transfer at both sides of the system are taken into account in our modeling. Effects of convection heat transfer coefficients, air flowrate, and thermoelectric material properties are investigated with varying key parameters such as TE leg thickness, module fill factor, and input current. Both constant material properties and graded properties are considered for the TE materials, and they are compared in terms of the degree of cooling, coefficient of performance (COP), and power consumption. For graded materials, we employ one-dimensional finite element methods to solve the coupled electrical and thermal current equations with arbitrary profile of material properties varying with position along the TE legs. We find that graded materials can enhance the degree of cooling, but only at the expense of COP, compared to the case of constant property materials. With constant material properties of ZT = 1 and relatively low electric current, the power consumption of TE cooler can be lower than those of conventional air conditioners at an equivalent cooling capacity. Considering additional advantages such as demand-flexible operation, low noise, and high scalability, thermoelectric cooling could be a competitive technology for future air conditioning applications. More than 100 years has passed since the invention of the first vapor compression-based electric air conditioner in the early 1900s While modeling a TE device, it is also important to note whether to model the properties as being constant or changing, for example, with position or temperature. For a large temperature difference across TE elements, temperature-dependent material properties must be taken into account. In air conditioning applications, however, there is a relatively small temperature difference close to ~ 10 K, such that a constant property model (CPM) may work well. In CPM, the Peltier effect is localized at the interfaces of TE materials, e.g. interfaces with the electrodes as no Thomson effect occurs inside the leg, so that TE module simulation is relatively straightforward. In CPM, the maximum cooling for a single-element TE cooler is known to be limited by the material figure of merit, such that (∆T) max = ZT C 2 /2, where T c is the cooled side temperature There have been several recent efforts to beat this maximum cooling limit by utilizing segmented or graded materials. In 2006, Bian et al. All these previous theoretical studies on graded coolers, however, mainly focused on maximizing the degree of cooling for a single-element device with unrealistic external heat transfer conditions such as an adiabatic condition at the cooled side with a perfect heat sink at the hot side. The impacts of the graded scheme on COP have been relatively unexplored, and the design optimization with multi-element modules and realistic external heat transfer coefficients has not been studied significantly either. In a large-scale air conditioning application, a number of multi-element TE modules must be used to cover a large heat exchange area. Also, keeping COP high is essential in a cost-effective cooling operation because the power consumption, and thus the operational cost, is determined by COP once the desired cooling power is reached. In this work, we propose to use a module design that keeps the COP sufficiently high at the expense of the degree of cooling per module as there is a trade-off between the two performance measures. Yet, the target degree of cooling can be met if several cooling modules are used in series for sequential cooling. Although the cost will increase with increasing number of modules used, we find that the COP can increase disproportionately, such that the overall cost can be maintained or even lowered for a target degree of cooling. Recently, a lot of thermoelectric A/Cs or air cooling designs have been experimentally and numerically analyzed. Aklilu et al. reviewed the integration of a TE AC system in a building involving radiant panels, air and water ducts In this work, we first provide the detailed modeling scheme for multi-element TE cooler modules with realistic external heat transfer coefficients for large-scale air conditioning. Then we discuss the trade-off relation between the degree of cooling and COP with the calculation results. Finally, we provide strategies for designing cost-effective TE air conditioning systems that can potentially beat the conventional air conditioning technology in terms of COP and cost. Fig. We also assume that the temperature on the outer surface of the water pipe is varying only with length, so the material connecting the pipe and TE legs can be taken as having negligible thermal resistances. The number of modules along the flow of air is calculated based on the desired air temperature drop (10 and 13 K). For one module, the total heat transfer is the sum of heat transfer in the individual legs. The dimensions of the air channel and water duct in one module are also shown in Fig. where, h is the heat transfer coefficient, A t is the area of the module, Cp and ṁ are the specific heat capacity and the mass flow rate respectively. The subscripts a and w are used for properties related to air and water respectively. Ta and Tw are the average temperatures of air and water respectively calculated by Eq. ( where Ti and Tf are initial and final temperatures respectively for one module, and the subscripts a and w denote air and water, respectively. An important part of the mathematical formulation is to estimate the heat transfer coefficients for both air and water flow. As shown in Fig. where A and P are the cross-sectional area and the perimeter of such a channel, respectively. For a rectangular cross section as is the case for the channel, the Nusselt number Nu for a fully developed laminar flow depends on the b/a ratio denoted as α where ka is the thermal conductivity of air. Note that h a ′ is the average heat transfer coefficient per the channel surface area. The effective heat transfer coefficient per the module area can be calculated using Eq. ( where As is the surface area of the entire heat exchanger in contact with air, At is the area of one TE module, H, and L are respectively the height and length of the channel. ns is the number of channels, 10 in this case. The factor of 2 in Eq. ( On the water side, we take a fully developed turbulent flow as the Reynold's number, Re = 4ṁw πμD is much greater than the transitional Re ~ 2,300 (Table The heat transfer coefficient can be calculated in the same way as air, by using the thermal conductivity k w and pipe diameter D, such that The effective heat transfer coefficient for water is where Asw is the surface area of water pipe given by L ′ is the length of water pipe in contact with the TE module, and it can be increased by using a serpentine pipe as shown in Fig. The thermophysical properties of air and water are taken at 20 and 25 °C, respectively We first model a thermoelectric cooler module with the constant property model (CPM). For one pair of ntype and p-type legs, the cooling power Qc and Qh are given by Here, the first term is the Peltier cooling, and the second and the third terms indicate, respectively, Joule heating and thermal conduction. S, R, and K are, respectively, the Seebeck coefficient, the electrical resistance, and the thermal conductance of one pair of TE legs given by where, Ll is the TE leg thickness, Al is the TE leg area and subscripts p and n indicates the p-type and ntype material properties, respectively. Note that S p > 0, and S n < 0, so that their magnitudes are added in the total Seebeck coefficient, which indicates that both types constructively contribute to the Peltier cooling. Rc is the additional resistance from electrodes and contacts. We use a constant Rc = 0.01 Ω per a pair of TE legs For the CPM case, we conduct simulations with a material having ZT=1 at 300 K, for which we selected the individual properties similar to those of Bi2Te3 as summarized in Table Table Magnitude of Seebeck coefficient S (μV K -1 ) 258.2 Electrical conductivity σ (Ω -1 m -1 ) 5 × 10 4 Thermal conductivity k (W m -1 K -1 ) 1.0 Fill factor is an important parameter for a TE module design. It is defined as the fractional coverage of TE elements for the entire module area, such that where N is the number TE leg pairs. We design a TE module in the way that the fill factor is selected, and then the number of TE leg pairs, N, is determined by the fill factor with fixed leg cross-sectional area and module area. These parameters and TE leg thickness alter the way a TE device performs. Hence geometry optimization is done to find a suitable thickness and a fill factor. Table where the factor 2Al(1-F)/F is the gap area per a pair of legs in the module. Thermal contact resistance is difficult to determine because of the complexity of the heat transfer. It has been addressed in the past Once we have the temperature profile, we can find the COP, and the cooling power given by Eq. ( ∆T air = T ia -T fa For a graded material, we adapt the analytical solution given by Thiébaut et al. where the position x is along the length of a TE leg, with x=0 at the cold side, and x=Ll at the hot side, kB is the Boltzmann constant and e is the electron charge. In this model, the two properties vary with x via position-dependent doping level in the semiconductor. The parameter c (0 < c < 1) is used to describe how much the doping varies with position and is defined as the ratio of doping concentration between the hot and cold sides. Between the two ends, the doping concentration is assumed to change linearly with position. For instance, c=1 for the same doping along the leg, which is the CPM case. The smaller the c is, the larger the doping varies between the two ends. In this work, c is taken as 0.1 to provide reasonable doping change along the leg for a significant grading effect. Lowering the c value further would not produce much significant improvement To take into account the position-dependent material properties, we employ a 1D finite element method. The temperature profile along a TE leg is solved for a number of nodes n in the leg as shown in Fig. Then, the total resistance in a leg is the sum of all the nodal resistances and the electrical contact resistance such that Thermal conductance includes the gap filler thermal conductivity calculated in a similar manner as in CPM. Other parameters are the same as in CPM. Since geometry optimization is done for CPM only, the obtained leg thickness and fill factors are used in both CPM and graded, while making a comparison for different ZTs. The COP is obtained in a graded device by COP = Q c I(V s +IR)N The mathematical model from Section 2 is coded in MATLAB for both CPM and graded (GPM) materials. The first step is to optimize one CPM module based on the air temperature drop and COP, with different leg thickness and fill factors, and varying electrical current. After the optimization, we select the desired thickness and fill factor, which are eventually used in further simulations. Heat balance equations produce a system of simultaneous linear equations which are solved using the Gauss Elimination method Fig. In a GPM, due to the varying TE properties in the graded segment, temperature is solved at each node along the length of TE leg. This also causes ZT to be different at each node. To make a comparison with CPM, the maximum ZT in the GPM leg is compared with the constant the ZT value of the CPM. Table Seebeck Next consideration is the electrical power consumption. We compare the power consumption and COP with typical A/Cs. By a little extra expense on the initial (material) cost, we can reduce the electricity cost by using a TE cooler. The number of modules along the flow of air is calculated by dividing the objective air temperature drop (10 or 13 K) by the temperature change calculated for one module. Total number of modules can then be found by estimating the number of parallel modules required for a target air flow rate. Effect of air flow rate is analyzed by varying either the mass flow rate of air through on series of modules or the total mass flow rate for whole device as explained in sections 4.3. We aim to provide air cooling at a lower electricity cost than conventional air conditioners. In the first part, we optimize the module geometry with TE leg thickness and module fill factor. This part is only for a CPM, and we take an example of ZT = 1. Fig. Since the Joule heating term varies as I 2 , the effect of TE leg thickness is more profound at higher currents. Due to the increased electrical resistance and current, which together increase the detrimental Joule heating inside the TE leg, cooling is decreased for thicker legs at the high current region. There is an optimum current that maximizes the degree of cooling, which is due to the interplay between Peltier cooling and Joule heating, both of which depend on current. This optimum current decreases with increasing leg thickness because of increasing electrical resistance, which needs a lower value of current to keep the Joule heating sufficiently low. Fig. Once the geometry is fixed, the performance of CPM can be compared with graded TE legs. Eqs. ( Fig. Furthermore, the graded model enhances cooling at all current values, which is attributed to the redistribution of Peltier cooling inside the TE leg with varying Seebeck coefficient with position As shown in the figure, in all cases, COP increases rapidly with decreasing current. Hence, a low current operation is justified for efficient TE cooling. The variation of COP with ZT at a fixed current is relatively small compared to that of the degree of cooling. For higher ZT, COP is higher as expected due to the higher cooling power. But since power input also increases (Fig. Number of modules required in a series are calculated directly from the degree of cooling (Eq. ( FIG. In the previous sections, the air mass flow rate through a single series of channels was set to 0.002 kg/s which can be quite low compared to conventional air conditioning systems. So, in this section, effects of increasing air mass flow rates, to resemble more closely that of conventional A/C flow rates, on the device performance are investigated. To get a certain amount of air going into the system, we can use a number of modules thermally in parallel that are transverse to the direction of air flow. Mass flow rate is varied in two ways. First, the total mass flow rate is fixed, so the number of parallel modules will be inversely proportional to the mass flow rate through one series of modules, i.e. N pm = ṁa ,tot ṁa . Hence, total mass flow rate ṁa ,tot is fixed to 0.05 kg/s first, and the device performance parameters are plotted with varying mass flow rate ṁa through one series in Fig. FIG. Secondly, the mass flow rate per module (ṁa) is changed to vary the total mass flow rate (m ̇a,tot ) while keeping the number of parallel modules constant at N pm =10. The number of series modules has been adjusted to keep the total ΔTair,target=13 K as the increased mass flow rate per module results in a decrease in ΔTair per module. The calculation results are displayed in Fig. Fig. As shown in Fig. When the parameters are tuned to achieve better COP and lower power, cooling is reduced, needing higher number of modules and hence a larger system. This would lead to a lower running cost at the expense of a higher initial cost. This is a limitation for the thermoelectric technology when applied to cooling hence the above trade-off must be kept in mind while designing such a cooling system. In summary, low current operation (<1 A) and mass flow rate (~0.05 kg/s) can help in maintaining low power and a smaller device. In this paper, we presented detailed modeling for thermoelectric air conditioning with both side convective heat exchangers, and provided strategies for cost-effective design of TE air coolers. We employed a 1D finite element method for the modeling of graded TE legs in the TE cooler. From our performance calculations, it is shown that the graded materials can produce better cooling than the modules with constant properties of the same figure of merit but at a significantly lower COP. Due to the reduced COP, power consumption is increased too much with the graded materials, which may not be suitable for cost-effective air conditioning. Our strategy for cost-effective design is to use a low current and low air mass flow rate with constant material properties to maintain a high COP and low power consumption as detailed in Section 4.3 and 4.4. This would mean that TE air conditioning is well suitable for small space cooling dealing with low air flowrates. Even for large spaces, the total power input can still be comparable to or lower than those of typical A/Cs (Fig. 