Fully self-consistent GW (sc-GW) methods are now available to evaluate quasiparticle and spectral properties of various molecular and bulk systems. However, such techniques based on the full matrix of G and W are computationally demanding. The routinely used single-shot GW-approximation (G0W0) has an undesirable dependency on the choice of initial exchange-correlation functional. In the literature, many so-called self-consistent GW methods are based on diagonal approximation of G and low-ranking approximation of W. It is thus worth to check how good such approximations are in comparison with the full matrix method. In this work, we consider AlAs, AlP, GaP, and ZnS as the prototype systems to perform sc-GW calculations by expressing the full G matrix using a plane-wave basis set. We compared our sc-GW results with the diagonal G and subspace W approximated sc-GW results (sc-GW-diagG and sc-GW-subW methods). In the sc-GW-diagG method, interacting G is expanded in the eigenvectors of non-interacting G such that only diagonal elements are retained, whereas, the number of eigenmodes is truncated in sc-GW-subW calculations. A systematic analysis of the results obtained from the above techniques is presented. The differences in the quasiparticle bandgap between the approximated and the full matrix sc-GW approaches are mostly less than 1.7% that validates such widely adopted approximations, and also shows how such low-ranking approximation can be used to include higher-order terms like the vertex correction. ` * + |ψ . ⟩{Re[Σ(ε . )] .6 + i,j Re <Σ=ε 6 >? .6 }⟨ψ 6 | of the previous iteration step. This allows the use of non-interacting G # (Eq. ( The density functional theory (DFT) in the Kohn-Sham (KS) formulation Despite the tremendous success of DFT, the bandgap problem using local density approximation (LDA) is well known. KS eigenvalues cannot be used to explain observed photoemission spectroscopy and optical absorption. However, such eigenvalues and eigenstates are generally used as a starting point for many-body excited-state calculations. Moreover, the lack of self-consistency in G leads to the violation of the conservation of particle number and total energy. where, ε 6 is the eigenenergy corresponding to the single-particle eigenstate ψ 6 (r) which are orthonormal to each other, μ corresponds to the Fermi energy, and a small imaginary δ is required for the convergence of the Fourier transform to frequency space. The above expression is exact for non-interacting systems; however, it is only an approximation if used for interacting system Green's function. We do note that for an interacting system Green's function, there is a Lehmann representation identical to Eq. ( where H # is the single-particle Hamiltonian and Σ(iω) is the self-energy. Both the G(iω) and Σ(iω) are full matrix depending on ω. In this work, we first perform a plane-wave based full matrix self-consistent GW (sc-GW method) calculation on a few semiconducting systems without resorting to diagonal G and low-rank W approximations. "space-time" method to solve the above G along the imaginary iω + μ axis in the complex ω plane. More importantly, we have kept a full matrix form for G and W, which allows us to test the accuracies of diagonal G and low-rank W approximations. To deal with the head divergence at k=0, we adopt an interpolation technique for the bandstructure using an extremely dense (126 × 126 × 126) interpolated k-point grid for the integration. Storing the full G matrix drastically increases computational cost. On the other hand, the implementation of diagonal-G (sc-GW-diagG) and low-rank subspace-W (sc-GW-subW) approximations can significantly reduce computational time and memory as it is done in most of the literature. The main goal of our current work is to test the accuracies of such approximations. In our sc-GW-diagG method, we have approximated the interacting G(iω) in a diagonal form as, G(r * , r + , iω) = G ψ 6 (r * )ψ 6 * (r + )f 6 (iω) the denominator of Eq. ( The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In the next section, we briefly present the description of our sc-GW methodology and the numerical techniques used for calculations. Then, we describe the framework of our sc-GW-diagG and our sc-GW-subW approaches. This is followed by the analysis of the results and comparison with other calculations and experiments in section 3 and in section 4 we present our conclusions. Our fully sc-GW scheme is based on the "space-time" method by Rojas et al., where, the G is solved along the imaginary axis iω + μ in the complex ω plane to avoid singularity on the real axis. such that for each wave vector k in the first Brillouin zone (BZ) and frequency iω, G, H, and Σ are the matrices either in real space (r index) or reciprocal space (q index). The DFT exchange-correlation function is only used in the first step. We have simply used LDA functional as our final converged result does not depend on the initial inputs. The transformation of the above functions from r to q space or vice versa is achieved by the following general expression, where Ω denotes the volume of the unit cell, r and q are the lattice vectors in real and reciprocal space, respectively, z is either iω or iτ. In the above equation, integration over r 1 and r 2 are done within a unit cell on a N Z = 32 × 32 × 32 numerical grid, while the summation over q 1 and q 2 are done within E |}c plane wave vector sphere. The analytical expression of G in iτ space is given by, Throughout the manuscript, we use τ • = iτ and ω • = iω to represent the time and frequency variables, τ and ω are real numbers. This will make τ′ and ω′ on the imaginary axis. Note, e .•.n = e Q.••.n ′, the Fourier transformation of the above the G between τ and ω is given by, Computationally, this is done with discretized Fast Fourier Transformation (FFT). The self-energy operator Σ is evaluated from G and W in the real space and time domain to avoid time-consuming convolution in the frequency space. More specifically, Hedin obtained a simple low-order expression of self-energy as the product of G and dynamical screened-coulomb interaction (W), so-called the GW approximation. . Here, w k corresponds to the weights associated with the k-points. The expression of the W function in the reciprocal space for a given iω reads as with factor It is to be noted that self-energy given by Eq. ( This divergence problem is handled by following a similar technique used for unscreened Fock exchange term calculation by Gygi and Baldereschi and "wing" expansion of the polarizability χ in the limits k → 0. To describe the head case, we expand the polarizability in the limits k → 0 as where, k α or k β (α or β = x, y or z) are the directional components of k approaching Γ point (k = 0). The first term in the above expression is zero and to get term χ α,β (+) (q 1 = 0, q 2 = 0, k = 0, iτ), we define a middle step term χ α,β (#) (q 1 = 0, q 2 = 0, k = 0, iτ) based on the Eq. ( Here, ∇ k 2 α H(r * , k 2 ) is the derivative of single-particle Hamiltonian (H(r, k) = e Q.k.r H(r)e .k.r ) with respect to k 2 along the α direction and in the calculation, it is written as a matrix to represent non-local term (k 2 belongs to the original k-grid in the first BZ). In the non-interacting formalism, χ α,β (+) (q 1 = 0, q 2 = 0, k = 0, iτ) can be equated to χ α,β (#) (q 1 = 0, q 2 = 0, k = 0, iτ) divided by eigenenergy square term which is obtained by a double integration of τ in the form (for τ > 0), χ α,β (+) (q 1 = 0, q 2 = 0, k = 0, iτ) = -u ̈-u χ α,β (#) (q 1 = 0, q 2 = 0, k = 0, iτ For τ < 0, the integrals should start from minus infinity. The approximated head expression in Eq. ( is rigorous only for non-interacting G but should capture the main contribution of the k expansion. Here χ̅ α,β (0,0, k 2 , iω) denotes the contribution of each k 2 point in the k 2 summation of Eq. ( and/or ψ . iteratively. In another approach, the frequency dependency of Σ(iω) in the Dyson equation (Eq. ( ) is approximated by a linear function that introduces a renormalization factor Z which transform Eq. (2) into an approximate quasiparticle equation. where, f 6,k (iω) contains the frequency dependency, which is obtained from < ψ 6,k |G(q 1 , q 2 , k, iω)|ψ 6,k >. In our calculation, ψ 6,k (q) of the static G(q 1 , q 2 , k, iω = 0) were obtained in the first iteration which is then used to construct the matrix elements of dynamic G(q 1 , q 2 , k, iω) at each frequency point in subsequent iterations. A comparison of diagonal and non-diagonal components of the G matrix in this new basis will be presented to highlight their significance. The major challenge in GW calculations lies in the full-frequency evaluation of the χ matrix that scales as O(N 4 ) where N is proportional to the system size. Moreover, a huge memory requirement to store above matrices is the major issue to calculate the vertex function. In an attempt to speed up above computation, Wilson et al. corresponding to the static W • (q 1 , q 2 , k, iω = 0) matrix as the basis set to evaluate W Note, if we include all the mode j1, j2 in Eq. ( In our sc-GW scheme, we use a norm-conserving semi-core pseudopotential to have the correct exchange integral, thus avoiding systematic errors that are built-in pseudopotential-based GW schemes. It has been shown that plane wave truncation mildly affects the valence energy levels, thus, it can be treated as a perturbation to the Hamiltonian. where, r, r ¿Àb‚ , and r |}c are the radius, position of the peak in the radial direction, and width of the Gaussian in the units of Bohr, respectively. We obtain the revised pseudopotentials that reproduce converged LDA bandgap values with Ecut = 75Ry (see is used to generate about 8609 (N qÏ ) plane waves to express W, ε, and χ matrices. The total number of grid points in real space is N r = 32 × 32 × 32 = 32768 which is roughly ten times bigger than N q . The evaluation of ε is the most time-consuming part of the algorithm whose convergence depends on the number of k-point summation. A much denser (15 × 15 × 15) LDA k-point grid than the GW calculation k-point grid (which is 6x6x6) is used to fix the shape of χ near the Γ point to be used for the linear interpolation scheme for the k-point summation. These schemes assume both the accuracy of the results and fast convergence with k-points. The imaginary frequency and time axis to describe G(iω) and G(iτ) matrices are divided into 100 and 80 exponential grid points, respectively. We first show the importance of using the self-consistent G matrix over non-interacting G # (Eq. ( The magnitude of imaginary and real part of Σ § vary significantly with ω, thus, we cannot approximate Σ § by its value at ω = 0. The calculation of quasiparticle energy and the spectral function which are often measured in the experiments require the knowledge of G and Σ functions in the real frequency domain. Therefore, we obtain Σ § 6k (ω) on real axis by analytical extension of Σ § 6k (iω) as proposed by Rojas et al. with a ] and z ] being the fitting parameters and the number of terms considered is l = 4 . It can thus readily be extended to the real axis by simply changing iω to ω. The reliability of this procedure in obtaining Σ § 6k (ω) for ω within 1 to 2 Hartree of μ is well tested. With approximation (Õψ 6k (ω)Ö ≈ Õψ 6k (0)Ö, this is equivalent to the diagonal approximation as will be discussed below), the above equation can be further transformed to In Figure within their quasiparticle approximation. Moreover, they used PBE as the exchange-correlation functional in contrast with our LDA for the G0W0 calculation which is reflected in the bandgap results. Now we turn to self-consistency, which lifts the choice of starting point dependency. The peaks lying above and below the Fermi energy (μ) are the quasiparticle bands associated with the valence band maximum (VBM) and conduction band minimum (CBM) of the system, respectively. We see an overall up-shift of the spectral peaks when comparing spectrums obtained from the sc-GW and G0W0 methods. Overall, the increase of the bandgap in sc-GW comes mostly due to the upward shift in the CBM. Moreover, in our analysis, we do not observe any satellite peak representing plasmon excitation. Cumulant method post-processing might be necessary to yield such satellite peaks. Overall, we found negligible changes in the spectral function due to these approximations as shown in methods (sc-GW, sc-GW-diagG, and sc-GW-subW). The variation in the bandgap values from the sc-GW-diagG method compared to fully sc-GW is less than 1.5% except for ZnS (5% bigger bandgap). Moreover, ε values within the diagonal G approximation are within 3.3% of the fully sc-GW method showing a very close agreement. To investigate these two approximations more directly to the matrix G and W, we have presented a colored contour plot in Figure The variations in the bandgap values obtained from the sc-GW-subW method compared to fully sc-GW is less than 1% with an exception to GaP showing a tiny difference of 1.7%. Further, the ε values extracted from the sc-GW-subW method are within 1.4% of ε obtained from our fully sc-GW approach. In our subspace W approximation, we have taken 30 lowest modes of W′. To check the accuracy of this approximation directly on the W′ matrix, we perform an analysis similar to above by plotting a colored contour map of the absolute values of the matrix element V (j * , j + , k = 0, iω) = ⟨θ 6 3 k (q 1 )|W′(q 1 , q 2 , k = 0, iω)|θ 6 " k (q 2 )⟩ at G point under the basis set of the eigenmodes of W′(ω = 0) for ω = 0.5 eV, ω = 53 eV , and ω = 2800 eV (Figure To summarize, we presented quasiparticle energies and spectral function for bulk AlAs, AlP, GaP, and ZnS from a fully self-consistent GW calculation (sc-GW) based on the Dyson equation using plane-wave basis set. Norm-conserving semi-core pseudopotentials with LDA is employed for the starting DFT computations. A full G matrix is constructed without any conduction band truncation. We observed that the initial non-self-consistent G # W # results increase the LDA bandgaps and show positive as well as negative differences when compared with the experimental results. On the other hand, self-consistence sc-GW always leads to overestimated bandgaps mainly due to underestimation in the macroscopic dielectric constant (ε). From the spectral function, we observe that sc-GW bandgap widens mostly by shifting the G # W # conduction band furthers up in energy during self-consistent iterations. One of the main goals in the current work is to test the diagonal G approximation and low-rank W approximations widely used in the literature. We implement diagonal G (sc-GW-diagG) and subspace W (sc-GW-subW) approximations within the frameworks of our fully sc-GW scheme. The tests are carried out in two different ways. First, using such approximations, the self-consistent iterations are carried out, and the final quasiparticle bandgap, as well as the spectral functions, are compared with the sc-GW result. Second, the approximated diagonal G and low-rank W′ are directly compared to the full matrix G and W′ of the sc-GW calculations. We found that, the sc-GW-diagG and sc-GW-subW methods predict the sc-GW quasiparticle bandgaps within 1.7% except for ZnS whose bandgap value with diagonal-G approximation differ by approximately 5% with sc-GW. Furthermore, the ε value obtained from sc-GW-diagG and sc-GW-subW methods differ from the fully sc-GW calculation by less than 3.3% and 1.4%, respectively. Using the direct matrix comparison, we found that the sum of all the off-diagonal elements in the full matrix G is less than 10 -4 of the diagonal value of G for all values of ω. The largest error comes from the intermediate value of ω. As for the W′, its matrix elements decrease exponentially as a function of the eigenmode index. This allows us to truncate the matrix, from a rank 8,000 to rank 30 matrix, without introducing big errors. Our test validates the widely used diagonal approximation for G and low-rank approximation of W′. Such approximations can serve as the starting point to incorporate vertex corrections based on the Feynman diagram. --|q 1 ̃k||q 2 ̃k| representing the symmetrized Fourier transformed bare Coulomb interaction and the dielectric function (ε) expressed in terms of irreducible polarizability (χ) which is further obtained as the product of G matrices from different k vectors, 1 = 0, q 2 , k, iτ) = -i ∑ ∫<∇ k 2 α H(r 1 , k 2 )G(r 1 , r 2 , k + k 2 k 2 , iτ)G( * (q 2 ) f 6,k (iω) 6 . systems are given in (3) Note approximation comes becauseψ 6 (r) is ω independent. However, during self-consistent interactions, ψ 6 (r) will be updated, and f 6 (ω) are independent functions for different j (alternatively, one can also use