Microwaves have been used for a variety of applications in the past two decades. However, there has been a significant and growing interest in the applications of microwaves in hard rock breakage and mineral processing industries. The purpose of this review paper is to focus on these applications and to present a careful review of the state-of-the-art experimental and numerical modeling techniques introduced in the literature from 2000 to 2020. The challenges involved in this research area are surveyed, and the efforts that should be made regarding the potential practical implementation of microwaves in industry are discussed. Over the years, mining companies have increased production rates due to increasing demand for raw materials from rapid growth in the global population and industrialization -mail addresses: 1 Khashayar.teimoori@mail.mcgill.ca, Teimoori@usa.com (K. Teimoori). Consequently, there has been significant industrial interest in replacing conventional methods of rock breakage with novel systems, as the bigger picture also considered the potential of creating non-explosive continuous rock breakage operations Since the 2000s, microwave-assisted rock heating and pre-conditioning have been found to be a potential new avenue to improve mining and civil engineering projects related to breakage of rocks and processing of minerals However, among different properties, the rock's dielectric properties, which comprise both dielectric constant and loss factor, play an important role in the amount of heating and damage produced after irradiation Even though electromagnetic waves were discovered in the mid-1800s, microwaves were first predicted by James Clerk Maxwell in 1864. Later in 1888, Heinrich Hertz proved the existence of microwaves by building a device that produced and detected microwave radiation Maurer (a) modified from If the reduction in the wear on the drills is offset by determinantal effects on the processing, then new protocols for the separation of valuable minerals from the waste will be required These findings have been key focuses, since energy consumption and mineral recovery have always been two important issues in the mineral processing industry In 1994, the American National Research Council Committee on Advanced Drilling Technologies (CADT) published a report entitled "Drilling and Excavation Technologies for the Future" The design is such that the applied microwaves are localized into a predetermined spot on the material. An GHz frequency. This apparatus has been successfully applied to a variety of materials such as glass, basalt, concrete, ceramics, and silicon, but it is still at the bench scale. In conclusion, it can be inferred that although tools operate on different scales, their penetration and fragmentation functions occur through the application of energy on similar rock failure mechanisms. In any rock destruction method, processes conducting a very rapid application of energy are critical to produce failure. In drilling, cutting, breaking, kerfing, boring, or any other similar applications, the penetration rate "R" is directly proportional to the amount of energy "P" applied to the process. Therefore, microwave energy in combination with a breakage machine raises the total energy applied to the rock and results in an easier failure of the rock. The purpose of this section is to focus on various applications and to present a technical review of the state-of-the-art experimental studies, modeling and simulation literatures, as well as technoeconomic analyses introduced in the literature from 2000 to 2020. As a final contribution of this section, the challenges involved in this research area with some concluding remarks from the discussed literatures are debated. Moreover, the attempts that should be made to numerically model the process of microwave treatment of rocks via computer simulations for future predictions of the effects of microwaves on different rock types without costly (and sometimes impossible) experiments are discussed. In the 2000s, several studies highlighted the effects of microwave treatment on different types of rocks and minerals by performing various experimental tests. The experimental approach is an ongoing methodology used by researchers to verify the potentiality of microwave energy in the pre-conditioning and breakage processes of rocks and in the processing of minerals. In this section, after the primary experimental studies are extensively discussed and reviewed, a summarized list of the results published in secondary experimental studies on laboratory experiments of microwave treatment of rocks and minerals is given in Table From the beginning of the 2000s, researchers from the University of Nottingham, UK, carried out a number of related studies on the effect of microwave irradiation on mineral processing, including minerals separation, grinding, purification, and the reaction mechanisms of microwaves on various types of rocks and ores with different morphologies. Kingman et al. In 2004, Kingman et al. From the results of multi-mode microwave tests, Kingman et al. In 2005, experimental investigations on the effects of microwave treatment on the fracturing and grinding of kimberlite ore samples were studied by Didenko et al. They further used a vapor bath method to investigate the effect of pressure rise due to the vaporization of water in the pores on the fracturing process; and found thermal shock fracturing could occur because of either linear expansion of solids in the heating process or the rapid evaporation of water in the rock pores. Another study by Wang and Forssberg To investigate the influences of microwave treatments on the samples, dry ball milling tests for grindability evaluations and UCS tests for samples' strength measurements were performed. By comparing the results of the untreated with treated (7 kW/10 min) samples, the authors observed that the uniaxial compressive strength of quartz and limestone decreased from 50 MPa to 25 MPa and 40 MPa to 35 MPa, respectively. On the contrary, the UCS size of dolomite was found to be incremented. Then Wang and Forssberg In 2006, the influence of applying microwave irradiation with low power levels of 100 W to 150 W on basaltic rock was experimentally investigated by Satish et al. The temperatures of the samples were recorded by using an Infrared (IR) camera after microwave treatments. Moreover, a standard point load tester was used for further mechanical and physical investigations on the amount of compressive and tensile strengths in the irradiated samples. The authors found that an increased exposure time resulted in increased temperatures, cracks, local spallation, and, subsequently, reduction of the rock's final strength. The trend of this reduction in the samples' compressive strength with respect to microwave exposure is shown in Fig. Can and Bayraktar These selected minerals were irradiated in a multi-mode microwave system at power levels of 600 W, 950 W, and 1300 W and exposure times of 5s, 20s, 60s, 90s, 120s and 240s. The authors performed microfloatation and magnetic separation tests to investigate the effects of the applied microwaves on the minerals. From the results of the experiments, Can and Bayraktar concluded that the sulfide minerals were unequally affected by microwaves; the floatability of pyrite, chalcopyrite and galena was negatively affected by microwave treatment; the floatability of sphalerite became unchanged after microwave treatment; and finally, the magnetic susceptibilities of the sulfide and the oxide compounds formed on pyrite surfaces were higher than untreated pyrite. Later, a similar study by Waters et al. In 2009, the effect of mechanical property variation and the cutting rate on the microwave-treated granite samples were experimentally studied by Sikong and Bunsin Point Load Strength (PLS) tests and Ultrasonic Pulse Velocity (UPV) measurements were used to evaluate the intensity of the damages induced within the samples because of microwave treatment. The author noticed high variability in the results and significant discrepancies between the mean and median values of the measured properties. It was noted that these variations were due to the anisotropic nature of the rocks and inconsistencies in electric field properties within the cavity. After different microwave power levels and exposure times were implemented, the results from the PLS tests were used to measure the strength of two kinds of copper and kimberlite ore samples. The results revealed that the stronger the ore samples, the higher the reduction. In addition, better results were achieved in the kimberlite samples that were treated for longer exposure times. The author concluded that the presence of hydrated minerals led to this phenomenon, which demonstrates the value of implementation of the right method of power delivery over higher power levels and microwave energy inputs. Furthermore, because of the incapacity of the point load test in observing the damage prior to and after the microwave experiments on the sample particle, UPV tests were conducted on the copper and kimberlite ore samples. As a result, Kobusheshe Consequently, the grindability of the iron ore was observed to increase significantly, with the specific rate of breakage rising by an average of 50%. Therefore, the authors pointed out that the grindability of microwave treated iron ores was accomplished much more rapidly than for untreated samples. In conclusion, it can be inferred from the results of Kumar et al.'s In 2011, the potential application of microwaves in hard rock drilling, cutting, and breakage was introduced and analyzed by Hassani and Nekoovaght In 2012, Chen et al. After microwave treatments of basalt with 3.2 kW power at 10s, 20s, 30s, 40s, 60s, and 120s exposure times, the samples' surface temperatures reached 100 °C after 30s, 280 °C after 60s, and 450 °C after 120s of irradiation. Additionally, Hartlieb et al. In another research project Jerby, Meir, and Faran In 2014, a review on the applications of microwave energy in cement and concrete was presented by Makul, Rattanadecho, and Agrawal In 2016, a technical research study investigating the effects of different microwave power levels and exposure times on temperature profiles and strength reduction in hard rocks was presented by Hassani et al. Microwave treatment did not affect the UCS of the granite samples, and the basalt samples showed a 30% decrease under 65s irradiation with an input power of 5 kW. The results of the BTS tests showed that increasing the exposure time had the same effect on strength reduction, although the energy input to the samples was increased. Moreover, microwave treatment had a better effect on norite than granite and basalt in terms of strength reduction. In 2017, a study by Hartlieb, Grafe, Shepel, Malovyk, and Akbari Moreover, liberation studies demonstrated that microwave treatment can lead to a 17.1% increase in carbon recovery for coal and a 42.46% increase in manganese recovery, but the iron ore did not show any improvement in mineral liberation. In addition, a possible design of several single-mode microwave antennas on breakage machines such as cutting discs and TBMs for microwave-assisted excavation was developed and proposed by Zheng The study demonstrates that it is feasible to install several microwave applicators on a cutterhead. However, there might be a challenging problem for a rotating cutterhead because of the very short exposure time of microwaves, which reduces the amount of heating and the subsequent micro fracturing effects. Another significant result from Zheng's study is his recommendation to use a horn applicator in order to have better directionality when microwave applicators (antennas) are installed on TBM cutterheads. In an extended work, Zheng et al. In 2018, in an extended research project, Hartlieb and Rostami In this case, a quick overview of Hartlieb et al.'s Extensive and wide cracking was observed in the treated samples after 120s of irradiation; and therefore, ultrasound velocity of the samples significantly decreased. Similarly, an increase in average surface temperature of the irradiated gabbro sample was observed with increasing irradiation times. This surface temperature rise was accompanied by a decrease in the gabbro's p-wave velocity. Hartlieb at al. GHz. Then, by using the cavity perturbation technique, they measured samples' dielectric properties, involving real and imaginary primitivities at different frequencies and different temperatures. The dielectric properties of olivine and serpentine were found to be frequency dependent, especially in the serpentine curves at low temperatures (below 500 °C). In addition, frequency dependence was also observed for the imaginary permittivity of serpentine at temperatures above 800 °C. Comparatively, the imaginary permittivity values for serpentine were significantly higher than those for olivine across the temperature range 0-1200 °C (see Fig. Further analyses on the treated ore samples were conducted by Bobicki et al. (3) the specific surface area of both ores improved. Ultimately, the authors reported that since microwave pretreatment did not decrease the energy required for grinding under the specified microwave conditions, the energy savings might only be realized for overall process improvements (e.g. grindability, rheology, and flotation). Ong and Akbarnezhad In 2019, structural changes in samples of granite (cube of 20 mm) at high temperatures (300-800 °C) induced by microwave irradiation were studied The results presented in a similar publication by Li et al. Additionally, Lu, Feng, Li, Hassani, and Zhang However, the only lack in the two studies might be energy and economical analyses for industrial implementations. In 2020, several researchers and research groups have investigated the impact of microwave treatment on hard rock pre-conditioning and fracturing. For example, by using the same microwave system explained in the study by Lu et al. As surveyed in this section, many studies have highlighted the existing challenges and potential applications of microwaves in the rock breakage and mineral processing industries in order to increase mineral compound liberation as well as potential reduction of energy usage. Below, a technical summary, including the details of applied experimental methods and the main findings of secondary experimental studies not discussed in this section, but that have made significant contributions in the application of microwaves in rock mechanics and mining industries, is given in Table Table Computers have evolved and advanced significantly over the decades since they originated. As a result, numerical modeling techniques have become stronger in recent years for simulation of the process of microwave treatment of materials. In tandem with experimental research, computational studies have come to play an important role in understanding how different mechanisms are involved in microwaveassisted rock pre-conditioning and breakage processes. Numerical models can be used to predict the coupled Electromagnetic, Thermal, and Mechanical (ETM) multiphysics interactions in rocks under microwave The study shows the total porosity of coal rose linearly with MW power, while it increased exponentially with greater water content (1% to 15%). Zeng et al. Zheng et al. treatments with different operating parameters including power levels, exposure times, and distances from the antenna (for single-mode microwaves). Moreover, the numerical modeling approach has been considered a useful comparative tool that allows quantification of the relationships between the material properties of rocks made up of different absorbent minerals and microwaves with different operating parameters. Therefore, the development of numerical models is considered an enhancement in understanding microwave-assisted rock breakage systems and their thermomechanical characteristics, i.e. temperature changes and initiation of mechanical stresses. In the 2000s, several studies have tried to numerically simulate the process of microwave heating and pre-conditioning of rocks and minerals to predict microwave effects. These modeling studies and their analyses for solving applied problems are now essential for a proper design and practical implementation of a functional microwave-assisted rock preconditioning system. The following literature review shows how evolution of computers and simulation techniques have significantly improved numerical modeling of microwave irradiation of rocks over the past two decades. In 2002, a very simple numerical simulation of the microwave-assisted drilling process in alumina was developed by Grosglik, Dikhtyar, and Jerby W/m 3 at 300 K to 9 × 10 9 W/m 3 at temperatures greater than 600 °C. Secondly, to study the effect of higher power levels of microwaves on temperature distribution, uniaxial compressive strength, and shear plane development within the ore samples, the study assumed that the samples were already exposed to singlemode microwave irradiation with a power density of 1 × 10 11 W/m 3 (15 kW at 2.45 GHz). Because of the higher power density, Whittles et al. The authors found that, at 1 × 10 9 W/m 3 input energy and 0.01s microwave exposure, the amount of grain boundary damage was less than 50%. However, at a higher value of 1 × 10 10 W/m 3 and lower exposure of 0.001s, the grain boundary damage increased to 74.3%, which confirms that the influence of microwave power density on the degree of ore liberation is high. The practical implication of the results presented in Ali and Bradshaw's Later, in another publication, Bradshaw et al. In 2010, using COMSOL multiphysics software a numerical modeling of microwave heating of an insulated sphere with a radius of 3 cm was presented by Lovás et al. This section aims to give an overview of the published studies related to energy-related (consumption, savings, etc.) investigations and to present techno-economic analyses on the results of microwave irradiation of rocks and minerals discussed in earlier sections, for future possible implementation of a pilotscale microwave in industrial usage. As discussed by Napier-Munn et al. Table For further technical investigation on the reported experimental data discussed in the literature review, Table The feasibility and potential of microwave irradiation of rocks and minerals was demonstrated after a techno-economic study by Bradshaw and colleagues As discussed earlier, the high consumption of energy in the process of microwave treatment of rocks and ores before their processing is the primary challenge that must be appropriately addressed before the technology becomes feasible and economical. Assuming that microwave treatment reduces 50% of the UCS of the rocks and $0.28/kWh to be the cost of electricity, $8.66/t is the electricity cost of implementation of the microwave treatment system working with 0.76 UCS reduction per energy rate (i.e. MPa per kWhr/m 3 ). However, by increasing this rate to ten times its initial value, the electricity cost of the microwave treatment system can be reduced to $0.89/t, which is much smaller in comparison to the total mining cost, e.g. higher economic feasibility. Therefore, in order to achieve these higher rates, higher power densities are required. But there are other researchers, like Didenko et al. In conclusion, the present review study demonstrates that the application of microwaves in the rock breakage industry, in both mining and processing of rocks and minerals, started after subsequent studies confirmed that microwaves are more competitive than any other assistive rock breakage techniques, considering: -Microwaves heat up rocks on the basis of their dielectric properties; therefore, energy is not wasted to warm up the whole rock body, since rocks are composed of various minerals with different dielectric properties -Microwaves are faster as they rely on selective heating of minerals (some minerals have a rapid response to the applied electromagnetic waves) -Microwaves have high a level of safety and automation Taking all the discussed literature into account, several experimental studies have been carried out in recent years to investigate and address the effects of microwave irradiation on various types of rocks and minerals. These studies were able to successfully identify the importance of microwave energy as a prospective application in future rock breakage operations and mineral processing applications in the civil and mining industries. In addition, in tandem with experimental research, computational studies have come to play an important role in understanding how different mechanisms are involved in microwave-assisted rock pre-conditioning and breakage processes. The development of a numerical model is considered an enhancement of the understanding of microwave-assisted rock pre-conditioning and breakage and thermomechanical characteristics of rocks after their exposure to microwaves at different microwave operating parameters, either in single-mode or multi-mode microwave cavity systems. As discussed and reviewed in this paper, today, the vital role of computer simulations in the field of mining and civil engineering is recognized for researchers and even the industry. Serious efforts have been made by researchers for developing a reliable and trustworthy numerical model that mimic the correct electromagnetic wave propagation in the multi-mode microwave system. However, although several studies have been done in recent years to investigate the effects of multi-mode microwave irradiation on rocks with the numerical modeling approach (e.g. finite element method), no numerical model of multi-mode microwave irradiation was found that: (1) is fully coupled for electrical and thermal multiphysics interactions, (2) represents a correct electromagnetic wave propagation inside the multi-mode microwave cavity as in the experiment, and more importantly ( results of highest surface temperatures achieved at recorded microwave exposure times in different rock samples after 3 kW microwave treatment Ferri.hassani@mcgill.ca (F.Hassani) *Note: In the table the term "microwave" is abbreviated as MW.