Microwave Pressing is a promising way to reduce microwave sintering temperatures and stabilize microwave powder materials processing. A multi-physics simulation was conducted of the regulated pressure-assisted microwave cavity. This simulation took into consideration resonance phenomena and the nonlinear temperature-dependent material parameters of zirconia. The intrinsic behaviors of microwave systems and zirconia make the regulation of the microwave pressing difficult. However, the same phenomena can be used to activate flash sintering. Flash microwave sintering uses high electric fields of the resonant microwave profile, the Negative Temperature Behavior (NTC) of zirconia resistivity, and the mechanical pressure applied to the powder via a die compaction configuration. The resulting flash microwave pressing still needs improvement in terms of the processed material structure homogeneity, but it has the capacity to become the fastest sintering treatment as it allows room temperature activation where the total process time only takes a few seconds. In addition, this 10-20s processing technique has shown good potential for improving the transparency of alumina pre-sintered specimens. Using microwave energy is a promising way for heating and sintering of ceramics Employing resonance phenomena, this approach is able to attain very high magnitude of the electric field allowing the heating of dielectrics and semiconductive materials At the same time, microwave sintering is known to have inherent problems of stability The electromagnetic properties of the affected materials evolve with temperature and modify the microwave field distribution and resonance in the cavity The coupling of these multi-physics phenomena makes the thermal regulation of directly microwave heated materials very challenging. On the other hand, the thermal runaway associated with the NTC resistivity behavior of materials like zirconia is used in field-assisted sintering to activate an ultra-rapid materials processing technique called "flash sintering" In this work, we will first study the resonance and heating behavior of the developed microwave press cavity via the finite element approach The microwave press configuration includes a 2.45GHz microwave generator adapted to a WR340 (86 x 43 mm) rectangular waveguide. This type of waveguide is chosen to enable a TE 10 microwave propagation mode at 2.45GHz. The microwave generator is a 2kW OEM coupled with a 2-port waveguide isolator (10kW, WR340) which absorbs the reflected power to protect the generator. The microwave equipment also includes a dual directional coupler for microwave measurements and a 3-stub impedance tuner to control the microwave transmission across a 30mm aperture iris The objective of this work is to study the microwave pressing of zirconia, in particular, under flash sintering conditions. The described microwave pressing setup enables the microwaves to propagate through the iris into the applicator zone, which is a resonant cavity. In this cavity, it is possible to modify the microwave field intensity by adjusting the cavity length using the movable short circuit. The heating can then be regulated by adjusting the short-circuit length to control the electric field strength and the corresponding heat response in the powder bed The simulation using a movable short circuit will be utilized to see the degree of the thermal homogeneity of Proportional Integral Derivative (PID) controlled heating in the pressing tooling and powder specimen. As discussed below, this approach requires advanced PID measurement/controlling devices and, in their absence, endures high thermal inhomogeneity. Instead, this work focuses on inducing an ultra-rapid heating using constant microwave applied power at different cavity resonance levels. The impact of different electric field intensities, heating rate and pressure was studied for zirconia powder specimens. After analyzing which experimental conditions activated the flash sintering phenomena in the zirconia powder, a spark plasma pre-sintered (SPS'ed) alumina specimen was placed in the zirconia powder bed to study the potential of the FMP for improving the alumina specimen transparency. Based on the work of Kim et al The governing equations of microwave heating are presented first. The boundary conditions are detailed afterwards. Microwave heating is simulated through an electromagnetic-thermal model (EMT) which couples the Maxwell's and heat transfer equations with E r defined by the harmonic electric field expression E = E r exp(jωt). The heat transfer part of the EMT model is represented by: The convection of the air is typically modeled through fluid dynamic equations The external boundary of the 86 mm insulation box surfaces is subjected to a convective flux loss (different from the previously discussed internal convection) and to the surface-toambient thermal radiation described by equations: . The convection coefficient h ia and emissivity ε of 5W•m -2 •K -1 and 0.85, respectively, are defined for the insulation box surfaces . With the ideal gray body simplification, we determined the relationship between the emissivity and reflectivity to be: . Then, we obtained the expression of the net inward radiative heat flux φ rss : The electromagnetic boundary conditions included perfectly reflective metallic wall surfaces and a TE 10 port at the generator location in the rectangular waveguide. The TE 10 port condition simulates the forward microwaves and the absorption of the reflected microwaves. This port condition approximates the microwave generator and the waveguide circulator. A simulation using a PID on the moving short circuit wall is carried out to study the thermal stability of microwave pressing under typical 50K/min constant heating rate. The 50K/min heating rate is imposed by resonance control adjusting the cavity length. This simulation used the following PID expression (9) for the cavity length L PID : A moving mesh using the Arbitrary Lagrangian Eulerian (ALE) method is employed to allow the PID to modify the waveguide length at the short circuit. The material properties are detailed in Ref In this section the simulation of the microwave field distribution in the cavity, dependent on the dimensional and thermal parameters, is presented first. Results are then presented of the simulation of the microwave heating through a typical 50K/min heating rate regime. After discussing the microwave and heating behavior of the cavity, the experimental investigations of the microwave pressing are presented in the following order: (i) the model/cavity calibration using the thermal response of a silicon carbide susceptor, (ii) the study of the flash microwave pressing of zirconia, and (iii) the potential application of FMP for improving the transparency of alumina specimens. In order to study the microwave field distribution and identify the resonant characteristics of the cavity, a parametric steady state simulation is conducted using the cavity dimensions and the tooling temperatures. The steady-state simulation allows testing of a parameter (iris aperture, temperature) with a scan of the waveguide dimensions to locate the resonance profile. The resonance profile corresponds to a maximum of the electric field intensity in the cavity and a minimum of the wave reflection parameter (see an empty applicator in Figure The resonant profiles corresponding to different iris apertures are plotted in Figure shifting of the resonance position to a shorter cavity length, and (ii) broader resonance peaks. This shifting means that the distribution of the field across the iris induces a contraction of the apparent TE 10 wave length. However, the most interesting aspect is the width of the resonance peak. An overly narrow resonance peak, like in the case of a small iris aperture, is difficult to control. The resonance peak for an aperture of 30mm is more stable while allowing a large increase of the electric field magnitude. Therefore, an aperture of 30mm is chosen. The dielectric properties of the zirconia powder, alumina tools and Zircar insulator include the complex permittivity, whose real and imaginary parts increase with temperature. At the same time, the apparent wave length is contracted with this increase modifying the resonant properties of the cavity. Understanding this phenomenon is essential for developing an efficient temperature regulation system that is not affected by the resonance change during heating. A parametric simulation was carried out considering three different temperatures. The results are reported in Figure In order to test the microwave press heating response, a typical 50K/min heating rate was imposed via a PID controller that adjusted the cavity length (see details in previous section). The simulation results are reported in Figure In the present case, the PID controller broke this thermal runaway by increasing the cavity length, which goes back to the lower E field far from resonance. This way, the 50K/min ramp was preserved and the runaway temperature range starts with the abrupt change in the cavity length (Figure The first experimental investigation was the calibration of the cavity based on the respective simulation. The heating response of the silicon carbide susceptor was tested for different cavity lengths in positions far and close to the resonance predicted by the simulation. Only low temperatures (200-500°C) were explored for this first investigation. The results are reported in Figure Like the previous calibration tests, the FMP experiments were first started by observing the sintering response (displacement curve) for different cavity length positions and for an initial applied pressure of 5MPa. The displacement curve recorded by the Instron mechanical testing device was used as an indicator of sintering advancement. For each flash sintering experiment, the pressure was applied by ramping to full pressure in 1min, and the microwave field was then turned on. The microwaves were turned off when the flash sintering displacement curves reached a plateau indicating sintering had concluded. The FMP displacement curves at 5MPa are reported in Figure Before finding the solution to the intrinsic homogeneity problems of the FMP, it is possible to use this process for improving the consolidation of pre-sintered samples. This can be demonstrated by the improvement of the optical properties of alumina spark plasma presintered samples. In the domain of transparent ceramics, specimens obtained by SPS often suffer from carbon pollution and reducing atmospheres caused by long sintering time at low temperature and high pressure FMP allows improvement of translucent alumina into a semi-transparent material. This result seems to validate the recent work of Kerbart et al A pressure assisted microwave system has been developed and studied by simulations and experiments. This equipment has been designed to be entirely controlled by the adjustment of the cavity dimensions and the inner resonant profile it develops. An electromagnetic-thermal model has been used to understand the complex coupling of different physics, the evolution of their properties with temperature and, in particular, the resonant behavior of the cavity. Flash microwave pressing has demonstrated good potential for room temperature activated flash materials treatment with a very short total processing time (~200s with a sintering time of about 20s). However, during FMP, the thermal field develops hotspots and it is nearly impossible to homogenize it in direct heating mode due to the cooling in the surrounding tooling. To homogenize the powder temperatures while avoiding hotspots, it is necessary to provide hybrid heating by using susceptors. This approach would require a special study dedicated to the determination of the optimal susceptor configuration able to resist the thermal shock without shielding the electric field in the powder. Despite the problems with the structure inhomogeneity when using this flash technique, this approach has shown good potential for improving the transparency of alumina pre-sintered specimens obtained by spark plasma sintering. FMP is promising due to its ability to partially collapse the residual porosity within a total processing time as short as 150s (with a pure sintering time of 18s). Further research is needed for achieving better control of the temperature homogeneity to avoid hotspot damage and crack nucleation in the specimens subjected to FMP. 