Magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene has recently become a thriving material platform realizing correlated electron phenomena taking place within its topological flat bands. Several numerical and analytical methods have been applied to understand the correlated phases therein, revealing some similarity with the quantum Hall physics. In this work, we provide a Mott-Hubbard perspective for the TBG system. Employing the large-scale density matrix renormalization group on the lattice model containing the projected Coulomb interactions only, we identify a first-order quantum phase transition between the insulating stripe phase and the quantum anomalous Hall state with the Chern number of ±1. Our results not only shed light on the mechanism of the quantum anomalous Hall state discovered at three-quarters filling, but also provide an example of the topological Mott insulator, i.e., the quantum anomalous Hall state in the strong coupling limit. Twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) burst on the scene as a tunable two carbon-atom layers thick system realizing a remarkable multitude of interaction-driven macroscopic quantum phenomena Currently, the prevailing opinion is that the QAH can be obtained from narrow band models with large Coulomb inter-actions Precisely such a state was sought by Raghu, Qi, Honerkamp and S.-C. Zhang in an entirely different context Here we show that the TMI is realized in a simple lattice model introduced by two of the authors as a local description of the correlations within the TBG narrow bands The key new ingredients are the off-site terms appearing alongside the usual on-site terms in the projected density operator. Physically, such terms originate in the extended multipeak nature of the maximally localized Wannier states Honeycomb Moiré Lattice Model. In the strong coupling limit, the aforementioned model (as illustrated in the upper panels of Fig. where U 0 constitutes the overall energy scale in the problem (≈ 40 meV in TBG and set to unity henceforth). ... FIG. R+δ l c R+δ l represents the cluster charge term The original bandwidth W ∼ 8meV It is worth emphasizing that Eq. (1) corresponds to the leading order terms when the distance to the gates l g is about the same as the moiré lattice constant |L 1 |, and thus the electron-electron repulsion decays exponentially when the inter-electron separation is larger than |L 1 | Phase Diagram. We solve the TBG lattice model in Eq. ( As shown in Fig. Stripe and QAH Insulators. The emergence of the stripe phase at small α can be understood from a perturbative analysis R e -ik•(R+δ λ ) ñR,λ , where the quantity ñR,λ = c † R+δ λ c R+δ λ -1/2 counts the number of electrons (with respect to the half filling) on the honeycomb site R + δ λ . In Fig. To reveal the TRS breaking in the large-α QAH phase, in Fig. Quantized Hall Conductance. To reveal the topological properties in the large-α phase, we perform a flux insertion experiment on the cylindrical geometry [c.f. the inset of Fig. x (φ) is the deviation of the charge number of the x-th column measured in the φ-flux inserted ground state |ψ φ from the half filling. For instance, we have λ=1 ψ φ |n (x-1)L1+y(L1-L2)+δ λ -1 2 |ψ φ for the XC geometry, and similar expressions for YC. As shown in Fig. x , where a half-charge ± 1 2 appears in two edges in |ψ φ=0 . As φ gradually increases, the left/right-end charge smoothly reduces/increases from ± 1 2 to ∓ 1 2 , which corresponds to an endto-end pumping of a unit charge ∆Q = 1, without "disturbing" the charge distribution in the bulk. We note that there is two-fold degenerate QAH ground state (apart from the additional degeneracy due to half-charge zero edge modes, see discussion below), and the charge pumping could be ∆Q = ±1, corresponding to the spontaneous TRS breaking states with C = ±1. Understanding the TMI phase. With DMRG calculations, we can also calculate the single-particle Green's function , from which we can find the electron occupation n λ,λ (k) in the momentum space. Due to the two-sublattice structure, G λ,λ (R -R ) and its Fourier transformation Gλ,λ (k) are both 2×2 matrices (cf., Supplementary Note 1). The two eigenvalues {n 1 (k), n 2 (k)} of G(k) are shown in Fig. To be specific, for small α, a second-order perturbation shows the charging term (Q -1) 2 favors the insulating phases in which each hexagon of the honeycomb lattice contains exactly one electron, i.e. Q = 1 for every hexagon. Among all the states satisfying this requirement, the first-and second-order corrections from the cross terms T (Q -1) vanish. The stripe phase is selected from such states because it minimizes the contribution of T 2 , with the energy H stripe ≈ α 2 U 0 (c.f. Supplementary Note 2). For large α, motivated by the resemblance of the DMRG ground state to the Slater determinant, we perform a variational mean-field calculation that approximates the true ground state with the ground state of a tight binding model containing various hoppings (see Methods and Supplementary Note 3). In particular the Fig. Moreover, as shown in Fig. As we mentioned, the QAH can be obtained from narrow band models of TBG with large Coulomb interactions, but these models are built in the basis of extended states The common belief, however, is that the nontrivial symmetry-protected topology of the narrow bands prevents a faithful construction of models within exponentially localized basis even when the bands' total Chern number vanishes The results presented here show that the truncation at just the nearest neighbor, parameterized by α in Eq. ( As for relevance of our model towards the real system, it is understood that other than the Q and T terms, we do not include all the other projected interactions nor the small kinetic terms, i.e., the detailed feature of the TBG material, which will surely modify the specific value of α c . Apart from that they should not qualitatively alter the two phases and thus also the main conclusion of the present work. In addition to the ground states given above, the dispersion of the charged excitations produced by Eq. ( Density matrix renormalization group. We employ the DMRG method, realized in the matrix product state form and with U(1) charge symmetry implemented, to accurately find the ground state of the TBG model. Following standard 2D DMRG calculations, we map the cylindrical geometries through a snake-like path, i.e., a quasi-1D structure, where highly controllable and efficient simulations can be performed. In practice, we retain up to D = 512(1024) for W = 4(6) cylinders, with truncation errors < 5 × 10 -5 , for an accurate large-scale calculations. The detailed convergence check of the TBG model calculations can be seen in the Supplementary Note 1. Mean-field analysis. We also applied the mean-field theory to approximate the interactions by a tight binding model with variational hopping constants. The hopping amplitudes are obtained by minimizing the expectation value of the interactions in Eq. ( When α is small, we can treat H 1 and H 2 as perturbations with respect to the leading term H 0 . At the half filling, the ground state of H 0 is given by the constraints (Q -1) |Ψ 0 = 0 for all the hexagons and thus the corresponding energy E 0 = 0. This constraint is satisfied by a large manifold of states, including both the stripe and sublattice polarized states. Now, consider the perturbation of H 1 and H 2 within the manifold of the degenerate states. For any state Ψ 0 in this manifold, (Q -1) |Ψ 0 = 0. As a consequence, both the first and second order perturbations of H 1 vanishes: where Ψ 0 and Ψ 0 are two arbitrary orthogonal states inside the ground state manifold of H 0 , and |n labels the excited state of H 0 . Up to O(α 2 ), we also need to include the first order correction of H 2 , i.e., Ψ 0 | (T ) 2 |Ψ 0 . After expanding the square form into the four-fermion terms, it is obvious that only the following terms survive, where the index R refers to the hexagon and R + δ l and R + δ l±1 are two neighboring vertices of this hexagon. These terms do not change the total charge of each hexagon. It is obvious that their first order correction is 1 if the site R + δ l is occupied and the site R + δ l±1 is empty, and becomes 0 otherwise. Therefore, among the states in which Q = 1 for every hexagon, this correction is minimized by decreasing number of "dangling" bonds that connect an occupied site and an empty one. At the half filling, the number of such bonds becomes smallest for the stripe phase, as shown in Fig. and plotted as the blue dashed curve in Fig. When α becomes larger, the perturbation theory in the previous section fails. Our DMRG calculation has revealed that the QAH state appears with α 0.12 and furthermore, the state can be approximated as the Slater determinant of the Bloch states. Motivated by these DMRG results, we consider a C 3 symmetric tight binding model with the hopping constants up to the fifth nearest neighbor. As shown in Supplementary Figure λ=1 n λ (k) ln n λ (k) that measures the deviation of the DMRG ground state from a Slater determinant of Bloch states. In Fig. 3(e), we show the calculated S vN averaged over the first BZ, which decreases as α increases, and becomes very small for large α cases. For example, we show the detailed