We formulate a theoretical description of antiferromagnetic magnons and their transport in terms of an associated pseudospin. The need and strength of this formulation emerges from the antiferromagnetic eigenmodes being formed from superpositions of spin-up and -down magnons, depending on the material anisotropies. Consequently, a description analogous to that of spin-1/2 electrons is demonstrated while accounting for the bosonic nature of the antiferromagnetic eigenmodes. Introducing the concepts of a pseudospin chemical potential together with a pseudofield and relating magnon spin to pseudospin allows a consistent description of diffusive spin transport in antiferromagnetic insulators with any given anisotropies and interactions. Employing the formalism developed, we elucidate the general features of recent non-local spin transport experiments in antiferromagnetic insulators hosting magnons with different polarisations. The pseudospin formalism developed herein is valid for any pair of coupled bosons and is likely to be useful in other systems comprising interacting bosonic modes. The bosonic excitations of ordered magnets -magnons -have become the active ingredient in an emerging paradigm for spin information transport and processing via magnetic insulators 1-14 . This has been enabled in part by accomplishing electronic injection and detection of magnon spin by an adjacent normal metal with spin-orbit coupling Subsequently, non-local spin transport in easy-axis antiferromagnetic insulators (AFIs) was demonstrated in similar devices The feature that makes bipartite AFIs unique with respect to ferromagnets in the present context is that AFI eigenmodes at a given wavevector occur in pairs and thus enable linear combinations or superpositions In the present manuscript, we develop a quantum field theoretic pseudospin description of AFI eigenexcitations and their nonequilibrium states demonstrating it to be especially useful in understanding non-local magnonic spin transport. While sharing similarities with various two level systems or excitations with two states, antiferromagnetic magnons are found to provide a unique embodiment of pseudospin due to their non-conserved bosonic nature. In this way, the similarities and differences with respect to the case of spin-1/2 electrons are recognized and a consistent theory for spin transport in AFIs with arbitrary anisotropies is developed. This comparison allows us to gain physical insights based on the existing understanding of electronic spin transport In the present section, we provide a qualitative discussion of the physics reported herein and an overview of the results discussed in subsequent sections. For readers not interested in mathematical details, the present section strives to sum up the main messages and should suffice for a physical understanding. While we introduce the pseudospin description in a broader context of understanding coherently coupled bosonic modes, the discussion and assumptions are often biased by the subsequent goal of addressing diffusive magnonic transport in AFIs. The pseudospin description of AFI modes may take inspiration from photons Let us first outline some key assumptions made in our analysis. We assume a Néel ordered AFI and capitalize on the typical hierarchy of energy scales, i.e. exchange interaction is assumed to be much stronger than all other energy contributions. This enables a perturbative treatment of anisotropies and other non-universal, material dependent interactions. Further, the ground state is assumed to have the two sublattice magnetizations antiparallel and oriented collinear with the z-axis. Therefore, spin-up and -down AFI magnons carrying unit spin parallel to the Néel vector (z-axis) constitute our natural basis. Spin-nonconserving interactions treated as perturbation couple the basis modes and enable the formation of their superpositions In sections III -V, we analyze and develop the pseudospin description of two coupled bosonic modes. For concreteness, we consider the latter to be spin-up and -down AFI magnons disregarding their wavevector index. This allows us to introduce the pseudospin operator in terms of the bosonic modes' ladder operators. We show that the Hamiltonian for the coupled modes may be expressed as a dot product between the pseudospin operator and a fictitious pseudofield vector defined in terms of the coupling. The eigenmodes that result from a finite coupling may thus be represented by antiparallel unit vectors aligned with the pseudofield (Fig. The measurable spin, however, is determined by both the eigenmodes and their occupation. Thus, in section IV, we introduce a vector pseudospin chemical potential in order to capture the nature of eigenmodes and their degree of occupation in certain nonequilibrium situations. This also allows us to conveniently address pseudospin dynamics as discussed in section V. We show that the pseudospin and its vector chemical potential precess about the pseudofield, analogous to the case of electron spin precessing about an applied magnetic field 52 . For AFI excitations, this pseudospin precession implies a transmutation between the various kinds of magnons with different spins or polarizations (circular and linear). In section VI, we employ the pseudospin and pseudofield concepts to obtain a description of diffusive magnon transport in AFIs. We derive a semi-phenomenological diffusion equation for the total pseudospin density and its chemical potential, where the pseudofield averaged over the occupied modes is shown to induce coherent pseudospin precession dynamics. The spin and pseudospin decay are introduced via phenomenological anisotropic relaxation times. Solving the diffusion equation thus derived, in section VII, we investigate non-local magnon spin transport in an AFI. Here, we consider a general model for the AFI that continuously captures situations with spin-1 (circularly polarized) to spin-zero (linearly polarized) magnons as the eigenmodes. We find that, for the case of spin-zero eigenmodes, the non-local magnon spin signal manifests oscillations as a function of injector-detector distance and pseudofield magnitude caused by a pseudospin precession, consistent with the recently reported AFI magnon Hanle effect Hanle contribution that decays on shorter lengths and a positive offset In the present section, we analyze the full range of eigenmodes admitted by two coupled bosonic modes and relate them to a spin-1/2 two-level system by describing the former in terms of a pseudospin operator and a fictitious pseudofield. For concreteness, we may consider the two bosonic modes to be spin-up and -down AFI magnons with a fixed wavevector and carrying a spin ±1 along the z-axis. We consider two coherently coupled bosonic modes described by the Hamiltonian H: where α and β respectively denote the spin-up and -down magnons, which constitute our preferred natural basis as discussed above in section II. ω α,β are the energies of the uncoupled modes and Ω accounts for the coherent mode coupling. In this manuscript, we set = 1. We further identify operators with overhead tilde and matrices/vectors with an underline. The Hamiltonian in Eq. (1) can be brought to a diagonal form: via a linear transformation α = P ψ substituted in Eq. (3) leading to: Since α, β, ψ1 , and ψ2 are annihilation operators for bosonic modes, they obey the standard commutation relations which lead to the condition: where I is the 2 × 2 identity matrix. P is thus a unitary matrix with P † = P -1 making Eq. ( where the two eigenvalues λ become ω 1,2 of Eq. ( The diagonal elements of Eq. ( allows us to express P via the Bloch sphere representation of the eigenvectors χ i : where θ 1,2 and φ 1,2 represent the two eigenvectors on the Bloch sphere 53 . The off-diagonal elements of Eq. ( where the subscript 1 has been dropped from θ and φ. The relation between the eigenmodes and the assumed natural basis then becomes: To summarize this subsection, the transformation (P ) describing the eigenmodes ( ψ † ) in terms of the basis (α † ) can be represented via two anti-parallel unit vectors on the Bloch sphere (Fig. This is already suggestive of its relation to a spin-1/2 system that we make more explicit in the next subsection. The Bloch sphere, depicted in Fig. and (c) ŷ y y. In the quantum picture, the eigenmodes are expressed as superpositions of the natural Bloch sphere basis -the spin-up and -down magnons. In the Landau-Lifshitz description, the eigenmodes correspond to (a) circular precession or (b), (c) linear oscillations of the two sublattice magnetizations. Motivated by the suggestive connection between two coupled modes and spin-1/2 systems discussed above, we define the pseudospin operator L L L = Lx x x x + Ly ŷ y y + Lz ẑ z z: where σ x,y,z are the Pauli matrices. The pseudospin operator components can be shown to satisfy the standard angular momentum commutation relations: [ Lj , Lk ] = i jkl Ll . It is also convenient to define: where σ 0 is the 2 × 2 identity matrix. Employing Eqs. ( where ω 0 and the components of ω ω ω, assumed real, are given by Comparing Eq. ( Finally, we can relate the actual magnonic spin to pseudospin by recognizing that α and β modes correspond to spin +1 and -1 magnons. Therefore the excitation spin operator is defined as Knowledge of the pseudofield ω ω ω thus allows a simple and direct understanding of the eigenmodes in terms of the associated Bloch vectors that are collinear with the pseudofield (Fig. In the previous section, we have defined the pseudospin operator along with other quantities and operators that allow us to describe the eigenmodes. However, we did not discuss observables and how they can be evaluated. We take up this task in the present section. We begin by recognizing the problem at hand and comparing it to the case of electrons. The spin carried by an electronic state can be evaluated once the eigenstate is known since each state can be occupied only once -the electron is either there or not. In contrast, the bosonic modes under consideration here can bear any integer occupation numbers and thus a knowledge of the eigenmodes does not suffice in determining the physical quantities such as spin. Our considered natural basis of α and β modes is spanned by the basis wavefunctions |N α , N β , where N α and N β denote the integer number of corresponding excitations and run from 0 to ∞. This basis is, in principle, complete and can be used to describe any state, including those which are the eigenstates of ψ 1 and ψ 2 modes. This requires keeping track of coherent superpositions and off-diagonal elements in the density matrix describing the system. Such a representation precludes a pragmatic description in terms of quasi-equilibrium distributions and quantities, such as chemical potential, which only allow diagonal elements of the density matrix to be non-zero. To alleviate this problem, we employ an overcomplete basis by including the eigenstates of ψ 1 and ψ 2 for all θ and φ [Eq. ( Let us consider eigenmodes characterized by θ, φ [Eq. ( Motivated by our present goal of describing the nonequilibrium state via quasi-equilibrium quantities, we further assume that the two modes have the same temperature but different chemical potentials μ 1,2 such that where k B is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature. Employing Eqs. ( where N ( ) ≡ 1/(exp( /(k B T )) -1) is the Bose distribution function and we have defined the pseudospin chemical potential: Thus, we see from Eq. ( Thus far, we have largely considered the equilibrium description of the two coupled modes. Even in discussing the pseudospin chemical potential, which represents a nonequilibrium quantity, we assumed it to point along the pseudofield that determines the equilibrium modes. We now consider the situation when pseudospin is not necessarily collinear with the pseudofield. Once again, we begin by recognizing the problem at hand and outlining the solution. Our general goal is to establish a time dependence of the pseudospin expectation value. The typical approach would be to determine the time evolution of the initial wavefunction and evaluating expectation value of the pseudospin operator using the time-dependent wavefunction. This approach is complicated by the bosonic system under consideration that allows for a large range of initial wavefunctions with different occupancies of the basis states. A convenient solution is found by working with the Heisenberg picture in which the operators themselves evolve while wavefunction and density matrix remain constant. The system dynamics can thus be captured via the operator evolution and is applicable for any initial density matrix. The Heisenberg equation of motion for the pseudospin operator becomes: where we employ the Hamiltonian as expressed in Eq. ( where ω ω ω is the pseudofield. Employing Eq. 31, we obtain the dynamical equation for pseudospin chemical potential: We thus see that the pseudospin chemical potential precesses about the pseudofield similar to the precession of electron spin chemical potential about an applied magnetic field A difference, however, in the sense of precession arises due to the negative gyromagnetic ratio of an electron. To gain further physical insight, we consider the situation where μ μ μ s initially points along ẑ z z while the pseudofield is directed along x x x (see Fig. In the previous sections, we have considered two coupled bosonic modes in order to define and understand the key features of pseudospin and pseudofield concepts. In an AFI, the spin-up and -down magnon modes at each wavevector constitute a pair of coupled bosonic modes. Thus, a pseudospin and pseudofield can be associated with each wavevector k k k. The physical response and properties of the AFI, however, may bear contribution from all wavevectors. In the present section, we consider the diffusive transport of the AFI magnon modes described in terms of pseudospin. We first resume our discussion of two coupled modes with the goal of achieving physical insights into the diffusion process. This is then generalized to include all wavevectors. We thus obtain a semi-phenomenological description of the spin and pseudospin transport in an AFI. The description thus developed explicitly assumes that mode coupling Ω is much smaller than the uncoupled mode frequencies ω α,β . Since exchange interaction typically sets the dominant energy scale, this assumption is valid for AFI modes in all but a small part of the phase space near k k k = 0 0 0, where it may break down. We now derive a diffusive transport equation for the pseudospin carried by two coupled modes. We employ a random walk model treating the quasiparticles represented by the modes to scatter after an average time τ while moving with a speed v. A detailed derivation in the context of electronic spin transport has been produced elsewhere where L L L is now the pseudospin density, D = v 2 τ /3 is the diffusion coefficient, L L L 0 is the equilibrium pseudospin density, and τ s is the phenomenological pseudospin relaxation time. In arriving at the equation above, we have transitioned from pseudospin to pseudospin per unit volume (density) by assuming that there is a unit density of states for the two coupled modes in our system. This transition appears more natural when we discuss modes characterized by different wavevectors in the next subsection. Employing Eq. 31, we can express the pseudospin density as: where V is the sample volume and the equilibrium contribution L L L 0 (∝ ω ω ω) has been separated. Substituting the expression above into Eq. 36, we obtain the corresponding diffusive transport equation in terms of the pseudospin chemical potential: where we have also allowed for an anisotropy in the pseudospin relaxation via a tensorial relaxation time ← → τ s representing different values for the three components. Thus, we have obtained a description of diffusive pseudospin transport within our toy model of two coupled modes. In the next subsection, this will be generalized to the realistic case of pseudospin transport in an AFI and provides insights into the approximations involved. We now discuss one such simplification that has already been employed in the above derivation. Our considered case of coupled bosonic modes differs from the case of electrons in two crucial ways. First, in the case at hand, the total number of quasiparticles is governed by the mode occupancy given by the Bose-Einstein distribution while the number of electrons is fixed by the density of states at the Fermi level. Second, for the case of electrons, charge neutrality imposes a spatially invariant electron density which allows a separation of spin and charge transport enabling the simple diffusive description In the present subsection, we discuss diffusive transport of AFI magnons in terms of their pseudospin density. For each value of the wavevector k k k, an AFI hosts two coupled modes with the natural basis of spin-up and -down magnons. Therefore, we may associate a pseudospin with each k k k and employ the analysis developed above. As in the case of electrons Employing Eq. ( where ω 0k k k is the uncoupled modes energy thereby constituting the dispersion relation obtained by disregarding the coupling between the spin-up and -down magnons. Further, we have defined an effective susceptibility χ and average pseudofield ω ω ω as With these definitions, we may sum Eq. ( where the quantities now include contribution from all wavevectors. We continue to assume wavevector-independent spin relaxation (τ s ) and momentum scattering (τ ) times for simplicity. The diffusion constant D is now given by its average value: where (∇ ∇ ∇ k k k ω 0k k k ) 2 is the squared group velocity of the mode. Finally, substituting Eq. ( Eq. ( We note again that the usual magnon spin accumulation in AFIs is given by the z component of the pseudospin chemical potential and is detected in typical non-local transport experiments. Furthermore, the pseudospin current density is obtained as: where the current has two directions -one associated with its flow and the other with its pseudospin component. In the equation ( In our analysis above, we first introduced pseudospin and related quantities by considering coupling between modes at a given k k k. Then, we summed over all modes in achieving the diffusive transport description for the entire magnon ensemble. As a result, the averaging of various physical quantities over the Brillouin zone, denoted by as the weighting function. Partly due to historical reasons, it is more common to sum over all modes and then consider the mode coupling or spin, for example in the case of electrons. For that order, the weighting function would simply become N (ω 0k k k ). The macroscopic physics observed in typical experiments is expected to be relatively insensitive to the exact weighting function. This is because the two weighting functions appear similar at not too small temperatures employed in most experiments and therefore yield comparable values for the averaged quantities. Furthermore, these effective parameters, such as average pseudofield, can be extracted directly from the experimental fits without making any assumptions regarding the weighting function. A key goal of our endeavor has been a description of magnonic spin transport in Néel ordered AFIs with arbitrary anisotropies. This is motivated by recent experiments investigating non-local magnon transport in ferri- We first introduce a simplified version of the boundary conditions relevant for the magnon spin injection and detection via heavy metal electrodes. A thorough analysis and derivation of these has been accomplished for ferromagnets where j s0 is the magnonic spin current density injected into the AFI by the injector electrode. In typical experiments, j s0 is proportional to the charge current driven through the injector electrode. The boundary conditions above imply that only spin-up and -down magnons can be injected into the AFI by a heavy metal consistent with our mathematical procedure of dis-regarding the mode coupling as a perturbation. A physical picture of this assumption can be painted as follows. Due to interfacial exchange interaction, an electron spin flip in the heavy metal can induce a flipping of an AFI spin localized at the interface. This delivers a localized spin of +1 or -1 to the AFI which becomes delocalized respectively into a spin-up or -down magnon mode at a time scale inversely proportional to the exchange energy. Only at a much longer time scale, inversely proportional to the mode coupling frequency, these delocalized spin-up or -down magnons recognize that they are not eigenmodes leading to pseudospin precession as captured by our diffusion equation (45). Finally, we treat the detector electrode to be weakly coupled to the AFI such that it does not significantly influence the magnon transport. The inverse spin Hall effect voltage in the detector electrode is thus proportional to μ sz thereby providing a measure of the magnon spin. With the goal of understanding non-local magnon spin transport in AFIs hosting different kinds of eigenmodes, we aim to solve Eq. ( where we consider ω ω ω = ω x x x x + ω z ẑ z z. We have assumed an isotropic pseudospin relaxation parameterized via time τ s . Here, as discussed in section III, ω x = 0 pertains to the AFI hosting as eigenmodes spin-1 magnons corresponding to circular precession of the Néel vector in the Landau-Lifshitz description. On the other hand, ω z = 0 and ω x = 0 pertains to the AFI bearing as eigenmodes spin-zero magnons, which correspond to a linear oscillation of the Néel vector. In the general case of ω x,z = 0, the eigenmodes have a spin magnitude between 0 and 1 corresponding to an elliptical precession of the Néel vector We assume the injector electrode to be located at z = 0 and extend uniformly along the xdirection. The AFI is assumed to be thin along the y direction (Fig. where l s ≡ √ Dτ s is the spin diffusion length and we have additionally defined Hence, we see that μ sz , and thus the non-local magnon spin transport signal, bears a contribution [Eq. ( We pause to discuss the physical content of the solution [Eqs. ( For ω x = 0, the AFI hosts spin-1 magnons that carry a diffusive spin current [Eq. ( For ω z = 0 and ω x = 0, spin-1 magnons are injected at z = 0 but they are no longer the eigenmodes, the latter being spin-zero magnons. The pseudospin therefore precesses about the pseudofield giving rise to an oscillation in the magnon spin and chemical potential arriving at the detector as described by Eq. (51) [see Fig. On the other hand, the decaying contribution to the non-local signal [Eq. ( x )]. The pseudospin precession and non-local spin transport discussed here is analogous to the case of spin precession with electrons In obtaining the solution Eqs. ( Solving the diffusion equation ( Taking inspiration from the coupled-boson representation of spin, we have developed a quantum field theoretic pseudospin description of the magnonic excitations in an antiferromagnetic insulator (AFI). Employing the simple case of two coherently coupled bosonic modes, we have introduced the concepts of pseudospin and pseudofield. These have been shown to provide a general and intuitive understanding of eigenmodes in an AFI. The nature of an antiferromagnetic eigenmode -circular precession or linear oscillation of Néel vector -has been shown to be associated with points on a Bloch sphere. The z coordinate of this point pertains to the actual spin carried by the corresponding magnon mode. We have shown that in nonequilibrium situations, the pseudospin precesses about the pseudofield similar to Larmor precession of an electron spin about an applied magnetic field. This pseudospin precession corresponds to a transmutation of the antiferromagnetic modes. Employing these ideas, we have obtained a description for diffusive transport of magnonic spin in AFIs. Solving the equation thus obtained, we have delineated the qualitative features of recent experimental reports on non-local magnon spin transport in AFIs. The role of eigenmode ellipticity or spin in non-local experiments as well as the recent observation of antiferromagnetic magnon Hanle effect have been clarified. The methodology developed herein is expected to find applications in understanding magnonic spin transport in a broad range of AFIs. Due to its validity for any coherently coupled bosonic modes, it may also trigger development of spin-dynamics-inspired physical insights for, among others, coupled optomechanical Employing Eq. (A16) above, we may express the perturbation Hamiltonian [Eq. (A14)] as: Employing Eqs. ( where we have employed Eqs. (A9)-(A12) in simplifying the expression above. Thus we see that the pseudofield [Eq. (A20)] bears a k k k-dependent x component resulting from the hard-axis anisotropy that breaks the axial symmetry about the Néel vector (z-axis). This contribution depends on the base Hamiltonian via the factors u k k k , v k k k [Eq. A17] and decreases with an increasing wavenumber. As a result, its contribution ω x to the pseudofield averaged over all modes is expected to decrease with an increasing temperature, since the thermally excited modes have larger wavevectors on an average at higher temperatures. This is reminiscent of a similar argument presented by Han and coworkers in explaining the temperature dependence of the spin diffusion length observed in their experiments * akashdeep.kamra@ntnu.no 1 Gerrit E. W. Bauer, Eiji Saitoh, and Bart J. van Wees, "Spin caloritronics," Nature Materials 11, 391-399 (2012).