The structure and design of optimal supply networks is an important topic in complex networks research. A fundamental trait of natural and man-made networks is the emergence of loops and the trade-off governing their formation: adding redundant edges to supply networks is costly, yet beneficial for resilience. Loops typically form when costs for new edges are small or inputs uncertain. Here, we shed further light on the transition to loop formation. We demonstrate that loops emerge discontinuously when decreasing the costs for new edges for both an edge-damage model and a fluctuating sink model. Mathematically, new loops are shown to form through a saddle-node bifurcation. Our analysis allows to heuristically predict the location and cost where the first loop emerges. Finally, we unveil an intimate relationship among betweenness measures and optimal tree networks. Our results can be used to understand the evolution of loop formation in real-world biological networks. The reliable function of supply networks is essential for biological as well as technical systems. Leaf venation networks supply plant leaves with water and nutrients The evolution or construction of supply and transportation networks is essentially determined by the trade-off between cost and resilience In this article, we focus on linear flow networks modelling power grids, hydraulic networks or vascular networks Here, we analyse the transition to loop formation on a theoretical basis and derive several analytical results. We consider optimal network structures in the sense that function is optimised while costs are constrained or vice versa. Two aspects of resilience are studied in detail -damage to edges and fluctuations of supply and demand. In particular, we investigate the optimal structure as a function of the severity of damage and the strength of fluctuations. In contrast to prior work we focus on the occurrence of the very first loop, which enables an analytical approach to loop formation and yields several rigorous results. We first establish this approach for an elementary sample network and then generalise it to networks of arbitrary size and compare analytic predictions and numerical results. In particular, we demonstrate that the transition to loop formation is generally discontinuous in the sense that optimal edge-capacities jump discontinuously when fluctuations increase or costs decrease. Loopy network structures emerge as new local minima of the dissipation function that form via a saddle-node bifurcation, and not via a bifurcation of an already existing minimum. Hence, a large number of local minima may exist simultaneously and we establish a purely topological expression based on the edge betweenness to understand their structure. As a direct application of our analysis we derive a simple criterion to predict the location of the first loop in the transition from a tree network. Modelling supply networks. We consider a simple supply network model which was previously used to study loop formation in generic distribution networks In addition to that, we assign a potential θ n to each node in the network. In terms of physical quantities, this potential θ n ∈ R can represent the pressure at the nodes of a hydraulic network, the voltage in DC resistor networks or the nodal voltage phase angle in linearised AC power grids scales linearly with the potential drop θ nθ m along the link and can be calculated as Together with the continuity equation ( We now illustrate how to determine the optimal supply network that is described by the above the set of equations. To this end, we want to find the edge capacities that determine the network structure that is optimal for performing a given task. Throughout this manuscript, we call the network structure optimal if the edge capacities are such that the overall network dissipation is minimised, as suggested for example in Refs. In addition to that, we assume that the resources to build the network are limited. This resource constraint takes the form where the cost parameter γ > 0 depends on the type of problem under consideration. For instance, assuming Poiseuille flow through cylindrical pipes of fixed length and radius R e , k e ∼ R 4 e , such that γ = 1/2 fixes total fluid volume and γ = 1/4 fixes total pipe mass In Supplementary Figure In general, it is neither useful nor meaningful to allow arbitrary connections between the nodes. Geometric constraints apply to a variety of networks. For instance, leaf vascular networks or river basins are naturally planar. To take into account such constraints and keep the problem feasible one typically fixes a set of potential edges E such that E ⊆ E. These edges are often taken from a square grid We focus on two different models here: a model with fluctuating sources and sinks and a model of stochastic damage to the edges. Both models can be thought of as quantifying network resilience: We call a network resilient if it is able to function properly under the uncertainities induced by edge damage or fluctuating inputs. For both models, our main question will be the following: Under which conditions does the optimal network structure contain loops and how do these loops emerge? Fluctuating sink model. First, we introduce the fluctuating sink model. In this model, we include fluctuations by treating the P n as random variables. For each random realisation, the sources and sinks are balanced, i.e. they sum to zero, Network structures are then optimised to have a minimum average dissipation for a given set of resources. Here, the brackets • denote the expected value taken over all realisations of the random variables P n . Note that the fluctuations affect only the flows directly by virtue of Eq. (3), whereas the network topology is assumed to be fixed by the construction of the network such that the average is taken over the squared flows only. Equation ( Realised edges (black) correspond to a global minimum of the dissipation for the fluctuating sink model where a single, fluctuating source (large circle) supplies the remaining network. ) This expression depends on the second moments of the flows F 2 e , which in turn depend on the capacities k e . Hence, Eq. ( Edge-damage model. A second class of dissipation-optimised networks that is relevant to biology and engineering seeks to find optimal networks subject to damage. For instance, leaf vasculature might be attacked by a herbivorous insect, or a power grid might lose a power line due to an outage. In the following, we generalise the broken-bond model considered in Ref. In this edge-damage model, the sources and sinks are still balanced, but do not fluctuate stochastically. Instead, we assume that all nodes but one are sinks with P j>1 = -P supplied by a single node with P 1 = (N -1) P , where N is the number of nodes. To model partial damage of edge l, we modify the edge capacities according to with the damage fraction Thus, a damage parameter ∆ = 1 corresponds to a complete removal of the damaged edge. We now define the average over all possible damage scenarios. Specifically, if g(k e ) is some function of the capacities k e , we define where |E| is the number of edges in the network. Here and in the following we use the notation • to distinguish the average over damage scenarios from the average over fluctuating sources and sinks. As before, the central objective is to minimise the average dissipation of the network, taken over all possible damaged edges under the resource constraint Eq. ( We now proceed to study loop formation in the two models outlined above in detail. Discontinuous transition to loop formation in small network. The central question we will study for this setup is the following: When is the optimal network tree-like (κ = 0) and when is it loopy (κ > 0) -and how does κ behave at the transition point? We first consider the case where the loop is not present, i.e. κ = 0. In this case, the network is a tree and we can calculate the second moments F 2 i , i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4} explicitly in terms of the capacities: they are determined by the statistics of the source and the sinks by virtue of the continuity equation How does this result change if we allow to close the loop as illustrated in Figure Let us assume that the loop carries a flow F5 and has a non-zero capacity k 5 = κ > 0. In the following, we denote the flows and capacities in the loopy network with a tilde. In the presence of a loop, we can no longer determine the flows using the continuity equation ( alone. Instead, we have an additional degree of freedom: a cycle flow f around the newly formed edge such that F1 = F 1 -f , F3 = F 3 + f and F5 = f . The strength of the cycle flow can be determined using the KVL (4) This approach allows us to eliminate the dependence on the cycle flow strength f , and we can evaluate the dissipation D loopy of the loopy network by inserting the result into Eq. ( (see Supplementary Note 4). The new expression for the dissipation no longer contains the flows explicitly, which considerably simplifies finding the optimal topology: we no longer have to take care of the interdependence of flows and capacities, but can minimise D loopy in terms of only the capacities ki . We proceed to evaluate the optimal network structure fixing the mean of fluctuations to μ = -1 and the resource constraint to K = 1. To examine the effect of the two remaining parameters separately, we analyse the transition to loop formation for γ = 0.9 fixed while varying σ and for σ = 3 fixed with varying γ. We then compute the dissipation D loopy as a function of the capacities κ and k 1 and compare it to the dissipation D tree of the corresponding tree network. Note that the capacities in the optimum tree network are explicitly given by Eq. ( For both varying fluctuations σ and varying costs γ, we find that the transition to loop formation is discontinuous: the loop starts to form with a non-zero capacity κ when analysing the globally optimal network structure (Fig. But what is the nature of this transition? In fact, we find that new minima emerge through a saddle-node bifurcation independently of the parameter we vary. Thus, new minima do not form from the existing tree minimum, but instead emerge elsewhere in the energy landscape. To support this claim, we plot the capacity at the saddle in Figure Discontinuous transition in edge-damage model. We now turn to the edge-damage model and analyse the optimal topology again for the graph shown in Fig. Discontinuous transition persists beyond the first loop. Whereas the transition to the first loop that forms is important in many real-world supply networks, such as the Gingko leaf and the distribution grid shown in Figure In Figure Identifying optimal trees for networks of arbitrary size. We now generalise our reasoning to larger networks with an arbitrary number of nodes N . For this analysis, we focus on the fluctuating sink model. Again we assume that all nodes j = 2, . . . , N act as sinks with P j being random variables and that the source j = 1 balances the sinks. We start from a tree network and analyse at what value of the cost parameter γ it becomes beneficial to add a single edge thus closing a single loop. This setup is sketched in Figure In an arbitrary tree network, the flows do not depend on the link capacities but only on the topology of the network as illustrated in the last section. This is due to the fact that for each node j = 2, 3, . . . there is only one path from the respective node to the root j = 1 of the tree. The flow F e on an edge e is thus directly given by the KCL Eq. ( To express the flows F e in terms of the sources and sinks P j , we introduce the tree matrix +1 if edge e is on the path from node j + 1 to the root j = 1 This yields an explicit expression for the flows, T e,j-1 P j . We can insert this result into the network dissipation (Eq. 8), which yields T e,j-1 T e,i-1 where T = E(G) is the set of all edges in the tree, i.e. before the addition of a loop. From trees to loopy networks: Optimising networks with a single loop. Remarkably, we can also find an explicit expression for the dissipation eliminating the flows in near-tree network by exploiting the KVL to eliminate the new degrees of freedom, similar to the strategy in the previous section. We consider a network that consists of a tree plus a single link = (m, n) with capacity κ as sketched in Figure such that the union of the edge set L ∪ R ∪ {(m, n)} forms a cycle. As we will see in the following, this definition turns out to be useful when studying the dissipation in the presence of a single loop. Due to the presence of the loop we have a new degree of freedom, the cycle flow strength f . According to the KCL Eq. ( The value of f is fixed via the KVL: e∈L We can now evaluate the dissipation Eq. ( The average dissipation thus reads where we introduced the abbreviations Eq. ( which are functions only of the updated capacities ke along the sets of edges L and R. Importantly, the resulting expression no longer contains the updated flows Fe , but only the flows in the tree network F e , which are determined by Eq. ( where λ, μ ∈ R are KKT multipliers. The minimum is then determined by the KKT conditions (see Methods). This approach results in explicit equations for the optimal edge capacities ke , κ in neartree networks for which we could, however, not find a closed form solution for arbitrary networks and values of γ (see Supplementary Note 2). Still, we can make use of the resulting equations to gain insight into the process of loop formation. In particular, the KKT condition for the newly added edge (m, n) with capacity κ reads i.e. the capacity of the new edge either vanishes (κ = 0) or has the non-zero value given above. Importantly, we can obtain insights into the process of loop formation even without explicitly solving these equations. How do loops emerge? We now illustrate how to make use of Eq. ( We summarise these results in the following. Theorem 1 (Tree remains KKT point). Consider a linear flow network subject to the resource constraint with γ ∈ (0, 1). Then the following statements hold for the KKT points of the average dissipation D loopy : 1. There is always a KKT point at κ = 0, i.e. the tree is always a (potential) local minimum. 2. The KKT point at κ = 0 is isolated in the sense that we can find a real number ε > 0 such that there are no other KKT points for κ ∈ (0, ε). The proof makes use of the fact that we can find lower and upper bounds for the functions B m,n , λ and C m,n even without explicitly solving Eq. ( We thus showed rigorously that for γ < 1, KKT points that characterise a loopy network cannot emerge through a bifurcation of the local optimum describing a tree network network since the KKT point at κ = 0 is isolated. Instead, new local minima of the dissipation generally emerge elsewhere and the transition to loopy networks is discontinuous. Having understood the mechanism of loop formation, we now proceed to analyse which edges will form the first loops. Where do loops emerge first? We now study the location of the first loop that appears in the globally optimal network as the parameters of the model are varied. We start from the regime where the global optimum is a topological tree. Consider the expression for the average loopy dissipation D loopy to which a single edge (m, n) of capacity κ was added, as calculated in Eq. ( Here, we defined the quantities B m,n (k e ) and C m,n (k e ) which we obtain from B m,n and C m,n (Eq. 24) by replacing the updated capacity ke by the tree capacity k e . The last expression can then be simplified considerably by making use of Eq. ( Thus, the emergence of loops is essentially governed by the potential drop across neighbouring vessels. Similar to how cracks in brittle materials form to relieve high elastic stresses, loop formation is determined by the relief of large pressure drops. Our explicit prediction is consistent with the idea that the reduction of pressure drops may have driven the evolution of leaf venation We confirm the 'stress relief' by loop formation in terms of the potential drop by analysing the pressure drop before and after the formation of the loop in Supplementary Figure We now study the predictions made using Eq. ( Starting from an optimal tree network, we first calculate the pressure drop (Fig. Edge betweenness determines network dissipation. As we have demonstrated, all trees are -and remain -locally optimal structures and loopy networks emerge via saddlenode bifurcations. Thus, there may be a multitude of different local minima for a given set of network parameters, so a natural question that arises is the following: How can we determine which of the local minima have less dissipation than others and how can we find an order of different topologies, e.g. to find the topology that globally minimises the dissipation? Remarkably, we can trace back the answer to a purely topological property: the edge betweenness centrality. We start by simplifying the locally optimal dissipation of the tree networks. In Eq. ( T e,j-1 T e,i-1 Importantly, the entries appearing in this expression only depend on the mixed moments of the sinks and their second moments. Since the sinks are i.i.d. Gaussian random variables, these moments are identical for different sinks and are given by Thus, the sum runs over identical entries and we can calculate the dissipation as Here, N p (e) is the sum over the column of the tree matrix T that corresponds to edge e. In fact, N p (e) has the following interpretation: it is the number of paths from the source s to any other node v that go through the edge e and may thus be identified as a measure of shortest-path edge betweenness To estimate the contribution of a single edge to the overall network dissipation in a loopy network, we first calculate its edge betweenness (Fig. We further discuss the possibility of characterising the global tree minima of the network dissipation in Supplementary Note 6. In summary, we demonstrated that the transition to loop formation in optimal supply networks is discontinuous throughout different models and parameters. We explored this discontinuity in detail for a small example network, and rigorously proved that the discontinuous nature of the transition persists for larger networks as well. We showed that loops emerge through a saddle-node bifurcation, explaining the discontinuous transition. Our results shed light on recent advances in the study of optimal supply networks. While the emergence of loops through fluctuations or damage was discovered recently Our results offer a new understanding of the interplay between the structure and function of supply networks. By unveiling the relationship between the network's topological edge betweenness and its average dissipation, we established a new link between form and function of networks. These results may aid in the understanding and design of globally optimal network structures such as biological vasculature, electrical grids, or neural networks. Our explicit prediction is consistent with the idea that the reduction of pressure drop variations may have been a factor in the evolution of leaf venation Let us finally discuss how our results derived for linear flow models relate to other types of networks and systems. The starting point of our analysis was the fundamental trade-off between cost and resilience, which determines the optimal structure of a network, and which extends far beyond the theory of supply networks. Resilience requires additional capacity or links which can take over the load in the presence of failures or fluctuations -but these are generally costly. From a practical view of network design, the fundamental question is thus: Where and how should new connections be added that increase resilience in an optimal way? Firstly, we discuss the question where new links should be added. A large body of literature in network science approaches aspects of resilience from the viewpoint of percolation theory. The fundamental question in this purely structural treatment is: Given a network, how many nodes or links may fail before the network gets disconnected? It has been shown that a decisive quantity to assess the resilience to random failures is given by the ratio of the second and first moment of the degree distribution, k 2 / k 1 . Secondly, we consider the question how new links should be added. A main finding of our work is that new links emerge in a discontinuous way with a finite non-zero capacity. That is, to be beneficial for the network, new links must have a certain minimum connection strength. This result has no direct equivalence in percolation approaches to network resilience, since the vast majority of studies in this field considers unweighted networks only. However, there is a strong interest in network formation processes, which induce discontinuities in macroscopic connectivity of the network -including competitive percolation models Numerical simulation of loop formation. When analysing the transition to loop formation such as in Figure As a next step, we add all non-tree edges from the underlying triangular grid with a very small capacity that corresponds to 1% of the minimum capacity in the optimal tree, k f = 0.01•min e∈T (k * e ), and then renormalise all capacities to make sure the resource constraint (6) holds. Finally, we then apply the iterative method described in Ref. To analyse the predictive power of the pressure drop in Fig. Evaluating edge betweeenness In Eq. ( Here, σ(s, t) is the number of shortest paths from node s to node t and σ(s, t|e) is the number of these shortest paths that contain the edge e. In the given setting, we consider this measure with respect to a single source s that is identified as the source node of the network. Furthermore, when analysing tree networks, there is only one path from the source to every node σ(s, t) = 1 and thus σ(s, t|e) = 1 ∨ = 0. In the main text, the edge betweenness is calculated using a method implemented in python's networkx library Finding minima of a function with inequality constraints using KKT conditions. Consider the function D(k) of some real vector k = (k 1 , ..., k N ) ∈ R N that is subject to the equality constraint h(k) = 0 and the inequality constraint g(k) ≤ 0 which we assume to be described by differentiable, real-valued functions g, f : R N → R. To identify potential maxima or minima of the function subject to the constraints, we can make use of the KKT conditions. To this end, we consider the Lagrange type function where λ, μ ∈ R are called KKT multipliers. Then the following conditions, the KKT condi- ( This formulation may be used to find out whether adding a single loop to a tree network may reduce its dissipation. 