An up to 15 T pulsed magnetic field generator in a volume of a few cubic centimeters has been created for experiments with magnetized laser plasma. The magnetic field is created by a pair of coils placed in a sealed reservoir with liquid nitrogen, which is installed in a vacuum chamber with a laser target. The bearing body provides the mechanical strength of the system both in the case of co-directional and oppositely connected coils. The configuration of the housing allows laser radiation to be introduced into the working area between the coils in a wide range of directions and focusing angles, to place targets away from the symmetry axis of the magnetic system, and to irradiate several targets simultaneously. Pulsed sources of a strong magnetic field are widely used in various devices and systems, including laser-plasma research. Interest in these works is largely stimulated by the search for new schemes for laser-plasma generation of charged particle beams and problems of controlling their characteristics, including the collimation of charged particle beams In this paper, we describe a pulsed magnetic system created at the IAP RAS for research in high energy density physics and laboratory astrophysics at the PEARL laser-plasma facility The problems of creating an experimental platform for studying a magnetized laser plasma are related with the need to generate strong magnetic fields of a given configuration on centimeter scales. To understand the characteristic values of the magnetic field and its spatial scales, one can use the estimates made in from where we obtain an estimate for the so-called classical plasma deceleration radius: (2) Figure In laser-plasma experiments with a high energy density in the beam, another mode, characterized by significantly higher values of the electron density, namely, 10 17 -10 19 cm -3 , and several orders of magnitude smaller plasma dimensions, appears to be very convenient. This mode makes it possible to use optical methods of plasma diagnostics, primarily laser interferometry. Indeed, the characteristic phase increment in the interferometric circuit is 0.1-10 rad, which is quite convenient for measurements (here,  is the critical plasma density for optical radiation at the frequency L  and wavelength 2 L c     ). At the same time, this mode requires the use of much stronger magnetic fields, of the order of several tens of tesla Obviously, in experiments on the interaction of a laser plasma with an external magnetic field, the characteristic scale L of the latter should be several times larger than Rb to make it possible to study not only the formation of a diamagnetic cavity, but also the dynamics of further interaction of the plasma with the magnetic field and background medium. According to Fig. This simple reasoning leads to the following requirements for the parameters of the magnetic system: the magnetic field is no less than 10 T, the dimensions in all directions are no less than 1 cm, and the pulse duration of the magnetic field is much more than 10 ns. In addition, the magnetic system should provide access of high-power and diagnostic laser radiation to the target in the widest possible range of angles and directions. An example of an experiment scheme for studying the interaction of a laser-produced plasma with an external magnetic field is shown in Fig.  setting up a target attached to the positioning system;  input and output of a diagnostic laser beam with a diameter of at least 1 cm in two mutually perpendicular directions;  the ability to enter high-power laser radiation in a wide range of angles with respect to the direction of the magnetic field. The last point imposes one more restriction on the design of the magnetic system. Indeed, to create a laser-produced plasma by substance ablation from the surface of a solid target, the intensity of nanosecond laser radiation on the target surface should be of the order of 10 11 -10 15 W/cm 2 . Typical parameters of a nanosecond laser beam that will be used in experiments are as follows: duration 1 ns, energy less than 100 J, and diameter 10 cm. Simple estimates show that when a beam with an energy of 10 J is used, an intensity of 10 15 W/cm 2 is provided when the laser radiation is focused into a spot with a diameter of 30 m, which corresponds to the focusing F/20 or better. An F/10 focusing was employed in the experiments. Thus, the structural elements of the magnetic system should not interfere with such focusing of laser radiation into the central region of the magnetic system. The requirements for the magnetic field uniformity in the region where the laser plasma interacts with the magnetic field are not very high, since, in any case, in the course of experiments, the magnetic field is strongly disturbed by the invading plasma flow, and the process of magnetic field penetration into the plasma is accompanied by the development of instabilities at the boundary between plasma and magnetic field. When designing the magnetic system described below, we restricted ourselves to the requirements for the magnetic field uniformity of the order of 0 0 10% B B   in the gap between coils. The studies of the processes of interaction of a laser-produced plasma of high energy density with a magnetic field are not limited to the case of a locally uniform distribution of the magnetic field. A number of problems on laboratory modeling of space plasma phenomena require the creation of highly non-uniform magnetic fields near the target, including the points with a zero magnetic field. Such problems include modeling of plasma processes during magnetic reconnection The main elements of the magnetic system are shown in Fig. The magnetic system is composed of two Helmholtz coils wound on a stainless steel housing and is designed to operate in a single pulse mode. The pulse repetition rate is determined by the Joule loss in the coils and the time required for cooling. To reduce the ohmic resistance of the wires (about 7 times compared to room temperature) and additional thermal stabilization of the initial state, the coils are immersed in a bath with liquid nitrogen. For the magnetic system, we developed a power supply that provides the formation of a given magnetic field in the operating volume of the solenoid with inductance Ls and active resistance Rs when a capacitive energy storage (CES) with capacitance C is discharged to it via a thyristor switch VS Рис.3 Fig. Table Inductance of a single coil 1.24 mH (1%) Inductance of the system with the coils connected in series 3.67 mH (1%) Inductance of the system with the coils connected in parallel 0.51 mH (1%) The design of the magnetic system makes it possible (by switching external connections) to use oppositely connected coils or employ only one coil to significantly extend the range of possible experiments. In particular, this will permit one to study the interaction of plasma flows with non-uniform magnetic fields and the processes of separation of plasma flows from the diverging magnetic field lines. Figure A magnetic system has been created and successfully tested, which makes it possible to repeatedly generate pulses of a magnetic field with an intensity of up to 15 T. A key feature of the system is the possibility of both co-directional and oppositely directed connection of a pair of coils, which ensures a variety of magnetic field configurations. At the moment, the operating time of the magnetic system is more than 1000 pulses, without any change in physical and technical parameters. Using the described magnetic system, a number of successful experiments, described in, e.g., 