We have used Bi 2 Se 3 nanoribbons, grown by catalyst-free Physical Vapor Deposition to fabricate high quality Josephson junctions with Al superconducting electrodes. In our devices we observe a pronounced reduction of the Josephson critical current density J c by reducing the width of the junction, which in our case corresponds to the width of the nanoribbon. Because the topological surface states extend over the entire circumference of the nanoribbon, the superconducting transport associated to them is carried by modes on both the top and bottom surfaces of the nanoribbon. We show that the J c reduction as a function of the nanoribbons width can be accounted for by assuming that only the modes travelling on the top surface contribute to the Josephson transport as we derive by geometrical consideration. This finding is of a great relevance for topological quantum circuitry schemes, since it indicates that the Josephson current is mainly carried by the topological surface states. The study of the proximity effect between a superconductor and a semiconductor or an unconventional metal, has lately received a dramatic boost due to the increasing possibilities to manufacture a larger variety of interfaces and materials. Novel phenomenology of the proximity effect is currently coming from the integration of semiconducting nanowires, with strong spin orbit coupling, as barriers, as well as the edge and surface states of twodimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) Topological Insulators (TIs) In this work, we have fabricated Josephson junctions by using Bi 2 Se 3 Topological Insulator Nanoribbons (TINR) with a widths spanning from 50 nm to almost a micron. Because the TSS extend over the entire circumference of the TINR, the superconducting transport associated to them is carried by modes on both the top and bottom surface of the nanoribbon. As shown in Fig. where n is an integer Nanoribbons of Bi 2 Se 3 with a variation of widths from ∼50 nm to about 1 μm were grown as reported in ref. The Pt interlayer between the Bi 2 Se 3 and Al has an important role in forming of transparent interface, as it was shown in our previous works Junctions were measured at a base temperature of 19 mK, in an rf -filtered dilution refrigerator. Planar Josephson junction can be described as SIS I -N-I S IS. Here S is the proximized TINR which lies underneath the superconductor (S) -Al, and N represents the not-covered TINR part between the two Al electrodes (see schematics in the inset of Fig. For STO with a relative dielectric contant of 25000 at low temperatures we approximate C 1 pF resulting in a quality factor smaller than one for junctions having a critical current lower than 50 nA. Instead for the Si/SiO 2 substrate it is more difficult to estimate the shunting capacitance due to the conducting substrate. However we expect a much smaller capacitance value resulting in quality factors smaller than one for critical currents already below 500 nA. the length of TINR; for this device no winding modes are expected to contribute to the Josephson transport. One clearly sees that if the length is fixed the J c sharply decreases as a function of the width W of the nanoribbon. We note that the value of J c can change by a factor of 5-6 by going from the narrowest nanoribbons of 60 nm to the widest ones. In contrast, as shown in Fig. for the devices on the Si/SiO 2 and STO substrate, respectively, is almost independent of W . This fact allows to exclude that the reduction of the J c at small widths W has its origin in strong modifications/deterioration of the junction specific resistance for narrow TINR. What is the origin of this peculiar J c (W ) phenomenology? As we have discussed earlier, the explanation of the phenomenon can have its grounds in the quantization of the nanoribon's propagation modes. One can derive that the relative number of modes n top /n tot travelling only on the top surface reduces with the junction width for a fixed junction length L. Here n tot is the total number of modes: and n top is the number of modes travelling only on the top surface of the nanoribbon: The relations above can be obtained from geometric considerations, see Fig. In Fig. For comparison in Fig. This interaction, which leads to a lower mobility (diffusive transport regime) of the Dirac states, might be responsible for the transport modes winding around the nanoribbon (high k y modes) contributing less to the Josephson transport. Although we can not exclude that the transport through the trivial 2D gas contributes to the Josephson current it would only cause a constant offset of the J C values without affecting the overall width dependence. We observe that the overall values of J C for the devices on the STO substrate are higher than those on Si/SiO 2 . This can be partially attributed to the larger values of the top surface Dirac carrier density of the batch used to realize the devices on the STO substrate. The larger value of the trivial 2D carrier density we typically observe in devices fabricated on STO substrates 33 could be further responsible for the difference observed in the critical current densities between devices on STO and Si/SiO 2 substrates. To conclude we have fabricated high transparency 3D TINR Josephson junctions showing a peculiar phenomenology that can be associated to the transport through the topological surface states. This is a step forward towards the study of topological superconductivity in few modes devices instrumental for topological quantum computation.