Type-II superconductivity is known to persist close to the sample surface in presence of a strong magnetic field. As a consequence, the ground state energy in the Ginzburg-Landau theory is approximated by an effective one-dimensional model. As shown in [CG2], the presence of corners on the surface affects the energy of the sample with a non-trivial contribution. In [CG2], the two-dimensional model problem providing the corner energy is implicitly identified and, although no explicit dependence of the energy on the corner opening angle is derived, a conjecture about its form is proposed. We study here such a conjecture and confirm it, at least to leading order, for corners with almost flat opening angle. The phenomenon of superconductivity was first discovered in 1911 by H. Kamerlingh Onnes and it is nowadays well understood: the electrical resistance of various materials, such as mercury, drops down dramatically below a critical temperature T c , whose value depends on the material. Its microscopic explanation relies on BCS theory When a superconductor is immersed in a magnetic field, however, an even richer physics may emerge: for instance, if the intensity of the external field is small enough, the material behaves like a perfect superconductor. Hence, no effect of the field is observed in the sample and the field is expelled from the material, giving rise to the famous Meissner effect. However, if the field is strong enough, the material loses all its superconducting properties. According to how this breakdown occurs, one can distinguish between two different kinds of superconductors: for type-I superconductors, there is only a first order phase transition, while type-II superconductors exhibit a more complex behavior and the normal and superconducting phase may coexist (mixed state). Close enough to the critical temperature, the response of the superconductor to the external magnetic field is very well described through a macroscopic model proposed in 1950 by V.L. Ginzburg and L.D. Landau 1.1. Ginzburg-Landau Theory. The GL free energy of a type-II superconducting sample made of an infinite wire of constant cross section Ω is given by where we assumed that the applied magnetic field is of uniform intensity h ex along the superconducting wire and that it is perpendicular to Ω; h ex A : R 2 → R 2 is the vector potential generating the induced magnetic field h ex curlA = h ex (∂ 1 A 2 -∂ 2 A 1 ); ψ : Ω → C is the order parameter, i.e., the center of mass wave function of the Cooper pairs. The modulus |ψ| is a measure of the relative density of the superconducting Cooper pairs, i.e., 0 |ψ| 1 and, wherever |ψ| = 0, there are no Cooper pairs (loss of superconductivity), whereas, if |ψ| = 1 somewhere, then all the electrons are superconducting. The phase of ψ encodes the information about the stationary current flowing in the superconductor, i.e., j[ψ] := i 2 (ψ∇ψ * -ψ * ∇ψ) = Im(ψ * ∇ψ). (1.2) We are interested in studying the equilibrium state of the sample, which is obtained by minimizing (1.1) w.r.t. ψ and A. Moreover, we focus on (extreme) type-II superconductors: indeed, we study the limit κ → ∞, also known as London limit. 1.2. Sample with corners. Before proceeding further, we specify the assumption we make on Ω: we consider a bounded and simply connected domain Ω with piecewise smooth boundary, such that the unit inward normal ν to the boundary is well defined everywhere but in a finite number of points. We call these points the corners of Ω. We now state our assumption in a more precise way (see also Assumption 1 (Piecewise smooth boundary). Let Ω be a bounded and simply connected open set of R 2 . We assume that ∂Ω is a smooth curvilinear polygon, i.e., for every r ∈ ∂Ω there exists a neighborhood U of r and a map Φ : , where (Φ) j stands for the j-th component of Φ. Assumption 2 (Boundary with corners). We assume that the set Σ of corners of ∂Ω is non-empty but finite and we denote by β j the angle of the j -th corner (measured towards the interior). 1.3. Critical fields. We now investigate the response of the superconductor to the external magnetic field. It is well known that the material exhibits a different behavior depending on the intensity of the field. Let us first describe what occurs for samples with smooth cross sections Ω: one can identify three different critical values of the applied field marking phase transitions of the material. More precisely, the first critical value H c1 is such that the minimizing order parameter has at least one vortex as soon as h ex > H c1 , i.e., superconductivity is lost at isolated points; the second critical field H c2 is related to the transition form bulk to boundary behavior, meaning that if h ex > H c2 , superconductivity survives only near the boundary of the sample; the last critical field H c3 is such that above it the material behaves as a normal conductor. Asymptotically, as κ → +∞, where C Ω > 0 depends only on the domain Ω and Θ 0 ≃ 0.59 is a universal constant. For more details about the critical fields for smooth domains, we refer respectively to Let us now underline the expected differences in presence of corners. The first one is a possible change of the asymptotic value of the third critical field where μ(β) stands for the ground state energy of a Schrödinger operator with uniform magnetic field in the infinite sector W β with opening angle β, i.e., Note that the universal constant Θ 0 related to the third critical field for smooth domains (see (1.3)) is nothing but the ground state energy of the same Schrödinger operator on the half-plane (i.e., for β = π). The shift of the third critical field occurs then whenever there is a corner with angle β such that μ(β) < Θ 0 . This is proven for β π 2 + ǫ [Bon, Jad, ELP-O] but, based on numerical experiments, conjectured to be true superconductivity is however uniformly distributed (in L 2 sense) along the boundary and exponentially small in the bulk, so recovering the same behavior as in smooth domains. This strongly suggests the emergence of a new critical field marking the transition from surface to corner superconductivity. Acknowledgments. The authors are thankful to S. Fournais and N. Rougerie for useful comments and remarks about this work. The support of the National Group of Mathematical Physics (GNFM) of INdAM through Progetto Giovani 2016 "Superfluidity and Superconductivity" and Progetto Giovani 2018 "Two-dimensional Phases" is also acknowledged. As anticipated, we aim at studying a model sample in the surface superconductivity regime, which is identified by an intensity of the external field since, in this parameter windows, superconductivity survives only near the boundary of the sample. More precisely, one can prove that, if (2.1) holds, the minimizing order parameter exponentially decays in the distance from the boundary ∂Ω. We stress that the presence of corners does not affect this behavior 2.1. Surface superconductivity in domains with corners. Before discussing further the properties of any minimizing configuration, we perform a change of units, which proves to be very convenient in the surface regime given by (2.1) above. We introduce a new parameter so that the GL functional becomes where the minimization domain is given by and we denote by (ψ GL , A GL ) any corresponding minimizing configuration. The precise statement of the order parameter decay in this setting takes the form of the so-called Agmon estimates: Theorem 2.1 (Agmon estimates Let Ω ⊂ R 2 be a bounded and simply connected domain, if b > 1. Then, any critical point (ψ, A) of the GL functional satisfies for some c(b) > 0. Thanks to the above result, one can restrict the analysis to a boundary layer of thickness of order ε, since the energy contribution of the rest of the sample is small: for instance, if we restrict to the region for a (arbitrarily large) constant c 0 > 0, the above Theorem 2.1 guarantees that the energy in Ω \ A ε is smaller than a (arbitrarily large) power of ε, which we denote by saying that it is O(ε ∞ ) there. The restriction to A is quite relevant, since it allows to use suitable tubular coordinates: let γ : [0, |∂Ω|) → ∂Ω be a parametrization of the boundary, then we denote by (s, t) ∈ [0, |∂Ω|) × [0, c 0 ε| log ε|] the coordinates satisfying r(s, t) =: γ ′ (s) + tν(s), ∀r ∈ A ε , (2.7) where ν stands for the inward normal to the boundary and t := dist(r, ∂Ω). The relation (2.7) introduce a local diffeomorphism in the smooth portion of A ε . We also denote by (s, t) the ε-rescaled counterparts of (s, t), i.e., s := s/ε, t := tε. The curvature of the boundary is denoted by K(s) and we set k(s) := K(εs) for short, so that, e.g., dr = ε 2 dt ds (1 -εk(s))t. We now focus on the energy asymptotics in the surface superconductivity regime. The most accurate result about is proven in Theorem 2.2 (GL energy in piecewise smooth domains Let Ω ⊂ R 2 be any bounded simply connected domain satisfying Assumption 1 and Assumption 2. Then, for any fixed 1 < b < Θ - (2.8) The first three terms on the r.h.s. (2.8) can be interpreted as follows: • the leading order term of order ε -1 is proportional to the length of the boundary and its coefficient is given by a one-dimensional model problem (see (2.9) below), whose expression is independent of the boundary curvature; • the curvature corrections to the energy are contained in the second term, which is of order 1 and whose coefficient is also curvature-independent (see (2.11)); • the contribution of corners is also of order 1 and it is given by the third term in the energy expansion in terms of an effective model on a wedge-like region (see (2.12)). ⋆ and E corr are determined through an effective one-dimensional model describing the variation of the modulus of the order parameter along the normal to the boundary. More precisely, we set (2.9) , and Here, we skip most of the details about the one-dimensional models and refer to Appendix A or E corner,β := lim where F := 1 2 x ⊥ , the latter functional is defined as in (2.3) with ε = 1 and A = F. Moreover, E 1D 0 (l) is the ground state energy of the finite-interval version of (2.9), i.e., (2.14) The domain Γ β (L, l) is on the other hand a sort of wedge (depicted in Fig. where we denoted by ∂Γ bd ∪ ∂Γ in the inner and tangential boundaries of Γ β , i.e., concretely, ∂Γ bd = AC ∪ EB and ∂Γ in = CD ∪ DE, and where (α 0 , f 0 ) is a minimizing pair realizing E 1D 0 (l) and (s, t) are boundary coordinates of Γ β (L, l), such that t ∈ [0, l] is the normal distance to the outer boundary and s ∈ [-L, L] the tangential coordinate (with the vertex in s = 0). The heuristic motivation behind the definition (2.13) of the effective energy is that, after blow-up around the singularity, in order to extract the precise contribution due to the presence of the corner, one has first to subtract the surface energy produced by the smooth part of the boundary, which equals exactly the first term on the r..h.s. of (2.13) (see, e.g., An important consequence of the energy estimate of Theorem 2.2 is that superconductivity is robust along the boundary ∂Ω with the possible exception of the corner points, i.e., ψ GL is non-vanishing there. More precisely, under the same assumptions of Theorem 2.2, we proved [CG2, Prop. 2.1] that where ∂Ω smooth := {r ∈ ∂Ω | dist(r, Σ) cε| log ε|}. As explained in details in [CG2, §2.2], the explicit dependence of E corner,β on the angle β is not accessible and the definition of the effective energy is rather implicit. However, based on some geometric considerations, we formulated in Conjecture 1 (GL corner energy). For any 1 < b < Θ -1 0 and β ∈ (0, 2π), The goal of this paper is to address (2.18) and show that, if the corner angle β is close to π, (2.18) is in fact correct, at least to leading order. This is the content of the next theorem. Theorem 2.3 (GL corner energy for almost flat angles). Let 0 δ ≪ 1 and 1 < b < Θ -1 0 . Then, as l → +∞ and L → +∞, The above result is an asymptotic confirmation of Conjecture 1 for almost flat angles. Unfortunately, we are not able to show that the remainder is identically zero, as it should be if one expects the conjecture to be true. There is however an important piece of information to extract from (2.19): the fact that the correction is non-zero for both acute and obtuse angles marks the difference with the linear behavior close to H c3 . Indeed, in that case, it is expected and numerically confirmed that the effective energy is a monotone function of the angle but stays constant for angles larger or equal to π. Here, on the opposite, we observe a symmetric behavior for acute and obtuse angles, at least for small variations around π: since one expects that E corr > 0 for 1 < b < Θ -1 0 , this would imply that corners with obtuse angles increase the energy, while acute angles lower it. The above result applies to the model problem (2.12), but it has a direct consequence on the more general setting of a sample with a curvilinear polygonal boundary, provided the corners' angles are almost flat. Corollary 2.1 (GL energy for domains with almost flat angles). Let 0 δ ≪ 1 and let Ω ⊂ R 2 be a bounded domain with a finite number of corners along ∂Ω with almost flat angles β j , j ∈ Σ, i.e., such that |β j -π| δ ≪ 1. Then, for any fixed The paper is organized as follows. We first discuss in detail the mathematical setting and formulate some preliminary results in § 3. The proofs of the main results above are then spelled in § 4. In Appendix A, we collect some useful results about the effective onedimensional models involved in the proofs. Before facing the proofs of our main results, we provide more details about the mathematical setting we are going to consider. We study a wedge like domain Γ π±δ (L, l) described in Fig. The decay stated in Theorem 2.1 holds true in the region Γ as well, with the obvious adaptations. For later purposes however we formulate a more specific result applying to a subregion of longitudinal length of order 1. Lemma 3.1. Let S ± ⊂ Γ ± be domains of the form for some smooth increasing function s(t). Then, for any b > 1, there exists a constant c(b) > 0, such that Proof. The proof is a simple adaptation of the argument used to prove An alternative form of the Agmon estimate is provided by next Lemma, whose proof is given in Lemma 3.2. For any b > 1 there exists a finite constant C, such that where c(b) is the constant appearing in (3.6). 3.1. Systems of coordinates. Besides the aforementioned polar coordinates, we are going to use other sets of tubular-like coordinates we introduce here. This however calls for a split of the corner region into two subregions, in which we are allowed to use the tangential length along the boundary and the distance from the outer boundary as global coordinates. For concreteness, we consider only the case of opening angle π -δ and provide a graphic representation of the domains Γ ± in next Fig. where θ bis := (π -δ)/2 for short. As before, we also set Let then (x, y) be the cartesian coordinates centered at the vertex V , as in Fig. Hence, in both regions s ± measures the tangential length along the outer boundary, while t ± is the normal distance to it. Inside each region Γ ± , the coordinates (s ± , t ± ) identify a smooth diffeomorphism mapping Γ ± to the sets {0 t + l, tan(δ/2)t + s + L} and {0 t -l, -L s --t -tan(δ/2)}, which with a little abuse of notation we still denote by Γ + and Γ -, respectively. Note that the vertex of the corner is identified by the tubular coordinates s ± = 0, t ± = 0. Remark 3.1 (Continuity of the normal coordinate). The coordinates defined above provide two patches to cover the corner region and are obviously discontinuous along the bisectrix. However, the discontinuity appears only in the tangential components s ± . The values of t ± indeed coincide on ∂Γ + ∩ ∂Γ -, i.e., on the line y = tan π-δ 2 x, where We anticipate that the jump discontinuity of the tangential coordinates s ± is going to play a key role in the proof of our result and, in order to take it properly into account, we identify a transition region around the bisectrix (see Fig. with γ > 0 a (small) parameter to be chosen later. We denote by Γ ± γ the corresponding subsets of Γ ± , i.e., explicitly, Γ ± γ := Γ ± ∩ {|θ -θ bis | γ/2}. The complementary sets are denoted by Γ ± c := Γ ± \ Γ ± γ , respectively. For later convenience, we observe that the relation between tubular and polar coordinates in Γ ± is given by 3.2. Sketch of the proof. Our main result is obtained by combining suitable upper and lower bounds to the energy E corner,π±δ (L, l) working in different ways in all the subregions we introduced above. The heuristics behind the splitting of Γ β (L, l) just introduced is indeed that the leading contribution to the energy is given by the regions Γ ± c , i.e., 2LE 1D 0 (l), while the regions Γ ± γ are instead responsible for the correction associated with the jump of the tangential coordinate, i.e., -δE corr . As discussed in detail in [CG2, §3.1] the dominant term in the energy of a finite strip in the surface superconductivity regime is given by E 1D 0 (l) times the length of the outer boundary (2L in our case), where l is the width of the strip. The presence of a non-trivial correction to such an energy is entirely due to the presence of the corner. Let us describe the underlying heuristics. Because of the singularity in the tangential coordinates s ± , it is indeed impossible to glue together the optimizers of the effective models in the two components Γ ± of the corner region. More precisely, to leading order, the boundary behavior of the order parameter is captured by a wave function of the factorized form (up to a global phase factor) f 0 (t)e -iα 0 s-i 2 st , where s and t stand for the tangential coordinate and the normal distance to the outer boundary, respectively, and (f 0 , α 0 ) ∈ H 1 (R + ) × R is a minimizing pair for the variational problem (2.14) (see also Appendix A). Here, the term -1 2 st is a gauge phase needed to map the magnetic potential F to the vector (-t, 0) in tubular coordinates. Now, the modulus of the above ansatz is continuous through the bisectrix (see Remark 3.1), but, on the opposite, the phase has a jump discontinuity, inherited from the behavior of the tangential coordinates s ± . In order to glue together the optimal profiles in Γ ± in the upper bound and then recover the leading order term of the energy, a non-trivial variation of the phase is needed, i.e., the phase of the minimizer must be a genuine two-dimensional function, unlike the model ansatz where the dependence on (s, t) is factorized. Concretely, we accommodate the transition by introducing a two-dimensional phase in Γ ± γ gluing together the phases -α 0 s ± -1 2 s ± t ± in Γ ± : with a little abuse of notation, we define Φ : Γ → R as where the two phases Φ ± are defined as follows and the function gluing them together is given in polar coordinates by (3.16) Note that the function Ξ has been defined in such a way that which ensures that the phase is continuous (in particular H 1 (Γ)). However, by estimating the difference Ξ| θ=θ> -Ξ| θ=θ< , one immediately sees that the phase undergoes a jump of order O(δ + γ) in the region Γ + γ ∪ Γ - γ , which is going to be very relevant in the proof. Note however that the choice of Ξ is rather arbitrary and any other function with the same properties would work. On the other hand, the lower bound part of the proof does not involve the phase Ξ, but an apparent discontinuity along the bisectrix emerges nevertheless: the key tools in the argument are a splitting technique to extract the energy to recover, by defining a pair of unknown functions u ± via and the consequent reduction of the problem to the minimization of a weighted functional E 0 of u ± . Note that, according to the upper bound heuristics, we expect u ± to be suitably close to 1, which would make the reduced energy E 0 vanish identically. The key step in the lower bound is in fact the proof of the positivity of such an energy: this is done via a suitable integration by parts of the only non-positive term of E 0 and exploiting the pointwise positivity of a one-dimensional cost function (see also Appendix A). There are however non-vanishing boundary terms along the bisectrix generated in the integration by parts, which provide an energy contribution necessary to recover the correction -E corr δ and which are entirely due to the discontinuity of the phase -iα 0 s ± -1 2 s ± t ± (and, in particular, to the jump of the coordinate s ± ) on the bisectrix. We denote for short by G the energy functional in (2.13), i.e., and by E Γ and ψ Γ its ground state energy and any corresponding minimizer for Ω = Γ, respectively (recall that Γ := Γ β (L, l)): where As anticipated, we combine suitable upper and lower bounds to the energy to obtain the main result. For the sake of simplicity, we are going to spell in full detail only the proof for opening angle π -δ, while the adaptation to the angle π + δ is discussed in § 4.3. 4.1. Energy upper bound. We first prove an upper bound for the energy E Γ . For any fixed 1 < b < Θ -1 0 , as l, L → +∞ and δ → 0, Proof. To prove the upper bound, we evaluate the energy of the trial state ψ trial ∈ D(Γ) given by (again with a little abuse of notation) ,θ) , in Γ ± γ . (4.4) Note that the trial state above satisfies the boundary conditions in D(Γ) and, moreover, ψ trial may be extended outside Γ expanding the domain of tubular coordinates. We start by working in the region Γ + c : denoting by R + the rectangle obtained by completing Γ + c , i.e., Using that the boundary coordinates (s + , t + ) coincide with the cartesian ones in R (recall (3.10)) and the identity where we have denoted by ês and êt the unit vector in the tangential and normal directions, respectively, an easy calculation shows that (see, e.g., [CG2, §3.1]) where we recall that E 1D 0 (l) is the ground state energy of the 1D effective model in the interval [0, l] introduced in (2.14). On the other hand, we compute in where we chose γ in such a way that δ = O(γ). (4.9) Note also that the integral on the r.h.s. can be easily seen to be O(1) by exploiting the decay properties of f 0 (see (A.10)) and the uniform boundedness of α 0 (see Appendix A). Let us now consider the region Γ - c : using the inverse transformation of (3.11) together with the cartesian coordinate representation of the unit vectors ês = (cos δ, -sin δ), êt = (sin δ, cos δ), we compute and combining this with the analogous result for Γ + c , we conclude that It remains to compute the energy contribution in the two regions Γ ± γ close to the bisectrix. There it is more convenient to work in polar coordinates. Since we obtain where we have omitted for short the dependence of f 0 and ψ trial on ̺ and θ. Furthermore, we have under the assumption δ = O(γ), so that (again by the decay (A.10) of f 0 ) We now estimate the angular component of the kinetic energy in Γ + c : 1 )+O(̺γ 2 ), (4.17) we find We can now apply the estimates proven in Lemma A.1, to get 19) where we have also exploited the fact that θ > -θ < = γ. Now, we can approximate the integration domain as follows: let F (̺) be a function enjoying the same decay properties as f 0 or f ′ 0 , then where we have denoted by (̺(θ), θ), θ ∈ [θ < , θ > ], the polar coordinates of points belonging to the inner boundary of the region Γ + γ ∪ Γ - γ (note that ̺(θ) l for any θ). Hence, The estimate of the energy contribution from Γ - γ is perfectly analogous and we obtain Combining this with (4.13), we finally get and, optimizing over γ, i.e., choosing γ = δ 2/3 , we conclude that 4.2. Energy Lower Bound. We now prove the lower bound corresponding to the upper bound proved in Proposition 4.1. Proposition 4.2 (Energy lower bound). For any fixed 1 < b < Θ -1 0 , as l, L → +∞ and δ → 0, The starting point of the lower bound proof is a suitable energy splitting, which is somewhat customary in the study of the GL and related functionals. For any fixed 1 < b < Θ -1 0 , let the function u Then, as l, L → +∞ and δ → 0, where we have used the compact notation and the current j[u] defined as in (1.2). Proof. Let us consider first Γ + : by (4.26), dropping the label + on u for short, Using (4.6), we get Acting as in where n+ is the outward normal unit vector along ∂Γ + . The boundary of Γ + is composed of four segments but Therefore, the boundary term above reduces to the one computed over the remaining portion of ∂Γ + , i.e., the bisectrix of the region Γ, that we denote by ∂Γ bis . Hence, we obtain which, via the variational equations for f 0 , leads to Reproducing the computation in Γ -and using (4.10) and (4.11) there, we end up with a similar expression, but, since n-= -n + , the two boundary terms cancel out, since |u and it just remains to compute the first term on the r.h.s.. Actually, such a computation has already been done in the upper bound proof, therefore we only sketch it: where we have computed and estimated (see (4.8)) After the splitting, we have almost isolated in (4.27) the energy to extract from the lower bound. Indeed, the reduced energy E 0 [u] turns out to be positive on a rectangle, as a consequence of the pointwise positivity of the cost function K 0,l (see (A.13)). There is however an additional unexpected term of order δ (the third one on the r.h.s. of (4.27)), which must cancel out in order to recover the correct energy. This is precisely the point where the phase discontinuity described in § 3 comes into play: the region Γ is indeed obtained by gluing together two almost rectangular regions Γ ± and E 0 [u] is positive on it up to some boundary terms on the bisectrix, which exactly cancel the unwanted term in (4.27). Proposition 4.4 (Lower bound on the reduced energy). Under the same assumptions of Proposition 4.3, Proof. The idea of the proof goes back to the works on Bose-Einstein condensates (see, e.g., As anticipated, however, the shape of the domain Γ = Γ + ∪Γ -is responsible for the emergence of some boundary terms along the bisectrix, which are actually crucial to recover the first term on the r.h.s. of (4.34). Recalling the definition (A.14) of F 0 , we write, -2 where τ± are the unit tangential vectors to ∂Γ ± . We first consider the first term on the r.h.s above: since where we have used the pointwise positivity of K 0,l in Il (see (A.15)) and the exponential decay of ∇ψ Γ , ψ Γ , f 0 and f ′ 0 provided by (3.6), (3.7), (A.10) and (A.12) to estimate the rest: by (A.17), Concerning the boundary term in (4.37), the vanishing of F 0 at t = 0 and t = l together with the vanishing of the t-current of u at the boundary ∂Γ bd , thanks to the boundary conditions satisfied by ψ Γ , imply that the only boundary terms surviving are the ones along ∂Γ bis . Exploiting the definitions of u ± in (4.26), which yield τ+ and the trivial identities cos θ bis = sin δ/2, cos(θ bis + δ) = -sin δ/2, we obtain Hence, the boundary terms in (4.35) become (since cos δ/2 = 1 + O(δ 2 )) By (A.17) and the decay of ψ Γ in (3.7), we can get rid of the prefactor 1 + O(δ 3 ) up to an error of order δ 3 . Furthermore, the smoothness of F 0 , the bound (A.17), the decay of f 0 in (A.10) and a direct integration by parts yield and plugging this into (4.37), we find Therefore, it just remains to bound from below the third term on the r.h.s. of (4.43). Let us consider only the contribution of u + , since the other is perfectly analogous: let χ be a smooth function such that χ = 1 on ∂Γ bis and which vanishes on a line parallel to ∂Γ bis and passing through (γ, 0) for some γ > 0 to be chosen later. Concretely, we may take a function χ(s) equal to 1 for s = t sin δ/2 and vanishing at s = t sin δ/2 + γ. Moreover, we may assume that |χ ′ (s)| Cγ -1 and We now estimate the two terms on the r.h.s. separately: acting as in the proof of Lemma A.2 and using once more (A.17), we estimate, for any a, d > 0, after an optimization over γ, i.e, taking γ = δ 2/3 | log δ| 2 . Hence, we can use the second term on the r.h.s. of (4.43) to compensate for the negative contribution on the l.h.s. above, to obtain the result. 4.3. Completion of the proofs. We are now in position to complete the proofs of our mains results. Proof. Proof of Theorem 2.3 For corner angle π -δ, the result is obtained via a straightforward combination of Proposition 4.1, Proposition 4.2 and (2.13). Let us then comment on the adaptations needed for opening angle π + δ. The strategy of the proof is indeed the same. In particular, in the upper bound, one has to split the region Γ into the subregions Γ ± c , Γ ± γ as before, with γ ≪ δ, and use the same trial state as in (4.4). The outcome is the same estimate as in (4.3) with an opposite sign in front of δ, which is due to the fact that in this case R ± ⊂ Γ ± . The lower bound, on the other hand, is proven in exactly the same way and, in particular, the phase singularity along ∂Γ bis appears as well. It just remains to address Corollary 2.1: Proof of Corollary 2.1. The result is a direct consequence of Gauss-Bonnet theorem for piecewise smooth domains combined with the energy asymptotics proved in Theorem 2.2 and Theorem 2.3. In fact, by Gauss-Bonnet, one gets where we have replaced l/ sin θ and l/ sin(θ + δ) with l in the integration up to a small error O(l -∞ ). We now estimate the second term in (A.21). Let us consider only Γ + γ since the estimate in Γ - γ is identical: for any d ∈ (0, l) On the other hand, the second term on the r.h.s. of (A.23) decays exponentially in d: by the exponential decay of f 0 in (A.10) and the fact that sin θ = 1 + O(γ 2 ) > 0, we deduce that -Cγe -1 2 d 2 , (A.24) which completes the proof after an optimization over d. We denote by C a positive finite constant, whose value may change from line to line.