Theoretical studies have shown that new physical properties such as tunable gap opening or quantum spin Hall effect could be expected from group IV graphene analogues (silicene, germanene, stanene). While there have been numerous studies of growth of such Si, Ge, Sn monolayers, the demonstration of their hexagonal organization has been often based on postgrowth characterization and their analogy to graphene has remained controversial. Our realtime scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) observation during Ge deposition on Ag(111) in the [380 K -430 K] temperature range reveals that Ag atoms are involved in all the structures observed before the formation of a second layer, rejecting the possible formation of germanene on this substrate within these experimental conditions. The observation by STM of Ge atomic diffusion shows that easy exchange between Ag and Ge atoms is responsible for the Ge-Ag surface alloying at such temperatures. Germanene, the two-dimensional allotrope of germanium, has been widely studied in the last decade, since initial works based on density functional theory (DFT) However, some of these results have been recently questioned. On HOPG, it has been shown that the corrugation observed after Ge deposition was due to a charge density wave, and not to germanene The case of germanene growth on Ag(111) is also controversial: some authors describe the result of depositing Ge on Ag(111) as an alloy, while others claim there is formation of a germanene single layer. In the following, the germanium coverage Ge  is given with respect to the atomic density of a Ag(111) plane; the coverage needed for a germanene monolayer (ML) is then 06 . 1 Ge   ML, assuming a germanene lattice constant of 0.397 nm ), but no contrast associated with this structure could be evidenced in the scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) images, which showed a   1 1 structure, similar to the one of bare Ag(111) surface Brillouin zone (SBZ) corresponding to satellite spots around the initial spots of the   reconstruction, and to a striped pattern in the STM images due to a long range modulation phases alternate In contradiction with these reports, some studies have concluded to the formation of germanene after Ge deposition on Ag(111). A STM and LEED study questioned the alloy model for the reconstruction striped phase for deposition at 423 K, but for a coverage of 0.74 ML, which was interpreted as germanene with a large tensile strain of 12% to 23 % as a function of the direction Other studies proposed alternative structures for deposits above 1/3 ML. At 300K, the early works indicated that the    , that has been associated with a coverage of 16 Ge atoms (for 14 Ag surface sites), forming 4 tetramers To summarize, similar results obtained by the same techniques have been differently interpreted. The   3 6 3  striped phase has been obtained either for 1/3 ML or for 0.74 ML, and interpreted either as a substitutional Ag2Ge alloy, or as a very highly strained honeycomb germanene layer. For increasing Ge amounts, different structures, either well or badly ordered, have been also interpreted as germanene layers, but with different amounts of Ge related to compressive or tensile strains, or without strain. The contradictions between these STM results show that they suffer from a lack of real-time observation of the surface, performed at the growth temperature and during the growth. This investigation should indeed permit to distinguish the processes in play and to determine the nature of the different Ge/Ag(111) structures, in relation with the amount of Ge. Such studies have previously been shown to be powerful for following the growth of Si layers on Ag(110) and on Ag(111) reconstruction is a Ag2Ge surface alloy, and that the disordered hexagonal structure also corresponds to a surface alloy, with a larger proportion of Ge atoms. Sample preparation and STM experiments have been performed in an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) system with a base pressure less than 1×10 -10 mbar equipped with an Omicron variable temperature STM. The Ag(111) single crystal was prepared by several cycles of Ar ion sputtering (  P 7×10 -5 mbar, 600 eV) and annealing (  T 870 K). Germanium was evaporated from a graphite crucible using an Omicron Nanotechnology e-beam evaporator installed in front of the STM with a very low flux  F 0.1 ML/h. All coverages have been calibrated using the completion of the striped phase as a reference, set to a coverage of 1/3 ML. STM imaging was performed in real-time during Ge evaporation, with a substrate held at a fixed temperature in the [380 K -430 K] range. The pressure was always below 1×10 -10 mbar during the experiments. Depending on the tip shape, small or large shadowing effects can occur during deposition. Indeed, as the STM tip remains very close to the surface (a few Å), the area located behind the tip with respect to the direction of the incoming flux is not covered by Ge atoms. However, as the tip moves over the surface while scanning, the shadow also moves, which gives rise to local inhomogeneities on the surface. In order to check that the growth is not influenced by the tip, we have performed experiments for which the tip was removed during evaporation, in order to avoid shadowing effects. For all cases, comparison between images of the same area performed at different times have been made by carefully correcting the STM images from the drift using a home-made procedure Fig. Whereas before Ge deposition, atomic steps display only small fluctuations, during deposition, the step edges are mobile and move towards the right part of the image, i.e. toward the descending direction, forming outgrowths on the inferior terraces, as shown by the white arrows in Fig. In the present case, the situation is different. In Fig. Fig. They have been shown to correspond to Ge atoms in substitutional position As deposition time increases, this dilute Ge phase becomes denser, Ge atoms form denser areas separated by nearly pure Ag regions, with a characteristic length of 2-3 nm (Fig. A first order transition occurs for a coverage of ~0.11 ML, where twig-like dendrites form on the surface, as shown in Fig. while the lighter areas in their vicinity have a   1 1 structure. This is clearly visible in Fig. Finally, local patches of a disordered-hexagonal (DH) reconstruction form. They start to grow at step edges, as already reported For higher coverage, a second layer starts to form above the disordered hexagonal layer, as already reported. In order to determine the fraction of Ag atoms in the observed structures, we have precisely measured the advance of Ag step edges, which corresponds to the quantity of Ag atoms that are expelled by Ge atoms during the deposition. The Ag concentration in the observed structures is thus the complement of the concentration of expelled Ag atoms ( structure obtained for 1/3 ML. Concerning the DH structure, the extrapolation of the data presented in Fig. In the temperature range of our experiments, the inserted Ge atoms that are observed for very low coverage (i.e 001 . 0 Ge   ML) are quite mobile. At 380 K, we observe that more than half of the Ge atoms have moved, from one atomic site to another, during the time interval of 13 min between two consecutive images (see Fig. We have also excluded Ge displacements higher than Several atomistic mechanisms may be involved in surface diffusion of atomic species On the contrary, if the vacancy remains in the neighborhood of the inserted atom, long correlated jumps may occur. This is generally the case for large atoms inserted in a surface, as In in Cu(100), where the atom-vacancy interaction is attractive since the presence of the vacancy reduces the compressive stress associated with the insertion of the foreign atom. In this case, periods of long jumps, when the vacancy remains close to the inserted atom, are separated by periods where the inserted atoms keep still. In the present case, the atomic radius of Ge is smaller than the one of Ag, so we expect a repulsive interaction between an inserted Ge atom and a vacancy, which makes the vacancy-assisted diffusion mechanism improbable. The second mechanism of diffusion involves a three-step process: exchange between an Ag adatom and a Ge inserted atom, diffusion of the Ge atom on the surface and reinsertion through exchange with a surface Ag atom. It has been for example shown to describe the diffusion mechanism of Pb/Cu(110) , whereas the difference in activation energy between atomic jumps on the surface and reinsertion determines the average length of a diffusion event. We note for which the difference in activation energy between atomic jump and exchange was shown to be 0.17eV For an attempt frequency 3    s -1 and no atomic motion can be observed at the timescale of the experiment. On the contrary, at 415 K, we derive 03 . 0 dis   s -1 . We have followed the diffusion at this temperature on images scanned with the up and down mode, with a scan speed of 0.75s/line. On the very top of the images, where similar lines on two consecutive images are scanned with a small time interval, some atoms are observed at the same position (Fig S8d-e In summary, we have followed by real-time STM the evolution of the successive structures formed on Ag(111) upon Ge deposition in the [380 K -430 K] temperature range. Our results show that Ge atoms easily exchange with Ag atoms to form various Ag-Ge surface alloys. For 1/3 ML, the substitutional Ag2Ge alloy forming a striped phase is observed. For a coverage of 0.6 ML, the disordered hexagonal structure is obtained, which is also interpreted as an alloy with a larger proportion of Ge atoms. No structure was found compatible with a germanene layer. The quantitative analysis of diffusion of isolated Ge atoms shows that atoms move in a three-step process: exchange between an Ag adatom and a Ge inserted atom, diffusion on the surface of the Ge atom and reinsertion through exchange with a surface Ag atom. The activation energy for Ge/Ag exchange is small, which leads to a high mobility of Ge atoms in the [380 K -430 K] temperature range studied. Single atom trajectories were computed using a Monte-Carlo program based on the Metropolis rejection algorithm. Two models were tested. In the first one, Ge atoms diffuse in the surface plane into vacant sites. Ag vacancies are treated in a mean-field approach and the probability that one of the six nearest neighbour sites is vacant is proportional to In the second one, the considered diffusion events were atom disinsertion, jumps and Tunneling conditions : Evolution of the Ag(111) surface during Ge deposition at 380K. Movie length: 7h25min. Size of the images: 500 × 500nm 2 .