From soda cans to space rockets, thin-walled cylindrical shells are abundant, offering exceptional load carrying capacity at relatively low weight. However, the actual load at which any shell buckles and collapses is very sensitive to imperceptible defects and can not be predicted, which challenges the reliable design of such structures. Consequently, probabilistic descriptions in terms of empirical design rules are used and reliable design requires to be very conservative. We introduce a nonlinear description where finite-amplitude perturbations trigger buckling. Drawing from the analogy between imperfect shells which buckle and imperfect pipe flow which becomes turbulent, we experimentally show that lateral probing of cylindrical shells reveals their strength non-destructively. A new ridge-tracking method is applied to commercial cylinders with a hole showing that when the location where buckling is nucleated is known we can accurately predict the buckling load of each individual shell, within ±5%. Our study provides a new promising framework to understand shell buckling, and more generally, imperfection-sensitive instabilities. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.125.225504 Compress an empty soda can from its top and it will remain stable over a considerable range of loads. However, at a critical load, the can eventually buckles, violently collapses, and irreversibly deforms. A classical linear stability analysis greatly overestimates the buckling load of thin cylinder shells and domes Classical theory mostly cannot capture the influence of defects and thus, in general dramatically overestimates the carrying-load of engineered shells, infamously affecting structural reliability Any sound prediction of the knock-down factor of a specific manufactured shell currently requires complete knowledge of the shell's imperfections. A full characterization of imperfections is extremely challenging Characterizing defect-sensitivity as observed in shell buckling is notoriously difficult because in any experi-mental setup a multitude of details need to be controlled practically perfectly. Notably, a similarly challenging situation arose in fluid mechanics, where the concepts of finite-amplitude perturbations in combination with very careful experiments lead to a complete rethinking of the transition from laminar flow to turbulence in pipe flows The challenging problem of the transition to turbulence is tackled within a nonlinear framework by considering the response of a perfect system, an ideal pipe, to a jet perturbation of finite-amplitude, A jet , that can trigger turbulence Inspired by the hydrodynamic analogy, we recently developed an experimental and theoretical framework In contrast to previous work, in our approach the poker-induced deformation is not interpreted as a defect; instead, the poker is a probe exploring the system's nonlinear response to finite-amplitude perturbations. By measuring the poker force applied on the shell F P as a function of displacement, D P , we recently quantified the critical perturbations that triggers buckling for varying axial loads F A . Mapping out the conditions under which buckling occurs, we identified a universal stability landscape for cylindrical shells, represented as a surface in a (F A , F P , D P ) three-dimensional space The landscape, which can be probed experimentally, characterizes the stability of a shell, which, in the most general case, is dictated by the complex correlation structure of its many defects. The stability landscape features a valley, a lake and a ridge (as described in Drawing from the analogy between imperfect shells which buckle and imperfect pipe flow which become turbulent, we show that lateral probing of cylindrical shells can indeed reveal their strength. By examining the safe regions of the stability landscape and extrapolating to the critical conditions, we use lateral probing to nondestructively predict the strength of individual imperfect shells. We direct buckling nucleation, by intentionally introducing a guiding defect in the shell. Doing so, we show, as a proof of concept, that probing near this guiding defect yields an accurate estimate of the shell's buckling load. Our results show that when the guiding defect is identified, tracking the ridge and extrapolating to where it vanishes works extremely well and predicts the critical buckling load to within 5% precision. This result considerably surpasses the NASA design rule which estimates a lower bound for the distribution of nominally identical shells while we accurately predict the strength of individual shells. Ridge-tracking thereby allows for a deterministic rather than a probabilistic prediction, and thereby opens avenues towards new design and control strategies for thin shell structures. The experimental setup consists of a custom-made biaxial mechanical tester (ADMET, Inc.) described in detail previously Ridge-tracking requires systematically poking the sample under gradually-increasing axial loads without triggering buckling, as shown for a typical experiment in Fig. In total, 38 samples were tested, with initial loads ranging between F 0 A = 522 N to F 0 A = 694 N, and an average load increment of 23 N. One exceptionally fragile sample failed at the first loading, before being probed. Otherwise, samples sustained repeated loading cycles, their ridges follow a straight line in the plane (F A , F max p ), while converging towards a wide range of buckling loads, as shown for 5 examples in Fig. Intriguingly, the ridges are only straight when probing is done near the hole. Probing further away from it yields ridges that turn towards the buckling-load prediction, as shown in the inset to Fig. Overall, for the 38 samples tested, the ridge-tracking protocol accurately predicts the buckling load over a wide range of critical loads, from F buckling A = 761 N to F buckling A = 1108 N, as shown in Fig. The dynamical systems approach suggests an appealing conceptual framing for the cylinder buckling problem, illustrated schematically in Fig. States outside the basin of attraction will not return to the unbuckled state but lead to a nonlinear instability and trigger buckling. Separating deformations that trigger buckling from those that return to the unbuckled state is the basin boundary, a co-dimension one manifold in state-space defining the nonlinear stability threshold. As the axial load increases, the basin of attraction shrinks, until the basin boundary eventually reaches the unbuckled state, as shown in Fig. For a real shell with imperfections, we expect all statespace structures and specifically the basin boundary to be distorted compared to the perfect shell, as shown on Fig. Embedded in the basin boundary are unstable saddle points including localized single dimple deformations We suggest the stability landscape is composed of experimentally-accessible projections of the basin of attraction along one path of deformations in a direction corresponding to the single dimple deformations and at different axial loads. The stability landscape thus indicates how the basin of attraction, measured in the direction of the guiding imperfection shrinks under increasing axial load and at which load it vanishes. Probing the shell at one location, passing the ridge and reaching the lake, thus yields the distance between the unbuckled state and the basin boundary, as shown in Fig. The successful prediction of spontaneous buckling loads highlights the utility of transferring nonlinear concepts from the study of turbulence transition in subcritical shear flows to shell buckling. Treating buckling as a nonlinear instability triggered by finite-amplitude perturbations of a subcritically loaded shell rather than as linear instability problem, rationalizes the striking sensitivity to defects. Moreover, it provides avenues for predicting the strength of a shell in the presence of an unknown defect distribution. We have specifically shown that characterizing the load-dependent critical perturbation amplitude via ridge tracking can predict the strength of commercial mini-Coke cans. The method involves introducing an additional localized imperfection in the form of a hole and probing in the vicinity of it. Notably, introducing the hole does not determine the strength of the shell which still varies greatly. In fact the hole does not appear to weaken the can at all; thus, introducing holes does not trivialize the challenge of buckling-load prediction. We hypothesize that the additionally introduced imperfection guarantees that the unstable mode excited first will indeed be a local dimple buckle near the probing location. Under these conditions, the stability landscape provides the most relevant projection of the basin boundary. Without a priori knowledge of where buckling will initiate, ridge tracking will likely require to probe at numerous locations. The precise conditions under which the additional controlled defect aids probing yet not affects the strength of the shell itself remain to be investigated in detail. Interestingly, while the specific hole does not determine the strength of the can, it does seem to serve as a nucleus or lightning rod for the nucleation of buckling, forcing a specific initiation location and allowing ridge tracking to work. Introducing controlled defects and ridge tracking opens new and exciting approaches for probing and controlling the stability of thin shell structures.