We carry out molecular statics (MS) simulations to study the indentation process of Pt (111) surfaces using an indenter with the radius of 5-20 nm. The substrate and indenter surfaces are either bare or graphene-covered. Our simulations show that the influence of the adhesion between the bare substrate and indenter tip can be significantly reduced by decreasing the adhesion strength and adhesion range between the atoms on the substrate and indenter, or by enhancing the substrate stiffness. Our results suggest that the elastic response of the substrate exhibits weaker adhesion after the coating of graphene layers on either side of the contacting interface, which is attributed to the weak interaction between the graphene layers. Based on these principles obtained for the bare substrate, the nanoscale contact behavior of the substrate can be tuned into a near-ideal Hertzian state by increasing the number of graphene layers, applying prestrains to graphene on substrate, or using large indenters. Therefore, even for strong adhesion between tip, graphene, and substrate, mechanical properties of substrate can be determined by nanoindentation using graphene coverage. Our research provides theoretical guidance for designing adhesion-less coatings for AFM probes and MEMS/NEMS systems. Graphene (Gr) is a two-dimensional (2D) material made of a single layer of carbon atoms Most of the studies of friction and nanoindentation have focused on the lateral friction behaviors In this work, through molecular statics (MS) simulations, we show that the elastic contact behavior of a metallic substrate exhibits a high load bearing capacity as well as a near ideal Hertzian contact that can be achieved by coating graphene on either side of the contact interface (upper spherical or lower flat surfaces). We analyze the atomicscale microstructure in the contact region between the tip and bare substrate, and find that the adhesion can be mitigated by reducing the adhesion strength and adhesion range of the interaction between influence atoms on influence tip and influence substrate, or enhancing the stiffness of influence substrate surface. More specifically, the adhesion between the tip and graphene-coated substrate can be significantly reduced by increasing the covered graphene layers or applying pre-strains to the graphene monolayer, further regulating the elastic response and yielding a Hertz-type contact. Moreover, the regulation of the elastic contact behavior of a graphene-coated substrate can be enhanced by increasing the indenter size due to the reduction of the relative adhesive area on the indenter, particularly for high adhesion of the tip to the substrate. As demonstrated in previous studies The embedded atom method (EAM) potential We start with indenting the bare substrate and analyzing the force versus displacement curves from these simulations to study the effects of tip-substrate adhesion and substrate stiffness on the contact behavior. In this regard, Hertz theory predicts that the force P due to a displacement h on a sphere of radius R is given by, where the contact modulus E * = E/(1 -ν 2 ) for a rigid and isotropic substrate. To quantify the deviation from the Hertz prediction, the exponent N and contact modulus E * of a specific contact behavior is determined by fitting to P/(4E R * R 2 /3) = (E * /E R * ) (h/R) N extracted from the load-displacement curve, where E R * = 207GPa is the fitted elastic modulus when employing a purely repulsive interaction. Fig. The influence of the equilibrium distance is illustrated in Fig. The inset of Fig. GPa, fcc lattice structure), respectively. Fig. Therefore, there are three main factors affecting the adhesion, namely adhesion strength, adhesion range, and substrate stiffness that provide effective guidance for adhesion mitigation. Naturally, this gives rise to the question on how to minimize or even eliminate adhesion effects during nanoindentation. Recent studies We coat a monolayer of graphene onto the substrate and simulate the indentation process of a diamond tip contacting a Pt substrate (inset, Fig. The force-displacement curve for the strong adhesion case presents a strong deviation from the Hertz contact behavior (N = 1.27 and E * = 186GPa for black curve in Fig. To further regulate adhesive contact behaviors for the monolayer system in the strong adhesion case, we increase the thickness of the graphene coating to bilayer and trilayer (blue and red curves in Fig. Considering that in the above-mentioned strong Gr-Tip adhesion case where some of the graphene atoms tightly adhere to the tip and lead to a severe deviation of the contact behavior, we naturally propose a method to coat a graphene monolayer directly onto the tip rather than the substrate From the load-displacement curve (blue) in Fig. The graphene coating on the tip provides a separation for the tip-substrate adhesion but does not affect the loading force so that in this case, graphene can be viewed as a part of the nanoindenter. The small deviation from 1.50 can also be rationalized by the influence of the normal graphene-substrate adhesion because the adhering graphene can transmit the adhesion force to the tip. However, this adhesive deviation can be substantially eliminated by applying the monolayer graphene coating on each contact side because the interactions between the graphene layers are very weak (see MD snapshots in Fig. Based on these results, for strong Gr-Tip adhesion or strong Gr-Sub adhesion, the most effectual approach for monolayer graphene to diminish the adhesion effects is to apply graphene coverage to the strong-adhesion side, applying segregation to the adhesion effects. As confirmed by the simulations, in the case of strong adhesion for both graphene-tip and graphene-substrate interaction, increasing graphene layers can be an ideal method for modifying contact behavior, whereas the layer of graphene on the top layer can confine tip movement to a large extent. Nevertheless, we reveal that coating graphene on both contact sides can considerably improve the mitigation effect because the interaction between the graphene layers is quite weak. Furthermore, we must mention that the original principle of this method is similar to that in the application of graphene-coated microsphere in superlubricity reported by Liu et al. Since the facial contact stiffness of the substrate is associated with the flexibility of graphene To quantitatively describe the effect of in-plane strain during contact, the fitting exponent N and contact modulus E * are plotted versus the biaxial strain in Fig. As represented in Fig. Our conclusion corroborates the results of other studies obtained by FEA method calculations In conclusion, our research demonstrates that the graphene coverage will lose its contact modification effect in some usual cases (strong Gr-Tip adhesion and compressive prestrain of graphene), which is critical to applications. To solve this problem, we reveal that the elastic contact behavior of metallic substrate exhibits a near ideal Hertzian contact that is achieved by coating graphene layers on either side of the contact interface. This regulation effect can be explained by the high in-plane strength and low surface energy of graphene and originates from the modification of the interaction forces between the tip and the indented surface. For the bare substrate, the effect of adhesion on the nanoindentation can be significantly mitigated by reducing the amplitude and range of atomic interaction between the tip and substrate, or enhancing the substrate stiffness. This principle shows that the elastic contact behavior for specific indenter/substrate interaction can be regulated by increasing the number of coated graphene layers due to the weak interlayer interaction between the graphene layers. Furthermore, the elastic contact behavior closer to the Hertz prediction can be obtained by using a larger indenter or by applying pre-strains to graphene layers. Hence, graphene-covered nanoindentation is an effective approach to measure mechanical properties of substrate for any adhesion between tip, graphene, and substrate. Our study confirms some related experimental results reported by other researchers and provides theoretical guidance for the design of adhesion-less coatings for the AFM probes and MEMS/NEMS systems.