Highly stable ozone and hydrogen sensing elements were fabricated based on well-crystalline rounded cube-shaped CsPbBr3 submicron crystals, synthesized by a facile solution process performed under ambient conditions. It is shown that such elements demonstrate enhanced room temperature gas sensing ability compared to the previously reported metal halide and oxide-based ones. Electrical measurements performed οn these sensing components revealed high response to ultra-low ozone and hydrogen concentrations, namely 4 ppb and 5 ppm respectively, as well as an impressive repeatability of the sensing behavior even after a few months of storage in ambient conditions. Both ozone and hydrogen detecting sensors were self-powered, i.e. they do not require the use of UV or heating external stimuli, and exhibited fast detection and short restoration times. These attractive properties along with the simple synthesis conditions could provide an easy, efficient and low-cost potential technology for the realization of future gas sensing devices. KEYWORDS: all-inorganic lead halide perovskite crystals, solution process, ozone sensing, hydrogen sensing, high sensitivity, room temperature sensor The great demand to detect a broad range of combustible, toxic and explosive gases has led to a significant development of gas sensing technologies. Particularly, gas sensors exhibit a wide range of either commercial or industrial applications including air-quality monitoring, 1 public safety 2,3 and agriculture. 4 The diversity in gas sensing technologies arises from the variety of the developed materials which interact with target gases. several applications such as water disinfection On the contrary, hydrogen is the most abundant chemical element in the universe. At room temperature and atmospheric pressure, pure hydrogen exists as a diatomic gas in concentrations less than 1 ppm. Perovskites crystals have attracted the interest of the scientific community mainly as materials for energy conversion and storage. A precursor solution consisted of 0.4 mmoles PbBr2 (trace metals basis, 99.999%, Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.4 mmoles CsBr (anhydrous, 99.999%, Sigma-Aldrich) dissolved in 10 ml N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) (anhydrous, 99.8%, Alfa Aesar) was prepared by following an already published chemical protocol under the protective atmosphere of an argon-filled Glovebox (MBRAUN, UNILab). The surface morphology of CsPbBr3 crystals was characterized by using Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM, JEOL 7000) operating at 20 kV. The elemental analysis of the as prepared samples was estimated by Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy (EDS, INCA PentaFET-x3). The crystal structure was investigated by X-Ray Diffraction (XRD, Rigaku D/MAX2000H) in a 2θ = 5 to 70 o angle range with 0.01 o step and a 2 s step time, using a monochromatic CuKa radiation source. The absorbance spectrum of the CsPbBr3 crystals was measured by UV-Visible spectroscopy (Perkin Elmer Lambda 950 UV/Vis/NIR) in the wavelength range of 250 to 800 nm. The Micro-Photoluminescence (μ-PL) spectrum of CsPbBr3 crystals was investigated by a home-made set-up at room temperature, in a backscattering geometry with a Diode-Pumped Solid-State (DPSS) Laser Nd:YAG 473 nm as excitation source. The gas sensing measurements were performed at room temperature, in a home-made gas sensing chamber, which allowed the electrical characterization of the sensors in a controlled atmosphere. The gas sensing assembly consists of certified gas suppliers connected with mass flow controllers and a stainless chamber which was initially evacuated down to 10 -3 mbar. For the investigation of the ozone sensing capability of CsPbBr3 crystals, a commercial ozone analyzer (Thermo Electron Corporation, Model 49i) was used to supply and record well defined ozone concentrations which are inserted in the chamber with a 500 sccm (standard cm 3 /min) flow. Electrical current measurements as a function of time were carried out by an electrometer (Keithley 6517A) by applying a constant voltage of 1 V. The sensing process was initiated by exposing the sensor to ozone gas for 10 min, and then, the sensor's recovery was followed by replacing the ozone gas with synthetic air for 20 min. The sample was exposed to different ozone concentrations ranging from 2620 to 4 ppb. The hydrogen sensing capability of CsPbBr3 crystals were examined in the same set-up by uncoupling the synthetic air supplier and the ozone analyzer and connecting certified pure nitrogen and hydrogen gas sources. The sensing process was initiated by introducing hydrogen gas for 3.5 min. Subsequently, the sensor was recovered by introducing in the chamber pure nitrogen for 5 min. The sensing performance of the sample was studied under different H2 concentrations ranging from 100 to 1 ppm. During both experimental procedures the pressure in the chamber was kept constant and equal to 600 mbar. The sensitivity S of the sensors was calculated according to the equation S% = I max -I min I min × 100 , where Imax and Imin denote the maximum and minimum current values in the presence and absence of the test gas respectively. Ligand-free CsPbBr3 crystals were directly grown onto commercially available interdigitated electrodes under ambient conditions via a simple re-precipitation technique. The morphology of CsPbBr3 crystals can be well described as a cube with rounded edges (Figure The ozone sensing properties of CsPbBr3 RCs were evaluated via electrical measurements performed at room temperature. In a typical experiment, the sensor was first placed into a homemade gas-sensing set-up and a voltage of 1 V was applied. Τhe initial current value was almost equal to 3 μΑ that can attributed to the strong photoresponse of CsPbBr3 rounded cubes to the visible light, which can be also indicated by their sharp absorption band edge at 544 nm (Figure Despite the common demand in sensing technology to detect at the lowest possible response time, the sensor stability and repeatability are also crucial performance features that determine the quality of a sensor. To examine the repeatability of the fabricated sensors, we have performed four ozone/synthetic air exposure cycles, . In all such cycles the ozone concentration used was kept constant at 510 ppb. As presented in Figure Finally, the XRD spectra analysis revealed that the sensing RC retained their initial orthorhombic crystal structure (Figure The ability CsPbBr3 RC, to detect hydrogen was also investigated via electrical measurements at room temperature. In this case nitrogen gas has been used as a carrier for the sensor's recovery. The electrical response of the sensor as a function of time for all the hydrogen levels tested is depicted in Figure The short-term repeatability of the sensor was also investigated following a series of H2/N2 sensing cycles (Figure Hydrogen. Cesium lead halide crystals are known for their high tolerance towards defects. Comparing with current state-of-the-art semiconducting elements: A variety of different semiconducting materials have been suggested for the detection of ozone and hydrogen gases. Comparing the performance for ozone detection of our sensor with the latest studies, the CsPbBr3 rounded cubes (RC) exhibit the best performance among other semiconducting materials since this sensor is able to detect extremely low ozone concentration (4 ppb) at the highest reported sensitivity at room temperature working conditions (Figure Figure Highly-stable, ligand-free CsPbBr3 rounded cubes have been prepared via a facile solution-based method under ambient conditions. The direct growth of the crystals onto electrodes offers a simpler and cheaper process for perovskite-based elements with enhanced sensing properties. Initially, this method was used for the preparation of an ultrasensitive self-powered ozone sensor (operating without triggering by an external stimuli (UV or heating)) with remarkable stability over time. In addition, its significantly high sensitivity (13% at 4 ppb) compared to those reported in the literature, its excellent repeatability under high O3 concentrations and its quick response and restoration could lead to new opportunities in gas sensing technology. The enhanced sensitivity as well as the ease of the preparation method made CsPbBr3 rounded cubes a good candidate for the detection of other gases. Hence, they were also tested as a hydrogen sensing elements. In this case, the sensor was able to detect fast, extremely low hydrogen concentrations, with sensitivity ranging from 1.5% at 1 ppm H2 concentration to 94% at 100 ppm. Moreover, its detection limit is among the lowest reported compared to other metal halides and oxides at room-operating temperature, providing new opportunities in H2 sensing applications. Size distribution, XRD patterns, EDS, absorption and PL spectra, electrical characterization of CsPbBr3 well defined and rounded cubes under different ozone concentrations and comparison of different sensing elements. S1. Wolkenstein's model: This model relies on the interaction between the gas molecules and the semiconductor' surface. In particular, the exposure of rounded cubes to ambient air results to the adsorption of oxygen molecules onto their surfaces. Consequently, the oxygen molecules trap electrons from the perovskite's valence band leading to an increase of the hole concentration, and hence, to the formation of a conductive surface layer and a resistive core. 