My research is dedicated to the electronic properties of functional oxides. My activity specifically focuses on ferroelectric tunnel junctions in which an ultrathin layer of ferroelectric material is intercalated between two metallic electrodes. In these devices, polarization reversal induces large modifications of the tunnel resistance, leading to a non-destructive readout of the information. After a demonstration of the concept with scanning probe microscopy techniques, I have been exploring the properties of ferroelectric tunnel junctions with various ferroelectric materials (BaTiO 3 , BiFeO 3 , and PVDF). I showed that these devices possess attractive properties for applications as non-volatile binary memories. In addition, exploring the fact that polarization usually reverses by the nucleation and propagation of domains, I demonstrated a memristive behavior in the junctions associated to non-uniform configurations of ferroelectric domains. Such ferroelectric memristors can be used as artificial synapses in neuromorphic architectures. Coupled to magnetic electrodes, the resulting multiferroic tunnel junctions enable a non-volatile control of magnetism at the ferroelectric/electrode interface and of the spin-polarized current associated. Besides this main activity on tunnel devices, I explored the influence of ferroelectricity on magnetic orders and on the properties of functional oxides. Mon activité de recherche se focalise sur les propriétés électroniques d'oxydes fonctionnels. Ces travaux s'articulent notamment autour des jonctions tunnel ferroélectriques où une couche ultramince ferroélectrique est intercalée entre deux électrodes. Dans ces dispositifs, le renversement de la polarisation ferroélectrique induit de fortes modulations de la résistance tunnel, conduisant à une lecture non-destructive de l'information. Après une démonstration du concept par des techniques de microscopie de champ proche, j'ai exploré les propriétés de jonctions tunnel ferroélectriques à partir de différents systèmes ferroélectriques (BaTiO 3 , BiFeO 3 et PVDF) et montré que ces dispositifs possèdent des propriétés attractives pour des applications en tant que mémoires non-volatiles binaires. De plus, en exploitant le fait que la polarisation ferroélectrique se renverse par la nucléation et la propagation de domaines, j'ai montré un comportement memristif associé à des configurations non uniformes de polarisations. Ces memristors ferroélectriques peuvent être utilisés comme synapses artificielles au sein d'architectures neuromorphiques. Couplées à des électrodes magnétiques, ces jonctions tunnel multiferroïques permettent un contrôle non-volatile du magnétisme d'interface et du courant tunnel polarisé en spin associé. Hormis cette activité centrale sur les jonctions tunnel, j'ai exploré l'influence de la ferroélectricité sur les ordres magnétiques et les propriétés d'oxydes fonctionnels. Ferroelectric random access memories At the surface of a ferroelectric, polarization charges are usually present and, depending on their sign, will repel or attract electrons. This occurs over a short distance in the electrode beyond which the density of electrons resumes its normal value: the electrons near the interface screen the polarization charges. In the Thomas-Fermi theory, the screening length is a function of the electronic density of states at the Fermi level. For very good metals, the Thomas-Fermi screening length can be shorter than a tenth of nanometer. For semiconductors, it can reach tens of nanometers and screening is imperfect. However, as emphasized by In this section, we review the influence of ferroelectric polarization (P) on the transport properties of an ultrathin ferroelectric layer sandwiched between two metallic electrodes. As described in the previous section, the imperfect screening of polarization charges at the interface results in a distorted potential profile whose asymmetry and average height can depend on the polarization direction. This is the main mechanism producing tunnel electroresistance in FTJs.  ifl = 60, m* = 1, A ** = 10 6 Am -2 K -2 ,  1 = 0.08 nm,  2 = 0.055 nm,  1 = 8,  2 = 2,  1,2 = 1 eV. Adapted from Although this manuscript mainly deals with FTJs, direct tunneling is not the only possible electronic transport mechanism across ultrathin ferroelectric films. Experimentally, the frontier between these different transport mechanisms is hard to draw as it depends on various specific parameters (dielectric constants, screening lengths, interface barrier heights, effective mass). Nevertheless, specific signatures of each transport mechanism can be identified through the voltage and temperature dependences of the electronic current. For example, thermionic emission is a thermally-activated process that should in principle lead to strong variations with temperature; this is not the case for direct tunneling. The interplay between electronic transport and ferroelectricity is in reality much more complex than what can be inferred from classical electrostatic models based on polarization charge effects. As ferroelectrics are all piezoelectric, converse piezoelectric effects result in a modification of the ferroelectric thickness when a voltage is applied. The voltage dependence of this modulation is reversed when the ferroelectric polarization is switched. This influences the current across a ferroelectric when read at a large voltage In depth investigations on model systems have been performed by ab initio calculations for direct tunneling transport. The tunnel current is dependent on the product of interface transmission functions and on the decay rate of the evanescent states within the barrier (related to its complex band structure) Ferroelectric tunnel junctions for information storage and processing V. Garcia and M. Bibes NATURE COMMUNICATIONS 5, 4289 (2014) The concept of FTJs was proposed by Giant tunnel electroresistance for non-destructive readout of ferroelectric states V. Garcia, S. Fusil, K. In some cases, probing the piezoresponse through the top electrode is too problematic. This is the case of poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF)-based tunnel junctions, in which the ultrathin ferroelectric polymer is technically challenging to probe already without top electrodes. In such cases, we expect that the weak Van-der-Walls interactions at the interface between the polymer and the electrodes do not strongly a b 500 nm affect the ferroelectric switching fields. Ferroelectric coercive fields probed on the free surface of the ferroelectric polymer (Figure The realization of ferroelectric tunnel junctions necessitates the stabilization of ferroelectricity for films with thicknesses of few nanometers. Inspired the pioneering work of Choi et al. on the strain-induced improvement of ferroelectrics properties in thick BaTiO 3 films ( In a previous section, we demonstrated the correlation between ferroelectric and resistive switching in FTJs based on BaTiO 3 In the case of a ferroelectric tunnel barrier with homogeneous polarization state, we expect the tunnel transport to be independent of the junction size, unless discontinuities exist (either pinholes or conductive filaments). Previously-mentioned Co/BaTiO 3 /La 0.67 Sr O.33 MnO 3 tunnel junctions are always initially in a homogeneous upward polarization state (pointing toward the top electrode of Co). This corresponds to the junction resistance state being ON. Using C-AFM, we mapped FTJs with different diameters in order to get statistics on their transport properties (Figure In addition, low temperature AFM measurements show little variations of the transport characteristics from those obtained at room temperature (Figure large electric fields (associated with defect formation) to commute the resistance state. Therefore, there is a trade-off between large TER effects and reversible toggling between the ON and OFF states. So far, the best top electrode material is Co which gives TER greater than 10 4 and a good reproducibility of ON/OFF commutations Engineering ferroelectric tunnel junctions through potential profile shaping S. Boyn, V. Although experimental evidence suggests that TER is undoubtedly associated with ferroelectric polarization switching During the PhD of Bobo Tian in collaboration with Brahim Dkhil (Ecole Centrale-Supélec), we investigated the transport properties of FTJs based on ultrathin films of PVDF deposited layer-by-layer (one layer (L) is 2.2 nm thick) by the Langmuir-Blodgett technique. We fabricated nanoscale junctions by patterning the bottom electrode of W into 190-nm-wide pillars isolated by a SiO 2 matrix prior to the deposition of the PVDF barrier and then deposited and patterned Au top electrodes with evaporation and photolithography. From current-voltage (I-V) transport experiments with a dc voltage, we observed hysteresis with associated TER of 3 and 10 for films with thicknesses of 1 L and 2 Ls, respectively (Figure In order to gain more insight into the interplay between polarization and tunneling, we performed I-V measurements in the low voltage range for both polarization orientations. The results are displayed for four typical junctions in Figure Over recent years, solid-state FTJs with various ferroelectrics such as BaTiO 3 Previously mentioned Co/BaTiO 3 /La 0.67 Sr O.33 MnO 3 tunnel junctions show large OFF/ON ratios (Figure A single voltage pulse is necessary to commute the resistance state of the FTJ between ON and OFF states and it requires low write current densities (10 4 A/cm 2 ) since the driving force for resistive switching is the electric field Among the 50 FTJs on the sample, 10% are either short-circuited or unswitchable. We obtain a high yield of working devices where 86% show OFF/ON ratios greater than 100 and 64% greater than 1000. The virgin state is a high resistance state as previously observed for FTJs contacted by conductive AFM tips. The ON state resistance is reached by successive 100 ns voltage pulses down to 2 V (Figure Endurance in FTJs has only been demonstrated up to a few 10 3 cycles destabilizes the ON state. A possible means of slowing down the migration of oxygen vacancies and therefore enhancing this result is doping BiFeO 3 by La or Nb to reduce their mobility When used as a digital memory, good retention properties of FTJs are crucial. Prior to the measurements on fully patterned FTJs, we performed retention experiments on an array of four 180-nm-wide FTJs contacted by the AFM tip. All the devices were switched to different (ON, intermediates and OFF) resistance states and imaged with PFM (Figure The intermediate resistance states are less stable and tend to relax toward higher resistances (Figure High-performance ferroelectric memory based on fully patterned tunnel junctions S. Boyn, S. Girod, V. FTJs are promising to be used as memristors in neuromorphic architectures and as non-volatile memory elements. For both applications device scalability is essential, which requires a clear understanding of the relationship between polarization reversal and resistance change as junction size shrinks. In this context, we initially demonstrated switching down to diameters of 70 nm in ultrathin films of BaTiO 3 During the PhD of Sören Boyn, we investigated the properties of Co/BiFeO 3 /Ca 0.96 Ce 0.04 MnO 3 FTJs with diameters ranging from 180 nm to 1200 nm. Figure In general, one would not expect the TER to depend on the lateral size of the junctions. Indeed, the resistance-area product of a junction in a homogeneous state of polarization should be constant if tunnel transport is involved. Figure In the ON resistance state however, the resistance-area product increases as the junction diameter increases (Figure In the initial state of 180-nm-wide junctions (OFF resistance, downward polarization, Figure The electric-field simulations thus demonstrate the influence of the electrode resistance on the efficiency of polarization switching in FTJs; this series resistance may impede the full reversal of polarization, limiting the TER. Owing to the stronger electric field at the edges, resorting to junction geometries with high perimeter-to-area ratios can improve the switching. We demonstrated that junctions with donut shapes show more efficient switching for similar areas. In contrast to thick insulating ferroelectric capacitors, the actual electric field across the ferroelectric tunnel barrier evolves dynamically with the domain population, resulting in a complex dynamic behavior. Our results indicate that FTJs are scalable and suggest that specific junction shapes facilitate complete polarization reversal. 3.6 A ferroelectric memristor for neuromorphic computing FTJs have potential applications as binary non-volatile memories, taking advantage of the nondestructive readout of polarization and simpler device architecture than conventional FeRAMs. Another degree of freedom is the ferroelectric domain structure of the tunnel barrier that can be exploited for analog devices such as memristors where S represents the normalized fraction of domains with downward polarization ( , for downward polarization and ; for upward polarization and ). Besides, in Co/BaTiO Later on, our experiments with 180-nm-wide Co/BiFeO 3 /Ca 0.96 Ce0 .04 MnO 3 tunnel junctions showed that the resistance variation of the junctions was correlated to the switching of polarization through images of ferroelectric domains (Figure A ferroelectric memristor A. Chanthbouala, V. Modeling the ferroelectric memristor response to arbitrary voltage waveforms in artificial neural networks requires understanding the physical process underlying the time-dependent evolution of the FTJ resistance with voltage pulses. For this purpose, we image the pseudo real-time evolution of ferroelectric domains in Co/BiFeO 3 /Ca 0.96 Ce 0.04 MnO 3 FTJs by stroboscopic PFM (100) while simultaneously measuring the electrical properties of the devices. Figure In collaboration with the group of Laurent Bellaiche (Univ. Arkansas), we complemented these experiments by effective-Hamiltonian-based atomistic molecular dynamics (MD) simulations on defectfree supertetragonal films of BiFeO 3 (104). These computations also yield an inhomogeneous character for polarization switching, therefore implying that this process is intrinsic in nature: one does not require the presence of defects to obtain an inhomogeneous switching in supertetragonal BiFeO 3 . Such findings contrast with the case of bulk-like BiFeO 3 (rhombohedral phase) for which a homogeneous switching was recently predicted (105). In the rhombohedral phase, the large antiferrodistortive (AFD) tilts of oxygen octahedra provide a specific homogeneous path for polarization reversal. The computation results reveal that, while the AFD tilts are initially close to zero in the supertetragonal phase of BiFeO 3 , regions with small polarization during polarization switching favor the emergence of significant AFD tilts. The supertetragonal phase can therefore develop an inhomogeneous AFD pattern during the switching, unlike the rhombohedral phase, explaining the possibility for inhomogeneous switching of polarization. We extract the normalized reversed area S from the phase images and plot it as a function of the cumulated pulse duration in Figure , where the index relates to the sign of the applied voltage. Fits obtained with this expression accurately reproduce the experimental data of ferroelectric domain dynamics probed by tunneling (black lines in Figure Figure Cortical information flows from neuron to neuron through synapses of variable connection strength. The overall distribution of the synaptic strengths provides the neural network with memory. Learning is achieved through the ability of synapses to reconfigure the strength by which they connect neurons (synaptic plasticity) (110). Several mechanisms regulating the evolution of the synaptic strengths have been proposed The implementation of STDP in artificial neural networks thus emerges as a crucial milestone toward the realization of self-adaptive electronic architectures. An electronic equivalent of the synapse for artificial neural networks is the memristor ( When both pre-and post-neuron spikes reach the memristor with a delay , their superposition produces the waveforms ( ) displayed in the inset of Figure Because of the direct relationship between S and R in these devices, the accurate description of ferroelectric switching by the nucleation-limited model (previous section) can be further extended to the modeling of resistance changes as a function of voltage amplitude. Figure The full description for each memristor device makes it possible to predict the conductance changes driving STDP learning in ferroelectric synapses. In Figure We now use our understanding of ferroelectric domain dynamics in FTJs, and the subsequent modeling of STDP in the devices, to simulate unsupervised learning in spiking neural networks with ferroelectric synapses. These simulations serve a test bench to investigate the influence of the STDP curve shape on the ability of the network to recognize patterns in images (e.g., the horizontal, diagonal, and vertical bars labeled A, B, and C, in the inset of Figure The simulated network is built around a crossbar of 9 × 5 ferroelectric memristors (Figure After learning (corresponding to 200 input image presentations), three of the output neurons have specialized to each of the three input patterns and systematically fire when the corresponding input is presented (Figure Coupling ferroelectrics with magnetic materials may enable a control of magnetism by an electric field. Interfacial magnetoelectric effects have aroused large interest over the past few years (131). Significant changes of the magnetic properties at the ferroelectric/metal interface can appear due to screening effects (132-135), changes of the interface bonding (136-139) and changes of the interfacial magnetocrystalline anisotropy (140). The reversible electric field created by the ferroelectric is predicted to induce interesting features such as (i) a modification of the magnetization of an adjacent ferromagnet (132, 141), (ii) the stabilization of ferromagnetism in a paramagnetic metal ( In spintronics, a key building block is the magnetic tunnel junction where two ferromagnetic electrodes sandwich an ultrathin layer of dielectric ( All the above-mentioned experiments of ferroelectric control of spin-polarization use at least one ferromagnetic electrode of La 0.67 Sr 0.33 MnO 3 , thereby limiting the experiments to operation below room temperature (150). Moreover, thermally-activated inelastic tunneling processes through defects in the ferroelectric tunnel barrier can limit both TER and TMR at higher temperature Ferroelectric control of spin-polarization V. Garcia, M. Bibes, L. During the post-doc of Daniel Sando, we investigated the optical properties of BiFeO 3 thin films. According to previous studies, epitaxial thin films of BiFeO 3 can be deposited on a variety of substrates imposing a wide range of biaxial strain varying from -3% to 1%. This strain mainly influences the critical temperature for the ferroelectric state and lowers it toward the Néel temperature that is virtually not sensitive to strain (153). In addition, strain induces a destabilization of the spin cycloid existing in bulk BiFeO 3 and leads to a pure antiferromagnetic state (154). Here we apply epitaxial strain engineering to tune the optical response of BiFeO 3 thin films. Ellipsometry measurements show a decrease of the refractive index with epitaxial strain in the wavelength window of 500 to 800 nm. These results indicate a large elasto-optic coefficient for BiFeO 3 , greater than most of the materials used in commercial modulators. The increase of compressive strain leads to the stabilization of the super-tetragonal phase of BiFeO 3 (T-phase) over the bulk-like pseudo-rhombohedral phase (R-phase). These two phases show significant differences in optical absorption with a 0.3 eV larger optical bandgap for the T-phase than for the R-phase. Within the collaboration with the group of Laurent Bellaiche, we explained these differences by a modification of the electronic configurations between the two phases related to a change in coordination. For specific growth conditions on LaAlO 3 substrates, it is possible to stabilize an ordered structure in which the two phases coexist with a peculiar topography associated (Figure During the PhD of Ryan Chérifi, we explored the combination of FeRh, which undergoes a first order antiferromagnetic-ferromagnetic transition near room temperature, with a ferroelectric material. The ferroelectricity of BaTiO 3 substrates was used to modify the metamagnetic transition of epitaxial thin films of FeRh, thus toggling electrically between the antiferromagnetic and magnetic states slightly above room temperature (Figure Nearly 90% of known magnetic substances have dominant antiferromagnetic interactions, resulting in no or very small magnetization, and most are insulators (159). This strongly complicates their investigation, especially when the magnetic order needs to be mapped at the nanoscale. While magnetic force microscopy (160) or X-ray photoemission electron microscopy (161, 162) can reach a spatial resolution of a few tens of nm, their sensitivities are not compatible with the detection of weak magnetic signals commonly involved in antiferromagnets. Spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy can resolve the magnetic moments of single atoms (163, 164) but is only applicable to conductive systems. Therefore, the nanoscale spin texture cannot be directly imaged in the vast majority of magnetic materials. This is increasingly problematic since magnetic materials with complex antiferromagnetic orders show very appealing functionalities (165-171), which are absent in ferromagnets, and could be exploited to develop a new generation of low-power spintronic devices (172). For instance, BiFeO 3 (173), in which antiferromagnetism and ferroelectricity coexist with high ordering temperatures, appears as a unique platform for spintronic (168) and magnonic devices (174). However, while the nanoscale structure of its ferroelectric domains has been widely investigated with PFM, revealing unique domain structures and domain wall functionalities The corresponding magnetic structure of the BiFeO 3 thin film was investigated through stray field measurements using a scanning nano-magnetometer based on a single NV defect in diamond (181-183), in collaboration with the group of Vincent Jacques (Univ. Montpellier). This point-like impurity can be exploited for quantitative magnetic-field imaging at the nanoscale by recording Zeeman shifts of its electronic spin sublevels through optical detection of the electron spin resonance (ESR). In this study, a single NV defect located at the apex of a nanopillar of a diamond scanning probe is integrated into an AFM, which allows scanning the NV defect in close proximity to the sample To gain further insights into the properties of the spin cycloid in this 32-nm-thick film of BiFeO 3 , PFM was used to design a single ferroelectric domain (Figure After demonstrating that the polarization and the cycloid propagation direction are intimately linked, we electrically manipulated this cycloid using the magnetoelectric coupling by defining another ferroelectric domain with an in-plane component of the polarization rotated by 90° ( ). The magnetic image shows that the propagation direction of the spin cycloid is also rotated by 90° with a very similar wavelength ( = 71.4  1.4 nm), corresponding to the propagation direction lying again in the (001) plane. These experiments illustrate how magnetoelectric coupling can be used to efficiently control and manipulate the antiferromagnetic order in a BiFeO 3 thin film. They also confirm that the abrupt rotations of the antiferromagnetic order observed in Figure We performed an analytical calculation of the stray field produced above the BiFeO 3 sample in which m DM is the only free parameter. The fit of the experimental data (Figure In summary, we report the first real-space imaging and electric-field control of the cycloidal antiferromagnetic order in a BiFeO 3 thin film using a scanning NV magnetometer operating under ambient conditions. These results open new perspectives for unraveling intriguing phenomena occurring in multiferroic materials like BiFeO 3 , from magnetoelectric coupling (168), peculiar properties induced by surface symmetry breaking, to conduction and magnetotransport properties at ferroelectric domain walls Controlling strongly-correlated electronic states and inducing metal/insulator transitions by electric-field effect is the key objective of Mott-tronics. Conceptualized by In the framework of my recent ANR FERROMON project, we will address both challenges and investigate a model system consisting of epitaxial perovskite heterostructures combining a Mott insulator, (Ca,Ce)MnO 3 , with a (magnetic) ferroelectric, BiFeO 3 . BiFeO 3 /(Ca,Ce)MnO 3 heterostructures are of high crystalline quality and we demonstrated a large electrical response at room temperature induced by ferroelectric switching in both planar (198) and vertical FTJ Perovskite manganites display sharp phase transitions when they are subjected to external stimuli such as magnetic fields, electric fields or light Bulk CaMnO 3 crystalizes in the paraelectric Pbnm orthorhombic ground-state structure where the tilting of oxygen octahedra produces a small distortion from the cubic structure of the perovskite. It is a G-type antiferromagnetic insulator (G-AFI) (202) mainly governed by superexchange interactions, although Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions at distorted Mn-O-Mn bonds cause spin canting, leading to a noncollinear G x A y F z order with weak ferromagnetic moment of 0.04 μB/Mn (203). The chemical substitution of Ca 2+ by Ce 4+ in Ca 1-x Ce x MnO 3 manganites gives two electrons in the Mn-3d (e g ) band which induces a transition to a metallic state around x = 5% (202). Thus, the metal-insulator transition occurs at much lower carrier concentrations than in widely investigated hole-doped manganites (204). This makes electron-doped manganites very appealing in view of integrating them as channel materials in oxidebased field effect transistors (FETs) where metal-insulator transitions could be triggered by an electric field. The delocalization of carriers resulting from Ce doping generates ferromagnetic double-exchange (205) and the transition to a metallic state is accompanied by the onset of a canted magnetic state (cG-53 AFM) (202). Higher Ce doping induces an orbital/charge ordering transition to a C-type antiferromagnet (C-AFI) (206). In thin films, the epitaxial strain imposed by the substrate has a profound effect on the phase diagram of (Ca,Ce)MnO 3 (207). While compressive strain (-0.5% on YAlO 3 substrates) stabilizes the cG-AFM metallic state at much lower doping than in the bulk (Figure In summary, CaMnO 3 appears as a very flexible template to generate a broad range of physical properties through three main handles: (i) epitaxial strain, (ii) Ce doping, (iii) isovalent substitution on the A-site. Ferroelectric-field effect is equivalent to a switchable chemical doping. The large ferroelectric polarization in the supertetragonal phase of BiFeO 3 makes it, in principle, possible to accumulate or deplete carrier densities on the order of 3 × 10 14 cm -2 in a non-volatile way. This is two orders of magnitude higher than what can be achieved with standard dielectric gate oxides, and comparable to values found with ionic liquids (218). In compressively strained (Ca,Ce)MnO 3 thin films grown on YAlO 3 , very low carrier densities (3 × 10 13 cm -2 or 0.04 e  /u.c.) are required to induce an insulator to metal transition (Figure 4.2 Ferroelectric/antiferroelectric devices for neuromorphic computing Ferroelectric materials possess a spontaneous electric polarization that can be reversed by the application of an external electric field. This polarization is the sum of individual electric dipoles in each unit cell of the material that align parallel to each other. In contrast, antiferroelectric materials, in which adjacent electric dipoles align antiparallel to each other (Figure More precisely, an antiferroelectric material is similar to a ferroelectric one in that its structure is obtained through distortion of a nonpolar high-symmetry reference phase. In addition, there must be an alternative low energy ferroelectric phase by a polar distortion of the same high-symmetry reference phase. An applied electric field must induce a first-order phase transition from the antiferroelectric to the ferroelectric phase, producing a characteristic double hysteresis loop of polarization vs. electric field (219). Complementarily, antiferroelectrics are often described as materials that exhibit a structural phase transition at zero field between two nonpolar phases with a strong dielectric anomaly around this transition Currently the latest developments of artificial neural networks in hardware rely on electronic synapses made of memristors and neurons fabricated with CMOS. The use of two different technologies for synapses and neurons complicates their interconnection and possible integration within a single wafer. Here we propose a concept of electronic neurons with similar materials as for ferroelectric synapses. Indeed, by inserting an antiferroelectric tunnel barrier between two electrodes (224), we aim at realizing a relaxation oscillator that emulates the behavior of a spiking neuron (225). Considering a circuit containing a serial resistance, a capacitance, and the unipolar resistive memory based on the antiferroelectric tunnel junction, the application of a dc voltage will lead to an oscillating output voltage mimicking the behavior of the neuron. In order to reach this goal, ultrathin films of antiferroelectric need to be closely investigated. However, the field of antiferroelectric thin films is still in its infancy compared to ferroelectric ones and requires a better understanding of the underlying mechanisms to set the basis for the design of future nanoelectronic devices. Besides the use of lead-based materials such as archetypical PbZrO 3 (Figure Conventional image sensors suffer from significant limitations imposed by their principle and operation. Acquiring visual information frame-by-frame limits the temporal resolution of the data, leading to distorted information from fast moving objects. This results in vast amounts of redundancy unnecessarily inflating data rate and volume, and yields relatively poor intra scene dynamic range. The neuromorphic event-based approach to vision and image sensing is recently gaining substantial attention as it proposes solutions to all the previously mentioned issues encountered with conventional technology. Neuromorphic vision systems are driven by events happening within the scene in view, as in biology, and unlike conventional image sensors, which are triggered by artificially-created timing and control signals. As a result, each pixel in a sensor array samples its visual input individually and adapts its sampling rate to the dynamics of the input signal itself. The output of such a sensor is a time-continuous stream of pixel data, delivered at unprecedented temporal resolution, containing zero redundancy, and encoding orders of magnitude higher dynamic range than conventional imagers (231-233). Bio-inspired event-driven vision and image sensors have reached a maturity level where they start being applied to an increasing variety of machine vision tasks. However, the event-based asynchronous output of these sensors has been processed using conventional computing devices such as central processing units (CPUs). This way of processing is obviously non ideal and does not allow to fully benefit from the unique characteristics of the sensor. The logical way would be to process the asynchronous event output with an event-based computational network based on neurons and synapses. In collaboration with the group of Sylvain Saïghi (Univ. Bordeaux), the Institut de la Vision and ChronoCam, the ANR MIRA project proposes to explore this concept by building a demonstrator in which a bio-inspired event-driven pixel array will be connected to an array of silicon-based neurons interconnected by ferroelectric synapses to solve an exemplary high-performance vision task. Following the demonstration of spike-timing-dependent plasticity with ferroelectric tunnel junctions, governed by nucleation-limited switching dynamics, we aim at integrating such artificial synapses in spiking neural networks. Indeed, spike-timing-dependent plasticity is at the heart of unsupervised learning in spiking neural networks (234). This important result demonstrates that the ferroelectric memristor is an excellent building block for developing neuromorphic electronics based on memristive synapses In the European H2020 ULPEC project (starting early 2017), the long term goal is to develop advanced vision applications with ultra-low power requirements and ultra-low latency. The output of the project is a demonstrator connecting a neuromorphic event-based camera to a high speed ultra-low power asynchronous visual data processing system (spiking neural network with memristive synapses). The project consortium includes the partners mentioned from the MIRA project as well as an industrial enduser (Bosch) which will investigate autonomous and computer assisted driving. For this kind of applications, vision and recognition of traffic event must be computed with very low latency and low power. Our main role will be to use our expertise with ferroelectric memristors to develop crossbar arrays of these ferroelectric memristors on silicon within this project. The oxide heterostructures on silicon will be elaborated by our partners in IBM Zurich, Univ. of Twente, and Twente Solid State Technology and we will probe their ferroelectric and transport properties using scanning probe microscopy and pulse-assisted electrical transport. The best identified systems on silicon will then be integrated as crossbar arrays with CMOS using wafer bonding. Related publications:Real-space imaging of non-collinear antiferromagnetic order with a single spin magnetometer I. Gross, W. Akhtar, V. Garcia, L.J. Martinez, S. Chouaieb, K. Garcia, C. Carrétéro, A. Barthélémy, P. Appel, P. Maletinsky, J.-V. Kim, J.-Y. Chauleau, N. Jaouen, M. Viret, M. Bibes, S. Fusil, V. Jacques SUBMITTED(2017) μm -1.0 T