Topological valley kink states have become a significant research frontier with considerable intriguing applications such as robust on-chip communications and topological lasers. Unlike guided modes with adjustable widths in most conventional waveguides, the valley kink states are usually highly confined around the domain walls and thus lack the mode width degree of freedom (DOF), posing a serious limitation to potential device applications. Here, by adding a photonic crystal (PhC) featuring a Dirac point between two valley PhCs with opposite valley-Chern numbers, we design and experimentally demonstrate topological valley-locked waveguides (TVLWs) with tunable mode widths. The photoinc TVLWs could find unique applications, such as high-energy-capacity topological channel intersections, valley-locked energy concentrators, and topological cavities with designable confinement, as verified numerically and experimentally. The TVLWs with width DOF could be beneficial to interface with the exsisting photonic waveguides and devices, and serve as a novel platform for practical use of topological lasing, field enhancement, on-chip communicaitons, and high-capacity energy transport. Inspired by the valleytronics, To overcome the above challenges, we design and experimentally demonstrate a topological valley-locked waveguide (TVLW), where a PhC featuring a Dirac point is sandwiched by two valley PhCs with opposite valley-Chern numbers. The topological guided modes in TVLWs are characterized with gapless dispersions, valley-momentum locking, robustness against defects, and, more importantly, a tunable mode width. Such TVLWs with the width DOF could be very promising in applications. For example, by abruptly adjusting the waveguide width, valley-locked reflection-free energy squeezing effect (similar to the squeezing effect in ε-near-zero narrow waveguide channels) The designed TVLW comprises three domains A |Bx| C (see Figures Figure where δk = k-kK is the displacement of wave vector k to K valley in momentum space, ). Thus, the topological guided mode could be regarded as a combination of the valley kink states in A | C domain wall and the bulk states in domain B. The measured transmissions (see Figure have the same valley pseudo-spin, while the transport routes from port 1 to port 3 (from port 4 to port 2) have the opposite valley pseudo-spins. To further confirm the topological cavity modes, we perform the experiments to measure the |Hz| 2 field distributions at 9.55 GHz (see Figure To conclude, we experimentally demonstrate a photonic TVLW where a Dirac PhC is sandwiched by two valley PhCs with opposite valley-Chern numbers. The topological guided mode in the TVLW is characterized with gapless dispersions, momentum-valley locking, robustness against defects, and tunable mode width. The present TVLW has found some unique applications, such as high-energy-capacity topological channel intersections, valley-locked energy concentrators, and topological cavities with tailorable mode confinement, which are enabled by the mode width DOF. Besides, in comparison to the previous domain wall structures hosting the valley kink states, the TVLW is more flexible to interface with the existing photonic waveguides and devices. Looking ahead, there are further potentials to incorporate the TVLW with mode width DOF into other photonic active device applications with high energy capacities.