Direct microwave heating of 3Y-ZrO 2 is studied at frequency of 2.45 GHz. Different conditions of input power, sample position and size are tested. For the first time, the experimentally known instability of microwave sintering is explained coupling the effective medium approximation and finite-element method. We show how the material dielectric permittivity imaginary part which increases with temperature and relative density encourages high hot spot phenomena. It is shown that the sample location has a great impact on the temperature distribution and decreasing the sample size promotes temperature homogenization thereby assisting the overall sintering stabilization. Zirconia ceramics presents useful properties in terms of super-plasticity, strength, hardness, ionic conductivity, and low thermal conductivity It is known that the microwave sintering technique allows consolidation of various materials with high heating rates (100 K/min or higher) based on volumetric heating of the sample; it promotes fine microstructures with high levels of densification Non-magnetic dielectric ceramic materials with a complex relative dielectric permittivity ε r = ε r ′ -jε r ′′ have a power dissipation per unit volume given by: where ω is the angular frequency, ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity and E is the electric field strength. Consequently, the power dissipation depends on the frequency, the electric field and the dielectric permittivity imaginary part, which itself depends on the electric conductivity, temperature and relative density. The temperature evolution of real and imaginary parts of ε r of 3Y-ZrO 2 can be found in Ref. with ε 3YZ being zirconia complex dielectric permittivity, ε gas -gas dielectric permittivity equal 1, ε eff -effective complex dielectric permittivity of the whole porous material to be determined, and C s -the solid concentration associated with the relative density. The results of the calculations of the real and imaginary parts of 3Y-ZrO 2 dielectric permittivity are reported in Fig. The real part increases with the temperature and relative density and is about 10 (at 1250 K and 55% of relative density). The imaginary part is very low at low temperatures (between 273 -673K) and is about 0.02 for that temperature range. These low values rapidly increase after 673 K up to the values of the order of magnitude of 30. Based on the determined dielectric properties of 3Y-ZrO 2 , the electromagnetic heating is investigated by the finite element method (FEM) using COMSOL Multiphysics TM software. The electromagnetic wave propagation obeys the Maxwell's equations, based on which COMSOL's 'RF module' can simulate the electromagnetic wave propagation using the following expression: with μ r being the relative permeability, k 0 -the vacuum wave number, σ -the electric conductivity and E r is defined by the harmonic electric field expression E = E r exp(jωt). The thermal part of the problem is described by the heat transfer and electromagnetic loss equations: where ρ is the density, C p is the specific heat, κ is the thermal conductivity, J is the current density, B is the magnetic flux density, and H is the magnetic field intensity. For this study, as mentioned above, a resonant rectangular wave guide is analyzed in a TE 102 mode. A rectangle cross-section with dimensions of a = 80 and b = 40 mm is considered for the 3D wave guide (see Fig. ); hence, the equation ( where a, b are the rectangular cross-section dimensions, l is the wave guide length to be determined, c is the light velocity, and ω nmp is the resonant frequency. The calculated wave guide length for the chosen rectangular cross-section dimensions is then l = 190 mm. The simulation results in the empty cavity reported in Fig. The direct microwave heating problem formulation considers the sample to be placed at midheight in the waveguide and in vacuum. The sample is located on a thermal insulating and microwave transparent support of fibrous alumina-silicate. In order to model this configuration a thermal insulation is placed at the bottom sample surface and the other faces are assumed to be subjected to pure thermal radiation: where φ r is the radiative heat flux, σ s is the Stefan-Boltzmann's constant, ε is the emissivity (0.7 for zirconia The calculated temperature curves, electric field intensity and electromagnetic losses are reported in Fig. This hot spot phenomenon (heating and, in turn, sintering instability) has been very often reported in the literature Consequently, the more the temperature is, the higher is the local dissipation. The EMA results shown in Fig. To conclude, the obtained results provide a basis for explaining the inherent instability and non-reproducibility of the experiments frequently reported in the literature for microwave sintering calculations Table