Elastic valley metamaterials offer an excellent platform to manipulate elastic waves and have potential applications in energy harvesting and elastography. Here we introduce a series of strategies to realize topological transition in spiral elastic valley metamaterials by parameter modulations. We show the evolution of Berry curvature and valley Chern number as a function of inherent parameters of spiral, which further results in a general scheme to achieve topological valley edge states. Our strategy leverages multiple degrees of freedom in spiral elastic valley metamaterials to provide enhanced opportunities for desired topological states. Topological valley metamaterials have emerged as a remarkable impact not only on condensed matter physics but also on manipulation of waves in electronics, photonics and phononics Wave propagation in topological valley metamaterials possesses prominent applications in information carrier and light modulation with its remarkable feature: the robust valley-polarized transport Recently, an elastic valley metamaterial that consists of a hard spiral in a soft hexagonal matrix has been proposed as a new design to achieve the valley topological insulators Though this system has shown promising properties and improved controllability in comparison to the symmetric valley system, there remain several natural questions about this spiral valley system. For example, since this is a chiral anisotropic system, how does the chirality affect the topological properties? How does the topological transition happen in an asymmetric system? Addressing these challenging questions is meaningful to understand and enrich the intrinsic physics of topological valley states. In this manuscript, we report topological transition via parameter modulations in the spiral elastic metamaterials. We discuss the effect of chirality, rotation angle, number of turns and thickness of the spiral to the topological properties in terms of Berry curvature and valley Chern number. Topological transition process of spiral elastic metamaterials is clearly shown by the inversion of the Berry curvature and valley Chern number. After the key factors contributing to the topological transition are determined, we propose a general scheme to generate the desired topological phase of these elastic metamaterials. Furthermore, we demonstrate the topological valley edge states by exploiting this general scheme. Thereby, our strategy provides enhanced degrees of freedom and opportunities to achieve topological transition by leveraging the spiral architecture's parameter modulations. In the first place, we investigate the effect of rotation angle of spiral around the center of the hexagon (θ) to the topological properties. According to our previous work, there exists a band inversion under certain circumstance between the second and the third band We calculate the valley Chern number C ! = " #$ ∫ i∇ % × ⟨u(k)|∇ % |u(k)⟩d # k based on the third band using the numerical method The Berry curvature of the second band has negative values and that of the third band has positive values. This inversion of the Berry curvature indicates the band inversion and the topological transition. The band inversion often reflects on the eigen modes of metamaterials, but interestingly, the eigen modes of these two configurations at K point do not show the swap of the two bands clearly (see the APPENDIX A). This is one of unique aspects of our spiral valley system in contrast to conventional symmetric valley system. Spiral is the natural chiral element, where the right-handed and left-handed spirals can be transformed by parity inversion After obtaining the general scheme of generating different topological phase, we create an elastic topological insulator based on our conclusion we draw in the last section. We can confirm that (right-handed, 60°, 1.5, 2) has a positive Berry curvature and a negative Berry curvature in its second and third bands, respectively, as observed from FIG. Returning to the configuration in FIG. The generated forward elastic wave is projected by the K' valley according to the group velocity shown in the projected band structure (FIG. In this study, we investigated topological properties of a spiral structure with multiple degrees of freedom in detail. We demonstrated computationally that the inherent geometrical parameters of the spiral architecture, such as chirality, rotation angle, and the number of turns, can induce the evolution of Berry curvature and valley Chern number of the spiral elastic valley metamaterial, thereby resulting in the landscape change of the topological characteristics. Knowledge of different roles played by spiral parameters enhances the understanding to the elastic topological phase transition using parameters modulation in our system and opens avenues for topological state manipulation. This strategy based on asymmetric spiral architecture gives us the possibility to realize and control topological interface state in a more controllable and efficient manner compared to symmetrical valley architectures. Our research may not be limited only to the monofilar spiral, but can be extended and generalized to the bifilar spiral, trifilar spiral and so on Because of the asymmetric spiral in the metamaterials, when the spiral rotates around the center, there is no degenerate point appearing at K point, though topological phase indeed inverts according to FIG. After we find our desired topological phase of the spiral elastic metamaterials via parameters modulation of chirality, rotation angle and number of turns, we need to find the overlapping band gap between two metamaterials. Tuning thickness d is able to adjust the band gap range. As shown in FIG. 