We present a comparative study of magnetic excitations in the first two Ruddlesden-Popper members of the Hg-family of high-temperature superconducting cuprates, which are chemically nearly identical and have the highest critical temperature (Tc) among all cuprate families. Our inelastic photon scattering experiments reveal that the two compounds' paramagnon spectra are nearly identical apart from an energy scale factor of ∼ 130% that matches the ratio of Tc's, as expected in magnetic Cooper pairing theories. By relating our observations to other cuprates, we infer that the strength of magnetic interactions determines how high Tc can reach. Our finding can be viewed as a magnetic analogue of the isotope effect, thus firmly supporting models of magnetically mediated high-temperature superconductivity. Identifying the driving force for Cooper pairing in cuprate high-temperature superconductors is an outstanding quest in quantum materials research To test the idea that superconductivity in the high-T c cuprates is magnetically mediated The pursuit for an energy correspondence between pairing and the paramagnons has proved challenging. Superconductivity is known to exist in a dome-like region of the generic p-T phase diagram To attain a definitive answer on this front, it is desired to study materials with very high yet sufficiently different T c , so that T c is not strongly reduced by material-specific details and its variations can be unambiguously compared to that of the magnetic energy. The first two Ruddlesden-Popper (RP) members of the Hg-family of cuprates, HgBa 2 CuO 4+δ (Hg1201) and HgBa 2 CaCu 2 O 6+δ (Hg1212), are ideal for such a test of the magnetic "isotope effect" on high-T c superconductivity. Hg1201 and Hg1212 are structurally and chemically nearly identical, have the highest T c (97 K and 127 K at optimal doping, respectively) among all cuprate families We have performed inelastic photon scattering experiments on two nearly equally underdoped high-quality single crystals of Hg1201 and Hg1212 (Fig. Figure The above observation calls for a systematic comparison between the two systems concerning the entire set of the paramagnon spectra, which we present in detail in Figs. Importantly, the 22-30% increase in the paramagnon energies from Hg1201 to Hg1212 is enough to account for most, if not all, of the difference in T c between the two systems both at optimal doping (from 97 K to 127 K) and in our actual samples (from 80 K to 107 K). The increase must originate in the strength of magnetic interactions within the CuO 2 layers, since magnetic coupling between adjacent CuO 2 layers in a bilayer cuprate is only about 10 meV, which has little effect on the (para)magnon energies far away from the zone center The pairing strength may also be measured by the superconducting gap 2∆ SC . To determine 2∆ SC for the two systems, we have performed variable-temperature electronic Raman scattering on the same two crystals studied by RIXS. In the B 1g scattering geometry In addition to the pair-breaking peak, a broad Raman peak is found to develop at a higher energy than 2∆ SC upon cooling (Fig. The significant increase in the paramagnon (and biparamagnon) energies from Hg1201 to Hg1212 may appear surprising at first glance. Ab initio calculations suggest that the antiferromagnetic interaction J does not vary much between the first two RP members of the Hg-family of cuprates 