The nonlinear optical (NLO) properties of the Indole-7-carboxyldehyde (I7C) have been investigated by computational and experimental (UV-VIS, Raman) data analysis. Mulliken charge analysis, molecular electrostatic potential, and UV-VIS absorption and vibrational Raman studies have been used to analyze the intra-molecular charge transfer occurrence in the probe system. Observed high value of dipole moment, linear polarizability and first order hyperpolarizability values suggest that the indole derivative may indeed have possibility to show good NLO behaviour. Nonlinear optical active (NLO) materials have attracted considerable attention in many applications such as integrated photonics, optical rectification, sum and difference frequency generation (SFG, DFG), second harmonic generation (SHG), frequency mixing terahertz (THz) wave generation, telecommunication Nowadays Indole and their derivatives are very attractive topic of research. They are similar with tryptophan residue, which is a part of protein as RNA and DNA I7C was purchased from Aldrich Chemical, USA and solvent teterahydrofuran (THF) was purchased from Fluka. UV-Vis absorption spectra were recorded at 300 K with a Perkin-Elmer absorption spectrophotometer (model Lamda-35, source: tungsten iodide and deuterium) in the spectral range 200-1100 nm with a varying slit width (0.5 and 1.0 nm). To record Raman spectra, a 532 nm excitation diode pumped frequency doubled Nd:YAG solid state laser (model GDLM-5015 L, 8mW) have been used. All the theoretical calculations, including the optimization of ground and excited state geometries were carried out using the Gaussian 09 program where ν0 = 9398.5 cm -1 is the laser exciting wavenumber, νi is the vibrational wavenumber of the i th normal mode (cm -1 ), Si is the Raman scattering activity of normal mode νi, and f is a constant (in our calculation f is 10 -12 ), which is suitably chosen common normalized factor for all peak intensities; h, k, c, and T are the Planck constant, the Boltzmann constant, the speed of light and the temperature in Kelvin, respectively. The FMOs and first order hyperpolarizability are also calculated. Further, molecular electrostatic potential (MEP) surface mapped with electrostatic potential surface and atomic charges (Mulliken) were derived by using optimized structure. I7C is a five membered indole substituted probe system having pyrrole (N ̶ H) and carbonyl (C=O) groups. The optimized structure of I7C shown in figure I7C is NCS with C1 point group symmetry. Graphical representation of Mulliken charge analysis is shown in Figure To study the NLO activeness of I7C, α and anisotropy of polarizability (  α) were calculated by using equation ( 3 Using finite field theory approach, the value of β, is computed by using different components of β as: Using X, Y and Z components of β, the magnitude of β can be calculated as: The final equation for calculating the magnitude of β can be written as: where βXXX, βYYY and βZZZ are the tensor components of hyperpolarizability (Table Raman modes are associated with the NLO activity, since polarizability is proportional to Raman intensity. We have computed Raman intensity for different nonlinear vibrations. Linear Raman spectroscopy is very useful technique for predicting different NLO coefficients like: α, β for the probe system where stronger Raman signal means higher Raman activity and so the higher polarizability. We have added this information in the revised manuscript. High Raman intensity of I7C also show the NLO activeness of the probe system. Table . 3 and Figure All the above-mentioned Raman active modes show the larger NLO activity in the I7C. In the present section, FMOs analysis is used illustrate the hardness/softness, chemical reactivity, and stability of probe molecule (Table The lower value of ∆ (4.15 eV) for I7C than that of frequently used NLO active urea and KDP (Table To check the NLO properties of the I7C, experimental and computed absorption analysis have been performed and spectra are shown in Figure Molecular electrostatic potential (MEP) surface plot of electrostatic potential helpful in determining reactive site of the molecule The geometrical structure, charge variation, UV-Vis, Raman analysis of I7C have been carried out using DFT calculations. Computed polarizability, hyperpolarizability and active Raman modes have been used to predict the NLO properties of I7C. Variation in charge clearly indicates possibility of ICT interaction within the systems. The UV-Vis spectral analysis of I7C predicts the presence of n→* and →* electronic transition and hence the variation of delocalized electron density within the molecule. Computed values of β is almost 6 times greater than the normally used reference material urea. MEP map and low energy gap also confirmed the NLO activity of I7C. The predicted results provide a better understanding into the NLO properties of I7C molecules to be used for many applications in optoelectronic and medical industries. Vibrational modes: ν, symmetric stretching; δ, bending in plane.