Reversibility is of paramount importance in the correct representation of surface peeling in various physical settings, ranging from motility in nature, to gripping devices in robotic applications, and even to sliding of tectonic plates. Modeling the detachment-reattachment sequence, known as stick-slip, imposes several challenges in a continuum framework. Here we exploit customized reversible cohesive elements in a hybrid finite element model that can handle occurrence of snap-through instabilities. The simulations capture various peeling phenomena that emerge in experimental observations, where layers are pulled from a flat, rigid substrate in the direction parallel to the surface. For long layers, periodicity in reattachment is shown to develop and is linked to the concept of Schallamach waves. Further, the connection between surface properties and stick-slip behavior is investigated: we find that stick-slip is linked to the propensity of the interface to localize deformation and damage. Beyond elucidating the various peeling behaviors and the detachment modes, the computational framework developed here provides a straightforward approach for investigation of complex delamination processes, which can guide the development of future applications across different scales and in various settings. Failure of bonded interfaces is ubiquitous at different scales and in various settings. While, in the mundane, failure of an adhesive layer is a common nuisance, in advanced engineering applications, controlling this failure can lead to desired functionalities and novel fabrication methods. Several such applications are inspired by the superior performance of adhesive interfaces that are used for locomotion in the animal kingdom, with examples ranging from the scale of a single cell, to insects and lizards Reversibility is a desired feature in robotics applications, where the exceptional load bearing capacities of modern adhesive layers that do not damage the climbing surface A recent study has shown that bi-layer adhesives can exhibit various distinct failure modes, including the formation of an interfacial cavity near the pulling end, or the propagation of a peeling front from the opposite end, which is referred to as curling, as it is associated with bending deformation of the far region While full control of the delamination process of soft adhesives is essential in robotics applications and has been observed in nature, successive de-bonding and re-bonding can occur spontaneously within regions of a loaded interface. Such phenomena have been referred to as stick-slip events The apparent analogies between stick-slip processes in tectonic plate movement, and debonding of soft adhesive layers, have motivated several studies that consider the latter as a desktop scale representation of the former Capturing the propagation of failure from its initiation to complete detachment in a theoretical model is especially challenging when considering zero-degree loading. This complexity is primarily due to the limited available computational tools that can account for the layers ability to re-attach, at a new location, if it comes back into contact with the substrate. Nonetheless, experimental evidence of this phenomenon has been repeatedly reported To the best of our knowledge, to date, no theoretical model has provided a comprehensive account of the various phenomena that emerge when reattachment of an adhesive interface is possible, as observed in zero-degree peeling of bi-layer adhesives. Understanding the range of model parameters for which such phenomena occur and their influence on the global behavior of the adhesive pad, can pave the way to engineering of advanced adhesive systems, and can elucidate phenomena observed in the natural world at various scales. In a finite element framework, cohesive elements are a natural choice for representing interfacial forces that are weaker than the bonds in the bulk of the material, where the failure is localized to the interface. Other than capturing fracture phenomena in stiff or brittle materials, such as metals and concrete The objective of this work, is to capture reversible interfacial peeling phenomena that may emerge in various delamination processes, including instability and stick-slip events. Hence, in this study, we propose a modification to the classical cohesive law by This manuscript is organized as follows: the next section describes the physical problem setting with all relevant model parameters, and provides an overview of various physical phenomena that emerge in experimental observations of this system. Modeling of the interface response is documented in Section 3. The specialized finite element algorithm developed to capture the peeling response is detailed in Section 4. Next, Section 5 presents the simulation results and their discussion, showing agreement with our experimental observations. We further extend the analysis to capture the response of infinitely long layers and to elucidate the constitutive sensitivities. Finally, concluding remarks are given in Section 6. Consider an elastic bi-layer composed of an adhesive layer of length l and thickness t that is perfectly attached to a stiffer backing of thickness t b and placed on a smooth, infinitely stiff substrate, as illustrated in Figure (1) A horizontal displacement, u, is applied to the backing at x = l -henceforth referred to as the pulling end, and is associated with a resultant force F (per unit length). We assume that both the adhesive layer and the backing of this bi-layer system are incompressible and capable of large elastic deformations that are well described by the neo-Hookean hyperelastic model. Their strain energy density can thus be written in terms of a single constitutive parameter, the elastic modulus Ê, in the form W = Ê(I 1 -3)/6 where I 1 is the first invariant of the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor. We denote the distinct elastic moduli of the adhesive layer and the backing by Ê = E and Ê = E b , respectively. Before defining the properties of the interface, it is instructive to examine, in more detail, the different modes of failure that may emerge in this system. Hence, we conduct a series of observations that we describe next. We emphasize that while earlier studies have provided a more comprehensive experimental investigation of the considered bi-layer system Figure The different modes of failure and the possible influence of re-bonding is demonstrated by three observations in Figure First, for the shortest layer (l/t = 5), we observe that peeling initiates from the far end (i.e x = 0) and propagates towards the pulling end, up to complete failure. In comparison with the pulling rate, which is effectively shown by the slope of the line that divides the red and blue regions in the figure, the curling front propagates faster, and accelerates as pulling progresses. In contrast, peeling of the layer with l/t = 14 propagates differently. More displacement of the pulling end is needed to initiate the propagation of the curling front (notice the different scale bars indicated for the different cases), which occurs simultaneously with the formation of an interfacial cavity. Shortly after its formation, the interfacial cavity is shown to split into two regions while an intermediate region appears to re-bond. This shedding event In all cases, 3D effects are observed upon initiation of failure and during its propagation. In particular, we find that the interfacial cavity nucleates from defects near the edges and then propagates to the entire width. These effects are not accounted for under the plane-strain assumption for which the entire length of the cavity would form simultaneously. It is thus expected that the model predictions, which we describe next, will result in a tougher response with higher load bearing capacity. From our observations in the previous section, re-bonding is clearly shown to play a key role in the peeling process. Moreover, as seen from the large displacements that are attained before complete failure, it can occur at a distance from the initial bonding location. To understand the influence of re-bonding on the peeling process and on the load bearing capacity of the layer, we describe next a cohesive law that can capture peeling and re-bonding at a new location, upon contact between the two surfaces. While several forms of a cohesive law can be conceived, without evidence of a specific physical form, we choose here the simplest possible law; a bi-linear stress-opening relationship (2) Figure Additionally, we will examine the separate contributions of the tangential displacement δ t and the normal opening δ n , which define the absolute opening through the equality where δ 0 t , accounts for an initial gap between the corresponding segments on either side of the interface, in the adhered state. Before re-bonding occurs δ 0 t ≡ 0. Nonetheless, if the bond breaks and then rebonding occurs, this gap can change, as will be explained shortly. The corresponding tangential and normal components of the interface stress are respectively. Note, that the above formulation of the cohesive law in equations ( where the stiffness k p is a numerical interpenetration penalty. Damage accumulation. For interpretation of the numerical results, it is instructive to determine the level of damage within the cohesive zone. Hence, we define a damage parameter D that varies linearly between 0 and 1 as damage accumulates, up to complete failure Although in conventional cohesive laws, damage is mechanically irreversible, in this work, we consider situations in which renewed contact between the two faces of the interface allows to recover the adhesive bond, and as such, to reverse the damage. Reversibility. Finally, we describe the key feature of the cohesive elements used in this work, their reversibility. For simplicity, we will assume here that if a segment of the adhesive surface reestablishes contact with the substrate, then the bond is fully recovered. Nonetheless, it would be rather straight forward to relax this assumption to account for a deterioration of the adhesive capability from one delamination event to another, or also its dependence on the peak value of the normal compressive interface stress σ n applied in reestablishing the contact. Considering situations in which large displacements can lead to re-bonding at a new location that may be distant from the initial bond, it seems natural to allow for new segments on either side of the interface to form bonds. However, such an approach is mathematically complex and computationally very costly. Instead, in this work, we implement the re-attachment between the initially linked pair, while re-positioning the interface stress to correctly account for the location of reattachment. An artifact of this approach is that the reaction interface stress acting on the substrate will be located at the position of the initial bond (Figure Then, as the bond is further deformed, the tangential displacement is measured from this point. In this framework, re-attachment events can happen multiple times and it is sufficient to declare a different δ 0 t . Accordingly, at the onset, δ 0 t ≡ 0 for all x. In this section we have established a framework that describes the response of reversible cohesive elements. For simplicity, this framework considers a bi-linear response, it is limited to adhesion on flat rigid substrates, and considers full recovery of the adhesive bond upon contact with the substrate. Nonetheless, it is straight forward to extend this framework and relax these assumptions to account for more complex, rate-dependent, adhesive response and mixed mode failure The considered problem encompasses large deformations, both in the bulk and at the interface, as well as local unstable response of interface bonds and their reversibility; it is thus highly nonlinear and requires specialized numerical implementation. The ingredients that are included in the numerical scheme to resolve these nonlinearities, and to minimize computation times, are detailed here: Setup of the simulation. The problem setting and constitutive properties described in Section 2 are implemented numerically to investigate the peeling response. The pad is loaded by imposing an increasing displacement u of the edge of the backing (i.e. at x = l and y ∈ [t, t + t b ]), while not allowing vertical displacement along y of this edge. Zero thickness, reversible cohesive elements, with a response described in the previous section, are included at the bottom of the pad (i.e. at y = 0 and x ∈ [0, l]). At the interface between the adhesive layer, a rigid substrate is included in the simulation to ensure proper boundary conditions. The remaining free surfaces of the layer remain unloaded. Meshing and calculation software. The mesh is generated using the open-source mesh-generation software Gmsh Using its linearization at each iteration of a Newton-Raphson-based scheme, a linear system of equations is solved at every iteration where K is the tangent stiffness of the structure that depends on u, the set of nodal displacements where nodal accelerations ü(θ) and velocities u(θ) are permitted, and M is the lumped mass matrix. In this time stepping scheme the nodal forces, displacements, accelerations and velocities depend on time, θ, and integration is performed using time increments, ∆θ, which correspond to displacement steps ∆u = v∆θ, where v is the pulling rate. To capture a 'nearly' quasi-static peeling response (i.e. with negligible levels of inertia), the choice of a specific pulling rate is a compromise between achieving minimal inertial effects, and allowing for reasonable simulation times The initial velocity before damping correction upred (θ) is calculated according to the standard explicit central difference method. The damping factor c < 1 is defined based on the time step-independent constant Algorithm 1 Solution procedure 1. Initialize the system: u 0 = 0, and u 0 , u0 , ü0 = 0. 2. Static solver: Update u i = u i-1 + ∆u. Use (8) to calculate u(u i ). Use ( If max {D(x)} ≥ 0.1, continue to next step; otherwise, repeat this step. 3. Hold dynamic solver: Update u i = u i-1 and θ i = θ i-1 + ∆θ. Use (10) to obtain u(θ i ), u(θ i ) and ü(θ i ). Use ( If more than 95% of the surface failed, stop the simulation. If ∀x ∈ (0, l), ∀ j ∈ (i -10, i -1) : D i (x) = D j (x), continue to the next step; otherwise, repeat the current step. 4. Accelerate dynamic solver: Increase the pulling velocity with a triangular acceleration profile over 100 μs by varying ∆u, along constant ∆θ. Update u i = u i-1 + ∆u and θ i = θ i-1 + ∆θ. Calculate the state of the system u(θ i ), u(θ i ), ü(θ i ) using (10). Use (6) to obtain D(x). If ∃x ∈ (0, l) : ((D i (x) -1)(D i-1 (x) -1)) = 0 ∧ (D i (x) D i-1 (x)), return to step 3; otherwise continue with this step. Once the target velocity v is reached, continue to the next step. 5. Steady dynamic solver: Update u i = u i-1 + ∆u with a constant ∆u = v∆θ and θ i = θ i-1 + ∆θ. Calculate the state of the system u(θ i ), u(θ i ), ü(θ i ) using ( ), return to step 3; otherwise, repeat this step. In this section we apply the computational model, described in the previous sections, to study the influence of reversible adhesive bonds on the peeling process. For a bi-layer adhesive pad, of given aspect ratio l/t, the problem is fully defined by a set of five independent dimensionless parameters The first three of these parameters are sufficient to describe the elastic response prior to debonding, as shown in the theoretical model by Next, we define the dimensionless pulling displacement, and the corresponding dimensionless applied force as respectively. Recall that F is defined as the force applied per unit depth of the layer. To examine the ability of our model to capture the different modes of failure that have been observed in Figure Note that this base set of parameters will be used in all simulations, unless noted otherwise. The dimensional values implemented in the simulations are provided in Appendix B. To visually compare the numerical results with the observations, we first show maps of the dimensionless normal displacements, δ n /δ 0 , on the ∆, x/l plane for three different aspect ratios l/t, in Figure An important parameter that is not visible from neither the observation (Figure To better portray the complex delamination process, which involves formation of an interfacial cavity, we show in Figure By now, we have portrayed the peeling process in multiple ways. The normal opening, δ n , is shown to be the most intuitive field parameter and corresponds directly to our observations, however it only provides a partial understanding of the phenomena. Our numerical simulations also allow examining the tangential displacements, δ t , from which we can observe the occurrence of stick slip events, and the damage, which provides us with clarity on the extent of failure propagation. Next, we examine how these peeling phenomena translate into load bearing capacity of the layer and determine the stability of the peeling process. In Figure The response of pads with higher aspect ratios illustrates the importance of reattachment. Successive shedding and stick-slip events significantly impede the failure process and increase the forcebearing capacity. Even upon initiation of curling, rather than catastrophic failure, a slower decline in force occurs. The impact of reattachment on the response can be further explained by examining the response of the same pads but without permitting reattachment, as shown on Figure Beyond the transitional peeling response and the formation of the first interfacial cavity, emerges a steady peeling front that can propagate in infinitely long layers. This front is characterized by periodic events of peeling and re-adhering which become apparent by examining the map of normal opening in Figure Intuitively, the observed periodicity can be understood by considering the displacement of the pad, which is similar to what was shown for the layer with l/t = 12 in Figure The influence of the periodicity on the force-displacement response is shown in Figure The stick-slip phenomena observed in the previous sections, are critically dependant on surface properties. Nonetheless, different physical systems can exhibit a range of surface properties that are not always straightforward to measure To examine this effect we consider two layers of the same aspect ratio of l/t = 15 and with the same dimensionless set of parameters These results inspire a more comprehensive sensitivity analysis that centers on the surface properties Γ, and the specific load bearing capacity, ζ, as shown by the phase diagram in Figure Overall, the results in this section demonstrate the application of our modification to the classical cohesive law by From synthetic adhesive pads to tectonic plates and locomotive capabilities in nature: sliding adhesive systems exhibit various interface phenomena. In many of them, reattachment can significantly alter the observed behavior. This is especially the case for bi-layer adhesives that peel via various failure modes, including formation of a stable interfacial cavity near the pulling end, unstable curling emerging from the opposite end, stick-slip and shedding events, as shown by our experimental observations. While earlier studies have focused on determining the conditions at initiation of failure in such systems, in this study we have developed reversible cohesive elements that are employed in a finite element framework to investigate the propagation of failure. These elements permit re-bonding at any new location upon re-establishing contact as achieved by a straightforward adaptation to the Camacho-Ortiz cohesive law. Additionally, to remedy numerical issues that are inevitable in presence of snapthrough events, we employ a specialized algorithm that pauses pulling during spontaneous propagation of surface failure, thus capturing a nearly quasi-static path. It is shown that this simple approach is able to capture the entire range of observed behaviors. Moreover, the significant role of re-bonding is confirmed by comparing with results for which re-bonding is not permitted. This emphasizes the importance of accounting for reversibility to study peeling processes. Extending this analysis to study peeling of infinitely long layers reveals the emergence of periodic de-bonding and re-bonding events leading to the propagation of a peeling front with a steady failure sequence. This periodicity is found to be consistent with reports of Schallamach waves albeit in a quasi-static simulation, thus suggesting a rate independent origin of Schallamach waves, which may be more prevalent in a larger extent of surface interactions than first thought. The importance of surface properties among the large range of systems where stick-slip could potentially occur, is portrayed on a phase diagram that covers several orders of magnitude of two main surface parameters. A clear transition between systems with and without stick-slip is shown to rely on the length of the unstable softening phase of the cohesive law relative to that of the stable phase. Stick-slip only occurs for interface laws with short softening phases and is linked to localization of displacement and damage. This observation can allow to deduce the general features of a cohesive law shape based on observations of surface behavior, or inversely, to deduce whether stick-slip will occur, based on knowledge of surface properties of a given system. This work is not without limitations, future developments are needed to capture peeling processes that occur on curved surfaces. Additionally, several peeling processes can exhibit significant rate dependence, a loss of adhesive power upon rebonding, and a dependence on previous loading and bonding states. These phenomena are not captured by the present formulation, but can be incorporated in the future, similar to Note that among several mechanisms that contribute to friction(Nosonovsky and Bhushan, 2007), such as plastic deformation at the interface and wear or contamination particles between the surfaces, we restrict our attention in this work to reversible mechanisms.2 It should be noted that studies on single-layer adhesives subjected to similar loading conditions The energy necessary to detach a unit area of the adhesive surface from its substrate is referred to here as 'surface energy', and is equivalent to the term 'fracture energy', which is commonly used for cracks. We emphasise that these observations are not intended as a comprehensive experimental investigation. As shown in the video, the main cavity releases a smaller cavity, which due to re-bonding, appears to propagate toward the far end. Hence the use of the term shedding. Note that for consistency, we describe the cohesive element in terms of its stress-opening response, where the stress is the force per unit area of the cohesive element and the opening is the gap between top and bottom surface of the cohesive element. To avoid confusion, note the difference between u and the applied displacement u In this work numerical stability is achieved for ∆θ of the order of the critical time step of the bulk, 0.1μs, resulting in long computation times of ∼ 6 hours on 28 cores. The maximal critical time step is defined as the time the fastest wave needs to travel the characteristic length of the mesh This constant is calculated using the formula θ 1% (c) = ∆θ ln(c)/ln(0.99) to eliminate dependence on the time step ∆θ. We display l D and l R for the infinitely long layer as η D and η R are not well defined on a infinite layer. For example, reported experimental values of surface energy of PDMS vary up to 3 orders of magnitude This set (different from earlier simulations) is chosen to allow for computational convergence within a wide range of values, which will be needed for the phase diagram that will be presented next.