The detection of explosives and drugs in hard-to-reach places is a considerable challenge. We report the development and initial experimental characterization of the air analysis system that includes Field Asymmetric Ion Mobility Spectrometer (FAIMS), array of the semiconductor gas sensors and is installed on multicopter. The system was developed based on the commercially available DJI Matrix 100 platform. For data collection and communication with operator, the special compact computer (Intel Compute Stick) was installed onboard. The total weight of the system was 3.3 kg. The system allows the 15 minutes flight and provide the remote access to the obtained data. The developed system can be effectively used for the detection of impurities in the air, ecology monitoring, detection of chemical warfare agents and explosives, what is especially important in light of recent terroristic attacks. The capabilities of the system was tested on the several explosives such as trinitrotoluene and nitro powder. TEXT Mass spectrometry is one of the most sensitive and accurate analytical techniques for the investigation of the chemical composition of the unknown substance and has found various application in the chemistry, forensic science, food and drug monitoring etc. The only disadvantage of the mass spectrometer that limits filed use is the weight and power consumption. However, there are many cases when the sample collection and its transfer to the laboratory is impossible. For example, the unknown chemical weapon was recently used in Syrian city Khan Sheikhoun. This substance could be easily identified by a compact mass spectrometer carried by a drone. At the same time, sending troops to collect the sample would inevitably include the considerable risk. The first installation of the mass spectrometer on the aircraft dates back to the 50-th, when Bennett radio frequency mass spectrometers where installed on the sounding rockets and artificial satellites and were used for the investigation of the ionic composition of the upper atmosphere Recently a considerable progress has been achieved in the developing of low weight and portable mass spectrometers In the present paper we describe our approach for the developing portable, low weight aircraft-born measurement system that includes FAIMS and the array of gas sensors. The total weight of whole system is 3.3 kg, and the dimensions are 52*52*22 cm. The low cost and compact size allow our system being potentially suitable for the ecology monitoring in the cities and for the detection of chemical warfare agents. The flying vehicle. We have chosen a DJI matrice-100 as an aircraft to carry the measuring system. This multirotor unmanned aircraft vehicle (UAV) includes the frame, adapted for the mounting of additional custom equipment; the motor assembly able to keep the UAV in the air to 40 minutes without payload; flight controller with GPS positioning with accuracy of hovering up to 2 meters; the control system over the distance of up to 2 km; the onboard telemetry data transmission system. Gas sensors. The array of the semiconductor gas sensors (DFRobot company, Shanghai, China ) was installed on the UAV. Semiconductor gas sensors measures the changes of the conductivity of the thing film after the adsorption of the target gas FAIMS spectrometer. The FAIMS spectrometer was developed by the company Lavanda-U Limited and was initially optimized for the detection of the explosives. The schematic design is presented in the Fig. Data acquisition and transfer system. The Intel Compute Stick with installed Windows 10 was used as a main onboard computer. This device has the weight of 80 g and requires only 5V power supply what enable its feeding from main copter battery. The data from the gas sensors were collected by the Arduino UNO microcontroller and transferred to the onboard computer. To enable the communication with the operator the remote desktop access to the onboard computer was provided using TeamViewer 12 software. To enable the internet access, the 4G modem was installed onboard (we used Yota LTE 4G). The photo of the assembled system is presented in the Fig. The onboard computer and FAIMS spectrometer were installed below the platform (Fig. The photo of the hovering system is presented in Fig. It was observed, that the developed system provided the stable data acquisition and transmission. The readings of gas sensors and FAIMS spectrometer were transmitted to the smartphone fixed on the remote control. This allowed the operator to simultaneously control the flight and read the information from the sensors. All data were saved to file and additionally the video from smartphone screen was recorded. First we have investigated the capability of the developed system to detect the volatile organic in the air. For this experiment the FAIMS tube was used without the sucking cup (Fig. The results of the measurements are presented in the Fig. The ionograms recorded by the FAIMS spectrometer are presented in Fig. After the validation of the system we have investigated its capability for the detection of the explosive. We have recorded the ionograms corresponding to the trace vapors of different After proving the capabilities of the system for detection of explosives we have performed the in-filed experiments. The design of the experiment is presented in the Fig. The suction cup was placed near the ground to increase the sensitivity. The results are presented in the Fig. We have developed a multicopter-based air monitoring system that utilize array of the gas sensors and FAIMS spectrometer. The developed system allows the detecting of air impurities in hard-to-reach places and transferring data online to the operator. The major disadvantage of the developed system is the powerful airflow created by the rotating propellers that mixes and homogenizes the atmosphere and, therefore, decreases the concentration of the target gas in the vicinity of the multicopter. Also, the turbulent wind can disturb the air flow inside the FAIMS tube. This limits the application of the developed system for the analysis of small objects, such as ventilation exhausts, but the system still can be used for the ecology monitoring and detection of chemical warfare agents. The total cost of the system includes multicopter (~5000$), FAIMS spectrometer (~3000$), onboard computer and 3G modem (~700$), array of gas sensors (~100$). The capabilities of the system was tested on the several explosives such as trinitrotoluene and nitro powder. The limit of detection for TNT is ~1*10 -13 g/cm 3 , the system can separate the TNT and nitroglycerin. Therefore, the developed system is relatively low cost, what makes it possible for almost any laboratory to assemble the remote FAIMS spectrometer. The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript The research was supported by the Russian Scientific Foundation grant No 14-24-00114. Authors declare no competing financial interests. TABLES Table Sensor Description Electrochemical CO2 sensor Semiconductor CO/Combustible Gas sensor Semiconductor hydrogen gas sensor. Carbon Monoxide Sensor. Concentrations in the air from 20 to 2000ppm. Semiconductor Propane Gas Sensor. Can be used to detect isobutane, propane and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG). Semiconductor gas sensor, which is very sensitive with LPG, natural gas , town gas. It is less sensitive with alcohol, cooking fumes and cigarette smoke Semiconductor gas sensor, which is able to detect nature gas, CH4. It is less sensitivity in detecting alcohol, cooking fumes, and cigarette smoke. Semiconductor alcohol sensor. It has a high sensitivity to alcohol and less sensitivity to benzine. Semiconductor gas sensor, which is able to detect LPG, i-butane, propane, methane ,alcohol, hydrogen, smoke. 