Figure α phase The charge distribution of the most relevant CsI-T surface models (v PbI 2 , v 2PbI 2 , i PbI 2 , i 2PbI 2 and i 4CsI ) at k-points "M" (upper panel) and "Γ" (bottom panel) for the α and the γ phases are depicted in Fig. Figure Table Despite the rapid PCE improvement in the laboratory, stability issues limit the development and commercialization of HPs for real photovoltaic applications. Especially, the organic components in hybrid perovskites are susceptible to ambient conditions such as moisture, oxygen, and heat, and exposure leads to rapid performance degradation In the context of A-site substitutions, the all-inorganic perovskite CsPbI 3 and its mixed-halide derivatives have emerged as a promising alternative to the hybrid MA-and FA-based perovskites. CsPbI 3 has a similar structure and slightly closer Pb-I packing and higher thermal and chemical stabilities than MAPbI 3 and FAPbI 3 In this work, we present first-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations for the reconstructed surfaces of the photovoltaic-active α (cubic) and γ (orthorhombic) phases of CsPbI 3 . Starting from the pristine (clean) surface models with CsI-and PbI 2 -terminations (denoted by CsI-T and PbI 2 -T, respectively), constituent elements (Cs, Pb, and I) as well as their complexes (CsI, PbI, and PbI 2 ) were added to or removed from the surface. The thermodynamic stability of these surface models was investigated for different chemical environments by means of ab initio thermodynamics The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we briefly outline the computational details of our DFT calculations and summarize the thermodynamic constraints for the growth of bulk CsPbI 3 as well as the CsI-T and PbI 2 -T surfaces. In Sec. III, we first analyze the stability of the clean-surface models (CsI-T and Pb 2 -T) and the reconstructed models with missing-and add-atoms (and their complexes). We then discuss changes in crystal structures due to missing-and add-atoms with focus on their stability and their atomic and electronic structure. Finally, we conclude with a summary in Sec. V. All DFT calculations were performed using the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof exchange-correlation functional for solids (PBEsol) In this work, we considered two experimentally accessible photovoltaic-active perovskite phases of CsPbI 3 : the α (cubic) phase with space group Pm 3m and the γ (orthorhombic) phase with space group Pnma. For each phase, we constructed and optimized a 2 × 2 × 2 bulk supercell with DFT (structures shown in Fig. The 2 × 2 surface unit cell allows us to study 26 reconstructed surface models each for CsI-T and PbI 2 -T. In detail, these amount to 13 missing-atom or missing-complex models (v Cs , v 2Cs , v 4Cs [only in CsI-T], v Pb , v 2Pb , v 4Pb [only in PbI 2 -T], v I , v 2I , v CsI , v 2CsI , v PbI , v 2PbI , v PbI 2 , and v 2PbI 2 ) and 13 add-atom or add-complex structures (i Cs , i 2Cs , i Pb , i 2Pb , i I , i 2I , i CsI , i 2CsI , i 4CsI [only in CsI-T], i PbI , i 2PbI , i PbI 2 , i 2PbI 2 , and i 4PbI 2 [only in PbI 2 -T]). For double missing-and add-atoms (i.e., v 2X and i 2X ), we considered both line and diagonal options (i.e., removing 2 iodine atoms along the [100] or [110] directions for v 2I ). We found no significant totalenergy differences between these two modes. Hence we only present results from the diagonal modes in this paper. In pursuit of open materials science For a system in contact with a particle reservoir and neglecting finite temperature contributions, the thermodynamic stability of a structure is obtained from the grand potential, Ω , Here μ i is the chemical potential of species i and x i the number of atoms of this species in the structure. The sum over i runs over all elements in the compound. The relative stability between two systems both in contact with the same particle reservoir is determined by differences in Ω , with Ω A < Ω B indicating that phase A is more stable than phase B. A special case of Ω is when a system is in contact with its constituent species in their most stable phase. This defines the standard formation energy which is denoted by ∆H hereafter: Here, μ i indicates the chemical potential of species i in its most stable form. The thermodynamic stability condition ∆H < 0 states that the system's total energy must be lower than the sum of its constituents' chemical potentials, each in their most stable phase. The chemical potentials μ i are set by environmental conditions. We apply a simple transformation to the chemical potentials, to introduce the parameter ∆μ i . ∆μ i is the change in the chemical potential away from its value in the element's most stable phase, μ i . The ∆μ i represent environmental growth conditions and are a convenient parameter to vary in order to map phase diagrams. The grand potential can be rewritten as The relative stability condition between phases A and B is then which can be rearranged as We recognize ∆H for phases A and B, The inequality given in Eq. ( for surface total energy E surf , bulk total energy E bulk , and the total energy of any adsorbants E ads . With the various total energies tabulated from DFT calculations, we plot an SPD based on the inequalities in Eq. ( We first consider conditions for stable CsPbI 3 in the bulk. In order to avoid the formation of atomic Cs, Pb, and I as well as bulk CsI and PbI 2 , the region of the phase diagram for stable CsPbI 3 is determined by the inequalities, ∆H(CsPbI 3 ) ∆μ Cs 0 , ∆H(CsPbI 3 ) ∆μ Pb 0 , ∆H(CsPbI 3 ) 3∆μ I 0 ; The inequalities in Eq. ( μ Cs , μ Pb , μ I are calculated for the stable structures of Cs (I 43m), Pb (P6 3 /mmc), and I (I 2 molecule). Eqs. ( To compare the stability of two surfaces, we solve Eq. ( In this section, we present the results from our thermodynamic analysis, compare the stability of our surface termination models (CsI-T vs. PbI 2 -T), and analyse the most relevant terminations using SPDs. We conclude the section with the electronic properties of the bulk and most relevant reconstructed surface models. The PBEsol-calculated formation energies of bulk CsI, PbI 2 , α-CsPbI 3 , and γ-CsPbI 3 are -3.40, -2.47, -5.89, and -6.02 eV, respectively. From Eq. ( Similarly, the growth limits for bulk CsPbI 3 at ∆μ Pb = 0 in the α and the γ phases are The small difference between the left and the right values of these inequalities indicates the narrow stability region of bulk CsPbI 3 . The stability window in the α phase is especially small, only ∼ 0.02 eV. For each phase, the width of this region equals the energy required for CsPbI 3 to decompose into CsI and PbI 2 . Therefore, the narrow energy range for the growth of bulk CsPbI 3 reflects the instability and ease of dissociation of CsPbI 3 into CsI and PbI 2 , as alluded to in Sec. I. Figure Δμ Cs = 0 α phase γ phase FIG. Figure With the exception of v 4Cs , all the observed reconstructions are valence-neutral, i.e., with addition or removal of valenceneutral units such as CsI or PbI 2 . Here, valence-neutral units refer to added or removed complexes that do not induce "net charges" on CsPbI 3 as a whole. The addition or removal of valence-neutral units is energetically more favorable than that of single atoms or non-valence-neutral complexes, because it does not introduce free charge carriers, as we will demonstrate in Sec. III B. As expected, we observe Cs-deficient reconstructed models (v 4Cs , v CsI , v 2CsI ) for low ∆μ Cs and Csrich ones (i 4CsI ) at the high ∆μ Cs region. A similar trend is observed for low and high Pb chemical potentials. A notable exception is the stability of i 4CsI in the Pb-rich region in the upper right panel. Since the Cs chemical potential is at a maximum, the Cs-rich, i 4CsI reconstruction dominates over Pb addatom structures. Of particular relevance to us are the surface reconstructions that intersect the bulk stability region (white region). These stable reconstructions that intersect the bulk region are the same for the α and the γ phases. In addition to the clean CsI-T surface, we find only the valence-neutral surface reconstructions v 2PbI 2 , v 2PbI 2 , i PbI 2 , i 2PbI 2 , and i 4CsI . It is noteworthy that although the clean surface occupies quite a broad stability region for ∆μ Pb = 0, it is only stable if the growth conditions are I-deficient and not at all in Cs-rich conditions. Figure In all reconstructions, we observe changes in the surface layer that translate into slight tilting of the surface octahedra. For instance, the surface octahedra in v PbI 2 for both phases tilt to account for the missing PbI 2 units. Similarly, the surface octahedra of i PbI 2 and i 2PbI 2 tilt to accommodate the added PbI 2 . In addition to the tilting, other slight changes in the atomic positions are observed. For example, the Cs-I bond lengths in the surfaces of i 4CsI for both phases vary by ∼ 0.1 Å. To highlight the changes in atomic positions, Cs, Pb, and I atoms of interest in Fig. A more drastic change occurs for v 2PbI 2 in the α phase. Migration of I atoms within the surface layer leads to an asymmetric distribution of them, causing the formation of separate PbI 5 and PbI 4 polyhedra in the surface layer. This structure is similar to the findings of Haruyama et al. for MAPbI 3 I migration is also observed in the i 2I reconstruction of both phases and v 4Cs of the γ phase (see Fig. In this section, we discuss the electronic properties of bulk CsPbI 3 , the clean surfaces in the α and the γ phases, as well as the relevant reconstructions reported in Figs. Figure In both phases, bulk CsPbI 3 exhibits a direct band gap at the Γ point. The charge densities (shown in Fig. Next, we investigate if the CsI termination introduces surface states. The middle panels of Fig. Figure Figure For the reconstructed surface models of the α phase, we observe the same surface states as in the clean-surface model (Fig. Our results offer guidance for growing favorable CsPbI 3 surfaces. By favorable, we here imply surface reconstructions that have a bulk-like band structure and no additional states in the band gap or perturbations of the band edges that might adversely affect the transport properties. Our analysis of the previous section suggests that the γ phase of CsPbI 3 is generally more suited for this purpose, as all of its stable surface reconstructions are free of band edge perturbations. For the α phase, the objective would be to avoid both PbI 2 deficient (v PbI 2 and v 2PbI 2 ) and rich (i PbI 2 and i 2PbI 2 ) reconstructions. Fortunately, the clean surface is stable across a wide range of the bulk stability region, as our surface phase diagram analysis shows. For Cs rich growth conditions, the i 4CsI phase dominates the phase diagram. This phase provides a good alternative to the clean surface since its band structure resembles that of the clean surface closely. In summary, we have studied the surface atomic and electronic structure of CsPbI 3 from first principles. For both the α (cubic) and the γ (orthorhombic) phases, we have considered the clean-surface models and a series of surface reconstructions. Surface phase diagram analysis indicates that the CsIterminated (001) surface is more stable within a large range of allowed chemical potentials for both phases. In addition, several CsI and PbI 2 rich and deficient surface reconstructions are stable. These surface reconstructions do not induce deep energy levels in the band gap. Nevertheless, the removal of PbI 2 units in the CsI-terminated α-CsPbI 3 surface has notice- See Supplementary Material for the charge density plots of all relevant surface models with CsI-termination, surface phase diagrams of PbI 2 -terminated models, crystal structures of studied surface models in both CsI-T and PbI 2 -T (that are not included in the main text) and the formation energies of all surface models. The data that supports the findings of this study will be openly available in NOvel Materials Discovery (NOMAD) repository at -2 X X X X X Γ