In situ scanning transmission electron microscopy enables observation of the domain dynamics in ferroelectric materials as a function of externally applied bias and temperature. The resultant data sets contain a wealth of information on polarization switching and phase transition mechanisms. However, identification of these mechanisms from observational data sets has remained a problem due to a large variety of possible configurations, many of which are degenerate. Here, we introduce an approach based on a combination of deep learning-based semantic segmentation, rotationally invariant variational autoencoder (VAE), and non-negative matrix factorization to enable learning of a latent space representation of the data with multiple real-space rotationally equivalent variants mapped to the same latent space descriptors. By varying the size of training sub-images in the VAE, we tune the degree of complexity in the structural descriptors from simple domain wall detection to the identification of switching pathways. This yields a powerful tool for the exploration of the dynamic data in mesoscopic electron, scanning probe, optical, and chemical imaging. Moreover, this work adds to the growing body of knowledge of incorporating physical constraints into the machine and deep-learning methods to improve learned descriptors of physical phenomena. Recent advances in in situ scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) allow for unprecedented observations of the dynamics of materials in response to external chemical, bias, and temperature stimuli with near atomic resolution. For instance, liquid phase and electrochemical STEM have enabled observation of battery devices operation, Here, we introduce an approach for analysis of the dynamics of bias-and temperatureinduced transitions using a deep learning workflow based on semantic segmentation for identification of relevant structural features via rotationally invariant variational autoencoder. In this approach, one projects the high dimensional configurational space of domain morphologies on a low-dimensional continuous latent space allowing for possible orientation variants, thereby effectively encoding the possible domain configuration. The complexity of description can be tuned via the length-scale of sub-images, providing insight into the corresponding physical mechanisms. We further illustrate that the latent space of the variational autoencoder contains regions of both physical and unphysical domain structures. This, in turn, offers opportunities to explore evolution of the system via associated latent representations. As a model system, we selected a proper ferroelectric material, BaTiO3, whose domain evolution upon electric field biasing is well established. Positive and negative voltages were applied to a thin lamella sample using a triangular waveform in the polarization direction; the thin BaTiO3 sample was mounted on a microelectromechanical systems (MEMS)-based device secured in a TEM holder. Prior to the rVAE analysis, we explored several strategies for pre-processing the experimental images to increase the visibility of the domain patterns. One approach was based on using classical image analysis tools such as resizing, blurring, and thresholding; however, these analyses are generally manpower intensive and not universal, leading to operator-dependent outcomes. Thus, to improve the identification of domain structures, we developed a deep convolutional neural network (DCNN)-based workflow for semantic segmentation of the images. In this approach, the human operator labels several of the images in terms of domain structures, backgrounds, and (optionally) contamination particles. The labeled data set is augmented and used to train the DCNN with the raw images as features and manually-defined classes (domain wall, background, contaminant) as labels. Once trained, the network can be used for analysis of the full image stack. A stack of randomly cropped images was generated from several labeled image sequence frames and were used to train the U-net-like DCNN. To determine the relevant domain geometries, we utilize the rVAE approach. In general, autoencoders are a class of neural networks where the original data set is compressed via a set of dense or convolutional layers into a small number of latent variables and subsequently deconvoluted into the original data set. Training of the autoencoders aims to minimize the reconstruction error. In this manner, latent variables create an optimal sparse representation of the initial data set, somewhat like a non-linear form of principal component analysis. Variational autoencoders (VAEs) adopt the same principle, but in this case learn a generative model, i.e., they attempt to model the generating distribution of the dataset with the latent layer representing a Bayesian prior distribution. We adapted a version of the VAE optimized for the analysis of systems that contain features with general rotational symmetry, The behavior of the latent space for a small window size is shown in Figure For the large window size, the dynamics captured by the rVAE become much richer. Here, the different parts of the latent space are occupied by dissimilar domain morphologies, e.g., double and triple domains. What is remarkable is that certain parts of the latent space, moving along selected directions recognizably, describe continuous changes in domain structure, e.g., an increase in the domain spacing or the emergence and growth of a new domain. At the same time, some parts of the latent space are populated by unphysical reconstructed structures that are readily recognizable by having an intermediate contrast. Note that since in this case the rVAE was applied to a semantically segmented image, we generally anticipate the contrast to be 0 or 1 with intermediate values confined only to small intermediate regions. The large regions with contrast adopting intermediate values do not correspond to physically realizable configurations. Also note that these regions will have very low density of data points from the original data set. The trained rVAE can be used to explore phase transition behavior via non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) analysis of the latent variables' statistics, similar to the GMM analysis reported earlier. Note that while for categorical GMM labels the data can in principle be represented via discrete variables (i.e., descriptor is the M-component vector describing the fraction of the M-th group of the GMM labels), the rVAE variables are continuous, necessitating such a representation. Here, each image during the experiment is encoded via rVAE, thereby giving rise to a set of latent variable values for each time step. The corresponding kerned density estimate is calculated, yielding the time-dependent probability density, e.g., for the L1 variable, the time evolution is described via 2D function kernel density KDE(L1,t). The KDEs for the angle and two latent variables are shown in Fig. The significance of this finding is that the combination of rVAE compression and subsequent matrix factorization is an unsupervised learning process with no ad hoc assumptions on the physics of the observed process. Despite this, the clear identification of relevant microstructural elements and identification of hysteretic behavior is possible. It is also important to note that while the exact rVAE behavior depends on the sampling window and training history, the overall behavior observed in Figure Figure To obtain insight into this behavior, we map the maximal contrast of reconstructed domains as shown in Fig. Alternatively, the structure of the latent space can be explored via multivariate analysis of the histograms of the reconstructed images. For the physical image, the contrast distribution is beta-like and is dominated by the low (no domain wall) and high bins. At the same time, for the unphysical images, intermediate contrast scales are abundant. Therefore, examination of the NMF endmembers and the corresponding loading maps visualized in the latent space provide insight into regions of physical and unphysical behaviors. Ultimately, one would want to supplement the learned behaviors from model predictions of a priori physics knowledge on the range of possible states. After all, states that are in the data are obviously physical, but those that are predicted by the generative model may be either physical or unphysical, and preferably, a penalty could be added to the learning process to encourage the physical states over the unphysical ones. Moreover, if it is possible to quantify (roughly) the energy of individual states, one can find transition pathways in the latent space directly through pathfinding or reinforcement learning approaches. An alternative pathway would be to try to simulate the transitions directly in the generative model by 3D convolutions and image stacks as input to a 3D rVAE (i.e., working in (x,y,t)). Nonetheless, the key to making this possible is the realization of low-dimensional, learned descriptors that can effectively summarize energy-degenerate states within the same latent variables, as is physically relevant. In other words, rotational and shift invariance lets us to consider energy-degenerate states equivalently without additional complexity; in this case by encoding the symmetry constraints. However, this approach can be extended toward more complex physics. To summarize, here we introduce a universal approach for analysis of dynamical electron microscopy data based on rotationally invariant latent embeddings and apply it for the exploration of bias-induced transformations in BaTiO3 visualized via in situ STEM. The dynamic microscopy data contains information on phase transformation mechanisms in the form of domain structures and morphologies. Variational autoencoders with rotational invariance are used as a universal method to project the broad variety of domain patterns onto the low-dimensional latent space. The bias-dependence of latent variable distribution allows description of the transition mechanism, in this case yielding the hysteresis loop. Deep analysis of the latent space allows identification of regions with physical and unphysical domain configurations, with clearly identifiable evolutionary pathways within the physical regions. The proposed approach is universal and can be applied to other dynamic phenomena ranging from thermal, bias, or chemically induced transformations in physical, chemical, electrochemical, and biological systems. Future developments can include exploration of dynamics and trajectories in the latent space for cases where individual physical units can be identified. Furthermore, we note that this approach is not limited to classical imaging and can be extended to multimodal and hyperspectral images, including microRaman, electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), and other imaging methods. The dataset used to showcase the developed analysis was previously used in Physical Review Materials 4 (2020) 104403 and arXiv:2011.05842.