2D intercorrelated ferroelectrics, exhibiting a coupled in-plane and out-of-plane ferroelectricity, is a fundamental phenomenon in the field of condensed-mater physics. The current research is based on the paradigm of bi-directional inversion asymmetry in single-layers, which restricts 2D intercorrelated ferroelectrics to extremely few systems. Herein, we propose a new scheme for achieving 2D intercorrelated ferroelectrics using van der Waals (vdW) interaction, and apply this scheme to a vast family of 2D vdW materials. Using first-principles, we demonstrate that 2D vdW multilayers-for example, BN, MoS2, InSe, CdS, PtSe2, TI2O, SnS2, Ti2CO2 etc.-can exhibit coupled in-plane and outof-plane ferroelectricity, thus yielding 2D intercorrelated ferroelectric physics. We further predict that such intercorrelated ferroelectrics could demonstrate many distinct properties, for example, electrical full control of spin textures in trilayer PtSe2 and electrical permanent control of valley-contrasting physics in four-layer VS2. Our finding opens a new direction for 2D intercorrelated ferroelectric research. The recent discovery of two-dimensional (2D) intercorrelated ferroelectrics has attracted tremendous interest in condensed matter physics Recently, numerous approaches are reported for realizing ferroelectricity, such as doping These strategies indeed succeed in producing IP and OOP ferroelectric polarizations, but not simultaneously, and even not to say their coupling, thereby being of useless for realizing 2D intercorrelated ferroelectrics. Moreover, these approaches are difficult to perform experimentally, and are far from controllable in practice. As an alternative, superlattices, such as (BaTiO3)m-(SrTiO3)n, are proposed in the context of generating both IP and OOP ferroelectricity In this work, we present a new scheme for achieving 2D intercorrelated ferroelectrics on the basis of first-principles calculations. Instead of utilizing the paradigm of non-centrosymmetric single-layers, the design principle is to use particular vdW interaction in 2D limit. By tuning the unique stacking configuration, both IP and OOP ferroelectric polarizations, as well as their strong coupling, can be obtained in 2D vdW multilayers, thus establishing 2D intercorrelated ferroelectrics. This unique scheme is successfully exemplified in a vast family of 2D vdW materials, such as BN, MoS2, InSe, CdS, PtSe2, Ti2CO2 etc.. As a new 2D intercorrelated ferroelectric family, its potential coupling with other physics may provide novel physics. We also predict that intriguing phenomena like electrical full control of spin textures and electrical permanent control of valley-contrasting physics could occur in such systems. Our results greatly extend the scope for candidate materials of 2D intercorrelated ferroelectrics and hence will simulate immediate experimental interest. Electrical polarization in 2D limit stems from the separation of positive and negative charged ions. Once the separation is switchable, 2D ferroelectricity will be realized One such example is the vdW interaction is 2D lattice, wherein both the layer-thickness and layerstacking can act as new freedoms to engineer the crystal symmetry and in turn the electric dipoles. Here, without loss of generality, we start with h-BN having non-ferroelectrics to dig into the design principle for realizing 2D intercorrelated ferroelectrics using vdW interactions. Due to the three-fold rotation symmetry of D3h point group, single-layer h-BN possesses three equivalent IP polarizations along the [110], Before studying 2D vdW multilayers, we first define six typical stacking patterns between two layers by distinguishing atomic positions of sequential layer with respect to bottom layer, i.e., AA, AB, AC, AA′, AB′ and AC′ (Figure While for the three parallel configurations, the IP polarization arises from two parts: the assigned i-IP polarizations in each layer and the IP polarization induced by the charge redistribution between two layers (c-IP). As the assigned i-IP polarizations of the two layers are aligned parallel, the reversal of the assigned i-IP polarization through layer sliding is forbidden, thereby excluding the IP ferroelectricity. However, arising from the simultaneous absence of mirror and inversion symmetries, the AB and AC configurations present a spontaneous OOP polarization of 0.68 μC•cm -2 and -0.68 μC•cm -2 , respectively (Figure Accordingly, by introducing the vdW interaction, the OOP ferroelectricity that is absent in singlelayer lattice can be successfully achieved in multilayer h-BN. But the existence of assigned i-IP polarization within single layers blocks the formation of IP ferroelectricity and hence intercorrelated ferroelectricity in 2D vdW multilayers. For realizing IP ferroelectricity, the assigned i-IP polarization should be offset when forming the 2D vdW multilayers, and the c-IP polarization should be preserved. Only in this case, the equivalent 180° rotation with respect to the direction perpendicular to both IP and OOP polarizations is possible to be obtained under layer sliding triggered by electric field. To satisfy this condition, we narrow down our choices to multilayer h-BN with even layers, and successfully realize the intercorrelated ferroelectricity in four-layer (FL) h-BN. In four-layer (FL) h-BN with intercorrelated ferroelectricity, the assigned i-IP polarizations in both two middle and two outmost layers should be "anti-parallel" aligned to offset the i-IP polarization as well as to facilitate the equivalent 180° rotation under layer sliding, and the inversion symmetry and mirror symmetries along OOP and assigned IP directions should be broken to produce IP and OOP polarizations. Following these two prerequisites, we consider all the possible configurations for FL h-BN and screen out 18 non-equivalent configurations with intercorrelated ferroelectricity (Figure Taking the ABB′A′ configuration as an example, we explore more physics underlying the intercorrelated ferroelectricity of FL h-BN. As shown in Figure These two states can be considered as two ferroelectric states FE and FE′. To confirm the feasibility of the OOP ferroelectricity, we calculate the energy profile for the switching between them using the NEB method. As shown in Figure suggesting the feasibility of OOP ferroelectricity in ABB′A′ configuration. Meanwhile, by focusing on the atoms on (11 ̅ 0) plane of the ABB′A′ configuration, as shown in Figure Actually, this scheme is also applicable for other single-layer materials with inversion symmetry, such as PtSe2, TI2O, SnS2, Sb2Te2X, MXene Ti2CO2, and so on. By looking at the ABB′A′ configuration of FL h-BN (Figure The energy barrier for such switching is estimated to be 63.7 meV/f.u., suggesting the potential for 2D intercorrelated ferroelectrics. Obviously, this scenario is appliable for other single-layer materials with inversion symmetry. In principle, by utilizing vdW interaction, 2D intercorrelated ferroelectric systems can be constructed by various kinds of single-layer materials with D3h or inversion symmetry. This, combined with the rich and varied properties of single-layer materials, would facilitate possibility of the coupling between intercorrelated ferroelectrics and other properties, thus inspiring exciting opportunities to design novel devices with new physics and phenomenon. In the following, we respectively take Rashba effect and valley-contrasting physics as examples to address the new physics raised from their coupling with intercorrelated ferroelectrics. Rashba effect is generally related to the presence of a potential asymmetry and a polar axis, which lifts the electron-spin degeneracy under spin-orbit coupling (SOC). In this case, significant Rashba effect is expected to be observed in 2D intercorrelated ferroelectric materials comprising heavy atoms. Different from conventional oxide films whose polarization usually is suppressed by complex depolarization field, 2D intercorrelated ferroelectric materials with robust polarization present an ideal platform for exploring the coupling between Rashba effect and intercorrelated ferroelectrics. One specific system is TL PtSe2. Figure Upon taking SOC into account, the spin degeneracy for the highest valance band around the Γ point is lifted, producing a significant Rashba splitting ES = 11 meV. In Figure Compared with Rashba effect, valley-contrasting physics is a more recent development. 2D hexagonal lattices with an inversion asymmetry provide an appropriate platform for operating valleycontrasting physics when their band edges are located at the corners of the Brillouin zone Especially for 2D VS2 After switching the OOP/IP polarization directions by either IP or OOP bias, the magnetization of FL VS2 shifts downwards. And the spin component of the K and -K valleys is reversed to spin-down; however, the -K valley from the spin-down band is still lower in energy than the K valley, preserving the valley polarization of 3.76 meV (Figure To summarize, a new scheme for realizing 2D intercorrelated ferroelectrics is proposed using firstprinciples. Going beyond the paradigm of non-centrosymmetric single-layers, our design principle is based on the particular vdW interaction in 2D limit. Both IP and OOP ferroelectric polarizations, as well as their strong coupling, can be obtained in 2D vdW multilayers, through tuning the layer number and stacking configurations, which establishes the long-pursuit 2D intercorrelated ferroelectrics. We reveal that this unique scheme can be exemplified in a vast family of 2D vdW materials, such as BN, MoS2, ZnO, InSe, SiC, CdS, PtSe2, TI2O, SnS2, Ti2CO2 etc.. More importantly, we find that as a new 2D intercorrelated ferroelectric family, they could demonstrate many unconventional phenomena and possibilities for practical applications, for example, electrical full control of spin textures in TL PtSe2 and electrical permanent control of valley-contrasting physics in FL VS2. Our findings greatly extend the scope for candidate materials of 2D intercorrelated ferroelectrics and provide a novel platform towards exploring novel physics.