The review is focused on our recent predictions of nontrivial physical phenomena taking place in the nanostructure single-layer grapheme on ferroelectric substrate, which are related with magnetic field. In particular we predicted that 180-degree domain walls in a strained ferroelectric film can induce p-n junctions in a graphene channel and lead to the unusual temperature and gate voltage dependences of the perpendicular modes ν⊥ of the integer quantum Hall effect. The non-integer numbers and their irregular sequence principally differ from the conventional sequence ν⊥= 3/2, 5/3.... The unusual v⊥numbers originate from significantly different numbers of the edge modes, ν1 and ν2, corresponding to different concentration of carriers in the left (n1) and right (n2) ferroelectric domains of p-n junction boundary. The difference between n1 and n2 disappears with the vanishing of the film spontaneous polarization in a paraelectric phase, which can be varied in a wide temperature range by an appropriate choice of misfit strain originated from the film-substrate lattice mismatch. Next we studied the electric conductivity of the system ferromagnetic dielectric -graphene channel -ferroelectric substrate. The magnetic dielectric locally transforms the band spectrum of graphene by inducing an energy gap in it and making it spin-asymmetric with respect to the free electrons. It was demonstrated, that if the Fermi level in the graphene channel belongs to energy intervals, where the graphene band spectrum, modified by EuO, becomes sharply spin-asymmetric, such a device can be an ideal non-volatile spin filter. The practical application of the system under consideration would be After single layer graphene as a conducting channel for FET was obtained for the first time experimentally in 2004, many remarkable effects, caused by it's Dirac-like spectrum, like Klein paradox etc., were observed in deck-top experiments This our review is focused on recent predictions of unusual physical phenomena taking place in the nanostructure single-layer grapheme on ferroelectric substrate, which are related with magnetic field. In particular we predicted that 180-degree domain walls in a strained ferroelectric film can induce p-n junctions in a graphene channel and lead to the unusual temperature and gate voltage dependences of the perpendicular modes ν⊥ of the integer quantum Hall effect Next we studied the electric conductivity of the system ferromagnetic dielectric -graphene channel -ferroelectric substrate It had been demonstrated theoretically that the Dirac-like spectrum of graphene Here xy  is the xy-component of conductance tensor and ν is the number of edge modes numbers are given by expression Symbol "[]" stands for the integer part of a number; n is the 2D concentration of electrons in graphene channel, and is the density of magnetic field flux, threading the 2D surface corresponding to the degree of the k-th LL occupation. Abanin and Levitov On the contrary, recently the formation of IQHE with p-n junctions created along the longitudinal direction of graphene cannel had been studied Recently On the basement of these works we have studied Noteworthy, that the temperature of phase transition from the ferroelectric (FE) to paraelectric (PE) phase taking place in a strained ferroelectric film can be changed by a misfit strain in a wide temperature range including room temperatures Let us focus on the result in more details. System under consideration in Ref. To minimize the surface-induced domain wall broadening given by expression T of a ferroelectric strained film can be controlled by appropriate choice of the misfit strain m u between the film and substrate where TC is a Curie temperature of a bulk ferroelectric, The concentration of carriers in a graphene channel placed at a single Ising-type 180-degree FDW on the left ( ( ) x n 1 ) and right ( ( ) ) sides from the wall is defined by the difference of electric displacement normal components in the oxide layer and in the ferroelectric, , and so it acquires the form: We derived Corresponding number of edge modes, ν1,2, with carriers concentrations to the left and to the right sides of FDW boundary n1,2, are ( ) , of the strained ferroelectric film on a rigid substrate can be controlled by changing of misfit strain m u , where S l is the screening length in graphene layer that is typically much smaller than 0.5 nm T is given by Eq.(1.3). ( ) , can be made close to room temperature by using appropriate film-substrate pair, which defines the misfit strain m u and decreasing the film thickness below 100 nm due to the existence of the thickness-induced phase transition into a PE phase A field effect transistor (FET) with a graphene channel on a dielectric substrate was created in 2004 for the first time , where AP R and P R are the valve resistances for antiparallel and parallel orientation of magnetization at ferromagnetic contacts, are very small to improve them Recently The graphene channel is placed on a single-domain ferroelectric film with a spontaneous polarization S P . Since the ferroelectric substrate can be used for the doping of a graphene conductive channel by a significant number of carriers without the traditional application of the gate voltage , where is the wave vector value, Fermi velocity, and the signs "+" and "-" correspond to the conduction and valence bands, respectively. In the graphene channel section located under EuO the spectra Note here, that first principle calculations Although the electron would pass through a non-magnetic graphene channel of length L without dispersion, however, the presence of the section with length L l  in the channel, where the graphene has pronounced magnetic properties, leads to the necessity to account for the local scattering of carriers with different spin signs. The conductivity of the graphene channel, taking into account the double degeneration of graphene at points ' , K K , will be described by the modified Landauer formula ) is the number of conductance modes. The transmission coefficient ( ) is the probability that the electron will pass without a scattering the "magnetic" section of length l , which depends on the value of the electron spin. For the full conductivity it is necessary to sum for both spin values. Using the relation L l  we can assume that with high accuracy, when Fermi energy level is inside the energy gap of the spectrum (2.1), and lies between the 2-nd and 3-rd energies levels. Outside the gap ( ) is described by the expression , and has the physical meaning of the number of de Broglie half-wavelengths 2 DB  for an electron in the graphene channel, which can be located at the width of this channel W. Symbol "Int" denotes the integer part. Using relation between 2D-concentration of electrons and Fermi energy in graphene, , we obtain for the de Broglie wavelength: When the Fermi level lies outside the gap of the spectrum (2.1), the number of conductance modes is: It was shown in Ref. when the Fermi level is within the energy interval between the first and the second energy levels in Eq.(2.1). When the Fermi level falls into the interval between the third and the fourth energy values, . When the values of polarization are so high that the Fermi level lies either above the first or below the fourth energy levels, both transmission coefficients are close to unity. Thus, there are intervals of ferroelectric polarization, for which the considered system is an ideal spin filter, and the value of the ratio is close to 1 for sufficiently small polarizations of the order of mC/m 2 . The value of the spontaneous polarization S P in thin ferroelectric films can be controlled by size effect, temperature T and/or misfit strain m u originated from the film-substrate lattice constants mismatch The spontaneous polarization 0 P corresponds to the bulk sample at zero Kelvin; and can vary PS from the bulk values of (0.5 -0.05) C/m 2 order to the values hundreds of times smaller. The temperature ( ) , of the second order phase transition of the film to the paraelectric state has the form Appl. Phys. 125, 174105 (2019)], with the permission of AIP Publishing). In Fig. is the electron free path corresponding to the Fermi level energy To resume, in Ref. In Note, that the problem solved in Ref. . However, as it was demonstrated by Hallal et al. According to the first principles calculations 