Motivated by the recent experiments suggesting the importance of nematicity in the phase diagrams of ironbased and cuprate high-Tc superconductors, we study the influence of nematicity on the collective modes inside the superconducting state in a non-equilibrium. In particular, we consider the signatures of collective modes in short-time dynamics of a system with competing nematic and sand d-wave superconducting orders. In the rotationally symmetric state, we show that the Bardasis-Schrieffer mode, corresponding to the subdominant pairing, hybridizes with the nematic collective mode and merges into a single in-gap mode, with the mixing vanishing only close to the phase boundaries. For the d-wave ground state, we find that nematic interaction suppresses the damping of the collective oscillations in the short-time dynamics. Additionally, we find that even inside the nematic s + d-wave superconducting state, a Bardasis-Schrieffer-like mode leads to order parameter oscillations that strongly depend on the competition between the two pairing symmetries. We discuss the connection of our results to the recent pump-probe experiments on high-Tc superconductors. The rapid development of pump-probe non-equilibrium spectroscopy opened new powerful tools to investigate collective excitations in condensed matter systems. In particular, probing relaxation dynamics in unconventional superconductors appears to be a promising field due to variety of different emerging phases accompanying superconducting ground state in these systems. One interesting example is an unconventional superconductor with a subdominant pairing interaction with a symmetry different from the ground state one. In that case a sharp collective Bardasis-Schrieffer mode (BS mode) associated with the 'failed' ground state is expected to be present within the superconducting gap. It has been originally introduced by Bardasis and Schrieffer in Ref. [37] for the subdominant B 1g (d x 2 -y 2 -wave)-symmetric mode in the A 1g (swave)-symmetric ground state. Most recently, possible signatures of this BS mode were reported in the Raman response of the iron-based superconductors due to the close competition between s ± -and d x 2 -y 2 -wave superconductivity in these compounds. In this manuscript we extend the analysis of collective modes in non-equilibrium superconductors To model superconductivity in the presence of the nematicity and its collective modes, we consider the two-dimensional single-band model on the square lattice with nematic and superconducting mean-field order parameters. The nematic order, ∆ n γ n k describes a Pomeranchuk-like instability and ∆ k refers to the competing s-wave (∆ k = ∆ s γ s k ) and d-wave superconducting order parameters or their mixture in the nematic and/or time-reversal symmetry broken state (∆ k = ∆ s γ s k + e iα ∆ d γ d k ) where 0 ≤ α ≤ π. Here, ∆ s and ∆ d are corresponding magnitudes of the sand the d-wave superconducting order parameter, respectively. The Hamiltonian reads where c kσ is the operator that annihilates (creates) an electron with spin σ with momentum k. The function ξ k = αk 2 -μ, with parameters α, μ > 0, describes the band dispersion. We do not assume a continuous rotational symmetry, taking instead the parabolic form as an approximation for a full lattice tight-binding dispersion that has only discrete (C 4 ) rotational symmetry. Note that although we focus on s-wave (A 1g ) and d x 2 -y 2 -wave (B 1g ) superconductivity, the considerations in this paper can be easily generalized to any superconducting order, which belongs to the even one-dimensional irreducible representations. For simplicity we will drop the index of d x 2 -y 2 . We also choose γ s k = 1 and γ d k = γ n k = √ 2 cos(2φ) similar to Ref. [52]. The conventional and helpful way to describe the short-time dynamics in the superconducting state The operators s x k , s y k and s z k fulfill the spin commutation relations. This description can be generalized to the presence of the nematic order in a straightforward way. Using Anderson pseudospins Eq. ( This form of the Hamiltonian describes a set of pseudospins Here we introduced the shorthand notation where ∆ k and -∆ k are the real and imaginary part of ∆ k , and the effective band structure ξk = ξ k + ∆ n γ n k . Note that the nematic order parameter ∆ n is real, while ∆ s and ∆ d can be complex numbers. Additionally, we introduce the pairing interactions V s and V d for the sand d-wave pairing channel and the nematic interaction V n , where V s,d,n < 0 means attractive interaction in these channels. The order parameters need to be determined self-consistently via The nematic interaction needs to overcome a critical attractive strength, V n,c = -1 2ν0 = -2πα, where ν 0 = 1 4πα is the density of states, to form a nematic state at zero temperature where the quasiparticle energy dispersion The general interplay of superconductivity and the nematic order is sketched in Fig. We aim to understand the short-time dynamics of the order parameters in this model, which is closely connected to the short-time dynamics of the pseudospin expectation values as seen from Eqs (4)- (6). Using the Heisenberg equation of motion one obtains Bloch-type equations for the time-evolution of the Anderson pseudospin operators The nematic order modifies the dispersion The properties of the pseudospins for conventional s-wave superconductors have been discussed extensively in previous works of the quenched quantity) has always the same effect: The pseudomagnetic field B k is tilted and, thus, the pseudospins s k are not pointing antiparallel to B k anymore and start to precess. To see how nematic order changes the picture we quench the nematic order to a finite value The inclusion of the effect of a time-dependent electromagnetic field via a time-dependent vector potential A(t) leads to a similar effect, as it enters the z-component of the pseudomagnetic field via a minimal coupling B z k = 2 ξk → ξ k+A + ξ k-A . The pseudomagnetic field B k becomes tilted in z direction, which leads to a precession of the pseudospins s k . Analogous effect is also obtained if one quenches the superconducting order parameter. Quenching the order parameters ∆ s or ∆ d leads to a change in the components B x k and B y k . This results also in a precession of the pseudospins s k . Thus, due to the three different order parameters there are multiple options how to quench the system and drive it out of the equilibrium. Using the equations of motion we are in the position to calculate the short-time dynamics for our model. In the following we discuss the short-time dynamics in the pure s-wave, pure d-wave and the mixed s + d-wave ground state for varying strength of the nematic interaction. In out-of-equilibrium experiments the ground state of these systems is excited by the application of a time-dependent laser field. This field pumps energy into the system and therefore excites Cooper pairs. However, in the non-nematic ground state, i.e., the pure s-wave or the pure d-wave state, the laser field does also temporarily break the rotational symmetry in these systems. This implies that even though one starts with a pure s-wave (d-wave) superconductor the pulse also excites d-wave (s-wave) Cooper pairs At the same time, the presence of the nematic order can also mix the sand dchannels, which raises the question of the influence of nematic collective modes on the BS mode in a non-equilibrium system. In the following section we study the interplay of the BS and nematic collective modes in the short-time dynamics of our model. We first solve the equations of motion Eq. ( To get further insight in the interplay of the subdominant pairing instability and nematic fluctuations onto the collective modes in a superconducting system, we compute the frequency dependence of these modes within linear response theory. Our starting point are the equations of motion in Eq. 10, which are linearized around their equilibrium values, i.e. we approximate s k (t) s eq k +δs k (t) and B k (t) B eq k +δB k (t). Thus, we obtain The perturbed pseudomagnetic field is determined by the perturbed order parameters The linearized equations of motion in Eq. ( Note that all order parameters in the matrix M k are at equilibrium. The perturbed pseudomagnetic field δB k contains both, the information on the δ∆ k and δ∆ n , as well as on the vector potential A. It can be rewritten in terms of these quantities as follows Here we introduced the matrix which contains all relevant form factors. Using Eqs. ( Inserting Eq. ( with is the Fouriertransformation of A 2 (t). The 5 × 5 matrix χ(ω) can be understood as the response function of the gaps δ∆ = T . In the simplest case the resonance frequencies of δ∆(ω) are given at those values of ω, where the r.h.s. of Eq. ( is fulfilled. As is expected in linear response, the form of the vector potential does not affect the frequencies. Without nematic interaction Eq. ( Upon inclusion of the attractive nematic interaction this picture changes as we have observed in the short-time dynam-ics in Fig. We can further demonstrate this analytically. Assuming a pure s-wave groundstate we can calculate the response function The sum over momenta k can we rewritten as an integral over the angle φ and an integral over ξ times the density of states ν 0 . This yields (the terms that vanish after ξ or φ integral are omitted) One finds that the dynamics of ∆ d and ∆ n decouple from that of ∆ s , ∆ s , ∆ d . Note that the first three entries on the diagonal of χ(ω) correspond to the decoupled response of ∆ s , ∆ s , ∆ d , while the response of ∆ d and ∆ n appears to be coupled. Plugging this into our condition for collective modes in Eq. ( where we introduced the integrals We want to discuss each part of the expression in Eq. ( This expression is zero because it is the exact condition of the self-consistency equation for ∆. The second term would correspond to the Goldstone-mode (here it is at ω = 0 but becomes gapped upon inclusion of the gauge fluctuations): One observes, that there is a cross term in Eq. ( Using the self-consistency equation one gets ω) can be evaluated analytically. Then, Eq. ( where x = ω 2∆ and the notation v d = V d /V s and v n = 2V n /V s has been introduced. L.h.s. of the Eq. ( All of this is in agreement with the results in phase diagram in Fig. Thus, we come to the conclusion that in an s-wave ground state with competing d-wave and nematic states, there is a single collective in-gap mode that generically has a mixed character, although the mixing is weaker near an instability, where the frequency of the excitation goes to zero. This is evident from Fig. We find that in the presence of nematic ordering tendency, in-gap collective mode cannot be immediately related to the competing superconducting correlations in the d-wave channel as was originally proposed Now we turn to the discussion of the short-time dynamics in the pure d-wave superconducting ground state, which is present if V d /V s > 1.2 and for weak nematic interactions V n < V n,c . This scenario applies for example to the high-T c cuprate superconductors, where the presence of nematicity and nematic fluctuations is intensively discussed We solve again the self-consistency equations and quench this time the finite ∆ d by a factor 0.95 and set the s-wave order parameter |∆ s | = 0.05|∆ d | similar to the previous subsection. In Fig. As shown in Fig. It is tempting to identify this nematic Bardasis-Schrieffer mode with the additional oscillation found recently in high-T c cuprates If the nematic interaction exceeds the critical value V n,c a nematic ground state forms and the tetragonal C 4 symmetry is broken. This breaking of the point group symmetry leads to a mixing of irreducible representations, with implications for superconducting state. In particular, a mixed two-fold symmetric composite s + d-wave state forms, where sand FIG. To study this regime, we set V n > V n,c and calculate the superconducting order parameters ∆ s and ∆ d and the nematic order parameter ∆ n self consistently. We quench both su-perconducting order parameters by a factor 0.95. The resulting short time dynamics is shown in Fig. To get further insight into the collective modes in the mixed s+d state we also compute their frequency dependence within linear response solving Eq. ( One of the main conclusions of our study is that the nematic interaction in the system has a strong impact onto the short-time dynamics of unconventional superconductors. In particular, we argue that its presence can yield additional os- cillations in the time evolution of the superconducting order parameter. These oscillations are in addition to the Higgs modes and appear as B 1g -symmetric Bardasis-Schrieffer type modes in the s-wave superconducting ground state, which appear (in the presence of nematic interactions) even if the interaction in the subdominant d-wave Cooper-pairing channel is weak. For the d-wave ground state, the nematic interactions yield additional weakly damped oscillations, whereas the pure s-wave BS modes are expected to be strongly damped by nodal quasiparticles. Furthermore, we argue that even if the tetragonal symmetry is explicitly broken in the nematic ground state the Higgs spectroscopy could be used to elucidate the nature of the primary and secondary superconducting instabilities, as the mode properties, such as lineshape, appear to be strongly dependent on the nature of the primary state. In this regard it is of interest to investigate further the short time dynamics of the iron-based superconductors, where both ingredients, strong competition between s ± -and d-wave superconductivity and nearby nematic order, are present and BS like mode has been observed Here a strong interplay of nematicity and various competing superconducting states would yield an interesting short-time dynamics. While we expect some quantitative difference due to the multi-band nature, the qualitiative picture of mixing of Bardasis-Schrieffer modes and nematic modes should not be affected. One other possible material class, where nematicity would affect the short time dynamics of the superconducting state are the cuprates. Recent experiments found signatures of a second collective mode inside the superconducting phase of cuprates beside the Higgs-mode and its origin is still not clarified. In summary, we have studied the interplay between nematic order or fluctuations and Bardasis-Schrieffer modes in unconventional superconductors. We have shown that nematic order fluctuations and B 1g symmetric Bardasis-Schrieffer mode mix into a single mode in the s-wave superconducting state, with its frequency softening in proximity to the boundary of the nematic and s + id states, where the mixing is negligible. We have also shown that in the superconducting d-wave ground state the nematic interactions lead to a reduction of damping of the mixed BS-nematic mode. Finally, in the mixed state s + d superconducting ground state, we have shown that lineshapes of the collective oscillations can be used to elucidate the nature of the primary and secondary superconducting instabilities. V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT P. A. V. acknowledges a Postdoctoral Fellowship from the Rutgers University Center for Materials Theory. In this section we discuss the effect of repulsive nematic interactions onto the collective mode. This implies that V n > 0 and therefore never leads to an emerging finite order parameter ∆ n and, thus, C 4 -rotational symmetry is always present. In Fig. Here we show that a B 2g -nematic order does not interact with the Bardasis-Schrieffer mode of the B 1g (d x 2 -y 2 -wave) pairing channel. To do so, we analyze Eq. ( The first four rows and columns connect real and imaginary parts of ∆ s with real and imaginary parts of ∆ d . The fifth component of δ∆ is nematic order and thus the (5, i)and (i, 5)-component of the response function for i = 5 describes coupling of nematicity to superconductivity. From Eq. (B1) we find that if one assumes a B 2g nematic formfactor γ n k = √ 2 sin(2φ k ), then all of these (5, i)and (i, 5)components vanish by symmetry because the B 2g -form factor is orthogonal to the B 1g form factor of d x 2 -y 2 -wave and A 1g form factor of s-wave superconductivity. Thus the re-sponse function consists of two independent block matrices: a 4 × 4-matrix, describing the collective response of superconductivity and, thus, the Bardasis-Schrieffer and Higgs-modes and a 1 × 1-matrix, describing the response of nematicity. Thus, the solution for the Bardasis-Schrieffer mode and the mode of the B 2g -nematicity in Eq. ( 