Developing compact, low-dissipation, cryogenic-compatible microwave electronics is essential for scaling up low-temperature quantum computing systems. In this paper, we demonstrate an ultra-compact microwave directional forward coupler based on high-impedance slow-wave superconducting-nanowire transmission lines. The coupling section of the fabricated device has a footprint of 416 μm 2 . At 4.753 GHz, the input signal couples equally to the through port and forward-coupling port (50:50) at -6.7 dB with -13.5 dB isolation. The coupling ratio can be controlled with DC bias current or temperature by exploiting the dependence of the kinetic inductance on these quantities. The material and fabrication-process are suitable for direct integration with superconducting circuits, providing a practical solution to the signal distribution bottlenecks in developing large-scale quantum computers. The scalability of superconducting quantum systems is constrained by the distribution of microwave signals to the quantum processors [1]. Within current designs, each qubit is individually wired for readout and control [1, 2], entailing an increasing number of devices and cables as the size of the circuit is increased. Inevitably, the present approach will lead to challenges in packaging, routing, thermalization, and footprint [3]. To realize large-scale circuits with thousands of qubits, most of the microwave electronics will need to be integrated on-chip [1, 3], necessitating the development of miniaturized low-power, low-dissipation RF devices. More broadly, a small-footprint cryogenic microwave electronics platform is also required for the advancement of several other applications relying on processing electrical signals at low temperature, such as single-photon detection [4], superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometry [5, 6], and radio astronomy [7, 8] . Many of the proposals to address scalability in superconducting circuits face several challenges in satisfying the requirements for on-chip integrability. Devices based on semiconductors [9-13] either dissipate too much power to be operated at a few milliKelvin [1] or are made from unconventional materials for which integration with superconductors has not yet been demonstrated. Among the superconducting solutions, 50 Ω transmission-line-based devices [14, 15] require too large a footprint for large-scale integration. Josephson junction (JJ) electronics are a natural candidate for integration with JJ-based quantum processors [ Recently, superconducting nanowires have emerged as an alternative approach to realize ultra-compact microwave devices Conventional directional coupler modules split, combine and distribute microwave fields to the subsequent processing layers or to the readout Our device is designed following a traditional coupled-line architecture (Fig. To practically illustrate this concept, we consider the side-coupled stripline implementation, shown in Fig. Fig. Compared to the same structure realized with conventional conductors The device was fabricated with parameters based on the modeling results. See SM for details on the fabrication. Fig. were also fabricated to allow wire-bonding and packaging. The footprint of the full superconducting structure (as outlined in Fig. The addition of the tapers, while increasing the total footprint of the device, improves flexibility, affording the possibility to interface the high-impedance coupling section to lowerimpedance environments without disturbing the forward coupling operation. In this case we interfaced the high-impedance nanowire transmission line coupler to 50 Ω RF electronics. Fig. We measured the microwave response of the fabricated coupler at 1.3 K with a vector network analyzer providing effective signal power lower than -60 dBm. In the same cooldown, we calibrated the cable and connector loss (cryostat to device box inputs/outputs) to scale the measured data. Fig. At 4.753 GHz, the input signal from Port 1 couples equally to the through port (Port 2) and forward-coupling port (Port 4) with a level of -6.7 dB, and the isolation parameter S31 = -13.5 dB. For comparison, we show simulations of the impedance-matched coupler, including the response of the feed lines, and corrected to account for fabrication non-idealities (see SM for additional details). The slight discrepancy (≈ 500 MHz) between the measured and simulated coupling frequency can be attributed to the uncertainties in the device parameters. For example, the fabrication process, consisting of several lithographic and etching steps, may induce a degradation of the film leading to an increase in the kinetic inductance that would explain this observation. We attribute the inconsistency in the magnitude of the S parameters to backward reflections, device-level conductor losses, and to additional contributions that were not accounted for in the calibration. In this experiment, the calibration does not account for losses and reflection from the sample holder PCB and wire bonds. The agreement with the simulation improves when we include normal conductor losses for the Au layers. More details can be found in the SM. The isolation parameter is at a significantly different level from the expected value. This discrepancy might be caused by factors such as the impedance-matching taper deviating from the prescribed design, with sub-optimal impedance matching and additional backward reflections, and the specific full device simulation not including element-to-element transitions (e.g. stripline to CPW). See SM for additional details. The microwave response was characterized with effective injected currents much smaller than the device depairing current I d (see SM). In this small-signal condition the device response is independent of the applied microwave power. However, the kinetic inductance strongly depends on carrier density, which can be tuned with current (I b ) and with temperature (T ): , where I sw is the switching current and T c is the critical temperature. Leveraging these dependencies affords the possibility of dynamically modulating the microwave characteristics of the modes in the lines, creating active, tunable devices. When the bias current in the nanowire approaches the depairing current (x → 1), the kinetic inductance diverges hyperbolically L k (x) ∝ (1x α ) -1/α , with α determined by the operating temperature of the device Fig. [44], a 30% theoretical maximum increment of the kinetic inductance might be expected. In the coupled-line architecture the two nanowires are galvanically isolated. Hence, the kinetic inductance of each nanowire can be tuned independently. We characterized the device tunability at 4.75 GHz by biasing the coupler through the isolation port and measuring the coupled and transmitted powers. When changing the operating temperature, a much wider variation of the kinetic in-ductance, and hence of the scattering parameters, can be achieved. Fig. The device presented in this work achieves 50:50 forward coupling in a dramatically reduced footprint by exploiting the properties of high-inductance superconducting nanowire transmission lines. The coupling section, as configured here, occupies only 416 μm 2 and can be integrated as-is in high-impedance environment circuits with Z 0 ≈ 1.5 kΩ. Moreover, as the characteristic-impedance depends strongly on the device geometry, the device can be matched to a wide variety of high-impedance environments by redesigning the coupling section's width and length, while keeping a small footprint. As mentioned above, the possibility of performing impedance matching using tapered structures allows one to interface the directional coupler to lower-impedance environment as well. The total occupied footprint, even including the tapers, is still lower than other conventional normal-conductor coupler designs, such as hybrid, Lange, or parallel lines The model developed to support the design of the device is in agreement with the measured response. The disagreement with the measured data, observed in the magnitude of the scattering parameters, are partially due to backward reflections and to device-level losses which are not accounted for in the system calibration. The effects induced by the use of normal conductors (feed lines and ground plane) or lossy dielectrics can be addressed by redesigning the material stack and adapting the layout. The device model also does not include the power-dependent non-linear effects that might play an additional role when driving the coupler in the highly non-linear kinetic-inductance regime. This could contribute to the discrepancies observed when testing the coupler for t → 1, where t is the reduced temperature. The study of the non-linearities in high-kinetic-inductance transmission lines is beyond the scope of this paper. The tunability of the coupling parameters opens up the opportunity for the realization of high-impedance tunable microwave devices. For example, a high-impedance single-pole double-throw non-linear switch could be realized based on this coupler architecture. Similarly, tunability with temperature may become practical if a heater element is fabricated in close proximity to the coupling section. We suggest this device may find application in existing superconducting quantum architectures, where the integration of superconducting nanowires, in the form of superinductors, has already been demonstrated See Supplemental Material for more details on modeling, simulation, fabrication and measurements. All files related to a published paper are stored as a single deposit and assigned a Supplemental Material URL. This URL appears in the article's reference list. In this section we describe the analytical modeling of the nanowire coupler, originally presented in We consider here the schematic shown in the main text in Fig. Taking the partial derivative with respect to z of Eq. (1b) and substituting in Eq. (1a) we have: with and for the two eigenmodes, the voltage ratios on the two lines are We now derive the general solution for the voltages on the lines in terms of forward and backward propagating waves for the c and π modes: The currents on the line can be obtained by substituting Eq.9 and Eq.10 in Eq.1b: where Z c,a,b and Z π,a,b denotes the common and differential mode impedances Finally, the port voltages can be evaluated by applying the following boundary conditions: V a (z = 0)/Z La = I a (z = 0) (19) where V IN is the input voltage at port 1 and Z Lb and Z La are the load impedances. and the propagation constants reduce to and similarly, the impedances for the c and π modes A signal injected through the input port is a superposition of the two modes and the energy propagates through the coupled structures, shuttling between the two lines with a periodicity From Eq. 25, the minimum length required for 50:50 forward coupling is where λ c is the guided wavelength for the common mode. Note that in the high-inductance regime, the coupling is mostly determined by the kinetic inductance and the capacitance terms. In Fig. To perform microwave response simulations we used Sonnet EM from SonnetLab The material stack and the geometry were set as in Fig. The material stack and the geometry were set as in Fig. The device was simulated as a netlist starting from full simulations of single components: the 4 port coupler, the 2 port taper, and the coplanar waveguide feedline. This simulation does not account for specific element-to-element transitions. For example, the transmission line arcs connecting the 4 port coupler with each taper or the transition between the mi- crostrip architecture to the CPW feed lines are not captured by the simulated layout. As the isolation and directivity of a parallel line coupler depends on the real geometric layout of the coupler We designed a Klopfenstein impedance matching taper following the works in Ref. The taper transforms the impedance of a transmission line, minimizing reflections. One end of the taper had a width of 300 nm to match the nanowire transmission line at the coupler section. The other end of the taper is designed to provide a 50 Ω characteristic impedance to match the room-temperature testing electronics. For the microwave environment of this transmission line, 50 Ω is obtained with a width of ≈ 15 μm. The taper had a total length of ≈ 1.97 mm in 5214 sections, with ≈ 1178 squares, for a total inductance of ≈ 94 nH assuming L k = 80 pH per square. The cut-off frequency was designed to be f co = 2.5 GHz. In Fig. In printed circuit boards, the performance of topside coupled-microstrip couplers is degraded due to asymmetry of the dielectrics (e.g. air/FR4). In this section we assess the impact of asymmetric dielectrics on our integrated coupler. We simulate the same coupler architecture described in the main text (Fig. A broadside coupler architecture, where two nanowires are stacked vertically as shown in Fig. In this section we discuss the measurement setups used for the microwave characterization. When measuring the coupling-point tunability with temperature, we allowed for a 5 minute stabilization time to avoid temperature fluctuation during acquisition. In this section we show the calibration data and the measured S parameters before correction. The calibration included the cables at room temperature, the cables from room temperature to the devices at 1.3 K, the intermediary connectors, the RF switch, the DC block, and the LNA. We measure the phase of the signals out of the coupler. The phase difference is fixed at 90 • due to the symmetry of the coupler The PCB used for the measurement has asymmetric trace lengths (Fig. where v ph = c/n is the phase velocity, n is the effective index of the PCB transmission lines. When taking into account the PCB phase shift, the phase difference is found to be higher than 90 • . The shape of the measured phase resembles the one obtained with the simulation. Therefore, we attribute this discrepancy to additional unaccounted phase shifts. In this section we show the characterization of the impedance-matching taper. In the main text we argued that the taper, which is indispensable to perform the measurement with 50 Ω electronics (as in this case), was deviating from the design and could be a source of added reflection that could degrade the measured performances. In a separate cooldown, we measured a two-port device consisting of only one of the branches of the coupler. This device was fabricated in the same run as the coupler and included two CPW microwave launchers, two impedance-matching tapers and one 520 μm long nanowire. We will refer to this device as Taper-Line, for convenience. In Fig. A ≈ 7 nm-thick NbN film was sputter deposited The sheet kinetic inductance at T = 0 K can be estimated as approximately 10% higher than the theoretical estimation. We started with the fabrication of 50 Ω coplanar waveguide (CPW) feed lines using direct writing photolithography (DWL), followed by gold evaporation and liftoff. We patterned the nanowire transmission lines and Klopfenstein tapers by aligned negative-tone electron beam lithography, using ma-N 2401 The packaging consisted of a custom made gold-plated copper box with a copper-plated Rogers 4003 PCB. To characterize the microwave response of the coupler, we used a nominal signal power of -40 dBm from the room temperature electronics. We estimate that the power at the device's input port, after accounting for system attenuation, was less than -60 dBm. Assuming an ideal broadband impedance transformer, with perfect matching and transmission, we can assume the following relation between the voltage applied at the low impedance end, V L , and the current at the high impedance end I H [6] For Z L = 50 Ω and Z H = 1446 Ω, a -60 dBm signal converts to a V pk,Z L = 316.2 μV and I pk,Z H = 1.2 μA. I pk,Z H is much lower than the switching current of the wire. Therefore, we assume the influence of kinetic inductance non-linearities to be negligible for these measurements. The kinetic inductance strongly depends on carrier density, which can be tuned with a The dependence of the kinetic inductance on current, in the fast relaxation regime At the base temperature T = 1.3 K the curve at t = 0.2 should be reasonably accurate. The dependence of the kinetic inductance on temperature is described by To simplify the calculation in the main text we made the assumption that L k (0, 0.2) ≈ L k (0, 0). From BCS theory it is possible to derive an integral expression for the superconducting gap dependence on temperature where ζ = ξ/∆. Then we numerically integrated and solved self-consistently by setting N (0)V = 0.32 The curves shown in Fig. The S parameter tunability data reported in the main text were obtained using the setup of Fig. Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this paper to facilitate understanding. Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by NIST, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment that are identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this paper to facilitate understanding. Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by NIST, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment that are identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose.