NaSn 2 P 2 is a recently discovered superconducting system belonging to a particular class of materials with van der Waals (vdW) structure. There is enormous interest in vdW compounds because of their intriguing electrical, optical, chemical, thermal, and superconducting state properties. We have studied the pressure dependent structural, thermo-physical, electronic band structure, and superconducting state properties of this quasi-two dimensional system in details for the first time via ab initio technique. The optical properties are also investigated for different electric field polarizations for the first time. Structural, electronic, and optical properties were explored via density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Thermal properties were investigated using the quasi-harmonic Debye model. NaSn 2 P 2 is found to be mechanically stable in the pressure range 0 -3.0 GPa. The elastic anisotropy indices point towards high level of mechanical and bonding anisotropy in NaSn 2 P 2 consistent with its highly layered structure. The elastic constants, moduli, and Debye temperature ( D ) show non-monotonic variation with pressure, particularly close to 1.0 GPa. The pressure dependent superconducting transition temperature, T c , of NaSn 2 P 2 is predicted to vary strongly with the pressure dependent variation of  D . The electronic energy dispersion curves, E(k), reveal high level of direction dependence; the effective mass of charge carries are particularly high for the out-of-plane (c-axis) charge transport. The optical parameters compliment the underlying electronic energy density of states features and are weakly dependent on the polarization of the incident electric field. The reflectivity of NaSn 2 P 2 is very high in the visible region and remains quite high and nonselective over an extended energy range in the ultraviolet region. The absorption coefficient is also high in the mid-ultraviolet band. All these optical features render NaSn 2 P 2 suitable for optoelectronic device applications. Interests in lower dimensional electronic systems including two-dimensional (2D) compounds and van der Waals (vdW) solids are growing rapidly across various strata of scientific and engineering disciplines due to their remarkable thermoelectric, electronic, optical, thermal, and chemical properties Very recently, superconductivity with a transition temperature in the range 1.2 K to 1.6 K was found in the SnAs based layered compound NaSn 2 As 2 belonging to a new class of vdW-type superconductor Information regarding the elastic properties and mechanical anisotropy are required to unlock the full potential of a compound for possible applications. Furthermore, study of optical properties provides with useful information that can assist us in designing optoelectronic device appliances. The energy dependent optical parameters also supplement the results of electronic band structure calculations. Study of thermal properties reveals how a compound behaves at different temperatures and pressures. Application of pressure modifies the physical properties of compounds. Pressure dependent elastic and band structure calculations are important for the understanding of bonding character, electronic density of states and superconductivity in materials As far as we are aware of, none of the physical properties mentioned in the preceding paragraph has been investigated in details for the van der Waals-type NaSn 2 P 2 pnictide yet. We wish to address these issues in this paper. All the calculations performed in this study were done via the density functional theory (DFT) based ab-initio procedure. The rest of this work has been organized as follows. Section 2 describes the methodology employed in this study. Results of our calculations and analyses are given and discussed in Section 3. Finally, important conclusions are summarized in Section 4. Perhaps the most popular approach to first-principles calculations of structural and electronic properties of crystalline solids is the DFT with periodic Bloch boundary conditions. In this particular approach the ground state properties of the compound is found by solving the Kohn-famous Sham equation In this expression based on time dependent perturbation theory,  is the volume of the unit cell,  is the angular frequency (or equivalently energy) of the incident electromagnetic wave (photon), e is the electronic charge, ψ and ψ are the conduction and valence band state functions with band index k, respectively. The delta function forces conservation of energy and momentum to be held during the optical transition. The Kramers-Kronig transformations connect the real part of the dielectric function  1 () to the imaginary part  2 () and can be readily used to obtain  1 () once  2 () is known. All the other optical parameters are related in one way or other to  1 () and  2 (), and can be calculated from these. This procedure has been applied by a large number of earlier studies to reliably calculate all the energy/frequency dependent optical parameters To explore the pressure and temperature dependent thermodynamic, elastic, and structural properties, we have employed the energy-volume data calculated from the third-order Birch-Murnaghan equation of state The schematic crystal structure of van der Waals-type NaSn 2 P 2 pnictide is displayed in Fig. We have illustrated the pressure, P, dependent behavior of C ij of NaSn 2 P 2 in Fig. We have investigated the mechanical stability of NaSn 2 P 2 at different pressures by employing the well known Born-Huang It is found that all the stability criteria stated above are satisfied for NaSn 2 P 2 in the pressure range considered here. Once again, there is no reported value of C ij of NaSn 2 P 2 at any pressure and therefore, the values reported herein cannot be compared. Poisson's ratio of the NaSn 2 P 2 compound at different pressures. As the Voigt approximation Altogether, this is known as the widely employed VRH approximation. Both Young's modulus, Y, and Poisson's ratio, n, are linked to the polycrystalline bulk and shear moduli and can be calculated from those Elastic moduli (all in GPa), Pugh's ratio, Poisson's ratio and Cauchy pressure (GPa) of NaSn 2 P 2 at different pressures (GPa). The small values of elastic moduli once again demonstrate that NaSn 2 P 2 is a fairly soft compound. Among the three elastic moduli, the Young's modulus is the largest signifying that the van der Waals-type NaSn 2 P 2 layered pnictide is most resistant against tensile stress. At all pressures considered, G < B. This implies that the mechanical failure mode of NaSn 2 P 2 should be controlled by shape deforming stress rather than the volume changing one. The hardness of a solid depends strongly on two parameters, the shear modulus G and the shear related stiffness constant C 44 Considering the calculated values of n at different pressures as displayed in Table As far as possible engineering applications are concerned, machinability index, μ M = B/C 44 Calculated indices of elastic anisotropy and compressibility ratio at different pressures of layered vdW compound NaSn 2 P 2 . It is found that A 1 = A 2 and both these shear anisotropy indices depart significantly from unity. A 3 , on the other hand is one. This is a consequence of trigonal crystal symmetry. The universal anisotropy index deviates strongly from zero. The ratio between the compressibilities is quite large, deviating strongly from unity. Large values of k c /k a imply that the crystal is much more compressible in the c-direction. Both A 1 and A 2 increases with pressure except at P = 1.0 GPa, where they show an anomalous decrease. Both anisotropy indices for bulk and shear moduli generally decrease with increasing pressure. Exception is found around 1.0 GPa. For perfectly isotropic crystals A B = A G = 0. Strong deviation from zero implies highly anisotropic nature of NaSn 2 P 2 . Like A B and A G the universal anisotropy index, A U , also decreases with increasing pressure except at 1.0 GPa, where the index is greatly enhanced. For elastically isotropic crystals, A G = 0. All the different indicators of anisotropy suggest together that the compound under investigation possesses highly anisotropic elastic property and its mechanical properties are predicted to be highly direction dependent. Figs. 3 complement the numerical analysis of the anisotropy indices quite nicely. We can visualize the highly anisotropic nature of the elastic constants and Poisson's ratio from these plots. The 3D plots clearly reveal that NaSn 2 P 2 possesses anisotropic elastic and mechanical properties both within the ab-plane and along the out-of-plane direction. Almost all of the technologically important physical properties of solids are determined by the valence and conduction electrons in the materials. The behavior of these electrons, on the other hand, is dependent on the nature of their energy dispersion (E(k)) within the Brillouin zone. This variation of the electronic energy in different bands with momentum maps the electronic band structure. We have calculated the electronic band structure with the optimized crystal structure of NaSn 2 P 2 . The electronic energy dispersion curves under different pressures along the high-symmetry directions of the Brillouin zone of NaSn 2 P 2 are shown in Fig. The band structure features clearly disclose that a number of bands with varying degree of dispersion cross the Fermi level. This confirms the metallic character of layered vdW NaSn 2 P 2 ternary. Highly dispersive bands running along A -H and K -Γ directions show electronic character. The charge transport properties are expected to be controlled by these bands. The bands crossing the Fermi level close to the M and L symmetry points are significantly less dispersive. Highly dispersive bands imply low charge carrier effective mass and high charge mobility. The presence of lowly dispersive E(k)around the M and L regions indicate that the material under study possess significant anisotropy in charge transport along different crystallographic directions as well as in the momentum space. In the preceding section, we have gathered ample indication that NaSn 2 P 2 is a highly deformable soft compound. Therefore, one expects that application of pressure should change the lattice constants and crystal volumes significantly. In general significant change in the cell volume leads to a notable change in the band structure. This is because the periodicity of the k-points ionic potential changes and affects the band dispersion. Surprisingly, very little change in the E(k) features is observed as a function of pressure (Fig. The electronic energy density of states extracted from the band structure calculations are shown in Fig. where N A , ρ, M and n denote the Avagadro's number, crystal mass density, molecular mass and the number of atoms in the molecule, respectively. The average sound velocity v in the solid is determined from, where v and v are the longitudinal and transverse sound velocities in the compound which can be obtained from the elastic moduliand density as follows, The pressure dependent values of θ D of NaSn 2 P 2 are given in Table Melting temperature, T m , is another important thermo-physical parameter which limits the application of a material at high temperatures. T m also reflects the overall bonding strength of solids. We have estimated the melting point of at NaSn 2 P 2 different pressures following the formalism developed in Ref. . The pressure variation of T m is shown in Fig. 3.4. Superconductivity in NaSn 2 P 2 and pressure NaSn 2 P 2 exhibits superconductivity at low temperature. For conventional low-T c superconductors where electron-phonon interactions lead to Cooper pairing, the superconducting transition temperature can be expressed as where  is the electron phonon coupling constant and μ * is the repulsive Coulomb pseudopotential. One can express the coupling constant as, λ = N(E F )V e-ph , with V e-ph representing the electron-phonon interaction energy responsible for the Fermi surface instability and eventual Cooper pairing. From the TDOS plots in Fig. Compounds are often used at different pressures and temperatures. Therefore, study of the variation of different thermodynamic parameters with pressure and temperature is important in view of potential engineering applications. All the pressure and temperature dependent thermodynamic properties presented in this section are obtained from the quasi-harmonic Debye approximation (QHDA). The QHDA is a lattice dynamical model of solid-state physics used to describe volume-dependent thermal effects. It is based on the assumption that the harmonic approximation holds for every value of the lattice constant, which is to be viewed as an adjustable parameter as a function of pressure and temperature. Details regarding this approximation can be found elsewhere Figs. Exploration of the potential of a newly synthesized compound for various possible applications is incomplete without a thorough understanding of the energy dependent optical parameters. Optical parameters of a compound determine its response to the incident electromagnetic radiation. The optical response to visible part of the electromagnetic spectra is particularly important from the view of optoelectronic device applications. This optical response The later is closely linked with the underlying electronic band structure and DOS of the electronic states involved. Fig. Optical absorption coefficient is an important parameter for optoelectronic device applications, particularly in the photovoltaic sector. Fig. range from ~ 5.0 eV to 13.0 eV, covering a wide band in the UV region. The absorption coefficient falls sharply at the plasma energy as at this energy the compound becomes largely transparent to incident EMW. The real and imaginary parts of the optical conductivity are shown in Fig. Finally, we have displayed the real and imaginary parts of the complex refractive index in Fig. The optical parameters shown in this section exhibit small to moderate level of optical anisotropies with respect to the polarization direction of the incident EMW. Moreover, the level of anisotropy is comparatively higher at low energies. First-principles density functional theory based calculations have been carried out to study the structural, elastic, electronic, thermodynamic, and optical properties of recently discovered layered ternary vdW NaSn 2 P 2 superconductor in the trigonal crystal symmetry. Various pressure and temperature dependent thermo-physical parameters have been explored using the QHDA for the first time. The frequency/energy dependent spectra of optical parameters have also been estimated for different electric field polarizations of the EMW for the first time. The optimized crystal structure and ground state lattice parameters agree reasonably well with earlier studies The electronic band structure and DOS studies reveal clear metallic character of NaSn 2 P 2 . Quite surprisingly, little effect of pressure was found in the electronic band structure. The TDOS at the Fermi level was largely insensitive to pressure. Therefore, we predict that the pressure dependent superconducting transition temperature of NaSn 2 P 2 should be affected mainly by the pressure dependent variation in the Debye temperature. At a pressure of 1.0 GPa, there is possibility of significant softening of the phonon modes which may lead to a large enhancement of the electron phonon coupling constant. It is instructive to note that the Fermi level is located at a steeply falling part of the TDOS profile (Fig. The temperature and pressure dependent features of the thermodynamic parameters of NaSn 2 P 2 compound presented in Section 3.5 exhibit standard behaviors Compared to the structural and elastic anisotropies, the anisotropy in the optical parameters is low. The energy dependent behaviors of dielectric constant, absorption coefficient and photoconductivity display metallic character. Peaks in the optical parameters spectra at different energies are consistent with electronic band structure calculations and energy dependent DOS profile. The reflectivity of NaSn 2 P 2 illustrates that this compound should be a very efficient reflector of infrared and near-visible EMW. Such materials with high reflectivity in the infrared region can be used to confine thermal energy in a specified volume and to minimize heat loss to the environment. Reflectivity is also high over a wide energy band in the UV part of the optical spectra. Moreover, the reflectivity spectrum is almost non-selective in this energy range (3.0 eV to 16.0 eV). Furthermore, the absorption coefficient is high in the near-and mid-ultraviolet regions. Compounds having high absorbance and reflectivity in the ultraviolet can be used as coating materials to protect systems which are prone to photo disintegration or photo-oxidation due to direct exposure to ultraviolet radiation. All these features can be useful for potential optical applications. To summarize, we have presented a detailed study of structural, elastic, electronic, thermodynamic and optical properties of recently synthesized layered vdW ternary compound NaSn 2 P 2 . Effects of pressure on various physical properties have been investigated. The compound under study possesses a number of interesting features which have been discussed. We hope that this study will inspire researchers to investigate this interesting material in greater details both theoretically and experimentally.