We report on the electric field response of 180° nanodomain walls in BaTiO3 using in situ electrical biasing in transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The sample is biased on a microdevice designed for reliable testing whose key attributes are confirmed by finite element calculations. The presence of weakly charged zig-zag domain walls at room temperature is attributed to the geometric confinement of the device. The motion of the domain walls under the applied electric field allows to extract local P-E loops where distinct domain wall pinning in deep and random energy potential profiles, characteristic for "hard" and "soft" ferroelectrics, respectively, are observed. "Hard" domain wall pinning results in asymmetrical loops typical for "hard" ferroelectrics while the "soft" domain wall pinning follows Rayleigh-like behaviour. All effects are measured locally and directly from the imaged domain structure. Understanding the electrical response, polarization switching, and domain wall movement processes in ferroelectric materials is important for the envisioned future applications such as field effect transistors for neuromorphic systems or the resurgence and optimization of devices including ferroelectric random-access memories (FeRAMs) The origins of ferroelectricity at atomic scale can be understood via various quantummechanical, order-disorder and displacive mechanisms Between the atomic and macroscopic scale lays the domain structure of the ferroelectric that can be experimentally accessed via various microscopy and scattering techniques The domain response to the electric field is typically probed indirectly using dielectric spectroscopy, polarization-or strain-response as a function of field, current response during switching or in situ diffraction techniques In all cases, it is necessary for the applied electric field to be homogeneous across the probed area in order to reduce complexity in interpretation of the observed dynamic processes. To perform in situ electrical biasing experiments in the TEM, several methods are available. Traditionally, biasing experiments were performed on TEM holders that could accommodate mechanically polished samples connected with electrodes far away from the area of interest, which could be contacted in several ways (wire bonding, silver paste etc.) Herein, we used MEMS-based microchip TEM holder technology to systematically bias a single crystal BaTiO3 sample along the pseudo-cubic [100]PC direction. In particular, we use an optimized sample geometry that enables us to precisely control the applied voltage and, in consequence, the electric field distribution in the probed area. The electrical performance of the device is confirmed with simulations using finite element methods. To quantitatively evaluate our results, we focused on the motion of 180o domain walls at room temperature. Local physical phenomena such as weakly charged zig-zag domain walls and domain wall pinning as a function of the applied voltage are directly probed. Single crystalline BaTiO3 (001) (MTI corporation) was used for the device fabrication. The largest facets of the crystal were already polished to optical grade. For the preparation of the lamella, the top surface was sputter-coated with 30 nm thick carbon layer (Cressington 108 series carbon coater). This step is required to dissipate the charges during electron imaging and to protect the surface from Ga ion implantation during ion beam milling. Inside the focused ion beam (FIB) milling instrument (Zeiss NVision 40, Ga + source), two sitespecific carbon protective layers were additionally deposited. A thin electron-beam deposited (thickness in the range of ~100 nm at 5 kV) followed by a thicker ion-beam deposited protective layer (1.5 μm thickness at 30 kV and 150 pA current). Trenches around the protected area were etched consecutively with 27, 13, 6.5, and 0.7 nA ion beam currents at 30 kV. The lamella was thinned to about 1 μm prior to its transfer with a micromanipulator (Kleindiek Nanotechnik) to a 4-heating and 2-biasing MEMS chip (DENSsolutions). Complete details of the final steps of the device fabrication and the measurement of the thickness of the final lamella can be found in Supplemental Material, SM Finally, the temperature on the heating element of the heating/biasing TEM holder was precalibrated using its electrical resistance and the electrical bias to the sample was applied with a source meter (Keithley SMU-2450) using a script to generate a triangular voltage waveshape. The electrostatic finite element model (FEM) of the device was created with COMSOL Multiphysics 5.4 package. Dimensions for the electrostatic model were measured from scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images. The dimensions of the simulation box were 40 μm width, 30 μm height, and 30 μm in depth. Tetrahedral adaptive mesh was used for the simulation. The general mesh element characteristics for the simulations involved the electron transparent window of 0.02 μm max and 0.008 μm min, the bulk part of the lamella of 0.05 μm max and 0.008 μm min, the surface of the electrodes of 2.2 μm max and 0.16 μm min, the SiNx membrane of 0.2 μm max and 0.008 μm min, and the vacuum region around the device 0.25 μm max and 0.008 μm min. The bulk part of the lamella was set to 1 μm thick and the electron transparent region to a thickness of 268 nm. The potential difference between the electrodes in the calculations was set to 1 V and it was used as a boundary condition. Bright field scanning transmission electron microscopy (BF-STEM) was performed on a double spherical aberration (Cs) corrected Titan Themis 60-300 (ThermoFischer Scientific) operated at 300 kV. A beam current of 100 pA was used, the beam convergence angle was 28 mrad and the collection angle was 79 mrad. Serial STEM imaging was done with a pixel scan area of 1024x1024 (3.204 nm/pixel) and 2.0 μs dwell time resulting in 2.98 s/frame. The images were then cropped to 764x764 or 760x1024 pixel size. Images were cropped to remove completely dark parts from the sides of the electron transparent window. Post-processing was performed using ImageJ software to enhance the domain wall contrast. It involved the following steps: Fourier filtering to reduce the horizontal scan noise from the images, subtraction of the background (50 pixel rolling ball radius), and contrast and brightness adjustment. We used a six-contact MEMS chip (Fig. Prior to biasing the sample, annealing above the Curie temperature (Tc) was performed inside the TEM. Heating is required to release most of the strain due to the FIB preparation process ). The dark contrast in the images corresponds to the domain walls. To improve this contrast without interference due to diffraction effects, the sample was mistitled by ~10 mrad from the [001]PC zone axis and was postprocessed. The sample was then biased with a triangular waveform (ΔU = 0.0351 V/s in the case of Umax = 3.5 V, while ΔU was reduced for smaller Umax to improve temporal resolution) starting from the positive direction to the maximum of the positive voltage (3.5 V, Fig. Considering the coercive field of BaTiO3 (approximately 0.5 kV/cm), by studying the domain response we conclude that the actual applied field is within one order of magnitude of the FEM calculated one By examining the domain structure in the BF-STEM images, we firstly note the presence of weakly charged zig-zag domain walls (Fig. The polarisation direction within the domains can be determined upon application of the electric field (Fig. When the direction of the electric field is changed, Fig. Finally, the applied bias cycle terminates after completing the full loop (Fig. These include domain wall pinning (weakly responsive polarization region in the -1 V to 1 V interval of the measured loops) and domain nucleation/annihilation accompanied with ballistic movement of domain walls. The apparent loop asymmetry and the fact that at 0 V the relative domain coverage does not reach 50 % (which would be a requirement for electro-neutrality) can be partly attributed to the nature of the local TEM measurements that do not necessarily correspond to the entire domain structure. On the other hand, the loop asymmetry and apparent pinching around 0 V bias indicate hard pinning of domain walls, which are released from pinning centres at higher fields as indicated by the loop opening. These defects exert restoring forces on the domain walls at weak fields limiting the movement of the wall and consequently pinching the loop. At higher electrical fields, the restoring forces are overcome and the domain wall movement is controlled by pinning centres randomly distributed in space and with variable strengths Rayleigh motion is achieved only at higher fields when the domain wall is de-pined and can move through the lattice with randomly distributed defects. The asymmetry of the loops indicates asymmetrical distribution of defects in the examined local area, which is again a feature that would not be necessarily noticed in a macroscopic loop measured over a much larger area. Similarly, the different slope of the positive and negative applied voltages of Fig. In summary, we demonstrated a specialised sample preparation method, which allows to perform reliable in situ electrical biasing measurements in the TEM and provides the ability for interpretable physical processes of ferroelectric nanodomains. The meticulously designed and fabricated geometry of the device results in a homogeneous electric field, whose magnitude and direction are confirmed by finite element calculations. We used the classical ferroelectric BaTiO3 and we showed that precise control of the external electric field and sequential BF-STEM imaging permits to locally study 180° domains and domain wall movements at room temperature. The origins and stability of weakly charged zig-zag nanodomain walls are associated with the thin slab geometry of the ferroelectric and interplay of BaTiO3 with Pt electrodes. Polarization-electric field loops calculated directly from the areas of the imaged domains elucidate the relation between bulk and nanoscale ferroelectric effects. The domain wall response at low electric field is associated with the hard pinning mechanisms on the defects within the lattice, which results in pinched and asymmetric domain area vs. voltage loops. At higher fields, domain walls are de-pined and localised effects such as new domain nucleation and sideways growth and domain wall bending were observed. At such fields (above the coercive field), we show that the domain wall motion follows Rayleigh-like behaviour. Thus, this controlled electrical biasing method can provide unprecedented insights on dynamic domain wall motion and domain interactions at the nanoscale The FEM simulation is used to explore influence of the sample's geometry on the magnitude and distribution of the electric field within the lamella. It is noted that the calculated electric field values from FEM are of the same order of magnitude but due to leakage effects and nonideal contact layers they are not expected to match one-to-one. The discrepancy between the FEM calculated electric field magnitude and the one applied during biasing experiments can be largely attributed to the FIB deposited Pt contacting layers between the BaTiO3 lamella and the electric lines of the MEMS chip. In the equivalent circuit above this is represented as R2. During the experiments resistance of the system is 33 MΩ. Comparably R1 is miniscule and can be easily neglected, therefore R2+R3 = 33 MΩ. The configuration of R2 and R3 in the equivalent circuit forms a voltage divider. Voltage drop U C on C in the equivalent circuit is as follows: U C = R3 R3+R2 × 3.5 V. If the contacting layers are of good quality R2 is small and the voltage drop on the C is the same as the supplied voltage to the circuit. On the other hand, if R2 ~ R3, the voltage drop across the C is smaller than the supplied voltage. In our case, we expect R3 > R2. That is our sample preparation leads to a situation, where the resistance of the lamella is larger than the resistance of the contacting layers, and this is supported by directly observing the domain response at moderate voltages. Nevertheless, the largest unknown in the system is the quality of the contact between the lamella and the MEMS Pt electric lines, which could improve the in situ biasing experiments of the ferroelectric samples. Measurement of the domain areabias loops FIG. 