Interactions between nematic fluctuations, magnetic order and superconductivity are central to the physics of iron-based superconductors. Here we report on in-plane transverse acoustic phonons in hole-doped Sr1-xNaxFe2As2 measured via inelastic X-ray scattering, and extract both the nematic susceptibility and the nematic correlation length. By a self-contained method of analysis, for the underdoped (x = 0.36) sample, which harbors a magnetically-ordered tetragonal phase, we find it hosts a short nematic correlation length ξ ∼ 10 Å and a large nematic susceptibility χnem. The optimal-doped (x = 0.55) sample exhibits weaker phonon softening effects, indicative of both reduced ξ and χnem. Our results suggest short-range nematic fluctuations may favor superconductivity, placing emphasis on the nematic correlation length for understanding the iron-based superconductors. Unconventional superconductivity in the iron-based superconductors (FeSCs) appears near a putative quantum critical point where collective excitations could play an important role in the pairing mechanism. These fluctuations and corresponding orders emerge from the interplay between lattice, spin and orbital degrees of freedom. Nematic order, in which rotational symmetry is broken while preserving translational symmetry, is a prominent example of such behavior For both the hole-and electron-doped sides of the FeSCs phase diagrams, the underdoped phase space is widely inhabited by intertwined nematic and magnetic orders An enhanced χ nem yields a softening of the shear modulus C 66 due to coupling with the lattice. This can be quantitatively studied through ultrasound The limitation in extracting ξ in previous works In this Letter, we present inelastic X-ray scattering measurements of the IPTA phonons in Sr 1-x Na x Fe 2 As 2 for an underdoped sample (UD, x = 0.36 with superconducting temperature T c = 8.7 K, PM-T to AFM-O transition temperature T S = 107 K and AFM-O to AFM-T magnetic transition temperature T r = 68 K ) and an optimally doped sample (OP, x = 0.55 with T c = 37 K) (Fig. High quality single crystals were synthesized using a self-flux method, and have been characterized using magnetization and dilatometry measurements To accentuate the abnormal phonon softening in momentum space, the quantity E ph /k against k, called kdependent sound velocity, is plotted as a function of temperature. For acoustic phonons without coupling to the electrons, the dispersion should be asymptotically linear in the long wavelength limit, therefore producing a constant E ph /k over momentum (Fig. Energies of the IPTA phonon E ph are renormalized due to coupling between the lattice and the nematic order parameter, with the spatial-dependence of the nematic correlations determining the momentum-dependence of the renormalizations. E ph as a function of k and the nematic correlation length ξ are related through where ρ is the mass density. The renormalized shear modulus C 66 is connected to the bare shear modulus C 66,0 through χ nem and the coupling strength λ as C 66,0 /C 66 = 1 + λ 2 χ nem /C 66,0 The observation of mean-field behaviors for both the nematic susceptibility It should be noted that the above analysis ignores the effects of the random nematic fields created by the compositional disorder. We expect that the random fields will cause a crossover to non-mean field behavior at large enough length scales. However, our data almost certainly do not probe the random field critical regime so mean field theory should obtain. In the UD sample, for T > T S we have ξ = ξ 0 ( T T0 -1) -1 2 when approaching a second-order phase transition The fits for both samples are shown in Fig. The temperature-dependence of the bare nematic susceptibility and shear modulus derived from our fits can be compared with Young's modulus measurements. Within a mean-field approach, due to coupling between the nematic order parameter and the lattice, the renormalized nematic susceptibility χ nem and the bare nematic susceptibility χ 0 are related through the relation χ -1 nem = χ -1 0 -λ 2 /C 66,0 Our findings reveal important characteristics of the nematic fluctuations in the AFM-T phase. Despite its tetragonal structure, our results reveal that the AFM-T phase exhibits a large nematic susceptibility, confirming the presence of significant nematic fluctuations Our results imply a role of the nematic correlation length in determining the system's electronic state, in-cluding the interaction with the superconductivity. An asymmetry in the phase diagrams of electron-and holedoped FeSCs is notable. Hole-doping results in a higher T c , a superconducting state that prevails for a much broader doping range Our findings demonstrate that, on an empirical level, a short nematic correlation length in the hole-doped FeSCs is correlated with a more robust superconducting dome and a higher optimal T c . This may be related to the fact that a short correlation length implies a weak tendency towards long-range nematic or magnetic order, which competes with superconductivity More broadly, our results suggest the correlation lengths of various electronic order parameters should be investigated in the FeSCs to understand their role in the superconductivity. Specific topics that warrant careful examination include comparison of the magnetic 