We report the engineering of air-voids embedded in GaAs-based photonic crystal surface emitting lasers realised by metalorganic vapour-phase epitaxy regrowth. Two distinct void geometries are obtained by modifying the photonic crystal grating profile within the reactor prior to regrowth. The mechanism of void formation is inferred from scanning transmission electron microscopy analysis, with the evolution of the growth front illustrated though the use of an AlAs/GaAs superlattice structure. Competition between rapid lateral growth of the (100) surface and slow diffusion across higher index planes is exploited in order to increase void volume, leading to an order of magnitude reduction in threshold current and an increase in output power through an increase in the associated grating coupling strength. Photonic crystal surface emitting lasers (PCSELs) have emerged as a new class of semiconductor laser that offer single-mode emission with extremely narrow beam divergence and tunable beam shape Whilst originally realised through wafer-bonding In this work, we present two GaAs-based PCSELs containing voids encapsulated during MOVPE regrowth of a patterned GaAs layer with AlAs/GaAs. The use of an AlAs/GaAs superlattice (SL) provides snapshots of the evolving growth front during regrowth and allows the mechanism of void formation to be inferred by scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM)-based analysis. The relationship between the crystallographic geometry of the patterned grating and the final void geometry is explored using two distinct grating profiles obtained by exploiting mass-transport and surface restructuring during pre-growth thermal processing within the MOVPE reactor. In particular, the proportion of (100) and the orientation of adjacent facets are shown to be important in influencing the extent of the lateral growth which causes the voids to form. The presence of fast-growing {311}-like planes results in small "pill"-shaped voids. Elimination of these planes from the grating profile produces much larger ellipsoidal voids which lead to significantly improved device performance. The base-epitaxial wafers for both devices presented in this study were grown by MBE on (100) GaAs with a 2°-offcut towards (1-10). The structure consisted of a thick n-AlGaAs cladding layer, an active region composed of three InGaAs/GaAs quantum wells, and a top p-GaAs layer. A square-lattice of circular holes with a period of 320 nm was defined in PMMA by electron-beam lithography and patterned into the p-GaAs layer by reactive ion etching (RIE). An SEM image of the as-etched PC is shown in Fig Following MOVPE regrowth, a 100 x 100 μm square mesa, etched to a depth of 300 nm, was defined in the p + -GaAs contact layer using a combination of photolithography and a solution of hydrogen peroxide and orthophosphoric acid. A 200 nm thick SiO2 passivation layer was then deposited across the wafer, into which a 100 x 100 μm contact window was opened on the mesa top using a CHF3/Ar reactive ion etch. A ptype Ti/Pt/Au contact was then deposited, and a 60 μm-diameter circular emission aperture defined using a standard lift-off process. Fabrication was completed by the deposition of a backside Ni/Au/Ge/Ni/Au n-type contact and thick Ti/Au bond pads on the top surface. Whilst the as-etched grating profile was nominally identical in both devices (Fig. The difference in cross-sectional profiles is illustrated in Fig. Structural analysis of the regrown PC region was performed using a JEOL ARM200cF STEM operating at 200 kV. Cross-sectional specimens were prepared in a Thermo Fisher Xe-Plasma focussed ion beam (FIB) system by a standard lamella lift-out method The evolving growth front seen in Device A is illustrated in the cross-sectional schematic shown in Fig. The quasi-continuous wave (CW) LI and spectral characteristics of the devices were measured at 20 °C using a pulse width of 2 μs and 1 % duty cycle. In the case of Device A, lasing occurred at a threshold current of 440 mA (J = 4.4 kA/cm 2 ) and a wavelength of 1074 nm. In addition, the device suffered from a low slope efficiency with an output power of only 64 pW recorded at 600 mA. The poor performance of the device can be attributed to the size of the PC voids. Previous simulations of square-lattice PCs consisting of circular holes have suggested that local maxima in the in-plane coupling coefficient are obtained when the r/a is either 0.2 and 0.4 Device B displayed significantly improved laser performance over A, with an order of magnitude reduction in threshold current to 65 mA (J = 0.65 kA/cm 2 ), and a measured output power of 3.61 mW at 300 mA, as shown in Fig. Quasi-CW LI and lasing spectrum (inset) of Device B measured at 20 °C with a pulse width of 2 μs and 1 % duty cycle. We have presented a study of growth-front development in MOVPE-regrown GaAs-based PCSELs containing air-void PC, made possible by the use of an AlAs/GaAs superlattice structure. Two unique void geometries have been realised by controlling the extent of mass-transport-driven deformation of the PC grating during the pre-growth temperature ramp process within the reactor. STEM analysis of the regrown devices reveals the evolution of the growth front in each case, confirming that void formation is the result of rapid lateral growth of the inter-hole (100) surface and slow diffusion across higher order surfaces binding the hole. The device containing voids with a larger volume exhibited greatly improved threshold current and output power, confirming the results of previous simulation-based studies. Further optimisation of void geometry and device parameters can be achieved by considering different growth temperatures and V/III ratio.