We report on the magnetic levitation of a millimeter-sized neodymium permanent magnet within the interior of a superconducting radio frequency (SRF) cavity. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first experimental work on levitating a magnet within an SRF cavity. The cavity is a coaxial quarter-wave microwave resonator made from 6061 aluminum, having a resonance frequency of 10 GHz and a loaded Q of 1400. The cylindrical magnet (N50) has a height of 1 mm, a diameter of 0.75 mm, a mass of 4 mg, and a remanence of 1.44 T. This produces a peak magnetic field 140 times greater than the critical field of aluminum. The magnet is placed either on the top of the coaxial portion of the cavity or on the cavity floor before cooling it below the superconducting transition temperature of aluminum. The coaxial mode's resonance frequency shifts as a function of the levitation height of the magnet and gives an idea of the magnet's position and mechanical motion. We observe a transition at a temperature of 650 mK where the Meissner effect levitates the magnet as the material beneath the magnet becomes superconducting. The magnet is levitated to a height of 2.5 mm above the surface of the cavity stub, which is a sufficient separation for the field strength of the magnet at the surface of the stub to be less than the critical field strength of the superconducting aluminum. We measure a 120 MHz upshift in the cavity resonance as the magnet is levitated from the top of the stub and 15 MHz downshift as it levitates from the floor of the cavity. Our measurements are consistent over several heating and cooling cycles. Our work provides a path towards a novel optomechanical system. Superconducting radio frequency (SRF) cavities are promising for use in cavity optomechanics and quantum information processing due to their well-defined frequency spectrum, low loss and electric and magnetic field localization properties J. Miller is with University of California, Merced, CA 95343 (e-mail: jmiller@ucmerced.edu). chanical object is physically tethered in some way to a boundary, and one can consider levitating the object so that the tether can be removed. Electromagnetic to mechanical coupling has been observed in optically levitated systems The experimental schematic is shown in the Fig. A pin antenna is coupled to the quarter-wave SRF mode at the stub height inside the cavity, where the electric field is strongly localized. Measurements are performed using a vector network analyzer whose probe signal passes through a circulator, is reflected by the cavity, and the reflection is separated by the circulator. For these measurements the cavity is over-coupled which reduces the loaded Q, but allows us to measure the resonance frequency from room temperature down to 50 mK. The cavity is held in place with N-type cryo grease to ensure thermal conductivity with the cryostat. We conducted a sequence of three experiments. First, the cavity (including a plastic sleeve around the stub whose purpose is to keep the magnet from falling off the top of the stub) is cooled without any magnet present. Here we see the dependence of the cavity resonance frequency as a function of temperature. Second, the magnet is placed within the cavity on the top of the stub where the plastic sleeve keeps the magnet from falling off of the top of the stub. Third, the same magnet is placed at the bottom of the same cavity. In all of these experiments all other experimental conditions remain the same. The dimension and shape of the cavity are shown in the Fig. When the cavity is cooled to below its superconducting transition, we expect the magnet to levitate above the surface due to the Meissner effect in Type I superconductors. Fig. In order to gain an understanding of the expected frequency shifts when levitation occurs, we measured the resonance frequency as a function of the position of a magnet in the cavity at room temperature. The magnet was held in a dielectric capillary and its position was controlled using micrometer stages. Measurements were also made with just the capillary and no magnet When there is no magnet in the cavity (a bare cavity), the resonance frequency is fixed and given by the blue curve. If the magnet rests on the bottom of the cavity, the cavity resonance frequency is higher than that of the bare cavity as shown by the green curve. As the magnet levitates above the bottom of the cavity, we expect the resonance frequency to shift lower as a function of levitation height (as indicated by the left-pointing purple arrow at the tip of the green curve). If the magnet rests on the top of the stub, its resonance frequency is significantly lower than that of the bare cavity as shown by the orange curve. As the magnet levitates above the stub, we expect the resonance frequency to shift higher as a function of levitation height (as indicated by the right-pointing red arrow at the tip of the orange curve). The sensitivity of the resonance frequency as a function of position depends on the radial position of the magnet. In both cases, as the magnet levitates the resonance frequency shifts towards that of the bare cavity. to eliminate the effect of the capillary on the measurements. Fig. The frequency of the bare cavity without the magnet is 10.041 GHz at 5K, shifting upward by 5 kHz as the temperature decreases from 5 K to 55 mK. With the bare cavity frequency as a reference, when the magnet is placed on the stub, the frequency shifts down by 130 MHz to 9.910 GHz. The amount of frequency shift varies with the exact position of the magnet on the tip of the stub with the maximum shift occurring when the magnet is placed near the edge of the stub. For the case of a magnet on the stub, we observed 120 MHz of frequency change as the temperature drops from 5 K to 65 mK, as shown by the solid lines in Fig. At 5 K the difference between frequency of bare cavity and cavity with magnet on the bottom is +11 MHz. As temperature is reduced to 57 mK the frequency difference drops to +5 MHz. The neodymium permanent magnet has a maximum magnetic field (remanence) of 1.44 T and a surface field of 0.67 T. When the magnet rests directly on the surface of the aluminum, the magnetic field strength at the interface is larger than the critical field of the aluminum 100 gauss at 1.2 K. This creates a normal conducting region having a depth of 1-2 mm directly below the magnet. As the temperature drops, the critical field increases and the normal region becomes thinner. Below 650 mK there is sufficient lift due to the Meissner effect to offset the gravitational force and levitate the magnet. Once the magnet begins to lift at 650 mK, the normal region shrinks which increases the Meissner force making magnet jump up to its equilibrium position of 2.5 mm. At this point the magnetic flux is completely expelled from the volume of the superconductor. For the case of the magnet levitated 2.5 mm above the stub, the sensitivity of the resonance frequency to height fluctuations is 10 MHz/mm. For levitation above the bottom of the cavity we (b): A composite of reflection spectrum measurements for the three cavity configurations and for a range of temperatures. When a magnet is located on the top of the stub and cooled to 70mK, we observe an downward shift in frequency (solid lines) which is reduced from -130 MHz at 1 K down to -12 MHz at 70 mK. When the magnet is located on the bottom of the cavity, the frequency is up shifted and drops from 11 MHz at 1 K to 5 MHz at 50 mK (dashed lines). expect the sensitivity to be less than above the stub by a factor of 50. We demonstrate levitation of a millimeter-sized neodymium permanent magnet to a height of 2.5 mm within the interior of a SRF cavity. The levitation temperature is 650 mK and we find that the levitation above the stub exhibits a larger sensitivity compared with levitation from the bottom of the cavity. Our future goals include characterizing the mechanical vibrations of the levitated magnet and integrating this magnet-cavity system with other cavity optomechanical schemes. J. Pate was with University of California, Merced, CA 95343 (e-mail: jpate@ucmerced.edu).R. Chiao was with University of California, Merced, CA 95343 (e-mail: rchiao@ucmerced.edu).J. E. Sharping is with University of California, Merced, CA 95343 (e-mail: jsharping@ucmerced.edu).