We investigate the effects of a magnetic impurity in a multiband touching fermion system, specifically, a triple-component semimetal with a flat band, which can be realized in a family of transition metal silicides (CoSi family). When the chemical potential coincides with the flat band, it is expected that the impurity response of this system will be very different from that of an ordinary Dirac or Weyl semimetal of which the density of states at the Fermi level vanishes. We first determine the phase diagram within the mean-field approximation. Then, we study the local moment regime by employing two different methods. In the low temperature regime, the Kondo screening is analyzed by the variational wavefunction approach and the impurity contributions to the magnetic susceptibility and heat capacity are obtained, while at higher temperature, we use the equation of motion approach to calculate the occupation number of the impurity site and the impurity magnetic susceptibility. The results are compared and contrasted with those in the usual Fermi liquid and the Dirac/Weyl semimetals. Weyl semimetals (WSMs) are topological metals that show interesting physics such as Fermi arc surface states and chiral anomaly 1 , and they have received a lot of attention recently. Their existence in condensed matter systems has been predicted by theories 1 and subsequently observed in experiments One of the examples which distinguishes the FL and the DSM/WSM is the Kondo effect In the condensed matter system, it is possible to have more bands touching at a single point in the Brillouin zone due to the crystal symmetry In the present work, we would like to analyze the Kondo physics of a single magnetic impurity in a J = 1 fermion system. In the local moment regime (i.e., the parameter regime in which the impurity behaves like a local moment), the coupling between the magnetic impurity and the conduction electrons can be described by the Hamiltonian where S is the impurity spin located at the position r = 0, τ (0) is the spin density of conduction electrons at the impurity site, and the constant K is the exchange coupling between them. When the conduction electrons are treated as noninteracting particles and characterized by the DOS N ( ), one may integrate out the excitations in the energy shell [e -l Λ, Λ] in terms of a simple generalization of the "poor-man's-scaling" method introduced by where For the triple-component fermion system, we have where A = CΛ 3 /3 and C is a positive constant, provided that we set the energy at the band touching point to be zero. We notes that A = 0 for the WSM. For both the triple-component fermion system and the WSM, we find that N (Λ) = CΛ 2 . Accordingly, one may naively indicate that the magnetic impurity in the J = 1 fermion system belongs to the pseudogap Kondo problem We model this problem in terms of the Anderson impurity model. We first determine its phase diagram within a mean-field approximation (Fig. Above the Kondo temperature, we employ the equation of motion (EOM) approach 29,30 within the Hartree-Fock approximation to calculate the impurity Green's function from which we can extract the temperature dependence of the occupation number of electrons at the impurity site (Fig. The present paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we discuss the various terms in the Hamiltonian of the Anderson impurity model and determine its phase diagram within a mean-field approximation. The properties of the local moment regime is analyzed in terms of the variational wavefunction and EOM methods, which are presented in Sec. III and IV, respectively. Our results are summarized and discussed in the last section. The details of the calculations are listed in the appendix. We use the Anderson impurity model to describe a single magnetic impurity in a J = 1 fermion system. The corresponding Hamiltonian consists of three terms: H = H C +H D +H V , where H C , H D , and H V describe the non-interacting J = 1 fermions, the impurity fermions, and the hybridization between them, respectively. The three-band touching is assured at high-symmetry points by some nonsymmorphic space group symmetries in certain lattice models Based on the above observation, the three-band touching in CoSi arises from the orbital dynamics of electrons. The role played by the electron spin is similar to that in graphene. Hence, we write H c in the form where Ψ pσ = [Ψ 1pσ , Ψ 0pσ , Ψ -1pσ ] t , α = 1, 0, -1 is the band index, σ = ±1 correspond respectively to up-and down-spins, μ is the chemical potential, and the annihilation and creation operators of electrons, Ψ αpσ and Ψ † αpσ , satisfy the canonical anticommutation relations. Near the band touching point p 0 , H(p) can be written as where k = pp 0 , v > 0 is the Fermi velocity, and J = (J x , J y , J z ) is the pseudospin-1 operator (with J = 1) which obeys the SU(2) Lie algebra [J a , J b ] = i abc J c with a, b, c, = x, y, z. At low energies, the physics is dominated by the excitations around the band touching point. Hence, we will change the notation and write c αkσ = Ψ αk+p0σ . It is clear that c αkσ , c † αkσ still obey the canonical anticommutation relations. To find the spectrum of H(p), we write k = k k where k = |k| and k = (sin θ cos φ, sin θ sin φ, cos θ). Then, H(p) can be diagonalized by the unitary matrix U as where Thus, the energy spectrum of H(k) is given by Notice that Eq. ( In terms of Eq. ( where n dσ = d † σ d σ is the number operator of the impurity fermions with spin σ, d is the on-site energy of the impurity fermions, and d σ and d † σ satisfy the canonical anticommutation relations. h is the applied magnetic field. Since we are only interested in the impurity contribution χ imp to the magnetic susceptibility, we consider only the coupling between h and the impurity fermions. When the condition is satisfied, the ground state of H D is singly occupied, i.e., a two-fold degenerate magnetic doublet. When it is probed at energies much below the smallest charge excitation energy, ∆E = min{μd , U + d -μ}, only the spin degrees of freedom remain. Thus, the impurity behaves like a local moment. This is the local moment regime in the atomic limit. In this regime, the interaction between the local moment and conduction electrons is given by Eq. (1) with K > 0. Finally, the hybridization between the J = 1 fermions and impurity can be written as By expanding around the touching point p 0 , we may neglect the momentum dependence of the hybridization amplitude, i.e., V pα ≈ V p0α . Moreover, for simplicity, we assume that the impurity is equally coupled to the three bands, i.e., V p0α = V . In the U → +∞ limit, we may obtain the Kondo coupling In general, the Anderson impurity model has two regimes: the simple resonance and the local moment regime On account of the competition between the hybridization and the on-site Coulomb repulsion U , the local moment regime will be different from the one in the atomic limit. Since the Kondo effect occurs only in the local moment regime, we need to determine the boundary between the local moment and simple resonance regime before plunging into the detailed study. To do it, we employ a mean-field decoupling of the U term in H D 31 : This results in the shift of the impurity level Hence, up to a constant term, the mean-field Hamiltonian is of the form Since H M F is quadratic in the fermion operators, it can be solved exactly. The values of n dσ at μ = 0 can be determined by the self-consistent equations where is the dimensionless coupling between the J = 1 fermions and the impurity, and D is the half band width. We express n dσ by the total occupation number n d = n d↑ + n d↓ and the local moment M = n d↑n d↓ , and thus Eq. ( where The local moment regime corresponds to M = 0. To determine the critical value of U c for given λ, we set M = 0 in Eq. ( where On the other hand, we expand the R.H.S. of Eq. ( The values of U c and n d (at U = U c ) for given λ can be obtained by solving Eqs. ( As we have mentioned in the introduction, since we are mainly interested in the Kondo physics which reveals itself most clearly deep inside the local moment regime, we will concentrate on analyzing the Anderson model in the infinite U limit in the following. We now study the ground-state properties of H in the U → +∞ limit with the help of the variational wavefunction method. This is supposed to capture the essential properties of the whole local moment regime. To proceed, it is convenient to perform a unitary transformation at each k point where U (k) is given by Eq. (7). With this transformation [Eq. (18)], H C takes the form while H V becomes where Ṽkα = V β U αβ (k). In the absence of H V , the ground state of H C is where means the product over states with energy below the Fermi level μ. The corresponding ground-state energy E 0 is of the form where means the sum over states with energy below the Fermi level. In the presence of H V , motivated by the form of Eq. ( in the U → +∞ limit. The variational energy E for the trial state |Ψ is then given by According to the variational principle, the values of a 0 and a αkσ are determined by the equations where ∆ b ≡ E 0 -E is the binding energy and η h = sgn(h). The derivation of Eq. ( For μ = 0 -, the contribution from the flat band at = 0 vanishes and Eq. ( provided that μ, |∆ b | D. Figure When λ < 0.1, ∆ b /D 1 and we may neglect the last term at the R.H.S. of Eq. ( ) . (28) Equation ( as λ → 0 + for given d < 0. That is, ∆ b approaches zero as a linear function of λ. This behavior is in contrast with the usual FL. There, the binding energy is given by where N (0) is the DOS at the Fermi energy F for a single species of fermions. In the Kondo problem, there is a characteristic energy scale -the Kondo temperature T K (by setting k B = 1). There are various ways to define it, which differ from each other by a constant of O(1). For example, in the perturbative RG approach, T K is defined as the energy scale at which the renormalized coupling diverges B. The impurity properties at T = 0 In terms of the above results, we first compute the impurity contribution χ imp to the magnetic susceptibility at T = 0 when μ = 0 + . By choosing h > 0, Eq. ( for h, |∆ b | D, where s = A/(CD 3 ) = 1/3 for the J = 1 fermions and s = 0 for the WSM. To calculate χ imp , we write ∆ b as ∆ b = ∆ 0 +c 1 h+c 2 h 2 +O(h 3 ) where ∆ 0 is the value of ∆ b at h = 0 and c 1 , c 2 are constants independent of h. Inserting this expansion into Eq. (30), we find that c 1 = -1 and , where b = 1/(2λ) + 1. For ∆ 0 /D 1, . The ground-state energy at small h is given by χ imp is defined by As a result, we get If the flat band is excluded by setting s = 0, c 2 would become which is vanishingly small. That is, the main contribution to χ imp at T = 0 arises from the hybridization of the flat band and the impurity. Next, we would like to compute the d-level occupation number n d 0 at T = 0. By definition, we have Since a 0 = 0, n d 0 < 1. In terms of Eq. (A2), we find that Accordingly, the d-level occupation number at Following from Eq. ( for λ 0.1, we conclude that 1 -n d 0 1 when λ 0.1. When T T K , the impurity spin is completely shielded, as suggested by the variational wavefunction approach. The impurity fermion and the conduction electrons within the shell, of width about T K , around the Fermi surface form a spin singlet. As a result, the impurity is no longer magnetic. It acts as a structureless scatterer. Although the impurity degree of freedom disappears from this problem at low temperatures, the effective Hamiltonian does not reduce to the pure potential scattering. This singlet displays polarizability, which provides an indirect interaction between electrons located in the vicinity of this singlet: one of the electrons polarizes the singlet, this polarization acts on another electron. Thus, a local interaction arises between the electrons. Based on this picture, we propose that the effective Hamiltonian close to the Kondo fixed point can be written as 10 where the scatterer formed by the singlet is modeled by a virtual level, of energy 0 , hybridized with the conduction electrons, with the hybridization strength T k . The operators f σ and f † σ , which obey the canonical anticommutation relations, describe the electrons around the scatterer and the Ũ term is the local interaction between electrons induced by the singlet. (Here we have treated the singlet as a point scatterer.) The fixed-point Hamiltonian is given by H ef f [ Ũ = 0], while the Ũ term is the leading irrelevant operator. Following the spirit of Landau's FL theory, the effects of the Ũ term can be obtained by the Hartree-Fock approximation or the perturbative expansion in Ũ . Notice that δn f σ = 0 may arise from thermal fluctuations at finite temperature or the presence of applied fields. Hence, the Ũ term may be neglected when its contribution is subleading compared to the one from the fixed-point Hamiltonian H ef f [ Ũ = 0] in the zero temperature or zero field limits. To relate the parameters in H ef f to those in the infinite-U Anderson model, we can employ H ef f [Eq. (33)] to calculate some physical quantities and identify them as those obtained from the variational wavefunction approach. For simplicity, we will set T k = T 0 . Here we shall choose n f 0 and χ (0) imp at T = 0, where χ (0) imp denotes the impurity contribution to the magnetic susceptibility given by the fixed-point Hamiltonian H ef f [ Ũ = 0]. Both can be obtained from Eqs. (C5) and (C6). We will identify n f 0 as n d 0 given by Eq. (32) and χ (0) imp as χ imp given by Eq. (31). Then, we get O(∆ b ). Different choices of it will lead to different values of 0 and g for given λ and d /D. Without loss of generality, we take it to be ∆ b . Equations ( The Kondo limit is usually defined by n d 0 = 1. This is achieved when following from Eq. (32). In this limit, χ imp = 2/∆ b at T = 0. Further, we find from Eqs. (34) and (35) that 0 ∆ b = 0.2537 and g = 0.2584 in the Kondo limit. With the help of Eq. (C4), the spectral density at the impurity site is given by at T = 0, where L 0 (ω) = (1 + 2g)ω 2 -0 ω -g∆ 2 b /3. We plot ∆ b ρ f as a function of ω/∆ b in the Kondo limit in Fig. Finally, we may employ H ef f to calculate the impurity corrections to the thermodynamic response functions at T T K . By integrating out the conduction electrons, the partition function with Ũ = 0 can be written as where Z 0 is the partition function of bulk electrons in the absence of impurity and the Fourier transform of D σ (τ ) is given by where L σ (ω) = (1+2g)ω 2σ ω-g∆ 2 b /3 and σ = 0 -σh. (This can be found with a procedure similar to the one to get Eq. (C3).) Consequently, the free energy can be written as F = F 0 + F imp where F 0 is the free energy of bulk electrons in the absence of the impurity and The frequency summation can be performed with the help of contour integration, yielding where f (ω) = 1/(e βω +1) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution. To compute the impurity correction C imp to the heat capacity, we set h = 0 in F imp . Since we are interested only in the behavior of C imp at T T K , it suffices to expand F imp in powers of T /∆ b . This can be achieved with the help of the standard Sommerfeld expansion, and we find that where As a result, C imp is of the form when T ∆ b . Curiously, the prefactor in the leading term is universal, irrespective of 0 and g. A few comments on the above results are in order. First of all, the correction arising from the Ũ term is subleading because δn f σ → 0 as T → 0. Next, let us compare C imp with the heat capacity per unit volume c 0 (T ) for a non-interacting J = 1 Fermi gas. The latter is given by c 0 (T ) is completely arises from the topologically nontrivial bands and the flat band does not contribute to c 0 at all due to the lack of nontrivial dispersion. We see that C imp has the same temperature dependence as c 0 when T T K . To study the physical properties in the local moment regime at high temperature, i.e., for T > T K , we would like to calculate the single-particle Green function of the impurity fermions, which in the imaginary-time formulation is defined as Following Refs. 29 and 30, we will calculate D σσ in terms of its EOM. In terms of the standard procedure, D σσ (τ ) satisfies the equation where ω n = (2n + 1)πT , Ã(iω n ) is the Fourier transform of A(τ ), and is the self-energy of the impurity fermions. In the following, we will focus on the μ = 0 case. To illustrate the physics in the local moment regime and connect it to the previous variational wavefunction approach, we consider the U → +∞ limit. When U = 0, an exact solution of Dσσ (iω n ) cannot be obtained. To proceed, we need to make some approximation. Within the Hartree-Fock approximation approximation 29,30 , i.e., and The details of the above derivation is left in appendix B. Substituting Eq. (45) into Eq. ( where In the U → +∞ limit, Eq. (46) becomes (48) Compared with the U = 0 solution [Eq. (C1)], the effects of the infinite U limit lie at two aspects: (i) First of all, the impurity fermions acquire the wavefunction renormalization Z = 1 -n d-σ , which will reduce the spectral weight. (ii) Next, the self-energy is reduced by a factor of 1 -n d-σ . Using Eq. (C2), we find that ). As a result, the spectral density is of the form (49) From Eq. (49), n dσ are determined by the following equations We plot the spectral density ρ d in the limit U → +∞ as a function of ω for various values of λ and d /D in Fig. Two features of the spectral density should be emphasized. First of all, it has two peaks instead of a single one as in the ordinary FL. As we have discussed before, this split of peaks arises from the flat band. Next, the peaks in the spectral density shown in Fig. When h = 0, n d+ = n d-= n d /2, and Eq. (50) reduces to The value of n d can be determined by solving Eq. (51). To obtain χ imp , we write where γ is a constant independent of h. Then, we have χ imp = 2γ/D. Inserting this expansion into Eq. (50), we have γ = A/(1 -B), where Substituting the value of n d into Eq. ( We plot n d as a function of temperature T for given values of d /D and λ at U = 0 and U → +∞ in Fig. The temperature dependence of χ imp at T > T K for given values of d /D and λ at U = 0 and U → +∞ is sketched in Fig. In the present work, we study the Kondo physics of a single magnetic impurity in a J = 1 fermion system by analyzing the Anderson impurity model in the infinite U limit. As we have argued in the introduction, the perturbative RG cannot capture the low-temperature physics in this situation due to the presence of a flat band. Hence, we employ two methods -the variational wavefunction and the EOM to examine the physical properties of this system. These two approaches are, in fact, complementary to each other. Actually, there are two types of three-band touching fermion systems in the literature. The first type has a strong SOC With the help of a mean-field approximation, we can determine the phase diagram of the Anderson impurity model. Similar to the magnetic impurity in a FL, there are two regimes -the simple resonance and the local moment regime, due to the competition between hybridization and the on-site Coulomb repulsion U . In the simple resonance regime, the hybridization between impurity and conduction electrons turns the impurity level to a virtual bound state and there is no local moment. The properties in this regime can be described qualitatively by the solution at U = 0. On the other hand, the Kondo effect occurs only in the local moment regime. In contrast with the FL, the local moment regime in the J = 1 fermions can be extended to the d > 0 region when the value of U is large enough. As we have discussed, this is related to the existence of the flat band. When the temperature is below the Kondo temperature T K , Kondo effect occurs, as we have shown in the approach of variational wavefunction, and the local moments are screened by conduction electrons. In terms of the variational wavefunction approach, we can calculate the binding energy and show that the Kondo screening always occurs as long as the exchange coupling between the impurity spin and the conduction electrons is antiferromagnetic in nature, similar to the case in the FL. We also calculate the impurity contribution to the magnetic susceptibility and the local electron occupation number at the impurity site at T = 0, which depend on the DOS of the flat band in a nontrivial way. Following the previous local-FL description of the Kondo effect 10 , we employ an effective Hamiltonian describing the low-temperature physics in the local moment regime in the infinite U limit. In terms of the above calculated ground-state properties, we can relate the parameters in the effective Hamiltonian to those in the infinite-U Anderson model. Consequently, we are able to determine the impurity spectral density at T = 0 and the impurity contribution to the heat capacity at low temperature. Especially, we show that the resulting Kondo resonance in this system is split into two peaks due to the presence of the flat band. The physics in the local moment regime can be qualitatively described by the infinite U limit. We then use the method of EOM to calculate the single-particle Green function of the impurity fermions in this limit, from which we can extract the temperature dependence of the occupation number n d of impurity fermions as well as the impurity magnetic susceptibility. Both are similar to those in a FL, as we would expect. Especially, χ imp exhibits a Curie-like behavior at T T K and is much enhanced near T K . On the other hand, the flat band has no effect on the temperature dependence of n d as long as T > T K , so that the latter is identical to the case in a WSM. The role of the flat band reveals itself only when the temperature is close to T K . If the flat band were absent, χ imp would become non-analytic function of T near T K . When U = 0, the set of EOMs cannot be solved exactly and we make the Hartree-Fock approximation, which takes into account the correlation brought about by an infinite U but misses the Kondo resonance. Therefore, our results on the temperature dependence of the occupation number of impurity fermions and the impurity magnetic susceptibility can be applied only to the temperature regime T > T K . Actually, a more sophisticated approximation can be made to capture the Kondo physics 34 . Also, the approaches adopted in the present work can be directly applied to other multiband touching fermion systems and can be used to study the anisotropic correlations introduced by the velocity anisotropy and/or the tilting of the dispersion. These will be left as future works. For simplicity, we have assumed that the hybridization between the impurity and the three bands have the same strength. We expect that small deviation from this isotropic limit will not affect the physics we have described qualitatively. Especially, the Kondo screening always occurs in the local moment regime as long as the impurity couples to the flat band. Nevertheless, in the highly anisotropic limit, i.e., the strength of the coupling to the flat band is much smaller than those to the topologically nontrivial bands, the resulting Kondo temperature may be too small to be accessible by experiments. In this situation, experimental data may suggest the pseudogap Kondo effect. In the present work, we have neglected the electronelectron interaction between conduction electrons. That is, we have assumed that there is a window for the interaction strength such that the three-band touching point is stable. Since the band structure of CoSi near the Γ point observed by the ARPES and that obtained by the ab initio calculations are both qualitatively consistent with the one of non-interacting J = 1 fermions, this assumption is at least valid in the CoSi family. In the study of the Kondo physics in graphene 35 , due to the presence of two valleys or Dirac nodes in the Brillouin zone, the issue of whether or not the two-channel Kondo physics is relevant at low temperature was raised. The is because electrons from the two valleys form two independent screening channels at low energy. For the J = 1 fermions with two nodes at the Fermi energy, the relevancy of the two-channel Kondo effect is an interesting open problem. However, for the CoSi family we studied in this paper, band structure calculations and the ARPES show that there is only a single nodal point at a given energy. Therefore, such an issue does not exist. In the present work, we consider only the simplest spin-1/2 impurity. When the impurity spin is larger than one-half, the underscreened Kondo effect may occur. All the above interesting questions will be left for future studies. For the magnetic impurity in a FL, the spectral density at U = 0 exhibits a peak at the impurity level, d . The only effect of the hybridization is to broaden this peak and turns the impurity level into a virtual bound state or resonance. For the case in the J = 1 fermions, the existence of the flat band leads to a two-peak structure in the spectral density and shifts them away from the position of the impurity level. On the other hand, the nonzero width of these peaks arises mainly from the hybridization with the topologically nontrivial bands. The total occupation number n d of the impurity levels at h = 0 is given by The U = 0 solution is supposed to capture the physical properties of the simple resonance regime qualitatively. This equation has two fixed points: λ = 0 and λ = λc = 4. For the antiferromagnetic coupling (λ > 0), the former is IR stable while the latter is IR unstable. Thus, for λ < λc, λ flows to zero at low energies, implying decoupled impurity spin and conduction electrons. On the other hand, λ flows to strong coupling at low energies when λ > λc, implying the occurrence of Kondo screening. As a result, the Kondo screening occurs only when K is larger than some critical strength in this case. 