Electromagnetic metasurfaces offer the capability to realize almost arbitrary power conserving field transformations. These field transformations are governed by the generalized sheet transition conditions, which relate the tangential fields on each side of the surface through the surface parameters. Ideally, engineers would like to determine the surface parameters for transformations based on their application-specific farfield criteria. However, determining the surface parameters to satisfy these criteria is challenging without direct knowledge of the tangential fields on one side of the surface, which are not unique for a given far field pattern. As a result, current design is restricted to analytical examples where the tangential fields are solvable or other ad hoc methods. This paper presents a convex optimization-based scheme which determines surface parameters, such as surface impedance, admittance, and magneto-electric coupling, which satisfy far-field constraints such as beam magnitude, side lobe level, and null locations. The optimization is performed on a model constructed using the method of moments. This model incorporates edge effects and mutual coupling. The resulting non-convexity from this model is relaxed using the alternating direction method of multipliers. Examples of this optimization scheme performing multi-criteria pattern forming, extreme angle small surface refraction, and Chebyshev beamforming are presented. E LECTROMAGNETIC metasurfaces (EMMSs) are ex- tremely powerful, two-dimensional structures capable of creating almost arbitrary wave transformations. To perform these transformations for scalar EMMSs, parameters such as surface impedance (Z e ) and admittance (Y m ) are varied spatially across the surface. More advanced transformations can be accomplished by allowing for bianisotropy, enabling tensorial Z e and Y m , along with a magneto-electric coupling term K em . These parameters relate the tangential fields directly above the surface to fields directly below the surface, which together form the desired fields on each side Ideally, a designer would like to produce EMMS parameters that achieve desired far-field criteria such as beam width, side lobe level, or null locations directly. Essentially, they would supply a set of masks constraining the far-field pattern. However, current EMMS parameter design typically requires knowledge of the fields near the EMMS, which is only available for a few known transformations such as refraction, reflection, and collimation Recently, the source reconstruction method (SRM) has been leveraged to synthesize EMMS parameters. It takes a desired far-field radiation pattern from the surface and aims to reconstruct an equivalent source to determine the required surface parameters. The SRM is used to derive surface impedance based on far-field criteria such as beam width, null location, and direction There has also been work on the synthesis of reflectarray metasurfaces incorporating mutual coupling and edge effects EMMS surface design has been approached using stochastic methods such as differential evolution algorithms and machine learning In this work, we present a new method to determine the EMMS parameters, which satisfy far-field design goals. Starting with an EMMS model derived using the MoM, we are able to fully capture edge effects and mutual coupling between EMMS elements. We then use the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) to deterministically optimize the EMMS parameters to satisfy far-field criteria including main beam level, side lobe level, and null location. In addition, we are also able to impose constraints on the curvature of the surface currents in order to allow for more manufacturable surfaces. The paper is structured as follows. In Section II, we begin by discussing how the formulation of the EMMS model from the MoM. Following this, in Section III, we outline how the ADMM optimizer is constructed. Lastly, in Section IV, we provide two-dimensional optimization examples demonstrating general multi-criteria optimization, extreme angle refraction with electrically small EMMSs, and Chebyshev beamforming before offering some concluding remarks. Our two-dimensional model for the EMMS is constructed using the electric and magnetic field integral equations (EFIE and MFIE respectively), and solved using the MoM where the electric and magnetic surface currents J z (y) ∈ C N , M y (y) ∈ C N are ẑ-directed and ŷ-directed respectively, while Z se ∈ C N×N and K em ∈ C N×N are diagonal matrices containing the surface impedance and magneto-electric coupling coefficient as a function of position. The magnetic field integral equation (MFIE) can be constructed in a similar way and written as where Y sm ∈ C N×N is a diagonal matrix containing the surface admittance. The scattered electric field in (1) from a thin strip along the y-axis is given by where w is the width of the thin strip. To discretize this, we expand the current J z (y) with pulse basis functions as which yields the matrix equation We can similarly derive the scattered magnetic field for (2) as M y (y )H (2) and subsequently discretize it. Using pulse basis functions as before to represent M y (y) Using point matching we can construct two MoM equations, which capture the mutual coupling and edge effects of an EMMS. The resulting system of equations is In our examples we would like to consider purely passive and lossless EMMSs because they are more efficient and easier to realise. As a result, Z se and Y sm will be purely imaginary, while K em is purely real We also require matrix equations describing the far-field scattering from the induced surface currents on the EMMS. Using the two dimensional free space dyadic Green's function we can describe the far-field electric field due to the electric at a distance ρ as J z (y )e jky sin φ dy . We can likewise find the far-field electric field due to magnetic currents as M y (y )e jky sin φ cos φ dy . We can again discretize the current using pulse basis functions to yield the matrix equations where G e ∈ C M×N and G m ∈ C M×N are matrices transforming the electric and magnetic surface currents to far-field electric field. Using these equations describing the EMMS and its farfield scattered field, we can now assemble an optimization scheme around them. It is worth noting that we have chosen a simple example for a demonstration of this method. MoM can be expanded for other geometries in two and three dimensions. In addition, any feed interactions or multiple EMMSs could also be incorporated into this model. These augmentations would only require altering the impedance matrix Z e and Z m to account for the altered coupling between surface currents and calculating E inc and H inc for different excitation fields in Convex optimization is the process of minimizing a convex objective function subject to a set of convex constraints. A function f (x) is deemed convex if for all x, y ∈ R and θ where f 0 is a convex function called the objective function, f i are convex functions forming the set of inequality constraints, and g k are affine functions forming a set of equality constraints. A point x 0 is called feasible if f i (x 0 ) ≤ 0 for i = 1, ..., n and g k (x 0 ) = 0 for k = 1, .., m. A point x * is deemed optimal if it is feasible and f 0 (x * ) < f 0 (x 0 ) for all feasible points x 0 . The main challenge of convex optimization is formulating a given problem as a convex one. Once that is achieved, there exist many reliable solvers which can solve most convex problems in polynomial time In order to optimize an EMMS, we need to formulate the problem as a convex one. This has a form similar to minimize subject to E inc = Z e I e + jX se I e -K em I m (16b) where f 0 and f i are some objective and constraint functions for a certain design goal. The optimization variables in this case are the surface current coefficients I e and I m along with the surface reactance (X se ), susceptance (B sm ), and magnetoelectric coupling (K em ). The advantage of this formulation is that we are able to optimize directly for passive and lossless surface parameters while incorporating all of the physics of the problem. Solving directly for the currents instead would then require another step to convert to a passive and lossless solution with the GSTCs. Solving for currents directly has been employed by other authors, but often requires global optimizers Unfortunately, the jX se I e -K em I m and jB sm I m + K em I e terms in (16b) and (16c) are non-convex. This is because they are bi-affine (two variables multiplied together). When confronted with a non-convexity there are two options. One can reformulate the model to eliminate the non-convex terms or relax the non-convexity. Reformulating the model without biaffine terms does not seem to be possible in our case. Therefore, we must relax the problem. A relaxation typically allows a non-convex problem to be formulate as a convex one at the expense of an enlarged feasibility region. As a result, it is important to ensure any solutions provided by the optimizer are also feasible for our original problem. This seems like a heavy price to pay. However, many relaxations provide solutions which are tight to the original problem. There exist many relaxations for biaffine problems ADMM first forms the augmented Lagrangian and then alternatingly minimizes the augmented Lagrangian with respect to one of the biaffine variables each iteration. Following this, it updates the dual variables to penalize equality constraint violation. Doing so, it arrives at a relaxed solution to the previously unsolvable problem. Convergence for ADMM in this case is confirmed by ensuring that the equality constraint violation is lower than a certain threshold α Z e and α Z m . A flow chart in Figure ADMM can be performed using the CVX Matlab package One thing to note is that complex terms should be separated into their real and imaginary components. For example one can decompose a vector a and matrix A as This is because most convex optimization solvers can't work directly with complex numbers. For the rest of the paper we will assume that complex terms will be converted into this form before being solved. It is worth noting no problem information is lost in this conversion. With ADMM, we have a way to relax and subsequently optimize the surface currents and parameters within the physical limits of the EMMS. The remaining step is to construct constraints and/or objective functions corresponding to potential design specifications. 1) Main Beam Level: To try to force a beam to achieve a certain level (or get as close as possible) we can add a 2 -norm minimization term to the objective. For example, to force a beam at φ 0 to a level MB level the objective function can take the form where E f f inc (φ 0 ) is the incident field in the spectral domain. This is required for the total field because G e (φ 0 )I e + G m (φ 0 )I m represents only the scattered field. One can form multiple main beams by supplying a range of angles to φ 0 , leading to more rows of 2) Null Location: To form a null at φ n in the far-field we can add the term, to the objective function. This is similar to 3) Maximum Side Lobe Level: Enforcing a maximum permissible side lobe over a certain set of angles can be done with the inequality constraint where we force the absolute value of the total field over the side lobe region SL to be less than a certain side lobe level τ. We've included a slack variable slack SL so the following term must be added to the objective: This is required in order to make the inequality active. The reason the slack variable is included is so that the optimizer has some "room" during the preliminary iterations to balance other parts of the optimization. Without it, ADMM would struggle to make progress for more challenging problems. This is further explored in Section IV. 4) Surface Current Smoothness: A useful term to add to the optimizer is a constraint on the limit of second derivative allowed by the surface currents I e and I m . This can be done with the inequality constraints, where D is the discrete second derivative matrix described by, 1 and ∆y = W /N is the distance between samples along the surface. Note that D ∈ R (N-2)×N as the the endpoints are allowed to be non-zero. As before the slack variables slack D e and slack D m must be minimized in the cost function with, The advantage of constraining the curvature of the currents is two-fold. Firstly, it makes the EMMSs easier to realize. This is because it is much easier to design unit cells if there is not a very large jump in surface currents from cell to cell. Secondly, because we use pulse basis functions, if the currents are allowed to be highly erratic, it could lead to some nonphysical results. Similar current regularizations have been used by other authors as well We can assemble a complete formulation if we fill in the objective function and inequality constraints of ( It is worth noting that the supplied design goals must be first and foremost physically feasible for the EMMS. While the success of the optimization tool could be used as a rough guide for far-field pattern feasibility, it is not rigorous. In the following examples we choose to terminate ADMM after a certain number of iterations (usually 150-200). This offers a good trade-off between far-field criteria and equality constraint satisfaction. For large 15λ EMMSs, 150 iterations takes roughly an hour on a typical desktop PC running CVX on Matlab for 15λ surfaces with N = 501 spatial and M = 361 angular samples. In order to demonstrate this methodology we will first present a multi-criteria optimization example. This example will combine all of the criteria in Sections III-C1 to III-C4. An example of far-field parameters to optimize can be seen in Table minimize subject to E inc = Z e I e + jX se I e -K em I m (25b) We can see the equality constraint residuals for each iteration in Figure In order to verify our results we input our surface parameters to a model in COMSOL, a commercial multiphysics solver. The scattered field can be seen in Figure Plane wave refraction is a well studied use case for EMMSs An interesting far-field pattern to replicate is the Chebyshev array factor typically used to achieve a constant side lobe level. To the best of our knowledge, the EMMS surface parameters needed for this have never been solved for before. The far-field pattern we will use is the Chebyshev array factor, but because we have EMMS elements, rather than isotropic elements, we will use a very small uniform aperture as the element factor. As a result, we will have the typical Cheybshev array factor on the transmitted side with no reflections. Without the extra degree of freedom afforded by bianisotropy, the scalar optimized case exhibits a large reflected beam at 180 • . We can see an improvement in beam direction and magnitude in comparison to the analytic formulation derived by Epstein et al In this paper we introduced a new method for solving for EMMS surface parameters. The method uses a MoM model to fully incorporate edge effects and mutual coupling. Using this MoM model, a convex optimization-based solver using ADMM is implemented to solve for surface parameters based on far field criteria. These criteria are main beam location and level, null location, and maximum allowable side lobe level. Three examples were then presented to demonstrate this method. These are a multi-criteria example demonstrating all of the criteria at once, extreme angle refraction with electrically small EMMSs, and an example demonstrating Chebyshev beamforming. Although this method has many potential uses due to its flexible MoM model and varied far-field criteria, there remain some areas for future work. The main area for future research would be a method to determine the feasibility of far field criteria for a certain EMMS. We know heuristically that a certain sized EMMS can only produce so much directivity but these restrictions become less clear when we introduce more sophisticated far-field criteria. A way to determine the feasibility of far field criteria for an EMMS would be valuable. In addition, we have not been able to fashion a convex constraint for a minimum beam level. This would be a valuable capability, which would enable true mask-based constraints with a minimum and maximum level.