In this work, we study the extended Falicov-Kimball model at half-filling within the Hartree-Fock approach (HFA) (for various crystal lattices) and compare the results obtained with the rigorous ones derived within the dynamical mean field theory (DMFT). The model describes a system, where electrons with spin-↓ are itinerant (with hopping amplitude t), whereas those with spin-↑ are localized. The particles interact via on-site U and intersite V density-density Coulomb interactions. We show that the HFA description of the ground state properties of the model is equivalent to the exact DMFT solution and provides a qualitatively correct picture also for a range of small temperatures. It does capture the discontinuous transition between ordered phases at U = 2V for small temperatures as well as correct features of the continuous order-disorder transition. However, the HFA predicts that the discontinuous boundary ends at the isolated-critical point (of the liquidgas type) and it does not merge with the continuous boundary. This approach cannot also describe properly a change of order of the continuous transition for large V as well as various metal-insulator transitions found within the DMFT. Interparticle correlations in fermionic systems give rise variety of intriguing phenomena. For example, these systems exhibit quite complex phase diagrams with, e.g., metal-insulator transitions and competition between different ordering such as spin-, charge-, orbital-order as well as superconductivity, e.g., Refs. Description of correlated electron systems requires special care and precision, because sometimes it happens that different calculation methods lead to qualitatively different results, e.g., the dependence of order-disorder transition temperature as a function of Hubbard-U interaction in the attractive Hubbard model (i.e., superconducting critical temperature) The advantage of this method is its relative simplicity and the ability to describe complex systems using analytic expressions. However, sometimes it turns out that the accuracy of calculations is not controlled by this method. In particular, it cannot properly describe the Mott localization at the metal-insulator transition To find the answer to this question, in this work we analyze the extended Falicov-Kimball model (EFKM) In general, the HFA fails in finite temperature when arXiv:2011.07493v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 15 Nov 2020 on-site Coulomb interaction U is present. However, at T = 0, analytic expressions for electron density and energy obtained using HFA and DMFT are proven to be equivalent (see Appendix A). Therefore, it is natural to expect that also in a low temperature range and/or for small values of the interaction parameter U we will get similar results when we use the HFA and the DMFT. And indeed, our calculations confirm this hypothesis. The present work is organized in the following way. Section II describes the model investigated (Sec. II A) and the method used (Sec. II B, includes also equation at T = 0 and T > 0 for the order parameters, the free energy as well as for the transition temperature). Section III is devoted to presentation of numerical results such as a phase diagram of the model and dependencies of various thermodynamical quantities (Sec. III A) and a comparison of these findings with the rigorous results (Sec. III B). In Section IV, the conclusions and final remarks are presented. The appendixes are devoted to a rigorous proof of the fact that the HFA is an exact theory for the model at T = 0 (Appendix A) and to an analysis of the equations obtained for a very particular case of U = 2V (Appendix B). The Hamiltonian of the EFKM (cf. also Refs. where ĉ † i,↓ (ĉ i,↓ ) denotes creation(annihilation) of fermion (electron) with spin σ (σ ∈ {↓, ↑}) at site i and ni,σ = ĉ † i,↓ ĉi,↓ . U and V denote on-site and intersite nearestneighbor, respectively, density-density Coulomb interactions. i,j indicates summation over the nearestneighbor pairs. μ σ is the site-independent chemical potential for electrons with spin σ. In this work, we consider the case of half-filling, i.e., μ σ = (U + 4V )/2 for both directions of the spin. The denotation used are the same as those used in Refs. A review of properties of the standard Falicov-Kimball model (FKM) [called also as the spin-less Falicov-Kimball model, i.e., V = 0 case of model From the historical perspective, the standard FKM appears in Hubbard's original work In this paper, we use mainly the semi-elliptic density of states, which is the DOS of non-interacting particles on the Bethe lattice with the coordination number z → ∞ In all these cases, the half-bandwidth is defined as 2t. In the rest of the paper, we take t as an energy unit. Let us consider the model on a bipartite (alternate) lattice, i.e., on the lattice which can be divided into two sublattices (denoted by α = A, B) in such a way that all nearest-neighbors of a site from one sublattice belong to the other sublattice. The Hamiltonian (1) is treated within the standard broken symmetry mean-field Hartree-Fock approach Q is a half of the largest reciprocal lattice vector in the first Brillouin zone, R i indicates the location of i-th site, and Parameters ∆ ↓ and ∆ ↑ are defined as differences between average occupation of sublattices by itinerant and localized electrons, respectively (cf. Refs. where n α σ = ni,σ for any i ∈ α, where α = A, B denotes the sublattice index. Now, the Hamiltonian (1) in the HFA can be written in terms of two sublattice operators in the reduced Brillouin zone (RBZ) as ĤMF = are the Nambu spinors, ĉ † α, k,σ and ĉα, k,σ are fermion operators defined by the discrete Fourier transformation: Matrix H k,σ has the form , δ m defines the locations of the nearest-neighbor sites in the unit cell consisting of two lattice sites and the sum is done over all nearest neighbors. All summations over momentum k are performed over the RBZ (there is N/2 states in the RBZ for each sublattice per spin). The eigenvalues σ . Thus, the full mean-field Hamiltonian can be expressed in the quasi-particle excitation as Ĥ are creation operators of the fermionic quasiparticles. The grand canonical potential Ω (per site) of the system is defined as Finally, one obtains the free energy of the EFKM (per site) in the following form T denotes temperature and k B is the Boltzmann constant. D(ε) is the non-interacting density of states (DOS), which an explicit form is dependent on the particular lattice on which model ( ∆ ↑ = tanh (βB/4) . ( Value ∆ F (ε) = 2A can be also interpreted as an energy gap at the chemical potential (the Fermi level at T = 0) for Bogoliubov quasiparticles Let us also notice, that Eqs. ( Note that if pair (∆ ↓ , ∆ ↑ ) is a solution of set ( Thus, we can further restrict ourselves to find the solutions of (4)-( These two parameters can be connected with charge polarization n Q and staggered magnetization m Q by relation: Please also note that the HFA for the intersite term restricted only to the Hartree terms is an exact approach in the limit of large dimensions From above equations, for β → +∞, one gets ∆ ↑ = 1 and derives the expressions in the ground state (i.e., at T = 0) for parameter ∆ ↓ in the form of as well as for the free energy per site [which is equal to the internal energy of the systems (per site) in the ground state] as where A 0 and E 0 are expressed by . Note that these expressions are exactly the same as a rigorous solution in the limit of large dimensions for the FKM (obtained within the DMFT, at least for the Bethe lattice; cf. Appendix A). Assuming the continuous vanishing of both parameters ∆ σ → 0 at T c , one can obtain from Eqs. ( where integral I c (β c ) is defined as and To obtain above relation we used that lim x→0 [tanh(kx)/x] = k (where k ∈ R) and assuming that ∆ ↑ ∝ ∆ ↓ near T c . It turns out that Eq. ( In addition, for t → 0, D(ε) → δ(ε) (for any of explicit forms used further in the paper), Here, δ(ε) denotes the Dirac function (distribution). It is clearly seen that this result is different than the rigorous result obtained at atomic limit of the EFKM (in infinite dimension limit) The diagram of the EFKM for T > 0 is determined by finding all solutions of the set of Eqs. ( The general structure of the finite temperature phase diagram of the model obtained within the HFA for fixed V /t is not dependent on particular value of V /t = 0. The exemplary phase diagram for V /t = 1.0 is shown in Fig. In particular, for U = 0, T c approaches the results for the atomic limit of the model: (at V /t → ∞) for any DOS. However, one should note that the lines T * c /V obtained for the lorentzian and rectangular DOSs cross at V /t ≈ 0.632 and this obtained for D L (ε) is above that calculated for D R (ε). The ground state properties of the model for the Bethe lattice were studied in detail in Ref. In Figs. Figure The analysis of behavior of the system for U = 2V is presented in Fig. one finds the continuous transition at T Is c (both solution with M > 0 and M < 0 are equivalent). If one investigates M as a function of H for T < T Is c , one finds the discontinuous transition at H = 0 between phases with M > 0 (stable for H ≥ 0 and metastable for H < 0) and M < 0 (having the lowest energy for H ≤ 0 and being metastable for H > 0). Note that in the vicinity of H = 0 both solutions with M > 0 and M < 0 exists. For better understanding the behavior of the model for T c > T > T * c let us also mention an analogy taken from the theory of magnetism. Namely, for T > T Is c , the magnetization of a paramagnet in the external magnetic field changes from M > 0 (if H > 0) to M < 0 (if H < 0) continuously through M = 0 with a change of direction of the external field H. But at H = 0, we do not observe any phase transition and M = 0 at T > T Is c , even though we can distinguish two regions on the phase diagram for H = 0. Obviously, we cannot construct a simple analogy between the Ising model and the continuous phase transition occurring at T c in the EFKM. Let us now discuss limitation of the HFA and compare the results derived within this approach with the results obtained by the DMFT. As we said previously, the HFA gives rigorous results at the ground state (Sec. II B 1 and Appendix A, cf. also Ref. Please also note, that the HFA results do not agree with the results of the DMFT, which predicts that CO-AF boundary is a standard first order transition (for T = 0) associated with the discontinuity of ∆ ↑ As one can expect the HFA fails in the description of metal-insulator transition. Within the HFA all ordered phases are insulators with the gap ∆ F (ε) = 2A (∆ F (ε) = 0 if ∆ ↑ = 0), whereas the DMFT finds several metallic phases with the long-range order Finally, let us discuss the dependence of ∆ ↑ as a function of reduced temperature T /T c for really small interactions parameters. It was found that for small U/t → 0 + and V /t = 0 the temperature dependence of ∆ ↑ is quite unusual, namely, it resembles mean-field solution of Eq. ( In this paper, we studied the extended Falicov-Kimball model within the weak-coupling limit, i.e., using the mean-field broken-symmetry Hartree-Fock approach. We determined the phase diagram of the model and showed some thermodynamic characteristics. We found that the diagram is symmetric with respect to U = 2V . The order-disorder transition is continuous, whereas the transition line between ordered phases at U = 2V is discontinuous and finishes at the critical-end point. The detailed analysis of this specific values of the model parameters was provided. Many analytic derivations based on the HFA equation for the order parameters and the free energy were performed for different density of states. We then compared the results obtained by the HFA with those derived using the DMFT for the Bethe lattice. We showed that only at T = 0 both these methods are equivalent in the whole range of coupling parameters. When the local interaction parameter U = 0 then the same results are also obtained for T > 0. Moreover, we obtained quantitatively similar results when T > 0 and U is small. However, we proved, that for not very small values of U HFA completely fails at T > 0, because it gives results that differ significantly in quantitative terms, or in some intervals of the parameters also qualitatively from those obtained using DMFT. Thus, we showed systematically that properties of the correlated electron system derived on the basis of the static (represented here by the HFA) and the dynamic (represented by the DMFT) mean field theory for not too small U and T > 0 are significantly different. In particular, these differences are enhanced in the limit of strong correlations, when U → ∞. We expect that similar conclusions to the ones presented here also apply to other models of correlated electrons, although proving this can be much more complicated due to the difficulty of obtaining exact results for these models. of model ( From (3) and the relations derived above one also gets that F (U, V, ∆ ↓ , ∆ ↑ ) = F (4V -U, V, -∆ ↓ , ∆ ↑ ) + (U -2V )/2. Setting U = 2V in this equation, one obtains that F (2V, V, ∆ ↓ , ∆ ↑ ) = F (2V, V, -∆ ↓ , ∆ ↑ ), what is a condition for a first order transition, at which ∆ ↓ changes discontinuously (∆ ↑ behaves continuously). Thus, for U = 2V and any temperature a transition occurs between solutions (∆ ↓ , ∆ ↑ ) and (∆ ↓ , ∆ ↑ ) = (-∆ ↓ , ∆ ↑ ) of ( Finally, let us analyze set (4)-( 