Milling of 2D flakes is a simple method to fabricate nanomaterial of any desired shape and size. Inherently milling process can introduce the impurity or disorder which might show exotic quantum transport phenomenon when studied at the low temperature. Here we report temperature dependent weak antilocalization (WAL) effects in the sculpted nanowires of topological insulator in the presence of perpendicular magnetic field. The quadratic and linear magnetoconductivity (MC) curves at low temperature (> 2K) indicate the bulk contribution in the transport. A cusp feature in magnetoconductivity curves (positive magnetoresistance) at ultra low (< 1K) temperature and at magnetic field (< 1T) represent the WAL indicating the transport through surface states. The MC curves are discussed by using the 2D Hikami -Larkin-Nagaoka theory. The cross-over/interplay nature of positive and negative magnetoresistance observed in the MR curve at ultra-low temperature. Our results indicate that transport through topological surface states (TSS) in sculpted nanowires of Bi2Te3 can be achieved at mK range and linear MR observed at ~ 2 K could be the coexistence of electron transport through TSS and contribution from the bulk band. Topological insulators (TI) possess very interesting transport through topologically protected metallic surface states (TSS) The magnetoresistance (MR) study is a simple method to investigate the type of conduction mechanism such as weak antilocalization (WAL) and weak localization (WL) effects which represent corrections to the conductivity arising from quantum interference of the electron wave functions between two time-reversed paths. These effects are noticeable in quantum diffusive regime where mean free path is much shorter than phase coherence length of quasi particles. Numerous studies have shown that these corrections in conductivity are affected by thickness of films, interaction of surface state and bulk carriers, presence of disorder and electron-electron interactions, where a crossover from WAL to WL can be observed The observance of linear MR (magnetoresistance) and negative MR (NMR), their cross over are important for technological applications as well understanding of these MR signatures is a basic research problem and recently it has been subject of intense research Further robustness of the surface states is mainly theoretically predicated and there is very less work has been done on the experimental testing of TSS to answer very basic question whether one can demonstrate the robustness of TSS in the presence of introduced disorders (nonmagnetic impurities and deformations) in the sample without breaking the fundamental symmetry. There are some strategies to make bulk insulating samples for accessing the transport through surface states e.g. suppressing bulk carriers by metal doping Hence to overcome the dominance of bulk contribution, to study the MR signatures and to check the robustness of TSS we reduce the sample dimension by simply sculpting the nanosheeets into the nanowires or nanoribbons and we report the magnetoconductivity measurements on bismuth telluride nanowires at ultra low temp. The temp dependent evolution of WAL effects in magnetoresistance/conductivity curves have been studied here. The MR shows temp dependent evolution of three phases i.e. quadratic, linear and nonlinear. We analyze these results using Hikami -Larkin-Nagaoka (HLN) equations and study the phase coherence length, its temperature dependence and 2D nature of the transport. Surprisingly we find negative MR at ultra low temp < 0.12 K and crossover between positive MR to negative MR was observed which we correlates could be due to disorder in the system. Our results indicate that LMR (linear magnetoresitance) observed at high temp range (>2K) is not sufficient for accessing the TSS and measurements at ultra low temp give more access to TSS. Figure Inset in Fig. In the literature, MR measurements showing WAL effects were heavily used to prove the transport through TSS The dependency of MR on 1/B 2 was observed for high temp 5 K and 10 K and is shown in the Fig. The logarithmic dependence of magnetoconductivity at high temp can be understood with the help of the electron -electron interaction which shows localization tendency indicating disordered nature. The arrows in Fig. HLN relation describes the correction in the conductance in presence of spin orbit coupling to the temperature dependent WAL effects. In presence of perpendicular magnetic field, Zeeman Effect is suppressed in topological insulator due to strong spin orbit couplings which indicates two dimensional nature of the transport Figure Crossover of weak anti-localization to weak localization is possible if Berry phase = 0, in case of WAL Berry phase changes from  to 2 and this could be the one reason to observe such change in the MR. Fermi level shifting causes competition between TSS electrons and bulk electrons and bulk gap can shift either valence bands or conduction bands. Thus Fermi level shift is also responsible for the crossover of the positive to negative magnetoconductivity. The WL is observed if the system is governed by the constructive interference of coherent quantum phases and often these type of systems show the presence of weak SOC or magnetic scattering. Previoulsy crossover from WAL to WL have been observed in many experiments, e.g. magnetically doped surface states In our present result, we observed a combination of WAL and WL in MR data. At low temp, where topological surface states (TSS) are dominant, we observed a WAL cusp near 0T, which is suggestive of the non-trivial -Berry phase that's a signature of TIs. However, with increasing temp, we observe that at 0T cusp becomes weaker and fades away, suggesting more bulk conduction channels in the sample due to higher thermal activation energies. Also, we observe that with increasing B-field, there is an interplay between WAL and WL features. Previously such effects have been characterized using spin-orbit scattering time (τSO) and electron dephasing time (τφ) For massless Dirac fermions which lies on the surface states, =0 so φ b = π, which suggests quantum interference between time reversed trajectories is destructive that suppresses backscattering and enhances the conductivity, leading to occurrence of WAL effect. While for massive bulk electrons, where mass term is the band gap between conduction and valence band, so φ b =0. In this large-mass limit, quantum interference changes from destructive to constructive and crossover from WAL to WL takes place. Note that here we used sculpted nanowires which could inherently introduce the disorder in the system. It has been observed that the locally conducting puddles of hole or electrons appear in some regions when the valence band top or conduction band bottom crosses the chemical potential. Such system coexist positively and negatively charged empty donors and occupied acceptors respectively. The thermally activated carriers do not show any significant screening at low temp and charged impurities pile up the fluctuations of the Coulomb potential In our previous work on FIB fabricated Bi2Te3 nanowires at ultra-low temp under in-plane parallel B-field, we demonstrated that spin-dependent scattering of surface and bulk electrons. The local magnetic moments produced by Ga ion milling contamination (with the help of first principles calculations) leads to the negative magnetoresistance in Bi2Te3 nanowires In present study, we have used out-of plane perpendicular B-field, where all such magnetic moments will align perpendicular to surface resulting into zero exchange interaction energy with surface electron spin (which is in-plane perpendicular to electron momentum direction). But, due to out-of plane perpendicular external B-field, time reversal symmetry will be broken, creating a "mass" or magnetic gap in the previously gapless linear Dirac spectrum. E = ± √( Ak x ) 2 + (Ak y ) 2 + m z 2 , if B-field is outof-plane perpendicular in z-direction, k is the wave-vector and m is the magnetic term. This will result into resistance increase (positive MR) with B-field. It might be possible that not all magnetic moments align in perpendicular field direction and some in-plane components might exist. However, these few in-plane moments will be then randomly oriented and will cause spin scattering, which should not decrease resistance and show negative MR. Scattering should cause resistance to increase and MR to show positive slope. In our previous work under in-plane (parallel to current) B-field, we observed large negative MR even at low B-fields around zero. The magnetic moments (due to Ga contamination) alignment is perpendicular to TSS spin in such case, which reduces spin scattering and causes this negative MR. Therefore, in present work, we believe that small negative MR in region 2 at T <= 0.14 K observed in these nanowires under out-of plane perpendicular B-field can be attributed to the small bulk contribution, where Weak localization effect is dominant. Overall MR change from negative to positive value is a complex phenomenon and more experimental work is necessary for understanding the other phenomena involved e.g. fermi surface nesting arising from the quantum oscillations. It is known that pure metals show a quadratic MR at low temp and saturates at high magnetic field but materials like topological insulators are mostly reported for non-saturating positive LMR hence it is important to study MR in TIs based nanodevices. We observed evolution of WAL effects from broad cusp to sharp cusp as a function of temp in sculpted nanowires of topological insulator. This indicates that bulk contribution to surface state transport can be minimized effectively at low temp. Strikingly, the negative magnetoresistance was also found at temp 0. Fabrication procedure: Bi2Te3 nanowires were fabricated from thin flakes of Bi2Te3 by using a scotch tape method and FIB milling technique as described in the literature Experimentally, it has been observed that FIB fabrication can introduce some Ga + ion contamination. Hence extra care was taken during the device fabrication and sample was never exposed to Ga + ion beam imaging. A low ion beam current (50 pA) was used to etch some portion of the deposited flake and beam exposure time was less than 20 sec. For electrical measurements, four-probe geometry with two voltage electrodes, two current electrodes were deposited on the Bi2Te3 nanowire using a gas injection system (GIS, FIB based metal deposition). 