The spontaneous exchange bias (SEB) effect is a remarkable phenomenon recently observed in some reentrant spin-glass materials. Here we investigate the SEB in La 1.5 (Sr 0.5-x Ba x )CoMnO 6 double-perovskites, a system with multifarious magnetic phases for which a notable increase in the exchange bias field is observed for intermediate Sr/Ba concentrations. The Ba to Sr substitution leads to the enhancement of the crystal lattice, which is accompanied by the raise of both the effective magnetic moment (μ ef f ) and the antiferromagnetic (AFM) transition temperature that is observed below the ferromagnetic ordering. Such increases are likely related to the increased fraction of Co 3+ in the high spin configuration, leading to the enhancement of Co 3+ -O-Mn 4+ AFM phase and to the reduction in the uncompensation of the AFM coupling between Co and Mn. The combined effect of the increased μ ef f and AFM phase plausible explains the changes in the SEB effect. Conventionally, the exchange bias (EB) effect is manifested as a shift in hysteresis loop measurements [M (H)] carried after cooling the system in the presence of an external magnetic field (H) There is an effort of the academic community to find new materials exhibiting robust SEB at higher T . In this sense, the synthesis and investigation of new materials exhibiting such effect is mandatory. Double-perovskite (DP) compounds are prospective candidates since their intrinsic structural and magnetic inhomogeneities usually leads to magnetic phase competition and frustration, key ingredients to achieve glassy magnetic behavior The SEB effect in La 1.5 A 0.5 CoMnO 6 (A = Ba, Sr, Ca) is directly related to the Co 3+ spin state, which in turn results from a delicate balance between the crystal field and the interatomic exchange energies, being thus very sensitive to structural changes Polycrystalline samples of La 1.5 (Sr 0.5-x Ba x )CoMnO 6 (x = 0, 0.2, 0.25, 0.3, 0.4 and 0.5) were prepared by conventional solid state reaction, as described in the Supplementary Material (SM). Attempts to produce 0 < x < 0.2 samples by using the same synthesis route were not successful. Laboratory XRD data were collected using a Bruker D8 Discover diffractometer operating with Cu K α radiation, while high resolution synchrotron XRD (SXRD) patterns were recorded at the XPD beamline of the Brazilian Synchrotron Light Laboratory (LNLS), using a reflection geometry. The data were obtained at room T by one-dimensional Mythen-1K detector (Dectris), using λ = 1.9074 Å. Rietveld refinements were performed using the GSAS+EXPGUI suite The XRD patterns revealed that all samples belong to the rhombohedral R 3c space group, as expected since both x = 0 and 0.5 end members present the same crystal symmetry Figure From the fit of the magnetic susceptibility curves at the paramagnetic region, with the Curie-Weiss (CW) law (see Fig. The μ ef f systematically increases with x, plausibly explaining the increase in T N . As aforementioned, previous studies of Co-and Mn-based DPs have revealed the presence of Co 2+ /Co 3+ mixed valence, with the amounts of LS/HS Co 3+ playing an important role on the SEB effect Fig. where H 1 and H 2 are respectively the left and right coercive fields. Fig. The evolution of the SEB effect in La 1.5 (Sr 0.5-x Ba x )CoMnO 6 can be understood within the framework of strong correlation between the structural and electronic properties observed for this system. The partial replacement of Sr by Ba acts to increase the crystal lattice, leading to the decrease of the crystal field splitting energy and thus favoring the HS configuration. This is manifested in the increase of μ ef f and in the decrease of θ CW , which are related to the increased strength of the Co 3+ -O-Mn 4+ AFM coupling. On the other hand, such enhancement in the Co magnetic moment reduces the uncompensation of its coupling with Mn, which would tend to reduce the EB field The lattice expansion is closely related to the increase in the portion of HS Co 3+ , which in turn brings two main outcomes: (i) the increase in the strength of the AFM coupling and (ii) the decrease in the uncompen- sated coupling between the transition-metal (TM) ions. These opposite effects are causally related to the changes in the SEB effect. In order to quantify this argument, we define here a coupling parameter C = μ ef f • θ CW . Fig. 3(b) shows the evolution of C as a function of x. As can be noticed, it presents the same behavior of the H EB curve. One can therefore conclude that the increase in the portion of HS Co 3+ with x, manifested in the enhancement of μ ef f , leads to the rise of the AFM phase, which is necessary for the observation of the SEB effect. In addition, it also leads to the a decrease in the uncompensation of the coupling between the Co and Mn superstructures, which acts to decrease the SEB. The intermediate concentration of Sr/Ba is the region of the series where this joint effect is maxima, resulting in the pronounced increase of H EB . J. Krishna Murthy et al. have found a maxima in the SEB of La 2-x Sr x CoMnO 6 (0≤x≤1) for intermediate x concentrations In summary, we thoroughly investigated the structural, electronic, and magnetic properties of the La 1.5 (Sr 0.5-x Ba x )CoMnO 6 system by means of XRD and magnetometry measurements. The lattice expansion with increasing x is closely related to the increase of μ ef f and T N . The ZFC M (H) loops showed a pronounced increase of the giant SEB for intermediate concentrations of Sr/Ba, where the combined effects of the enhanced AFM phase and the decreased uncompensation in the magnetic coupling between Co and Mn, both resulting from the increased portion of HS Co 3+ , result in a maximum SEB effect for the x = 0.25 compound. See supplementary material for details of the crystals growth and some structural and magnetic properties of the investigated samples.