Although it has been recently demonstrated that the laser-assisted (LA) crystallization process leads to the formation of perovskite absorber films of superior photovoltaic performance compared to conventional thermal annealing (TA), the physical origin behind this important discovery is missing. In this study, CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite thin films have been synthesized by means of LA and TA crystallization on the surface of two hole transport layers (HTL) namely poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) and poly(triarylamine) (PTAA). A systematic study of the effect of laser irradiation conditions on the crystalline quality and morphology of the perovskite films was performed via scanning electron microscopy, X-Ray diffraction and absorption spectroscopy. Meanwhile, time-resolved transient absorption spectroscopy under inert atmosphere conditions was used to evaluate the carrier transport dynamics. It is found that for the PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3, structures the LA process resulted to perovskite layers of larger grains, faster charge carrier extraction properties and slower bimolecular recombination, when compared to TA. On the contrary, the LA-assisted formation of the PTAA/CH3NH3PbI3 heterostructures leads to extensive presence of residual PbI2 and thus inferior performance and charge carrier dynamics. During the last decade organic and inorganic lead halide perovskites have been the main subject of numerous scientific studies due to their enormous potential for being the main component of next generation photovoltaics. All TAS measurements were performed entirely under inert conditions, immediately after the perovskite film synthesis, while it is the first time to the best of our knowledge that such studies are made on perovskite films prepared via LA crystallization. It is found that the LA process gives rise to faster charge carrier dynamics in the case of PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3 system. These findings account plausibly for the recently reported enhanced PCEs of the photovoltaic absorbers prepared by means of LA crystallization. All HTL/CH3NH3PbI3 configurations of this study were prepared on 2 x 1.5 cm 2 glass substrates (Naranjo Substrates) that are coated with pre-patterned indium tin oxide (ITO). Before the HTL deposition, a three-step rinsing procedure with de-ionized water, acetone, and isopropanol was followed in order to ensure that all ITO/glass surfaces were completely free of impurities. The synthesis of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films was performed by means of either conventional thermal annealing or by laser-assisted (LA) crystallization. For both fabrication protocols the perovskite precursors were introduced on the HTL substrate by executing a standard solution-based two-step procedure that makes use of two separate anhydrous solutions within a nitrogen-filled glass box. On a quite different manner, in the second step of the LA crystallization method the CH3NH3I solution was casted without any heating. Rather differently, upon spin-coating the crystallization of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films was instantly achieved by irradiating the precursor solutions with a continuous wave laser operating at 532 nm. Figure Following sample fabrication all HTL/CH3NH3PbI3 configurations were characterized by TAS, performed also under inert conditions with the sample remained sealed inside the chamber throughout the measurements. TAS scans were conducted on a Newport (TAS-1) transient absorption spectrometer while using a 1026 nm pulsed laser source beam generated from an Yb:KGW-based laser system (PHAROS, Light Conversion), i.e. with 170 fs pulse duration and 1 kHz repetition rate. The configuration of TAS is shown schematically in Figure Aiming to explore further the crystalline nature of the obtained PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3 films XRD investigation was performed and the corresponding normalized patterns are shown in Figure In order to investigate the photovoltaic potential of PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3 films of this study, while revealing the underlying mechanisms of the charge carrier transport processes and corresponding dynamics, the so-formed film architectures were examined by TAS. Figure Namely, τ2 for sample TA-PD is 440 ps, whereas the corresponding τ2 times for LA-PD samples lie within the range of 111 to 224 ps. Strikingly enough, LA-PD-3 film exhibits a τ2 of 111 ps, which is four times faster when compared to the τ2 of the TA-PD sample. These findings strongly imply that the employment of LA crystallization techniques upon synthesis results to considerably faster hole extraction from the perovskite film into the PEDOT:PSS polymer. In one of our previous studies, As a second part of this study, we attempted to exploit the benefits of LA crystallization for the formation of CH3NH3PbI3 films on the surface of PTAA polymer. This was prompted by our recent findings, where the employment of PTAA instead of PEDOT:PSS resulted to the formation of absorber films with better morphological characteristics and improved electrical performance. TAS provides multiple insights on how the revealed peculiar morphological and composition characteristics of the LA crystallization PTAA/CH3NH3PbI3 films affect their charge carrier extraction efficiency and the corresponding recombination rates. Figure Although it was possible to perform good quality three-exponential and polynomial fittings for samples LA-PT-1 and LA-PT-2, that was not the case for the remaining two PTAA/CH3NH3PbI3 samples, i.e. LA-PT-3 and LA-PT-4. Attempting to perform typical fitting models to data of samples LA-PT-3 and LA-PT-4 resulted to poor fitting quality. Indicatively, the inset of Figure Finally, we consider the reasons that render the rapid LA crystallization protocol detrimental in terms of synthesizing CH3NH3PbI3 films on the surface of PTAA polymer. It is known from atomic force microscopy (AFM) studies that the surface of PTAA polymer is considerably smoother when compared to PEDOT:PSS, i.e. average roughness values are found equal to 0.51 and 0.94 nm, respectively (SI and Figure CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films were synthesized by means of the laser-assisted crystallization and conventional thermal annealing processes on the surface of two HTL polymers, i.e. PEDOT:PSS and PTAA. For the case of the former polymer, it was found that the employment of the rapid LA crystallization technique resulted to perovskite grains of larger grains when compared to typical thermal annealing. More importantly, TAS studies performed under ambient conditions revealed, that upon following the LA crystallization route for the development of PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3 architectures, significantly faster charge carrier extraction properties and slower bimolecular recombination rates were attained. These findings render the LA fabrication procedure beneficial in terms of cost-effectively synthesizing perovskite absorber films of superior crystalline quality and electric performance. On the contrary, when the smoother and more hydrophobic PTAA polymer is used, the thermal annealing route was proved to be more successful for fabricating PTAA/CH3NH3PbI3 structures with enhanced carrier transport dynamics, since the LA crystallization resulted to excessive presence of residual PbI2. 