The present article reports a comprehensive energy balance analysis of a photon-enhanced thermionic emission (PETE) device when it is used for concentrated solar power (CSP) generation. To this end, we consider a realistic PETE device composed of a boron-doped silicon emitter on glass and a phosphorus-doped diamond collector on tungsten separated by the inter-electrode vacuum gap. Depth-dependent spectral solar absorption and its photovoltaic and photothermal energy conversion processes are rigorously calculated to predict the PETE power output and energy conversion efficiency. Our calculation predicts that when optimized, the power output of the considered PETE device can reach 1.6 W/cm 2 with the energy conversion efficiency of ∼18 % for 100× solar concentration, which is substantially lower than those predicted in previous works under ideal conditions. In addition, the photon-enhancement ratio is lower than 10 and decreases with the increasing solar concentration due to the photothermal heating of the emitter, suggesting that PETE may be an adequate energy conversion process for low-to-medium CSP below ∼100× concentration. These observations signify the importance of a rigorous energy balance analysis based on spectral and spatial solar absorption distribution for the accurate prediction of PETE power generation. A thermionic energy converter (TEC) is a solid-state heat engine that directly generates electric power from heat by thermionic emission of electrons The photon-enhancement of thermionic emission has been verified experimentally for different semiconducting materials In the present article, we report the comprehensive energy balance analysis of a PETE device when concentrated solar radiation is incident onto the device. Instead of assuming perfect solar absorption by the thermionic emitter Fig. For the energy balance analysis of the PETE device upon the concentrated solar irradiation, the emitter structure is discretized into N layers for the glass substrate, each at temperature T i (i = 1, 2, 3...N ), and the Si emitter layer at T E (i = E). When the collector temperature is assumed to be uniform at T C , the energy balance equation for each layer of the emitter structure can be written as for the glass substrate and for the Si emitter. Here, Q i abs is the total solar irradiance absorbed in the i-th layer, Q rad is the radiative heat flux, Q i→(i+1) con is the conduction heat flux from the i-th to (i + 1)-th layer, and Q e is the net energy flux carried by electrons. It should be noted that the convection heat loss from the top surface of the glass substrate is ignored by assuming that the PETE device is vacuum-packaged. The solar absorption per unit area in the i-th layer (Q i abs ) can be calculated by , where G λ (z i , ω) is the spectral solar irraidance (or flux) at interface z i and ω = 2πc 0 /λ is the angular frequency with c 0 and λ being the speed of light in free space and the wavelength of solar radiation, respectively. In the present study, the spectral solar irradiance at each interface of the multi-layered emitter structure is calculated by the scattering-matrix method Radiative heat loss is another key feature for the accurate energy balance analysis. Radiative heat loss from the glass substrate to the environment is expressed as , where ε is the total emissivity of glass, σ is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant, and T ∞ is the surrounding temperature where superscripts S, E, and C represent the glass substrate, the emitter, and the collector, respsctively, and S z is the time-averaged Poynting vector in the z-direction between layers as indicated by the arrow, which can be calculated using the multi-layer dyadic Green's function where k eff is the effective thermal conductivity and ∆z is the distance between the center points of the i-th and (i + 1)-th layers The net energy flux transported by electrons from the emitter to the collector is expressed as where J E(C) is the current density of the emitter (collector), W max is the maximum potential barrier, k B is the Boltzmann constant, and q is the electron charge. It should be noted that a portion of the electron-carried energy is used to generate electric power while the remainder is lost as heat. Solar radiation whose energy is greater than the energy bandgap of Si photoexcites electrons to the conduction band, which greatly enhances the concentration of electrons in the conduction band (n) over the equilibrium value (n eq ). The thermionic current density from the emitter due to photoexcited electrons can be written as where denotes the conventional thermionic current density, indicating that n/n eq can be defined as the (photon-)enhancement ratio. Similarly, the collector current density is expressed as where A C = 120 A/cm 2 K 2 is the Richardson constant of the diamond collector The carrier concentration in the conduction band of the Si emitter under photoexcitation (n) is calculated by the following equation which balances the photogeneration rate of electron-hole pairs due to solar absorption (Γ gen ), the recombination rate of electron-hole pairs (Γ rec ), and the thermionic emission rate of photoexcited electrons from the emitter (Γ e ). The photogeneration rate of electron-hole pairs can be expressed as where d E is the emitter thickness, is the reduced Plank constant, E g is the energy bandgap of the emitter, and Q E abs,λ is the spectral absorption of the solar irradiance in the emitter. In the present study, the temperaturedependence of the Si bandgap is considered by E g = 1.170 -(4.73 × 10 -4 )T 2 E /(T E + 636) eV Detailed formulation of each type of recombination can be found in other works based on the potential barrier profile due to electron accumulation in the inter-electrode space, W sc (x), and the image charge perturbation, W ic (x). When electrons accumulate in the inter-electrode vacuum space and build up negative space charges, it hinders further emission of electrons from the emitter surface. Under the assumption that electrons traveling in the inter-electrode gap are collisionless, the space charge potential can be calculated by numerically solving Poisson's equation where x is the location between the emitter (x = 0) and the collector (x = d G ), N e (x) is the local electron number density, and 0 is the permittivity of vacuum. Boundary conditions for Eq. ( where Φ E(C) is the work function of the emitter (collector). For a semiconductor emitter, the work function can be expressed as Φ E = χ+E g -E F , where χ and E F are the electron affinity and the Fermi energy of the emitter, respectively. The numerical framework to calculate W sc has been discussed in detail in Ref. where Ψ is the digamma function. It should be noted that the image charge effect competes with the space charge effect in modifying the potential barrier. For a larger inter-electrode vacuum gap, the space charge effect plays a dominant role to increase the potential barrier. However, as the inter-electrode gap distance decreases, the image charge effect becomes important to lower the potential barrier while the space charge effect is suppressed due to the sweep of electrons under the stronger electric field between the electrodes Since charge and thermal transport processes are strongly coupled, the energy balance analysis should be carefully conducted through iterations. After the initial calculation of Q i abs in each layer, the temperature distribution of the emitter structure is calculated iteratively until the incoming and outgoing energy fluxes of the Si emitter in Eq. ( In addition, the energy conversion efficiency is defined as where C is the concentration factor and Q s is the total solar irradiance with the global standard spectrum (AM1.5D). Therefore, when the concentration factor is fixed, the energy conversion efficiency should be linearly proportional to the generated power density. Table When concentrated solar radiation is incident on the PETE device, part of the solar energy is absorbed as it interacts with each of the layers. Fig. The net PETE current density (J net = J E -J C ) as a function of the operational voltage is shown in Fig. Previous studies have demonstrated that the electron affinity of Si can be tuned over a wide range even to a negative value by cesium deposition or oxygen-potassium co-adsorption by lowing the potential barrier, resulting in a decrease of the emitter temperature. When optimized at χ = 0.7 eV, the emitter temperature at the maximum power output is calculated to be 925 K, which is much lower than an operational temperature of conventional thermionic power generation. The thickness of the semiconducting emitter layer may be one of the most important factors that govern PETE power generation. As shown in Fig. Another key parameter for PETE power generation is the inter-electrode vacuum gap distance. The gap-dependent PETE behaviors shown in Fig. 3/2 being the effective density of states in the conduction band of Si Fig. As expected, both the PETE power output and the efficiency monotonically increase with the increasing solar concentration factor. However, a high concentration factor drastically decreases the photon-enhancement ratio, indicating that the thermal excitation of electrons should play a more dominant role than photoexcitation in thermionic power generation for high solar concentration. The transition of the electron excitation mechanism is supported by the monotonic increase of the emitter temperature plotted in Fig. Although the collector temperature is set to 540 K to meet the optimal operating condition in the present study, Fig. Table These two loss factors emphasize the importance of substrate material for PETE power generation. Since a substrate is an essential structure that supports a thin semiconducting emitter layer, a substrate material should be carefully selected or engineered to minimize solar reflection in the visible range and thermal emission in the mid-IR range while being transparent in the above-bandgap solar spectrum for effective photoexcitation of electrons in the emitter layer. The optimal design of a substrate material and structure is one of the key requirements to maximize the PETE performance and should be studied in the near future. Thermionic energy transport (Q e ) is the most important mechanism that carries more than 50% of the incoming solar energy to the collector. Although ∼65% of the thermionic energy is lost as waste heat, this loss is inevitable as far as P net is to be maximized: see Eqs. ( eV without non-radiative recombination processes is another reason of their overprediction of the PETE power output. However, our results show that PETE is still competitive when compared with other CSP technologies The present study reports a rigorous energy balance analysis of a PETE device for the evaluation of its performance when the device is to be used for CSP. Instead of assuming ideal materials and operating conditions, we have considered a PETE device configured with real materials (i.e., a boron-doped Si thermionic emitter on top of a glass substrate and a phosphorus-doped CVD diamond collector on top of a tungsten substrate) and accounted for all major energy loss mechanisms occurring in the device under solar irradiation. The dependences of the PETE process on several key parameters, such as the Si emitter thickness, the inter-electrode vacuum gap, the solar concentration factor, and the collector temperature, have been carefully examined to find an optimal design point that would provide the best PETE power output and the energy conversion efficiency. The predicted performance turns out to be not as remarkable as the earlier studies mainly due to the optical and far-field radiative heat losses from the glass substrate, which could be reduced by optically engineering a substrate material and structure to balance the photoexcitation and thermalization processes of electrons in the emitter layer. Although we have considered only one specific PETE device configuration, the developed energy balance analysis and the obtained results can help better understand a realistic feature of the photon-enhanced thermionic energy conversion process for CSP. The spectral irradiance of 100× solar energy (AM 1.5D) and corresponding absorption in the emitter and the substrate, respectively. The shaded region refers to the photon energy higher than the energy gap of the silicon at its operating temperature (T E = 925 K) for the default conditions as summarized in Table The temperature at the top surface of the glass substrate is lower than that of the Si emitter due to the radiative heat loss to the surroundings. the emitter temperature as a function of the operating voltage for the electron affinity of 0.6,0.7,0.8 and 0.9 eV. A Si emitter with a higher electron affinity generates a lower current density and power output and a higher emitter temperature for the operating voltage below ∼0.6 V. However, these curves are merged as the operating voltage further increases to the Boltzmann regime. Here, the operating conditions are the same as described in Table As the collector temperature increases above 540 K, the performance of the PETE device plummets due to the back emission from the collector. Although the obtained result shows a slightly better PETE performance at lower collector temperatures, it should be noted that the calculation does not consider a cooling load of the collector. e = 9.11 × 10 -31 kg is the electron rest mass. ‡ Based on calculation results