The performance of solution-processed organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs) is often limited by non-uniform contacts. In this work, we introduce Ni-containing solution-processed metal oxide (MO) interfacial layers inserted between indium tin oxide (ITO) and poly(3,4ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) to improve the bottom electrode contact for OLEDs using the poly(p-phenylene vinylene) (PPV) derivative Super-Yellow (SY) as an emission layer. For ITO/Ni-containing MO/PEDOT:PSS bottom electrode structures we show enhanced wetting properties that result in an improved OLED device efficiency. Best performance is achieved using a Cu-Li co-doped spinel nickel cobaltite [(Cu-Li):NiCo2O4], for which the current efficiency and luminous efficacy of SY OLEDs increased, respectively, by 12% and 11% from the values obtained for standard devices without a Ni-containing MO interface modification between ITO and PEDOT:PSS. The enhanced performance was attributed to the improved morphology of PEDOT:PSS, which consequently increased the hole injection capability of the optimized ITO/(Cu-Li):NiCo2O4/PEDOT:PSS electrode. Since the discovery of polymer light emitting diodes In this work, we introduce Ni-containing solution-processed metal oxide (MO) interfacial layers between ITO and PEDOT:PSS, to improve bottom contact properties. Metal oxides synthesized in air usually present surfaces rich in hydroxyl groups, which can be exploited to increase the wettability of PEDOT:PSS on hydrophobic ITO surfaces In this report, we propose that the use of suitable Ni-containing solution-processed (SCS) MO interfacial layer between ITO and PEDOT:PSS can be used as a method to improve the properties of the bottom electrode (ITO/MO/PEDOT:PSS). Un-doped spinel nickel cobaltite (NiCo2O4) and codoped with 3% Cu and 2% Li [(Cu-Li):NiCo2O4] Pre-patterned glass-indium tin oxide (ITO) substrates (sheet resistance 4 Ω.sq -1 ) were purchased from Psiotec Ltd. Hole injection layer, Clevios P VP AI4083 low conductivity grade For the combustion synthesis and deposition of NiCo2O4 nanoparticles (NPs), (Cu-Li):NiCo2O4 NPs, and Cu:NiOx more details can be found elsewhere Organic light emitting diodes with normal structure and different hole injection layers (HIL) ITO/HIL/SY/LiF/Al were fabricated as follows. ITO were subsequently cleaned in acetone and isopropanol under sonication for 10 min, and then dried and exposed to uv-ozone treatment for 5 min. The ~40 nm PEDOT:PSS films were coated using static spin coating (Delta 6RC-Suss MicroTec, Garching, Germany) at 4000 rpm for 30 sec, followed by annealing at 140 °C for 20 min, under ambient atmosphere. Metal oxides were deposited using doctor blade (Erichsen, Hemer, Germany) or spin coater technique and their thickness was controlled through the concentration of the used solution. Super-yellow solution was spin coated at 6000 rpm for 30 s resulting in a thickness of ~80 nm, and simultaneously annealed on a hotplate at 50 °C for 20 min. Both spin coating and annealing were performed, under inert glovebox atmosphere. To complete the normal-structured stack, 1 nm (0.2 A/s) of lithium fluoride (LiF) and 100 nm (2 A/s) of aluminum (Al) were thermally evaporated in a vacuum chamber (Angstrom Engineering, Kitchener , Canada) at a base pressure of ~2 × 10 -6 mbar through a shadow mask resulting in an active area of 9 mm 2 . As a final step, all the devices were encapsulated using a glass slide and a UV-curable encapsulation epoxy from Ossila Ltd. (Sheffield, England) Hole only devices (HODs) configuration were fabricated using the following device structure ITO/HIL/SY/MoO3/Au, where the same processing steps and materials were used as mentioned in OLED devices except the top electrode. MoO3 HIL and Au electrode were thermally evaporated to form 10 nm (0.2 A/s) and 100 nm (2 A/s) layers, respectively. For film characterizations Schimadzu, UV-2700 UV-vis spectrophotometer was used to measure the transmittance spectra of the investigated materials on ITO substrates. Jasco FP-8300 spectrofluorometer with a corresponding 400 nm excitation wavelength was used to define the PL spectra of SY light emitting polymer (LEP) on various HILs on quartz substrates. AFM images were obtained using a Nanosurf easyScan 2 controller under the tapping mode. The thickness of the films was measured with a Veeco Dektak 150 profilometer. Eventually, complete devices were characterized using current density-voltage-luminance characteristics (JVL), which were obtained using a Botest LIV Functionality Test System with a calibrated silicon photodiode sensor (spectral sensitivity 350-730 nm and responsivity 60 nA/lux). All the characterizations were performed in ambient conditions. The electrode performance of OLEDs strongly depended on the electrical conductivity, the work function, energy levels of electronic materials, and their wetting properties. Using the sessile drop technique, we investigated the wetting properties of the PEDOT:PSS (AI4083) on ITO and ITO/(Cu-Li):NiCo2O4 surfaces, as presented in Figure Among the examined Ni-containing SCS metal oxides, we focused our studies on (Cu-Li):NiCo2O4 due to its superior wetting properties. Optical and morphological investigations of ITO/(Cu-Li):NiCo2O4, and ITO/(Cu-Li):NiCo2O4/PEDOT:PSS were performed and compared with ITO/PEDOT:PSS, which is considered as a reference bottom electrode. Figure To investigate device performance effects that are based on the proposed bottom contact interface modification, OLED devices were fabricated using the configuration illustrated in Figure Figure As shown in Figure To explain the increased luminance, the investigated OLED devices were studied using hole only single-carrier device architecture. Hole only devices (HODs), with the structure of ITO/HIE/SY/MoO3/Au with different hole injection electrodes, were implemented to ensure hole-only currents The effect of appropriate solution-processed metal oxide interfacial layers between ITO and PEDOT:PSS on the performance of OLEDs was investigated. Improved wetting properties were achieved by using solution combustion synthesized Ni-based metal oxides [Cu:NiOx, undoped-NiCo2O4 and co-doped (Cu-Li):NiCo2O4] but not with SCS CuOx interface modification. The improved performance of Ni-based metal oxides indicated the influence of Ni/oxygen vacancies on the presented wetting properties. We show that a range of Ni-containing solution-processed MO interfacial layers between ITO and PEDOT:PSS can be used to improve the bottom electrode contact and OLED device efficiency. The OLED device performance based on ITO/Ni-containing MOs/PEDOT:PSS bottom electrode was strongly correlated not only with the common optoelectronic properties but also with the MOs wetting properties. The best performing co-doped (Cu-Li):NiCo2O4 interfacial layer exhibited adequate transparency, the highest conductivity of ~4 S cm -1 and the lowest static contact angle of ~6°. The wetting properties of co-doped (Cu-Li):NiCo2O4 resulted in a smooth and homogeneous PEDOT:PSS overlayer that provided intimate interfaces and improved the hole injection properties of the bottom electrode [ITO/(Cu-Li):NiCo2O4/PEDOT:PSS] for the super-yellow OLED devices, as experimentally verified by the presented photocurrent mapping and single carrier device studies. The incorporation of co-doped NiCo2O4 [(Cu-Li):NiCo2O4] as interfacial layer between ITO and PEDOT:PSS provided a high performance ITO/(Cu-Li):NiCo2O4/PEDOT:PSS bottom electrode that increased the super yellow OLEDs current efficiency and power efficacy by 12% and 11%, respectively. We believe that the proposed metal oxide-based interface modification can be used as a method to control wetting properties and to improve the bottom contact in a range of solutionprocessed light emitting diodes. Replacing (Cu-Li):NiCo2O4 by Cu:NiOx or CuOx using a type B (indium tin oxide/metal oxide) device configuration, the performance analysis in Figure 