The ductile fracture process in porous metals due to growth and coalescence of micron scale voids is not only affected by the imposed stress state but also by the distribution of the voids and the material size effect. The objective of this work is to understand the interaction of the inter-void spacing (or ligaments) and the resultant gradient induced material size effect on void coalescence for a range of imposed stress states. To this end, three dimensional finite element calculations of unit cell models with a discrete void embedded in a strain gradient enhanced material matrix are performed. The calculations are carried out for a range of initial inter-void ligament sizes and imposed stress states characterised by fixed values of the stress triaxiality and the Lode parameter. Our results show that in the absence of strain gradient effects on the material response, decreasing the inter-void ligament size results in an increase in the propensity for void coalescence. However, in a strain gradient enhanced material matrix, the strain gradients harden the material in the inter-void ligament and decrease the effect of inter-void ligament size on the propensity for void coalescence. In porous metals, void coalescence often drives the onset of the macroscopic flow localisation that marks the end of uniform deformation and acts as a precursor to failure, as well as the initiation and propagation of ductile cracks The gradient induced size effect resulting in strengthening and hardening in metals has been confirmed in many material tests involving non-uniform deformation including indentation The objective of this work is to understand the interaction of the inter-void spacing (or ligament size) and the resultant gradient induced material size effect on void coalescence for a range of imposed stress states. To achieve this, three dimensional finite element unit cell calculations for a periodic array of initially spherical voids embedded in a strain gradient enhanced material matrix are carried out. Several unit cell geometries have been analyzed to investigate the effect of inter-void ligament size under multiple loading conditions. The imposed stress states are characterised by fixed values of the stress triaxiality and the Lode parameter (a measure of the third stress invariant). The value of the Lode parameter is shown to affect the evolution of voids in computations involving conventional plasticity theory Our results show that for a conventional material matrix, increasing the inter-void ligament size results in an increase in the critical stress to void coalescence, up to a threshold value of inter-void ligament size. The sensitivity of the critical stress to the inter-void ligament size is found to increase with increasing stress triaxi-ality. The quantitative effect of the Lode parameter is found to be small for the stress triaxiality values varying from 1 to 3. However, for inter-void ligament sizes below the threshold value, the critical stress is smallest for a Lode parameter value of -1, whereas above the threshold value the critical stress is smallest for a Lode parameter value of 0. For a void in a strain gradient enhanced material matrix, the value of the critical stress for void coalescence increases with increasing length parameter i.e. increasing gradient effect. This effect of the length parameter on the critical stress magnitude is found to increase with increasing imposed stress triaxiality and decreasing inter-void ligament size. This is because at higher stress triaxiality values and for smaller inter-void ligament sizes, there is an increase in the propensity for plastic flow localisation that introduces strong plastic strain gradients and in turn hardens the ligament. This mechanism leads to a decrease in the dependence of critical stress on the inter-void ligament size with increasing length parameter. The gradient induced strengthening also tends to homogenize the deformation in the unit cell thus decreasing the effect of the Lode parameter. The structure of the manuscript is as follows. Section 2 frames the study and presents the numerical method. The unit cell geometries considered, the method utilized to impose proportional loading throughout the deformation history, and the strain gradient plasticity material model are also presented in Section 2. The numerical results are presented and discussed in Section 3. Finally, the key results and conclusions of this work are summarized in Section 4. This work considers a limit load-type analysis to determine the critical stress level at which a given microstructure configuration loses load carrying capacity. Hence, an elastic-perfectly plastic material model is employed. The configuration of the unit cell and the simulation setup is described in Section 2.1, while the approach to prescribe a constant value of stress triaxiality and Lode parameter is outlined in Section 2.2. Three dimensional finite element calculations are carried out to model the response of an array of spherical voids with initial radius r 0 , Fig. For all unit cells considered, the initial void volume fraction is f 0 = 0.01, where f 0 = (4/3πr 3 0 )/(8a 0 1 a 0 2 a 0 3 ). The initial void radius, r 0 , is kept constant, while the cell dimensions are varied to achieve various initial inter-Fig. Table The unit cells are subject to prescribed displacements and the boundary conditions applied to the faces of the cell are The applied symmetry boundary conditions are In Eq. ( where ρ 2 and ρ 3 are constants. The overall stress components Σ ij are found by volume averaging over all el-ements, such that: , where V is the unit cell volume. The overall effective stress, Σ e , and the overall hydrostatic stress, Σ h , are given by which in terms of the relative stress ratios become The stress triaxiality, T , and the Lode parameter, L, are given by and The overall effective strain, E e , is given by where the strain components, E ij , are found in a way analogous to the stress components. The macroscopic normal stress components vary throughout the deformation, but the stress ratios are maintained in each increment of the simulation according to Eq. ( Additional degrees of freedom are added to impose boundary conditions on all sides of the model while prescribing the stress ratios. Three dummy nodes, N i , are created outside of the mesh and connected to one connector node, M , in the mesh as shown in Fig. and k i being the spring element constants given by , where the factor of 10 -1 is introduced to stabilise the numerical solution, following Ref. where A i is the area over which the forces act. Combining Eqs. ( where ρ 2 and ρ 3 are input values for the stress ratio, u is the displacement of dummy node j in the direction of x i , u M i is the displacement in x i -direction of the connector node M , A i are areas from Eq. ( The calculations are carried out for three values of Lode parameter, L = -1, 0, and 1. The Lode parameter values L = -1 (Σ 11 > Σ 22 = Σ 33 ) and L = 1 (Σ 11 = Σ 22 > Σ 33 ) correspond to overall axisymmetric stress states, while L = 0 (Σ 11 > Σ 22 > Σ 33 ) correspond to an overall state of shear plus hydrostatic stress. For each value of Lode parameter, three triaxialities are considered, T = 1, 2, and 3. The values for ρ 2 and ρ 3 to achieve these stress states are given in Table The calculations were carried out using the commercial finite element code ABAQUS with the gradient theory applied to the matrix material through a UEL subroutine. The reader is referred to Ref. The gradient enhanced constitutive model employed is based on the visco-plastic strain gradient plasticity theory proposed by Gudmundson where σ ij and s ij = σ ij -1 3 δ ij σ kk are the Cauchy stress tensor and the stress deviator, respectively. The microstress, q ij , is work conjugate to the plastic strain rate, εp ij , and τ ijk is a higher order stress, work conjugate to the plastic strain rate gradient, εp ij,k . The right hand side of the PVW includes the conventional traction, T i = σ ij n j work conjugate to the boundary displacement rate, ui , and the higher order traction, t ij = τ ijk n k , work conjugate to the plastic strain rate, εp ij . Here, the outward unit normal to the surface S is n i . Balance laws for the stress quantities are given by σ ij,j = 0 and q ij -s ij -τ ijk,k = 0 The rate-dependent visco-plastic formulation employs a potential to account for plastic dissipation as follows Here, σ c is the gradient enhanced effective stress, related to the current matrix flow stress through m , with ε0 denoting the reference strain rate, and m denoting the rate-sensitivity exponent. The material in this work does not undergo strain hardening, making σ F independent of Ėp and equal to the material yield stress Σ 0 . The viscoplastic law is implemented following the algorithm presented in Ref. and the associated work conjugate gradient enhanced effective stress by Here, L D is a dissipative constitutive length parameter that enters for dimensional consistency. The superscript D refers to dissipative quantities, and the dissipative stress quantities are given by The dissipative length parameter controls the strengthening size effect with an increase in the dissipative length parameter giving an increase in the apparent yield stress in the presence of strain gradients, see Throughout, the following material parameters are used; Σ 0 /E = 0.001, ν = 0.3 and m = 0.01, where Σ 0 is the yield stress, E is Young's modulus, ν is the Poisson ratio, and m is the strain rate sensitivity exponent. The value of m is considered sufficiently small for the results to approximate a rate-independent material response. The influence of the Lode parameter, L, the stress triaxiality, T , and the normalised length parameter, L D /r 0 , is studied. The effect of the inter-void ligament size is discussed in combination with the other parameters, L, T , and L D /r 0 . Figure The material response shows a clear effect of plastic strain gradients, such that the larger the length parameter, the higher the equivalent stress level. This means that an increase in the stress level is obtained when down-scaling the microstructure and, thus, yielding of the material is delayed due to increasing strain gradient strengthening. The critical equivalent stress, Σ c e /Σ 0 , signaling localisation (and coalescence) is taken to be at the plateau of the equivalent stress-strain curve. Several ways exists to establish a coalescence criteria based on either critical stress or strain. The method employed in this work is inspired by the work of The conventional limit, L D /r 0 = 0, is considered to set the scene for the study of material size effects. The focus here is the effect of inter-void ligament size on the critical stress at localisation under various loading conditions. First, three values of the Lode parameter are considered, L = -1, 0, and 1, for a fixed stress triaxiality, T = 2. Figure Next, the effect of stress triaxiality is considered. In Fig. A small drop in the critical equivalent stress is seen to occur for the largest ligament for all values of triaxiality in Fig. The effect of gradient strengthening in the matrix material is introduced through the length parameter L D (see Section 2.3). One can imagine down-scaling the microstructure when increasing the value of L D /r 0 . Three values of the length parameter, L D /r 0 = 0.2, 0.5, and 1, are considered in the following for all combinations of the Lode parameter, L = -1, 0, 1, and stress triaxiality, T = 1, 2, 3. Figure The general observation is that the critical stress at localisation increases with the magnitude of the length parameter (down-scaling the microstructure). However, Fig. the critical stress has a natural upper bound where the gradient strengthening is so severe that the entire matrix material yields. At such large values of the length parameter, the effect of the Lode parameter, stress triaxiality, and inter-void ligament size vanish and the critical equivalent stress is identical for all combinations of geometry and loading condition. The threshold value is evident from Figs. Figure Figure The combined effect of the stress triaxiality (for a fixed Lode parameter) and the length parameter is visualised by the rows in Fig. For the lowest stress triaxiality value, T = 1, the effect of the length parameter is small. Nonetheless, the plastic strain gradients that build up around the void give rise to the small increase in gradient strengthening. For the loading conditions giving T = 1, the onset of localisation is significantly delayed, thus allowing the material to withstand higher critical stress with a smaller dependence on the inter-void ligament size. The deformation mechanism prevailing at this low value of triaxiality, where macroscopic localisation and void coalescence occur simultaneously For a higher value of stress triaxiality, T = 2, the effect of the length parameter is more prominent as seen in Fig. The interaction of the inter-void ligament size and the gradient induced material size effect on void coalescence is investigated for a range of imposed stress states, here characterised by fixed values of the stress triaxiality and the Lode parameter. To this end, three dimensional finite element unit cell calculations for a single initially spherical void embedded in strain gradient enhanced material matrix are carried out. A conventional material matrix (absence of gradient induced strengthening effects) is considered as reference. Increasing the length parameter, and thereby the gradient effect, is equivalent to down-scaling the microstructure. All mi- crostructures considered in this work contain voids that are below a critical flaw size The results for the conventional material show that the critical coalescence stress increases when increasing the inter-void ligament size. The effect of the inter-void ligament size is, however, dependent on the imposed stress triaxiality, such that the effect of the inter-void ligament size increases with increasing stress triaxiality. However, above a certain threshold for the inter-void ligament size, the results show a slight decrease in the critical stress. This drop has to do with a transition from plastic flow localisation within the smallest inter-void ligament to plastic flow localization at ≈ 45 • to the main loading axis. The transition in the plastic flow localisation pattern is found to be particularly pronounced for a Lode parameter of L = 0. However, irrespective of the Lode parameter value, the transition occurs as the unit cells approach a cubic geometry. For a void embedded in a strain gradient enhanced material matrix, the value of the critical coalescence stress increases with increasing length parameter i.e. increasing the gradient strengthening effect. The effect of the length parameter is found to intensify with increasing imposed stress triaxiality and decreasing inter-void ligament size. This is due to a propensity for plastic flow localisation in the inter-void ligament when the ligament is small and the stress triaxiality high. Plastic flow localisation introduces large plastic strain gradients which in turn strengthens the ligament and delays further localisation of plastic flow. The strengthening from plastic strain gradients also leads to a weakened dependency in the critical coalescence stress on the inter-void ligament size. Finally, the results show that there exists a natural upper bound where the gradient strengthening is so severe that the entire matrix material yields. For very large values of the length parameter, the effect of the imposed stress state and the inter-void ligament size vanish, and the critical equivalent stress is identical for all combinations of the unit cell geometry and the loading conditions considered.