Cloaking elastic waves has, in contrast to the cloaking of electromagnetic waves, remained a fundamental challenge: the latter successfully uses the invariance of Maxwell's equations, from which the field of transformational optics has emerged, whereas the elastic Navier equations are not invariant under coordinate transformations. Our aim is to overcome this challenge, at least in practical terms, and thereby unlock applications in mechanics, ultrasound, vibration mitigation, non-destructive evaluation and elastic wave control. We achieve near-cloaking by recognising that, despite the lack of invariance, a decoupling into a system of form invariant potential equations together with a quantifiable approximation, can be used effectively in many cases to control the flow of elastodynamic waves. Here, in particular we focus on the efficiency and practicability of the proposed near-cloaking which is illustrated using carpet cloaks to hide surface defects from incoming compressional and shear in-plane waves and from surface elastic Rayleigh waves. Motivated by the successes of cloaking for electromagnetic waves there is considerable interest in mirroring this success for elastic waves. Unfortunately, elastic waves for the full vectorial system have several complications, and differences, from their electromagnetic counterparts, for instance the shear and compressional wavespeeds being different and the inherent coupling of wave-types upon reflection from most interfaces amongst other reasons Several ideas have been advanced to sidestep this restriction and allow for cloaking, for instance using a pentamode assumption which in principle decouples the longitudinal and transverse waves by canceling the latter The literature on transformational optics, and its generalisations, is now vast and it is a widespread tool in both optics and acoustics; the concepts can be traced back to calculations in hydrodynamics There are also numerous fabrication issues with making cloaks, and those for the simple elastic plates often involve multiple layers and media We consider a point-wise deformation from the undeformed virtual domain X ∈ Ξ to the deformed domain x = χ(X) ∈ ξ with the deformation gradient defined by F = ∇ X x with F -1 = ∇X, where ∇ X represents the differential operator for the gradient in the original undeformed coordinates, whereas ∇ refers to the same operator in the deformed configuration A conformal map is defined as a map that preserves angles with V = nI and n being the stretch experienced isotropically by every fiber of space; the change of volume is J = n m , where m is the dimension of the problem. Under the transformation, the Laplacian in the undeformed configuration transforms according to that, for the conformal map, is In the following sections we apply this transformation to the elasticity equations. First, we set the scene using anti-plane shear waves where the displacement U 3 (X 1 , X 2 ) is governed by the two-dimensional scalar wave equation: with ∇X as the differential operator in two dimensions, μ 0 and ρ 0 the shear modulus and the mass density, respectively; for homogeneous media (4) is: with shear wavespeed c S0 = μ 0 ρ 0 . Applying the conformal map (3) then gives where u 3 (x(X)) = U 3 (X).It is now possible to deduce a new material, occupying the domain ξ, with shear modulus μ and density ρ such that it mimics the virtual domain. The wave equation governing its anti-plane motion reads: and if the gradient of μ is null, then it is sufficient that for the medium to mimic the virtual domain. In particular, selecting material properties μ = μ 0 and ρ = ρ 0 /n 2 gives the perfect conformal cloak and this process mirrors that in electromagnetism or acoustics We now turn our attention to the full vector equations of elastodynamics that do not allow the neat process in the previous section to be performed exactly. The vector displacement U in homogeneous media obeys the elastodynamic Navier wave equation with λ 0 and μ 0 the Lamè parameters of the material. The Helmholtz decomposition using the scalar compressional Φ, and vector shear Ψ, potentials gives two wave equations: with compressional wavespeed c 2 P 0 = (λ 0 + 2μ 0 )/ρ 0 and shear wavespeed c 2 S0 = μ 0 /ρ 0 . At first sight these appear as decoupled wave equations and naively applying the same process, using the conformal map, as in anti-plane elasticity appears attractive. In terms of an exact solution this idea is flawed as tractionfree boundary conditions implicitly couple the potentials. We consider plane wave propagation in the X 1 , X 2 plane: an harmonic Pwave and shear waves are obtained from respectively. We align our axes so that for plane wave propagation no gradients are observed in the third direction, and the problem is then essentially twodimensional, and the wave equation for the scalar potential becomes: Moreover, the displacements associated with shear waves, are expressed in terms of Ψ as For a SV wave there is no antiplane motion thus: and without loss of generality Ψ 1 and Ψ 2 are taken zero, thus the vector wave equation governing plane shear waves is the two-dimensional scalar wave equation in Ψ 3 : To summarise, the equations for in-plane motion are: As previously seen in section 2.1, after transformation, these equations become To find the corresponding material properties that, in the physical domain, mimic the wave propagation occurring in virtual domain, we now consider the elastodynamic wave equations for general inhomogeneous media: If the gradient of the Lamé parameters is null, upon the substitution: the following is obtained: This is rearranged as: thus, if the gradient of density can be considered negligible, then the identity is satisfied by and the same decomposition in scalar and vector potentials is seen to be applied as in the case of the virtual domain. The cloak for plane waves can then be performed by scaling both longitudinal and transversal wave speeds according to the local metric change of the transformation. The displacements will be then associated to the gradient of φ and to the curl of ψ. since for the chain rule ∇ = F -T ∇ X , then, recalling that V ∈ Sym + is symmetric and R is orthogonal: This means that the displacements assume the same local rotation of the medium and are simply scaled according to the local stretch. Clearly an assumption has been made above regarding the density gradient and we now assess and quantify the impact, and limitations, of doing so, by obtaining a global performance index for the cloak. Turning to Eq. ( while the right hand side becomes: We use the relation for plane waves in homogeneous media φ = φe i(ωt-κ P •x) to make estimates of the modulus of the last two terms in having introduced < ∇ρ >, i.e. the averaged value of the gradient of density over the surface of the cloak, as an estimate of ∇ρ. The order of magnitude of the ratio between the two is: which shows this added extra term can be reasonably considered negligible in the limit where κ P becomes very large and/or the fluctuation in density with respect to background value (i.e. the fluctuations of metric change) are small. A similar approach applies for the last two terms in ( which means the ratio scales as As a consequence, for a given transformation the cloak is expected to have increasingly good performances for all frequencies above a certain cutoff, which is set from the conditions expressed by requiring the adimensional ratios ( Note that the same distribution of refraction index could be in principle obtained keeping fixed the density and scaling both the Lamè parameters or even changing all the three material parameters, as proposed in previous works We now exploit the insight gained from our theory to obtain a carpet cloak working for both in-plane and anti-plane motion. A height defect with Gaussian shape on an otherwise flat free surface is probed by an incident wave. The conformal map linking such deformed domain to the reference flat surface is shown in Figure of the distribution of the FFT calculated for wavenumbers corresponding to P and S waves (the white quarter of circles depicted in Figure The dependence of cloaking performance with respect to frequency of operation and maximum width of the Gaussian defect are completely defined by the indicators given by ( A thorough numerical sensitivity analysis of the performance of the cloak with respect to changes in this global indicator are given in the Supplementary Material. As the cloak is finite, a phase shift is also expected between the reference and cloak solutions. This is hard to discern from the field plots shown in Figure 7 and hence we show solutions evaluated along the travelling direction of the scattered waves along the red lines shown in the lower panels of Figure Apart from incident purely compressional, P, or shear, S, waves, the cloak works well for other incident fields and we now turn to the important example of incident Rayleigh surface waves We have demonstrated that near-cloaking is achievable with just density changes, and have quantified the error in doing so, and this opens the way to designing elastic cloaks for experiments and applications. Moreover, we have demonstrated the effectiveness of the approach that we advocate by showing that it is robust for all angles of incidence and across a broad range of frequencies. Technically, using the decomposition of the Navier equation into a decoupled set of equations for scalar and vector potentials allows us to clearly isolate and quantify the extraneous terms introduced to marry the equation of the physical domain to the transformed equation. This leads to a convenient adimensional parameter being introduced to express the global dependence of performance with respect to working frequencies and local stretch imposed by the transformation. The best choice of material parameters that we found, to perform the near-cloak, comprises a gradient in the density only. This then naturally leads to viable materials for experiments as, for instance, metamaterials showing independent control of stiffness properties and density have been successfully manufactured In Figure The same parametric study is performed for incident P waves also: in Figure and SV waves, Figure 