Numerical inverse Laplace transforms are used to analyze the transient response of non-ideal transmission lines to a voltage step. We find that the detailed shape of the transient response is sensitive conductor losses, but insensitive to dielectric losses. Furthermore, we find that the low-loss approximations for the transmission line propagation constant and characteristic impedance in the complex-frequency domain are sufficient to accurately model the observed transient response. We also investigate the effects of: (1) a parasitic capacitance terminating the open end of the coaxial transmission line, (2) the input impedance of the oscilloscope used to make the measurements, and (3) the finite rise time of the voltage step. Finally, we cool a semi-rigid coaxial cable in liquid nitrogen so as to reduced conductor lossless and observe a transient response that is closer to that expected from an ideal lossless line. In a recent paper we investigated the non-ideal characteristics of transmission lines using frequency-domain insertion loss measurements. where j = √ -1. Following the recommendation of the authors of the method, we used a = 6 in our implementations of INVLAP. The input impedance of a lossy transmission line of length l terminated by a load impedance Z L is given by where Z c and γ are the characteristic impedance of the line and the signal propagation constant, respectively. In terms of the fundamental equivalent circuit parameters, the characteristic impedance and propagation constant are given by In these expressions, L and C are the per-unit-length capacitance and inductance of the transmission line, respectively. R is the per-unit-length resistance due to conductor losses and G is the per-unit-length conductance The s-domain equivalent circuit of (a). Vs is the Laplace transform of the voltage pulse and Vg, measured using an oscilloscope, is the voltage at the node between Rg and the transmission line. due to dielectric losses. The variable s is the complex frequency which is typically given by jω, where ω is angular frequency. where The experimental setup used to study the transmission line transient response is shown schematically in Fig. This section presents the results of the numerical inverse Laplace transforms used to determine the time dependence of v g . Various forms of Z in and V s are considered and numerical results are compared to experimental data. Transient response of a 8.07 m length of UT-141 coaxial cable when using Rg = 1 kΩ. The plot includes the experimentally-measured response (data points), the calculated response of a lossless transmission line (dashed line), and the calculated response of a low-loss line (solid line). The first case considered is the low-loss limit given by Eqs. ( Finally, if we take v s to be an instantaneous voltage step from zero to V 0 at t = 0, then V s = V 0 /s. Combining all of these results yields where and τ ≡ 2Z 0 / (v 0 R). Figure The result of that calculation using Z 0 = 49.05 Ω and v 0 /c = 0.6795, where c is the vacuum speed of light, is shown as the dashed line in Fig. To include non-zero conductor losses, we used the sdependence of R implied by the frequency-domain measurements reported in Ref. 1. In that work, we found that the effective conductor resistance could be modeled as R = a √ f , where the square root frequency dependence is due to the electromagnetic skin depth of the conductors. For a UT-141 coaxial cable with a copper outer conductor and a silver-plated copperweld (SPCW) center conductor, the value of the coefficient was experimentally determined to be a = 1.252 × 10 -4 Ω s 1/2 /m. The sdependence of R is determined by writing f = -js/ (2π) which leads to Using this model for R, the inverse Laplace transform of Eq. ( We also calculated the transient response when including a non-zero conductance due to dielectric losses. The s-dependence of G from frequency-domain measurements was found to be G = -jbs/2π with b = 1.31 × 10 -13 s Ω -1 m -1 for the UT-141 semi-rigid coaxial cable. All practical pulse generates transition from zero to a nonzero voltage over a finite time. The solid line in Fig. To take into account this effect in our transient response calculations, we generalized our model for V s . The inverse Laplace transform of V s = V 0 /s represents a voltage step that transitions from zero to V 0 instantaneously at t = 0. One can instead model the pulse generator as a damped oscillator with a resonant frequency f 0 and quality factor Q. For an underdamped oscillator (Q > 0.5), the time to transition between equilibrium states is approximately given by 2Q/ω 0 , where ω 0 = 2πf 0 . V s for an underdamped oscillator in the s-domain is given by Evaluating the inverse Laplace transform Eq. ( where w 0 /w 1 = 2Q/ 4Q 2 -1. The dashed line in Fig. Although we show the response only up to times of 1 μs, we have used INVLAP to numerically calculate v g for times up to 100 μs following the voltage pulse and observed stable behavior at all times. We also varied the values of n sum and n dif used when calling INVLAP. Reducing both n sum and n dif by a factor of two has no perceptible effect on the calculated v g . The transient responses in Sections III A and III B assumed an infinite load impedance at the open end of the transmission line such that Z in ≈ Z c coth (γl). However, fringing electric fields are known to result in an effective parasitic capacitance C p terminating the line. Finally, we used INVLAP to investigate the effect that the input impedance Z sc of the oscilloscope has on the measured transient response. The oscilloscope places a shunt resistance R sc and a shunt capacitance C sc in parallel with Z in shown in Fig. The Tektronix TBS 1104 oscilloscope used to measure the transient response is specified to have R sc = 1 MΩ and C sc = 20 pF. We first evaluated L -1 {V g } for many values of R sc spanning 0.5 to 2 MΩ while keeping C sc fixed and found that v g has almost no dependence on the value of R sc . On the other hand, scanning the value of C sc while keeping R sc fixed resulted in a noticeable change to the effective signal propagation speed. Neglecting C sc causes v 0 to be underestimated from the experimental data. Figure In order to observe a transient response that more closely approximates that of an ideal transmission line, we cooled the UT-141 coaxial cable in liquid nitrogen and repeated the measurement shown schematically in Fig. The line in Fig. Figure We have used numerical inverse Laplace transforms to calculate the transient response of lossy transmission lines to a voltage step. The calculations were compared to experimental measurements and found to be in good agreement when using realistic parameter values. Conductor losses were found to have an important effect on the detailed shape of the transient response, whereas dielectric losses could be neglected. Modeling the input voltage step as an underdamped oscillator allowed the finite rise time of the step to be incorporated into the calculation which was important for reproducing the finite slopes of the vertical steps in the measured transient response. Finally, we found that it was important to include the input impedance of the oscilloscope in order to accurately determine the signal propagation speed. Neglecting the 20 pF input capacitance of the oscilloscope used in our measurements resulted in the propagation speed being underestimated by 2.2 %.