We report on the synthesis and superconductivity of high-entropy-alloy-type (HEA-type) compounds TrZr2 (Tr = Fe, Co, Ni, Rh, Ir), in which the Tr site satisfies the criterion of HEA. Polycrystalline samples of HEA-type TrZr2 with four different compositions at the Tr site were synthesized by arc melting method. The phase purity and crystal structure were examined by Rietveld refinement of X-ray diffraction profile. It has been confirmed that the obtained samples have a CuAl2-type tetragonal structure. From analyses of elemental composition and mixing entropy at the Tr site, the HEA state for the Tr site was confirmed. The physical properties of obtained samples were characterized by electrical resistivity and magnetization measurements. All the samples show bulk superconductivity with various transition temperature (Tc). The Tc varied according to the compositions and showed correlations with the lattice constant c and Tr-Zr bond lengths. Introduction of an HEA site in TrZr2 is useful to achieve systematic tuning of Tc with a wide temperature range, which would be a merit for superconductivity application. Superconductivity is a macroscopic quantum phenomenon typically characterized by zero-resistivity state, Meissner effect, and Josephson effects. Superconductors are used in large-scale application and device applications Recently, superconductivity in HEAs have been getting attention due to the possible robustness of superconducting states under extreme conditions and flexible tuning of superconducting properties by alloying To further extend the field of HEA superconductors, we have synthesized HEA-type compounds, in which the crystal structure possesses an HEA-type site Polycrystalline samples of TrZr2 with Tr = (A) Fe0.1Co0.2Ni0.1Rh0.3Ir0.3, (B) Fe0.1Co0.3Ni0.2Rh0.1Ir0.3, (C) Fe0.2Co0.2Ni0.2Rh0.2Ir0.2, and (D) Fe0.3Co0.2Ni0.3Rh0.1Ir0.1 were synthesized by arc melting in Ar atmosphere. Powders of pure Co (99%), Ni (99.9%), Fe (99.9%), Rh (99.9%), and Ir (99.9%), were mixed with a certain composition by mortar and pestle and pelletized into 7mm in diameter. The metal pellet and plates of pure Zr (99.2%) were used as starting materials. To obtain homogeneous sample, arc melting was repeated five times for all the samples. The weight (typically 1 g in total) loss was less than 1 % for all samples. The chemical compositions of the obtained samples were characterized by energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence analysis with a spot size of 0.9 mm on JSX-1000S (JEOL). The phase purity and the crystal structure were examined by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) with Cu-Kα radiation by the θ-2θ method on Miniflex-600 (RIGAKU) equipped with a high-resolution semiconductor detector D/tex-Ultra. The obtained XRD patterns were refined by the Rietveld method using RIETAN-FP Magnetization measurements were performed by a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) on MPMS-3 (Quantum Design) under a magnetic field of 1 mT. The magnetic Tc was estimated as a temperature where magnetization clearly begins to decrease due to the emergence of diamagnetism. Irreversibility temperature (Tirr), which indicates the emergence of superconducting current, was estimated as the temperature where the zero-field cooling (ZFC) data deviates from field cooling (FC) data. See Supporting Information (Fig. The analyzed compositions and estimated ΔSmix (Tr site) are listed in Table One of the notable trends of this system is that the observed Tcs for sample We 