In the present work, it is shown that the surface preparation method used on two Ni-based superalloys prior to aluminizing chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is one of the most important factors determining the oxidation resistance of aluminized Ni-based superalloys. It was found that grit-blasting the substrate surface negatively affects the oxidation resistance of the aluminized coatings. For grit-blasted and aluminized IN 625, a thicker outer NiAl coating was formed compared to that of IN 738. In contrast, no effect on NiAl coating thickness was found for grit-blasted and aluminized IN 738. However, a thicker interdiffusion zone (IDZ) was observed. It was shown that the systems with grit-blasted surfaces reveal worse oxidation resistance during thermal shock tests-namely, a higher mass loss was observed for both grit-blasted and aluminized alloys, as compared to ground and aluminized alloys. A possible reason for this effect of remaining alumina particles originating from surface grit-blasting on the diffusion processes and stress distribution at the coating/substrate is proposed. Modern materials used in the hottest parts of stationary gas turbines or aircraft engines are facing very aggressive environments at high temperatures. This leads to the oxidation of the base materials, which, in turn, causes oxide scale formation and spallation, resulting in component walls' thickness decrease and the losing of mechanical properties at elevated temperatures In this work, aluminide coatings produced on two commercially available Ni-base superalloys from the Inconel family-namely IN 625 and IN 738-with the nominal composition given in Table Figure To investigate the effect of substrate roughness on the roughness of an aluminide coating, a surface roughness measurement of the aluminide coatings in the as-received condition was carried out using a standard contact profilometer. The results of these measurements are summarized in Figure To elucidate the durability of the investigated aluminide coatings at an elevated temperature, a thermal shock test at 1120 °C in laboratory air was performed. The mass change curves obtained for the investigated aluminide systems are illustrated in Figure Base on the results obtained in the present work, the following conclusions can be made:  Surface mechanical treatment influences the thickness and morphology of aluminized Ni-based superalloys: for grit-blasted IN 625, the thickening of NiAl coating was observed. Tor grit-blasted IN 738, a thicker IDZ was found. The presence of foreign particles, namely alumina, coming from grit-blasting process negatively affects diffusion processes at an elevated temperature. In addition, they can introduce additional stresses during the heating and cooling of the samples at the coating/substrate interface. The grit-blasting of substrates results in a worse oxidation behavior of studied aluminized systems.