The structural stability and electrochemical performance of boron substituted fluorinated graphite as a Li ion batteries cathode material are studied by first principles calculations. The results show that boron substituted fluorinated graphite BC3F4 possesses excellent structural stability, good electrical and ionic conductivities. Unexpectedly, the average Li intercalation voltage of LiBC3F4 is up to 4.44 V, which is much larger than that of LiBCF2. The average voltage of LiBC3F4 is even larger than that of common commercial transition metal oxides cathodes, indicating that LiBC3F4 is a breakthrough of transition metal-free high voltage cathode materials. By comparing the Fermi level, we found the Fermi level of LiBC3F4 is 1.38 eV lower than that of LiBCF2, leading to the decrease of the electron filling energy for the Li intercalation and forming much higher voltage. Moreover, LiBC3F4 shows small volume expansion and high energy density. LiBC3F4 is a promising high voltage cathode material for Li ion batteries. Finally, by calculating the evolution of Li intercalation voltage and Fermi level during the discharging process, a linear correlation between the Fermi level and Li intercalation voltage has been found. Li ion batteries (LIBs) have been wildly used in consumer electronics, electric vehicles, large-scale energy storage applications In this work, the structural stability and electrochemical performance of boron substituted fluorinated graphite LiBC3F4 are studied by first principles calculations. By decreasing the boron substitution, the structural stability of BC3F4 is improved, compared with BCF2 (fully charged state). LiBC3F4 shows good electrochemical performances as a new cathode material. The average Li intercalation voltage is up to 4.44 V. The capacity and energy density of LiBC3F4 are 206.75 mAh/g and 917.81 Wh/Kg, respectively. Furthermore, the electrical and ionic conductivities of LiBC3F4 are studied. By calculated the sequential Li intercalation voltage and Fermi level during the discharging process, a linear relationship between the Fermi level and Li intercalation voltage has been revealed. All calculations are performed in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) The projector augmented-wave (PAW) approach The kinetic energy cutoff of plane-waves is 500 eV. The Monkhorst-Pack mesh for kpoint sampling The Li intercalation voltage is defined as Where E(LimBC3F4), E(LinBC3F4), E(Li), and e are the total energies of the LimBC3F4, LinBC3F4, bulk Li metal, and the charge of one electron, respectively. When m=1 and n=0, the Li intercalation voltage V is the average voltage of the whole discharging process. Based on the excellent structural stability of BC3F4 under the Li intercalation, we shift our attention to its electrochemical performance. Li intercalation voltage is a key parameter for cathode materials. As we mentioned above, when the Li concentration is 0.125 (figure The top and side views of the atomic structure of BC3F4 are shown in Figure