We report a novel method of growing strongly-disordered superconducting titanium nitride (TiN) thin films by reactive electron-beam deposition. The normal state sheet resistance and superconducting critical temperature (Tc) can be tuned by controlling the deposition pressure in the range of 1.1 × 10 -6 to 3.1 × 10 -5 mbar. For 10 nm thick films, the sheet resistance (R ) reaches 1361Ω/ and T c = 0.77 K, which translates into an estimate for the sheet inductance as large as L = 2.4 nH/ . Benefiting from the directionality of reactive evaporation, we fabricated RF test devices with micron-sized dimensions using a resist mask and a lift-off process, which would be impossible with sputtering or atomic layer deposition methods. The spectroscopic measurements result in consistent sheet inductance values in two different device geometries and the quality factors ranged from Q = 300-2200. The loss is likely due to the presence of titanium oxynitride(TiN x O y ) in the morphological composition of our films. The flexibility of the lift-off process suggest applications of reactively-evaporated TiN for making supporting structures around quantum circuits, such as readout resonators or compact on-chip filters. High kinetic inductance of disordered superconducting films is a useful asset for device applications, including detectors, amplifiers, resonators, and qubits. Here we explore a novel approach which utilizes reactive electron beam (e-beam) evaporation to fabricate TiN thin films. Such a process generates a directional TiN flux for deposition while the substrate is maintained at room temperature. This allows for the patterning of a device with standard ebeam lithography resist masks without additional post deposition fabrication and processing. Our growth technique produces highly disordered films whose sheet inductance values are as high as L = 2.4 nH/ , which is larger than any reported TiN films grown by other growth methods with similar film thickness. Our TiN thin films are deposited by reactive e-beam evaporation on silicon-(100) oriented substrates. The substrates were prepared by sonication in acetone and isopropanol, then blown dry with nitrogen. The devices fabricated for DC transport properties were patterned with a Hall bar geometry cre- ated by a physical shadow mask. The devices fabricated for RF measurements were patterned by electron-beam lithography using a MMA-EL13 resist mask. The substrates were then loaded into a Plassys MEB550S E-beam evaporation system where the main deposition scheme is shown in FIG. position chamber. Due to the high energy of the e-beam and the high temperatures of the titanium source, nitrogen gas reacts with the titanium flux to form TiN. During deposition, the chamber deposition pressure is determined by titanium deposition rate and nitrogen gas flow rate. Clearly, the higher the nitrogen gas flow rate, the higher the chamber pressure. However, the evaporated titanium material can both simultaneously generate titanium flux (raising the chamber pressure) and serve as a titanium sublimation pump (reducing the chamber pressure). To control the chamber pressure and reaction condition, a feedback circuit loop of the ebeam current maintains a constant deposition titanium rate at 0.15 nm/sec for all TiN films in this study. The chamber pressure is then tuned by nitrogen flow rate, which is controlled in the range of 0-20 cubic centimeters per minute (sccm) and has a precision of 0.1 sccm. The actual TiN deposition is only started once both deposition rate and chamber pressures have reached stable values. Unlike ALD growth, the substrate is always maintained at room temperature during the whole deposition process. Also, the evaporated material flux is directional -same as the normal e-beam evaporation process. Thus, this film growth process is suitable for both photo-and e-beam resist mask fabrication techniques. The only required post deposition step of fabricating RF devices is the standard lift-off procedure of the e-beam mask by a heated acetone bath for approximately one hour. We utilize a physical properties measurement system (PPMS) to characterize DC transport properties of TiN films. All the samples for DC transport are performed by standard four terminal measurements and summarized in Table In FIG. The TiN film properties are also tunable by changing the film thickness d. FIG. To probe the RF properties of TiN films, we patterned two different types of devices: (1) resonators (shown in FIG. The resonator device was deposited at P dep = 6.3 × 10 -6 mbar with a 100 nm thick TiN film. There were a total of six resonators with a separation of at least 2 mm to the nearest neighboring resonator such that the coupling between resonators is weak. The capacitance value is dominated by the two 175μm × 175μm square pads. The capacitance of the antenna was determined by HFSS simulations to be 39 fF. The inductance value is dominated by the kinetic inductance of the 100μm long thin wire connecting the two pads. The width of the wires are chosen to be 1.575μm, 2μm, 2.25μm, 2.5μm, 3μm, and 3.55μm for these six different resonators. The magnitude of the reflected signal, S11, is shown in FIG3.(b). There are six dips at 8.6 GHz, 9.5 GHz, 10.1 GHz, 10.7 GHz, 11.7 GHz, and 12.5 GHz, which correspond to the resonance frequencies of the six resonators. The total inductance of each resonator can be extrapolated from the measured resonance frequencies and simulated capacitance value. Assuming the inductance values here are all provided by the kinetic inductance of the disordered TiN film, we find the sheet inductance value of each resonator to be 139 pH, 146 pH, 145 pH, 142 pH, 145 pH, and 146 pH. The maximum difference between individual resonator's sheet inductance is about 4 percent, which reveals the non-uniformity of the TiN film within a single deposition. Moreover, the thickness and deposition pressure of this device is controlled to be the same as film D in the DC measurement experiment but each sample was deposited in two different depositions. The DC mea- surement analysis of film D revealed a sheet inductance of 148pH, which has only a 3 percent difference to the average sheet inductance value of the six resonators in the RF measurement. The systematic difference from deposition to deposition is comparable to sputtering TiN and Josephson junction chains. We obtained Q int values in the range of 1500 -2200 for the six resonance peaks. The transmission line device is designed with two parallel 10 mm long, 3μm wide TiN wires shown in FIG. To further understand the origin of the disorder and the morphology in the TiN films, we performed various morphology analysis to the films grown with the same conditions of sample F in Table First, we used transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to analyze local crystalline morphology of the TiN films. The most striking feature is that most areas are amorphous with only sporadic poly-crystalline embedded within, shown in FIG. The atomic composition of the TiN films were analyzed by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) with a 5 KeV accelerating voltage variable pressure Hitachi scanning electron microscope. Contrary to the expected composition of just titanium and nitrogen, a large amount of oxygen was present in all TiN films. FIG. In conclusion, the values of the sheet kinetic inductance of TiN films prepared by nitrogen assisted reactive e-beam deposition can be tuned by two orders of magnitude, from 27pH/ to 2.4nH/ . The tuning knobs are deposition pressure and film thickness. The variations of kinetic inductance within the same deposition and between different depositions is within about 5%. Although the quality factors of our lift-off devices is short of the values accessible with more traditional sputtering or ALD film growth methods, our process can be useful in creating compact high-impedance resonators and filters that survive in a relatively high magnetic fields. The method for directional reactive TiN deposition was suggested by late Patrick Smuteck to whom this article is dedicated. The authors thank Dr. Sz-Chian Liou from Advance Imaging and Microscopy Lab in University of Maryland for his assistance in TEM imaging and analysis and Dr. Joshua Higgins for assistance with XRD analysis and PPMS measurements. This work was supported by the NSF Career grant (DMR 1455261) and by ARO-LPS program "New and Emerging Qubit Science and Technology" (W911NF1810115).