Self-propelled particles and, in particular, those based on mesoporous silica, have raised considerable interest due to their potential applications in the environmental and biomedical fields thanks to their biocompatibility, tunable surface chemistry and large porosity. Although spherical particles have been widely used to fabricate nano-and micromotors, not much attention has been paid to other geometries, such as nanorods. Here, we report the fabrication of self-propelled mesoporous silica nanorods (MSNRs) that move by the catalytic decomposition of hydrogen peroxide by a sputtered Pt layer, Fe2O3 nanoparticles grown within the mesopores, or the synergistic combination of both. We show that motion can occur in two distinct sub-populations characterized by two different motion dynamics, namely enhanced diffusion or directional propulsion, especially when both catalysts are used. These results open up the possibility of using MSNRs as chassis for the fabrication of self-propelled particles for the environmental or biomedical fields. Self-propelled nano-and microparticles, inspired by the motion of biological organisms, have emerged as a new and interesting type of active systems which have found numerous applications in fundamental physics Multiple types of self-propelled particles, also called micro-and nanomotors or swimmers, have been reported over the last fifteen years Likewise, other motors based on carbon fibers All the tubular structures described so far have reported a heterogeneous library of scaffolds with a wide range of applications, but there is a need of more versatile materials with tunable properties and the possibility of easily loading cargo or drugs. On this subject, silica has become an excellent candidate for nano-and micromotor applications Here, we explore the use of mesoporous silica nanorods (MSNRs) as chassis for the development of novel non-spherical self-propelled silica-based systems. To the best of our knowledge, all of the nano-and micromotors based on mesoporous silica use spherical nano-or microparticles or hollow nano-or microjets, and none have explored the possibility of using nanorods with cylindrical pores oriented along the rod axis, which could be used to load drugs or other molecules. In our case, as a proof of concept, we incorporated iron oxide nanoparticles inside the pores (MSNR-Fe), to aid the motion via Fenton-like reactions with H2O2 fuel. Furthermore, we partially coated the MSNRs, with and without Fe2O3 nanoparticles, with Pt to create Janus-like structures (MSNR-Fe-Pt and MSNR-Pt), introducing an additional level of asymmetry. Results showed that the reaction catalyzed by the internal Fe2O3 nanoparticles alone (MSNR-Fe) is not enough to yield efficient active motion, but its coupling with Pt deposition enhances its effect (MSNR-Fe-Pt), even beyond those with only partial Pt coverage without nanoparticles (MSNR-Pt). Moreover, our analyses revealed two types of sub-populations with distinct types of motion, one of them characterized by an enhanced Brownian motion, while the other shows enhanced directionality and propulsive behavior, pointing towards the possibility of modulating the motion behavior by fine-tuning the fabrication strategy. MSNRs were synthesized by a sol-gel method that used silica alkoxide as a precursor and Pluronic P123 as a surfactant by a modified procedure from ref. Finally, the MSNRs were washed in ethanol in a Soxhlet extractor (24 cycles) to remove the surfactant and they were annealed at 550 °C for 5 h. As in ref. To fabricate nanomotors based on Pt, monolayers of MSNR and MSNR-Fe were deposited by adding 50 μL of a solution (2 mg/mL) of each type of nanorod on a glass slide of 24x24 mm kept at 45°, which had been previously cleaned with acetone and isopropanol and treated with oxygen plasma. After the MSNR monolayers had dried, Pt was sputtered on the exposed side of the MSNR using a Leica EM ACE600 sputter, at a rate of 0.4 nm/s, with a working distance of 45 mm, a current of 35 mA and achieving a thickness of 10 nm of sputtered Pt. The MSNRs and the three types of motors derived from them were characterized by SEM, TEM, DLS and EDX mapping. SEM imaging was performed using a FEI NOVA NanoSEM 230 scanning microscope at 10 kV. TEM imaging was performed with a JEOL JEM-2100 transmission microscope. The electrophoretic mobility of the nanorods was obtained with a Wyatt Möbius DLS machine coupled with an Atlas pressurization system, using a 532 nm wavelength laser and a detector angle of 163.5°. EDX mapping was performed with a Magellan 400L Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope with attached X-Max Ultim Extreme EDX (Oxford Instruments). The crystalline phase of iron oxide particles was analyzed in a JEOL JEM-1210 TEM operating in diffraction mode, at an operating voltage of 120 kV. One drop of MSNR dispersion in ethanol was placed on a TEM grid (Micro to Nano, EMR carbon support film on copper 200 square mesh). The motion of the nanorods and nanomotors was performed with an optical inverted microscope (Leica DMi8), equipped with a 63x water immersion objective (NA = 1.2). Briefly, a concentrated solution of nanomotors was diluted in 1 mL of water. Then, a drop of this solution was mixed in a 1:1 ratio with a H2O2 solution to achieve final concentrations of 0%, 0.5%, 1%, 1.5%, 3% and 5% (v/v), and the final solution was placed in a glass coverslip under the microscope. Several videos of 30 s at 25 frames per second (FPS) were recorded for each condition. The trajectories of the particles were obtained with a previously available home-made tracking software based on Python that locates and tracks the particles based on computer vision techniques, returning the positions of the particles with time where <•> represents ensemble and time average, t 0 is the initial time and Δt is the elapsed time or the inverse of the FPS. The first 2 s of the MSD were fitted to an equation of the form: from which the α exponent was extracted. Based on the value of α, different approximations were performed. For α > 1.2, the MSD was assumed to describe a propulsive behavior which depends on time as a combination of Δt and Δt 2 polynomials, as in the well-known formula where D t is the translational diffusion coefficient and v is the propulsive speed. When α < 1.2, the nanomotors were assumed to behave with enhanced Brownian motion and were fitted to the equation: where D e is the enhanced diffusion coefficient, higher than D t , as it contains the information about the reaction activity. Rod-shaped silica nanomotors, self-propelled by inorganic catalytic reactions, were synthesized by a sol-gel method that uses Pluronic P123 as surfactant and yields nanorods with straight cylindrical hexagonally ordered mesopores along the rods main axis (MSNRs). These nanorods were coupled with one or more metallic components that can catalyze reactions and become nanomotors in three different manners: i) nanorods horizontally placed on a substrate sputtered with Pt to achieve one-side asymmetric metallic coating (MSNR-Pt); ii) nanorods with Fe2O3 nanoparticles trapped inside the mesopores (MSNR-Fe); and iii) a combination of the two approaches, namely nanorods with Pt on the surface and Fe2O3 nanoparticles inside the pores (MSNRs-Fe-Pt). Pt is one of the most used metals to catalyze the decomposition of H2O2 to generate motion of nano-and microstructures and it generally needs an asymmetric covering for an efficient motion Sputtering Pt on MSNRs produces an asymmetric coverage of half of the rod surface, in a longitudinal manner, which might seem insufficient to induce directionality. One could expect that such a lateral coverage would increase the diffusivity of the nanorods by increasing their active fluctuation, covering a wider area in an enhanced Brownian motion. To improve the directionality of the motion, Fe2O3 nanoparticles were synthesized within the mesopores, similarly to a previously reported strategy where enzymes were added inside micro-rods to achieve directional motion Thanks to the reduction of Fe 3+ to Fe 2+ and the oxidation of Fe 2+ to Fe 3+ in a Fenton reaction, active motion could be induced due to the expulsion of the reaction products through the pores. Finally, from the combination of both species (Pt and Fe2O3) one could expect an even more efficient and directional motion. pattern presented in Figure The motion of MSNR-Pt under the presence of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) at different volume concentrations is shown in Figure In this case, and throughout this work, the squared value of the propulsive speed is reported, as cases with v = 0 can yield negative squared speeds, which are physically meaningless. It can be seen that higher fuel concentrations show positive speed, although their values barely reach 1 μm/s 2 and their variability is large. This difference seems small compared to the very clear differences between fuels observed in the representative trajectories of Figure A closer study to the distribution of α values over the whole population of nanomotors can improve the analysis. A) The distribution of MSD exponents (α) for a fuel concentration of 5% reveals that there are two subpopulations of motors, some behaving diffusively (α = 1) and others superdiffusively (α > 1). B) Approximating all motors with α < 1.2 to a diffusive behavior with α = 1 shows that for higher fuel concentrations, there is an enhanced diffusion of the motors. C) Approximating the MSDs to a quadratic equation reveals that the subpopulation of motors behaving superdiffusively have a squared speed roughly four times higher than the one reported in the global analysis; those in the low α sub-population have zero propulsive speed. D) The angular autocorrelation functions of both sub-populations for higher fuel concentrations show that the high α sub-population has a higher directionality than the low α one, which shows no correlation. move diffusively with α ~ 1, but might have an enhanced diffusion thanks to the catalytic activity. The second peak of higher α represents a sub-population of nanomotors that move in a superdiffusive manner, and probably with more directionality. It is clear, then, that we cannot treat these two populations with the same statistical approach, as they represent different motion types. The presence of a bimodal distribution is more clearly seen at high fuel concentrations, although for moderate concentrations a spread in the standard deviation of this distribution, indicating an increase in the overall activity of the nanomotors, can also be observed (Figure Figure Mesoporous silica is an excellent chassis for micro-and nanomotors due to its convenient surface chemistry, biocompatibility and possibility of encapsulating drugs or other molecules. In this work, we report the fabrication and characterization of nonspherical nanomotors based on MSNRs with two different catalytic engines, namely partial surface coverage with Pt of the nanorods and Fe2O3 nanoparticles inside its pores. Upon addition of H2O2 as fuel, two sub-populations of nanomotors with different motion dynamics arose, likely due to a lack of fine geometrical control during the Pt deposition. By studying separately these two sub-populations with different scaling exponent, "high α" and "low α", we conveyed that the low-α population is better described as moving by enhanced diffusion and the high α-population by propulsive and directional motion. Note that the motion of MSNR-Fe due to the Fenton reaction catalyzed by the Fe2O3 nanoparticles was not efficient to produce significant motion. However, when MSNR-Fe were coupled with partial coverage of Pt, both the enhanced diffusion and propulsive speed were greatly increased. This synergistic effect could be due to a stabilization of the nanorods from turning due to the expulsion of reaction products through the pores, enhancing the directionality of the motion 