In this work we elaborated and characterized nanocomposite thin films using a preselected multiferroic matrix Bi0.9Gd0.1Fe0.9Mn0.1O3 (BGFMO) in the aim to enhance their basic ferroelectric and magnetic properties. The local ferroelectric character of these nanocomposites thin films was investigated by piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM). Switching behavior for ferroelectric domains was probed by locally manipulating domains. The magnetic investigation showed that the incorporation of transition metal elements in the BGFMO matrix brings out interesting increase in the macroscopic magnetisation at room temperature. Moreover, a spin glass type behavior is observed in M(T) curves for the studied thin films. Last decade has seen an increasing interest in magnetoelectric phenomenon, highlighted by the increase number of publications dealing with this topic, either on theoretical or experimental aspects The ME effect can be expressed according to the following equations: where, (P) is the polarization, (H) applied magnetic field, external electric field (E), (M) induced magnetization and α(αE) is the ME voltage coefficient. Noting that to achieve an acceptable α(αE) coefficient, both high ferroelectric and magnetic properties are required. This new challenge, underlines the race towards getting materials with desired properties to meet the new technologies needs. It should be notice that a number of single phase multiferroic materials has been explored One of the possibilities to enhance ME coupling is the synthesis of artificial nanocomposite multiferoic films materials. Such type of architectures could be achieved by three different ways: (i) multilayer of piezoelectric and magnetostrictive materials; (ii) hierarchical nanostructed composites; or (iii) piezoelectric matrix embedded with magnetic materials. The advantages and drawbacks associate to each case are summarized in ref. For the way (iii), that concerns the subject of the present study, only few works reported nanocomposites films prepared by a sol-gel process and spin-coating technique. Obviously, the real problems known for this type of nanocomposites are the low resistivity in the magnetic phase and the difficulty to apply high electric field to induced polarization changes In the present work, emphasis is placed on using as based matrix for nanocomposites thin films elaboration, the Bi0.9Gd0.1Fe0.9Mn0.1O3 (BGFMO) composition, highlighting its ferroelectric and magnetic properties. The incorporation of Cr 3+ or Co 3+ [Bi0.9Gd0.1Fe0.9Cr0.05M0.05O3 (BGFMCr) and Bi0.9Gd0.1Fe0.9Co0.05M0.05O3 (BGFMCo) respectively] has shown to influence microstructure and multiferroic properties of BGFMO. Thin films of the studied materials were elaborated using spin-coating technique on a commercial (111)-Pt/Ti/SiO2/Si substrate heterostructure. The starting reagents were Biacetates, Gd acetates, Mn,-Fe, -Co and Cr acetylacetonate, They were dissolved in 2methoxyethanol to yield a sol concentration of 0.22mol/l. Pyrolysis was conducted on the hot plate at 260 °C. Final annealing was performed in a preheated tube furnace in a saturated oxygen atmosphere at 650 °C for 60 minutes. The phase analysis was characterized at room temperature using a four circle high resolution D8 Discover Bruker diffractometer equipped with a Göbel mirror (Cu Kα radiation, ƛ=1.5418 Å), by Raman spectroscopy (X-Y spectrometer with Ar + laser excitation at 514.5 nm, Dilor/Horiba Jobin Yvon, France). The surface morphology and local electromechanical behavior were investigated using a commercial setup NTEGRA Aura (NT-MDT) microscope working in contact mode. For the studies of nanoscale piezo-ferroelectric properties, the microscope is equipped with an external lock-in amplifier (SR-830A Standford Research and Pt/Ir coated tips with nominal stiffness of 7.4 N/m were used (Nanoandmore tips, reference PPP-NCSTPt). The bias voltage is applied the tip whereas the bottom electrode is grounded. The magnetic properties were measured using a commercial Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS DynaCool, Quantum Design). Room temperature hysteresis loops of the investigate samples were carried at H= 1kOe. The temperature dependencies of magnetization M(T) were recorded in the temperature interval 2 K <T< 300 K and with an applied magnetic field up to H = 1kOe in both ZFC (zero-field-cooled) and FC (field cooled) regimes. Figure1 shows the XRD patterns of the investigated films. The mother phase (BGFMO) consists of a pure perovskite, and is free from parasitic phases. All observed peaks are indexed in a pseudocubic unit cell. However, for BGFMCo, all reflections of the mother phase are observed with an additional one observed around 30.2°. A similar peak position is observed in the spinel ferrites system with formula Co1-xMnxFe2O4, corresponding to (220) reflexion As it can be shown in the figure, the mother phase BGFMO presents two large bands situated at around 620 cm -1 and in the range from 450 to 550 cm -1 . We have assigned these features to respectively symmetric and antisymmetric stretching of the basal oxygen ions of the Mn 3+ O6 octahedra associated with the Jahn-Teller distortion. More discussion about this behavior and the effect of the presence of manganese on the BFO host lattice can be found in our previous works Otherwise, the Raman spectra of Cr-phase reveals two remarkable changes. Firstly, the feature developed around 622 cm -1 shows a considerable reduction of its intensity compared to the mother phase. The reduction of this intensity let imply a reduction of Mn 3+ ions, favoriting the presence of the non-JT active Mn 4+ ions. Secondly, the spectrum of Cr-phase exhibits a new band developed at Ca. 827 cm -1 which may come from Cr-O band Figure In order to investigated localized polarization switching behaviors for the three films, a DC bias voltage was applied to the conductive PFM-tip probe. A 7.57.5m 2 square were initially written by applying a positive bias voltage, followed by the writing of an internal 55m 2 square negatively poled. The result of these poling experiments are shown in figure As highlighted by the well-defined squares observed after poling experiments (see figure For this latter film, the coexistence of ferroelectric and non-ferroelectric regions corroborates XRD and Raman investigations. The magnetic hysteresis curves at room temperature for the studied specimens are shown in Figure In a previous work We shall now discuss the origins of magnetization improvement observed in the prepared nanocomposite films. Recall that Goodenough et al. Concerning the BGFMCr films, a clear ferromagnetic behavior is depicted at RT. On considering BFGM as mother phase, we expected that Mn 3+ (3d 4 ) ions are partially substituted by isoelectronic Cr 3+ (3d 3 ) which have the same electronic configuration as Mn 4+ (eg, t 3 2g). In the system LaMn1-xCrxO3, Zhang et al However, the partial substitution of Fe 3+ by Cr 3+ could induce the 180° Cation-anion-cation super-exchange interactions between Fe 3+ -O-Cr 3+ . This type of magnetic interaction is ferromagnetic according to Goodenough -Kanamori -Anderson (GKA) semi-empirical rules Regarding the nanocomposite BGFMCo films, a narrow hysteresis loop is obtained with Mr~5emu.cm -3 . Such behavoir could be considered as a ferrimagnetic like (or soft ferromagnetic) one. A similar ferrimagnetic M-H loop was observed in Co doped BFO For further investigating the magnetic properties of the prepared samples, we have performed temperature dependence of magnetization in Zero-Field-cooled (ZFC) and Field Cooled (FC) modes and M-H curves at different temperatures as shown in Figs. To get more information about the effect of Co and Cr on the magnetic properties, temperature dependence of magnetization in ZFC and FC modes and M-H loops at different temperatures were performed on the investigated samples. The obtained results of M(T) curves show the occurrence of spin-glass-type behavior in all thin films. However, these results lest suggested that the improvement of magnetization as well as the change in the magnetic behavior are related directly to the nature of the secondary phase. Based on these findings, we conclude that these nanocomposites bear promising for extended functionalities.