Of all parent compounds of iron-based high-temperature superconductors, EuFe2As2 exhibits by far the largest magnetostructural coupling due to the sizable biquadratic interaction between Eu and Fe moments. While the coupling between Eu antiferromagnetic order and Fe structural/antiferromagnetic domains enables rapid field detwinning, this prevents simple magnetometry measurements from extracting the critical fields of the Eu metamagnetic transition. Here we measure these critical fields by combining x-ray magnetic circular dichroism spectroscopy with in-situ tunable uniaxial stress and applied magnetic field. The combination of two tuning knobs allows us to separate the stressdetwinning of structural domains from the field-induced reorientation of Eu moments. Intriguingly, we find a spin-flip transition which can only result from a strongly anisotropic interaction between Eu planes. We argue that this anisotropic exchange is a consequence of the strong anisotropy in the magnetically ordered Fe layer, which presents a new form of higher-order coupling between Eu and Fe magnetism. Magnetism is the origin of a wide range of intriguing phenomena in iron-based superconductors, including electronic nematicity and high temperature superconductivity[1]- Very recently, it was shown that a similar biquadratic coupling plays a role in the unusually large magnetoelastic coupling in EuFe2As2, where the introduction of a magnetic lanthanide element adds another layer of complexity into the magnetism of iron-based superconductors orientation with the Fe-SDW direction Here, we report the discovery of another consequence of the higher order Eu-Fe coupling in EuFe2As2 -a highly anisotropic Eu-Eu interplanar coupling. The degree of anisotropy of Eu-Eu interlayer exchange ( -) is about 75 times larger than the structural orthorhombicity, which can only be understood by considering the influence of the Fe-SDW order. The anisotropy of Eu-Eu interlayer exchange was overlooked previously because the field detwinning process masked the spin-flip nature of Eu metamagnetic transition. We overcome this challenge by a direct measurement of the Eu metamagnetic transition in a mechanically detwinned sample using a piezoelectric stress device, which allows us to apply magnetic fields either parallel or perpendicular to the easy axis of Eu moments within a single structural domain. Conventional magnetometry techniques are difficult to apply to a sample mounted to a strain device due to the added size and background magnetization contributed by the device. We therefore employ x-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) on the Eu L3 edge to measure the Eu-specific in-plane magnetization induced by an applied magnetic field. We show that we are able to strain the crystal into a monodomain which exhibits either a large jump in magnetization, consistent with a spin flip transition, or has a perfectly linear magnetization from continuous canting of Eu moments (i.e., we are able to turn the metamagnetic transition on and off). From the measurement of the critical field for the Eu spin flip and the field dependence of the spin canting, we determine the energies of the Eu-Eu and Eu-Fe coupling and discover that the Eu-Eu interaction itself is directionally dependent on the orientation of Fe moments. We then confirm this by first principles calculations. The discovery of the anisotropic Eu-Eu interplanar coupling also sheds light on the evolution of the Eu magnetism in doped EuFe2As2 which we reevaluate in the discussion. Figure Eu moments are aligned ferromagnetically within each plane and antiferromagnetically between planes. The Fe spin density wave ordering results in a small structural orthorhombicity and the formation of structural twin domains that are identical up to a 90-degree rotation. Within each domain, the Eu AFM and Fe SDW easy axes are aligned with the longer orthorhombic a lattice constant XMCD measures the induced Eu magnetic moment along the field direction, which is fixed parallel to the incident x-ray direction in this study. First, we address the effect of the applied magnetic field at T=30K, below the orthorhombic and SDW transitions (T = 187K), but above the Eu AFM ordering temperature (T = 19.1K). In the Eu valence state, the 4f electrons have zero orbital angular momentum (L = 0), and as such are expected to show an isotropic response to applied field. After detwinning to either the A or B monodomain, we applied fields from 0 to 1 T and measured the XMCD and resistivity simultaneously in 0.02 T steps (XMCD data were not collected for the B monodomain for 0.8 T-1 T at this temperature). We find an XMCD signal that is indistinguishable between the two domains, suggesting that at this temperature and field range the Eu-Fe interaction is negligible compared to the Eu paramagnetic coupling to applied field (Fig. We now discuss results from within the Eu AFM phase at 7K. We applied field through a 1 T loop to each detwinned state and measured the XMCD and resistivity simultaneously in 0.02 T steps (Fig. The resistivity is approximately linear in field for |μ H| < 0.4T and |μ H| > 0.6T for both domains. For 0.4T < |μ H| < 0.6T, a large hysteretic drop occurs in the B domain resistivity, coinciding with the jump in XMCD. A much smaller drop also occurs in the A domain, which also shows a small hysteresis (Fig. Both the XMCD and resistivity data show excellent agreement between positive and negative field values. In Figure We can relate the spin flip and saturation fields H and H to the microscopic interactions in the sample using a spin Hamiltonian (Supplementary Information section IV). We will start with a modified version of the spin Hamiltonian presented in ref. From the symmetry of the magnetic ordering structure (Fig. For the B domain, Eu and Fe moments are aligned both before and after the spin flip, and so the presence of the biquadratic coupling does not change the value of the spin flip field, but only serves to provide the necessary magnetocrystalline anisotropy to enforce a sharp spin flip transition. For the A domain, the biquadratic coupling provides an extra energy barrier that must be overcome by the field to reach the fully saturated canted state. From the measured values μ H = 1.17 T and μ H = 0.48 T, and using the expected Eu moment M = 6.8 μ At this point we are facing an apparent contradiction: we observe experimentally a sharp spin flip transition, but for > 1 the spin Hamiltonian would actually be expected to result in a spin flop transition, as shown in Fig. The three parameters J, K and W cannot be uniquely determined by the two experimentally measured values. Therefore, additional constraint is needed. This constraint can be provided by the measurement of H ° , i.e. the field required to saturate the magnetization when the field is aligned 45 degrees to the easy and hard axis, such that the field has an equivalent effect on both domains. It has the following expression: As our strain+XMCD measurements have demonstrated the need for the W term, we now discuss the extraction of J, K and W from magnetization measurements using a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) on a second sample from the same growth batch. We stress that this extraction is not possible without the confirmation of a spin-flip transition by XMCD measurement on a stress-detwinned sample. The sample was encased in GE varnish so that the domain configuration is fixed to 50/50 and the field detwinning is prohibited. The thin octagonal shape of the sample also ensures that field applied totally in- Therefore, we find that the Eu-Eu interaction is much stronger for Eu moments aligned parallel (J = J + W = 88.5 μeV ) compared to perpendicular ( J = J -W = 55.1 μeV ) to Fe moments. Further, the normalized difference of the anisotropic interplanar interaction, = 23.3%, is nearly two orders of magnitude greater than the corresponding normalized difference of in-plane lattice constants (the orthorhombicity), ~0.28%, which strongly implies the Fe-SDW origin of the anisotropy. To gain more insight, we used density functional theory (DFT) to calculate the exchange coupling between Eu layers as the difference between ferro-and antiferromagnetically stacked Eu layers, for Eu moments parallel and perpendicular to the Fe moments. We used the standard VASP package and verified that the results were fully converged with respect to the Brillouin zone integration, plane wave cutoff, and the number of bands included in the diagonalization. We also varied the effective Hubbard repulsion parameter for Eu f orbitals, U-J, between 5 and 7 eV, which had little impact on the result. We find that for parallel Eu-Fe moments, J =150-170 μeV, while for perpendicular Eu-Fe moments, J is essentially zero. While this result seems to considerably overestimate the exchange anisotropy (see ref. The anisotropic interaction between Eu planes can be thought to result from the anisotropic hopping of conduction electrons through the Fe plane. Considering a standard superexchange interaction, conduction electrons with spins polarized along the Eu direction will generally have a larger Eu-Fe hopping amplitude t when the Eu and Fe moments are parallel (J = J + W) rather than perpendicular (J = J -W), which generates a stronger antiferromagnetic interaction for collinear Eu-Fe moments. Further, the weak but finite ferromagnetic interaction between Eu planes is also mediated through the Fe layer, and as the Fe moments have a much larger susceptibility perpendicular to their ordering direction, the ferromagnetic interaction is stronger for perpendicular Eu and Fe moments, which weakens their overall effective antiferromagnetic interaction (this can be considered an extreme case of the RKKY interaction). In this sense, we can view this Eu interplanar interaction anisotropy (W) as a generalized Eu-Fe biquadratic coupling independent of the previously investigated Eu-Fe biquadratic coupling (K), where the square of Fe moments f , -f , couples the Eu moments above and below the iron plane. We note that this picture is reminiscent of the Fe-Fe biquadratic coupling within the FeAs plane that generates an effective anisotropic in-plane exchange of Fe moments J -J A complete determination of the spin Hamiltonian in EuFe2As2 also sheds light on the doping dependence of Eu magnetic order, which has yet to be fully understood. As in other iron pnictides, chemical doping in EuFe2As2 rapidly suppresses the Fe-SDW and stabilizes superconductivity In conclusion, our sample environment allows us to approach the magnetic coupling and magnetotransport properties of the EuFe2As2 system in an unprecedented fashion. Through mechanical stress we can prevent field detwinning and gain access to the meta-magnetism and the associated magnetotransport behavior of a monodomain sample. From measurements of the spin flip and moment saturation fields we are able to determine the strengths of coupling between Eu and Fe planes and discover the presence of an anisotropic exchange term in the spin Hamiltonian. We emphasize again that in a freestanding crystal, the rapid field-detwinning has prevented any previous determination of the anisotropic Eu interplanar interaction in this system. This new technique not only deepens our understanding of the EuFe2As2 system, but can also be applied to a variety of systems to disentangle the strongly coupled spin, orbit and lattice degree of freedom. Single crystal samples of EuFe As were grown from a tin flux as described elsewhere Measurements of the resistivity coefficient ρ aligned along the stress axis were performed using a standard 4-point measurement and an SR830 lock-in amplifier. A second sample from the same growth batch was cut into a thin octagon with surface area 2.18 mm 2 and thickness 0.0165 mm, with negligible in-plane demagnetization factor XMCD was measured at the Advanced Photon Source beamline 4-ID-D at Argonne National Laboratory. We probed the Eu L3 edge using x-rays of 6.97 keV, which measure the spin polarization of the Eu 5d band due to the magnetic moment of the 4f orbital. Generally, the Eu L3 edge XMCD signal can be taken as proportional to the 4f moment magnetization; however, as the Eu 5d band has a significant hybridization with the As 4p orbitals The XMCD spot size illuminates the whole sample width across the y direction and is roughly 100 microns wide along the x direction (between the transport wires) and probes a depth of about 5 microns. The beam is centered on the middle of the crystal where strain is most transmitted and homogenous. The transport wires are separated by about 1700 microns, and transport is sensitive to the whole bulk of the sample. While the resistivity and XMCD are not measuring exactly the same volume of crystal, the tight correlation between the two data sets suggests no major difference in crystal behavior between the two sampled volumes. The magnetization of the single crystal EuFe2As2 sample was measured by the vibrating sample magnetometer option of a Quantum Design Dynacool. The sample was cut into a thin octagon so that field applied along the [1 0 0] and [1 1 0] directions have the same (minimal) demagnetization factor. The sample was encased in GE varnish, which is known to fix the domain configuration and prevent field detwinning. In Figure 