The field of magnonics offers a new type of low-power information processing, in which magnons, the quanta of spin waves, carry and process data instead of electrons. Many magnonic devices were demonstrated recently, but the development of each of them requires specialized investigations and, usually, one device design is suitable for one function only. Here, we introduce the method of inverse-design magnonics, in which any functionality can be specified first, and a feedback-based computational algorithm is used to obtain the device design. Our proof-of-concept prototype is based on a rectangular ferromagnetic area which can be patterned using square shaped voids. To demonstrate the universality of this approach, we explore linear, nonlinear and nonreciprocal magnonic functionalities and use the same algorithm to create a magnonic (de-)multiplexer, a nonlinear switch and a circulator. Thus, inverse-design magnonics can be used to develop highly efficient rf applications as well as Boolean and neuromorphic computing building blocks. Magnonics is an emerging field of science in which magnons, the quanta of spin waves, are used to carry and process information instead of electrons nonreciprocal diodes/circulators However, the development of each of these devices requires specialized effortsdemanding and complex investigations. In contrast, modern electronics is much more advanced and the design of even the most complex circuits is usually performed using automatized electronic software such as VHDL Here, we introduce the inverse-design method into the field of magnonics and demonstrate its high performance, flexibility and potential. We show numerically that a design region of only 1×1 μm 2 is sufficient to perform conceptually different functionalities. To demonstrate this, we explore linear, nonlinear and nonreciprocal functionalities of the device and use the same automatic feed-back algorithm to develop a nanoscale magnonic (de-)multiplexer, a nonlinear switch and a circulator. The size of each element in the used 10×10 (or 10×20) matrix was chosen to be 100×100 nm 2 , in order to ensure simplicity in the experimental realization of the matrix As the first example, the structure of the inverse-designed magnonic frequency demultiplexer is shown in Fig. The yellow region indicates the magnetic material (YIG) and the white holes imply that the material has been fully removed. An external field of 200 mT is applied along the zaxis. magnetization The DBS algorithm is an optimization method that sequentially evaluates every element of the design region. The optimization process of the DBS algorithm is shown in Fig. Subsequently, the initial saturation magnetization distribution is introduced into Mumax 3 , a micromagnetic simulation software One can expect that there should be a number of possible element combinations which show similar performances comparing with the global maximum. However, the DBS algorithm is sensitive to the initial state and also to the selection order of the elements and tends to suffer from premature convergence in local maxima. Therefore, we repeat the same optimization procedure several times with random initial conditions and chose the best design with the largest objective function as shown in Fig. Figure If the system is perfectly reciprocal, one can obtain the multiplexer just by reversing the spin-wave flow direction. However, as discussed below, a weak nonreciprocity exists in our system and the multiplexer based on the design shown in Fig. Nonlinear phenomena are required for data processing and pronounced nonlinear spinwave properties are one of the significant added values offered by magnonics [10- ]. Here, we demonstrate the use of the inverse-design approach for the development of a nonlinear magnonic switch, in which a low-power spin wave is guided into one output waveguide while the high-power wave is guided into another one. Similar functionality was shown recently experimentally in the nanoscale directional coupler and was used for the development of a magnonic half-adder via the realization of AND and XOR logic gates , where and represent the spin-wave intensity for low and high input power at the i-th output waveguide (i = 1,2), respectively. Figure The realization of a nonreciprocal device, such as isolators and circulators, is of fundamental importance in electronic, photonic and magnonic systems. In the field of magnonics, this effect is usually achieved by the usage of ferromagnetic dipolarcoupled bilayer systems , where represents the spin-wave intensity from the input i to the port j (i,j = 1,2,3). Figure In order to understand the physical phenomena staying behind the nonreciprocal functionality, additional simulations are performed in a single waveguide of the same width as the input and output waveguides in Fig. This nonreciprocity is caused by the element of the dipole-dipole interaction, which breaks time-reversal symmetry Additional simulations with increased damping and two cells along the thickness of the structure are shown in the Supplementary Information to exclude other possible mechanisms behind the nonreciprocity. Finally, we would like to emphasize that the functionality of the magnonic circulator is realized by the accumulation of the rather weak intrinsic nonreciprocity of FVSWs in a nanoscale structure. This suggests that the inverse-design approach can be also used for the finding and exploration of the upto-know overlooked potential capacity of physical phenomena for applications. We have developed an inverse-design method for magnonics and demonstrated its capabilities and potential by designing various linear, nonlinear and nonreciprocal magnonic devices. The simulated (de-)multiplexer, nonlinear switch and circulator have similar architectures and their functionalities were achieved automatically by the feed-back DBS optimization algorithm. The proposed devices have compact footprints (down to 200×100 nm 2 ), exhibit high efficiency with the high potential for further improvement, and can be easily manufactured as well as scaled down to the CMOS scale. We expect that any other functionality of the device for microwave application, Boolean logic or unconventional computing can be achieved using the same approach because particularly inverse-design magnonics allows for simultaneous operation with nonlinear and nonreciprocal waves. Moreover, the inverse-design algorithm attracted our attention to the week nonreciprocity of Forward Volume Spin Waves in the nanostructures and accumulated it for the realization of the magnonic circulator. We sincerely believe that inverse-design magnonics provides a new significant momentum to the development of the applied solid-state physics and technology. The micromagnetic simulations were performed by the GPU-accelerated simulation package Mumax 3 to calculate the space-and time-dependent magnetization dynamics in the investigated structures The time for one single simulation is around 45 s with two gaming graphic cards (TITAN xp GPUs). One iteration (including 100 simulations for the inverse-design of