FEbeam is a compact field emission data processing interface with the capability to analyze the field emission cathode performance in an rf injector by extracting the field enhancement factor, local field, and effective emission area from the Fowler-Nordheim equations. It also has the capability of processing beam imaging micrographs using its sister software, FEpic. The current version of FEbeam was designed for the Argonne Cathode Teststand (ACT) of the Argonne Wakefield Accelerator facility switch yard. With slight modifications, FEbeam can work for any rf field emission injector. This software is open-source and can be found at GitHub. As field emitters are poised to be the next generation of electron sources in rf and microwave systems, the ability to analyze field emission cathode performance by processing extensive raw data in a compact, easy-to-use format is crucial. Therefore, a toolbox called FEbeam was developed to fill the existing gap. FEbeam consists of 17 different Matlab functions. A single graphical user interface (GUI) conveniently combines and cross-links them together. Fig. This paper is laid out as follows: Section I describes how charge (Q)-electric field (E) curves are obtained; Section II describes how Fowler-Nordheim (FN) fitting parameters get determined; Section III describes image and resulting scientific data postprocessing and plotting; Section IV contains conclusion and outlook. Given the direct link with the physics of dark current and vacuum breakdown/arc, additional sister toolkits FEbreak (breakdown statistics) and FEpic (image/pattern recognition) a) Electronic mail: schne525@msu.edu b) Electronic mail: jevarji1@msu.edu c) Electronic mail: jshao@anl.gov d) Electronic mail: serbar@msu.edu This FEbeam version is specifically optimized to automate the Argonne Cathode Teststand (ACT) shown in Fig. The forward and reverse power are measured using a directional coupler on the waveguide near klystron. The raw data used to calculate the field emission characteristics is obtained from the oscilloscope in a CSV format consisting of the voltage waveforms for the Faraday cup, forward power, and reverse power. Each CSV file is a single point in the Q-E curve where each point consists of 10 individual pulse shots. The opening GUI screen, Select Raw Data Files, is shown in Fig. After the datasets have been selected, renamed, and translated into Matlab data files (.MAT format), the rf parameters need to be set in the FEbeam screen, as shown in Fig. The difference between the high and low charge scenarios refers to the terminating impedance on the oscilloscope in the Faraday cup circuitry. The low charge case uses the impedance of 1 MΩ as the larger impedance allows for larger voltage drop read by the scope and hence higher sensitivity to lower charge beams. However, the FIG. Faraday cup signal length will increase by a few orders of magnitude. As a result rf pulse and Faraday cup signals cannot be captured simultaneously. Therefore, Faraday cup signal is recorded to only calculate RC time constant τ RC as illustrated by the interface screen shown in Fig. where V F C is the voltage waveform from the Faraday cup within the specified boundaries in the settings, τ RC is the time constant calculated for the low charge case, Z L is the load impedance, and t 1 and t 2 are the 10% and 90% boundaries. If an oscilloscope with limited bandwidth is only available, it is still possible to measure envelope for the forward and reflected power in order to establish the applied field on the cathode. Fig. (2) where power waveforms for both the forward (FP) and reverse (RP) power have units of milliwatts in this equation. To convert original voltage waveforms for the forward and reverse power into actual power, the following equations are used where AT T F P is the forward power attenuator, AT T RP is the reverse power attenuator, AT T W G is the waveguide attenuation, and AT T DC is the attenuation for the directional coupler which, in this case, is 60 dB. The -3 term denotes the conversion from milliwatts to watts. It is assumed that the rf pulse is a flat top; therefore, if we integrate over the forward power and then divide by half, this midpoint should be where the level of the flat top is, as shown by Eq. 6. This corresponds to the median applied field over that rf pulse. Time k corresponding to that midpoint is found from relation where t i and t f are initial/start and final/end time integration boundaries. Finally the applied macroscopic electric field can be found as where P k F is the power at time t k measured in W as found from Eq. 6 and P ACT f actor is the ACT power conversion factor equal to 208.5 W•m 2 /MV 2 . The applied field and power conversion factor are imported from the Parameter File Settings, and labeled in accordance with the highest E c achieved, called E h . Subsequently, each of the data points in the Q-E curve are combined into a single file. The next step is converting the Q-E curve into the Fowler-Nordheim coordinate representation to further extract the field emission characteristic parameters, the field enhancement factor β, cathode local or microscopic electric field E L = β × E c , and the effective emission area A e . According to the Fowler-Nordheim (FN) equation, the transient field emission current when the cathode field is positive (cos(ωt) > 0) can be expressed as where φ is the work function. The emission profile can be approximated by a Gaussian distribution whose standard deviation σ depends on the maximum microscopic cathode field β|E c |, as illustrated in Fig. For the ACT, every data point of the Q-E measurement consists of 10 pulses (or, shots). Averaged values and an iterative fitting algorithm are used where the Fowler-Nordheim plot is split into two independent line segments shown in Fig. If a knee point is found, the Fowler-Nordheim plot is split into two regions. Each region is fit independently of each other to find the β-factor and emission area A e for each line segment, i.e. for the high and low field regions. Additionally, the knee point is applied to extract β-factor and A e for both the I-E and Q-E dependences. A comparison between these two fitting methods can be seen using the postprocessing options along with image processing results. Both of these options are independent from the main data processing pipeline and can be done in tandem with the data processing. If no knee point is found, the entire Fowler-Nordheim plot is fit by a single line. FEbeam displays figures in Fowler-Nordheim coordinates with the knee point indicated. Additional plot showing the R 2 value is generated if the knee point was determined. It should be noted that if the algorithm cannot find the knee point due to no diversions from the Fowler-Nordheim law, the user is able to select an option on the FN Options interface (seen in Fig. The image processing option in FEbeam is selfcontained from the rest of the data processing pipeline seen in Fig. Beyond the traditional Fowler-Nordheim parameters and Fowler-Nordheim plot, the fitting can also be compared in both the I-E and Q-E versions. Additionally, the dc Fowler-Nordheim plot log(I/E 2 ) vs. 1/E is available. There are options for the Millikan plot log(I) or log(Q) vs. 1/E and its R 2 values which gives the user better insight if significant space charge effect is present As field emission sources are notoriously difficult to characterize, FEbeam provides an intuitive field emission data processing pipeline with the additional benefit of having image and post processing capabilities. FEbeam is also of a highly modular design with only one subsection being specific to the ACT, which it was originally designed for. Supplementary modules can be added for additional functionality. New work is underway aiming to join FEbeam, FEpic (expanded to unsupervised machine learning algorithm), and a breakdown analyses module FEbreak under a single umbrella called FEmaster. **