After decades of fundamental research, unconventional superconductivity has recently been demonstrated in rare-earth infinite-layer nickelates. The current view depicts these systems as a new category of superconducting materials, as they appear to be correlated metals with distinct multiband features in their phase diagram. Here, we provide an overview of the state of the art in this rapidly evolving topic. Unconventional superconductivity, understood as superconductivity beyond the electron-phonon paradigm, remains a defining problem in condensed matter Even though this latter discovery is very recent, nickelates have been debated as intriguing analogs to the high-T c cuprates for decades Here, we provide an overview on the current status of the field. Recent research has unveiled intriguing departures from the initial conjecture. Accordingly, superconducting nickelates are now depicted as a distinct class of correlated materials hosting unconventional supercon-ductivity among other interesting properties. Rare-earth infinite-layer nickelates RNiO 2 have been known for decades. This special type of nicketales can be seen as the n = ∞ members of the series R n+1 Ni n O 2n+2 , with each member containing n-NiO 2 planes. LaNiO 2 was the first synthesized compound of this type in the early 1980s Pr1-xSrxNiO2 FIG. deposition (PLD) and molecular beam epitaxy (MBE)) The superconducting T c upon hole doping reaches ∼ 15 K. However, the transport data reported so far is still sample dependent, with nominally equivalent samples displaying finite resistivity or a complete drop Pr1-xSrxNiO2 FIG. Fig. This question has been further addressed by X-ray spectroscopic techniques Fig. The single particle tunneling spectrum has been measured on (Nd,Sr)NiO 2 thin films deposited using MBE Resolving the degree of connection between nickelate and cuprate superconductivity has been the one of the main motors of a rather frenetic theoretical activity. A number theoretical tools and ideas were already on the table for constructive confrontation. The electronic structure, in particular, has been revisited from different perspectives and for different purposes. A. Single-particle picture At the single-particle DFT level, the calculations support the multiband picture of the infinite-layer nickelates in agreement with experimental data The presence of R-5d electrons is indeed compatible with the XAS spectrum as well as with the negative Hall coefficient measured experimentally in the parent compounds. Quantitative agreement with the Hall data, however, requires to somehow gap out the contribution from the main hole Fermi surface for the parent compounds Beyond that, one important parameter that can be obtained from DFT calculations is the difference in chargetransfer energies. That is, the difference in on-site energies promoting charge from O-2p to Ni-3d orbitals. This difference is to be compared to the Coulomb-interaction energy-scale U on the Ni sites, as this determines whether the system could be considered as charge-transfer or Mott-Hubbard-like according to the Zaanen-Sawatzky-Allen scheme These insights, essentially obtained from the comparison between experiments and single-particle DFT cal- Electronic structure of the reference material LaNiO2 obtained at the DFT level [fatband plot, density of states (DOS) and Fermi surface from culations, have set the stage and motivated a detailed analysis of the nickelate-specific electronic correlations. In this respect, a methodological note is due on the DFT-based approaches. Undoubtedly, they provide important fundamental insights. However, the state of the art is such that the 4f -electrons introduced by the magnetic rare-earth elements cannot be treated on the same footing as the rest of states. This circumstance leaves LaNiO 2 as reference compound, in the sense that only here all power of a first-principles approach can be truly exploited. Otherwise, the 4f -electrons are treated as core electrons -so that Nd or Pr become electronically equivalent to La-or LDA+U -corrected, which may not be totally justified. The standard electron-phonon mechanism has been ruled out as the main reason for superconductivity in infinite-layer nickelates where n ασ = c † ασ c ασ and n α = n α↑ + n α↓ (c † ασ creates electrons in orbital α with spin σ). Here U and U represent intra-and inter-orbital Hubbard interactions, J the Hund's rule exchange, and J the 'pair hopping interaction'. In practice, these parameters are taken such that U = U -2J and J = J which corresponds to a spin rotational invariance for the overall two-body local interaction. These interactions were considered at both Ni and rare-earth sites in The same conclusion about the d-wave symmetry of the superconducting gap was reached in As mentioned above, infinite-layer nickelates in their normal state systematically show a weakly-insulating or bad-metal behavior, also in the overdoped regime (see Fig. If electronic correlations remain relatively weak, then it is natural to revise the DFT picture by means of many-body perturbation theory in the first place. This enables the ab initio treatment of these correlations, which has been performed at the GW level DFT+DMFT (dynamical mean-field theory) calculations according to the model interaction Hamiltonian (1) have been performed to further scrutinize the correlated nature of the different orbitals and clarify the multiband nature in RNiO 2 Thus, from the point of view of correlations, one current picture describes infinite-layer nickelates in terms of bad-metallic Ni-e g states coupled to itinerant R-5d bands. Rather than to canonical Mottness, the bad metallic behavior here is ascribed to Hundness as the formally occupied Ni-3d z 2 orbitals are found to participate in the low-energy physics in a Hund-assisted manner As mentioned above, no sign of long-range magnetic order has been reported so far for any RNiO 2 parent material A complementary point of view is actually obtained Beyond that, an intrinsic difference that could be behind differing properties across the RNiO 2 series, notably the emergence of superconductivity itself, is the presence/absence of magnetic rare-earth elements To date, superconducting samples of infinite-layer nickelates have only been obtained thanks to thin-film growth techniques. The surface/interfaces of these epitaxial thin-films are readily available for experimental characterization. Thus, the question of whether their electronic properties match the bulk picture -so that superconductivity can be preserved and/or supplemented with additional local features This question was first addressed by means of DFT calculations for RNiO 2 /SrTiO 3 superlattices in In any case, this sort of 'chemical' reconstruction was further shown to produce drastic changes in the electronic structure at the interface The recent discovery of superconductivity in infinitelayer nickelates has created intense excitement. These systems have been rapidly scrutinized from many different angles, using a battery of experimental and theoretical tools. The initial motivation of drawing analogies with the high-T c cuprates has thus been surpassed. Instead, the accumulated results have now consolidated these systems as a new class of unconventional superconducting materials. Specifically, the rare-earth infinite-layer nickelates have been confirmed to host a distinct multiband interplay, on top of which electronic correlations build and determine the main properties of these systems. This interplay is present already within the Ni sector itself, as not only the Ni-3d x 2 -y 2 states but also the Ni-3d z 2 ones are found to be active. This further introduces specific correlation effects and the bad metallic, or weakly insulating behavior is now understood as a direct manifestation of these correlations. However, a Hubbard vs Hund dichotomy has emerged that is yet to be clarified. In addition, the rareearth states introduce extra specific ingredients such as the self-doping effect and a 4f -ness that may qualitatively be even more important. When it comes to the central question, that is, the emergence of superconductivity in these materials, it has been ascribed to spin fluctuations (in a broad sense), and there is now experimental evidence of incipient antiferromagnetic order. These are now well-established traits of the infinitelater nickelates. Additional progress to further clarify these aspects, as well as the actual superconducting properties beyond T c can be naturally expected More importantly, a crucial issue to address is: are the rare-earth infinite-layer nickelates a solitary beast or just the tip of the iceberg? That is, is there a whole new family of nickel-based unconventional superconductors waiting to be discovered? This question currently motivates the experimental and computational search of new alternative materials Shedding light on these issues will not only help understanding superconductivity in these specific low-valence layered nickelates but will also provide new perspectives about the nature of unconventional superconductivity in general.