Superconducting magnetoelectric effect, which is the current-induced magnetization in a superconductor, mainly focused on the spin magnetization in previous studies, but ignore the effect of the orbital magnetic moments carried by the paired Bloch electrons. In this work, we show that orbital magnetic moments in superconductors can induce large orbital magnetization in the presence of a current. We constructed a unified description for the current-induced spin and orbital magnetization across the superconductor-normal metal phase transition. We find that in a superconductor with uniform pairing, the current-induced magnetization at a given current density is the same as that in its normal metal state, while with the nonuniform superconducting pairing, the current-induced magnetization exhibits an abrupt change in magnitude near the superconductor-normal metal phase transition. Importantly, our theory predicts the orbital magnetoelectric effect in superconducting twisted bilayer graphene which has paired Bloch electrons with large orbital magnetic moments and negligible spin-orbit coupling. We propose that the measurement of the current-induced orbital magnetoelectric effect can be used to detect the possible nonuniform pairings in twisted bilayer graphene and other newly discovered superconductors with non-trivial Berry curvatures. Here H 0 (k) is the normal state Hamiltonian matrix, ∆ (k) is the pairing matrix and c † k (c k ) is the creation (annihilation) operator that includes multiple components for all the orbital and spin degrees of the system. In the normal state, a Bloch electronic state |φ ν,k with energy Introduction. Superconducting magnetoelectric effect is the current-induced magnetization in the superconducting state of a material. In previous studies, it mainly focused on the current-induced spin magnetization which arises from the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) in noncentrosymmetric superconductors In this work, we show that in superconductors where the paired Bloch electrons carry orbital magnetic moments, applying current can generate orbital magnetization. Importantly, we constructed a unified description for the current-induced spin and orbital magnetization that is applicable in both regions across the superconductor-normal metal phase transition. At the phase transition, the current-induced magnetization in the normal metal state is found to have smooth connection to that in the superconducting state when the pairing is uniform on the Fermi surfaces, while the magnetization exhibits an abrupt change in the nonuniform pairing case. The abrupt change is further ascribed to the nonuniform excitation of quasiparticles controlled by the nonuniform pairing on the Fermi surfaces. To demonstrate the utility of our theory, we study the case of twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) and predict that the TBG exhibits current-induced orbital magnetization in the superconductivity region. The TBG has recently been observed to exhibit both superconductivity A unified description for the magnetoelectric effect. Both the normal and superconducting states of a material can be described by the Bogliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian [29] FIG. , with μ B being the Bohr magneton and g the Lande g factor. The SOC in the material is manifested by the locking of the spin magnetic moment direction with the group velocity v ν,k = ∂ k ξ ν,k . In the absence of inversion symmetry, nonzero Berry curvature Therefore, in a noncentrosymmetric superconductor with finite Berry curvature, the paired electrons generally carry both spin and orbital magnetic moments even though the net magnetization is zero in the absence of a current. However, as we show below, applying a current can induce net spin and orbital magnetization. Applying a current to a metal or superconductor can be described by introducing a U (1) gauge field to the original Hamiltonian H → H + δH where with the spatial components denoted by i, j = x, y, z, and A (r, t) = q A (q, t) e iq•r being the vector gauge potential. The perturbation δH changes the distribution of Bloch electrons at the Fermi energy, and also changes the original Fermi surfaces, as is shown in Fig. To calculate the current-induced magnetization in both the normal and the superconducting states, we apply the linear response theory and obtain the current-induced bulk magnetization as [29] This magnetization is associated with the current density Here, k ≡ BZ dk/ (2π) d with d being the dimension, τ is the effective scattering time, and f ( ) is the Fermi Dirac distribution function. In the derivation of Eq. 3 and 4 we applied the Coulomb gauge so the electric field takes the form E = iωA For the current-induced magnetization described in Eq. 3 and 4, the vector fields E and A can further be replaced by the current density J , which results in the following expression: Here the susceptibility tensor α ij describes the magnetization induced by a unit current density and can be nonzero only for crystals with point group symmetry belonging to one of the 18 gyrotropic point groups Importantly, at zero temperature , with k F being the wave vector on the Fermi surfaces, so the induced magnetization M at a given current density J at T = 0 K is the same regardless of whether the system is superconducting or not. The susceptibility α ij at T = 0 K is only determined by the group velocity and total magnetic moments of Bloch electrons on the Fermi surfaces. It indicates that for a normal metal that has current-induced orbital magnetization, the orbital magnetization can also arise from applying supercurrent in its superconductivity region. In the temperature range 0 < T < T c (T c is the critical temperature for a superconductor), as the excited quasiparticles come into play a role in the currentinduced magnetization, the pairing gap that controls the quasiparticle excitations becomes another factor that can affect the magnetization at given current density. Nonuniform pairing induced abrupt change in the current-induced magnetization. The effect of quasiparticle excitations on the current-induced magnetization is the most prominent at the temperature near the superconductor-normal metal phase transition, where the small pairing gap near T c allows a large number of quasiparticle excitations to coexist with Cooper pairs. From the first term in Eq. 3 and 4 it is known that the current from the excited quasiparticles and the affiliated magnetization inherit from those in the normal metal state. In the case of uniform pairing gap |∆ ν,kF | = ∆ 0 , since the suppression of quasiparticle excitations is uniform on the Fermi surfaces, the quasiparticle current and the affiliated magnetization are produced in the same ratio as the current and the current-induced magnetization in the normal metal state. In contrast, when the pairing gap ∆ ν,kF is nonuniform on Fermi surfaces, the ratio of quasiparticle current and the affiliated magnetization differs from that in the normal metal. We know from the T = 0 K result that the ratio of the supercurrent and the supercurrent-induced magnetization is the same as the ratio in the normal metal state. Therefore, across the superconductor-normal metal phase transition, the current-induced magnetization is exactly the same in the uniform pairing case, while an abrupt change in magnitude can happen in the nonuniform pairing case. The abrupt change of current-induced magnetization at T c in the nonuniform pairing case can be deduced from the Taylor expansion of γ ij , ṽij in terms of ∆ ν,k , which yields , so the dependence on the paring ∆ ν,kF arises abruptly in the susceptibility α ij once T < T c . When the pairing is nonuniform on the Fermi surfaces, the susceptibility α ij thus differs at the two sides of T c . Such abrupt change of current-induced magnetization across T c is an indicator of the nonuniform pairing in the superconducting state. The orbital magnetoelectric effect in superconducting twisted bilayer graphene. In previous studies, currentinduced magnetization in the superconducting state only involves the spin magnetization caused by SOC The TBG that shows superconductivity in experiment lies on the hBN substrate, so the coupling of the bottom graphene layer with the hBN can gap out the Dirac points and generate finite Berry curvature Near the superconductor-normal metal phase transition, the proportion of orbital magnetization that comes from the quasiparticle current becomes considerable, so the pairing gap that controls the quasiparticle excitations will affect the current-induced orbital magnetization near T c . For the superconducting TBG on hBN, a possible nonuniform singlet pairing can be approximated as Discussion. Experimentally, the magnetization that involves orbital magnetic moments polarization in the normal state of materials has been observed through the optical Kerr effect It is important to note that our theory applies to a large number of recently discovered superconductors with Berry curvatures and negligible SOC, such as a trilayer graphene Moiré superlattice on hBN Supplemental Material for "Superconducting Orbital Magnetoelectric Effect and its Evolution across the Superconductivity Normal Metal Phase Transition" The generic Hamiltonian that can describe the normal state of a system takes the form with c † ν,k (c ν,k ) being the creation (or annihilation) operator, H 0,νν (k) being the element of the Hamiltonian matrix H 0 (k), and ν = 1, 2, 3, . . . denoting the spin and orbital index of the system. The Bogliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian that can describe the superconductivity state of a system is where . . , and ∆ (k) is the pairing matrix. We know that the normal state Hamiltonian H 0 (k) can be diagonalized by an unitary transformation U (k) as with U † (k) U (k) = 1 and the corresponding eigen states Applying the unitary transformation to the Bogliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian then yields Importantly, after the unitary transformation, we obtain In such eigen-band basis φ † 1,k , φ † 2,k , ..., φ † ν,k , φ 1,-k , φ 2,-k , ..., φ ν,-k , the intraband pairing φ ν,-k φ ν,k gives an energetically favourable pairing phase, while other interband pairing will require extra attractive interaction to overcome the energy (momentum) difference As a result, the Bogliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian in the eigen-band basis takes the form We define the Green's function for the Bogliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian as , and and then we apply the unitary transformation to the Green's function: which gives Applying current introduces a perturbation to the Bogliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian, so the free-energy density of the system gets changed. The change of free-energy density can be obtained through expanding the electromagnetic gauge fields, and it can be expressed as Here, the terms T s ij (q, iω m ) and T s ij (q, iω m ), where give the spin magnetoelectric susceptibility in both the superconductivity and normal metal regions, while the polarization tensor Π ij (q, iω m ), where is responsible for the current and current-induced orbital magnetization in both the superconductivity and normal metal regions. Polarization Tensor, Current, and the Current-induced Orbital Magnetization Substituting Eq. S10, S11, S12, S13 into Eq. S18, we can obtain the polarization tensor Π ij (q, iω m ), where and the dynamic part Π dyn ij (q, iω m ), where (S20) The static and dynamic part of the polarization tensor can then be expanded in terms of q to the linear order as with The intra-band contribution to Π For the inter-band contribution, we assume that the pairing gap |∆ ν,k | is much smaller than the inversion symmetry breaking-induced band splitting, so the inter-band term can be approximated by that used in the normal metal phase with ∆ ν,k = 0: We also know from the gauge invariance that so eventually we obtain the Π sta,(0) ij , where with the group velocity that is iω m dependent, we consider the dominant intra-band contribution and take the analytic continuation The intra-band contribution to being the orbital magnetic moment. For the inter-band contribution, given that the pairing gap |∆ ν,k | is much smaller than the band splitting, it can also be approximated by that used in the normal metal phase in a way that is similar to Eq. S23. We know that the summation of the intra-band and inter-band static terms in the normal metal phase gives ), which is confirmed to be zero For the dynamic part Q dyn ijl , we consider the dominant intra-band term and use the analytical continuation iω m → ω + i τ -1 as well, and then we can obtain Eventually, the polarization tensor Π ij (q, ω) can be approximated: From Eq. S15, we can then obtain the current density: Interestingly, we notice that the free energy density related to Q sta ijl and Q dyn ijl can be further simplified as Then, we derive the current-induced orbital magnetization: Here the electric field has been expressed in terms of the vector gauge potential as E = iωA. The spin magnetoelectric susceptibility T s ij is calculated as: We further sum over the Matsubara frequency and decompose the spin magnetoelectric susceptibility into the static (iω m = 0) and dynamic (iω m = 0) parts as and The intra-band contribution to T s,sta For the inter-band contribution, similarly, we assume that the pairing gap |∆ ν,k | is much smaller than the band splitting so that it can be approximated by that in the normal metal phase. We also know that the summation of the intra-band and inter-band terms in the static limit will vanish, so the inter-band contribution can be written as We know that for a Bloch state, the spin magnetic moment is S ν,k = φ ν,k | 1 2 μ B gσ |φ ν,k , so the static part of the spin magnetoelectric susceptibility can be calculated as T s,sta ij can be obtained similarly following the above procedure: For the dynamic part that is iω m dependent, we consider the dominant intra-band contribution and obtain T s,dyn ij (iω m ) can be obtained similarly following the above procedure as well: Eventually, we get the spin magnetoelectric susceptibility as Current-induced Total Magnetization Now we are ready to write down the expression for the total magnetization induced by current: which is induced by the current density The total magnetic moment M ν,k = m ν,k + S ν,k includes both the orbital magnetic moment m ν,k and the spin magnetic moment S ν,k . As a result, at given current density J , the induced magnetization becomes M i = α ik J k , where the susceptibility α ik is with Near the critical temperature T c , we consider the limit ωτ 1, so the tensor γ ij , ṽij can have the taylor expansion in terms of the pairing ∆ ν,k as We consider 42 sites in the hexagonal reciprocal lattice so that h η (k) is an 84×84 matrix in the calculation for the energy dispersion ξ ν,s,η,k . For a specific band with index ν, the Bogliubov de-Gennes Hamiltonian in the eigen-band basis φ † ν,↑,η,k , φ † ν,↓,η,k , φ ν,↓,-η,-k , φ ν,↑,-η,-k can be written as 