Nitrogen vacancy (NV) centers in diamond have developed into a powerful solid-state platform for compact quantum sensors. However, high sensitivity measurements usually come with additional constraints on the pumping intensity of the laser and the pulse control applied. Here, we demonstrate high sensitivity NV ensemble based magnetic field measurements with low-intensity optical excitation. DC magnetometry methods like, e.g., continuous-wave optically detected magnetic resonance and continuously excited Ramsey measurements combined with lock-in detection, are compared to get an optimization. Gradiometry is also investigated as a step towards unshielded measurements of unknown gradients. The magnetometer demonstrates a minimum detectable field of 0.3 -0.7 pT in a 73 s measurement by further applying a flux guide with a sensing dimension of 2 mm, corresponding to a magnetic field sensitivity of 2.6 -6 pT/ √ Hz. Combined with our previous efforts on the diamond AC magnetometry, the diamond magnetometer is promising to perform wide bandwidth magnetometry with picotesla sensitivity and a cubic-millimeter sensing volume under ambient conditions. Quantum sensors have made extraordinary progress in sensitivity, precision, bandwidth, spatial and temporal resolution over the past years Highly-sensitive DC magnetometry techniques have been developed across various platforms, with sensitivities from femto-to nanotesla On the other hand, the nitrogen-vacancy center in diamond has evolved into a competitive room-temperature platform for magnetometry with its exceptional spatial resolution, dynamic range, and sensitivity In this work, we present DC magnetometry and gradiometry with (0.5 mm) 3 diamond volume, which contains NV center ensembles with a minimum ODMR linewidth of 28 kHz and a long dephasing time of 8.5 μs. With excitation laser power below 100 mW, mul-tiple diamond DC magnetometry methods are investigated. Pulsed schemes with continuous excitation and readout are demonstrated with a better sensitivity potential than optimized CW-ODMR measurements. On the other hand, we also show that the CW-ODMR driving both hyperfine and double resonance (DR) transitions demonstrate optimized sensitivity close to Ramsey measurements with the same low-power laser excitation. We present a measurement showing the minimum detectable field at 2 -3 pT within the bandwidth of 0 -200 Hz in 73 s measurement time, and the 1 Hz normalized noise spectral density is 17 pT/ √ Hz. We also present a gradiometry measurement, showing the minimum detectable differential field noise at 4 -6 pT with the 73 s measurement time. Furthermore, by applying a ferrite flux guide (FG), the measured minimum detectable field goes down to subpicotesla at 0.3 -0.7 pT over the mentioned bandwidth, corresponding to a sensitivity level at 2.6 -6 pT/ √ Hz. The optimization of diamond magnetometry sensitivity has been reviewed in detail recently Figure A loop antenna is applied in the reference channel. In order to test the sensitivity enhancement by the FG, a ferrite rod (MN60) is placed between the diamond and a coil applying the test field, as shown in Fig. One of the most critical techniques in sensitive measurements is lock-in detection to avoid low-frequency 1/f noise. Figure Figure where τ m is optimized from the dephasing time T * 2 , C det is the detected contrast, N is the number of photons collected per measurement, and t is the measurement time. Experimentally N can be estimated by the photon detection rate R = N/T seq . The sensitivity is calculated by η = δB √ t. The equation calculates the shot noise without explicitly including the photon detection efficiency. When the laser power is not saturating the NV ensembles, as in our case of low optical pumping, the collected photon rate is also related to the pumping power. In Fig. Among all the diamond DC magnetometry schemes, Ramsey magnetometry is among the most sensitive methods. However, its practical sensitivity suffers from technical limitations. For example, enormous laser power is needed for the initialization of the spin ensembles. It brings heating problems and extra noise with it. In contrast, CW-ODMR is a method that can be easily implemented with low laser power. In the following, we first analyze the CW-ODMR sensitivity and the optimal laser and MW parameters. Then, Ramsey magnetometry is investigated based on the same laser power. The shot noise measured by the CW-ODMR method is described as Here P F is a lineshape dependent factor, which is 0.77 for the Lorentzian line profile in this work. The critical parameters for experimental optimization are the linewidth ν and the contrast C det , which are dependent on the Rabi frequency Ω R , and the ratio of the applied laser power to the saturation power, s. Figure In order to have an optimized SNR, the collected fluorescence emission power should be on the order of mW with roughly 3 × 10 -4 lower than the saturation laser power. In order to avoid applying an unnecessarily high laser power, the excitation power is optimized by comparing the experimental pumping rate with the simulation of the excitation kinetics. With a fluorescence emission rate of 66 MHz Figure MW angular modulation is implemented as discussed in Sec. II. Either frequency modulation (FM) or phase modulation (PM) can be applied. Taking the FM MW signal as the example, the signal can be described as where f 0 is the resonance frequency, f m is the modulation frequency, β = f d /f m is defined as the modulation index in which f d is the frequency modulation amplitude. In the case of PM, the modulated phase term is φ d sin(2πf m t), and the signal S P M can be expressed as (3) by replacing β with the phase modulation amplitude φ d . In applications, the FM signal is usually more precise than the PM signal due to the high frequency resolution of instrumentation. However, the PM signal provides a more stable phase reference, which is essential when applying a multi-frequency MW signal for the DR driving with lock-in detection. Another parameter that is worth discussing is the bandwidth of the modulated MW signal. The bandwidth of the modulated MW signal, i.e., Carson bandwidth, is defined as , and the FM signal can be decomposed as where J n (β) is the Bessel function of the first kind. The CE-Ramsey scalar factor is also plotted in Fig. The applied BW F M is 100 kHz to ensure the modulated fluorescence signal amplitude maximal. As depicted in Fig. We investigate the instrument noise floor by measuring the noise spectrum and plotting the calculated root mean square voltages at different demodulation frequencies from 1 kHz to 20 kHz. When the setup operates with the laser switched on and the microwave signal offresonant, the noise reduces by roughly 100 times from 1 kHz to around 10 kHz. However, the measured signals by each method reduce only by a few times, as shown in Fig. The resonantly measured magnetic field noise spectrum is depicted in Fig. 1(b), we measure the diamond magnetic gradient field noise as shown in Fig. This work demonstrates the diamond DC magnetometry and gradiometry with low optical pumping power. Fields ranging from few picotesla to subpicotesla level are measured within a sensing volume of 0.125 mm 3 . We take advantage of the narrow linewidth and the low noise floor of the lock-in detection technique, using the Ramsey method with low power continuous excitation. With the optimized parameters, the CE-Ramsey measurement can achieve a better sensitivity than CW-ODMR measurement. The real field measurements indicate the intrinsic magnetic noise level of the diamond magnetometer is 2 -3 pT with a 13.7 mHz frequency resolution, corresponding to a bandwidth normalized noise spectral density of 17 pT/ √ Hz. The gradiometry measurements also demonstrate a < 10 pT gradient field noise with the same frequency resolution. By applying a ferrite rod with a 2 mm end diameter as the flux guide, the noise level (spectrum calibrated by the battery discharging signal) reduces to 0.3 -0.7 pT, corresponding to a bandwidth normalized noise spectral density of 2.6 -6 pT/ √ Hz. For practical applications, one could combine the FG and the gradiometer to take the combined advantage of the sensitivity, spatial resolution, and magnetic field noise suppression. The FG could be further optimized for higher flux gain by changing its geometry and structure, such as the gap distance between the diamond and the FG end and the structure with a flux return ferrite. Moreover, upon compromising the spatial resolution, the setup could yield a magnetic field sensitivity of a few hundred fT/ √ Hz at ambient environment if the flux concentrator geometry is used. Techniques such as double quantum magnetometry The diamond samples are (111)-oriented (0.5 mm) 3 cubes obtained by laser-cutting and polishing from a 99.97% 12 C enriched single crystal. The crystal is grown by the temperature gradient method at high pressure and high temperature (HPHT) conditions. The initial nitrogen concentration of the original crystal was 1.4 ppm. After irradiation of 2 MeV electrons and annealing (1000 • C for 2 h in vacuum), the NV concentration reached 0.4 ppm. The laser used in experiments is the low noise version of the Lighthouse Sprout-G 532 nm laser. The homebuilt photodetector is based on the Hamamatsu S3590-09 model with an active area of 10×10 mm 2 and a simple trans-impedance amplifier circuit with a gain of 5.1 kV/A. The detected fluorescence and laser reference signals directly go to the differential input of the lock-in amplifier (LIA, Zurich Instruments, HF2LI). Two vector signal generators (Rohde & Schwarz, SMIQ03B) are used to generate MWs for the double resonance (DR) driving. In the CW-ODMR measurements, the MWs are mixed with a PM modulated RF signal generated by a function generator (Rigol DG1022), of which the second channel generates a 2.163 MHz signal mixed with the MW by a mixer (Minicircuits, ZAM-42) to drive the hyperfine lines. In the MW pulsed measurements, the MW signal is gated by a data timing generator (Tektronix, DTG5274) and a switch (Minicircuits, ZASWA-50DR+). The combined multi-frequencies MW signal is amplified by the Amplifier-Research 50S1G4 and finally applied to the diamond through the dielectric resonator antenna The CW-ODMR operation has been described in several publications The CE-Ramsey operation is based on the sequence described in Fig. The external magnetic field is measured by continuously running the sequence with the fixed τ m . In order to suppress the thermal fluctuation, the double quantum magnetometry can also run with the CE-Ramsey scheme as well by replacing the pulses with double quantum magnetometry pulses The transition kinetics simulation follows the energy level diagram described in Fig. in which ρ ij are elements of the density matrix, Γ p is the optical pumping rate, Γ 1 = 1/T 1 , Γ * 2 = 1/T * 2 , and ∆ is the MW offset frequency. Here we take the |0 → |+1 basis. Combined (S2), (S3) with the optical pumping kinetics, the model is described as: In the model (S4) -(S13), n i is the population of state i, R ij is the transition rate from state i to state j, and R f l = 66 MHz is the fluorescence emission rate. The intersystem crossing parameters R 82 = R 83 = 0.7 MHz, R 81 = 1 MHz, R 57 = R 67 = 53 MHz, and the metastable states emission rate R 78 = 1000 MHz To calculate the bandwidth of the magnetometer, we applied the modulated MW signal with frequency shift follows ∆(t, f m , f d ), where f m is the modulation frequency, f d is the frequency deviation, and the modulation index One important question is, what would be the cost of using continuous excitation for getting away from the technique noises. Experimentally, Rabi oscillation and the free induced decay (FID) signal are measured with both pulsed laser and continuous laser excitation. Fluorescence signals are all acquired with a 10 μs gate after the MW pulses so that the calculated contrast of the two measurements can be comparative. As shown in S-Fig. In the experiments, Ω R ≫ Γ p , Γ 1 , and there would be no significant Rabi frequency change until Γ p ≈ Ω R . In any case, the pulse width error in Ramsey sequence can be experimentally compensated. According to (S3), the repolarization does not contribute to the dephasing in the kinetics during the phase integration time interval τ m . S-Figure Techniques such as balancing-detector, heat sinking can also be applied for better SNR and stability. While these techniques cannot address all the issues in regular Ramsey measurements, continuous excitation can fix all the problems as mentioned in the main text. For example, a balancing-detector cannot eliminate pulsed readout when the two arms are not well balanced, but by continuous excitation there will be no background fluorescence pulses. Heat sinking cannot prevent the thermal dynamics over the diamond induced by laser pulses, and it could be a reason for linewidth broadening in bulk diamond measurements. Combining continuous excitation with a heat sinking can suppress most of the thermal fluctuations, and thermal stability can be further improved by monitoring the laser power fluctuations. In conclusion, continuous excitation using a low pumping power is beneficial with minimal influence on the signal contrast. Our diamond sample has NV ensembles with a long dephasing time of T * 2 = 8.5 μs, and it ensures the very narrow ODMR linewidth. The CW-ODMR linewidth of the diamond can be estimated by where Γ 2 = Γ * 2 + Γ c , and Γ c is the optical cycles. When both MW power and laser power approach 0, the CW-ODMR linewidth limit can be estimated as Γ * 2 /2π ≈ 19 kHz. The minimum linewidth detected experimentally is 28 kHz. It was difficult to measure the ODMR linewidth with further lower MW power because of the extremely low contrast and the linewidth broadening due to the magnetic field drifts during a long averaging time. On the other hand, pulsed-ODMR reaches the linewidth limit when the π-pulse time T π ≈ T * 2 . The linewidth is estimated as ∆ν = (2 √ ln 2)/(πT * 2 ) ≈ 62 kHz This section discusses the contrast reduction induced by the MW modulation in magnetic field measurements. Figure As for the Ramsey measurement, the main reason for the contrast reduction is the insufficient repolarization due to the short cycle time in the lock-in detection, which is discussed in Fig. where τ m = 6.42 μs, is the field measurement time. With demodulation frequency of 9 kHz, the cycle time T seq ≈ 110 μs, and the reference time t 0 is taken as 150 μs. It can be calculated that U LIA = 6.2 mV. Meanwhile, according to S-Fig. When τ m = 0, U G = 38.3 mV with the repolarization reference time t 0 = 150 μs, and the signal contrast is calculated as U G /U 0 ≈ 2%. On the other hand, the gated acquisition deteriorates the sensitivity by a factor of T seq /∆t (similar sensitivity deterioration happens in Ref. In order to estimate the shot noise limited sensitivity, the linewidth, contrast, and photon detection rate have to be determined experimentally. According to Fig. where G T I = 5100 is the transimpedence gain, and q is the electron charge. Therefore, the shot noise limited sensitivity can be estimated according to equation (2) as 0.96 pT/Hz 1/2 . However, this sensitivity limit is calculated without considering the contrast reduction due to the MW modulation. The parameter ν/C det should be corrected with a factor depending on the MW modulation frequency. According to the discussion of the CW-ODMR contrast in Section V F, the factor 9.45 can be considered in the estimation. As a result, the shot noise limited sensitivity of CW-ODMR measurement with 9 kHz MW modulation is estimated as 9.1 pT/Hz 1/2 . Experimentally, the scalar factor measured by CW-ODMR with 9 kHz MW modulation is calculated according to S-FIG. As for the CE-Ramsey measurement, the dephasing time T * 2 = 8.5 μs is measured as shown in S-Fig. With the 1 s measurement time, the sensitivity η = δB √ t is calculated to be 7.7 pT/Hz 1/2 . The sensitivity is close but superior to the CW-ODMR sensitivity even without considering the double quantum magnetometry. Experimentally, the scalar factor measured by the CE-Ramsey method is calculated according to S-Fig. where k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature taken as 20 • C, and ∆ν = 1 Hz is the measured bandwidth. The current shot noise is calculated according to where I is the current in the coil. Since the coil pair generates roughly B bias = 10 -3 T field with U = 12 V power supply, the magnetic field noise generated by the coil pair can be estimated as 8 pT with 1 Hz bandwidth, and the noise level is 0.01 pT with measurement time of 73 s. Thus, the coil noise can be neglected with the fully charged batteries, and the noise spectral measured by the OPM and the diamond magnetometer are comparable to each other. Another method to determine the intrinsic noise of the magnetometer is to apply a known oscillating field to the magnetometer and compare the detected signal magnitude at the frequency in the spectrum. One problem of the calibration method is that the known field signal spike could be underestimated because the magnetometer output includes both signal and noise. The underestimation of the signal magnitude leads to the underestimation of the detected noise floor. Thus, calibration measurements with known fields are used as the optional proof of the magnetometer characteristics. The calibration field has a magnitude of 150 pT, and the frequencies are at 2 Hz, 5 Hz, and 10 Hz. In order to avoid the higher noise level and all the spikes at low frequencies according to the measured noise spectrum in Fig One of the issues using the diamond with narrow linewidth is that the modulated MW could have a bandwidth similar to the original ODMR linewidth, and the modulated MW would reduce the ODMR contrast and broaden the linewidth. To look into the effect of applying modulated MW with a broaden bandwidth, we use an amplitude modulated (AM) MW signal with only two single-tuned sideband signals at f 0 + f m and f 0 -f m . S-Figure In this work, the applied modulation frequency f m = 9 kHz, and φ d = 2. The Carson bandwidth BW F M = 54 kHz near the FWHM linewidth. The components amplitude is decomposed by the Bessel function first kind J n (β), which are 0.224, 0.577, 0.353, 0.129 for n=0 to 3. Thus, most of the MW energy (n=0 to 2) within the NV linewidth makes the parameters reasonable in the measurements. Schematic of the ferrite-diamond geometry is depicted in S-Fig S-Figure The flux guide is not optimal in this experiment. For example, the gap between the ferrite and the diamond is as large as 1 mm, and it makes the flux gain much lower than using a smaller gap. A flux return ferrite could give a higher gain for flux concentration and better field homogeneity. We simulate a flux guide schematic as S-FIG. 