In quantum optomechanics, finding materials and strategies to limit losses has been crucial to the progress of the field. Recently, superfluid 4 He was proposed as a promising mechanical element for quantum optomechanics. This quantum fluid shows highly desirable properties (e.g. extremely low acoustic loss) for a quantum optomechanical system. In current implementations, superfluid optomechanical systems suffer from external sources of loss, which spoils the quality factor of resonators. In this work, we propose a new implementation, exploiting nanofluidic confinement. Our approach, based on acoustic resonators formed within phononic nanostructures, aims at limiting radiation losses to preserve the intrinsic properties of superfluid 4 He. In this work, we estimate the optomechanical system parameters. Using recent theory, we derive the expected quality factors for acoustic resonators in different thermodynamic conditions. We calculate the sources of loss induced by the phononic nanostructures with numerical simulations. Our results indicate the feasibility of the proposed approach in a broad range of parameters, which opens new prospects for more complex geometries. In recent years, progress in cavity optomechanics, which exploits the coupling of light or microwave fields to mechanical motion, has enabled the development of a wide range of designs and applications In general, mechanical resonators are fabricated from solid materials, however, there has been a recent interest in using superfluid helium 4 as a mechanical element in cavity optomechanical systems. As a natural quantum fluid, superfluid 4 He holds several advantages for a mechanical system over classical materials, which include an absence of viscosity, a naturally high purity and thermal conductivity, and quantized vorticity. Of particular interest to quantum optomechanics, are its vanishing acoustic and dielectric loss at low temperature. For instance, it was shown that, in theory, losses in superfluid 4 He can lead to an acoustic quality factor of the order of Q a ∼ 10 10 at 10 mK To improve the capabilities of superfluid optomechanical systems as quantum resources, it is key to enhance the coherent coupling between the light field and the acoustic field by maximising the optomechanical coupling strength (g 0 ), while limiting the sources of acoustic loss (Γ a ) and optical loss (κ). While superfluid 4 He holds remarkable intrinsic properties (i.e. vanishing losses), these can be spoiled by external factors causing heating or radiation losses. In the present work, we propose a novel architecture for superfluid optomechanics, based on engineered nanostructures allowing a better control over superfluid phonon propagation, preserving superfluid 4 He's exceptional intrinsic properties, and leading to enhanced quality factors and coupling strengths. Exploiting recent progress in quantum nanofluidics, concerning the confinement at the nanoscale of quantum fluids (liquid helium-4 Using a methodology borrowed from previous work on phononic crystal slabs FIG. The highly confined acoustic mode is coupled (via electrostriction) to an electric field generated by a nanoscale capacitor located at the point defect of the sonic crystal. Enclosed within the nanofluidic geometry, the capacitor is terminated by large antennas, which couple the microwave field of a 3D cavity mode to the capacitor. This forms a cavity optomechanical system in which the mechanical mode is a superfluid acoustic mode confined at the point defect of the sonic crystal, and the optical cavity mode is defined by the microwave cavity coupled to the nanoscale capacitor. We find that the proposed superfluid optomechanical system should have a relatively large optomechanical coupling strength (g 0 ∼ 10 -2 Hz), which is about 6 orders of magnitude larger than in previous superfluid optomechanics work with microwave fields In section II, we give a short background on the superfluid 4 He two-fluid model, and collective excitations. In section III, we describe the characteristic properties of superfluid 4 He as an acoustic medium, including the different sources of internal attenuation identified as relevant to quantum optomechanics. In section IV, we introduce our proposed nanofluidic system, the sound propagation inside, and the different sources of acoustic loss in these geometries. In section V, we present a possible implementation of the proposed phononic nanostructures in a cavity optomechanical setup, and the optomechanical coupling. A. Two-fluid model Liquid 4 He is a system of strongly correlated bosons, a quantum Bose liquid, which behaves like an ordinary fluid (He I) down to a critical temperature T λ = 2.17 K. Below this critical temperature, liquid 4 He transits into a superfluid phase (He II), which exhibits peculiar properties, such as a vanishing viscosity for fluid flow in thin capillaries In the two-fluid model, the liquid is divided into two components. These two components are not a real division of the liquid but rather a mathematical abstraction, which works well to describe the properties of the superfluid phase. In this construction, the superfluid component of mass density ρ s and velocity v s , carries neither entropy nor viscosity. The superfluid component represents a collective phenomenon, in which particles move together to preserve the macroscopic occupation of a single quantum state of the Bose liquid. The second component, the normal fluid component of mass density ρ n and velocity v n , represents the gas of elementary excitations (or quasi-particles) of the Bose liquid, which is discussed in the next section. The total mass density ρ and momentum density j of the fluid are given by At the transition temperature (T = T λ ), the superfluid component density vanishes (ρ s = 0, ρ n = ρ). In the zero temperature limit, the normal fluid component density vanishes (ρ n = 0, ρ s = ρ), and with it, the entropy of the fluid ρS = ρ n S n , where S n is the entropy of the normal fluid component. Since the superfluid component describes a single macroscopic quantum state, there is no viscosity associated with the superfluid flow (η s = 0). The viscosity of the liquid comes from the gas of excitations, identified as the normal fluid component. These excitations scatter randomly against the atomically rough walls of the container transferring momentum from the fluid to the walls, hence providing a viscous friction with a coefficient of viscosity η = η n comparable to that of the normal liquid phase (He I). The gas of excitations is also responsible for sound attenuation. Landau proposed that the normal fluid component can be seen as a gas of weakly interacting elementary excitations The linear section of the dispersion curve at low energy (q → 0) corresponds to phonon excitations, i.e. long wavelengths density fluctuations. We note that while phonons usually emerge as the quantized vibrational states of a crystal lattice, in superfluid 4 He, phonons correspond to the gapless Goldstone modes of the Bose liquid where c is the first-sound (i.e. density waves) velocity and γ the phonon dispersion coefficient. Both parameters are pressure dependent, and importantly γ is negative at low pressure (anomalous dispersion) and positive at high pressure (normal dispersion). The sign of γ dictates the nature of phonon interactions, and therefore the nature of sound attenuation in superfluid 4 He. The minimum of the dispersion curve in Fig. only one atom can pass through the ring. In an alternative view, a roton can be seen as the backflow induced by a moving impurity atom where ∆ r /k B = 8.594 K and q r = 1.926 Å-1 are the energy and momentum coordinates of the roton minimum, and μ r = (1/ 2 )∂ 2 (q)/∂q 2 = 0.124 m 4 the roton effective mass associated with the curvature of the dispersion curve at the roton miminum. Values for these parameter have been extracted from neutron scattering measurements These two contributions (shown Fig. The impurities in solution represent another loss channel for sound propagation. In superfluid 4 He, the only impurities are the isotopic 3 He impurities since at low temperature all the other impurities have either been filtered or adsorbed on the walls of the container. In this work, we will consider typical natural concentrations at the part per million (ppm) level, and ultra-low concentrations at the part per billion (ppb) level or lower. In the mK temperature range, the gas of 3 He impurities will be non-degenerate, T T F , where T F is the Fermi temperature of 3 He atoms. At thermal equilibrium, 3 He atoms form a gas of slowly moving quasiparticles of momentum k. In the limit of low 3 He concentration, considering the superfluid 4 He at rest, the gas of 3 He quasiparticles is described by the following energy spectrum where m 3 is the bare mass of a 3 He atom, and m * 2.34 m 3 is the effective mass of 3 He atoms in superfluid 4 He at zero pressure SUPERFLUID 4 HE: ACOUSTIC MEDIUM A. Sound propagation in superfluid 4 He In electromagnetism, the wave equation of the field follows directly from Maxwell equations, for which monochromatic plane waves are rigorous solutions. In contrast, the wave equation for acoustics is only an approximate equation derived from the non-linear hydrodynamic equations, and plane waves are approximate solutions. Nevertheless, it was proposed that for pure 4 He and long wavelength excitations, an arbitrary state of the sound field can be decomposed into a linear superposition of plane waves A complete description of the motion of the fluid in the superfluid phase (He II) involves solving the equations of motion for the two-fluid model, which have been derived in various textbooks and the thermodynamic variables are close to their equilibrium value indicated by the subscript zero: where ρ, p, T , and s are respectively the mass density, pressure, temperature, and entropy fields. We assume the disturbance to be small (e.g. δρ ρ 0 ), and the velocity fields δv n , δv n to be smaller than the sound velocity. As for classical fluids, we can linearise the equations of motion neglecting all quadratic terms in the small quantities. Hence, the linearised equations of motion without dissipative effects become where δj = ρ n,0 δv n + ρ s,0 δv s and δμ = (1/ρ 0 )δp -s 0 δT are respectively the mass current and the chemical potential disturbance from equilibrium value. The two first equations above derive from conservation of mass and entropy, the other two equations are typical of the two-fluid model for which a pressure gradient drives a total mass current, and a chemical gradient drives a superfluid flow. Combining Eq. 14 and Eq. 16, we obtain the first-sound acoustic wave equation: with ∇ 2 the Laplacian operator defined in Cartesian coordinates as Considering the equation of state for the fluid p = p(ρ, s), and its (isentropic) differential form we define the isentropic sound velocity c 1 given by which represents the velocity at which pressure (or density) waves propagate in He II. To the first-order approximation, we obtain a constitutive equation and can rewrite the first-sound acoustic wave equation as or Hence, we see that the first-sound mode in He II is analog to a classical sound mode (density waves) in ordinary fluids, for which plane waves are simple solutions given by with A the acoustic wave amplitude, Ω = 2πf the angular frequency, k = nk = n(Ω/c 1 ) the wave vector, and n the direction of propagation of the plane wave. Combining the other two equations of motion, Eq. 15 and Eq. 17, leads to a wave equation describing second sound propagation, a sound mode corresponding to a temperature (or entropy) wave, which can be interpreted as compressional waves in the gas of excitations. The first sound (density waves) and second sound (entropy waves) wave equations derive from the two-fluid model hypothesis taken in the hydrodynamic regime, for which spatial variations of density and entropy fields are slow compared to the relaxation time needed to establish thermal equilibrium in the gas of excitations (i.e. phonons) where τ r = 1.43 × 10 -10 /T 5 is the relaxation time required for achieving local thermodynamic equilibrium in the phonon gas B. Sound attenuation in superfluid 4 In general, the presence of dissipative effects in ordinary fluids, such as those related to viscosity or heat conduction lead to sound attenuation. This is true of superfluid 4 He in the hydrodynamic limit. However, in the collisionless regime the gas of excitations does not reach local thermodynamic equilibrium, therefore it does not dissipate sound energy as effectively as in the hydrodynamic regime, and neither viscosity nor heat conduction are well-defined. Besides, the presence 3 He quasiparticles in solution provides another acoustic loss channel. Finding the full temperature and frequency dependence of sound attenuation in He II is a challenging problem. However, in the low temperature range (T < 0.1 K) and for low 3 He concentration (x 3 < 10 -6 ) sound attenuation is simplified. For these conditions, sound attenuation can be separated into a phonon-phonon interaction contribution, in which energy loss is caused by acoustic phonons scattering against thermal phonons, and a phonon- 3 He interaction contribution, in which acoustic phonons scatter against 3 He quasiparticles. Theoretical investigation of the phonon-phonon interaction contribution to sound attenuation was originally developed in refs. where q and Ω q are respectively the acoustic phonon wavenumber and pulsation frequency, τ the typical phonon relaxation time, qth = 3k B T /c is the average thermal phonon momentum, and is the Grüneisen constant, a dimensionless parameter. Hence, in the collisionless regime (Ω q τ 1), the sound attenuation can be written as Note that this expression is only valid for an acoustic phonon frequency much smaller than the typical thermal phonon frequency, that is for Ω q k B T . More recently, it was shown by Kurkjian et al. Including Beliaev processes leads to a more complex expression of the damping rate, which was computed for quantum gases by Kurkjian et al. q q q 2 q 1 q 2 q 3 (a) (b) FIG. where we introduced the dimensionless wave number rescaled by the typical thermal phonon wave number k B T / c. The functions ΓBel/Lan (q) are universal functions of q given by where the Bose functions g α (z), also called polylogarithms Li α (z), are given by and the Riemann zeta functions are given by ζ(α) = g α (1). In the limit q → 0, which corresponds to acoustic phonons in the mode q having an energy ω q much lower than the typical thermal phonons energy k B T , we obtain which leads to which corresponds to the commonly used expression, given at Eq. 28, for the acoustic attenuation in superfluid 4 He due to 3-phonon interaction in the collisionless regime (ω q τ 1), and the low temperature and low frequency limit ( Ω q k B ). By including Beliaev processes, one can compute the total damping rate Γ q = Γ Lan q + Γ Bel q numerically, which gives the acoustic damping and the attenuation at larger mode frequency. Fig. Recent high-precision neutron measurements from Beauvois et al. The damping rate due to 4-phonon interaction was originally calculated, in quantum hydrodynamics, by Landau and Khalatnikov where Γ2↔2 (q) is a quadruple integral whose exact form is given in ref. and at high-q given by Γ2↔2 where ζ(5) = 1.03693 is the Riemann zeta function ζ(α) taken at α = 5. Using these asymptotic forms, we can compute the damping rate in the low temperature limit and compare it with the damping rate originating from 3-phonon interactions. We show Fig. 2. Phonon - 3 He interaction In addition to phonon-phonon scattering, the other important intrinsic acoustic loss source in superfluid 4 He is due to 3 He impurities. The natural concentration of standard commercially available helium 4 gas varies depending on the location of the helium plant, from a ratio 3 He/ 4 He of the order of 0.1 ppm to a few ppb as measured by Souris et al. Most of the work on sound attenuation in dilute mixtures of 3 He in 4 He has been concerned with relatively large concentrations, with 3 He/ 4 He ratio at the percent level (x 3 ∼ 10 -2 ). Much of this work is based on Bardeen, Baym and Pines (BBP) theory is the Fermi wave number, is of the order of 0.3 mK at 3 He concentration of 1 ppm, and 3 μK at 1 ppb. More importantly, the primary mechanism for sound attenuation at relatively large concentrations relies on the viscosity of the 3 He gas, caused by rapid 3 He- 3 He collisions maintaining a local thermodynamic equilibrium among themselves. For the viscous attenuation by the 3 He gas to be significant, it requires ωτ η 1 where τ η is the 3 He- 3 He scattering relaxation time appropriate to viscosity where l 33 8.66 × 10 -10 /x 3 m is the mean free path of an unpolarized 3 He gas Currently, there is no reported theoretical work on sound attenuation in the case of ultralow 3 He concentrations, low temperature, and high sound frequency (i.e. collisionless regime). In the work by De Lorenzo et al. Using the result of ref. where J is an angular integral defined by where the parameters A = -1.2 ± 0.2 and B = 0.70 ± 0.035 are dimensionless quantities In previous sections, we considered phonon-phonon and phonon- 3 He interactions in the case where the thermal phonon mean free path is limited by collisions between phonons, and where the 3 He quasiparticle mean free path is limited by collisions between 3 He quasiparticles; this is a valid approximation in bulk. In the nanofluidic geometries proposed in this work, the confinement is considerable, such that the boundaries of the geometries could limit the phonon or 3 He quasiparticle mean free paths. In principle, if the walls of the nanofluidic geometries were rough they would significantly limit the mean free paths; as originally described by Casimir where l 0 B is the boundary mean free path defined by the characteristic size of the confinement geometry, and S, quantifies the roughness of the wall, representing the fraction of the incident phonons (or 3 He quasiparticles) that are specularly reflected from the walls. The remaining phonons are diffusively scattered in all directions. The parameter S describes the whole range of cases from S = 0 (perfectly rough) to S = 1 (perfectly smooth). In nanofluidic geometries, atomically smooth silicon surfaces can be used to reach a specularity close to its maximum value Exploiting the recent development in quantum nanofluidics A schematic of the nanofabrication process steps is shown in Fig. In this proposal, we aim to study superfluid 4 He, at mK temperatures, deep into the superfluid phase (ρ s → ρ). In this regime, superfluid 4 He can be described as an ideal fluid with no viscosity, with dissipative effects treated separately. For this case, superfluid hydrodynamics is governed by Euler equation where p = p(r, t) is the scalar pressure field in liquid helium at position r and time t, and c h is the sound velocity in liquid 4 He at zero temperature and saturated vapour pressure where E is the Young's modulus, and ν is the Poisson ratio of the solid material. Assuming continuity of the pressure field at the liquid/solid interface, one obtains the normal incidence reflection coefficient for the acoustic wave amplitude at the liquid/solid interface: where Z h = ρ h c h and Z sub = ρ sub c sub are respectively the characteristic acoustic impedances of liquid 4 He, and the solid substrate. The characteristic acoustic impedance of the different substrate materials for the sonic crystal are reported in Table Because of the high reflection coefficient, we can approximate the boundary conditions for acoustic propagation within the channel by the sound-hard boundary conditions given by where n is a unit vector normal to the surface of the wall. This Neumann boundary condition means that the normal derivative of pressure vanishes on the wall, expressing the fact that a sound wave is perfectly reflected at the liquid/solid interface. We show in the next section how deviations from this ideal model lead to radiation losses, which can be taken into account using numerical simulations. In the proposed nanofluidic geometries, the height of the geometry is much smaller than the lateral dimensions. An example of a typical rectangular nanofluidic channel is shown Fig. where n = 0, 1, 2, ... is an integer. Therefore, the cutoff frequency is at a channel height of the order of 100 nm. Modes with k z = 0 and a frequency below the cut-off frequency are evanescent and do not propagate in the nanofluidic geometry. In the proposed experiment, the sound frequency will be kept well below the cut-off frequency so that the sound propagation inside the nanofluidic geometry with k z = 0 can be considered 2D to a good approximation. Using standard optical lithography techniques, we can pattern microscale cylindrical solid pillars into a wafer substrate. Following a direct wafer bonding step, the pillars on the bottom wafer are enclosed by a second substrate on top, creating a nanofluidic environment. A lattice of these pillars forms an artificial crystal. Filling this structure with a fluid (i.e. superfluid helium) creates a 2D sonic crystal, a type of artificial phononic crystal for pressure waves in the fluid. Fig. Bulk superfluid helium is an isotropic acoustic medium with a quasi-linear dispersion relation Ω c h k at low wave vectors, which is a valid approximation at all the sound frequencies used here. Meaning that the acoustic eigenmodes (i.e. phonons) in bulk superfluid helium are well-defined plane waves. In our nanofluidic geometries, the confinement along the z-axis, causes the sound propagation to be guided in 2-dimensions. Also, the boundary conditions imposed by the lattice of pillars defining the sonic crystal, generate Bragg scattering. Hence, propagating modes in the sonic crystal are Bloch waves of the form p(r) = e -ik•r p(r), Phononic band structures plotted as a function of the reduced wave vector in the irreducible Brillouin zone (IBZ), such as the one shown Fig. The position and width of the bandgap are functions of the geometric parameters of the lattice. For this sonic crystal geometry, the frequency of the center of the bandgap is governed by the distance between pillars (a 1 ), while the bandgap width is also governed by the ratio pillar diameter (a 2 ). For instance, increasing the a 2 /a 1 ratio towards unity, increases the bandgap width. Results of numerical simulations show (see Fig. The acoustic mode of interest is localised at the point defect of a 2D sonic crystal embedded in a nanofluidic device. The nanofluidic device will be immersed in liquid helium contained within a 3D superconducting microwave cavity as described in section V. The extrinsic sources of loss are associated with mechanisms by which acoustic energy is radiated out of the sonic crystal's point defect into, both the substrate and the surrounding liquid helium. The acoustic mode defined at the point defect of a sonic crystal has a quality factor defined by where Q int a corresponds to the intrinsic quality factor due to internal dissipation mechanisms in superfluid 4 He, which are discussed at section IV. Q ext a on the other hand corresponds to the extrinsic sources of loss from acoustic radiation out of the point defect mode, and is given by where Q sc a is the quality factor related to the planar acoustic radiation loss out of the sonic crystal caused by the finite size of the sonic crystal, and Q sub a is the quality factor related to substrate internal loss. These two quantities, Q sc a and Q sub a , constitute the main contributions to the external quality factor. 1. Planar radiation loss: 1/Q sc a The planar radiation loss out of the sonic crystal (1/Q sc a ) contribution is obtained by assuming that the substrate enclosing the nanofluidic geometry behaves as infinitely rigid walls, leading to perfect acoustic wave reflection at the liquid/solid interfaces. This condition leads to a sound-hard wall boundary condition as given by Eq. 46, and here the substrate loss contribution is ignored. In this case, and because the acoustic pressure field is uniform in the z-direction inside the nanofluidic geometry, we can ignore the 3 rd dimension, and only consider acoustic propagation in the xy-plane. In theory, the band structure calculated for a 2D sonic crystal, shown in Fig. For the largest ratio shown (a 2 /a 1 = 0.9) and for a crystal of size N = 17 (i.e. few mm 2 ), we obtain a quality factor Q sc a ∼ 10 10 , which is comparable to the internal quality factor caused by 3-phonon processes at 10 mK (see section III B). Hence, if radiation loss out of the sonic crystal was the only external loss factor, obtaining an ultra-high quality factor where internal losses would be the limiting factor, is within reach considering standard nanofabrication techniques. However, radiation loss is not the only external loss factor, which is discussed in the next section. 2. Substrate losses: 1/Q sub a Modelling substrate losses is not trivial, and required a full 3D FEM numerical simulation of the nanofluidic device's components. We identified two main channels of loss originating from the substrate. First, out-ofplane acoustic radiation in the z-direction, propagating through the substrate into the surrounding bulk helium. Secondly, internal loss caused by the substrate's participation in the acoustic mode. To account for out-of-plane acoustic radiation, we studied the acoustic propagation in a simpler acoustic waveguide system made from a nanofluidic rectangular channel inside a thick substrate. The cross section dimensions of the rectangular channel (100 μm ×250 nm) are mimicking acoustic propagation in a particular direction of the xy-plane of the sonic crystal. Fig. The displacement field in the substrate decays exponentially as expected for evanescent waves. Like for an optical fibre waveguide, because of the wave impedance mismatch, and the fact that the wavevector is confined in the x-direction of the channel, or the xy-plane in the sonic crystal, it leads to total internal reflections at liquid/solid interfaces. Since evanescent waves do not carry acoustic energy, one would expect zero acoustic radia- tion through the substrate. However, evanescent waves would only be the correct solutions of the wave equation for an infinitely thick substrate, which in practice, is not the case. Hence, numerical simulations provides a useful tool to quantify deviations from evanescent waves, and estimate the associated loss channel. The results of our numerical simulations, nevertheless, indicates that this loss channel is negligible compare to the second loss channel discussed below. The main source of loss in the substrate comes from the substrate's internal loss via its participation in the acoustic mode. To account for this loss channel, we add a loss coefficient for superfluid 4 He and the substrate in our FEM simulations. For the fabrication of the sonic crystal, an appropriate substrate material must be selected. Substrate loss coefficient (α) values were calculated from the quality factor values given in the literature for resonators made of these materials, a reasonable approximation provided that internal losses were the limiting factor in these experiments. This proposal aims to provide an architecture in which we can preserve the intrinsic quality factor of superfluid 4 He, which is expected to be large at low temperature. Hence, in these simulations, we chose a relatively large value of the internal quality factor for superfluid 4 He (Q int a = 10 10 ), the one given by 3 phonons processes at 10 mK. From Eq. 50, one can define the reduction coefficient η corresponding to the reduction of the intrinsic quality factor of superfluid 4 He caused by substrate loss as The numerical simulations allow us to calculate this quality factor reduction coefficient for different type of substrate materials. We run these simulations for the simple rectangular acoustic waveguide geometry and the sonic crystal geometry. In the sonic crystal simulation, we observed that the contribution of the solid substrate to the acoustic mode is localised in the vicinity of the point defect. See Fig. A nanoscale parallel plate capacitor can be formed inside the nanofluidic geometry by depositing two superconducting electrodes, on the top and bottom inner surfaces of the sonic's crystal point defect. The typical capacitance will be given by the standard formula C nano = A 0 h /d, where d is the gap between the two parallel electrodes, A is the effective surface area of the electrodes, 0 = 8.85×10 -12 pF/m is the vacuum permittivity, and h = 1.057 the relative permittivity of liquid 4 He Using the standard cavity optomechanics framework where a † are the creation operator for cavity mode photons, and b † for acoustic mode phonons. The coupling between the cavity mode and the acoustic mode is para-metric, such that the cavity resonance frequency is modulated by density fluctuations (δρ) of the acoustic mode, and can be expanded as: Considering small density fluctuations, it is sufficient to keep the linear term only. We define the frequency shift by density as G = -∂ω 0 /∂ρ. Expanding to leading order in the density, we obtain for the optomechanical interaction part of the Hamiltonian, where g 0 = Gδρ zpf is the single-photon optomechanical coupling strength, expressed as a rate, quantifying the interaction between a single photon and a single phonon. In the proposed implementation, the microwave cavity mode frequency is modulated by density fluctuations of the acoustic mode, via the liquid 4 He dielectric constant's dependence on density h (ρ h ). This dependence is expressed by Clausius-Mossotti relation given by where M = 4.0026 g/mol is 4 He molar mass, α M = 0.123 cm 3 /mol is 4 He molar polarizability, which remains constant from room temperature to low temperature which gives the linear part of the dielectric constant's dependence on density fluctuations. Assuming that the frequency modulation is small compared to the resonance frequency, one can use the result of the theory of cavity perturbations caused by a change in dielectric constant δ h , and a change in magnetic constant δμ h , where μ h is the magnetic constant, |E 0 (r)| (|H 0 (r)|) is the electric field (magnetic field) amplitude mode shape, and the integral is taken over the entire volume of the cavity mode. We observe that the terms are related to the electromagnetic stored energy, so that a decrease in the resonance frequency can be related to the increase in the stored energy of the perturbed cavity. Since the magnetic susceptibility of liquid helium is negligible (χ m ∼ -10 -7 ) [109], compared to its electric susceptibility (χ e ∼ 0.057) and so the relative frequency shift can be written as To find the single photon coupling strength, we now write the relative frequency shift associated with zeropoint fluctuations of the acoustic mode. The density variation is concentrated in the sonic crystal point defect resonator, and can be written as δρ(r) = δρ zpf f (r). ( where f (r) is a dimensionless, normalised function, representing the mode shape function associated to the acoustic mode. The total acoustic energy stored in this mode is given by the usual expression of the potential energy for an acoustic resonator, where p(r) = K h δρ(r)/ρ is the pressure variation caused by density variations, and K h is helium's bulk modulus (i.e. inverse of compressibility) defined as We can then write the total acoustic energy as which we equate to the zero-point energy ( Ω a /2) to find the zero-point density fluctuation amplitude: where V eff = d 3 rf (r) 2 is the acoustic mode effective volume. The typical zero-point fractional density change of our acoustic resonators, equivalent to a strain, is given by where Ω a /2π ∼ 1.5 MHz is the typical frequency of the acoustic mode, V eff = αV def is the effective volume of the acoustic mode with V def ∼ 10 -15 m 3 the volume of the sonic crystal's point defect, and α a numerical constant that depends on the mode shape. Numerical simulations give α ∼ 0.3 for a sonic crystal defined by a 2 /a 1 = 0.8, and α ∼ 0.2 for a 2 /a 1 = 0.9. We can now express the single photon optomechanical coupling strength: where g(r) is a dimensionless, square-normalised function representing the mode shape of the cavity mode electric field. In order to maximize the mode coupling integral in Eq. 67, the electrodes forming the nanofluidic capacitor can be positioned so that they the electric field overlaps with the maximum of the pressure field (Fig. Superfluid optomechanics offers great prospects for quantum sensing and quantum technology applications. In this work, we presented the characteristic properties of superfluid 4 He as an acoustic medium that are relevant for these applications. Of particular interest, is superfluid Furthermore, the exquisite properties of superfluid 4 He can easily be spoiled by the design of the acoustic cavity, which can cause radiation loss and heating. Our proposal focuses on a novel type of devices based on phononic nanostructures enabling the confinement of superfluid acoustic modes at the nanoscale leading to higher frequency modes and the enhancement of optomechanical coupling strengths. We identified the different loss mechanisms for our proposed geometry. Our results, based on FEM numerical simulations, show that sonic crystals provide a useful method to significantly limit radiations losses out of the acoustic mode. Additional external losses arising from the substrate participation to the acoustic mode have been identified, and could be limited with the appropriate choice of substrate materials (e.g. silicon, glass, quartz) and geometries. Finally, an implementation of these phononic nanostructures in a cavity optomechanical setup based on superconducting microwave cavities was proposed. The system parameters have been calculated and compared to the literature. We note that this proposal provides a six order of magnitude improvement on the optomechanical coupling strength compared to previous microwave optomechanical systems. Future prospects include the possibility of reducing the mode volume to enhance the optomechanical coupling strength, coupling multiple acoustic modes to create optomechanical arrays and metamaterials, and forming hybrid system by coupling these acoustic modes to other nanomechanical structures (e.g. compliant membranes). b 