Microelectromechanical system (MEMS) focal plane array (FPA) with optical readout offers exciting opportunities for real-time terahertz (THz) imaging. However, conventional FPA suffers from a low THz absorption ratio, which further decreases the performance of THz imaging. Here, we present a simple and scalable approach for the realization of THz focal plane metamaterial array with a relatively high absorption ratio. The key idea is to combine the advantages of substrate-free structures with metamaterial. A 100 × 100 THz FPA with a 150 × 150 μm pixel is designed, fabricated, and characterized. The dependence of the THz absorption ratio on the thickness of SiN x dielectric substrate film is investigated. The fabricated FPA exhibits a 90.6% resonant absorption at 1.36 THz, agreeing considerably with the theoretical simulation results. Our results imply that such a substratefree THz focal plane metamaterial array enables the realization of THz imaging. Technology development of components and instrumentation for the largely unexplored terahertz (THz) spectral region (10 11 -10 13 Hz) has proceeded rapidly in the last fifteen years The Bi-material based THz FPA can be used in THz imaging systems A series of researches on THz metamaterial have been reported previously The incident THz radiation from the target source is illuminated on the front of the FPAs. The absorbed radiation causes an increase in temperature, which results in the deformation of the micro-cantilever pixels in the array. Conversely, an LED is illuminated on the backside of the FPA. Then the light reflected from the FPA creates a thermal image and is recorded by a charge-coupled device (CCD) camera. The detailed operating principle was described in our previous work To characterize the electromagnetic response as a function of orientation, terahertz timedomain spectroscopy (THz-TDS) The low-stress silicon nitrogen film deposited by low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) was chosen as the structure layer of the FPA, due to its simple fabrication process and relatively high heat capacity. Afterward, plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) SiN x film was used as the absorption layer, and the reflecting mirror and metamaterial structure were made of gold. Hence, the bi-material cantilevers comprised the LPCVD SiN x film and the gold film. To improve the sensitivity of the detector, two limitations need to be considered. First, how to increase the absorption at expected THz frequency, and second, how to increase the temperature as much as possible. Ideally, a periodic array is an effective way to enhance the absorption, and the factors, such as the proper shape, thickness, and metallic properties, enable high absorption at a specific frequency. In practice, the resonant absorption can be affected by the dimension of a patch of the array and thickness of the dielectric film beneath the periodic array, which is a form of frequency selective surfaces (FSS). According to the equivalent circuit method, the resonant wavelength of FSS is related to the effective electric length of the FSS patch element by the following approximate formula: To better understand the measured response, a CST microwave studio was used to simulate the electromagnetic response Next, with SiN x film thickness at 2 μm and patches side length at 40 μm, the effects of the split ring resonator (SSR) in FPA was investigated. The resonant frequency of the SSR was determined by the ring length and the split size. In this work since the SSR is much longer than the patch side, the resonant frequency of the SSR is much lower than that of the FSS. Hence, the SSR has barely any effect on the response frequency and the absorption of the pixel. In Fig. where λ is the wavelength of the readout light, L is the reflector length along the cantilever direction, N is the quantization level of CCD, and Δθ and ΔI are the changes in the deformation angle and the grey level of CCD, respectively. Therefore, the reflector length along the leg is required to be as long as possible to minimize θ min . Contrarily, a larger deformation angle can be achieved by increasing the number of folded cantilevers. We note that both methods above are limited by fabrication, device volume, and image resolution. All the samples were prepared with conventional micro/nano-fabrication processes, as shown in Fig. where αm is the emittance/absorbance of the metasurface, P m is the incident THz power modulated at a specific frequency ω, C is the heat capacity of the metasurface, and G T is the thermal conductance of the total power loss, which consists of convection, conduction, and radiation. With the method described in By investigating the relationship between the absorption and thickness of the SiN x dielectric film, we selected the optimal thickness for THz absorption. Afterward, a 100 × 100 THz FPA with a pixel of 150 × 150 μm and a fill factor of 66.7% was successfully designed. Through direct measurement, we find that it has higher thermal sensitivity (up to 0.075°/°C) than IR FPA. Furthermore, its absorption rate is up to 90.6% at 1.36 THz, which is consistent with the simulation result. Due to the above observed high thermal sensitivity and absorption ratio, we believe that this kind of FPA has a powerful potential application in THz imaging.