Recently, monolayer SnS, a two-dimensional group IV monochalcogenide, was grown on a mica substrate at the micrometer-size scale by the simple physical vapor deposition (PVD), resulting in the successful demonstration of its in-plane room temperature ferroelectricity. However, the reason behind the monolayer growth remains unclear because it had been considered that the SnS growth inevitably results in a multilayer thickness due to the strong interlayer interaction arising from lone pair electrons. Here, we investigate the PVD growth of monolayer SnS from two different feed powders, highly purified SnS and commercial phase-impure SnS. Contrary to expectations, it is suggested that the mica substrate surface is modified by sulfur evaporated from the Sn2S3 contaminant in the as-purchased powder and the lateral growth of monolayer SnS is facilitated due to the enhanced surface diffusion of SnS precursor molecules, unlike the growth from the highly purified powder. This insight provides a guide to identify further controllable growth conditions. Tin monosulfide (SnS), which is a group IV monochalcogenide (SnX, GeX; X: S, Se), has been widely studied for low-cost and scalable thin-film photovoltaics due to a theoretical power conversion efficiency close to the Shockley-Quiesser limit of ~32% Looking back on past photovoltaic research, 3 purification of commercial feed powder has been reported to drastically improve the power conversion efficiency owing to the exclusion of the phase impurities Sn2S3 and SnS2. Therefore, two kinds of feed powders are studied in the present work: commercial SnS powder (3Nup, Kojundo Chemical Laboratory Co.) and a SnS powder crushed from high purity single crystal SnS, which was grown by the horizontal gradient freeze method from S powder purified by distillation and Sn shot (4N). In this article, we address monolayer SnS growth on an atomically flat mica substrate from different powders to identify the mechanism for micrometer-scale monolayer growth. Since chemical characterization of the nanoscale microstructure is determinant in this study, a core-level photoelectron spectromicroscopic apparatus installed at the synchrotron radiation facility of SPring-8, called "3D nano-ESCA," The SnS was grown on a mica substrate with 10×10×0.5 mm 37 in a three-zone heating tube furnace by PVD, which is schematically shown in Fig. To suppress the vertical growth rate of SnS, the three-zone furnace temperatures and growth pressure were systematically investigated. Interestingly, the micrometer-scale monolayer SnS is only found when using the commercial powder, as explained below. This suggests that the atomically flat submicron grains could be key for the enhanced lateral growth. Therefore, SnS growth from the commercial powder is addressed here. Figure To characterize the submicron grains, the HAADF-STEM image at position (ii) is shown in Fig. To prove that the submicron grains are indeed Sn2S3, scanning photoelectron microscopy measurement using 3D nano-ESCA was carried out. Figure Finally, let us consider the role of submicron Sn2S3 grains in the micrometer-scale lateral growth of monolayer SnS film. These Sn2S3 grains are peculiar to the commercial powder, which initially contains a small amount of Sn2S3. Although monolayer SnS often grows on Sn2S3 grains (Fig. The reason why micrometer-scale monolayer SnS was grown by simple PVD was explored by comparing the growth from high purity and commercial powders. Contrary to expectations, monolayer SnS was grown only from the commercial powder. The submicron grains around the SnS film on the mica substrate were identified as Sn2S3 by 3D nano-ESCA, which suggests that the mica substrate surface is modified by sulfur evaporated from the Sn2S3 contaminant in the as-purchased powder and that the lateral growth of monolayer SnS is facilitated due to the enhanced surface diffusion of SnS precursor molecules, unlike the growth from highly purified powder. This insight obtained in this study provides a basis for identifying further controllable growth conditions. SnS crystals were grown by a home-built PVD growth furnace with three heating zones, as shown in Fig. 