Materials with transition metals in triangular lattices are of great interest for their potential combination of strong correlation, exotic magnetism and electronic topology. Kagome nets are of particular importance since the discovery of geometrically frustrated magnetism and topological band structures in crystals like Herbertsmithite and Fe3Sn2, respectively. KV3Sb5 was discovered to be a layered topological metal with a Kagome net of vanadium. Here, we fabricated Josephson Junctions (JJ) of K1-xV3Sb5 and induced superconductivity over long junction lengths. Through magnetoresistance and current vs. phase measurements, we observed magnetic field sweeping direction dependent magnetoresistance, and an anisotropic interference pattern with a Fraunhofer pattern for inplane magnetic field, but a suppression of critical current for out-of-plane magnetic field. These results indicate an anisotropic internal magnetic field in K1-xV3Sb5 which influences the superconducting coupling in the junction, possibly giving rise to spin-triplet superconductivity. In addition, the observation of long-lived fast oscillations shows evidence of spatially localized conducting channels arising from edge states. These observations pave the way for studying unconventional superconductivity and Josephson device based on Kagome metals with electron correlation and topology. The Kagome lattice, formed by corner-sharing triangles of atoms, is an important structure type that is proximate to the honeycomb (like graphene), hosting topological band structures, electron correlation, and geometrical frustration Many studies have been performed to explore and understand the nature of these properties and electronic states in the AV3Sb5 quantum material family. While no long-range magnetic order has been observed through inelastic neutron scattering In addition to looking for intrinsic superconductivity, utilizing the proximity effect is another route to investigate the superconducting and electronic properties of materials. The quantum material Josephson junction (JJ), where two superconductors (SC) are coupled via a bridge of nonsuperconducting (non-SC) quantum material, is an effective structure to induce superconductivity. In a JJ, proximity-induced Cooper pairs are very sensitive to the barrier properties, and the resultant interference effects based on the coupling of the SC wavefunctions can reveal inherent physical properties of the barriers, including topological states and magnetism In this work, we fabricated Josephson junctions of intrinsically non-superconducting, potassium-deficient K 1-xV3Sb5 (x ~ 0.26 -0.31), and then induced superconductivity through proximity. The Josephson effect is observed in long channels up to 6 μm, and the JJs exhibit a prominent asymmetry and reversion of the magnetoresistance for the up and down magnetic field sweeps only in the superconducting state of the JJ. Moreover, the interference pattern of critical current (Ic) vs magnetic field shows a typical Fraunhofer-like pattern for an applied in-plane field, but an anomalous pattern with a minimum near zero-field for an applied out-of-plane field. These unusual magnetic field modulations of supercurrent with strong directional anisotropy indicates the superconducting coupling in the junction is influenced by the internal anisotropy of K1-xV3Sb5 which should be related to the charge order state and the internal magnetic field. The possible spin-triplet pairing in the JJs is discussed. Finally, a non-vanishing, fast oscillation of Ic with a scalloped peakprofile and excitation branches was observed, indicating the presence of edge localized supercurrent. Theoretical analysis of the band structure confirms the expectation of topological surface states in the (010)/(100) plane of KV3Sb5, corresponding to the edges of our samples. This solidifies K1-xV3Sb5 as an exciting platform to study the interplay of superconductivity, quantum magnetism, and topology. Proximity effect induced superconductivity. KV3Sb5 crystallizes in the hexagonal centrosymmetric space group P6/mmm and is composed of Kagome layers of vanadium interleaved with honeycomb layers of Sb and K (Fig. Figure To verify that the superconducting signal is related to the proximity effect from the superconducting electrodes, we investigated the length dependence of superconductivity by measuring the I vs V curves of different channel lengths at 20 mK using the two-probe method. Figure The proximity effect induced superconductivity is also supported by many other evidences. The superconducting transition temperatures and critical current of different junctions made on the same flake (with uniform width and thickness) are different (Fig. While the proximity length up to 6.05 μm is quite long, much longer than the coherence length (ξξ NN ~230 nm) calculated based on bulk mobility of the barrier material (see details in Methods), similar results have been observed in JJs with a giant proximity effect when the nonsuperconducting bridge material in a JJ is close to superconducting itself (i.e. can superconduct with mild doping or temperature is above Tc of barrier) Magnetic field sweep direction dependence of magnetoresistance. We next study the magnetic field dependence of superconductivity in the K1-xV3Sb5 JJs with both in-plane and out-of-plane magnetic field. Figure To further understand the magnetic field dependence of superconductivity, the magnetic field modulation of the critical supercurrent in the K1-xV3Sb5 JJs is studied. Figs. The results in Fig. In KV3Sb5, no long-range magnetic order has been observed down to 0.25 K via neutron scattering (below the Tc of these JJs) The distinct interference patterns for in-plane and out-of-plane field in K1-xV3Sb5 JJ implies that the internal field is also anisotropic, as the superconducting coupling in the junction was modulated differently when changing the direction of the external magnetic field. Recently, muon spin relaxation experiments have reported anisotropy of the internal local magnetic field between in-plane and out-of-plane directions in the sister compound CsV3Sb5 Associated with this anisotropic magnetic field dependence of the supercurrent, we discuss the origin of the suppressed Ic with a minimum near zero field in the interference pattern (out-of-plane field). In general, a JJ with normal spin-singlet pairing of non-magnetic barriers displays a standard single-slit Fraunhofer interference pattern, with periodic oscillations and a central maximum. The unusual central minimum of Ic normally appears in JJs with magnetic barriers where the junction has modulated phase and spin-triplet paring For the KV3Sb5 family, as discussed before, TRS breaking was reported in many works, and several possible charge/spin order states were predicted in the Kagome plane We next analyze the oscillations in the interference pattern, and focus on the spatial distribution of the supercurrent and the prominent long-lived fast, SQUID-like oscillation of Ic in the Fig. The interference pattern for the out-of-plane magnetic field, however, with fast oscillations on top of the background is not a typical Fraunhofer pattern. The SQUID-like fast oscillation maintains a period of ∆BB~0.5 mT that is consistent with the frequency of the oscillation on the R vs B curves and corresponds to an effective flux-penetration area of Seff ~ 4.13 μm 2 calculated from Φ 0 = ∆BB * SS eff . This is smaller than the crystal area (SS = LL * WW ≈ 12 μm 2 ), which is likely caused by partial penetration of the flux, as was seen with MoTe2 To examine the origin of this edge supercurrent, we further performed density functional theory (DFT) calculations of the electronic band structure of KV3Sb5. Previous work on both the isostructural, isoelectronic compound CsV3Sb5 as well as KV3Sb5 have predicted Z2-protected topological surface Dirac crossings just above the Fermi level In summary, we fabricated JJs of the topological Kagome metal, K1-xV3Sb5, and observed Josephson coupling through long distance; asymmetry and reversion of R vs B as well as a zerofield minimum in the Ic vs B pattern which indicate anisotropic internal magnetism and possible spin-triplet superconductivity; and also the signal of supercurrent of the predicted topological surface states in K1-xV3Sb5. These observations in one system open the door for exploring the combination of superconductivity with quantum magnetism and topology. Fundamentally, there is a variety of opportunities for future theoretical and experimental work to excavate unconventional superconductivity based on Josephson junctions of Kagome materials. Thin flakes of KV3Sb5 were exfoliated onto an SiO2/Si substrate, followed by standard electron beam lithography (EBL) and sputtering processes to fabricate the Josephson Junction (JJ) devices with Niobium (~ 40 nm) as the superconducting electrodes. The JJ's were measured in a Bluefors dilution refrigerator with base temperature reaching ~ 15 mK. The resistance of device was measured by applying different AC current excitations with low frequencies (below 30 Hz) and Zurich lock-in amplifiers. The differential resistance (dV/dI) was measured by adding an external DC source onto the small AC source of lock-in. The electronic structure of KV3Sb5 was simulated in VASP v5.4.4(68-70) using projectoraugmented wave (PAW) potentials For K1-xV3Sb5, according to equation μμ = eell ee /ħkk FF with mobility μμ~0.2mm 2 /VVVV (18) and kk FF ~0.032 Å -1 , the mean free path of le~42 nm is extracted. Since ll ee is smaller than the coherence length of Nb (ξξ SS = ħVV FF 1.76ππkk BB TT cc ≈ 64 nm, TT cc ≈ 6.2 K , VV F ≈ 3 × 10 5 mm/VV )(78), the superconducting coherence length of spin-singlet pairing in non-magnetic materials 