Ever since its publication, the Griffith theory is the most widely used criterion for estimating the ideal strength and fracture strength of materials depending on whether the materials contain cracks or not. A Griffith strength limit of ~E/9 is the upper bound for ideal strengths of materials. With the improved quality of fabricated samples and the power of computational modeling, people have recently reported the possibility of exceeding the ideal strength predicted by the Griffith theory. In this study, a new strength criterion was established based on the stable analysis of thermodynamical systems; then first-principles density functional theory (DFT) is used to study the ideal strength of four materials (diamond, c-BN, Cu, and CeO2) under uniaxial tensile loading along the [100], [110], and [111] low-index crystallographic directions. By comparing the ideal strengths between DFT results and the Griffith theory, it is found that the Griffith theory fails in all the four materials. Further analysis of the fracture mechanism demonstrates that the failure of the Griffith theory is because the ideal strength point does not correspond to creating of new surfaces, which is against the Griffith assumption that the crack intrinsically exists all the time; the failure point corresponds to the crack at the start of propagation. The theoretical strength of ideal materials is the upper strength limit that a perfect crystal can withstand at 0 K to estimate the ideal strength of materials, where E is the elastic modulus of the materials under uniaxial tensile loading, a is half of the space between the neighboring atoms, and s  is the specific surface energy. Subsequent developments by Polanyi, Orowan, and other scientists considered the theoretical ideal strength to be ~E/10 However, there is large discrepancy between the DFT (density functional theory) calculated results and experimental results Consider a material specimen as a thermodynamic system under some external mechanical loading in some environmental temperature. To establish a theory to determine the strength of the material, one can imagine that under the quasi-static loading process. For an equilibrium state, if the state is stable under any perturbation, the loaded material specimen has not reached the failure point, whereas, if the state is not stable under some perturbation, the material specimen has reached the critical failure state, and the critical conditions at this state is the strength criterion. This is our basic idea for how to establish the strength criterion to determine the ideal strength for materials. For the first-principle simulation, one can find the maximum stress under uniaxial loading for a given material, but under complex loadings, a strength criterion must be used in any calculations. In what follows, we will show how to establish stable conditions for the material system. To judge if a state of a thermodynamic system is stable or not, one can add some small perturbations or fluctuations to the system's thermodynamic quantities; according to the thermodynamic principles, if the system with the perturbation is driven back to its equilibrium state, the state is stable. However, if the system with the perturbation is driven away from its equilibrium state, the state is not stable. Thus, one can establish the stable condition, or the strength criterion. As stated in modern thermodynamics where G, U, and W are the Gibbs free energy, internal energy, and the work on the system by the applied load, respectively. Equation ( In the expansion, the term G  represents the first-order terms containing  , 2 G  represents the second order terms containing 2 ( )  , and so on. At an equilibrium state, the first-order terms are zero, and the leading contribution of the change in Gibbs free energy is due to the second terms. If the second-order variations 2 0 G   , the equilibrium state is stable, and if 2 0 G   , the state is not stable. In such way, one can establish the stable criterion or the strength criterion using the following equation: Thus, equation (3) gives the critical value of the strain, and equation ( For a penetrating crack with length 2a in a plate with thickness B under the action of tensile loading  , the elastic Gibbs free energy can be written in the form as where  is the surface energy density. If one assumes that c a a  is an equilibrium state, to investigate its stability behavior, the perturbation of the free energy can be expressed in the form for any equilibrium state a G for unstable state a From the first derivative of the free energy being zero, Griffith derived In fact, for his case, the surface energy density is a constant, and the second derivative is always negative. Therefore, if the load reaches the value given by equation ( For many ideal materials, the failure point does not correspond to create new surface but corresponds to inducing the lattices rearrangement and electron cloud density to change, as shown below by first-principle calculations. For such cases, the Griffith equation on theoretical strength is not correct. In fact, for those failure mechanisms with different energy dissipation processes in addition to creating a new surface, one needs to set the second derivative at zero to determine the critical crack length, then use the first derivative at zero to determine the critical load. To The DFT calculation methods can be found in the Supplementary Information (SI). Figure According to Table [110] direction as well as the corresponding stress evolution, and the fractured structure is also shown when the applied strain is 0.403. It can be seen that the fracture occurs after the maximum stress. The bond length of C-C increases gradually before the fracture. When the strain reaches 0.388, the bond length increases sharply from 2.12 to 3.26 Å, indicating the occurrence of crack and fracture. The abrupt increase of the C-C bond length also indicates the softening of the bond. In the case of CeO2 as shown in Figure This may explain the reason for the failure of Griffith theory in some cases. Due to the anisotropy of crystals, it is highly possible that the realistic ideal strength of materials in experiments can exceed the theoretical values calculated by the Griffith theory. Therefore, new strength theory is needed to estimate the ideal strength of materials. In summary, we have established a criterion to determine the ideal strength of materials by the approach of thermodynamics. The criterion suggests that the inflection point of the second derivative of the system energy as a function of strain matches exactly with the ideal stress. First-principles simulations were conducted to study the mechanical behaviors of three example materials, which verify the validity of the criterion. More importantly, we found that there was big discrepancy between the ideal strength calculated by DFT and the Griffith theory, despite the anisotropy of crystals. Further analysis elucidated the reason for the discrepancy is that the material does not contain any cracks when reaching its maximum stress, whereas the Griffith theory considers the existence of cracks even before the fracture occurs. This is supported by some experimental observations that the ideal strength of materials can exceed the theoretical strength estimated by the Griffith theory. Our study demonstrated that the Griffith theory used to predict ideal strength of materials could fail in many cases, and a new form of theory is needed to predict the ideal strength of materials.