In a subcritical reactor, each neutron produces only k eff < 1 neutron per generation (asymptotically and on average), and thus the neutron population decreases exponentially in the absence of external source. The chain reaction is thus easy to stop, making such reactors inherently stable. Interestingly, and contrary to common wisdom, there is no relation between k eff , the external source intensity, and the output power of the reactor. In this paper, I present various possible strategies to exploit this fact, and apply them to the design of a rudimentary multi-layer system that allows to reach an arbitrarily large number of fissions per source neutron, while keeping k eff < 1 fixed (I used k eff = 0.97). The behavior of the amplifier is verified with simple Monte-Carlo transport simulations. The proposal admittedly brings complications and subtleties that need to be studied further, but, if developed, could allow to drive subcritical reactors with faint neutron sources, e.g. radioisotope based. Introduction -Subcritical nuclear reactors are a serious candidate for the incineration of minor actinides produced by current light water reactors. With an asymptotic neutron multiplication k eff < 1, they allow an intrinsically stable operation without the need for delayed neutrons, and can thus operate which much higher minor actinide content than more standard critical reactors. But neutrons have to come from somewhere, and one The high power need comes from the requirement of a k eff not too close to 1 to ensure safe operation, the choice k eff 0.95 usually being made in the literature We need to keep track of neutron generations and consider the fact that the multiplication per neutron k i can be generation dependent because of the geometry of the system. The number of neutrons produced from a single source neutron is on average: This N , or equivalently k s , is what we care about when we consider the total neutron multiplication of the system, and the output power for a given source. The number k s is the equivalent multiplication we would need to get the same N had the multiplication k i been generation independent. Importantly, it has nothing to do with k eff , which is defined as: which is the asymptotic multiplication. Only k eff governs the long time reactor kinematics and is thus relevant to assess criticality. We see that, in principle, there is no theoretical obstacle to a N arbitrarily large (k s arbitrarily close to 1) with a fixed subcritical k eff provided the first k i 's are large. In fact, some ADSR designs obtain modest amplification from the naive k eff = k s relation with a highly enriched core near the spallation source surrounded by low enriched blankets. However, such designs typically reduce the accelerator requirements only by a rather moderate amount. This brings a natural question: is it possible to design a core such that k eff is fixed but N is large enough to substantially reduce the accelerator requirements? Can multiplication be increased to the point that a much smaller accelerator can be used or even that much weaker radioisotope sources can be used? Is there a physical limit to amplification due to neutron transport in existing materials? Is there a practical limit with current technology and engineering constraints? Strategies -To increase N while keeping k eff < 1 one needs to create an irreversibility or decoupling in the neutron current. Imagine we were given a perfect neutron diode, that is a material letting neutrons go in one, and only one direction. Then, we could easily stack subcritical sections, separating them by the diodes and the total would remain subcritical, with the same k eff . However, the neutron amplification would be enhanced geometrically with the number of layers, without obvious physical limit. Of course, perfect neutron diodes do not grow on trees, and the challenge lies in creating a genuine unidirectionality of the neutron current so that the criticality k eff does not increase (or only in a subleading way) when stacking more subcritical layers. There are at least four conceptually different ways to create a one way neutron current between different parts FIG. of a reactor, summarized in Fig. The first idea corresponds to the one that, to my knowledge, was considered initially, as early as 1957 The second option is in a way opposite to the first. Instead of capturing slow neutrons, one could selectively capture fast neutrons with a material like low enriched uranium that works as a neutron multiplier only in thermal spectrum while captures by 238 U dominate in fast spectrum. The idea is to put a moderator first and then this fast spectrum capture material to obtain a diode. This one way amplification through fast captures is likely insufficient to create a genuine irreversibility alone, but seems to play a role in the multiplication reached by various proposals. The third option is to use a threshold fissile material like 237 Np or 241 Am, which is fissile in fast spectrum only and that consequently multiplies only fast neutrons. As before, this allows to construct a one way amplifier with the addition of a moderator. The fourth option is purely geometric, and is in a way the simplest (see Let us finally mention a more recent idea, which is to exploit magnetic fields to deflect neutrons via the coupling to their spin Pre-amplifier exploration -My objective is to see how a combination of the previous strategies could fare with physically realistic materials and geometry (including neutron loss). To this end, it seems easier to distinguish two levels of amplification, that would be joined together in a complete reactor, but that come with starkly different constraints. A first stage, the preamplifier, would bring an arbitrarily faint neutron flux to the intensity needed to drive a second "power" stage. This second stage, a more standard reactor core, would be made of only a few simple layers, with low amplification but high power density. The proper study of a modestly amplifying reactor core is difficult but largely done in the literature To my knowledge, a many-layer preamplifier has never been studied. The constraints are different from those of the core. To achieve massive amplification, the design should be scalable, which a priori excludes playing with a spherical or cylindrical concentric geometry, and favors a linear stacking of layers. On the other hand, the power density would be orders of magnitude lower than the one in the core, especially in the first layers closer to the (faint) source. This in turns means that cooling, reactivity evolution, and neutron economy would be secondary constraints. They should be taken into account ultimately, but in the spirit of a first exploration, it makes sense to neglect them to focus on neutron transport. Finally, such a preamplifier might be useful as a standalone device, e.g. to produce intense neutron pulses (at low average power), or breed radioisotopes and tritium, which further motivates its study. Finding an optimal or even adequate design of preamplifier given reasonable engineering and safety constraints is a non trivial task. My objective is more modest: I merely want demonstrate that amplification is physically feasible, at least in principle. To this end, I threw everything but FIG. the kitchen sink (geometry), to keep a scalable design where an arbitrary number of layers can be stacked. More precisely, I considered a stack of layers each made of 4 cells containing 1) a fissile material with fission enhanced in thermal spectrum [a mixed oxide of 239 Pu and 238 U], 2) a threshold fissile material [metallic 241 Am], 3) a thermal neutron absorber [cadmium], and 4) a moderator [heavy water]. This combines the 3 non geometric amplification methods mentioned before. This choice is largely arbitrary, and it is likely that much better combinations can be found. The precise geometry, including the reflector, is provided in Fig. Results -I carried a simple test of the previous proposal with the help of the Monte Carlo transport simulation tool openMC After some trial and error but no systematic optimization, it is easy to reach a scalable amplification of 1.6 per layer [1.6 times more neutron flux and fissions in layer n + 1 than in layer n] for k eff = 0.97 while keeping layers with a reasonable cross section 130 × 130 cm 2 and width 38 cm (see Fig. Most of the space is taken by the heavy water moderator, with a thickness of 35 cm per layer. The thicker this cell, the better the neutron flux is thermalized which enhances the decoupling between layers. On the other hand, a thicker cell increases the leak of thermal neutrons into the lead reflector where they can recouple to previous layers. Taking a larger layer cross section allows to proportionally reduce the surface leaks in the reflector and thus permits an increase in the moderator thickness. This yields an improved amplification at fixed k eff , at the price of an overall larger amplifier. Using light water would reduce the thickness required to thermalize the neutron flux, but I observed a lower overall amplification because of the higher capture rate. The mixed oxide section is chosen rather narrow (1.5 cm) and highly fissile The americium section is taken similar in thickness to the fissile one (1.3 cm) and allows to fully exploit the third strategy. Finally, the cadmium layer is very thin (3 mm) which is sufficient to capture most thermal neutrons while remaining mostly transparent to epithermal and fast ones. This implements the first strategy. The way arbitrary geometric amplification is allowed despite fixed k eff is transparent in this proposal and follows the argument in the introduction. Stacking more layers does not bring the system closer to criticality (after a certain point) as backward coupling is suppressed (see Fig. Discussion -With the rudimentary amplifier I put forward, it is possible to reach an amplification as large as one needs. Since the amplification grows geometrically in the number of layers, one can in principle have as input an arbitrarily faint neutron source, and even dream of ditching the accelerator driven spallation source to use radioisotopes. Naturally, this comes with severe limitations that are yet to be addressed. Assuming a realistic amplifier could be designed along the lines presented here (including cladding, cooling, control systems, etc.), its safety would still need to be demonstrated. Indeed, the preamplifier operates away from its maximally reactive geometry: a sufficient bending of the layers or melting of the cells could turn the system critical. Further, one would need an efficient in situ measurement of k eff : in all ADSRs but even more so in a multi-layer system, the output power can decrease as k eff increases, making subcriticality difficult to guarantee in practice. The development of accurate reactivity measurement techniques is an active area of research (see e.g. A more minor drawback of a subcritical system with a large preamplification, compared to standard ADSRs, is that the neutron economy is unavoidably worse, as input neutrons are negligible in the overall balance. This means, at least a priori, that thorium breeding in thermal spectrum is more difficult with such designs. I have studied the preamplifier as a standalone device, and its use to drive a reactor core would necessarily bring some residual backward neutron coupling, slightly increasing the k eff of the whole. The quick saturation of the k eff as the number of preamplifying layers is increased (see Fig. These limitations notwithstanding, there are interesting open questions of a more theoretical nature. In particular, it would be helpful to know what the maximum reachable amplification is for given k eff , reactor size budget, and safety constraints. Likewise, what is the lowest k eff that can be reached with scalable amplification? Multi-layer systems also present challenges for accurate Monte-Carlo simulations: naively estimating k eff and the neutron flux everywhere in the system becomes prohibitively costly as the number of layers is increased, because of the transient exponential gain. There is certainly a way to do better. In the end, scalable subcritical amplification presents great challenges but is physically sound. It is in principle feasible with materials that exist, and with a simple geometry. If realized, such amplifiers could become a useful building block of full fledged reactors, to produce electricity, incinerate (some) radioactive waste, or provide on demand sources for science. As a result, multi-layer amplification likely deserves to be studied further and at a finer level of detail. I hope the present paper will stimulate this exploration. I am grateful to Sylvain David and Alexis Nuttin for helpful comments and discussions.