In this letter, the effect of four types of defects (O N out , O N in , V N out and V N in ) on the structural, electronic and magnetic properties of MoSi 2 N 4 monolayer were investigated using first-principles calculations. The calculated results reveal that all the four types of defects lead to structural distortions around the O-dopant or N-vacancy, and thereby change the lattice parameter a ′ and monolayer height h. Specifically, O N out or O N in increases the lattice parameter, but V N out or V N in is on the contrary. O N out or V N out increases the monolayer height, whereas the height decreases for O N in or V N in . Each of the four types of defects has a fundamental effect on the electronic properties of MoSi 2 N 4 monolayer, which can induce a transition from semiconductor to metal. O N in or V N in plays a vital role in the occurrence of a transition from non-magnetism to ferrimagnetism in MoSi 2 N 4 monolayer. The effect of biaxial strain on the magnetic properties of the two systems with O N in and V N in was subsequently investigated. It is found that the total magnetic moments are less sensitive to biaxial strain whereas the local magnetic moments residing on the Mo atoms are increased for the two systems with O N in and V N in , as strain increases from -3% to 10% and from -9% to 10%, respectively. Furthermore, the magnetic phase transitions between ferrimagnetic and paramagnetic states were found to occur around -4% strain and within the range of -10% ∼ -9% for the two systems with O N in and V N in , respectively. This study may provide a guidance for the application of MoSi 2 N 4 monolayer in the spintronic and magnetic materials. Two-dimensional (2D) materials, exhibiting physical and chemical properties that are richer than and completely different from the 3D bulk crystals due to the inherent quantum confinement effect along the direction of atomic-layered height, and thus have drawn considerable attentions from the scientific and industrial circles on a global scale in the past few years. The most typical and also earliest 2D material confirmed experimentally is graphene The MoSi 2 N 4 compound, a novel synthetic 2D layered van der Waals (vdW) material without known 3D layered parents fabricated very recently by Hong et al. As is well known, the physical and chemical properties of 2D materials under diverse conditions and requirements can commonly be effectively modulated by using of defect, strain, external electric field In view of the facts, herein we targeted to view the structural, electronic and magnetic properties of MoSi 2 N 4 monolayer induced by the defects with O-doping and N-vacancy using first-principles approach based on DFT. The electronic and magnetic properties were studied through GGA + SOC and GGA + Spin Polarization calculations, respectively. The calculated results of intrinsic MoSi 2 N 4 monolayer were also given in this letter for comparison. Considering that there are two types of N atomic layers according to the symmetry of septuple-atomic-layered MoSi 2 N 4 monolayer, namely the outer and inner layers, which were respectively marked with N out and N in in Fig. Figs. 1(a) and 1(b) present the side and top views of intrinsic MoSi 2 N 4 monolayer respectively, which belongs to the hexagonal lattice with the P-6M2 space group (No. 187). The lattice parameter a (a = b) of the unit cell, monolayer height h and cohesive energy E coh for intrinsic MoSi 2 N 4 monolayer were calculated first to examine the validity of the DFT-PBE method employed in this letter. The calculated a, h and E coh are respectively 2.932 Å, 7.075 Å and -8.573 eV/atom, which agree well with previous values The calculated electronic band structures along the high symmetric paths in the 1st Brillouin zone (Fig. We detected the Mulliken overlap populations The spin polarized calculations without SOC and given initial magnetic configuration were performed to analyze the magnetic behavior. According to the calculated Mulliken atomic populations, the total magnetic moments m tot of intrinsic and four defective systems are also tabulated in Tab. I. From this table, the intrinsic MoSi 2 N 4 monolayer possesses no magnetic moment, which is consistent with previous result calculated by Hong et al. We inspected the local magnetic moments of the two systems with O N in and V N in further. Figs. In order to verify the magnetic structure further, two different initial magnetic configurations within the 2 × 2 × 1 supercells of the system with O N in or V N in were given, namely, one ferromagnetic (FM) and one antiferromagnetic (AFM) initial states (see Figs. 6(a) ∼ 6(d)). We found that whatever the initial magnetic configuration is, the system with O N in or V N in becomes a ferrimagnetic state finally which is the same as that (see Figs. Next, the effect of biaxial strain on the magnetic properties of the two systems with O N in and V N in was discussed. Here, the biaxial strain ε is defined as where a ′ and a ′ 0 are the strained and unstrained lattice parameters, respectively. The positive (negative) ε represents the tensile (compressive) strain, and a strain range from -10% to 10% was applied to both of these systems. Tab. II and Tab. III list the calculated total magnetic moment m tot , local magnetic moments residing on the Mo atoms m Mo (1) , m Mo (2) , m Mo (3) and m Mo(4) of the two systems with O N in and V N in under different strains, respectively. From Tab. II, it is obvious that the system with O N in exhibits a ferrimagnetic state within the range of -3% ∼ 10%. The variation of m tot is negligible as strain increases from -3% to 10%, indicating that the m tot is less sensitive to biaxial strain. Nevertheless, the m Mo (1) , m Mo (2) , m Mo (3) and m Mo( In conclusion, we systematically investigated the structural, electronic and magnetic properties of MoSi 2 N 4 monolayer induced by the four types of defect (O N out , O N in , V N out and V N in ), using first-principles density functional theory calculations. Our results reveal that all the four types of defects lead to structural distortions around the O-dopant or N-vacancy, and thereby change the lattice parameter a ′ and monolayer height h. Specifically, O N out or O N in increases the lattice parameter, but V N out or V N in is on the contrary. O N out or V N out increases the monolayer height, whereas the height decreases for O N in or V N in . Each of the four types of defects has a fundamental effect on the electronic properties of MoSi 2 N 4 monolayer, which can induce a transition from semiconductor to metal. O N in or V N in plays a vital role in the occurrence of a transition from non-magnetism to ferrimagnetism in MoSi 2 N 4 monolayer. Subsequently, the effect of biaxial strain on the magnetic properties of the two systems with O N in and V N in was investigated. It is found that the total magnetic moments are less sensitive to biaxial strain, the local magnetic moments residing on the Mo atoms are increased for the two systems with O N in and V N in , as strain increases from -3% to 10% and from -9% to 10%, respectively. Furthermore, the magnetic phase transitions between ferrimagnetic and paramagnetic states were found to occur around -4% strain and within the range of -10% ∼ -9% for the two systems with O N in and V N in , respectively. This study may provide a guidance for the application of MoSi 2 N 4 monolayer in the spintronic and magnetic materials. 