Nematic phase transitions in high-temperature superconductors have a strong impact on the electronic properties of these systems. BaFe2As2, with an established nematic transition around 137 K induced by magnetic fluctuations, and BaNi2As2, a non-magnetic analog of BaFe2As2 with a structural transition in the same temperature range, share a common tetragonal aristotype crystal structure with space-group type I4/mmm. In contrast to BaFe2As2 where collinear stripe magnetic order is found for the orthorhombic low-T phase, a unidirectional charge density wave together with (distorted) zig-zag chains are observed for the triclinic low-T phase of BaNi2As2. Here we show that between the high-and low-T phases of Ba(Ni,Co)2(As,P)2 an additional phase with broken fourfold symmetry and dxz orbital order exists which is a promising candidate for charge/orbital-fluctuationinduced nematicity. Moreover, our data suggest that the enhanced Tc found for Ba(Ni,Co)2(As,P)2 for higher Co or P substitution levels might result from suppression of the (distorted) zig-zag chains by reducing the contribution of the dxy orbitals. High-temperature superconductivity in iron-based pnictides (FeSCs) BaNi 2 As 2 (Ni122) is a non-magnetic superconducting analog of Fe122. It shares the same tetragonal hightemperature (high-T ) structure and exhibits a structural transition at a very similar temperature (≈ 131 K) The most important prerequisites for charge/orbitalfluctuation-induced nematicity in Ni122 [see also Here we will demonstrate that Ba(Ni,Co) 2 (As,P) 2 is a promising candidate for such a charge/orbitalfluctuation-induced nematicity. By combining the strengths of thermal expansion (TE), single-crystal x-ray diffraction (XRD), and near-edge x-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS), we show that charge/orbital fluctuations exist far above the nematic transition, that the fourfold symmetry of the high-T phase is broken below T S,1 (as will be shown our experimental T S,1 (Color online) Relative length change, ∆L/L, versus temperature of the [100]tet and the Single crystals for all compositions in this work were grown from self-flux and characterized using XRD and energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy as described in Temperature-dependent x-ray diffraction data on Ni122, BaNi 2 (As,P) 2 , Ba(Ni,Co) 2 As 2 and Fe122 single crystals were collected between 90 K and room temperature on a STOE imaging plate diffraction system (IPDS-2T) equipped with Mo K α radiation. NEXAFS measurements at the Ni L 2,3 edges were performed at the Institute for Quantum Materials and Technologies beamline WERA at the KARA synchrotron light source (Karlsruhe, Germany) on samples from the same batches in an analogous way as outlined in The temperature-dependence of the ( 3 3 6) tet XRD reflection is illustrated as well as an example for all relevant reflections. From crystallographic considerations With the identification of a symmetry-broken phase between the high-and low-T structure, which lays the foundation for a possible nematicity, we find from our XRD data refinement in SG Immm (see Appendix) for BaNi 2 (As,P) 2 as well as for Ba(Ni,Co) 2 As 2 that the Ni atoms move away from their special position 1 2 ,0, 1 4 in the high-T phase to a new equilibrium position 1 2 ,0, 1 4 + δ in the orthorhombic phase (T S,2 ≤ T ≤ T S,1 ). This leads for all NiAs 4 tetrahedra to two shortened and two elongated NiAs bond lengths of ≈ 2.34 and 2.36 Å for BaNi 2 (As,P) 2 and ≈ 2.34 and 2.37 Å for Ba(Ni,Co) 2 As 2 , thereby lifting the degeneracy of the d xz and d yz orbitals, as indicated in the inset of Fig. For completeness, we present the changes observed for the low-T spatial structure. The triclinic structure of Ni122, BaNi 2 (As,P) 2 , and Ba(Ni,Co) 2 As 2 below T S,2 , for which the Ni-Ni bonds approximately form zig-zag chains, is shown in Fig. With the knowledge of a d xz orbital-ordered orthorhombic phase below T S,1 , for which the four-fold symmetry is broken, and the structural details of the triclinic phase we will now have a closer look at the Tdependent development of the charge ordering probed by our XRD studies. To this end, Fig. To complete the picture of the charge ordering for BaNi 2 (As,P) 2 , the temperature dependence of an (h 1 l) tet plane is illustrated in Figs. Finally, we want to see if and how the charge-ordering effects are tied to the orbital physics at the Ni sites. NEXAFS is uniquely suited for this since the excita- Please note that ∆I is multiplied by a factor of 4 and that a positive area means loss of spectral weight relative to RT. A significant charge transfer from orbitals with in-and outof-plane character, i.e., dxz,yz orbitals, to orbitals with exclusively in-plane character, i.e., to dxy orbitals is found below TS,2 ≈ 106 K. First indications for this transfer are, however, observed already above TS,1. tion process is element-specific (Ni 2p → 3d) as well as polarization-and, thus, orbital-dependent. In the present context, the e-type orbitals (d x 2 -y 2 and d 3z 2 -r 2 ) are essentially filled Taken together, the results presented here demonstrate that Ba(Ni,Co) 2 (As,P) 2 is a promising candidate for a system with charge/orbital-fluctuationinduced nematicity. All necessary prerequisites for charge/orbital-fluctuation-induced nematicity are met such as charge/orbital fluctuations above T nem (= T S,1 in our measurements), a second-order nematic/structural transition for which the fourfold symmetry breaking is accompanied by orbital order in the temperature range T CDW ≤ T ≤ T nem , and finally a first order transition for which the translation symmetry is broken in the CDW ground state below T CDW (= T S,2 in our measurements). Another argument supporting charge/orbital fluctuations might be that the d xz orbitals continously order as staggered chains along [100] tet in the nematic phase of Ba(Ni,Co) 2 (As,P) 2 in contrast to the ordering along We conclude with some findings for the relation between the ground state CDW phase and T c : According to our data, the d xy orbitals are very important for the zig-zag chains of Ni122 while they play a lesser role for the connected Ni-Ni 'dimers' of BaNi 2 (As,P) 2 , and Ba(Ni,Co) 2 As 2 where the contribution of the d xy (d xz,yz ) orbitals is gradually reduced (enhanced) with increasing substitution. Taking into account the postulated phase diagrams of Ref. In addition to the peak broadening a general increase in diffuse scattering is observed upon cooling in the immediate vicinity of the fundamental reflections which grows already above T S,1 . This increase in diffuse scattering (DS) displayed for Ni122 and BaNi 2 (As,P) 2 in Figs. Below T S,2 = 137 K a very strong splitting of the ( 3 3 6) tet reflection of BaNi 2 As 2 is observed in Fig. To this end, Fig. To complete the picture of the charge ordering for BaNi 2 As 2 , the temperature dependence of an (h 1 l) tet plane is illustrated in Fig. Using Mo K α radiation all accessible symmetryequivalent reflections were measured up to a maximum angle of 2Θ = 65 • . The data were corrected for Lorentz, polarization, extinction, and absorption effects. Using SHELXL Table Finally, we want to investigate if and how the charge ordering effects and the structural properties found for Ni122 are connected to the element-specific orbital physics. As outlined above, NEXAFS is an ideal tool for determining the orbital-dependent unoccupied density of states. Using linearly polarized light, normal incidence probes predominantly orbitals with complete (d xy , d x 2 -y 2 ) or partial (d xz,yz ) in-plane character, whereas grazing incidence probes orbitals with predominantly out-of-plane contributions (d xz , d yz , d 3z 2 -r 2 ) and the observed spectral weight can be interpreted as the unoccupied density of states of the five 3d orbitals with the relevant directional characteristics. Fig. of Ni122. Taking the temperature-dependent changes of the difference spectra, ∆I = I(293 K)-I(T ), for normal and grazing incidence into account this demonstrates that for temperatures below T S,2 ≈ 137 K, charge carriers are transferred from orbitals with simultaneous in-and out-of-plane character, i.e., d xz,yz orbitals (energy region ≈ 852 eV ≤ E ≤ 853 eV), to orbitals with exclusively inplane character, i.e., to d xy orbitals (energy region ≈ 853 eV ≤ E ≤ 855 eV). [Following Ref. We note that NEXAFS data of Ni122 illustrated in Fig. To complete the picture of the charge ordering for Ba(Ni,Co) 2 As 2 , the temperature dependence of an (h 1 l) tet plane is illustrated in Figs. Structural details of Ba(Ni,Co) 2 As 2 resulting from refinements of diffraction data measured at temperatures characteristic for the tetragonal, orthorhombic/nematic, and triclinic phase, respectively, are listed in Table Fig. In addition to the transfer of spectral weight observed below T S,2 a comparable amount of charge carriers is, surprisingly, transferred between d xz,yz and d xy orbitals already at 120 K, i. e., above the triclinic phase transition at T S,2 = 117 K. Since 120 K is only slightly above T S,2 we have considered that the Co content possibly differs somewhat between samples from the same batch and measured the sample at 170 K, i. e., far above the expected tetragonal-to-orthorhombic transition at T S,1 = 122 K. Yet also at this temperature a significant transfer of spectral weight between d xz,yz and d xy orbitals is found which again points to possible charge/orbital fluctuations already in this T range. This finding is consistent with the diffuse scattering found in all of our XRD experiments which might be attributed to nematic effects. The high-resolution thermal expansion, ∆L/L, of BaFe 2 As 2 shows a strong difference between the orthorhombic a and b axis below the tetragonal-toorthorhombic phase transition which is well documented for instance in Refs. Since XRD is insensitive to magnetic fluctuations they cannot be detected with x-rays in contrast to the charge fluctuations found for BaNi 2 (As,P) 2 , Ba(Ni,Co) 2 As 2 , and Ni122 in our data. For Fe122 so far only spin density waves but no charge density waves have been observed and this is reflected by the absence of any kind of superstructure reflections in our investigation of the reciprocal lattice. Just for completeness Fig. Fig. normal incidence spectra and all of the grazing incidence spectra are identical and fall on top of each other and, thus, no T -dependent charge transfer between d xz,yz and d xy orbitals is observed for BaFe 2 As 2 . In principle, small spectral changes could have been expected between the high-and low-T data at the tetragonal-to-orthorhombic transition due the energetic splitting of the initially degenerate d xz /d yz orbitals. Most probably this effect is, however, washed out by (a) the strong twinning of our samples which averages out the spectral difference between the two twins and (b) the fact that NEXAFS measures the k-integrated unoccupied density of states. More important, the spectra clearly show that the orbital type is not changed at the transition and a charge transfer between in-and out-of-plane orbitals as observed for Ni122, BaNi 2 (As,P) 2 , and Ba(Ni,Co) 2 As 2 can definitely be excluded. Fig. Appendix D: Spin-driven vs. orbital-driven nematicity In this final chapter we want to discuss the differences between structural transitions for which the fourfold symmetry is broken (a) by magnetic fluctuations or (b) by charge/orbital fluctuations. For this purpose we have plotted the hierarchy of the electronic ordered states for both kinds of fluctuations in Fig. (a) Magnetic-fluctuation-induced nematicity: The lowtemperature SDW ground state of these systems is characterized by magnetic stripes of parallel spins along either the crystallographic b (ordering vector Q 1 = (π, 0)) or a axis (ordering vector Q 2 = (0, π)) and an antiparallel ordering of the spins in the perpendicular inplane direction (b) Charge/orbital-fluctuation-induced nematicity: Even though the charge/orbital-fluctuation model is more complex it is, in its simplest form, completely analogous to the magnetic one, with the main difference that the interaction between electron and hole pockets is attractive while it is repulsive for magnetic fluctuations Let us now compare the model described in (b) to what we observe experimentally for Ni122, BaNi 2 (As,P) 2 , and Ba(Ni,Co) 2 As 2 . All of these systems have in the high-T phase SG type I4/mmm. Upon cooling we find in our NEXAFS data strong indications for charge fluctuations between out-of-plane and in-plane orbitals. Concomitantly, we find in our XRD data an increasing diffuse scattering which points to charge fluctuations as well. At T S,1 which corresponds to T nem in the theoretical model (see above) the fluctuations become strong enough and a structural transition to SG Immm takes place for which the fourfold symmetry is broken. This Z 2 symmetry breaking together with the orbital ordering observed in our XRD studies is in line with a nematic transition. Interestingly an I-CDW accompanies this transition. The intensity of the I-CDW direcly scales with the orthorhombic distortion and the staggered ordering of the d xz orbitals is tied to the I-CDW. Therefore, the finding of an I-CDW suggests an interpretation as a possible charge/orbital-driven electronic nematic phase. The question of its origin, however, is not fully answered yet. Finally, the transition to the triclinic SG P 1 and the C-CDW appear when cooled below T S,2 (T S,2 corresponds to T CDW in the theoretical model described above). While the finding of the C-CDW is expected for charge/orbital-fluctuation-induced nematicity, the accompanying strong symmetry reduction and the significant changes in the lattice parameters together with the opposite sign of the TE anomalies at T S,1 and T S,2 speak for an additional structural component. Thus, many of the above mentioned experimental findings are consistent with charge/orbital-fluctuationinduced nematicity. Further experiments, however, like doping-dependent diffuse scattering, inelastic x-ray scattering, or high-pressure XRD on Ni122, BaNi 2 (As,P) 2 , and Ba(Ni,Co) 2 As 2 are imperative to clarify the nematic character of these systems and the interrelation between the two types of charge density waves. zag chains of the low-T triclinic structure or the staggered chains along [100] tet in the orthorhombic/nematic structure, have already been discussed in detail above. Since a complete crystallographic discussion is beyond the scope of an Appendix we will take a closer look only on the changes S,2 ≈ 117 K, charge carriers are transferred from orbitals with simultaneous in-and out-of-plane character, i.e., d xz,yz orbitals (energy region ≈ 852 eV ≤ E ≤ 853 eV), to orbitals with exclusively in-plane character, i.e., to d xy orbitals (energy region ≈ 854 eV ≤ E