Over the past six years, superconductivity at high temperatures has been reported in a variety of hydrogen-rich compounds under high pressure. That high temperature superconductivity should exist in these materials is expected according to the conventional theory of superconductivity, as shown by detailed calculations. However here we argue that experimental observations rule out conventional superconductivity in these materials. Our results indicate that either these materials are unconventional superconductors of a novel kind, which we term 'nonstandard superconductors', or alternatively that they are not superconductors. If the former, we point out that the critical current in these materials should be several orders of magnitude larger than in standard superconductors, potentially opening up the way to important technological applications. If the latter, which we believe is more likely, we suggest that the signals interpreted as superconductivity are either experimental artifacts or they signal other interesting physics but not superconductivity. According to the conventional BCS-Eliashberg theory of superconductivity Together with these experimental discoveries, sometimes before and sometimes shortly thereafter, a variety of detailed calculations have been performed based on BCS-Eliashberg theory that both predicted and apparently confirmed that these materials are high temperature conventional superconductors Superconducting materials According to the established understanding of superconductivity In this paper we argue that hydride superconductors exhibit properties characteristic of both type I and type II superconductors, in particular strongly type II. Standard superconductors can be borderline type I/ type II if ξ ∼ λ L but they cannot be type I and strongly type II simultaneously. Therefore, we will argue that hydrides under pressure are 'nonstandard superconductors' or, alternatively, that they are not superconductors. A preliminary account of this work can be found in Ref. As summarized in Sect. II of Fig. Instead, in a type-II superconductor the material exhibits perfect diamagnetism only up to a critical field H c1 smaller than H c ; with increasing applied field, flux begins to penetrate the material in the form of vortices. This continues to occur up to an upper critical field, H c2 , above which the material becomes normal. When cooling a type II superconductor in an applied field H, the system will undergo a second order phase transition at the temperature T (H) where H = H c2 (T (H)) where it enters the 'mixed phase', with vortices in its interior, their density depending on temperature and magnetic field. In this mixed phase, whether or not the system has finite or zero resistance depends on the behavior of the vortices, whether or not they are 'pinned'. We will discuss this in a later section. Note from Fig. Whether a material is a type-I or a type-II superconductor depends on the Ginzburg-Landau parameter κ = λ L (T = 0)/ξ(T = 0). Since the penetration depth increases as the mean free path decreases both for type I and type II superconductors, and at zero temperature it is given within BCS theory by where ∆ is the energy gap and g(ǫ F ) the density of states at the Fermi energy. Within Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory the thermodynamic critical field is given by where φ 0 = hc/2e is the flux quantum. The lower and upper critical fields for type II superconductors are given within GL theory by with κ(T ) = λ L (T )/ξ(T ), and are related to the thermodynamic critical field by A strongly type II superconductor has κ >> 1 and hence To get simple explicit expressions for the temperature dependence we can use the two-fluid model. The thermodynamic critical field is given by (t ≡ T /T c ) and the London penetration depth by The upper critical field is then given by and the coherence length by We argue that experimental evidence clearly shows that hydride superconductors, particularly those with high T c , are strongly type II. Ideally, one would want to measure both ξ and λ L to answer this question. However in none of the experiments reported so far was λ L inferred from experiment (in Consider the carbonaceous sulfur hydride (CSH) recently reported to be a room temperature superconductor. Resistive transitions in applied magnetic field are shown in Fig. yielding ∆(0) = 44 meV. From Eq. ( Assuming the density of states is given by the free electron expression with an effective mass m * yields with n the number density and m e the bare electron mass. The band effective mass should be close to the bare electron mass, corrected by the mass enhancement resulting from the electron-phonon interaction. Assuming an electron-phonon coupling constant λ ∼ 2 resulting from Eliashberg calculations yields yielding The Wigner-Seitz radius (radius of a sphere with volume equal to the volume per conduction electron) is so that in order for the density of states Eq. ( which is much smaller than half of any interatomic distance in CSH or any other hydride under pressure We conclude then that hydrides under pressure, if they are superconductors, are type II superconductors. The reduction in T c with applied magnetic field then reflects the upper critical field H c2 and not the thermodynamic critical field H c . Under this assumption, for the case of CSH, extrapolation to zero temperature using either GL theory or other theoretical approaches yields for the zero temperature upper critical field values in the range H c2 (0) = 50T to 85T For type I superconductors, coherence lengths are at minimum several hundred Å. Coherence lengths of order 20 Å indicate the materials are strongly type II. For example, for the conventional superconductor M gB 2 , ξ ∼ 50 Å and λ L ∼ 1400 Å. For YBCO, ξ ∼ 30 Å and λ L ∼ 1500 Å. For a rough estimate of λ L here, we use the BCS formula for the coherence length together with the relation and the London penetration depth given by to yield In particular for CSH with ξ = 23 Å and ∆(0) = 0.0437eV , so that λ L >> ξ for any reasonable value of m e /m * . In standard conventional and unconventional type II superconductors it is empirically observed that the resistive transition is broadened in an applied magnetic field, the more so the larger the field. It is also observed that the broadening is larger for materials with higher T c , which are also strongly type II (λ L >> ξ). Typical data for broadening of the resistive transition in standard superconductors are shown in Figs. As discussed in Sect. II, when a type II superconductor is cooled in a magnetic field H, it first enters the mixed state, with vortices in its interior. A vortex has a normal core of radius ξ and carries magnetic flux φ 0 , the flux quantum. Right at T c (H) (defined as H = H c2 (T c (H))) the number of vortices per unit area is 1/(2πξ 2 ), so that the vortex cores of radius ξ, where the system is normal, almost overlap. As the temperature is further lowered, with constant applied H, the density of vortices stays roughly constant but their core size shrinks, as more electrons condense into the superconducting state. Figures In hydride superconductors, the resistive transition in a field looks qualitatively different to what it looks like in standard superconductors, as shown in Figs. The most glaring difference is seen for the case of the 'room temperature superconductor' CSH For the other examples of hydride superconductors shown (Figs. 7, 8, 9, 10) the transition in the absence of a field is broader, more in line with standard superconductors, but the behavior under application of magnetic field is equally anomalous. Either the transition width doesn't change with field, or it even narrows, as seen in Fig. In Fig. For all standard superconductors shown in Fig. As mentioned above, when a type II superconductor is cooled in the presence of an applied magnetic field H, it undergoes a second order phase transition to a mixed state at temperature T c (H) that satisfies H c2 (T c (H)) = H. Immediately below this temperature, normal vortex cores in this mixed phase occupy approximately half of the volume of the material according to Eq. (4b). When current flows, vortices are expected to flow driven by the Lorentz force which is equivalent to the flow of normal current, giving rise to a finite voltage drop across the electrodes and Joule heat dissipation. Hence there is non-zero resistance, called flux-flow resistance. As the temperature is lowered further for fixed magnetic field, the density of vortices stays constant but their core size shrinks, the condensation energy increases and a larger fraction of the material enters the superconducting state. At some lower temperature it is observed that the resistance drops to zero or to immeasurably small values, which is attributed to the vortices becoming pinned at impurities or imperfections in the sample, preventing their motion. The strength of pinning potential needed to pin the vortices also depends on the interaction between vortices: if the interaction is sufficiently large that they become rigidly connected to each other forming a 'vortex glass' Why should we expect the broadening of the transition to be larger for higher T c materials, and to increase with increased magnetic field? We can understand it as follows. As discussed by Anderson with H c the thermodynamic critical field. This indicates that the required pinning energy becomes smaller for shorter coherence length; this is the case for more strongly type II superconductors. In addition, Yeshurun and Malozemoff argued Within GL theory Eqs. ( , with t = T /T c the reduced temperature, and hence Eq. ( where C is a numerical factor. The pinning energy decreases with increased magnetic field H, which gives larger broadening for larger H. This realization provided some theoretical support for the work of Müller et al. where C ′ is a constant, and J c0 (0) is the critical current density for T = 0 and H = 0. Insertion into the Ambegaokar-Halperin expression where A is a dimensionless constant, R n is the normal state resistance and I 0 (x) is the modified Bessel function of the first kind. As Tinkham illustrated The broadening that occurs in the Iye data The previous expression assumes that the intrinsic width, with no applied magnetic field, H 0 , is zero, but in general this is not the case for a variety of possible reasons such as disorder in the sample. To take into account this intrinsic width we substitute in Tinkham's formula Eq. ( In addition to transport measurements, some of the experimental papers on high temperature hydride superconductors also report results of magnetic measurements that appear to support the claim of superconductivity. Let us consider those measurements. Reference In Ref. In this paper we have considered the question of whether superconductivity in hydrides under high pressure follows the expected behavior of other superconductors. We have found that the answer is negative. Our finding is remarkable because hydride superconductors are considered to be textbook examples of conventional BCS-Eliashberg superconductors driven by the electron-phonon interaction, which unlike unconventional superconductivity has been thought to be well understood for the last 60 years. All the theoretical analysis of these materials conclude that their T c is perfectly well explained by standard superconductivity theory The only conceivable explanation within the standard theory for the absence of broadening of the resistive transitions in a magnetic field would be that for some reason there is an enormous pinning potential that confines the vortices immediately as the system enters the superconducting state, much larger than in standard superconductors. If that was the case, it would also be true that the critical current should be enormous in these superconductors, opening up the way for important technological applications. Unfortunately we know of no physical reason why these materials should have such anomalously large pinning potentials. Furthermore, even if that was the case it would not explain the extreme sharpness of the transition in magnetic susceptibility measurements, which is not affected by the strength of the pinning potential. We conclude then that there are two possibilities: (1) These materials constitute a new category, 'nonstandard superconductors', exhibiting physics that is qualitatively different from that of standard conventional and unconventional superconductors. Perhaps these materials are simultaneously type I and strongly type II superconductors, exhibiting a new kind of 'complementarity'. Recall that for standard type I superconductors the transition to superconductivity in a field is first order, while for type II it is second order. Perhaps even the classification of type I versus type II does not apply to them. Perhaps the coherence length and the London penetration depth are not the relevant lengths. Their electrodynamic behavior needs to be understood in a new theoretical framework, unlike the one formulated for standard superconductors. If this is the case it is very remarkable that the conventional framework of BCS-Eliashberg theory would still apply to them with no modification, as found in the theoretical analyses (2) These materials are not superconductors. Their measured properties that have been interpreted as reflecting superconductivity are instead reflecting either (a) experimental artifacts or (b) different physics, or (c) a combination of both. Let us consider these possibilities. The possibility that experimental artifacts may be responsible for all or some of the signals mistakenly interpreted as superconductivity cannot be ruled out a priori in any experiment. Examples in the scientific literature where claims of superconductivity were subsequently withdrawn abound. The strong desire to find superconductivity in a compound may cause careful researchers to misinterpret the origin of observations. We feel that research in high pressure hydride superconductivity may have reached the stage where theoretical bias is unduly guiding the interpretation of experimental findings. Alternatively, we have suggested in Ref. In conclusion, more experimental and theoretical work is needed to establish what is going on in these materials.