We study the behavior of the mutual information (MI) in various quadratic fermionic chains, with and without pairing terms and both with short-and long-range hoppings. The models considered include the short-range limit and long-range versions of the Kitaev model as well, and also cases in which the area law for the entanglement entropy is -logarithmically or non-logarithmicallyviolated. In all cases surveyed, when the area law is violated at most logarithmically, the MI is a monotonically increasing function of the conformal four-point ratio x. Where non-logarithmic violations of the area law are present, non-monotonic features can be observed in the MI and the four-point ratio, as well as other natural combinations of the parameters, is found not to be sufficient to capture the whole structure of the MI with a collapse onto a single curve. We interpret this behavior as a sign that the structure of peaks is related to a non-universal spatial configuration of Bell pairs. For the model exhibiting a perfect volume law, the MI vanishes identically. For the Kitaev model the MI is vanishing for x → 0 and it remains zero up to a finite x in the gapped case. In general, a larger range of the pairing corresponds to a reduction of the MI at small x. A discussion of the comparison with the results obtained by the AdS/CFT correspondence in the strong coupling limit is presented. Over the years, information theory has provided valuable tools to analyze and interpret many-body quantum systems. The entanglement entropy (EE), as measured by the von Neumann and Rènyi entropies, has quickly established itself as a standard benchmark that allows to discriminate different phases of matter and properties escaping traditional paradigms. EE provides relevant knowledge such as how much classical information is necessary for a faithful representation of a quantum system or as an efficient witness of critical behavior The EEs are bipartite measures, since they assess how much information is shared between two complementary subsystems of a system in a pure state (that is, with no intrinsic entropy as a whole). This information cannot be accessed by measurements on one part alone, as it reflects correlations between the two subsystems. Since correlations lie mostly on the boundaries between the subsystems, the area law, at most with logarithmic corrections, is typically obeyed To access additional information on the structure of multipartite entanglement and quantum correlations, multipartite measures have also been introduced. One such measure, although not an entanglement estimator, is the so-called mutual information (MI). The MI is typically tripartite. Starting with a system in a pure state, one indeed divides the system into two (non-overlapping) subsystems A and B and their complement C ≡ A ∪ B. The MI measures how much information on A we can obtain by measuring B (or vice-versa). Thus, the MI can be considered as a kind of two-point function, while, from this point of view, the EEs are essentially one-point functions. Note, however, that an alternative point of view is to start with a system made only of A and B in a mixed state obtained by tracing out C and then to calculate the MI between A and its complement B = A. Comparing the two points of view, the latter can be considered as the result of removing C and letting A and B be "immersed" in the bath constituted by C. Taking this into account, in this work we will take the former approach and only consider pure tripartite systems, initializing the system under consideration in its (pure) ground state We then divide the lattice in the three disjoint parts A, B and their complement C = A ∪ B. The reduced density matrix of each subsystem is given by ρ A = tr B∪C {ρ}, ρ B = tr A∪C {ρ}, ρ AB = tr C {ρ}, and ρ C = tr A∪B {ρ}, respectively. Starting from the von Neumann entropy of the subsystem j, defined as (where ρ j is the reduced density matrix of the subsystem j), the MI between A and B, denoted by I (A,B) , is given by The MI is positive and symmetric in A and B. If A and B are complementary (that is A∪B equals the entire arXiv:2012.00045v2 [quant-ph] 20 Sep 2022 system) and the whole system is prepared into a pure state, then S AB ≡ S A∪B = 0 and I (A,B) = 2S A = 2S B , thus the MI reduces to the von Neumann entropy. The MI satisfies an area law Thus, the MI vanishes when no correlation exists between A and B. In the general case, I (A,B) is independent from UV cutoff parameters (since the divergences of the individual regions cancel over those of their union) and this is one of the properties that renders it more flexible over the entanglement entropy, for which it is sometime complicated to disentangle the physical from the cut-off contributions. Another limitation of the EE is that it makes sense as a measure only if the system is prepared in a pure state, while, as we remarked, the MI applies also to mixed state systems. The MI can be considered as a kind of two-point function, since it depends on the relative position of regions A and B. The MI is not a proper entanglement measure. However it is a measure of correlation between subsystems of a quantum system, and it quantifies the amount of information shared between the two regions, providing a quantum counterpart of the Shannon MI, which in general quantifies in suitable units the amount of information obtained about a random variable via the measurement of another random variable The MI has been studied in several prototypical settings, starting from the Ising model A general prediction for the behavior of the MI comes from the anti-de Sitter (AdS)/CFT-correspondence, in the strong-coupling (large conformal charge c) limit, where the MI has been found to behave as as a function of the conformal four-point ratio x, defined as where l is the length (i.e., the number of sites) of the two subsystems A and B (taken to be the same size) and, assuming A and B both simply connected. In Eq. ( Most of the studies of MI have focused so far mostly on systems with short-range couplings/interactions. In this respect it would be interesting to compare results for long-range systems with the corresponding short-range findings, as motivated by recent results for quantum systems with long-range couplings where the effects of longrangedness on critical properties, quantum dynamics and quantum entanglement properties have been studied Regarding points i) and iii), we observe that although the models considered are not in the regime of validity for the AdS/CFT result The plan of the paper is the following. In Section 2 we introduce the models we are going to consider, which comprise short and long-range, with and without pairing terms. Section 3 is devoted to the short-range models, with the tight-binding model considered in Section 3.1 and the Kitaev chain in 3. In this paper, we consider 1D fermionic models of the form where H H is the hopping part and H P the pairing part of the Hamiltonian. Sites are labeled by indices i, j = 1, • • • , N s and N S is the number of sites. The fermionic operators creating and destroying a fermion on site i are denoted by c i and c † i , respectively. The filling f , which is also the number of particles per site, is defined as f = N T /N S , where N T = N S i=1 c † i c i is the total particle number operator. As usual, the filling can be fixed directly or via the introduction of a chemical potential μ, amounting to fixing the number of fermions from the Hamiltonian H -μN T . We will consider as well translational invariant models, where, unless explicitly stated, periodic boundary conditions (PBC) are imposed (antiperiodic boundary conditions will be instead imposed when long-range pairing terms will be considered): The hopping part H H of the Hamiltonian where t i,j is the hopping amplitude among sites i and j. Several form of t i,j will be considered: a) nearest-neighbor, with t i,j = 0 for j = i ± 1 and vanishing otherwise; b) selective hopping, with t i,j constant and nonvanishing if the distance between i and j is in an assigned interval of values. For instance, the antipodal model has t i,j = 0 only if |i -j| = N S /2 (with N S even). c) long-range with where the distance | • | p , due to PBC, is defined as Notice that while in Sections 3.1 and 4 the prefactor not written in The power-law exponent Eq. α in Since we are adopting PBC, the eigenfunctions of the matrix -t i,j are plane waves ψ k (j) ∝ e ikj , with k = 2π N S n k and n k = -N S /2, . . . , N S /2 -1, again assuming N S even (the lattice spacing is set for simplicity ≡ 1). Therefore the hopping Hamiltonian ( with c k the Fourier transform of c i and k depending of course on the specific form of the t i,j . In Section 4.1 a model with fractal Fermi surface is studied, and there the form of k will be directly given without explicitly assigning the hoppings t i,j . For the hopping Hamiltonian (9) the EE of the subsystem A having l sites is given by In ( with i, j = 1, • • • , l being the sites belonging to A and Ψ the ground-state of the fermionic system. To calculate the MI, we calculate the EE of two systems A and B having each l sites, then the EE of A ∪ B, and finally the MI using Let us now discuss the pairing term H P in the total Hamiltonian When both the pairing term ∆ i,j and the hopping term are nearest-neighbor ( = 0 only if j = i ± 1 and zero otherwise), then one has the Kitaev model both with short-range and long-range hopping t i,j . The full Hamiltonian, being quadratic, can be readily diagonalized In this Section we consider short-range models, with nearest-neghbor hopping and ∆ i,j = 0 (Section 3.1) or ∆ i,j nearest-neighbor as well (Section 3.2). The usual tight-binding chain Hamiltonian reads: with the PBC (8), so that c N S +1 = c 1 . We will consider its generalization in eq. ( the nearest-neighbor case (16) being obtained in the limit α → ∞. The reason for considering ( , where the ψ α are the eigenfunctions of the matrix t i,j . In the considered translationally invariant case, the quantum number l becomes the wave vector k and the eigenfunctions ψ l simply plane waves. So, if the dispersion relation k has a purely monotonous behavior for k either positive or negative, then the correlation matrix is the same (since one has to sum on the same eigenfunctions). Thus, also the eigenvalues of the correlation matrix C i,j are equal and so are the EE and, therefore, the MI as well. Since for any α in ( In Fig. These results can be compared with the analytical values of the EE for disjoint subsystems of Dirac fermions, see are represented by the blue continuous line. We find a strongly improving agreement between numerics and analytics as l increases. Moreover, for fixed l, a very good stability of the data is achieved for N s ∼ 1000. Further analytical results would be desirable to determine the MI as a function of x for intermediate and large values of N S , l, and d at fixed filling to discuss finite-size corrections, however from the results presented here it emerges that x is the good quantity to use, the MI being a monotonic function of x. The prediction (5) is clearly not verified, as expected. We consider in this Section the Kitaev Hamiltonian focusing on the limit α → ∞. In this limit, one recovers the short-range Kitaev chain to the Hamiltonian Presenting the results also for finite α, the spectrum of excitations is obtained via a Bogoliubov transformation and it results in: where and The functions f α (k) become, in the thermodynamic limit where tan(2θ kn ) = -fα(kn+π) μ-cos kn and it is even under the Z 2 fermionic number parity of the Hamiltonian The spectrum in (20) displays a critical line at μ = 1 for every α and a critical semi-line μ = -1 for α > 1 (and therefore in the short-range Kitaev model α → ∞ as well). We report in Fig. Finally, studying the MI on the massless line μ = 1, one finds a monotonic growth of the MI with x, qualitatively equal to those in Figs. In this Section we consider several models with longrange hopping. For the model ( where k = 2πn k /N S belongs to the first Brillouin zone, As commented in Section 3.1, the dispersion relation ( We assume here that the Hamiltonian is such that the single-particle energy spectrum has the form where γ is a positive odd integer. Hamiltonian For instance, at half-filling f = 0.5, the Fermi energy is zero, with the point k = 0 being an accumulation point, see the bottom right inset of Fig. Our results for the MI are reported in Figs. MI vs x for the chain with dispersion ( area law. We considered other combinations of system parameters different from x such as l/d, but we found that they did not introduce a simplification of the obtained results and thus we do not presents plots of such results. It is found that the larger is the deviation from the area law, the more non-monotonic the MI is. Figure Other models exhibiting non-logarithmic violations of the area law are considered in the following Sections 4.2.1 and 4.2.2. In both cases the pairing terms are absent, their effect being studied in Section 5. A possible way to modify the structure of the Fermi surface, is to introduce a space-dependent phase in the hopping matrix where φ = 2π N S Φ (with Φ a constant) and d(m) is the oriented distance, defined as The energy spectrum is found to be While for φ = 0 this function is monotonic for k ∈ [0, π], for non-zero φ there is a critical value of α c (φ) < 1 such that for α < α c (φ), at half filling f = 1/2, the energies We study in this Section the "antipodal" model in which each-site is connected via a hopping term to the more distant site in the chain (at the antipodes). This model has a maximally entangled ground-state with the maximum number of Bell pairs, and it exhibits perfect, maximal volume law where PBC are implied. This model is readily diagonalized in Fourier space, with energies k = -2 t 1 cos (ks 1 )+t 2 cos (ks 2 ) cos (kr) 1 + tan (kr) tan (k/2) . Antipodal Hopping: s 1 = N S /2, t 2 = 0 (t 1 = t): Let us first set r = 0 (pure antipodal hopping). This means that we allow particles to hop only between the antipodal points and back (again, we take N S to be an even number). The single-particle spectrum reduces to which shows that there are two branches in the flat dispersion, with positive (negative) energy for odd (even) wave numbers. At half-filling, we thus have an alternating Fermi surface and an EE ruled by a perfect, maximal volume law. In fact, this choice of parameters creates a long-range Bell-paired state of maximal EE, since each particle is delocalized between two sites half-system apart. Remarkably, we find that such high entanglement content does not translate into the MI, which is in fact vanishing for any distance. This can be explained as a reflection of the entanglement monogamy Allowing for r = 0 reduces the EE. For r = 1 one has Fig. with r = 0, and for general r, from which the Fermi surfaces can be worked out. The EE violates the area law and the MI is plotted for different values of s in Fig. Hopping exactly to two distant sites with r = 0: With hopping allowed only between sites with distances s 1 and s 2 , one has For s 1 = N S /2 and s 2 = N S /4 at half-filling f = 1/2, the single-particle spectrum is following a zig-zag behaviour, with odd wavenumber states filled in the ground state. As for the case of Fig. with single-particle spectrum The MI is depicted in Fig. We consider in this Section the effect of a long-range counterpart of the fermionic pairing as given in Eq.( Let us consider here long-range pairing (∆ i,j = ∆ 2|i-j| α p | ) and nearest-neighbour hopping (t i,j = t only if i = j ± 1 and zero otherwise). The MI for the limit α → ∞ has been discussed in Section 3.2, where we also reported the energy spectrum for finite α in Eq. We remind that the spectrum (20) displays a critical line at μ = 1 for every α and a critical semi-line μ = -1 for α > 1. Moreover, if μ = -1 the velocity of quasiparticle with k = ±π diverges if α ≤ 3 2 , while it diverges at α ≤ 2 if μ = -1 Around the line a = 1, the change in behaviour is smooth at finite size N s , similarly to the EE In Fig. The MI can be used to detect quantum phase transitions. To show this, we keep the four-point ratio fixed and swipe for the phase-diagram parameters μ and α. In Fig. In Fig. Finally, for completeness we report in Fig. Finally, we consider the long-range paired Kitaev model with also long-range hopping: where we denote by β (α) the power-law decay exponent of the hopping (pairing) term. We plot in Figs. We have studied the mutual information (MI) for several quadratic fermionic chains with a variety of different long-range hoppings and superconductive pairings, The conclusions emerging from the considered examples are the following. 1) When the area law is obeyed with at most logarithmic corrections, the MI is a monotonically increasing function of x, going to zero for x → 0. 2) x appears as a convenient variable for the critical short-range Kitaev model and the non-critical long-range Kitaev model, with small values of the exponent α (where the correlations have a power-law tail), in the sense that different values for the sizes of the system, of the subsystems and their distance with the same x produces for large chains the same MI. However x is not in general a variable for which MI data collapse, especially for not critical cases, and, as a rule of thumb, when x is not a good variable, other combinations of parameters we tried are not either. 3) When there are non-logarithmic violation of the area law, the behaviour of MI vs x is no longer monotonic and peaks appear, with the exception of the antipodal model in which MI vanishes identically, corresponding to a perfect, maximal volume law for the bipartite EE. 4) In these non-monotonic cases, x does not capture the structure of the MI, since parameters with the same x do not have the same MI (even though a similar qualitative behaviour is found). The short-range Kitaev model in the massive regime exhibits a behaviour such that the MI is vanishing for small values of x, noticing however that we are outside of the range of validity for the AdS/CFT prediction (5). This result is actually independent from the short or longrange nature of the hopping. When the pairing becomes strongly long-range (α < 1), then the MI is no longer vanishing for small x due to the power-law nature of the correlations induced by the long-range pairings. We point out that, as expected, for the Kitaev model we did not find a good agreement between our results for larger values of x (say x > ∼ 1/2) and the AdS/CFT prediction (5), since the latter is valid in the strong coupling limit. However, in both cases there is an overall monotonic growth of the MI as a function of the conformal four-point ratio x. For the considered Kitaev models, we showed the possibility to locate phase transitions using MI. Keeping the four-point ratio constant and sweeping the phase diagram, the MI displays distinct peaks at the closings of the gap, as shown in Figs. We also analyzed the MI behavior in systems with volume-like violations of the area law. We observed the emergence of peaks, and in particular for x 0, reflecting the structure of shared Bell-pairs between the subsystems. In fact, violations of the area law imply the formation of Bell pairs at arbitrary distances, growing with the thermodynamic limit. From this point of view we can then expect that in the infinite chain length limit, these peaks get squeezed toward x → 0 (see Fig. The presented results show that the MI, even though not a proper entanglement measure, can be used to extract important information about the entanglement and quantum correlations properties and the phases of a quantum system. The peculiar role of long-range terms, as intertwined with the possible occurrence of violations of the area law, have been investigated and shown to produce a variety of interesting features. It would be certainly very interesting both to find analytical results for the behaviour of MI as a function of the conformal four-point ratio for some of the models considered here and to extend the analysis of the MI to interacting, nonquadratic models. Indeed, our results show that already for systems that can be mapped to free fermions the MI is not always captured by the existing analytical expressions. An interesting generalization and application of our study can be the use of MI as a scrambling quantifier (for dynamics under entangling unitary controls), for both open and closed quantum systems, in condensed matter (spin chains) as well as in high energy physics. This possibility has been highlighted recently in 