We show that Floquet chiral topological superconductivity arises naturally in Josephson junctions made of magnetic topological insulator-superconductor sandwich structures. The Josephson phase modulation associated with an applied bias voltage across the junction drives the system into the anomalous Floquet chiral topological superconductor hosting chiral Majorana edge modes in the quasienergy spectrum, with the bulk Floquet bands carrying zero Chern numbers. The bias voltage acts as a tuning parameter enabling novel dynamical topological quantum phase transitions driving the system into a myriad of exotic Majorana-carrying Floquet topological superconducting phases. Our theory establishes a new paradigm for realizing Floquet chiral topological superconductivity in solid-state systems, which should be experimentally directly accessible. Introduction -Ever since the discovery of the quantum Hall effect Recently, far-from-equilibrium dynamical topological phenomena have attracted research attention In this work, we propose an experimentally feasible and highly tunable solid-state paradigm for achieving AFCTSC and Floquet chiral Majorana physics. Our proposed platform is based on a superconductor/magnetic topological insulator/superconductor sandwich structure [see Fig. Model Hamiltonian -We start by introducing the model Hamiltonian for the CTJJ system (Fig. Here σ and s are the Pauli matrices denoting the surface layer and spin degrees of freedom, respectively. g z denotes the z-directional Zeeman effect due to the bulk magnetization and t(k) = t 0 -t 1 (cos k x +cos k y ) describes the hybridization between top and bottom Dirac surface states. In the presence of the superconductor the effective Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) theory for the system is given by where the isotropic s-wave pairing is given by Here, ∆ t(b) is the proximitized superconducting orders for the top (bottom) surfaces of the magnetic topological insulator and φ(t) is the Josephson phase between ∆ t and ∆ b . τ 0,x,y,z are the Pauli matrices for the particlehole degree of freedom and we define σ ± = (σ 0 ± σ z )/2 and μ as the chemical potential. When a constant bias voltage V 0 is applied between the superconductor layers, φ(t) starts to periodically modulate according to the second Josephson relation This converts the CTJJ to an effective Floquet superconducting system with a driving frequency of ω = 2eV 0 , although the dynamics here is intrinsically generated by the Josephson effect and not by any explicit external time dependent field. In the frequency domain, the Floquet + ωlδ ll for l, l ∈ Z. Here we have defined h (l-l ) ω = 1/T ́T 0 H CTJJ (t)e i(l-l )ωt dt with the driving period T = 2π/ω. It is straightforward to show that along with h ω ) † and h High-frequency Limit -When the energy scale of eV 0 is much larger than the bandwidth of h (0) ω , the system enters the high-frequency regime and the corresponding topological physics is governed by h (0) ω , the zeroth order contribution in the Floquet-Magnus expansion of H F . When μ = 0, the eigenspectrum of h ω is analytically tractable with where Then it is straightforward to show that the bulk gap-closing condition for h By defining α = 2t 1 /t 0 , we have t(Γ) = (1 + α)t 0 , t(X/Y ) = t 0 , t(M ) = (1 -α)t 0 for the highsymmetry momenta Γ = (0, 0), X = (π, 0), Y = (0, π), and M = (π, π). Therefore, the topological phase boundaries for h (0) ω at μ = 0 are completely determined by three independent parameters: g z , ∆ b , and α. In Fig. Dynamical Topological Phase Transitions -With the Floquet chiral TSC phase, we are now ready to move away from its high-frequency limit by gradually reducing the driving frequency ω. Practically, this process simply amounts to reducing the bias voltage V 0 in the experimental setting. We note that the value of ω/2 sets the boundary of the Floquet Brillouin zone (BZ) for the quasienergy ε. Therefore, whenever the reference line of ε = ω/2 intersects with the energy bands of h (0) ω at a high-symmetry momentum k i , the bulk Floquet gap at k i must close at ε = ω/2 as well, inducing a dynamical topological phase transition (DTPT). Throughout our work, we will refer DTPT as the phase transition occurring on the Floquet BZ boundary ε = ω/2. Without loss of generality, we start with the same Flo-quet chiral TSC phase in Fig. We then proceed to calculate the ŷ-directional Floquet edge spectrum at T = 1.5, right after the first DTPT. As shown in Fig. where l1l2l3 is the Levi-Civita symbol for l 1,2,3 ∈ {k x , k y , t}. Here U (k, t) is the micromotion operator for the driven system. Starting from the time-evolution unitary U (k, t) = T exp[-i ́t 0 H CTJJ (k, t)dt] with T denoting the time ordering, we have , where the logarithmic branch cut is chosen to be ω/2 for our purpose. Crucially, it is both the BdG Chern number C and the winding invariant W that together determine the complete topological properties of a general 2D class D Floquet TSC, including both the anomalous and non-anomalous ones, leading to a Z × Z topological classification. The general relation between the bulk topological indices (C, W) and the edge Majorana physics can be understood as follows. Let us first denote the numbers of chiral Majorana modes within the ε = γ gap as n edge (γ) for γ = 0, ω/2. In particular, when n edge (γ) is positive (negative), it indicates |n edge | number of right-moving (left-moving) chiral Majorana modes. Then the bulkedge correspondence is given by Specifically, the anomalous chiral Majorana configuration in Fig. One can similarly identify the topological nature of all Floquet phases induced by the other four DTPTs in Fig. In general, the possible outcome of driving-induced DTPTs sensitively depends on the choice of static parameters (e.g. g z , ∆ b , α, etc.), so that it is not possible to map out a complete topological phase diagram in the high-dimensional generic parameter space. Nevertheless, based on Eq. 8, we expect that by gradually reducing V 0 from the high-frequency limit, the DTPT will always generate a Floquet state with chiral Majorana edge modes across the ω/2 quasienergy gap, which, crucially, is independent of (i) the topological nature of the initial high-frequency limit; (ii) the precise position of DTPT occuring in the momentum space. Namely, even starting from a topologically trivial state with C = 0 [like the ones shown in Fig. Conclusion -To summarize, we have proposed a topological Josephson junction as a new experimentally feasible paradigm for achieving anomalous Floquet chiral Majorana modes in solid-state systems. The remarkable electrical tunability of CTJJ allows for the realization of Floquet chiral TSC physics, with the Josephson DC voltage being the key control knob. We note that the topological insulator-superconductor sandwich structures have already been fabricated experimentally with either Pb 