Bismuth perovskites ABiO3 (A = Sr, Ba) host a variety of peculiar phenomena including bonddisproportionated insulating phases and high-temperature superconductivity upon hole doping. While the mechanisms underlying these phenomena are still debated, off-diagonal electron-phonon (e-ph) coupling originating from the modulation of the orbital overlaps has emerged as a promising candidate. Here, we employ classical Monte Carlo simulations to study a semiclassical threeorbital model with off-diagonal e-ph interactions. We demonstrate the existence of a (bi)polaron correlations that persists in the model at high temperatures and for hole doping away from the bonddisproportionated insulating phase. Using a spatiotemporal regression analysis between various local quantities and the lattice degrees of freedom, we also identify the similarity between heating-and doping-induced melting of a bond-disproportionated insulator at a microscopic level. Our results imply that (bi)polaron physics can be a unifying concept that helps us understand the rich bismuth perovskite phase diagram. Bond-disproportionated or "dimerized" insulating phases have been found in several families of quantum materials including the bismuth perovskites ABiO 3 (A = Sr, Ba) In the case of barium bismuthate, subsequent doping with Pb or K suppresses the insulating phase, relaxes the bond-disproportionated structure, and ultimately results in high-temperature (high-T c ) superconductivity. The rare-earth nickelates, on the other hand, cannot be hole doped. Still, they do undergo an insulator-to-metal transition at high temperature, with a similar relaxation of the bonddisproportionated structure. The literature invokes two main mechanisms -charge disproportionation and bond disproportionation -as the potential driving force behind these transitions. Here, we focus on the bismuthates, but these concepts also apply to the rare-earth nickelates with some caveats. The charge disproportionation scenario is built on the idea that the nominal Bi 4+ valence state of the valenceskipped Bi ions is not energetically favorable. Instead, charge transfer occurs that produces alternating Bi 3+ and Bi 5+ ions on interpenetrating sublattices. Bond disproportionation is an alternative to charge disproportionation. This scenario derives from the notion that the bismuthates belong to the so-called "negative charge transfer" family of materials Charge and bond disproportionation are not mutually exclusive, of course, and it is possible that both a charge ordering on the Bi ions and lattice distortions contribute to the formation of the charge density wave gap in bismuth perovskites. In fact, these scenarios can be viewed as opposite ends of a range of possibilities controlled by the charge transfer energy and the size of the Bi-O overlap integral Determining where the nickelates and bismuthates lay on this spectrum has implications for our understanding of their metallic phase, and potentially superconductivity in the bismuthates Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) experiments on bismuthate single crystals (films) have recently become available, and have provided some insights into these questions. The first ARPES study on the parent compound BaBiO 3 found that its band structure was well described by DFT within the local density approximation (LDA) and was fully consistent with the negative charge transfer/bond disproportionate view A later study on Ba 1-x K x BiO 3 (BKBO) with x = 0.49 observed an increased bandwidth This latter result is consistent with the experimental observations of local short-range Ni-O bond distortions in the metallic phase of the related rare-earth nickelates This progress has motivated an extensive theoretical investigations aimed at extracting the relevant minimal models A recent DFT investigation supporting the bond disproportionation scenario 4 has also motivated the derivation of several tight-binding models to describe the low-energy electronic excitations of the bismuthates and their possible simplifications as a function of structural distortions in two and three dimensions The microscopic e-ph coupling needed to capture the situation described is a generalization of the Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (SSH) interaction, where the motion of the oxygen atoms modulates the Bi-O overlap integrals. In this paper, we present a complementary study of a model for the bismuthates, similar to the one used in Ref. This paper is organized as follows. Sec. II describes The purpose of this analysis is to provide a clearer picture of the spatiotemporal correlations between the electronic and lattice degrees of freedom as a function of doping and temperature. Finally, we close in Sec. IV with some additional discussion of our results and our conclusions. We consider a three-orbital model consisting of a Bi 6s orbital and two O 2p σ orbitals on a two-dimensional (2D) Lieb lattice, as sketched in Fig. By allowing for both kinds of fluctuations, our model can describe physics beyond Hartree-Fock mean-field theory. For example, this approach correctly captures the non-monotonic dependence of the Néel temperature for the threedimensional half-filled single-band Hubbard model The model's Hamiltonian is H = H el + H lat , where describes the electron motion through the lattice for a given set of oxygen displacements, and describes the potential energy of the ions and contains both harmonic K and anharmonic α contributions. (The anharmonic terms are needed in this case to ensure that reasonable magnitudes for the displacements are obtained for realistic parameter choices.) The operators s † rσ (s rσ ) and p † rδσ (p rδσ ) create (annihilate) spin-σ holes on the Bi 6s and O 2p δ orbitals, respectively; X rα is the displacement of O atom α measured relative to its equilibrium position; ... denotes a sum over the nearest-neighbor orbitals so that δ, δ = ±x, ±y index the four O atoms surrounding each Bi; s and p are the Bi and O site energies, respectively; μ is the chemical potential; and t sp (X rδ ) and t pp are the Bi-O and O-O nearest neighbor hopping integrals, respectively. Here, we neglect the distance dependence of the latter (the magnitude of t pp is small), while the former are determined according to Harrison's rule We studied the model using a combined exact diagonalization (ED) and classical Monte Carlo (MC) method (ED+MC), which is useful for simulating Hamiltonians where classical degree of freedoms (the lattice displacements) couple to quantum ones (the fermions). This approach is very similar to the one used recently to study single-and multi-orbital spinfermion models for the cuprates For our classical phonon displacements, the expectation value of an observable Ô in the grand canonical ensemble is given by where Z is the partition function, is the inverse temperature, dX is shorthand for a 2Ndimensional integral over the atomic displacements, and |m are the eigenstates of H, computed for a given configuration of displacements {X rδ }. In the ED+MC method, the multidimensional integral in Eq. ( To compute each observable, the desired physical quantities are measured periodically after the sampling procedure has obtained thermodynamic equilibrium. Because of the O(N 4 ) scaling in ED+MC, we are limited to lattices up to N = 10 × 10 in size, and most of our results will be for this lattice size. We did, however, also simulate larger lattices by employing the traveling cluster approximation (TCA), which improves the scaling. The TCA reduces the computational complexity of standard ED+MC simulations from O(N 4 ) to O(N ) Our focus is on lattice (bi)polaron correlations and their evolution upon heating and hole doping. The (bi)polarons, where the holes are bound to local breathing distortions of the oxygen sublattice, can be described by the polaron S p = 1 N r p(r) and bipolaron B p = 1 N r ĝ(r) number operators, where p(r) = X rLs (n r↑ + nr↓ -2n r↑ nr↓ ) (5) and ĝ(r) = X rLs nr↑ nr↓ . Here, nrσ = ns rσ + nLs rσ and nLm rσ = σ L † mrσ L mrσ are local number operators. The operators L mrσ (L † mrσ ) with m = s, d, x, y define molecular orbitals from linear combinations of ligand oxygen orbitals surrounding each Bi site One can also perform a similar transformation for the oxygen displacements Note that the L s and L d operators correspond to the A 1g and E g orbitals in Ref. When the system has significant bond disproportionation correlations, a two sublattice structure will appear as the oxygen octahedra collapse and expand about alternating Bi sites. This phenomenon will be reflected in a given local quantity Ôr if sublattice averages are performed. In our case, bond disproportionation leads to a bipartite lattice structure, and so we define A/B sublattice averages using where the + (-) sign corresponds to lattice sites on the A (B) sublattice. Finally, the total hole concentration ρ = 1 N r,α n r,α is determined from a sum over all orbitals in the cluster. Our first task is to establish the existence of a metalto-insulator transition at half-filling, which will form the basis for our discussion in the remainder of the paper. Figure Next, we examine several of the system's sublattice orbital occupations as a function of temperature T and filling. Fig. Figure [The precises values depend somewhat on the cluster size, see e.g. Fig. The bifurcation in the orbital occupations indicate that strong deviations occur between the compressed and expanded oxygen plaquettes due to the bonddisproportionation. Moreover, the similarity between the behavior of the system upon either heating or doping implies that the mechanisms underlying the temperature-or doping-driven transitions from the bonddisproportionated state to the non-disproportionated one have a common origin. We will return to this point shortly. Several works For example, our model parameters and classical MC treatment places our system squarely in the adiabatic regime Ω/E F 1. By contrast, Ref. To assess the finite-size effects, Fig. We end this subsection with an examination of the real-space structure of the staggered polaron and bipolaron static correlations functions, which are defined as C SP (r -r) = φ(r -r)ρ(r )ρ(r) and C BP (rr) = φ(r -r)ĝ(r )ĝ(r) , respectively, where ρ(r) and ĝ(r) are defined in Sec. II C and φ(r) = (-1) -0.07 -0.05 -0.01 -0.00 -0.01 -0.04 -0.07 -0.04 -0.02 0.00 0.02 -0.00 -0.02 -0.04 -0.01 0.00 0.03 0.10 0.03 0.00 -0.01 0.00 0.02 0.11 0.30 0.11 0.02 0.00 -0.01 0.00 0.03 0.10 0.03 0.00 -0.01 -0.04 -0.02 -0.00 0.02 0.00 -0.02 -0.04 -0.07 -0.04 -0.01 -0.00 -0.01 -0.05 -0.07 -0.41 -0.48 0.02 -0.13 0.04 -0.46 -0.40 -0.45 -0.06 -0.11 0.22 -0.13 -0.07 -0.45 0.06 -0.10 0.36 0.64 0.36 -0.10 0.06 -0.09 0.26 0.65 2.54 0.65 0.26 -0.09 0.06 -0.10 0.36 0.64 0.36 -0.10 0.06 -0.45 -0.07 -0.13 0.22 -0.11 -0.06 -0.45 -0.40 -0.46 0.04 -0.13 0.02 -0.48 -0.41 (d) BP×10 temperature of β = 25 eV -1 . As we will see, this is sufficient to contrast the behavior of the undoped and doped system but finite size effects may be present. Figure Figures The results presented so far suggest that the system transitions from an insulating bipolaron lattice, characterized by a bond-disproportionate structure, into a more uniform phase with weak, short-range correlations via heating or doping. But we have only considered the lattice/sublattice averages of various quantities to this point. To investigate the melting process and nature of the uniform phase, we now examine the spatial and Heating effect of the spatiotemporal distribution of four molecular orbitals' occupancies as functions of their corresponding phonon modes at half-filling. temporal correlations in the lattice displacements. To this end, we present detailed histograms of various local physical quantities, collected at each Monte Carlo step of the simulations. These plots provide more detailed snap-shots of the correlations present at each Monte Carlo step and thus supply additional information on the microscopic relationships between several observable quantities and the specific lattice configurations. We first concentrate on the effects of heating at halffilling. Fig. The leftmost column of Fig. One issue being debated in the context of the charge-and bond-disproportionation scenarios is their relationship to the charge density modulation appearing on the Bi atoms. Our analysis indicates that the occupations of the Bi orbitals in the expanded and contracted plaquettes are ∼ 0.15 and ∼ 0.45, respectively, corresponding to a charge transfer of about 0.2 holes/Bi in the bond-disproportioned state. This value is comparable to the 0.1 holes/Bi obtained using DQMC for a related model The middle and right columns of Fig. The behavior of the distributions shown in the right hand panel provides strong indications of the persistence of the polarons at high temperature. For example, although the bimodal distributions have merged into a single mode at these temperatures, we observe persistent correlations between the n s and n Ls occupations and the sign of the X Ls displacements. Conversely, we do not observe any clear correlation between the occupations of the n s orbitals and the X L d displacements, between the n d orbitals and the X L d displacements, or other combinations (not shown). These observations provide compelling evidence that the holes with particular orbital symmetries are strongly attracted to the compressive distortions of the oxygen atoms, consistent with a polaronic view of the metallic phase. We now examine the doping-driven transition from the bond-disproportionate state to the uniform metallic state using a similar spatiotemporal distribution analysis. To this end, Fig. The leftmost column of Fig. The middle and right columns illustrate the doping induced melting, which is reminiscent of that induced by heating, shown in Fig. Apart from that, the transition from the two-clouds to the one-cloud distribution is rather similar in both cases; all this is consistent with the data shown in Fig. We have presented a numerical study of a twodimensional three-orbital model with SSH-like e-ph interactions, which was solved using a combined exact diagonalization and classical Monte Carlo method (ED + MC). Having bismuthates in mind, we studied the model for concentrations near one hole/cation site, and in the negative charge transfer regime, where the holes preferably occupy the oxygen sublattice. Our key results include: 1) the observation of a bond-disproportionated insulating state at half-filling, which can be viewed as the frozen bipolaronic crystal state; 2) the observation of insulator-to-metal transitions with either increasing temperature or hole doping; and 3) the observation of local bipolaron formation in the resulting metallic phases. While many of our conclusions agree with a recent DQMC study of a similar model 27 , our work should be seen as complementary to this study. For example, by using classical treatment of the lattice degrees of freedom, we accessed much larger system sizes and smaller phonon energies. This aspect places our model in the adiabatic regime, which is more relevant to the real materials, while Ref. 27 considered a set of anti-adiabatic phonon parameters. As such, our results enlarge the parameter space considerably and provide a more complete view of the physics of the model. In some instances, we were even able to perform meaningful extrapolations to the thermodynamic limit. Moreover, our spatiotemporal analysis allowed us to examine the correlations between various local electronic quantities and the lattice degrees of freedom, which in turn allowed us to identify the similarities in the heating-and doping-induced melting of the bond-disproportionated state. Contrary to the previous DQMC study, however, our analysis of local charge density on Bi ions observed a more significant charge modulation between the Bi atoms in alternating compressed and expanded octahedra, which is even higher than the values inferred experimentally In the case the rare-earth nickelates, charge disproportionation is facilitated by the Ni 3d Hund's coupling, which offsets the substantial Coulombic cost of the charge density modulation. The molecular orbital viewpoint seems to be quite general in high oxidation state oxides, e.g. nickelates with a linear combination of O-2p atomic orbitals of Eg symmetry Interactions of this type are also sometimes refereed to as "Peierl's" couplings. For brevity, we will referee to them as SSH-like interactions, even though the original SSH model was derived for one-dimensional chains with hoping between identical orbitals.