In high-temperature cuprate superconductors, the anti-ferromagnetic spin fluctuations are thought to have a very important role in naturally producing an attractive interaction between the electrons in the d-wave channel. The connection between superconductivity and spin fluctuations is expected to be especially consequential at the overdoped end point of the superconducting dome. In some materials, that point seems to coincide with a Lifshitz transition, where the Fermi surface changes from the hole-like centered at (π, π) to the electron-like, centered at the Γ point causing a loss of large momentum anti-ferromagnetic fluctuations. Here, we study the doping dependence of the electronic structure of Bi1.8Pb0.4Sr2CuO 6+δ in angle-resolved photoemission and find that the superconductivity vanishes at lower doping than at which the Lifshitz transition occurs. This requires a more detailed re-examination of a spin-fluctuation scenario. Even before the discovery of high temperature superconductors (HTSC), it was realized that antiferromagnetic (AF) fluctuations give rise to a d-wave pairing from short ranged repulsion of electrons on a lattice Experimentally, the coincidental loss of superconductivity and the Lifshitz transition have been observed in some materials at the overdoped end of the superconducting dome, reviving the interest in this matter In the case of the single Cu-O plane cuprates, the coincidence could be considered as a clear-cut evidence that the spin-fermion model is at play at the overdoped end-point of the doping range These discrepancies call for a reexamination of the spin-fluctuation scenario in which the Lifshitz transition triggers the loss of d-wave superconductivity. Here, we study the electronic structure of Bi 1.8 Pb 0.4 Sr 2 CuO 6+δ (Bi2201), a single layer cousin of Bi2212, in angleresolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and find that the superconductivity in this system is lost sooner than the doping at which the Lifshitz transition occurs. This would suggest that the picture in which the topology of the FS alone is the driving force for the loss of superconductivity in the overdoped cuprates is too simplistic and requires other ingredients. The experiments were done in an experimental facility that integrates oxide-MBE with ARPES and SI-STM capabilities within a common vacuum system Figure For Bi2212, t ⊥ = 0 and ± is for anti-bonding (bonding) state; μ is chemical potential. The hopping parameters that best describe the FSs of the selected measured samples are given in Table The Lifshitz transition related to the filling of VHS at the antinodal points of the Brillouin zone is further evidenced in Fig. It is interesting that in the Bi2212, the Lifshitz transition in one of the Fermi sheets (antibonding) coincides with the loss of superconductivity, while the other Fermi sheet (bonding) remains hole-like (Fig. The main points of this study are summarized in Fig. We note that our results on Bi2201 are in contrast with previous ARPES studies With the observed irregularities in the coincidence of the Lifshitz transition and the loss of d-wave superconductivity in Bi2201 and in different families of cuprate superconductors, a simple picture relating the FS topology with the presence or absence of superconductivity requires a more detailed re-examination. One problem could be that a certain level of three-dimensional (3D) character in the electronic structure (k z warping) might spread the VHS and place its apparent position in ARPES at the point that depends on the experimental parameters, i.e. the used photon energy. This might be particularly important in La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 that shows a higher level of 3D character There is also a possibility that the curvature of the FS in the antinodal region might play a significant role in cuprate superconductivity. The straight antinodal segments would normally favor nesting and a formation of density waves. However, in the highly overdoped regime near the end point of the superconducting dome, the density waves can be discarded, as evidenced by the lack of any gaps or reconstructions that they should produce. These segments might be ineffective in forming mobile Cooper pairs because the group velocity of these segments lacks the component that should connect them from k F to -k F into singlet pairs. The Bi2212 (Fig. Finally, we speculate that the apparent coincidence of the onset of the ferromagnetism and the demise of superconductivity in the n-type cuprates In summary, we have explored the correlation between the loss of superconductivity and the Lifshitz transition occurring in the heavily overdoped side of the phase diagram of the hole doped cuprates. Although the two transitions are not perfectly coincidental in all the cuprates, there seems to be a general trend where they are relatively close but the exact positions in the doping phase diagram may be influenced by other factors such as the amount of elastic scattering and the curvature of the FS. In addition, the energy scales related to electrons and the details of energy and momentum distribution of spin susceptibility might also play a role in fine tuning of doping positions of these two transitions. This implies that the d-wave superconductivity in cuprates is very strongly coupled to the AF spin fluctuations that, when present, likely mediate the pairing in these materials. This work was supported by the US Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, contract no. DE-SC0012704. I.P. was supported by ARO MURI program, grant W911NF-12-1-0461. Sample