The discovery of signatures of topological superconductivity in superconducting bulk materials with topological surface states has attracted intensive research interests recently. Utilizing angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy and first-principles calculations, here, we demonstrate the existence of topological nodal-line states and drumheadlike surface states in centrosymmetric superconductor SnTaS 2 , which is a type-II superconductor with a critical transition temperature of about 3 K. The valence bands from Ta 5d orbitals and the conduction bands from Sn 5p orbitals cross each other, forming two nodal lines in the vicinity of the Fermi energy without the inclusion of spin-orbit coupling (SOC), protected by the spatial-inversion symmetry and time-reversal symmetry. The nodal lines are gapped out by SOC. The drumheadlike surface states, the typical characteristics in nodal-line semimetals, are quite visible near the Fermi level. Our findings indicate that SnTaS 2 offers a promising platform for exploring the exotic properties of the topological nodal-line fermions and helps in the study of topological superconductivity. The long-sought topological superconductor (TSC) with Majorana fermions extends scientific territory and plays an important role in strategies for topological quantum computing, though it still remains elusive in real materials. A typical TSC can be found in a p + ip system, where the core of the superconducting vortex contains a localized quasiparticle with exactly zero energy In addition, noncentrosymmetric superconductors with strong SOC have been proposed as a kind of TSC, because of the breaking of spin degeneracy by asymmetric SOC In this paper, we demonstrate the existence of topological nodal-line states and nontrivial surface states in a type-II BCS superconductor SnTaS 2 by employing ARPES and scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/S) in combination with first-principles calculations. STS measurements indicate that the superconducting gap of about 0.35 meV at T = 0.4 K can be suppressed by an applied magnetic field of 0.013 T perpendicular to the sample surface, which is consistent with the transport measurements The single crystals were grown by the chemical vapor transport method as described elsewhere The crystal structure of SnTaS 2 is illustrated in Figs. To reveal the surface topography and the superconductivity, STM/S measurements were carried out on the (001) surfaces of SnTaS 2 . The high-resolution STM topography taken on the area of the cleaved surface [Fig. We performed orbital-projected DFT calculations to study the low-energy electronic bands with their orbital characters in SnTaS 2 . Figure ) In addition, the drumheadlike surface state is a typical characteristic in nodal-line semimetals and could bring varieties of unusual intriguing properties. To study the surface states, we performed the slab calculation with a 30-unit-thick layer [Figs. 2(h) and 2(i)]. The bands with separation and the gray shaded regions present the bulk bands, and the others are surface bands in Figs. To directly detect the topological features near E F , we performed ARPES measurements on (001) surfaces of SnTaS 2 . Since the nodal lines are located on the k z = 0 plane according to the calculation, we carried out the photon-energydependent ARPES measurement to investigate the detailed k z dispersions. With an empirical value of the inner potential of ∼11 eV and c = c/2 = 8.725 Å (due to the bilayer in the conventional unit cell), we found that hv = 60 and 84 eV are close to the Γ point and 48 and 72 eV are close to the A point, according to the free-electron final-state model 3(f)-3(h), the Fermi surfaces of the k z ∼ 0 and π planes are almost the same. The Fermi surfaces are similar to those of PbTaSe 2 , which can be more precisely figured out with the help of calculations and quantum oscillations In Fig. By presenting an investigation of the low-energy electronic structures in both experiments and calculations, we provided evidence of topological nodal lines and surface states in centrosymmetric superconducting SnTaS 2 . STS measurements indicate that a superconducting gap of about 0.35 meV at T = 0.4 K is suppressed by a magnetic field of 0.013 T perpendicular to the sample surface. As typical characteristics in nodal-line semimetals, the surface states connecting the nodes make SnTaS 2 a good platform for exploring the topological nodalline fermions. Our findings are also beneficial for studies on TSCs.