The development of portable and wearable electronics requiring only few tens of microwatts to operate fosters the search for low power energy sources. Moreover, the fast-growing demand for new sustainable energy has raised the interest in energy harvesters able to convert mechanical energy into electrical power. Triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs) can provide such green power supply. Recent developments in TENGs technology show that they can be used in different applications ranging from wearable self-powered sensors to wind and sea wave energy harvesting. In spite of the wide number of TENGs developed so far, an in depth understanding of their working principle is still missing. In this work, we highlight the fundamental role played by the interface between the triboelectric material and the electrode collector in contributing to the TENG's power generation. We show that by simply replacing the "standard" gold electrodes with flexible few layer graphene electrodes in TENGs operating in vertical contact mode, a 26fold increase in power density is achieved. Here, we elucidate the main mechanism at the base of such boost in power output, describing guidelines for the combination of electrode and triboelectric materials to optimize the mechanical energy conversion efficiency in TENGs. The field of flexible and wearable electronics In order to enable TENGs cost-effective production by means of printable technologies, such as roll-to-roll coating, TENGs' active materials have to be solution processable. Gold electrodes were prepared by e-beam deposition of 5 nm Ti and 70 nm Au on polyethylenetherepthalate (PEN 50 ╬╝m thick, Dupont-Tejin) substrates. Few-layer graphene flakes were produced via wet-jet-milling (WJM) as previously described. The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis is accomplished on a Kratos Axis UltraDLD spectrometer at a vacuum better than 10 -8 mbar, using a monochromatic Al K╬▒ source operating at 20 mA and 15 kV and collecting photoelectrons from a 300 ├Ś 700 ╬╝m 2 sample area. The charge compensation device was not used. Wide spectra were acquired at pass energy of 160 eV and energy step of 1 eV, while high-resolution spectra of O 1s, N1s, C 1s and Au 4f peaks were acquired at pass energy of 10 eV and energy step of 0.1 eV. The samples were mounted on the sample holder with copper clips and quickly transferred from air to the XPS chamber. Data analysis is carried out with CasaXPS software (version 2.3.19PR1.0). The energy scale was calibrated by setting the Au 4f 7/2 peak at 84.0 eV and C 1s peak (graphitic component) at 284.3 eV. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) with He I (h╬Į = 21.2 eV) radiation was performed to estimate the Fermi energy level (EF) and the valence band maximum of the materials under investigation. The experiments were conducted on the samples after the XPS analysis using the same equipment. Spectra were acquired at pass energy of 10 eV and energy step of 25 meV, collecting photoelectrons from a spot with 55 ╬╝m diameter. A -9.0 V bias was applied to the sample in order to precisely determine the low kinetic energy cut-off. The energy scale was corrected according to the binding energy calibration performed for the XPS measurement. Conductivity of the FLG flexible electrode was measured with the van der Pauw method on a 4├Ś4 cm 2 electrode. We also measured the sheet resistance of the pastes bar coated on kapton substrates and of gold electrodes on PEN with a four-point probe Jandel system (RM300). We measured a sheet resistance of (142 ’é▒ 5) ’üŚ/’ü┐ for the FLG flexible electrode and (1.1 ’é▒ 0.2) ’üŚ/’ü┐ for the thin film gold. The sheet resistance of the FLG electrodes does not vary with the addition of the carbon black (139 ’é▒ 5 ’üŚ/’ü┐). Self-assembled monolayers on gold were prepared by overnight immersion of the clean gold substrates in 1 mM solution in ethanol. After incubation, the substrates were rinsed with ethanol and dried under N2. 1-dodecanethiol and aminoethanthiol hydrochloride were purchased from Sigma. The triboelectric characterization of the TENGs was performed using a shaker setup (TIRA BAA 60), an oscilloscope (Tecktronix MSO5000), a voltage probe 40 M’üŚ (Tecktronics) for voltage measurements and a current amplifier (1211 DL Instruments) for current measurements. A home built resistance commutator was used during power measurements. The power density was calculated from the root mean square (RMS) value of the current measured during the press and release cycle. The time dependent sinusoidal force profile is reported in Figure SI-8. The energy generation in TENGs is based on the Maxwell electrostatic induction and displacement current, In this work, the experimental configuration used for testing TENGs is the vertical contactseparation mode, This experimental evidence is a first demonstration of the crucial role played by the interface between the active material and the electrode in contributing to the power density in TENGs. To better understand the mechanism behind the higher charge density accumulated at the FLG electrode/tribomaterial interface compared to the gold electrodes, we acquired SEM images of the two electrode surfaces (Figure Due to the presence of carbon nanoparticles agglomerates and irregularly distributed few-layer graphene flakes, the FLG electrode shows a rougher surface compared to the gold ones. Therefore, a higher electrode capacitance can be one reason at the base of the observed increase in power density generated in TENGs based on FLG electrodes, compared to the gold-based ones. Thus, the selection of the electrode collectors is strictly relying also upon the choice made on positive (e.g., Nylon) or negative (e.g., PVDF) tribomaterial. The driver to optimize optoelectronics devices, such as photovoltaic diodes, LEDs and transistors, mainly relies on interface engineering, i.e., the possibility to vary the charge injection or extraction at the electrode and active material interface. Therefore, the presence of two electrodes with different work functions determines the establishment of a built-in potential (Vbi) and a corresponding electric field (Ebi) into the TENG. It is intuitive to expect that if such built-in field is opposite in sign to the triboelectrification field generated by the triboelectric charges, an overall decrease of the displacement field should be expected, with a consequent decrease in the TENG output. Vice-versa the built-in field can sum up to the triboelectrification field, giving rise to an overall improvement of the device performance. This simple relation is described in eq. 2, in which the contribution of the electric field (E) to the displacement field D (eq. 1), is expressed in terms of the electric field generated by the triboelectrification charges (Etribo) and the preset built-in electric field (Ebi) established by the electrical contact of the Fermi energy alignment between the two electrodes: Figure In the configuration reported in figure A simple electrodynamic model of the working potential in a contact-separation TENG, can be drawn under the assumption of infinitely large electrodes as previously reported by Niu et al. In this work, we prove that FLG electrodes represent a highly efficient charge collector in TENGs, overcoming the performances of conventional metal electrodes, with the added value of easy integration into flexible devices via solution processing in ambient conditions. We demonstrate that the design of new TENG configurations requires the complete understanding of all factors that affect the triboelectric charging and induction processes, which have to take into account not only the charge affinity and triboelectric properties of the tribomaterials but also the processes occurring at the tribomaterial/electrode interfaces. Here, we demonstrate that the work function of the electrodes is a fundamental parameter to be controlled for the generation of a favorable built-in potential in TENGs. This built-in potential contribute to enhance the electrical performances by increasing the charge density accumulated at the electrode/tribomaterial interface. In addition, our finding also bring to the conclusion that the selection of the electrode can modify the relative positioning of the tribomaterial along the triboelectric series. Therefore, this parameter has to be taken into account when designing experiments aiming at defining the tendency of insulating materials to undergo triboelectrification. Corresponding authors: giuseppina.pace@iit.it, francesco.bonaccorso@iit.it Differently from the case presented in Figure Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Graphene Labs, Via Morego, 30, 16136 Genova, Italy ASG Superconductors S.p.A., corso Ferdinando Maria Perrone, 73R, 16152 Genova, Italy BeDimensional S.p.A., via Lungotorrente Secca 3d, 16163 Genova, Italy