Inhomogeneous metasurfaces have shown possibilities for unprecedented control of wave propagation and scattering. While it is conventional to shine a single incident plane wave from one side of these metastructures, illuminating by several waves simultaneously from both sides may enhance possibilities to control scattered waves, which results in additional functionalities and novel applications. Here, we unveil how using coherent plane-wave illumination of a properly designed inhomogeneous metasurface sheet it is possible to realize controllable retroreflection. We call these metasurfaces as "coherent retroreflectors" and explain the method for realizing them both in theory and practice. We show that coherent retroreflectors can be used for filtering undesired modes and creation of field-localization regions in waveguides. The latter application is in resemblance to bound states in the radiation continuum. Metasurfaces, as optically thin layers structured at the subwavelength scale (e.g., In this letter, we introduce surface-inhomogeneous coherent metasurfaces which can be defined as the surfacevarying sheets with extended properties under coherent illumination from both sides. In particular, this letter introduces and studies coherent metasurfaces designed for total retroreflection, as illustrated in Fig. Retroreflectors that are capable of reflecting the electromagnetic energy back to the source are essential for different important applications We explain how to design coherent retroreflective metasurfaces for both transverse-electric (TE) and transverse-magnetic (TM) linearly polarized waves. Furthermore, we discuss how the proposed retroreflective metasurface can be effectively used to suppress unwanted waveguide modes and localize high-amplitude fields in unbounded waveguiding structures. In addition, we note that it is possible to replace conventional retroreflec- tors Let us consider a metasurface sheet of negligible thickness as an interface between two vacuum regions, as shown in Fig. , where E τ,1-2 (H τ,1-2 ) are the total tangential electric (magnetic) fields on the two sides of the metasurface, respectively, and Z s denotes the corresponding surface impedance In order to function as a retroreflector, the metasurface requires different surface impedance profiles depending on whether it is illuminated with TE or TM waves. In more detail, the desired field structure is a set of two incident plane waves, which are illuminating the opposite sides of the metasurface, and two retroreflected plane waves. Let us first consider the TE polarization, illus-trated in Fig. in region 1, and in region 2. Here, E I and E R represent the amplitudes of the incident and reflected waves, respectively. Also, η 0 and k 0 are the free-space intrinsic impedance and wavenumber. We consider the fullreflection scenario, where all the incident power is reflected by the metasurface, with reflected fields defined as E R,1 = E I,1 exp(jφ R,1 ) and E R,2 = E I,2 exp(jφ R,2 ). In addition, we suppose that the incident electric fields have the same magnitude, but there is a difference in phase: ). Based on these considerations and Eqs. ( Thus, the surface impedance of coherent retroreflective sheets for TE polarization is a function of the position with the period D = λ 0 /2 sin(θ i ) which depends on the angle of incidence and frequency (recall that k 0 = 2π/λ 0 ). It is worth mentioning that the effect of the reflection phase on the surface impedance is equivalent to a displacement of the retroreflective sheet along the y-axis, as portrayed in Fig. As it is seen from the above two equations, surface impedances for TM and TE polarizations are quite similar, with the cosine term as the only difference. To illustrate the capabilities of surface-inhomogeneous coherent metasurfaces, we suggest two relevant applications where thin sheets can be effectively employed as coherent retroreflectors. The first application is about filtering undesired waveguide modes. We consider a parallel-plate waveguide which is formed by two ideally conducting sheets, as shown in Fig. As a proof-of-concept example, let us assume that the waveguide has h = 33.31 mm distance between the plates, enough to allow free propagation of transverseelectromagnetic (TEM), TE 1 , and TM 1 modes at the reference frequency of f 0 = 10 GHz, even in the scenario when a thin PEC plate is placed in the middle of the waveguide. Suppose that the TM 1 mode is undesired, and, therefore, we are interested in blocking this specific mode. Since the angle of incidence for each mode is given by θ i = arccos(nλ 0 /(2h)) in which λ 0 is the wavelength and n represents the mode number The second application is based on the use of coherent retroreflectors inside a waveguide to achieve significant field localization. A pair of coherent retroreflectors is aligned as shown in Fig. Similar field-localization effects can be achieved in the scattering regime. To demonstrate that, we remove the Hertzian dipole sources and position two small PEC (perfect electric conductor) wire scatterers at the center of the structure. The waveguide is excited by a wave port at the left end of the simulation domain. The two PEC wires are rotated at the angle ±45 • and separated by λ 0 /4 distance, so that they excite enough strong electric fields with the y component in the vicinity of the scatterers [see Fig. In summary, we propounded the concept of coherent surface-inhomogeneous metasurfaces on an example of retroreflective sheets, whose attribute is to reflect plane waves back to the source when they are illuminated from both sides simultaneously. Unlike retroreflective boundaries, the proposed coherent retroreflective sheet reaches total retroreflection without the use of additional layers. This work presented scenarios of practical applications of non-homogeneous surfaces under coherent illumination. Through electromagnetic simulations, we have developed coherent retroreflective sheets that are capable to prevent propagation of a given electromagnetic mode in a multimode waveguide, without interfering with other modes; and to create localized field regions inside waveguides. The latter one can be viewed as a novel approach for realization of bound states in the radiation continuum. We expect that extending the concept of coherent inhomogeneous sheets to other metasurface functionalities will reveal other interesting new phenomena.