High spin-orbit torques (SOTs) generated by topological materials and heavy metals interfaced with a ferromagnetic layer show promise for next generation magnetic memory and logic devices. SOTs generated from the in-plane spin polarization along y-axis originated by the spin Hall and Edelstein effects can switch magnetization collinear with the spin polarization in the absence of external magnetic fields. However, an external magnetic field is required to switch the magnetization along x and z-axes via SOT generated by y-spin polarization. Here, we present that the above limitation can be circumvented by unconventional SOT in magnetron-sputtered thin film MnPd 3 . In *Corresponding authors: mdc2019@stanford.edu and sxwang@stanford.edu Efficient control of magnetization at ultra-high speed has been of prime interest to the spintronics community To achieve high density magnetic memory and logic devices, perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) is desired where t is MnPd 3 film thickness. This drift-diffusion model considers that the spin current generated by the bulk of thin films is completely absorbed by the ferromagnetic layer without any dissipation at the interface and back-flow of the spin current. θ y (t ≈ ∞) and λ obtained by ordinary drift-diffusion model are 0.34 and 6.30 nm, respectively. Now by considering spin-back flow the drift-diffusion model can be modified into where ρ is bulk resistivity, G ↑↓ is spin-mixing conductivity, respectively. The red line in Fig. As presented in Fig. ⁄ Ω -1 m -1 (Methods and Extended Data Fig. Alternatively, magnetometry was also used to confirm that PMA is present in MP10/Co1 sample (Methods and Extended Data Fig. These experimental results of PMA switching have been qualitatively reproduced by the LLG simulations (Methods and Extended Data Fig. We also performed SHH measurements on the PMA samples, as detailed in Methods and Extended Data Fig. ). R xy 1ω fits perfectly to the sin2φ, indicating that the out-of-plane field projection due to the imperfect sample mounting is absent. R xy 2ω as a function of magnetic field angle is presented in Fig.