The electronic structure of the enigmatic iron-based superconductor FeSe has puzzled researchers since spectroscopic probes failed to observe the expected electron pocket at the Y point in the 1-Fe Brillouin zone. It has been speculated that this pocket, essential for an understanding of the superconducting state, is either absent or incoherent. Here, we perform a theoretical study of the preferred nematic order originating from nearest-neighbor Coulomb interactions in an electronic model relevant for FeSe. We find that at low temperatures the dominating nematic components are of inter-orbital dxz -dxy and dyz -dxy character, with spontaneously broken amplitudes for these two components. This inter-orbital nematic order naturally leads to distinct hybridization gaps at the X and Y points of the 1-Fe Brillouin zone, and may thereby produce highly anisotropic Fermi surfaces with only a single electron pocket at one of these momentum-space locations. The associated superconducting gap structure obtained with the generated low-energy electronic band structure from spin-fluctuation mediated pairing agrees well with that measured experimentally. Finally, from a comparison of the computed spin susceptibility to available neutron scattering data, we discuss the necessity of additional self-energy effects, and explore the role of orbital-dependent quasiparticle weights as a minimal means to include them. The research of electronic properties of iron-based superconductors has proven to be a rich field that challenges our understanding of correlated multi-band systems. In this respect, particularly the superconducting iron-chalcogenides, FeSe and doped FeTe, have attracted considerable attention due to their unusual low-energy electronic states The very high level of rotational anisotropy is evident, e.g., from theoretical modelling of experimental data measured at low temperatures in FeSe Of course, any theoretical approach for explaining the large electronic anisotropy of FeSe relies on having a reasonable starting point for inclusion of interactions in the band structure. It was initially proposed, based on comparison to ARPES data available at the time, that FeSe features nematicity in the d xz and d yz intra-orbital channels with form factors transforming as the irreducible representations (IRs) A 1g and B 1g of the given point group These recent developments raise a number of important questions related to the low-energy band structure and the associated superconducting gap structure of FeSe. For example, what underlying physical interactions naturally produce nematic order that generate single-electron-pocket bands Here, motivated by several earlier theoretical studies of the effects of longer-range Coulomb interactions V on band structure renormalizations of ironbased superconductors In order to explore how the electronic structure of FeSe is affected by longer-range Coulomb interactions, specifically nearest-neighbor (NN) density interactions, we apply the following many-body Hamiltonian where i, j indicates the set of NN sites. Here, the operator c iμσ annihilates an electron in orbital d μ with spin projection σ at lattice site R i , and n iμσ represents the density operator. The kinetic part of the Hamiltonian We incorporate the effects of NN Coulomb interactions by performing a Hartree-Fock mean-field (MF) decoupling of H int , and introduce the following homogeneous bond-order fields in wave-vector space with N being the number of lattice sites, and f A1 k being the form factor of the interaction, which transforms as the IR A 1 . Specifically for the nearest-neighbor interaction studied here , where d labels the set of primitive lattice vectors, and a d is the lattice constant in the d-direction. Note that in the decoupling of H int , the Hartree terms contribute only to a constant energy shift, which can be readily absorbed in the chemical potential μ 0 → μ 0 -4V k μσ n k μσ /N . Upon reaching the nematic transition temperature T n , the system will spontaneously violate S 4 symmetry, and we therefore seek to split the bond order fields into S 4 symmetry-preserving and symmetry-breaking terms, in order to identify the origin of nematicity driven by NN interactions. The symmetry-preserving terms, denoted by N μν kσ,br , will in general lead to band renormalizing (br) terms, and is obtained by averaging over the four cycles of S 4 where D(S 4 ) is the representation of S 4 in orbital space. As a consequence of SOC, one should in general also perform the S 4 averaging in spin space. However, by exploiting that the fields N μν kσ are diagonal in spin space and the fact that the action of S 4 is equivalent to a π/2rotation about the spin z-axis, we find that S 4 leaves the spin projection σ of N μν kσ invariant. Momentum dependent band renormalizing terms, such as N μν kσ,br , have been previously put forward as potential candidates for explaining the band structure renormalizations of ironpnictides and iron-chalcogenides Here, the main focus is on the S 4 symmetry breaking (sb) terms leading to nematic order, which are simply the remainder of the total field N μν kσ,sb = N μν kσ -N μν kσ,br . In order to extract the form factors entering in the symmetrypreserving and symmetry-breaking fields, we perform the following projection onto the normalized lattice versions of the basis functions f γ k belonging to the group D 2d As a consequence of the NN interaction, the sum over γ is restricted to include only the lowest order lattice harmonics, i.e. only linear combinations of cos(k d a d ) and sin(k d a d ) enter in f γ k , while a longer-ranging interaction in general allows for higher order terms. Thus, we arrive at the following MF decoupled interaction Note that we here introduced the enhancement factor α, since the interaction strength V in the symmetrypreserving and symmetry-breaking channels in general will be different, since the fields belong to different IRs of the point group, and can potentially lead to distinct couplings in a renormalization group procedure. Thus we allow α = 0 throughout, similar to earlier works Equipped with the above model Hamiltonian and symmetry considerations, we are now able to calculate the bond order fields N μν γσ,br/sb self-consistently for a fixed electron filling n = 6.0, (for details see App. A). In our calculations we adopt the kinetic Hamiltonian for FeSe given in Ref. The effects of NN interactions, captured by the terms entering in Eq. ( Turning our attention to the symmetry breaking fields, N μν γσ,sb , we find that only fields that are coupled to the dwave form factor play an essential role, see Fig. To gain deeper insight into the emergent nematic order, we now proceed and study more carefully the IRs of N μν kσ,br/sb . By construction, the S 4 symmetry preserving fields can only consist of terms transforming as A 1 and A 2 , and, in fact, we find through our self-consistent calculations that only A 1 terms are non-zero in N μν kσ,br , see App. B for further details. In contrast, N μν kσ,sb can contain terms transforming as the remaining three IRs of the group, i.e. B 1 , B 2 and E, allowing for the nematic order to arise in any of these three channels. As we explicitly show in App. B, we find non-zero S 4 symmetry breaking terms belonging to two distinct IRs, namely B 1 and E. This implies that the system undergoes two consecutive phase transitions upon lowering of the temperature. In order to quantify this, we focus on the t 2g orbitals, and define the following leading order parameters where σ is the opposite spin projection of σ. For details see App. B. In Fig. We stress that the effects of the e g orbitals and remaining fields N μν γσ,br/sb not displayed in Fig. The low-energy electronic structure established above has important consequences for spin excitations that should be compared with experiments. In this respect, a series of inelastic neutron scattering experiments In Fig. On the other hand, these various hypothetical renormalizations do not lead to substantial changes in the gap structure obtained for FeSe within the corresponding spin fluctuation pairing theory. This is simply because in a multiband system even at ω = 0 contributions to χ(q) arise from states tens or even hundreds of meV from the Fermi level In this work we have pursued a scenario where nematicity originates entirely from NN Coulomb repulsion, even though it is well-known that onsite interactions alone may also drive a nematic instability as a precursor to stripe magnetism Recently, another theoretical study investigated the possibility of nematic order lifting one of the electron pockets (above the Fermi level) in FeSe As mentioned in the "Results" section, the nematic lowest-temperature phase advocated in this work, resides in the C 2 (monoclinic) group, containing only a C 2 rotation around the x-axis as the remaining symmetry operation. This constitutes a clear prediction within the current scenario; the electronic sector should exhibit a double transition as the temperature is lowered. We are not aware of such evidence, e.g. from specific heat data Recent theoretical works explored the possibility of pinned local nematic order In summary, we have discovered an inter-orbital nematic order generated from nearest-neighbor Coulomb repulsion for electronic models relevant for FeSe in particular, and perhaps the iron-based systems more broadly. A natural property of this kind of nematic order is the generation of highly anisotropic Fermi surfaces, featuring in some cases, only a single hole and electron pocket. We have shown how, for FeSe, this explains photoemission data and the experimentally extracted very anisotropic superconducting gap structure. However, a consistent picture of the neutron scattering data, cannot be straightforwardly obtained within this nematic scenario, without invoking additional self-energy effects, which in the simplest case, involves sizable corrections in the form of reduced orbitally dependent quasiparticle weights. Appendix A: Details on bond-order fields and self-consistent calculations The explicit forms of N μν kσ,br and N μν kσ,sb are found through the averaging in Eq. ( This projection disentangles the wave-vector and orbital dependence, and thereby greatly simplifies Eq. ( with a x = a y = a ≡ 1. For NN interactions in three dimensions, the above equations are accompanied by where D(S 4 ) and D spin (S 4 ) are matrix representations in orbital and spin space, respectively, while D(S 4 ) is the representation in the combined space. Any symmetry operation acting in spin space can be expressed in terms of the Pauli matrices σ x,y,z accompanied by the identity 1 σ . Note, however, that the fields N μν kσ are diagonal in spin space, and therefore not affected by D spin (S 4 ). One can therefore solely consider the action of D(S 4 ), as discussed in connection to Eq. ( By executing the above on a 2D system, we end up with the following band renormalizing (br) terms where we used the convenient shorthand notation {d xz , d yz , d x 2 -y 2 , d xy , d 3z 2 -r 2 } ≡ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. Similarly we find the following symmetry breaking (sb) terms These fields, combined with the basis functions f γ k , enter in the mean-field decoupled Hamiltonian in the following way, see also Eq. ( The Hamiltonian becomes bilinear in creation and annihilation operators upon approximating the electron density n takes the simple form where n F (E kmσ ) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. Furthermore, we find that the terms entering in the ma- Each field is coupled to the belonging form factor listed in Eq. (A2). Only (b) and (d) display non-zero solutions, and the former will ultimately give rise to the highly anisotropic FS shown in Fig. trix elements in Eqs. (A4) and (A5) are expressed as By calculating the above self-consistently with the parameters used in Fig. Although the above classification of band renormalizing and symmetry breaking fields suffices in describing the occurrence of nematic order, it fails to express the exact symmetry of the emergent nematic order. In other words, the band renormalizing and symmetry breaking fields transform as a sum of IRs, specifically and it is therefore not obvious whether the nematic order parameter transforms as B 1 , B 2 or E. In order to shed light on this ambiguity, we will in the following perform a thorough classification of the bondorder fields, and further segregate these into IRs. In doing so, we average out the various IRs of the already established N μν γσ,br/sb , similar to Eq. ( where N γ,Γ represents a matrix in combined orbital and spin space transforming as the IR Γ of the group D 2d . The γ-subscript indicates that the matrix couples to the form factor f γ k . Similarly, N γ,br/sb is a matrix containing the elements N μν γσ,br/sb . As discussed in App. A, D(g) is the matrix representation of g ∈ D 2d in combined orbital and spin space. By explicitly performing these averages for the 2D system under consideration, we get the following matrices N γσ,Γ in orbital space for a given spin projection σ = {↑, ↓} ≡ {1, -1} where we introduced the following quantities for brevity with σ = -σ. Note furthermore that the matrices labeled by the IR E x,y transform as the basis functions (x, y), while N γσ,E Lx and N γσ,E Ly instead transform as the angular momentum pseudovector (L x , L y ). In gen-eral we allow for magnetic terms, i.e. m μν γσ = 0, however, we find these fields to be orders of magnitude smaller than the density terms n μν γσ . Nonetheless, for completeness our calculations and classification include all terms, so not to miss any subtle details. We can then, after having performed the various averages in Eq. (B2), express N μν kσ in terms of the IRs in the following way This informs us that a single term f γ k N μν γσ,Γ must transform as the product of the two IRs γ and Γ, e.g. for γ = d ∼ B 1 and Γ = A 1 , the term altogether transforms as B 1 ⊗A 1 = B 1 . With this in mind, we can collect terms that transform equivalently, and get for the IRs A 1 , A 2 , B 1 and B 2 , respectively, and finally for the 2D IR we arrive at From the above, we are able to pinpoint exactly what fields give rise to the nematic order. For example, if a non-zero B 1 term appears in our self-consistent calculations, then we know that the nematic order transforms as B 1 , and that the resulting crystalline point group must be D 2 D 2d . From our self-consistent calculations, we find that all A 2 and B 2 terms are identically zero, i.e. N μν kσ,A2 = N μν kσ,B2 = 0, which immediately implies that N μν kσ,br ≡ N μν kσ,A1 , thus the band renormalizing terms all transform as the IR A 1 . See Fig. i.e. all terms coupling to f px,y k cancel in this IR channel. From our self-consistent calculations, we also find that N μν sσ,B1 = 0, leaving us with only a single remaining term in N μν kσ,B1 , namely N μν dσ,A1 . See Fig. For the terms transforming as the 2D IR E, we find the non-zero matrices displayed in Fig. Similar to the B 1 terms, also here we can adopt the nonzero elements of N μν kσ,E as an order parameter of the system. Specifically we define the following two component order parameter The order parameters N Ex,y will enter on equal footing in a Landau free energy expansion, since they are interrelated by symmetry, and the system can thus display either N Ex = 0 or N Ey = 0. Through our self-consistent calculations we find in fact both solutions, depending on the initialization of our computations, i.e. where in the energy landscape the calculations start. Throughout the paper we have focused on solutions with N Ex = 0. Conclusively, we see that the presence of two non-zero order parameters, belonging to distinct IRs, hints at the following two phase transition scenarios: i) By lowering of the temperature, N E becomes non-zero which imposes the symmetry point group transition D 2d → C 2 . For this specific point group N B1 transform trivially, and is thus allowed to enter simultaneously with N E , i.e. N E and N B emerges at the same transition temperature. The other scenario is ii) The system undergoes two consecutive phase transitions, with N B1 entering prior to N E when lowering the temperature, leading to two transition temperatures and the following point group reduction scheme D 2d → D 2 → C 2 . For the spicific system under consideration, we find scenario ii) to be true, see Fig. Appendix C: Susceptibility and spin-fluctuation pairing from a partially incoherent electronic structure Adopting the properties of a correlated electron gas which is characterized by a reduced quasiparticle weight Z(k F ) at the Fermi level, it seems a good approximation at low energies to parametrize the Green function as ). As for the B1 field, also here the non-zero elements allow us to define an order parameter, see Eq. (B16), which can be used as an indicator for when the symmetries of the system are described by the monoclinic point group C2. All values in the figure have been rounded to the second decimal place. interactions from the Hubbard-Hund Hamiltonian where the parameters U , U , J, J are given in the notation of Kuroki et al. where we have adopted the shorthand notation k ≡ (k, ω n ) and defined the abbreviation n (k)a μ2, * n (k)a μ1 m (k+q)a μ3, * m (k+q). To evaluate the susceptibility, we perform the frequency summation analytically and numerically sum over the full Brillouin zone using 400 × 400 k points. Note that the susceptibility is just related by χ0 μ1μ2μ3μ4 (q) = Z μ1 Z μ2 Z μ3 Z μ4 χ 0 μ1μ2μ3μ4 (q), (C5) to the one from a fully coherent electronic structure, i.e. the quasiparticle weights enter as prefactors and renormalize each component of the susceptibility tensor. Finally, we treat the interactions in a random phase approximation (RPA) to calculate the spin (1) and charge (0) susceptibilities χRPA 1 μ1μ2μ3μ4 (q) = χ0 (q) 1 -Ū s χ0 (q) χRPA 0 μ1μ2μ3μ4 (q) = χ0 (q) 1 + Ū c χ0 (q) The total spin susceptibility as measured experimentally is given by the sum χ(q, ω) = 1 2 μν χRPA 1 μμνν (q, ω) . (C7) Note that the interaction matrices Ū s and Ū c contain linear combinations of the parameters U, U , J, J , for details see for example Ref. 72. To calculate the superconducting instability in the spin-singlet channel (the dominant one for the present models), we use the vertex for pair scattering between bands n and m, 