Hybrid halide perovskite semiconductors exhibit complex, dynamical disorder while also harboring properties ideal for optoelectronic applications that include photovoltaics. However, these materials are structurally and compositionally distinct from "traditional" compound semiconductors composed of tetrahedrally-coordinated elements with an average valence electron count of silicon. As discussed here, the additional dynamic degrees of freedom of hybrid halide perovskites underlie many of their potentially transformative physical properties. Neutron scattering and spectroscopy studies of the atomic dynamics of these materials have yielded significant insights to the functional properties. Specifically, inelastic neutron scattering has been used to elucidate the phonon band structure, and quasi-elastic neutron scattering (QENS) has revealed the nature of the uncorrelated dynamics pertaining to molecular reorientations. Understanding the dynamics of these complex semiconductors has elucidated the temperature-dependent phase stability and origins of the defect-tolerant electronic transport from the highly polarizable dielectric response. Furthermore, the dynamic degrees of freedom of the hybrid perovskites provides additional opportunities for application engineering and innovation. Hybrid halide perovskites and their structural derivatives have advantageous optoelectronic properties for a relatively wide range of applications. The tunable band gap, defect tolerance and long electronic excited state lifetimes of these perovskites make them ideal semiconductors for photovoltaics Hybrid halide perovskites exhibit additional dynamic degrees of freedom when compared to traditional compound semiconductors (e.g., CdTe, GaAs, TlBr). Materials such as (CH3NH3)PbI3 and (CH(NH2)2)PbI3 are plastic crystals, as schematically depicted in Figure rotating the molecules can be used to compute a revised Goldschmidt tolerance factor based on the ionic radii of the constituent ions (Figure Various advantageous electronic properties in hybrid perovskites have been attributed to the dynamic, plastic crystalline behavior. While long electronic excited state lifetimes have been linked to collective dynamics of the extended octahedral framework (i.e., phonons) A bottleneck of heat-transporting phonons prevents electronic relaxation, such as the relaxation of "hot" carriers to the band edges Broken inversion symmetry in the presence of strong spin-orbit coupling splits doubly degenerate bands into spin-up vs spin-down bands in momentum space to yield a material with close direct and indirect transitions, enabling strong absorption but long-lived carriers. The frontier electronic states of halide perovskites couple primarily to the low energy optical phonons. The influence of lattice dynamics on semiconductors typically revolves around a discussion of the scattering of charge carriers from electron-phonon coupling. In compound semiconductors with the diamond-type structure such as GaAs, optical phonons reside near ∼40 meV; thus they are not appreciably populated at room temperature and play a relatively small role in electron-phonon scattering processes Exciton: Used here as the Coulombicallyattracted bound state of negative and positive charge carriers in a crystal. Coupling of a charge to the presence of the electric field generated from a longitudinal optical phonon The distortion of an ionic lattice in response to extra charges, akin to the Fröhlich mechanism. Optical phonons, primarily derived from the cooperative dynamics within the octahedral framework, drive the phase behavior of halide perovskites. Akin to the ferroelectric per- Neutron scattering is a powerful tool to investigate the structure and dynamics of materials through analysis of the dynamic structure factor, S(Q, ω) (Figure Currently, these experiments can only be conducted at large, shared spallation-or reactor-based neutron sources. As such, INS is complementary to infrared and Raman spectroscopy; QENS is complementary to other techniques sensitive to motions on 10 -9 s to 10 -12 s time scales, such as nuclear magnetic spectroscopy (also nucleus specific) and optical spectroscopies (e.g., Brillouin light scattering Yields structural and dynamical structural information. Incoherent scattering: Yields information independent of positional correlations. These same collective dynamics influence charge transport primarily through electronphonon coupling. The optical phonons generate just over half of the polarizability in the dielectric response of CH3NH3PbI3, as portrayed in Figure Quasi-elastic neutron scattering (QENS) can be performed on neutron spectrometers with excellent energy resolution (∆E ∼ 1 to 3 μeV). The quasi-elastic scattering (e.g., energy transfer = 0 within the instrumental resolution) yields information about slow motions corresponding to relaxation of nearly stationary states, such as diffusion or molecular relaxation via translations or rotations. These relaxations provide a Doppler broadening of the elastic scattering due to the small energy transfer between neutrons and the moving nuclei in the sample. This is often differentiated from inelastic scattering, where the neutrons excite or are excited by discrete motions with finite energies (e.g., internal molecular vibrations). To analyze the molecular motions, one can use a "jump model," as molecules are assumed to reside in preferred orientations with frequent (e.g., GHz) jumps between symmetry-related (site and molecular) orientations With such excellent energy resolution on a neutron spectrometer, one can accurately measure the fraction of elastic scattering. The incoherent elastic scattering yields information about thermal motion, which follows a Q-dependent attenuation depending on the mean squared displacement (MSD) of atomic motion via the the Debye-Waller factor = exp(-q 2 u 2 /3), for isotropic, harmonic motion, as shown in Figure ductors GaAs (α =0.068) and CdTe (α =0.39) 2.2. Independent, Aperiodic Dynamics 2.2.1. Inorganic dipolar dynamics. The fluctuations of lone pair electrons modify the structure and properties of hybrid perovskites. They have been linked to many exciting aspects of hybrid perovskites, including the large ionic dielectric responses, light holes, and unconventional band gap: all contribute to the favorable electronic transport and "defect tolerance" Lone Pair Electrons: Ge(II), Sn(II), Pb(II), Sb(III), and Bi(III), have the valence electron configuration, "ns 2 ," that can become stereochemically active to create space-filling lone pair electrons All-inorganic perovskites exhibit significant polar dynamics from anharmonic ionic fluctuations, attributed to a "head-to-head" motion of cesium ions Hybrid halide perovskite are plastic crystals, and the dynamically disordered organic cations impart new degrees of freedom relative to conventional compound semiconductors. These dynamics play a role in various functional properties, deriving primarily from their polarizability Although the exact mechanism behind the long excited state lifetimes for thermalized and hot carriers remains debated, the orientational dynamics of the organic molecules play an important role in many (and not mutually exclusive) hypotheses. Organic cation dynamics have been implicated in the formation of large polarons that interact with both exciton The dynamic organic molecules also impact the ionic transport and diffusion. Hybrid halide perovskites have a significant ionic contribution to the conductivity under various circumstances Given the importance of reorientational dynamics in hybrid perovskites for their functional performance, many studies have sought to understand the nature of these dynamics, both of simple hybrid halide perovskites and of technologically-relevant complex alloys (88). The remainder of this perspective details several case studies of organic cation dynamics through neutron scattering and complementary techniques. Myriad competing interactions govern the complex dynamics in hybrid perovskites. The activation energies and residence times of the reorientations of organic cations for several APbX3 perovskites shown in Figure Additional complexity is apparent upon examination of the residence times of organic molecules. For both methylammonium and formamidinium perovskites, studies reveal two characteristic residence times for two distinct motions identified as a long time-scale reorientation and a short time-scale wobble (Figure In this section, we present case studies of organic cation dynamics based on neutron spectroscopy and complementary techniques (e.g., NMR, dielectric spectroscopy, time-resolved vibrational spectroscopy), as well as their dependence on chemical substitution, and their relationships with optoelectronic properties. These case studies demonstrate the insight that neutron scattering has to offer for hybrid halide perovskites. 3.1.1. Methylammonium Lead Halide Perovskites. Methylammonium lead halide perovskites have been the archetypal hybrid perovskite for solar applications, due to the advantageous band gap of methylammonium lead iodide and the ease of preparation of methylammonium lead iodide compared to the cesium and formamidinium analogues (2, 103, 104). Early nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and calorimetric studies demonstrated that methylammonium is dynamically disordered in the high temperature cubic phase, with increased orientational ordering on cooling that relates to the two known phase transitions (105). Between 400 K and 100 K, methylammonium lead iodide transitions from the high temperature cubic phase (space group: P m 3m) to a tetragonal phase (space group: I4/mcm) characterized by out-of-phase octahedral rotations when looking perpendicular to the c axis (Glazer notation: a 0 a 0 c -), and then to an orthorhombic phase (space group P nma) characterized by additional octahedral tilt axes (Glazer notation: a -b + a -) (105). These transitions change the shape and size of the cuboctahedral void where methylammonium sits and thus its dynamical behavior. The phase behavior of CH3NH3PbX 3 perovskites reflects the presence of organicinorganic coupling. The phonon dispersion measured in the cubic phase of methylammonium lead iodide with high energy resolution inelastic X-ray (HERIX) scattering revealed large amplitude and anharmonic zone-edge rotational instabilities of the octahedra and short-range disorder of the octahedra (49). This disorder is largest for the hybrids, as opposed to all-inorganic materials (106). Subsequent neutron scattering revealed that these instabilities are resolution limited in energy, and thus correspond to static (i.e., with lifetime of τ > 36 ps) tetragonal domains similar to the critical scattering seen from SrTiO3 In CH3NH3PbBr3, there is a clear correlation between the phonons of the Pb-Br framework and methylammonium dynamics. At the orthorhombic to tetragonal order-disorder transition, sharp modes attributed to methylammonium vibrations decrease in scattered amplitude while heating; at the transition these modes are replaced by broad QENS associated with methylammonium reorientation (Figure Given the significance of hydrogen bonding in CH3NH3PbX 3 (102), the organicinorganic interactions are a likely source of anharmonic behavior, as supported by density functional theory calculations of the rotational energy barriers Methylammonium rapidly reorients in the high-temperature cubic phase and exhibits a decrease in amplitude, timescale, and dynamic degrees of freedom on cooling as the cuboc-tahedral void constricts, as learned from extensive neutron scattering and complementary NMR spectroscopy studies. In methylammonium lead bromide, the temperature-dependent mean squared displacements (MSDs) calculated from incoherent elastic neutron scattering (Figure The reorientational dynamics of methylammonium are well described by a jump model of transitions between idealized orientations, as originally proposed from changes in degrees of freedom at various phase transitions determined from calorimetry The molecular reorientations correlate most strongly to the dielectric response. As shown in Figure Through this organic-inorganic coupling, the dynamic degrees of freedom of methylammonium correlate to changes in the optoelectronic properties. For example, the freezing out of the C4 whole molecular reorientation at the tetragonal-orthorhombic phase transition correlates to faster recombination of excited state charge carriers as well as an increase in exciton binding energies Halides. Formamidinium lead halide perovskites typically have unusual phase behavior compared to methylammonium and cesium analogues, including reentrant phase transitions (116), path dependent phase transitions (104), and crystallographically unresolvable phase transitions Based on the molecular geometry, the natural rotations for formamidinium are 180 • rotations with the axis of rotation parallel to the carbon-hydrogen bond or about the axis connecting the two nitrogen atoms, as well as a 120 • rotation orthogonal to the molecular plane (Figure The complex behavior of formamidinium dynamics appears to be related to its distinct distribution of electrostatic charges. Formamidinium has a weaker dipole moment and stronger quadrupole moment than methylammonium (120). A pair of molecular quadrupoles embedded in a dielectric crystal prefer to orient perpendicular to each other in a "T" shape (121), which can couple strongly to compressive and expansive strains from the surrounding anionic lattice (94). This pairwise "T" shape cannot tile any Bravais lattice, and therefore the molecular orientations of formamidinium are frustrated Nuclear Quadrupolar Resonance (NQR): a nuclear resonance technique performed in the absence of a magnetic field on solids containing quadrupolar nuclei, wherein the nuclear spin levels are split by the local chemical environment and interrogated with radio waves. 3.1.3. Lead-free Hybrid Perovskite Halides. While more difficult to experimentally study (e.g., due to air sensitivity), tin and germanium perovskites offer new opportunities for functional properties, as they show an increased contribution of the ns 2 lone pair electrons and lack the toxicity of lead Most of the technologically-relevant hybrid halide perovskites for photovoltaic applications are heavily chemically substituted (i.e., alloyed), as exemplified by a high-performing composition: (CH(NH2)2)0.79(CH3NH3)0.16Cs0.05Pb(I0.84Br0.17)3 (88). Chemical substitution is easily accomplished synthetically in the solution-phase or solid-state routes to these materials (88, 132), which allows for tuning of optoelectronic properties such as the band gap and polaron mobility This section focuses on the role of cesium substitution in the two perovskite materials described above, methylammonium lead bromide and formamidinium lead bromides. In contrast to the hybrid materials, cesium lead bromide exhibits orthorhombic symmetry with octahedral tilting at and below room temperature, with the cubic and tetragonal phases accessible at temperatures above 80 • C and 140 • C, respectively (142). The generalized phase behavior of the substituted alloys can be understood within the context of a pseudobinary phase diagram, where compositions closest to the end members behave as solidsolutions separated by a two-phase region for intermediate compositions. However, the detailed nature of the phase transitions requires closer examination of the dynamic nature of the organic cations in these plastic crystals. Bromide. In methylammonium lead bromide, cesium substitution for methylammonium leads to inhibition of the methylammonium dynamics. As discussed above, methylammonium undergoes 90 • rotations perpendicular and 120 • rotations parallel to the carbon-nitrogen bond axis The pinning of molecular reorientations with cesium substitution in (CH3NH3)1-xCsxPbBr3 correlates with a significant modification of the phase behavior. In contrast to CH3NH3PbBr3 (Figure In analogy to spin glasses, the formation of an orientational glass relates to frustration of order parameters related to the orientation of the molecule Bromide. The orientational phase transitions of formamidinium lead bromide are sensitive to chemical substitution. The five phase transitions of formamidinium lead bromide have dynamic signatures that manifest in 1 H NMR, 14 N NMR, and MSDs between room temperature and 100 K (Figure Halides. The ability to use a cocktail of cations and anions to create highly stable, functional photovoltaic devices reflects a unique defect tolerance of hybrid perovskites.(88). While pseudo-binary solidsolutions formed by substitution on either A-site (e.g., (CH(NH2)2)1-xCsxPbI3 (147)) or the halogen site (e.g., CH3NH3Pb(I1-x Brx )3 ( Therefore, one expects complex substitutions to also influence the organic molecular dynamics. The inhibition with cesium substitution in methylammonium perovskites resembles methylammonium-substituted formamidinium lead iodide, in which lineshape analysis of 14 N NMR spectra reveals that methylammonium and formamidinium reorientations become increasingly anisotropic with increased substitution (122). Substitution at the halide site, as used to increase stability and tune the electronic bandgap (88, 150), also leads to inhibited cation dynamics. Pump-probe two-dimensional infrared spectroscopy studies of CH3NH3Pb(Clx Br1-x )3 and CH3NH3Pb(Brx I1-x )3 show that both series exhibit slower methylammonium dynamics than either end member Collective and local dynamics in hybrid perovskites underlie the optoelectronic properties that make them of interest for photovoltaics, radiation detection, and light emitting diodes. Therefore, characterization of these dynamics is essential for building useful theories to describe their behavior, especially for local dynamics that do not yet have rigorous models. Neutron scattering plays a large role in uncovering these dynamics -the dynamic structure factor, S(Q, ω), informs researchers of the correlations of these molecular dynamics in both space and in time. Complementary methods, such as NMR, dielectric spectroscopies, Xray scattering, molecular dynamics simulations, and DFT calculations, provide a complete perspective across many environmental conditions. Neutron scattering has been used to track the changes in dynamics as a function of temperature, to describe the symmetry of molecular reorientations, and to characterize their activation energies. These investigations demonstrate that these local dynamics are affected by cation identity, electrostatic and hydrogen-bonding interactions with the extended octahedral framework, and substitution. This creates a deeper understanding of the phase behavior of hybrid halide perovskites. Investigations into 2D perovskite materials have only just begun, and many questions remain about the dynamic degrees of freedom of bulky organic cations and their relationship to optoelectronic properties. Similar questions remain for other hybrid perovskite derivatives, including zero dimensional vacancy ordered perovskites. These insights are the basis of rigorous structure-property relationships that will enable the rational innovation with nextgeneration semiconductors. 1. Hybrid perovskite semiconductors are plastic crystals with dynamically reorienting organic cations. 2. Organic cation dynamics have a direct influence on the dielectric response of hybrid perovskite semiconductors. 3. Molecular reorientational dynamics exert indirect influences on the optical and electronic properties of hybrid perovskites by way of locally broken symmetry, electronphonon coupling, and defect creation and motion. 4. Chemical substitution of hybrid perovskite semiconductors influences the thermodynamic stability and organic cation dynamics. www.annualreviews.org • Dynamics in Hybrid Perovskites Mozur et al. Mozur et al. 