We provide a set of computational experiments based on ab initio calculations to elucidate whether a cuprate-like antiferromagnetic insulating state can be present in the phase diagram of the lowvalence layered nickelate family (Rn+1NinO2n+2, R= rare-earth, n = 1 -∞) in proximity to halffilling. It is well established that at d 9 filling the infinite-layer (n = ∞) nickelate is metallic, in contrast to cuprates wherein an antiferromagnetic insulator is expected. We show that for the Ruddlesden-Popper (RP) reduced phases of the series (finite n) an antiferromagnetic insulating ground state can naturally be obtained instead at d 9 filling, due to the spacer RO2 fluorite slabs present in their structure that block the c-axis dispersion. In the n = ∞ nickelate, the same type of solution can be derived if the off-plane R-Ni coupling is suppressed. We show how this can be achieved if a structural element that cuts off the c-axis dispersion is introduced (i.e. vacuum in a monolayer of RNiO2, or a blocking layer in multilayers formed by (RNiO2)1/(RNaO2)1). Superconductivity in cuprate-like systems has been long sought for In spite of the similarities between this nickelate family and the cuprates described above, a remarkable difference is that while parent cuprates are antiferromagnetic (AF) insulators In this paper, using first-principles calculations, we try to address these questions. We argue that the metallic non-cuprate-like behavior of parent infinite-layer nickelates can be attributed to the strong Ni-R-Ni off-plane hopping. This gives rise to extremely dispersive R-d bands, strongly hybridized with the Ni-d occupied bands. These R-d bands cross the Fermi level leading to a deviation from half-filling in the Ni-d x 2 -y 2 band via a self doping mechanism. We show that if structural modifications are used to provide a means to suppress the Ni-Ni off-plane hopping, an AF insulating state can be obtained. As such, we reveal that in the purely twodimensional limit, RNiO 2 materials are indeed AF insulators. This very same phase can be realized naturally in the finite-n members of the layered nickelate family (with a fluorite blocking slab between NiO 2 planes), including the recently found n = 5 layered nickelate superconductor. As such, our calculations show that these finite-n nickelates can be AF insulators at d 9 filling without any structural changes. All in all, our results illustrate that a crucial part of the phase diagram of the superconducting cuprates (the parent insulating antiferromagnetic phase) can indeed be present for the whole series of layered nickelates. In the case of the n = ∞ compound it is simply hindered by strong off-plane band dispersions but a dimensionality reduction can bring it to light. Our electronic structure calculations in layered nickelates were performed within density functional theory For LaNiO 2 , when thin films are discussed, a sufficient vacuum of 20 Å was introduced, enough to guarantee the lack of interaction between two planes (periodic boundary conditions are utilized along the three spatial directions). Both in thin films and multilayers, atomic positions were fully relaxed within GGA-PBE using the in-plane lattice parameter of LaNiO 2 . In both cases, relaxations were done in a checkerboard antiferromagnetic state in a √ 2× √ 2 supercell of the tetragonal (P 4/mmm) cell. A C-type antiferromagnetic state has been chosen in the bulk as this is the ground state of the system as soon as a small U is included For the La-based n = 4 -6 compounds (La 5 Ni 4 O 10 (n = 4), La 6 Ni 5 O 12 (n = 5), and La 7 Ni 6 O 14 (n = 6)), whose structures have not been experimentally resolved yet, we conducted structural relaxations using VASP within GGA-PBE, optimizing both lattice parameters and internal coordinates in a √ 2× √ 2 supercell of the tetragonal (I4/mmm) cell in a checkerboard (C-type) antiferromagnetic state. As above, a C-type antiferromagnetic state has been chosen as this is the ground state of the finite n materials as soon as a small U is included to account for correlations in the Ni 3d states. In the VASP calculations, an energy cutoff of 650 eV and a kmesh of 6×6×1 were adopted with a force convergence criterion of 5 meV/ Å. With the VASP-optimized structures for the n = 4 -6 nickelates, we then performed further electronic structure calculations using the wien2k code. In these calculations, muffin-tin radii of 2.50 a.u., 2.00 a.u., and 1.72 a.u. were used for La, Ni, and O, respectively. We used R mt K max = 7.0 and a k-grid of 21×21×21 for all materials in the irreducible Brillouin zone. To modify the chemical potential in the finite-n compounds, the virtual crystal approximation (VCA) was used in both the Lasite and Ni-site (to achieve a nominal d 9 filling for all materials), both yielding consistent results. In order to unravel the nature of the ground state of the whole layered-nickelate family when approaching the d 9 nominal filling, we will start by analyzing the electronic structure of the reduced RP compounds as n is varied. As mentioned above, the n = 5 Nd-based layered nickelate has been recently found to be superconducting, increasing the interest in these higher-n layered nickelates. We have used the I4/mmm structure of the n = 3 compound Once the relaxations are carried out, we have artificially moved the chemical potential in all compounds (using the virtual crystal approximation) so that a nominal d 9 filling is achieved, in order to explore what magnetic and electronic phase is the ground state in this situation. The GGA checkerboard AF solutions at d 9 filling are metallic, a U needs to be introduced on the Ni-d states to open up a gap. A summary of the derived AF band structures within GGA+U for the n = 3 -6 compounds is presented in Fig. We start by describing the basic electronic structure of infinite-layer nickelates and how we can understand the differences between the n = ∞ case and the n = ∞ oxygen-reduced RP compounds described in the previous section. Figure Figure In order to illustrate the lack of La-d -Ni-d hybridization in this case, we have highlighted in the band structure of Fig. In order to study the band(s) that bring about metallicity in the bulk in more detail, we have constructed a hypothetical system, like the one shown in Fig. It is important to explain this result in detail. If one looks at the band character of the band crossing the Fermi level in bulk LaNiO 2 We have shown that an AF insulating ground state can be obtained in R n+1 Ni n O 2n+2 layered nickelates at d 9 filling: in a natural manner in the reduced RP phases (n = 3 -6), or introducing a structural element to cut the c-axis dispersion in the n = ∞ compounds. In the infinite-layer nickelates (RNiO 2 ) we have shown that the origin of the celeb self-doping effect is not simply in the rare-earth d bands -the existence of the electron pockets with R-d parentage requires a strong hybridization with the Ni-d z 2 bands. This hybridization leads to the formation of wide bands that arise due to the large hopping taking place along the c-axis. This provides further evidence of the active role of the Ni-d z 2 orbitals in the electronic structure of infinite-layer nickelates This situation (a highly dispersive band crossing the Fermi level) does not occur in the parent cuprates. There are various reasons for this. In the isostructural infinitelayer cuprate (CaCuO 2 ) the Ca-d bands are very far above the Fermi level to be able to produce any effects in the electronic structure. In other cuprates containing atoms with available unoccupied d bands (such as the La bands in La 2 CuO 4 or the Y bands in the YBCO family), there are important structural differences. The case of La 2 CuO 4 allows for a direct comparison with the layered nickelate family. Such a structure To summarize, we have shown that a parent insulating AF phase can take place in the phase diagram of layered nickelates (R n+1 Ni n O 2n+2 ) close to half-filling. Our work shows yet another piece of evidence of the similarities between layered nickelates and cuprates, which were not apparent at first but can be elucidated digging deeper into the properties of these new nickel-oxide materials. 