The use of elemental analysis based on Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS) combined with Neural Networks (NN) is being evaluated as a method for assigning archaeological bone remains to individuals. The bone samples examined originate from excavations of burials at the Cross Street Unitarian Chapel, Manchester (United Kingdom) tha date from the 17 th to the 19 th century. In this study, we critically assess the influence of soil contaminants, by separating the bone elemental fingerprint into two groups of different components prior to the NN analysis. The first group includes elements related to the bone matrix (Ca and P) as well as elements that are regularly incorporated in the living bone tissues (Mg, Na, Sr, and Ba). The second group includes metals with a low probability of accumulation in living bone tissues whose presence is more likely to be related to diagenesis and the chemical composition of the burial soil (Al, Fe, Mn). The NN analysis of the spectral data, based on the use of an open access software, provided accurate results, indicating that it can be a promising tool for enhancing LIBS applications in osteoarchaeology. The influence of bone diagenesis and soil contaminants is significant. False classifications occurred exclusively in the NN analyses that relied partially on elemental peaks from the second group of elements. Overall, the The excavation and methodical examination of graves with disarticulated, commingled, multiple individuals or mass graves poses a major problem to archaeologists and anthropologists given that a key and demanding aspect of their analysis is the separation and grouping of commingled human remains into individual skeletons Currently, several well-established methods (macroscopic and non-destructive) are being extensively used in re-associating commingled skeletal remains. These are primarily based on osteometrics but often utilize other aspects of skeletal variation, for example, pathology, age, sex and activity markers Modern techniques for the analysis archaeological DNA (aDNA) are increasingly deployed in commingled assemblages, to identify fragmentary evidence and assemble separated remains of single individuals following mass disasters Recently, elemental fingerprinting through Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS) combined with a supervised Neural Networks (NN) algorithm was applied by Moncayo et al. There is additional potential to apply this type of screening method to human remains in archaeological contexts, similar to studies applying elemental fingerprinting and neural networks to archaeological material culture, for instance ancient or historical pottery The main objective of the present research work is thus to investigate the use of the NN method applied on LIBS spectra of archaeological bone remains as regards its potential to aid discrimination of individuals and further to examine limitations related to the diagenetic influence of the burial environment (i.e. soil) on the elemental composition of the bones. Seven different bones from five individuals were used in this study (Fig. Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS) is a spectrochemical method that provides information about the elemental composition of materials. Focusing a pulse from a nanosecond laser onto the surface of an object or sample results in material ablation and formation of a transient micro-plasma, which emits light upon its relaxation. The plasma emission is spectrally analysed and recorded on a spectrometer thus producing a LIBS spectrum, which features intense, sharp atomic emission peaks, used to identify the elements contained in the sample on the basis of their characteristic wavelength. The emission intensity at the maximum of a spectral peak or, alternatively, the total (or integrated) emission corresponding to a peak is related to the number density of each emitting species in the plasma plume and this, in turn, with the concentration of specific elements in the ablated material The speed of LIBS analysis permits handling of large numbers of samples in short times, while its portability makes it a user-friendly and flexible tool for materials analysis in many different, sometimes difficult-to-access, locations. Several LIBS spectrometers have been specifically developed to be compact and portable The LIBS system used in this study has been presented elsewhere Within this area, the laser irradiation creates a luminous plasma plume of partly ionised sample material. A quartz fibre collects the light emitted by the plume and guides it into a compact Czerny-Turner spectrometer (Avaspec-2048-USB2, Avantes) that was used to record the spectra in the range of 200 -466 nm with a resolution of 0.2 nm. The delay time applied on the CCD was τ D = 1.28 μs and the integration or gate time was τ G = 1 ms. It is noted here that spectra are typically recorded with a short time delay, τ D , with respect to the initiation of the plasma formation, as this results in cleaner and better-resolved spectral features. Fifty-five to sixty different points were analysed on each bone by LIBS. Ten laser pulses were applied, at a repetition rate at 0.5 Hz, on each point. The first 5 pulses were used to remove superficial dirt and dust revealing a clean surface, while the next 5 pulses in the set produced an averaged LIBS spectrum per each sampling point. These were the data subjected to Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and the NN processing for discriminating the bones. The discrimination of the biogenic from the diagenetic signal is rather difficult and requires complex methods applied mainly in palaeodietary research The first group (group 1) includes calcium (Ca) and phosphorus (P), since these elements are related to the intrinsic chemical composition of the bones, namely hydroxyapatite, (Ca 10 (PO 4 ) 6 (OH) 2 ) and calcium phosphate, Ca 3 (PO 4 ) 2 . Additionally, group 1 includes elements such as magnesium (Mg), sodium (Na), strontium (Sr) and barium (Ba), soluble in the blood, that can be easily deposited in living bones and therefore can be used with higher reliability for discriminating among individuals To illustrate the positions (wavelength) of spectral peaks corresponding to elements in group 1 and group 2, we indicate in Fig. In contrast to the emission of calcium, the signal from phosphorus, as recorded through transition lines at 213 -215 nm, is considerably weaker (Fig. Additional phosphorous lines are present in the 252-256 nm spectral range but overlap with emission lines of iron Finally, other intense peaks originating from elements in group 2, including Ba, Sr, Pb, Mn and Fe, are indicated in the spectra shown in Figure Initially, Principal Components Analysis (PCA) was applied separately to the dataset corresponding to each bone (54-58 spectra) in order to detect any outlier spectra. Including outlier spectra into the NN model interferes with the discrimination ability of the model, therefore, spotting outliers by use of PCA and filtering these out is an effective way of improving the subsequent analysis in the NN model. Indeed, by using PCA as a means to remove outliers, we were able to filter out inconsistencies within the datasets for each individual bone sample. As a result of this filtering procedure the number of spectra for each bone was reduced from 54-58 down to 50. Figure The open-access R-package "neuralnet" (Version 1.44.2) was used to perform the NN analysis The neurons in the input layer comprised the emission intensity values at the selected spectral regions as shown in Figure Neural network classifications can be evaluated by removing some of the data (in our case spectra) and training the network on the remaining subset. Following the training stage, those spectra that were previously withheld were used as a test for the model. In the present case, 300 spectra out of a total of 350 (86%) were selected randomly to train the network and the remaining 50 spectra (14%) were used to test the network. Four different preprocessing methods were applied for standardizing the spectral data in both the training and the test sets and their influence on the robustness of the model was examined. These were: 1) normalization by the sum of the intensity values of each spectrum, 2) normalization to the square root of the sum of the squared intensity values of the spectrum, 3) normalization by the maximum intensity value of each spectrum and 4) normalization to the variance of the dataset. The percent of success in the tested dataset of group 1 for all individuals was calculated and the process time required for the NN method to converge was measured for each normalization method as shown in Table The accuracy of the neural network analysis was estimated by applying the "spectral correlation" (SC) parameter proposed by Moncayo et al in several of their papers (1) where d i is either 1 when a spectrum is classified correctly or 0 otherwise, and N is the total number of spectra. To consider a bone sample as being accurately classified, the predicted class of the model must agree with the actual class when the spectral correlation parameter exceeds a threshold (arbitrarily set at) SC th ≥ 80%. A bone sample is defined as 'unassigned' when SC < SC th for either one of the five individuals. Given these preconditions, we performed several neural network analyses, one that included all elements, and two that distinguished between elements falling into the 'biogenic' and 'diagenetic' groups to compare their varying results. Finally, we simulated a real case scenario to evaluate the performance of the neural network model and the overall capability of it for associating separated bones from the same individual under realistic analysis conditions. In this experiment, the training and test spectra were not selected randomly and across all bones, but instead 250 (71%) spectra from five bones -each belonging to one of the five individuals -were used to train the network and 100 (29%) spectra of two bones that belong to individuals 1 and 2 (SK 3.25 scapula and SK 3.50 clavicle) were used for testing. Initially, PCA was applied to the data obtained from all bone samples, first separately on the selected spectral windows related to the bone matrix components (group 1) and to the soil background (group 2) and then to both of them together. The aim of this procedure was to assess the capacity of PCA to provide any kind of discrimination of individuals (Fig. The process of training and testing the neural network was performed in less than a minute when the code was executed on a desktop computer using the datasets of groups 1 and 2 (157 and 185 input neurons, respectively). The process time increased by a factor of five when the same code was executed by including the dataset of the whole spectral range (2048 pixels or input neurons). It is also clear that processing time will increase exponentially if the number of datasets from skeletal remains is increased. The results of the initial neural network analysis including both groups to train and test the NN model are promising as shown in Table As already mentioned, in the simulation of a real case scenario, a non-randomized selection of training and test spectra is made, with two bone samples excluded entirely from the neural network training, as would be the case in an actual situation, in which one would try to associate bones of unknown relation to a range of other bones attributed with certainty to different individuals. The results of the discrimination based on group 1, group 2, and the combined group 1 and 2 datasets are presented in Table Using the group 1 dataset, the NN model correctly assigns the SK 3.50 clavicle bone to individual number 2 with an SC value of 91%. However, it fails to classify the SK 3.25 scapula bone to the correct individual (4 instead of 1). Since the SC (53%) for individual 4 is below the threshold value of 80%, this bone is classed as 'unassigned' due to low confidence in this result. Using the group 2 dataset the NN model failed to classify the SK 3.25 scapula bone to its correct individual (4 instead of 1), however, since the SC (72%) was again below the confidence value of 80%, this bone remained as 'unassigned'. Moreover, the NN model only achieved an SC value of 69% for the SK 350 clavicle bone, leaving the sample, too, 'unassigned'. The results were mixed when using the combined elemental datasets of group 1 and 2. Once again the SK 3.50 clavicle bone was assigned correctly to individual number 2 based on a SC value of 82%. However, the model provided a false positive classification for the SK 3.25 scapula bone, which was assigned to individual 3 with a high confidence (SC = 90%). The results of this study indicate that the elemental peaks related to the bone matrix composition can lead more reliably to bone discrimination while those originating from the soil background were inadequate for providing accurate bone discrimination using NN models on bone datasets that were selected for testing. However, the probability to acquire false positives turned out to be higher in the case of elemental peaks related to both bone and soil chemical composition, compared to elemental peaks related only to the bone matrix. The failure to assign the dataset from bone sample SK 3.25 scapula to individual 2 can be attributed to extensive contamination and diagenesis of the bone that has given rise to additional spectral lines interfering with the elemental peaks of species related to the bone matrix. It is conceivable that these errors could be mitigated by an increased number of bones per individual to train the NN, rather than relying only on a single bone for training. It is also possible to take the specific composition of the local soil into account to understand the origin of some elements in the bone and use this understanding to quantify their influence on the NN model. Detailed information on the burial soil composition is not available for the skeletal remains in our study. Nevertheless, this information could be helpful when considering the potential for a difference in diagenetic influences within the assemblage and to prevent false positives driven by the seemingly more influential soil-related elements. As such, the effect of soil composition on the elemental spectrum should be considered and quantified in future studies. Lastly, it was noticed that emission peaks from copper (Cu) differ strongly between individuals, with males indicating higher Cu concentrations than females within our test group. A clear discrimination by sex was observed by comparing the intensity ratio of the Cu emission peak at 324.754 nm against the Ca peak at 315.887 nm (Fig. A method based on Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS) combined with a supervised Neural Networks (NN) algorithm has been applied for the first time on archaeological bones to discriminate human remains based on characteristic spectral features and to reveal the influence of chemical exchange with soils in archaeological material. The LIBS spectra were divided into two groups. The first group includes the two main elements related to the chemical composition of the bone matrix (Ca and P) and in addition those that can be easily deposited in living bone tissues (Na, Mg, Sr and Ba) and therefore can be used with higher reliability for the discrimination of individuals. The second group corresponds to metals with a smaller accumulation probability on living bone tissues (Al, Fe, Mn) and therefore their presence is related to diagenesis thus contamination of the bones from the soil of the burial area. The biogenesis group provided partly successful discrimination in a realistic scenario, while the diagenesis group failed to provide any kind of successful discrimination. It was further found that elemental peaks related to bone matrix and burial soil composition, considered jointly, have a high probability of giving rise to false positives compared to elemental peaks related only to the bone matrix. The open-source NN software (R package 'neuralnet') demonstrated its potential to be a reliable tool for LIBS applications. It has several advantages as it continues to evolve, has reduced costs, and exhibits a high adaptability and interoperability with respect to existing requirements. Therefore, the use of open-source NN software and tools can potentially boost the application of advanced machine learning methods in the particular field of LIBS analysis. Overall, our results indicate that the elemental peaks related to the bone matrix composition can lead to fast discrimination of individuals with the potential to be applied cost-effectively and while in the field. Important parameters need to be further explored which are relevant to the optimum interaction of the laser beam with the bone matrix coupled to efficient collection of the emission signals, selection of clean spectral lines free from interferences, particularly those arising from the diagenetic background, and proper sampling across the bone surface. Moreover, more detailed empirical data on how to mitigate the influence of diagenesis and avoid false-positives is required before confident discrimination between individuals can be achieved. An additional factor to be taken into account relates to the fact that LIBS is a minimally (or micro-) destructive method thus obtaining official permit for sampling of each sample will always be necessary. Finally, combination of the LIBS-NN approach with osteometric or other macroscopic examination and sorting methods, extensively applied in osteoarcheological studies, needs to be considered. This is expected to generate even more reliable results exploiting skeletal parts, already assigned to an individual on osteometric grounds, for training and testing the NN models or just bypassing their analysis and thus reducing analysis time. b The emission lines and spectral ranges were identified based on the NIST atomic spectra database 