Quantum sensing and computation can be realized with superconducting microwave circuits. Qubits are engineered quantum systems of capacitors and inductors with non-linear Josephson junctions. They operate in the single-excitation quantum regime, photons of 27μeV at 6.5 GHz. Quantum coherence is fundamentally limited by materials defects, in particular atomic-scale parasitic two-level systems (TLS) in amorphous dielectrics at circuit interfaces. TLS are known to be an important decoherence mechanism in quantum circuits, for Josephson junctions as well as for capacitors, inductors, and resonators. We characterized ten resonator test chips cut from a single 150 mm wafer, each with ten λ/4 resonators. X-ray photoemission spectra (XPS) were acquired after etching for variable intervals, followed by microwave reflectometry and scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM). XPS is non-destructive and relatively fast, giving averaged interface information over 400 μm regions. XPS can "see through" the surface oxides into the bulk Nb and Si, quantifying the oxide thicknesses and allowing the different Nb and Si oxidation states to be resolved from their chemical shifts. Figure The MA interface is shown in detail in the yellow box in Figure Given our clean resonator MS interface, we focused on mitigating process oxides on the MA and SA interfaces through post-fabrication buffered oxide etching (BOE). We found a 8 pm/s etch rate for niobium oxide, hundreds of times lower than the 1.8 nm/s rate for silica. The impact of post-fabrication etching was quantified by microwave reflectometry of the frequency-multiplexed test-chip resonators. The observed total quality factor Q T = f 0 /Δ f = δ -1 T , where f 0 and Δ f are the measured resonant frequency and linewidth at half-maximum and δ T is the total loss tangent, including energy lost to the 50 Ω input feed line (δ ext = 1/Q ext ) and internal dissipation (δ int = 1/Q int ). Fits to resonator transmission are consistent with Q ext ∼ 0.7 × 10 6 , in good agreement with electromagnetic simulations. In Figure Although the TLS standard tunneling model is not sufficient to explain resonator noise and power-dependent TLS saturation, for the current manuscript we will follow a common practice in the literature, We exploit the ∼200:1 BOE etch selectivity between SiO x and NbO x to experimentally assign loss contributions to the SA and MA interfaces. Standard resonator losses (Fig Extended BOE etching reduces the MA NbO x process oxide. Both δ T LS and δ o decrease monotonically with NbO x thickness (Fig. Long etch times dissolve much of the MA oxide, but etch rate slows as the Nb:O ratio increases. Oxide regrowth on a sputter-cleaned Nb film was ∼ 1.3 nm after 90 minutes in air, the approximate time required for mounting a test chip (Figs. The power and temperature dependence δ int for low-loss resonators deviate from the predictions TLS standard tunneling model (Fig. We have robustly achieved state-of-the-art Q values in niobium co-planar waveguide resonators by removing surface process oxides in devices with pristine metal-substrate interfaces. Selective etching showed that TLS losses arise primarily from exposed dielectric process oxides on our resonators, at least 70% from SiO x and 15% from NbO x . Power independent losses are also concentrated in these oxides, 55% from NbO x and 17% from SiO x . As we mitigate surface interface losses, we approach a regime where TLS losses no longer dominate, which could allow losses in superconducting films such a non-equilibrium quasiparticles to be investigated in more detail. Surface passivation after oxide removal, or changes in fabrication to avoid surface oxidation, could lead to general improvements in quantum circuit performance. Resonator fabrication. Each 10 x 10 mm test chip had ten superconducting niobium frequency-multiplexed λ/4 resonators spanning 6.25 to 7 GHz. Sample storage, resist stripping and transport. The protective resist was stripped from test chips by spraying with acetone for ∼ 30 seconds, then soaked in a beaker partially filled with Microposit Remover 1165 in an 80 • C water bath for ∼ 12 hours. Chips were then sonicated in deionized water, then acetone, and finally IPA, all at 50 • C, before and ashing in an oxygen plasma for 1 min. Samples were placed in a custom high vacuum transport vessel (stainless steel, KF flanges, dry turbo pump) for transfer between the Molecular Foundry LBL (XPS, TEM/STEM and SEM, cross sectioning, BOE etching) and the Siddiqi labs UCB Physics (chip fabrication, resist stripping, BOE etching, microwave characterization). No evidence was found of oxide growth or contamination of resist-protected chips during storage. BOE post-fabrication etching. We confirmed that BOE will etch niobium oxide through XPS experiments on resonators and on sputtered Nb films oxidized by plasma ashing (see supplemental information for addional details). The etch rate was hundreds of times lower than for silicon oxide, ∼ 6 pm/s for 5:1 BOE, and 0.7 pm/s for 10:1 BOE, compared to 1.8 and 0.9 nm/s for silica. TEM cross-section sample preparation. TEM cross sections were prepared in a FEI Helios G4 UX dual beam Focused Ion Beam (FIB) equipped with an EasyLift rotatable needle at the National Center for Electron Microscopy (NCEM) facility at the Foundry. Successive layers of electron-beam induced carbon, electron-beam induced platinum and ion-beam induced platinum were deposited at the surface of devices for sample protection before lift-out and thinning. Additional TEM cross sections were prepared by Outermost Technology using similar instruments and procedures. TEM imaging and spectroscopy. High resolution TEM images and EDS elemental chemical analysis were acquired at 200 kV with a JEOL 2100-F Field Emission Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope (STEM) equipped with an Oxford high solid-angle Silicon Drift Detector (SDD) X-Ray Energy Dispersive Spectrometer (EDS). A 1 nm diameter electron beam probe was used for EDS spectral imaging. Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy (EELS) was performed at 300 kV in the TEAM I double-aberration-corrected (scanning) transmission electron microscope (STEM/TEM) equipped with a high-resolution Continuum Gatan Imaging Filter (GIF) spectrometer and a 4k x 4k Gatan K3 direct electron detector. EELS spectral imaging maps were acquired using an electron beam probe 0.1 nm in diameter with 1 eV energy resolution (elastic peak). XPS. X-Ray Photoelectron spectra were acquired with a Thermo-Fisher K-Alpha + XPS equipped with a focused, monochromatic Al X-ray source, a collection lens with a 30 • half-angle acceptance, and hemispherical analyzer with a multi-channel detector at normal incidence to the sample. The X-ray spot size was 200 or 400 μm depending on the data set. A dual monoatomic/gas cluster Argon ion source was used for sputter cleaning and depth profiling. Peak fitting used "skewvoigt" for metallic Nb and "pseudovoigt" for other peaks using python software and the Lmfit module. SEM imaging. Top view SEM images were acquired in a ZEISS Gemini ULTRA-55 Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope. High magnification images were collected at 2 kV through a high efficiency In-lens Secondary Electrons detector. Low magnification, large field of view images, used 5 kV and a conventional Everhart Thornley Secondary Electron Detector. Resonator Cryo Characterization. Tests were carried out in a HPD Rainer 103 ADR Cryostat with a base temperature of 65 mK. Most measurements were performed at 100 mK. Measurement and shielding details were similar to Kreikebaum The internal quality factor was extracted from the scattering parameters using a vector network analyzer (Rodhe&Schwartz ZVM). At resonance we observe a sharp attenuation peak which depends on intrinsic resonator loss and external coupling to the feed line. We designed the chip to achieve an external coupling Q e ∼ 0.7 × 10 6 which was designed to achieve critical coupling at single photon excitation for our standard resonators. The typical model to extract the quality factors from the scattering parameters is a multi-port network (Fig. We measure the reflected signal when the other end of the feed line is open (Z L → ∞, Γ L → 1). An intuitive way to understand this configuration is to consider the resonator attenuating the signal twice, first when it passes by as an incoming signal from the left, and the second time from the right after being reflected at the open end of the feed line. So the reflection coefficient S 11 in the reduced 1-port measurement is given by S 11 = T 21 T 12 ≈ 1 -2Δ where only the linear term in δ f is kept and the result is identical to a capacitively coupled resonator at the end of the feed line (1-port model). A more rigorous derivation The extended part of the feed line modifies the coupling, so that if Q e is the coupling without an extension, we get Q e = Q e 4Γ f (1+Γ f ) 2 . The factor e i φ is introduced to take into account the impedance mismatch However, as pointed out in The input power can be converted to average photon number using n = 2 πh f 2 Q 2 Q e P in which can be derived by setting the difference between the input and the reflected power equal to the dissipated power P in = P in |S 11 | 2 + 2π f E/Q int . The input power was estimated from the network analyzer output, taking into account the attenuation from a RCDAT-8000-60 programmable attenuator and ∼ 100 dB of attenuation from the components inside the fridge (measured at room temperature). Fig. The output line included two K&L 10 and 12 GHz low pass filters, a homemade absorptive infrared blocking filter, 36 dB of isolation from two circulators, and 40+36 dB of gain from a LNC4-8A HEMT at 2.7 K and a MITEQ AFS4-00100800-14-10P-4 amplifier at room temperature. The TLS standard tunneling model predicts a temperature-dependent resonant frequency shift where p h is the participation ratio, the fraction of electric field energy stored in the TLS host material, and δ 0 T LS is the loss tangent. This response is independent of the saturation of resonant TLS or interactions between TLS. The same model predicts the temperature dependence of TLS loss in the low power limit. In a real quantum circuit with multiple TLS host materials their contributions are summed. The TLS standard tunneling model power dependence is: where n c is the photon number where saturation effects reduce loss by 1 √ 2 . For uniform electric fields as in parallel plate capacitors or Josephson junctions β ∼ 1. For distributed structures such as a CPW resonator where electric fields vary with distance from the resonator electrodes and along the length of the resonator the effective value of β can be smaller, but not less than ∼ 0.8 for spatially uniform TLS distributions. The table in Fig. 16/20