The challenge in solar energy today is not the cost of photovoltaic (PV) electricity generation, already competing with fossil fuel prices, but rather utility-scale energy storage and flexibility in supply. Low-cost thermal energy storage (TES) exists but relies on expensive heat engines. Here, we introduce the concept of luminescent solar power (LSP), where sunlight is absorbed in a photoluminescent (PL) absorber, followed by red-shifted PL emission matched to an adjacent PV cell's band-edge. This way the PV cell operates nearly as efficiently as under direct illumination, but with minimal excessive heat. The PL-absorber temperature rises due to thermalization, allowing it to store the excessive heat, which can later be converted into electricity. Tailored luminescent materials that support an additional 1.5kWh PV-electricity for every 1 kWh of (virtual) heat engine-electricity, with a dynamic shift between the two sources are experimentally demonstrated. Such an ideal hybrid system may lead to a potential reduction in the cost of electricity for a base-load solution. Concentrated solar power (CSP) denotes the technology wherein a thermal absorber is heated by the concentrated sunlight, thus enabling thermal energy storage (TES) for dispatchable generation To utilize both heat energy and PV electricity from solar radiation, we may, for instance, look to the concept of solar thermal PV (STPV) Current PV/T techniques such as spectral splitting, where part of the solar spectrum is channeled to the PV cell while the other is channeled to a heat cycle, however, fall short because they sacrifice heat utilization for PV efficiency or vice versa. The concept we propose here can best be explained thermodynamically by introducing the ideal PV/T concept of PV heating. A solar cell, when conventionally operating at 20-30% efficiency, converts the residual 70-80% of the incident solar power into heat. Conceptually, if the solar cell would work efficiently at high temperatures, 500 o C for example, the heat accumulated on the cell could be converted into electricity in parallel through a conventional heat engine as in CSP. This would result in an additional 20-30% efficiency. Unfortunately, such an ideal hybrid PV/CSP solution cannot be done with solar cells, as their efficiency inherently drops as the temperature rises due to a reduction in open circuit voltage The PL process is very similar to what occurs in PVs. It conventionally involves the absorption of energetic photons, followed by thermalization and emission of low energy red-shifted photons. The external quantum efficiency (EQE)-the ratio between emitted photons and absorbed photons -does not necessarily depend strongly on the temperature of the PLabsorber stores and later transfers the heat to a heat engine for electricity generation. As an example of our concept, consider a single-junction InGaAs (or possibly InGaAsP) PV cell with a band-gap of 1.1 eV designed for CPV. A matching optimal PL-absorber material should have full solar absorption up to a desired cut-off wavelength and a narrow emission peak centered at a wavelength matching the PV cell's band-edge for minimal heating (Figure Much of the heat load induced by thermalization of energetic photons and solar infrared (IR) light, falls on the absorber material, leaving only residual heating at the PV cell (Figure In addition, as will be shown later, by reducing the HTF flow-rate, the temperature of the PLabsorber increases, and the emission toward the PV cell is reduced. This way, LSP can shift more energy to storage or immediate supply (PV). Such flexibility in the power flow allows a twenty-four-hour "on-demand" supply with minimal waste, overcoming a major loss in PV/CSP systems, which have a predetermined capacity. An efficient LSP device will depend on the optical performance of the absorber material, specifically, its solar absorption and emission spectra, and the EQE under the concentrated sun at temperatures relevant for TES. In the following, we demonstrate the above experimentally and analyze the PV cell's performance under the solar spectrum altered by the high-temperature PL emission. For a 1.1eV PV cell's band-gap, ideal for the solar spectrum These materials also have a high EQE when doped in transparent matrices such as single-crystal (SC) and polycrystalline (ceramic) yttrium aluminum garnet (YAG), replacing different elements in the lattice The prominent comparison parameters are the EQE of the PL material and the full photon rate under broad sunlight excitation in the working temperature range. Of the variety we tested, a few stood out. We focus our study on four of them with weight percent (wt%) compositions of A=%Cr 3+ ,B=%Nd 3+ , C=%Yb 3+ doped in YAG: a (A=0.5,B=1,C=1) SC, and (A=0.5,B=1,C=1), (A=3,B=1,C=1) and (A=3,B=1,C=3) ceramics, namely, SC#1, Ceramic#2, Ceramic#3, and Ceramic#4, respectively. The samples typically have a broad absorption up to 650nm, and several narrow absorption lines in the near-IR (see Figure Figure The thermal cycle portion, TC portion was calculated using the following formula: where  t is the thermal conversion efficiency including losses taken as 0.4 assuming outlet temperature of 480°C of the HTF 2 ; R P,BG is the ratio between the solar power up to 1100nm and the entire solar spectrum taken as 0.83; R P,abs is the ratio between the absorbed solar power up to the cut-off wavelength and the total solar power up to 1100nm; R PL/abs is the ratio between the PL average photon energy and the absorbed average photon energy; and R P,IR is the ratio of the solar power at wavelengths longer than 1200nm and the entire spectrum, taken as 0.12, which can be absorbed in the front cover of the receiver using ITO nanoparticles The total combined efficiency of the system is calculated by and presented in Figure In the LSP system, there is inherent mutual compensation between the PV portion and the thermal portion, which reduces losses compared to each conversion mechanism separately. It can be seen from Figure Calculating the expected performances using our measured data of a-680nm cut-off wavelength and 70% EQE at an average temperature of 430°C, the result is that 45% of the power goes to the thermal part, thereby generating 17.8% electricity through the turbine. Another 24.4% is delivered by the PV, which results in an overall efficiency of 42.2%. An additional feature of the LSP device comes from the photon rate reduction as the temperature rises, as evident in Figure For a broader view of LSP, we also estimate its potential to reduce the LCOE. We note that LCOE estimation is challenging for any new concept. Here, we rely on the well-established LCOE of CSP with recent bids at 7¢/kWh LCOE for CSP 5 and an additional heliostat field at an LCOE of 1.7¢/kWh where is the percent of the absorbed heat from the total incoming power, which according to the experimental results is 0.45. The LCOE estimation is depicted in Figure To conclude, here we have presented the concept of LSP, where photoluminescence allows the parallel generation of electricity from PV cells and from the residual heat that otherwise is wasted. Our experimental results show 90% of the solar photon rate can be maintained on a PV cell while the PL-absorber remains at an average temperature of 430 o C. This is projected to yield electricity generation by the PV and the heat cycle having 42.5% total efficiency. In addition, LSP allows dynamic "on-demand" shift from PV power to (storable) thermal power while maintaining nearly unchanged total efficiency, which is a clear advantage over today's predetermined capacity of current solar plants. We analyzed the potential reduction in LCOE based on known CSP's LCOE and reached an average (day and night) LCOE value of 3.72¢/kWh with the potential to reach values lower than 3¢/kWh. This concept may open the way for thermal storage to become a leading solution in the increasing demand for base-load solar energy systems aiming to replace fossil fuel power plants. For the spectral photon rate measurements at temperatures from 25°C to 600°C, each sample is placed on a temperature-controlled heater (Thorlabs) inside an integration sphere (LabSphere 4") and excited by concentrated sunlight. The sunlight is collected by an in-lab solar concentrator system coupled to an optical fiber that is collimated and then focused onto the PL-absorber. The spectrum in the range of 300-800nm is measured by a UV-VIS spectrometer (Ocean Optics Flame-S-UV-VIS) and the spectrum in the range of 660nm-1150nm is measured by a VIS-NIR monochromator (Andor Shamrock i303) with an InGaAs (Andor iDus) camera. At temperatures higher than 300°C, the thermal emission of the heater is measured separately and is reduced from the emission measurements. The entire setup is calibrated against a standard quartz tungsten halogen (QTH) calibration lamp (Newport). The heater's surface temperature is measured during the EQE measurements. The sample's temperature as a function of the heater's temperature is calibrated by measuring the sample's upper and lower faces temperatures as a function of the heater's temperature. The temperatures are measured by k-type thermocouples connected to a thermometer (Fluke). The presented temperatures are the average sample temperatures calculated by a calibration curve created for each sample as a function of the heater surface temperature. The simulation was done using a MATLAB code developed in the lab. The standard solar spectrum for direct illumination was taken from: https://www.nrel.gov/grid/solar-resource/smarts.html