A wide range of approaches have been explored to meet the challenges of graphene nanostructure fabrication, all requiring complex and high-end nanofabrication platform and currently suffering from surface contaminations, which not only give rise to potential electrical noise but also hinder its ideally atomic spatial resolution. Here, with the use of an electrical pulse on a low-capacitance graphene-on-glass (GOG) membrane, we fabricated ultraclean graphene nanopores on a commercially available glass substrate with exceptionally low electrical noise. In-situ liquid AFM studies and electrochemical measurements revealed that both graphene nanopore nucleation and growth are stemming from the electrochemical attack on carbon atoms at defect sites, ensuring an inherently ultraclean graphene nanopore. Strikingly, compared to conventional TEM drilled graphene nanopores on SiN supporting membranes, our developed GOG nanopores featured with an order-of-magnitude lowered broadband noise, which we ascribed to the electrochemical refreshing of graphene nanopore on mechanically stable glass chips with negligible parasitic capacitance (~1 pF). Further experiments on double-stranded DNA translocations not only demonstrated the greatly reduced current noise, but also confirmed the formation of single GOG nanopores. Therefore, the exceptionally low noise and ease of ultraclean GOG nanopore platform will facilitate innovative researches to understand the fundamental property and application of such atomically thin nanopore sensors. KEYWORDS: graphene nanopores, ultraclean, low noise, electrochemical etching, glass substrate Owing to the graphene atomically thin and ion-impermeable structure, nanopores CVD graphene transfer and liquid handlings. Polycrystalline CVD graphene was obtained from Graphenea with good monolayer homogeneity (>98 %) and micrometer-sized grains. Raman spectra and imaging were performed on a WITec confocal spectrometer with 100×objective (lateral resolution of ~300 nm) and blue laser (488 nm, 1 mW), confirms the relatively high quality of graphene on copper foils (not shown). Prior to CVD graphene transfer, the Nano-Patch-Clamp chips (Nanion) were subjected to sonication in DI water, ethanol, and followed by blow drying with nitrogen. The glass chips were then treated in an oxygen plasma for 2 mins. Capacitively coupled plasma system with the radio-frequency (RF) of 40 kHz and 200 W power from Diener electronic (Femto) was employed at room temperature with a base pressure <0.02 mbar and 50 W/2.4 mbar for oxygen plasma. PMMA supported CVD graphene layer floating on pure DI water (which was achieved by spin coating PMMA, copper etching, and DI water rinsing) was then transferred onto such prepared glass chips. The PMMA layer was dissolved in acetone in the last step of transfer, leaving freestanding CVD graphene on the glass chips with micrometer-sized conical shaped aperture at the centre (Fig. AFM microscopy. AFM images were performed on a JPK NanoWizard Ultra Speed machine. A silicon probe (AC240TS, Asylum Research) with ~70 kHz nominal resonance frequency in air and ~30 kHz resonance frequency in liquid, was used. The images were scanned in an intermittent contact mode, which allows to work with softer and easy to damage material, in liquid and at room temperature with 512 × 512 pixels. Such collected images were then processed using a JPK SPM Data Processing software. The in-situ liquid AFM images in the inside were performed both before and after the application of electrical pulses without drying the sample. Detailed pictures and illustrations of the in-situ liquid AFM setup can be found in Fig. Electrical measurements and pulse generator. All the nanopore measurements were performed with an ultralow-noise patch clamp amplifier (AxopatchTM 200B, Molecular Devices) with resistive-feedback circuitry in whole-cell mode. Ag/AgCl electrodes are used to detect ionic currents and to apply electric fields. An Agilent pulse generator (81101A) was used to apply 50 ms long voltage pulses. To protect the amplifier from large input voltages, a mechanical switcher was used to disconnect the amplifier before each pulse. The AxopatchTM 200B amplifier was reconnected 2 s after each pulse such that the GOG system gets stabilized. We empirically adopted a 7 V/5 V protocol for electrochemical etching as previous electrical pulse fabrication method also reported the lowest voltage to reliably nucleate pores (~7 V) and the lowest voltage to reliably enlarge nucleated pores (~5 V): 1) 7 V pulses with 50 ms period were applied repeatedly for both nucleation and formation, and 2) 5 V pulses with 50 ms were used for enlarging and stabilizing the GOG nanopores. DNA translocation and noise measurement. λ-DNA (48,502 base pairs, Lot: 1651504, from New England Biolabs Tech. N3011S) solution was prepared into a concentration of around 15 μg mL -1 in 1 M KCl with 10 mM tris and 1 mM EDTA, pH 8.1. DNA translocation events were recorded under ~100-200 mV bias voltage using a band pass filter of 100 kHz and a sampling rate of 500 kHz. The current traces were filtered using an 8-pole Bessel filter at 10 kHz in Clampfit. A low noise data acquisition system (AxonTM Digidata 1550A, Molecular Devices), was adopted to further eliminate local noises and to record small biological signals. Power spectral densities were calculated by taking the Fourier transform of the autocorrelation function and dividing it by the sampling frequency and the sample length. For normalization, the power spectral densities were divided by the mean current of the corresponding traces. All of the analyses and fitting were done with a combined in one single, comprehensive new Matlab GUI-based package named Transalyzer. As the starting substrate, commercially available glass chips (insulating borosilicate Nano-Patch-Clamp chips purchased from Nanion) were used, containing a micrometer-sized conical aperture at the center (Fig. In the following, we always use 50 ms pulses with 2 s separation time, if not otherwise specified. We formed a GOG nanopore with a resistance of 88 MΩ when continuously repeating the 50 ms pulses for another 50 times after the first opening of the pore (Fig. In the case of dielectric breakdown fabrication in SiN membranes, unwanted) nanopore formation. Consequently, we expect the electrochemical formation of Cl2, O2, and more aggressively, Cl•, O•, and O3• radicals, The successful nucleation of a graphene nanopore (7 V, 50 ms, 10 times) introduces a possible pathway of the current. In Figure CVD graphene (or even exfoliated graphene) contains defects, including vacancies and grain boundaries. These defective carbon atoms, as well as possible amorphous carbon introduced during chip preparation and storage, are more inclined to be oxidized and attacked in an electrochemical reaction induced by the voltage drops at the graphene/liquid interface. Regrettably, given the extremely small amount of carbon atoms being removed from the graphene membrane during nucleation, it was impossible to directly study the reaction products to resolve the exact mechanisms of nanopore nucleation. However, using liquid atomic force microscopy (AFM) we were able to monitor the in-situ electrochemical etching of graphene (Fig. To further shed light on the mechanism of pore formation, we transferred CVD graphene on an Al2O3(20 nm)/SiO2(285 nm)/Si substrate (Fig. We also applied an additional 20 nm thick atomic layer deposition (ALD) Al2O3 layer to block any possible leakage current through the substrate. These translocation events can be distinguished based on the magnitude of the conductance blockade (ΔG). In Figure Figure , where CLF represents the low-frequency noise amplitude. Here, based on the normalized noise power spectra measurement (Fig. indicates that the low frequency 1/f noise of the GOG nanopore is one order lower than that of electrically fabricated or TEM drilled graphene nanopores on SiN membrane in other studies. That is, the red curves depict log-normal distributions exhibiting an average value of <CLF>= 5.8×10 , where σ represents the bulk conductivity and d is the pore diameter. We unraveled the mechanism of ultraclean graphene nanopore/nanogap formation via electrochemical etching based on a graphene-on-glass platform. We conducted in-situ liquid AFM studies and demonstrated the enlargement of a graphene nanostructure taking place at its freestanding edges during electrical fabrication. This electrochemical mechanism is strongly supported by our observed electrical etching of CVD graphene on silicon substrate under similar electrochemical conditions. One step further, we confirmed the electrochemical formation of a single graphene nanopore by double-stranded DNA translocation experiments and envision that this electrochemical etching mechanism offers a new strategy to meet the challenges of ultraclean graphene device fabrication at nanometer scale, including nanogaps. Particularly, the ultraclean GOG nanopores with exceptionally low noise level and ease of fabrication under voltage pulse make this a versatile platform to be used for improved nanopore measurement. Furthermore, such platform also featured as a relatively cheap substrate to obtain nanopores in various 2D materials for various nanoelectronics and biomolecule detection applications.