Patterned substrates for optics, electronics, sensing, lab-on-chip technologies, bioanalytics, clinical diagnostics as well as translational and personalized medicine are typically prepared by additive substrate manufacturing including ballistic printing and microcontact printing. However, ballistic printing (e.g., ink jet and aerosol jet printing, laser-induced forward transfer) involves serial pixel-by-pixel ink deposition. Parallel additive pattering by microcontact printing is performed with solid elastomeric stamps suffering from ink depletion after a few stamp-substrate contacts. The throughput limitations of additive state-of-the art patterning thus arising may be overcome by capillary stamping -parallel additive substrate patterning without ink depletion by mesoporous silica stamps, which enable ink supply through the mesopores anytime during stamping. Thus, either arrays of substrate-bound nanoparticles or colloidal nanodispersions of detached nanoparticles are accessible. We processed three types of model inks: 1) drug solutions, 2) solutions containing metallopolymers and block copolymers as well as 3) nanodiamond suspensions representing colloidal nanoparticle inks. Thus, we obtained aqueous colloidal nanodispersions of stamped drug nanoparticles, regularly arranged ceramic nanoparticles by post-stamping pyrolysis of stamped metallopolymeric precursor nanoparticles and regularly arranged nanodiamond nanoaggregates. Capillary stamping may overcome the throughput limitations of state-of-the-art additive substrate manufacturing while a broad range of different inks can be processed. Substrate manufacturing Here we evaluate capillary stamping with mesoporous silica stamps as parallel additive substrate pattering technique that potentially overcomes the drawbacks of the state of the art. For this purpose, model inks representing three important ink categories were tested: 1) inks containing organic low molecular mass compounds such as active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs), 2) inks containing polymers and 3) colloidal nanoparticle inks. Solutions containing the synthetic estrogen 17α-ethinylestradiol (EE2) were tested as examples for inks containing functional low-molecular mass compounds because additive manufacturing is considered as a promising access to drug delivery and testing systems. To test capillary stamping for parallel additive surface patterning, we selected mesopororous silica stamps 2) The mesoporous silica stamps used here were derived from the trifunctional silica precursor MTMS. As a result, they exhibit non-polar methyl-terminated mesopore walls with neutral properties with respect to nonvolatile ink components. Hence, non-volatile and particulate ink components are not attracted by the mesopore walls -in contrast to porous oxidic stamps with hydroxyl-terminated pore walls or polymeric stamps with pore walls consisting of polar polymers or block copolymer components. 3) The rigid contact elements of the mesoporous silica stamps are stable against deformation during substrate contacts. Hence, capillary stamping with mesoporous silica stamp is a robust process tolerant against variations of stamp-substrate contact times and the pressure exerted on the mesoporous silica stamps. The size and the shape of the stamped patterns are determined by a complex interplay of the size and the shape of the stamps' contact elements, the ink-substrate contact angles and the volatility of the ink solvents. Here, we used mesoporous silica stamps obtained by molding MTMS-containing sol-gel precursor solutions for silica against silicon molds accessible by standard photolithography and wet-chemical pattern transfer. The mesoporous silica stamps thus obtained with mean mesopore diameters of 31 nm and 38 nm were patterned with contact elements having base diameters of ≈600 nm, tip diameters of ≈400 nm and heights of ≈500 nm forming trigonal arrays with a nearest neighbor distance of ≈1.3 μm (Supporting Figure To exemplarily demonstrate capillary stamping of inks containing functional lowmolecular mass compounds like drugs, we stamped a 50 mM solution of EE2 in acetonitrile onto glass slides coated with the perfluorinated silane 1H,1H,2H,2Hperfluorodecyltrichlorosilane (FDTS). The FDTS coating reduced the adhesion of the formed EE2 nanoparticles to the substrates and facilitated their transfer to aqueous colloidal nanodispersions. The positions of the stamped EE2 nanoparticles imaged by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Figure On the other hand, the conveyor system would move the foil carrying the drug nanoparticles through a water bath where the drug nanoparticles are detached from the foil so that they enrich in the water bath until the target concentration is reached. Further molecular building blocks can be coupled to the EE2 molecules via their terminal triple bonds. We exploratively functionalized EE2 nanoparticles dispersed in water by coupling the dye sulfo-cyanine-3-azide to exposed EE2 triple bonds. Residual dye was then carefully removed from the reaction mixture by dialysis. Thus, the color of the reaction mixture containing the dye-modified EE2 nanoparticles turned from pink to colorless. However, fluorescence emission spectroscopy revealed that the EE2 nanoparticles were functionalized with sulfo-cyanine-3-azide (Figure Inks containing PFS homopolymer were tested as first model system for polymeric inks. We stamped a mixture of 25 vol-% toluene and 75 vol-% chloroform containing 2.5 mg/mL PFS onto FDTS-coated glass or quartz substrates (the latter were used for the pyrolysis experiments). The contact angle of the solvent mixture used here on FDTS-coated glass amounted to 55°. Stamping PFS homopolymer ink onto FDTS-coated quartz substrates yielded arrays of PFS nanoparticles (Figure We stamped an ink containing 2.5 mg/mL PFS-b-P2VP in a mixture of 25 vol-% toluene and 75 vol-% chloroform onto FDTS-coated glass or quartz substrates. Thus, the inks used to stamp PFS-b-P2VP and PFS homopolymer were -apart from the polymeric component -identical. However, in striking contrast to PFS homopolymer, stamping ink containing PFS-b-P2VP onto FDTS-coated glass slides yielded arrays of flat PFS-b-P2VP microdots (Figure The PFS and P2VP block segments repel each other and preferentially interact with the ink solvents. Under the dynamic conditions in the liquid bridges, the formation of closeto-equilibrium PFS-b-P2VP structures with particulate micelle-like phenotypes is likely prevented. As more PFS-b-P2VP is drawn into the liquid bridges, the favored swollen state is maintained by surface diffusion of the of the PFS-b-P2VP molecules on the FDTScoated substrate surface. This leaking from the liquid bridges may drag the microscopic ink-substrate contact line beyond the position being expected when the macroscopic ink contact angle is considered. A glass transition temperature Tg of 112°C for P2VP homopolymer forming 160 nm thick films on silicon nitride substrates was obtained by nanocalorimetry, The carbon-ceramic hybrid nanoparticles formed hexagonal lattices and are, therefore, still located at the positions where the contact elements of the mesoporous silica stamps contacted the substrate. However, smaller carbon-ceramic hybrid nanoparticles with diameters of a few 10 nm are also visible, which approximately mark the boundaries of Voronoi cells centering about the large carbon-ceramic hybrid nanoparticles defining the hexagonal lattice (Figure Finally, we tested whether colloidal nanodispersions can be used as inks for capillary stamping, since in this way arrays of small aggregates of dispersed, preformed nanostructures may be accessible. Dispersions of 10 μg NDs with a nominal diameter of 10 nm per mL isopropanol were infiltrated into mesoporous silica stamps from their nonstructured backsides. The mesoporous silica stamps acted as filters and rejected larger ND aggregates. Moreover, the confinement imposed by the mesopore walls prevented agglomeration of the NDs inside the mesoporous silica stamps. Finally, the relatively weak interactions between the NDs and the methyl-terminated mesopore walls reduced clogging. Thus, smaller NDs passed the mesoporous silica stamps and were deposited on FDTS-coated glass slides within the liquid bridges formed at the positions of the stamps' contact elements (the contact angle of isopropanol on FDTS-coated glass amounts to ≈45°). After retraction of the mesoporous silica stamps, hexagonal patterns of ND nanoaggregates were obtained (Figure The center frequencies mutually differ slightly due to thermal background contributions. The deviation from zero magnetic field resonance at room temperature may arise from crystal strain typically observed for small nanodiamonds. We have evaluated capillary stamping with mesoporous silica stamps as process platform for parallel additive substrate patterning and for the formation of nanoparticle arrays. So far, additive patterning has been conducted by serial ballistic methods associated with certain throughput limitations or by parallel microcontact printing with solid elastomeric stamps suffering from ink depletion after a limited number of stamp-substrate contacts. Mesoporous silica stamps enable continuous or triggered ink supply to their contact surfaces anytime during use via their mesopore systems. Thus, the problem of ink depletion is overcome while the throughput advantages of parallel stamping are maintained. Additive parallel capillary stamping with mesoporous silica stamps was tested using model inks containing low-molecular mass compounds such as drugs, homopolymers and block copolymers as well as colloidal nanoparticles. As model ink containing a low-molecular-mass drug, a solution of the contraceptive 17αethinylestradiol was stamped onto silanized glass slides. The drug nanoparticles obtained in this way were transferred to aqueous colloidal nanodispersions. Secondly, we tested polymeric inks and the post-stamping modification of the stamped polymeric patterns by pyrolysis or solvent treatments. Pyrolysis of stamped poly(ferrocenyldimethylsilane) nanoparticle arrays yielded arrays of ceramic Fe/SiC nanoparticles -a surface pattern, which is of interest for the guided growth of carbonaceous nanostructures. Capillary stamping of inks containing BCPs was also studied because of the BCPs' intrinsic capability to self-organize. As-stamped BCP patterns consisted of arrays of flat BCP microdots with a thickness a few nm. Only on silanized substrates dewetting induced by thermal annealing or solvent treatment resulted in the conversion of as-stamped flat BCP microdots into more compact 3D BCP nanoparticles with structures closer to equilibrium. This morphometric reconstruction appears to be the prerequisite for the pyrolytical conversion of flat PFS-b-P2VP microdots into Fe/SiC nanoparticles. As third model ink, we tested nanodiamond suspensions as example of colloidal inks containing dispersed preformed nanostructures and generated exemplarily arrays of nanodiamond nanoaggregates. The stamps' mesopore systems acted as filters rejecting large nanodiamond clusters and the confinement imposed by the mesopore walls prevented clustering of the nanodiamonds inside the mesoporous silica stamps. We anticipate that automatization of capillary stamping using commercially available stamping devices developed for polymer pen lithography enables the integration of parallel additive substrate manufacturing into continuous production processes. Functionalized substrates as well as nanoparticles -either as substrate-bound arrays or as colloidal nanodispersions after detachment -may be accessible with little consumption of solvents. Materials. All solvents and reagents were purchased from Alfa Aesar, Sigma Aldrich, Fisher Scientific, ABCR or Merck and used as received unless otherwise stated. Tetrahydrofuran (THF) was distilled from sodium/benzophenone under reduced pressure (cryo-transfer) prior to the addition of 1,1-diphenylethylene (DPE) and n-butyllithium (n-BuLi) followed by a second cryo-transfer. Dimethyl[1]silaferrocenophane was synthesized and purified as described elsewhere. Mesoporous silica stamps with a mean pore diameter of 31 nm used for capillary stamping of nanodiamonds and EE2 were prepared following procedures reported elsewhere. Glass slides with a thickness of 0.17 mm extending 18 × 18 mm 2 were obtained from VWR. The quartz substrates used for the stamping of PFS and PFS-b-P2VP were standard ST cuts purchased from Hoffman Materials. The glass slides and quartz substrates were subjected to oxygen plasma for 10 min at a pressure of 5 mbar for 10 min using a Diener femto plasma cleaner. For silanization with 1H,1H,2H,2Hperfluorodecyltrichlorosilane (FDTS; supplied by abcr GmbH), glass slides and quartz substrates were heated to 80 °C for 2 h in a sealed glass container in the presence of an excess of FDTS (≈2 μL). Prior to stamping, all silanized glass slides were washed with ethanol and dried with nitrogen. Non-silanized hydroxyl-terminated glass slides were used directly after the plasma treatment. General procedure: As stamp holders, we used stainless steel cylinders with a height of 4.5 cm, a diameter of 2 cm, a mass of ≈27 g and a flat cylinder base. Using double-sided adhesive tape, elastomeric poly(dimethyl siloxane) (PDMS) films with a thickness of ~3 mm were glued onto the flat cylinder bases of the stamp holders. The elastomeric PDMS films were prepared using Sylgard 184 formulation (Dow Corning). Base and PDMS prepolymer were mixed at a ratio of 1:9, stirred for 10 min, and poured into a polyethylene mold. The mixture was then allowed to cure for 1 week at room temperature. After removing excess ink from the surfaces of the mesoporous silica stamps with tissue, the mesoporous silica stamps were glued onto the exposed surface of the PDMS films with double-sided tape. All capillary stamping experiments were carried out manually under ambient conditions with a stamp-substrate contact time of 5 s. Capillary stamping of EE2. EE2 (17α-Ethinylestradiol) and acetonitrile (ACN) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. Prior to capillary stamping, the mesoporous silica stamps were immersed into ACN for 12 h and subsequently into a 50 mM solution of EE2 in ACN for 2 h. Capillary stamping of PFS, PFS-b-P2VP and PS-b-P2VP. Mesoporous silica stamps stored in ethanol were transferred in the wet state into a mixture of 25 vol-% toluene and 75 vol-% chloroform for 1 day. Prior to capillary stamping, the mesoporous silica stamps were immersed into the inks for 2 h. As inks, we used solutions containing 2.5 mg/mL polymer in a mixture of 25 vol-% toluene and 75 vol-% chloroform. Chloroform was obtained from Roth (Germany), toluene was obtained from Fisher (Germany). As polymeric components, we used PFS and PFS-b-P2VP synthesized as described above, as well as PS-b-P2VP (Mn(PS) = 27700 g/mol; Mn(P2VP) = 4300 g/mol, Ð = 1.04) obtained from Polymer Source (Canada). Capillary stamping of nanodiamonds. Milled nanodiamonds (NDNV10nmMd10ml) with a nominal diameter of 10 nm were received from Adámas Nanotechnologies as aqueous colloidal nanodispersion containing 1 mg mL -1 NDs. Prior to capillary stamping, the NDs were transferred to colloidal nanodispersions in isopropanol. For this purpose, 1 mL of the aqueous colloidal ND nanodispersion was centrifuged and washed with 1 mL water and two times with 1 mL isopropanol. The precipitation was redispersed in 100 mL isopropanol to obtain a colloidal nanodispersion containing 10 μg mL -1 NDs to be used as ink. The ink was applied to the unstructured backsides of the initially dry mesoporous silica stamps until the latter were completely transparent. Preparation of aqueous EE2 nanoparticle dispersions. 10 EE2 nanoparticle arrays extending 5 x 5 mm 2 were stamped next to each other onto FDTS-coated glass slides. The samples were then sonicated in 2 mL deionized water with a Sonorex RK 102 H sonicator (Bandelin) at a frequency of 35 kHz for 2 h at 50 °C. Estimation of the EE2 concentration in the EE2 nanoparticle dispersions. We assume that the EE2 nanoparticles generated by capillary stamping constitute a defect-free trigonal lattice with a lattice constant of 1.3 μm. The area A of a hexagon with an edge length of a = 1.3 μm corresponding to the lattice constant of the EE2 nanoparticle array can be calculated as: The hexagon contains one EE2 nanoparticle in its center. Moreover, one EE2 nanoparticle is located at each of the six hexagon corners. Each of these 6 EE2 nanoparticles touches overall three hexagons so that 1/3 EE2 nanoparticle is counted for the considered hexagon. Therefore, the number P of EE2 nanoparticles that can be ascribed to a hexagon can be calculated as: The total area Atot of the 10 successively stamped EE2 nanoparticle arrays having areas of 5 x 5 mm 2 amounts to 250000000 μm 2 , and the total number of stamped EE2 nanoparticles Ptot = Atot/A to ≈170 million. We modelled the stamped EE2 nanoparticles as spherical segments with a height h of 11 nm and a segmental radius s of 62 nm. The spherical radius r amounting to 175 nm can be obtained from the following relation: The volume V of a spherical segment can be calculated as follows: Therefore, the integrated volume of all stamped EE2 nanoparticles amounts to Vtot =1.11 • 10 13 nm 3 . Assuming an EE2 density of 1.21 g cm -2 , Click-reaction of suspended EE2 nanoparticles with sulfo-cyanine-3-azide. Sulfo-cyanine-3-azide was obtained from Lumiprobe (Germany). All steps were carried out at room temperature (≈22 °C). 5 μL of an aqueous 1 mM sulfo-cyanine-3-azide solution were added to 2 mL of an aqueous dispersion of EE2 nanoparticles prepared as described above. The solution was slowly stirred for 2 h. The reaction solution was then washed in a dialysis tube (Servapor; pore diameter ≈2.5 nm; molecular weight cut-off 12000-14000; obtained from SERVA Electrophoresis GmbH) with 1 L deionized water for 5 days and then with 1 L of fresh deionized water for one more day. Pyrolysis of PFS and PFS-b-P2VP. FDTS-functionalized quartz substrates stamped with PFS nanoparticles or PFS-b-P2VP microdots were pyrolized in a tube furnace under a constant flow of argon (1.5 sccm, quality 4.6) by heating at a rate of +40 to +41 K/min within 22 min to 900°C. Subsequently, the furnace was switched off, and the samples cooled to room temperature at the natural cooling rate of the furnace. The samples shown in Figure SEM imaging was carried out with a Zeiss Auriga system applying an accelerating voltage of 3 keV. Images were acquired with a secondary electron chamber detector or with an in-lens detector. Prior to SEM analysis, the samples were coated with platinum/iridium alloy using a K575X Sputter Coater from Emitech. Analysis of SEM images was carried out with the software ImageJ. AFM measurements were carried out with a NT-MDT Ntegra device using gold-coated silicon cantilevers with a force constant of 0.003-0.13 N/m in the contact mode, except the AFM measurements on PFM homopolymer samples, which were carried out using aluminum-coated silicon cantilevers with a force constant of 30-70 N/m in the non-contact mode. Dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurements on aqueous colloidal EE2 nanodispersions were carried out with a Zetasizer Nano Series (Malvern) at 25 °C applying a laser wavelength of 633 nm. Equilibration times amounted to 2 min and 15 single measuring cycles were performed for one measurement. Fluorescence emission spectroscopy was carried out with a Cary Eclipse Fluorescence Spectrometer from Agilent Technologies with the specified excitation wavelengths. Contact angle (CA) measurements were carried out in the sessile drop mode at 22 °C and a humidity of 37 % using a drop shape analyzer Krüss DSA100. To measure contact angles of mixtures of 25 vol-% toluene and 75 vol-% chloroform on PS and P2VP, we prepared PS (Mw = 239000 g/mol, Mn = 233000 g/mol, Ð = 1.03; Polymer Standards Service, Mainz) homopolymer films as well as P2VP (Mw = 37500 g/mol, Mn = 35000 g/mol, Ð = 1.07; Sigma-Aldrich) homopolymer films. To this end, 2.5 mg homopolymer was dissolved in 500 μL chloroform and drop-cast onto glass slides. ODMR measurements were conducted using a home-built confocal microscope. A 520 nm digital modulated diode laser (Swabian Instruments) was used for optical excitation in the constant wave mode and for initialization as well as readout in the pulsed mode. For the focusing of the laser beam and for the collection of the fluorescent light of NV - centers an oil immersion objective (PLAPON 60XO; NA = 1.42; Olympus) was used. The emitted photons were guided through a 25 μm pinhole, detected with an avalanche photodiode (SPCM-AQRH-24; Excelitas) and counted either by a NI PCI-6236 counter card (National Instruments) or by a FPGA-based counter (Swabian Instruments). The microwave was applied by means of a 30 μm copper wire fed from a MW generator (APSIN 6010; AnaPico) that was amplified by ~40 dB with a high-power amplifier (AS0104-30/17; Milmega). Experimental control was accomplished using an adapted version of the Python-based software suite Qudi. Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the author. 