Recently, RE 3 Sb 3 M 2 O 14 as a new family of twodimensional kagomé-lattice compounds were synthesized Quantum spin liquids (QSLs) are an exotic state of matter that is subject to extensive research. However, the relationship between the ubiquitous disorder and the QSL behaviors is still unclear. Here, by performing comparative experimental studies on two kagomé-lattice QSL candidates, Tm3Sb3Zn2O14 and Tm3Sb3Mg2O14, which are isostructural to each other but with strong and weak structural disorder, respectively, we show unambiguously that the disorder can induce spinliquid-like features. In particular, both compounds show dominant antiferromagnetic interactions with a Curie-Weiss temperature of -17.4 and -28.7 K for Tm3Sb3Zn2O14 and Tm3Sb3Mg2O14, respectively, but remain disordered down to about 0.05 K. Specific heat results suggest the presence of gapless magnetic excitations characterized by a residual linear term. Magnetic excitation spectra obtained by inelastic neutron scattering (INS) at low temperatures display broad continua. All these observations are consistent with those of a QSL. However, we find in Tm3Sb3Zn2O14 which has strong disorder resulting from the random mixing of the magnetic Tm 3+ and nonmagnetic Zn 2+ , that the low-energy magnetic excitations observed in the specific heat and INS measurements are substantially enhanced, compared to those of Tm3Sb3Mg2O14 which has much less disorder. We believe that the effective spins of the Tm 3+ ions in the Zn 2+ /Mg 2+ sites give rise to the low-energy magnetic excitations, and the amount of the random occupancy determines the excitation strength. These results provide direct evidence of the mimicry of a QSL caused by disorder. Quantum spin liquids (QSLs) represent a novel state of matter in which spins are highly entangled, but do not order nor freeze even in the zero-temperature limit acy. Considering the crystal-electric-field (CEF) effect, the degeneracy of J will be lifted, which was suggested to give rise to a non-Kramers doublet ground state In this work, in order to identify the role of disorder in the QSL candidates, we choose Tm 3 Sb 3 Zn 2 O 14 and its sister compound Tm 3 Sb 3 Mg 2 O 14 with quantifiable disorder, that is, strong and weak disorder in the former and latter, respectively, and investigate how disorder affects the material's magnetic properties. On one hand, the absence of magnetic order and spin freezing down to ∼50 mK far below the Curie-Weiss temperature (Θ CW ), the presence of residual linear term in the specific heat, and the observation of broad gapless magnetic excitations resemble those of gapless QSLs. On the other hand, we find that the disorder resulting from the random mixing of magnetic Tm 3+ and nonmagnetic Zn 2+ or Mg 2+ in the Tm layers is intimately correlated with the strength of the low-energy magnetic excitations. In particular, in Tm 3 Sb 3 Zn 2 O 14 which has strong disorder, as identified from the structural refinement and CEF excitations, the value of the residual linear term in the specific heat is about 4 times larger, and the intensity of the gapless spin excitations in the INS spectra is greatly enhanced, compared to those of Tm 3 Sb 3 Mg 2 O 14 with much less disorder. These results demonstrate conclusively that disorder in a geometrically frustrated compound can make it mimic a QSL. C and longer reaction time of 5 days were required to obtain the pure phase. X-ray diffraction (XRD) data were collected in an x-ray diffractometer (X TRA, ARL) using the Cu-K α edge with a wavelength of 1.54 Å. Rietveld refinements on the data were run by the EXPGUI and GSAS programs Figures The random site mixing between the magnetic and nonmagnetic sites is expected to have a strong impact on the magnetic properties, which is indeed the case as will be discussed later. To address this issue, it is better to have a comparative compound that is isostructural to Tm 3 Sb 3 Zn 2 O 14 but has less disorder resulting from the random mixing of the magnetic and nonmagnetic ions. For this purpose, we have replaced the nonmagnetic Zn in Tm 3 Sb 3 Zn 2 O 14 with Mg and synthesized Tm 3 Sb 3 Mg 2 O 14 , which has less disorder as we show below. We have performed similar refinements and the results are shown in Fig. We further characterize both compounds by measuring the magnetic susceptibility (χ) with a magnetic field of 0.1 T, and the results are shown in Figs. these observations To further investigate the disorder effect in these two compounds, we measured the CEF excitations, and the experimental results are shown in Fig. In order to confirm the signals we have observed here indeed originate from CEF excitations, some Q scans located at representative energy levels were performed. In Figs. The rare-earth ions in the materials are strongly influenced by the electrostatic environment they occupy. Therefore, in order to quantitatively identify how the (2J + 1)-fold (J = 6) spin-orbital degeneracy is lifted by the CEF effect, a CEF analysis was performed, and the effective Hamiltonian was obtained by the point-charge model according to the point-group symmetry where O m n and B m n are the Steven operators Since the CEF of Tm 3+ at the original sites has a very low symmetry of the C 2h point group with eight oxygen ligands, the 13-fold degeneracy of the ground-state manifold 3 H 6 is expected to be completely lifted. Fortunately, the diagonalization of Eq. (1) predicts that the splitting of two low-lying singlets are small enough to be regarded as a nearly degenerate non-Kramers doublet. The effective spin in the doublet is an easy-axis moment, and the components are mostly J z = ±6 along the easy axis. If we choose our local axes such that the two-fold rotation symmetry is about the y axis and the easy axis is the z axis, the doublet shown in Table III can be well described by symmetric and antisymmetric combinations of J z = ±6 states: Due to the low symmetry, the CEF peaks observed experimentally are not sufficient to simulate all the CEF parameters. In addition, the disorder would further influence the simulation. In this case, we simply do the symmetry analysis and obtain the effective CEF Hamiltonian by point-charge approximation. Since the lifting of the degeneracy is mainly determined by the pointgroup symmetry, we think the analysis is sufficient to identify the low-lying states, which are very far away from other higher energy levels. Further fitting would revise the higher energy levels, but the components of the non-Kramers doublet would not change significantly. A similar non-Kramers doublet was also reported for Ho 3 Sb 3 Mg 1 O 14 (Ref. 65) and Tb 3 Sb 3 Mg 2 O 14 (Ref. 66), which share the same structure. The fitting analysis of the same structure of other crystals also supported that the symmetry analysis is qualitatively efficient for the low-lying states For the Tm 3+ cations at the Zn(1) sites in Tm 3 Zn 2 Sb 3 O 14 , the ligand environment is a squashed oxygen octahedron, whose symmetry is higher than the original sites. The CEF with D 3d point group symmetry will split the 13-degenerate states into five singlets and four doublets. It has been revealed that two low-lying singlets would compose the nearly degenerate non-Kramers doublet We now turn to the INS measurements at low energies to gain further insights into the magnetic state. The INS measurements were performed on the samples with similar weights and thus similar amount of magnetic Tm 3+ ions. Furthermore, we used the same experimental setup and equal counting time. Therefore, Figs. 4(a)-4(c) and 4(e)-4(g) can be compared directly. Different from that in Tm 3 Sb 3 Zn 2 O 14 , the low-energy excitations are barely visible in Fig. To further investigate the broad excitations centered at Q ∼ 1 Å-1 , we integrated the intensities with Q ranging from 0.6 and 1.4 Å-1 at various temperatures, and the integrated intensities are plotted as a function of energy in Fig. How do we understand the INS results given the strong site mixing demonstrated from the XRD, CEF, and specific heat results? At first glance, the lowenergy magnetic excitations in Tm 3 Sb 3 Zn 2 O 14 are distinct from conventional spin-wave excitations, but similar to the spectrum expected from the deconfined spinons in QSLs 