A dense system of independent oscillators, connected only by their interaction with the same cavity excitation mode, will radiate coherently, which effect is termed superradiance. In several cases, especially if the density of oscillators is high, the superradiance may dominate the intrinsic relaxation processes. This limit can be achieved, e.g., with cyclotron resonance in two-dimensional electron gases. In those experiments, the cyclotron resonance is coupled to the electric field of light, while the oscillator density can be easily controlled by varying the gate voltage. However, in the case of magnetic oscillators, to achieve the dominance of superradiance is more tricky, as material parameters limit the oscillator density, and the magnetic coupling to the light wave is rather small. Here we present quasi-optical magnetic resonance experiments on thin films of yttrium iron garnet. Due to the simplicity of experimental geometry, the intrinsic damping and the superradiance can be easily separated in the transmission spectra. We show that with increasing film thickness, the losses due to coherent radiation prevail the system's internal broadening. Since the current CMOS-based electronics is soon to reach its limitations 1 , the design of fundamentally new ways to forward, process, and store information is of vital importance. One possible direction is offered by magnonics, where information is manifested in the magnetic state of matter and forwarded as an oscillating magnetic wave (magnon) The lifetime of such an excited state, usually in the microwave frequency range, is a crucial factor when designing potential applications. Besides their use in information technology, the research of magnonic systems with long-lifetime excitations is also motivated by their role as model systems of fundamental physical effects, such as Bose-Einstein condensation and other macroscopic quantum transport phenomena Lifetime measurement of various excited states is an essential tool for analyzing physical, chemical, and biological processes and making spectroscopic state assignments The third method utilizes Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, which connects the lifetime of a state to the uncertainty of its energy 8 , resulting in the natural line broadening of the spectroscopic absorption or emission signal. However, starting from the earliest spectroscopic experiments, the intrinsic natural broadening is dominated by other phenomena, such as the collision between particles and the Doppler-effect due to thermal motion in the atomic spectral lines of gases In several cases, when intrinsic damping is low and the density of oscillators is high, the damping due to coherent radiation starts to dominate, the effect known as superradiance Superradiance denotes coherent emission of uncoupled emitters when interacting with the same mode of electromagnetic wave, predicted in the Dicke-modell In all examples of superradiance listed above the light-matter interaction takes place in the electronic channel, while the superradiance of magnetic resonances seems to be more challenging to realize. Nevertheless, superradiant response of nuclear spins has been found In this work, we present the optical transmission investigations of possible superradiance at the magnetic resonance in thin films of yttrium iron garnet (YIG). Based on Maxwell's equations, we separate the effects of the geometrical and magnetic parameters of the sample on the broadening of the resonance signal. Thus, the intrinsic damping due to the limited lifetime of the magnon excitation can be restored by following the frequency dependence of the absorption linewidth. Since the magnetic resonance is excited coherently, the radiative broadening, caused by the re-emission of a secondary electromagnetic wave, is also originating from a coherent process, showing similarities to the superradiance broadening effect observed in the same frequency-range cyclotron resonance of a three-dimensional topological insulator Magnon damping in thin magnetic films. To address the effects of the intrinsic and radiative decay processes of magnons in thin magnetically ordered films, in the following a quasi-classical formalism is presented. The coherent magnetization dynamics is described by the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert model 37 , while the electrodynamical problem of optical transmission is treated within the thin sample approximation The response of the magnetic moment M of YIG to an external magnetic field H is given by the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation of motion 37 where γ denotes the gyromagnetic ratio, M 0 the saturation magnetization, α the dimensionless Gilbert damping parameter, and μ 0 the vacuum permeability. In case of an incoming THz beam with angular frequency ω and within Faraday geometry (wave propagation is parallel to the magnetic field), the magnetic field in the film is given by Here h x,y e iωt is the oscillating (AC) field in the sample plane, H F 0 is the strength of the static (DC) magnetic field in the material given by H F 0 = |H 0 -M 0 |, with the applied external field H 0 . Linearizing Eq. ( where m ± , h ± are the circularly polarized AC magnetization and field, respectively, and is the angular frequency of the ferromagnetic resonance. Similarly, in the Voigt geometry (wave propagation perpendicular to the magnetic field) with linearly polarized light H = (H 0 , h y e iωt , 0) the susceptibility is obtained as with ω V 0 = γ H 0 (H 0 + M 0 ) resonant angular frequency. To obtain the radiative contribution to the damping, we consider the transmission through a magnetic sample in the thin film approximation to obtain the fields on both sides of the film: On the left-hand side of Eq. ( The AC electric and magnetic fields are connected via e = Z 0 h/n 1,2 , where Z 0 = μ 0 /ε 0 is the impedance of free space, and n 1,2 is the refractive index of the dielectric media on both sides of the film. To further simplify the final expressions, for frequencies close to the ferromagnetic resonance, we assume χ F ± ≫ 1 and neglect all smaller terms. After some simple algebra, the transmission coefficient is obtained as: where n stands for the refractive index of the substrate (GGG in our case). In order to obtain relative transmission due to the magnetic resonance in YIG, Eq. ( where we introduce the radiative damping parameter as Here λ is the radiation wavelength in vacuum. In the case of Voigt geometry, the normalized transmission for a linearly polarized wave with h y results in the same expression as in Eq. ( For comparison, in the case of electric superradiance in thin films the corresponding equation reads 36 Here n 2D is the density, e the charge, and m the effective mass of two-dimensional electrons. In the electric case, to control the ratio between intrinsic and radiation damping, the electron density can be easily changed by variation of the gate voltage Equation (7) provides an expression for a resonant minimum in transmission with an effective width given by the sum of intrinsic(αω) and radiative(Γ F rad ) parts. Since both the amplitude and the linewidth of the peak in Eq. ( A quantum-mechanical approach of magnonic superradiance Analysis of the different contributions to the absorption linewidth. According to Eq. ( The ferrimagnetic resonance field H res of YIG shows an approximately linear dependence on the angular frequency ω (see inset of Fig. The values of intrinsic damping obtained from the present experiments are shown in Fig. To numerically validate our model in Eqs. (8,9), we compared the radiative damping rates, rid of the experimental and material parameters, to the universal values of π and 2π for Voigt and Faraday geometries, respectively. As presented in Fig. Alternatively, the collective nature of the secondary radiation can be studied on the dependence of Γ rad on the number of emitters. Namely, for coherent emission the radiative damping parameter grows linearly with the magnetic moment per unit area of the quasi two-dimesional structure, Γ rad ∝ M 0 d. In Fig. We have presented a method to separate the intrinsic and radiative contributions to magnetic thin films' resonance linewidth in optical absorption experiments. Compared to previous microwave studies Moreover, the free-standing sample in transmission experiments offers a universal method to eliminate the damping effect of the measurement setup, such as the induced currents in the waveguide or resonator cavity. In the case of thin samples, the re-emission of the electromagnetic radiation by the individual magnetic moments occurs in a coherent process, resulting in a quadratic scaling of the emitted power with the magnetization of the material, and with the volume of the sample. The coherent nature of the radiative line broadening mechanism allows its identification as the magnetic equivalent of superradiance, opening a fundamentally new way to study this collective phenomenon in the dynamics of magnetic systems. The characteristic frequency of magnetic excitations is by several orders of magnitude lower than that of the other extensively investigated quantum-optical systems 59 , granting the possibility of time-resolved detection of the magnetic superradiant dynamics. Since the thickness of the thin films is crucial for the interpretation of the optical experiments, for quality control, static magnetization measurements were performed in a vibrating sample magnetometer and in the temperature range of 5 -300 K. The thickness of the YIG layer in the sample was accurately determined from the magnitude of the observed magnetization step at a small magnetic field, corresponding to the switching of the ferrimagnetic magnetization of the YIG film. Sub-THz spectroscopy. Quasi-optical experiments were performed in a sub-THz Mach-Zehnder interferometer Data analysis. The transmission spectra have been analyzed using the Fresnel optical equations for a multilayer system 