To realize the braiding operations of Majorana zero mode in the vortex cores of a topological superconductor (TSC), a novel approach is proposed in this letter to replace the common tip (or tip-like) method. Instead of on top of the TSC thin film, arrays of electrically controllable pining centers are built beneath the film, hence detecting can proceed along with braiding. It does not only increase the braiding rate, but also enables the braiding to be performed in an electrically controllable way and to be integrated into large scale. Our work paves the way towards large-scale topological quantum computation. Quantum computation is believed to be much more powerful than classical one, especially when it comes to problems which are incapable for a conventional computer, such as the prime factorization MZM exists in the Abrikosov vortex core of TSC, so braiding MZM is equivalent to braiding the vortices. Abrikosov vortex in a type-II superconductor has two critical length scale: the coherence length of the cooper pairs ξ, which determines its size, and the magnetic penetration depth λ, which is the decay length for the circling * jfjia@sjtu.edu.cn supercurrent. Each vortex has a quantized magnetic flux. After a magnetic field is applied, vortices are generated in the superconductor and pinned at the positions where the local potential suppresses the superconductivity (usually defects). Then moving (pushing or dragging) the vortices involves only either depin or repin manipulations 1) It is very slow to drag or push the vortex with a mechanical-driving tip. And it cannot be expected to speed up since the bindings between a tip and vortex are fragile. 2) In the tip (or tip-like) way, one cannot directly de-arXiv:2012.10014v1 [cond-mat.other] 18 Dec 2020 termine the positions of the vortices since their generations are uncontrollable (note a single vortexantivortex pair can be generated controllably 3) The tip (or tip-like) way cannot be integrated into large scale since one tip can only perform one braiding operation at the same time, hence limiting its further developments to full-scale quantum computer. To overcome these shortcomings, in this letter, we propose an alternative way to perform the braiding. The main idea is to build arrays of electrically controllable pining centers beneath, but not on top of the TSC thin film [Fig. Here take building pinning centers with local strain as an example, we give a full description of this method in the following text while the other two methods, namely building pinning centers with local magnetic field or local hot spot induced by a tunneling current, will be discussed later. Our proposal towards braiding MZM in terms of local strain proceeds in four steps. As shown in Fig. above, this strain may locally suppress the superconductivity and finally contribute to pinning vortex27. The first step is highly feasible for experimental setup and may be achieved in the near future. With tiles at hand, the second step is to assembly some of them into braiding unit, as shown in the top-right panel of Fig. Step 2 is a benchmark of our proposal towards TQC. Once succeeds, step 3 and step 4 then are straightforward. Just by integrating more and more braiding units, we obtain an electrically based "chip" and finally industrial "CPU" which may be able to perform full-scale TQC, see the bottom panels of Fig. Note for the above toy buildings, we have ignored many details. Here we comment on two of the most important requirements that must be fulfilled in the experimental implementation: i) The size of the tiles should be smaller than the size of the vortex (depends on the coherence length ξ), otherwise we cannot finely generate and control the pinning and moving of the vortices, which will lead to inevitable failure of the braiding operations described above. Typically, the size of the tiles can be as large as ∼40 nm ii) The local strain may not be able to fully suppress the local superconductivity of the TSC, therefore, it can only serve as a pining center. Then a question is: how can we initialize a vortex at the pinning center? This difficulty can be solved by first triggering local strain at specific positions as artificial pining centers, then applying suitable magnetic field to generate vortices which may be pinned by the established pining centers. This idea can be applied to the other two methods as well. But anyway, such a requirement put a limitation on real implementations of this method. If alternatively using electrically controllable local magnetic field to build the pinning centers, the limitation can be removed since the generation of vortex is just the generation of magnetic flux. The tiles now are heterostructures of the top TSC thin film and bottom magnetoelectric (ME), or equivalent MZ layer [Fig. to generating and/or pinning vortex. However, the induced local magnetic fields should be strong enough to generate and/or pin a vortex in the TSC. In fact, on the one hand, the required strength of the magnetic field is quite small for some artificially topological superconductors Other than the two methods, one can also use electrically controllable hot spot to build the pining centers To conclude, we proposed an alternative way other than the common tip method to realize the braiding operations of MZM. There are some special advantages for our proposals. First, the vortices on top of TSC are electrically controllable, giving rise to much faster braiding rate and easy manipulation. Second, the arrays of electrically controllable pining centers are built beneath the film, which enables the detection while braiding. Third, the braiding units of our proposal can be easily integrated into large scale. This property is of great importance in developing full-scale TQC and one sees no such possibility with the common tip way before. However, we are aware that the proposals in this letter are difficult for real implementations. But all the requirements and needed techniques are accessible with nowadays technologies, in principle, the proposed methods for the braiding operation of MZM are expected to be feasible. Our proposals may open a new era for the experimental implementation of TQC.