Perovskite based tandem solar cells are of increasing interest as they approach commercialisation. Here we use time-resolved and steady-state optical spectroscopy on stateof-the-art low-and high-bandgap perovskite films for tandems to quantify intrinsic recombination rates and absorption coefficients. We apply these experimental parameterised data to calculate the limiting efficiency of perovskite-silicon and all-perovskite two-terminal tandems employing currently available bandgap materials as 42.0 % and 40.8 % respectively. By including luminescence coupling between sub-cells, i.e. the re-emission of photons from the high-bandgap sub-cell and their absorption in the low-bandgap sub-cell, we reveal the stringent need for current matching is relaxed when the high-bandgap sub-cell is a luminescent perovskite compared to calculations that do not consider luminescence coupling. We show that luminescence coupling becomes important in all-perovskite tandems when charge carrier trapping rates are < 10 6 s -1 (corresponding to carrier lifetimes longer than 1 μs at low excitation densities) in the high-bandgap sub-cell, which is lowered to 10 5 s -1 in the better-bandgapmatched perovskite-silicon cells. In both tandem technologies, this threshold corresponds to a high-bandgap sub-cell with an external luminescence quantum efficiency of at least ~0.1 % at maximum power point. We demonstrate luminescence coupling endows greater flexibility in both sub-cell thicknesses, increased tolerance to different spectral conditions and a reduction in the total thickness of light absorbing layers. To maximally exploit luminescence coupling we reveal a key design rule for luminescent perovskite-based tandems: the high-bandgap subcell should always have the higher short-circuit current. Importantly, this can be achieved by reducing the bandgap or increasing the thickness in the high-bandgap sub-cell with minimal reduction in efficiency, thus allowing for wider, unstable bandgap compositions (>1.7 eV) to be avoided. Finally, we experimentally visualise luminescence coupling in an all-perovskite tandem device stack through cross-section luminescence images, revealing that the effect must already be considered for further perovskite tandem development. The performances of halide perovskite solar cells, epitomised by the workhorse methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) composition, have rapidly improved over the last decade and power conversion efficiencies now rival those of silicon Here we measure intrinsic recombination rates and absorption coefficients in perovskite thin films using time-resolved and steady-state optical spectroscopy, and use these values to calculate the thermodynamic efficiency limit of low-bandgap perovskite formamidinium leadtin iodide (FAPb0.5Sn0.5I3) as 32.1 %, an all-perovskite tandem, with the same low bandgap system coupled to FA0.7Cs0.3Pb(I0.7Br0.3)3, as 40.8 %, and this high-bandgap system coupled to an idealised silicon absorber layer as 42.0 % (using literature recombination rates and absorption coefficients for silicon). We demonstrate that consideration of luminescence coupling between sub-cells, i.e., the emission of light from the high-bandgap sub-cell and its subsequent reabsorption in the low-bandgap sub-cell, relaxes the need for current matching compared to previous calculations that do not include the effect. It becomes important when charge trapping rates are <10 6 s -1 in all-perovskite tandems and <10 5 s -1 in perovskite-silicon tandemsvalues comparable to what are already achievable in reported materials, where charge lifetimes in the charge-trapping regime are on the order of 1-10 μs The maximum efficiency of a single bandgap solar cell was derived in the seminal paper by Shockley and Queisser 16 and extended to include any number of ideal tandem solar cells by de Vos ( Here V is the voltage across the semiconductor (in an ideal case assumed equal to the Fermilevel splitting), and the maximum efficiency is found by maximising the product When considering tandem solar cells, an additional intrinsic process should be included when compared to single junction devices: luminescence coupling between the sub-cells. This phenomenon has been previously explored in idealised systems In Figure where n is the excited charge density and t is time. In both materials we observe a broad ground state bleach in TA which scales linearly with excitation density (see SI Figure where G ext is the laser generation rate, η esc is the photon escape probability, b r is the internal radiative bimolecular recombination rate and p i is the background hole concentration (in the case of a p-type material). By measuring the laser generation rate, G ext , and calculating n from values obtained in our TA measurements (as G ext = an + bn 2 + cn 3 ), we fit our PLQE data using Equation ( For the low-bandgap system, we use our previously reported doping densities, radiative bimolecular and Auger recombination rates (Table To measure optical constants for both materials we combined ellipsometry and photothermaldeflection spectroscopy (PDS) measurements The dashed lines denote regions within 1 % of maximum efficiency. d) The difference in energy generated with and without luminescence coupling throughout the year for North Roseau on the USA-Canada border. Sub-cell thicknesses are chosen to maximise energy yield in these simulations of 1000 nm and 220 nm without luminescence coupling/1000 nm and 310 nm with luminescence coupling, for low-and high-bandgap sub-cells, respectively (see SI Figure To calculate the fundamental limiting efficiency of a solar cell at maximum power point, the absorption is maximised (using the Hybrid model, which gives less absorption than in Shockley-Queisser tandems) and the recombination rate is minimised by setting all controllable loss mechanisms to zero. Therefore, only radiative recombination and intrinsic non-radiative Auger recombination are included in our limiting efficiency calculations, while the effects of charge trapping are considered later. We also assume an equal Fermi-level splitting such that the populations of electrons (n) and holes (p) as a function of applied voltage V follow n = p = n i e qV 2k B T in our intrinsic approximation, where q is the charge of an electron and k B T the thermal energy. The limiting efficiency of an all-perovskite tandem under AM1.5 as a function of sub-cell thicknesses with experimental-parameterised absorption and recombination coefficients, in the case where luminescence coupling is not considered in the modelling, is presented in Figure We also model a perovskite-silicon tandem by coupling the same high-bandgap perovskite to an idealised silicon sub-cell (see SI Note 3 for details and SI Figure To explore how luminescence coupling affects tolerance to real-world spectra we again consider the all-perovskite tandem cells constructed from our experimental films and calculate the energy generated from a year's worth of irradiance spectra without including and including luminescence coupling. We used a typical meteorological years' worth of data from the National Solar Radiation Database, which includes spectrally resolved data and temperature variation, for a region on the border between United States and Canada (North Roseau) that represents reasonable spectral variation throughout the year In Figure In order to experimentally demonstrate luminescence coupling and its effect on actual tandem devices, we perform measurements on an all-perovskite tandem cell following the device architecture of Palmstrom et al. A confocal PL map of a cross-section of the tandem using appropriate optical filters to selectively observe emission from the high-or low-bandgap sub-cell is shown in Figure when exciting with a 636 nm laser and using a 775 nm short pass or long pass filter to only observe PL from the high-or low-bandgap sub-cells, respectively. c) Fixed excitation at the centre of the HG sub-cell with 636 nm excitation and spatially varying the PL detection away from the excitation spot across the device cross-section, using 750-nm short pass and 800-nm long pass filters to collect emission from HG and LG materials, respectively. Note distance scale here does not exactly correspond to distances on the sample surface (see SI Note 9). d) Time-resolved PL of the HG and LG regions, as well as the square root of the low-bandgap decay to show the match with the HG decay. In this work we have calculated the limiting efficiencies of perovskite-based tandem solar cells, including all intrinsic loss processes and luminescence coupling between sub-cells. By measuring the recombination rates and absorption coefficients of low-and high-bandgap perovskite films, we calculated the limiting efficiency of an all-perovskite tandem as 40.8 % and a perovskite-silicon tandem as 42.0 % when the intrinsic process of luminescence coupling between the sub-cells is included and in the absence of trapping. We show that current state of the art high-bandgap perovskite films for tandem cells have charge trapping rates and luminescence quantum efficiencies on the order required for luminescence coupling to play an important role in devices, which reduces the need for short-circuit current matching compared to earlier predictions that do not consider luminescence coupling. We demonstrate luminescence coupling in perovskite tandems, when compared to a model which ignores this effect, gives increased tolerance in choice of bandgaps, sub-cell thicknesses, and greater tolerance to a range of real-world spectra, and hence relaxes the previously determined criteria for materials and device design. We conclude with a new design rule for perovskite tandems: it is always better for the high-bandgap material to have the higher short circuit current, as any discrepancy in current matching will be partially corrected by luminescence coupling between sub-cells. Importantly, these guidelines allow unstable >1.7 eV high-bandgap perovskite absorbers to be avoided when targeting maximum performance. We also present experimental evidence of luminescence coupling occurring in an all-perovskite tandem including visualisation of the effect, highlighting the importance of the effect in ongoing perovskite tandem developments. Low-bandgap FAPb0.5Sn0.5I3 samples were prepared in a nitrogen-filled glovebox as described in our previous work To prepare the high-bandgap perovskite, a 1.2 M solution of FA0.7Cs0.3PbI0.7Br0.3 was used. First, 304.3 mg PbI2 (TCI) and 198.2 mg PbBr2 (TCI) were dissolved in 0.8 mL anhydrous N,N-dimethylformamide (sigma) and the solution heated to 100 °C. The solution was then cooled to room temperature and 144.4 mg FAI (greatcell solar) was added. For the CsI (sigma) precursor, we prepared 1.8 M CsI solution in dimethyl sulfoxide (sigma) and heated the solution to 150 °C. Finally, the FAPb(IBr) and CsI solutions were mixed with a 4:1 volume ratio to achieve the desired composition to finalise the precursor solutions. Prior to spincoating, the glovebox was purged for 15 minutes with nitrogen to achieve a clean atmosphere. To prepare the films, 50 μl of perovskite precursor solution was deposited on a glass, quartz or silicon substrate (which had been cleaned by sonication in anisole and isopropanol) and spincoated at 1000 rpm for 10 s and then 6000 rpm for 20s. 100 μl of chlorobenzene anti-solvent was dynamically dropped on the middle of substrate, 5 seconds before the end of the spinning protocol. The films were then annealed on a hotplate at 100 °C for 30 minutes in the glove box. The spin-coating method is optimised for an integrated spin-coater in an MBRAUN glovebox with the lid open. To confirm phase purity we carried our X-Ray diffraction on our highbandgap samples and results are shown in SI Figure All films for photoluminescence quantum efficiency and transient absorption spectroscopy measurements were encapsulated with a glass cover slip using a transparent UV epoxy (Blufixx). Perovskite-perovskite solar cells were fabricated following the procedures of Palmstrom et al. Photoluminescence quantum efficiency (PLQE) measurements were recorded using an integrating sphere, following the three measurement approach of De Mello et al. For the pump, sub-ns pulses at 532 nm were generated by a Picolo-25 MOPA laser (InnoLas). A Spectra Physics Solstice Ti:Sapphire laser generated 90 fs pulses at a frequency of 1 kHz and a broad band probe beam was generated using a home-built noncollinear optical parametric amplifier. Probe and reference beams were measured with a Si dual-line array detector (Hamamatsu S8381-1024Q) and read by a board from Stresing Entwicklungbüro (custom made). Excitation fluence varied with an optical filter wheel. Other details are similar to those in Rao et al. A monochromatic pump light beam was impinged on the sample (film on quartz substrate), which on absorption produced a thermal gradient near the sample surface via non-radiative relaxation induced heating. This results in a refractive index gradient in the area surrounding the sample surface. This refractive index gradient was further enhanced by immersing the sample in an inert liquid FC-72 Fluorinert® (3M Company) which has a high refractive index change per unit change in temperature. A fixed wavelength continuous wave laser probe beam was passed through this refractive index gradient producing a deflection proportional to the absorbed light at that particular wavelength, which is detected by a photo-diode and lock-in amplifier combination. All samples were loaded into the inert liquid in a nitrogen filled glovebox to prevent effects of air or moisture exposure. The complex refractive index of the different perovskite films, √ε b (E) = n(E) -ik(E), was obtained from ellipsometry measurements at room temperature (Sopra PS-1000 SAM). We employed a genetic algorithm to fit the experimental data assuming a Forouhi-Bloomer model for three oscillators 1 -ε eff (E) 1 + 2ε eff (E) p p + ε b (E) -ε eff (E) ε b (E) + 2ε eff (E) (1 -p p ) = 0 where pp is the porosity, i.e. the air to perovskite ratio, of the layer. To reduce the impact of randomness on the initial fitting parameters, some of the parameters were appropriately bounded according to the experimental values of the layer thickness (estimated from crosssection scanning electron microscopy images) and the bandgap (extracted from the photoluminescence maximum). Fits to recorded data are presented in SI Figure Hyperspectral Photoluminescence Measurements (and definition of 1 sun for current-voltage measurements under 405 nm excitation) Absolute photoluminescence maps were recorded using a hyperspectral widefield imager from Photon etc. using a 20x objective. Following literature The QFLS was calculated by assuming Lambertian emission via Würfel's generalized Planck law I PL (E) = 2πE 2 a(E) h 3 c 2 ⋅ 1 exp ( E -QFLS k B T -1) This equation can be simplified by assuming that the spectral absorptivity approaches unity for photon energies above the bandgap 