The Heusler compound ScInAu 2 was previously reported to have a superconducting ground state with a critical temperature of 3.0 K. Recent high throughput calculations have also predicted that the material harbors a topologically non-trivial band structure similar to that reported for β-PdBi 2 . In an effort to explore the interplay between the superconducting and topological properties properties, electrical resistance, magnetization, and x-ray diffraction measurements were performed on polycrystalline ScInAu 2 . The data reveal that high-quality polycrystalline samples lack the superconducting transition present samples that have not been annealed. These results indicate the earlier reported superconductivity is non-intrinsic. Several compounds in the Au-In-Sc ternary phase space (ScAu 2 , ScIn 3 , and Sc 2 InAu 2 ) were explored in an attempt to identify the secondary phase responsible for the non-intrinsic superconductivity. The results suggest that elemental In is responsible for the reported superconductivity in ScInAu 2 . Many recent studies in condensed matter physics and materials science have been focused on the investigation of symmetry-protected topological states One such candidate, the 5.4 K superconductor β-PdBi 2 , attracted attention when it was found to have topologically non-trivial surface states The search for candidate materials with certain combinations of properties has recently been facilitated by the accessibility of new databases of both experimental and computationally predicted properties. In this case, we searched for materials that exhibited an intersection of two properties: 1. Previous experimental reports of superconductivity, and 2. Computational prediction of a topologically non-trivial band structure. The list of experimental T c values was taken from the SuperCon database Given the facts above, we thus sought to characterize the potential interplay of superconductivity and topological properties in ScInAu 2 . Polycrystalline ScInAu 2 was synthesized via arc-melting. Annealing the samples yielded nearly single phase ScInAu 2 that displayed no superconducting transition down to 1.8 K via electrical resistivity and magnetization measurements. These results are in contrast to earlier work Arc-melted samples were prepared by combining the raw elements in stoichiometric ratios and melting on a water-cooled copper hearth under Ar atmosphere. Each sample was melted multiple times, and was flipped in between each melting to ensure homogeneity throughout the boule. Samples that did not contain In had negligible mass loss, whereas samples containing In showed mass losses around 3%. In order to compensate for this, extra In was added and the samples were arc-melted again until the mass of the sample indicated the correct stoichiometry had been reached. The samples were then annealed while wrapped in Ta foil under partial Ar atmospheres. The crystal structures were characterized with powder x-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Siemans D500 diffractometer or a Panalytical X'Pert Pro diffractometer, and Rietveld refinements using GSAS-II Polycrystalline samples of ScInAu 2 were synthesized via arc-melting. Samples were measured both before and after annealing at 700 °C for three days. Figure Figure Arc melted and annealed samples of ScAu 2 show diffraction patterns that matched the expected MoSi 2type structure Single crystals of ScIn 3 were grown with the molten flux method: 80:20 atomic % In:Sc were heated in an alumina crucible sealed in a quartz ampule under 70 torr Ar gas to 1000 °C and then cooled to 400 °C over 240 hours. After holding at this temperature of 8 hours, the ampule was centrifuged to remove the flux. This revealed small, cubic crystals, confirmed by xray diffraction to be cubic ScIn 3 Magnetic measurements on samples yielded a diamagnetic signal with an onset of around 3 K, but the shielding fraction of order 1%. Furthermore, a magnetic field of 0.05 T removed this feature. Both of these facts indicate that the superconductivity is not intrinsic to the ScIn 3 but is due to droplets of In flux on the surfaces of the crystals. Superconducting transitions have been observed at 0.78 K and 0.71 K in YIn 3 and LaIn 3 respectively Samples of Sc 2 InAu 2 were synthesized by arc melting. The tetragonal Mo 2 FeB 2 -type structure The previously reported superconducting behavior of ScInAu 2 , a material that shares the same topological classification as β-PdBi 2 , has been re-analyzed. These measurements suggest that ScInAu 2 is not intrinsically superconducting, but that unannealed samples can exhibit partial superconducting shielding in the magnetic susceptibility due to a secondary phase -most likely unreacted indium. We also investigated the possibility that another phase is responsible for the superconductivity in unannealed samples of ScInAu 2 . Queries were performed with the Materials Platform for Data Science [25] and the Superconducting Material Database With the existence of large databases of experimental and computational properties, the search for materials with certain combinations of properties is now straightforward. In this case we identified an inaccuracy in the record -ScInAu 2 is non-superconducting, though it had previously been reported to have T c = 3 K [25] E. 