We study the design and implementation of numerical methods to solve the generalized Langevin equation (GLE) focusing on canonical sampling properties of numerical integrators. For this purpose, we cast the GLE in an extended phase space formulation and derive a family of splitting methods which generalize existing Langevin dynamics integration methods. We show exponential convergence in law and the validity of a central limit theorem for the Markov chains obtained via these integration methods, and we show that the dynamics of a suggested integration scheme is consistent with asymptotic limits of the exact dynamics and can reproduce (in the short memory limit) a superconvergence property for the analogous splitting of underdamped Langevin dynamics. We then apply our proposed integration method to several model systems, including a Bayesian inference problem. We demonstrate in numerical experiments that our method outperforms other proposed GLE integration schemes in terms of the accuracy of sampling. Moreover, using a parameterization of the memory kernel in the GLE as proposed by Ceriotti et al In this article we study numerical discretization schemes for a generalized Langevin equation (GLE) of the form (GLE) q = M -1 p, ṗ = -∇ q U (q) -t 0 K(ts)M -1 p(s)ds + η(t). where the dynamic variables q ∈ Ω q = R n , p ∈ Ω p = R n denote the position and momenta of a Hamiltonian system with energy function The mass matrix M ∈ R n×n is assumed to be symmetric positive definite, and U is a smooth confining potential function (i.e., U ∈ C ∞ (Ω q , R) and U (q) → ∞ as q → ∞) such that Ωq e -U(q) dq < ∞. K : [0, ∞) → R n×n is a matrix-valued (generalized) function, which is referred to as the memory kernel, and η is a stationary Gaussian process with vanishing mean taking values in R n and which (in equilibrium) is assumed to be statistically independent of q and p. The dynamical variable η models a random force, which is such that a fluctuation dissipation relation holds. That is, the auto-covariance function of the random force and the memory kernel K coincide up to a constant pre-factor, i.e., E[η(s + t)η ⊤ (s)] = β -1 K(t), for all t, s > 0. In its general form (GLE) the GLE is a non-Markovian dynamical model, meaning that the evolution of the state of the described system depends not only on the state itself but on the state history. The underdamped Langevin equation is obtained as a special Markovian variant of the GLE when the memory kernel is chosen as K(t) = Γδ(t) and η = 2 Γβ -1 Ẇ , where δ(•) denotes the Dirac delta function, Ẇ is a Gaussian white noise in R n with independent components, i.e., Ẇ = [ Ẇi ] 1≤i≤n , such that, Ẇi ∼ N (0, 1) and E[ Ẇi (t) Ẇj (s)] = δ ij δ(ts), and Γ is a symmetric positive definite matrix which is commonly referred to as the friction matrix. Under this parameterization (GLE) simplifies to the Itô diffusion (LD) q = M -1 p, ṗ = -∇ q U (q) -ΓM -1 p + 2 Γβ -1 Ẇ . 1.1. The GLE as a dynamical model. Traditionally, the generalized Langevin equation is widely used in thermodynamics to model the dynamics of an open system which exchanges energy with one or more heat baths. The equation can be formally derived via the Mori-Zwanzig projection formalism Besides its application as a dynamical model, the GLE has been used in molecular sampling to design (approximate) Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods with enhanced sampling properties In a nutshell, the idea behind the enhanced sampling methods developed in 1.3. Scope and main results of this article. The purpose of this article is to provide a class of numerical integrators with well understood theoretical properties which are suitable for simulation of the GLE in a wide range of applications. Within this class of numerical integrators we identify one scheme, gle-BAOAB, which we show analytically and in numerical experiments to outperform previously proposed schemes in terms of numerical discretization error and numerical stability. The fact that in any computer simulation only finite memory is available means that any computer simulation of (GLE) inevitably results in a quasi-Markovian process. That is, the obtained process is Markovian in some (generally obscure) state space. Here, we focus on a particular class of quasi-Markovian instances of (GLE), whose Markovian form can be related directly to a certain class of Itô diffusion processes in an extended state space (see subsection 1.4). Instead of attempting to directly discretize (GLE), we numerically integrate the corresponding equivalent stochastic differential equation (SDE). This approach allows us in applications where the solution process of (GLE) is not quasi-Markovian (this is for example the case if K(t) has the form of a power law) to clearly separate the error due to time-discretization of the process -the focus of this article-from the error induced by a quasi-Markovian approximation. The focus of this article is on the construction and analysis of integration schemes for the quasi-Markovian approximation. The proposed time discretizations (Sec. Section 2) of the equivalent SDE are constructed as symmetric stochastic splitting schemes. The decomposition (of the associated generator) which is used as the basis for these stochastic splitting schemes is informed by results on stochastic splitting schemes for the underdamped Langevin equation In terms of the analysis we focus on the properties of the Markov chain obtained by such time-discretization of the quasi-Markovian approximation. That is, we discuss the existence of a stepsize dependent invariant measure π h of that Markov chain (here, h > 0 denotes the stepsize of the time discretization) and provide conditions for geometric convergence and the validity of a central limit theorem (Section 3). Moreover, we provide a detailed analysis of the marginal measure π h (dq) of the position variable q and its convergence to the exact marginal measure π(dq) as h → 0 (subsection 3.2). While the approximation accuracy of the measure π h (dq) obviously is highly relevant for sampling applications, we emphasize that an accurate approximation of the marginal measure π(dq) is also relevant for accurately recovering dynamical properties Another aspect covered in this article is the behavior of the introduced stochastic splitting schemes in certain limits of parametrization (Section 4). We show that the obtained numerical schemes behave consistently with well known homogenization results (summarized in subsection 1.5) of the continuous dynamics and reduce to numerical integrators of the corresponding limiting dynamics with well known numerically favorable properties. This has important implications for both sampling applications and for applications where the GLE is used as a dynamical model. In the former case our results ensure that the convergence order of the stepsize dependent error incurred in the invariant measure π h is not reduced in the respective limits. In fact we show that in the overdamped limit of (GLE) we obtain an increase of convergence order (fourth order instead of second order). A property which-in accordance with previous results In the remainder of this section we set up the basic framework for studying the Markovian reformulation of the GLE. We briefly review the above-mentioned homogenization results for the continuous dynamics as well as some results on the ergodic properties of the continuous dynamics. 1.4. Quasi-Markovian generalized Langevin equations (QGLE). Consider the SDE defined on the extended space where Γ, Σ are block matrices of the form with m ≥ n, and where Ẇ is a Gaussian white noise in R n+m with independent components, i.e., Ẇ = [ Ẇi ] 1≤i≤n+m , such that, Ẇi ∼ N (0, 1) and In what follows we first provide a set of sufficient conditions which ensure that the SDE (QGLE) can be rewritten in the form of the stochastic integro-differential equation (GLE) and possesses an invariant measure which is such that its marginal in q, p coincides with the Gibbs-Boltzmann distribution. (i) There exists a symmetric positive definite matrix Q ∈ R m×m such that, (ii) the real parts of all eigenvalues of the matrix A derivation of the following proposition can be found in Proposition 1.1. Let Assumption 1 hold and let Q ∈ R m×m be as specified therein. The SDE (QGLE) conserves the probability measure π(dq dp ds) with density If further, s(0) ∼ N (0, Q) (independent of q(0), p(0), Ẇ ), then the SDE (QGLE) can be rewritten in the form of a stochastic integro-differential equation (GLE) with We refer to generalized Langevin equations whose memory kernel is of the form specified in Assumption 2. The matrices Γ and Q are such that either Parametrization according to Assumption 2 (i) allows for the representation of memory kernels of the form By choosing the matrices Γ 1,2 and Q appropriately, one can additionally include cross-correlations between components. Typically such parameterizations are used in applications where the GLE is being treated as a dynamical model; see subsection 1.1. Parametrization according to Assumption 2 (ii) allows for the representation of memory kernels where K acts as a high-pass filter. Such parameterizations are most commonly used in sampling applications; see subsection 1.2. For example, the memory kernel K(t) = I n γδ(t)λ γ τ e -t/τ , λ ∈ [0, 1), γ > 0, τ > 0 used in 1.4.1. Ergodicity and central limit theorem for QGLEs. Under additional conditions on the coefficients of (QGLE), the solution process is ergodic with unique invariant measure π and satisfies a central limit theorem. This follows from the fact that the semi-group of the associated evolution operators decays exponentially in a weighted L ∞ -norm. In order to state this result, we need to first set some notation. For prescribed K ∈ C ∞ (Ω x , [1, ∞)) with well-defined limit lim x →∞ K(x) = ∞, we define the set of functions which, when equipped with the norm φ → φ L ∞ K := sup x∈Ωx |φ(x)/K(x)|, forms a Banach space. We denote by In particular, the infinitesimal generator, L GLE , of (QGLE) when constrained to this set of test functions takes the form (1.9) where Here, as well as in the remainder of this article, z = (p, s) is used as shorthand for the combined vector of momenta and auxiliary variables. We denote the formal L 2 adjoint (also known as the Fokker-Planck operator) of L GLE as L † GLE . For t ≥ 0, we denote the evolution operator associated with the SDE (QGLE) as e tLGLE , i.e., e tLGLE φ (x where the expectation is with respect to the driving Wiener process, W of (QGLE) and x = (q, p, s) is used as a shorthand for the combined vector of positions, momenta, and auxiliary variables. The matrices Γ M and Σ are such that the operator ∂ t -L GLE is hypoelliptic. (see (ii) The potential function U is of the form U (q) = U 1 (q)+ U 2 (q), where U 1 (q) = 1 2 q T Ωq, with Ω ∈ R n×n being a symmetric positive definite matrix, and ) is such that its derivatives are uniformly bounded in R n , i.e., sup < ∞ for any k ∈ N, and i 1 , . . . , i k ∈ {1, . . . , n}. Under the above stated assumptions exponential convergence of the associated semi-group and a central limit theorem for trajectory averages can be established: Proposition 1.2 ( for some l ∈ N, then there is a finite σ 2 φ > 0 so that If not explicitly stated otherwise, we assume throughout the remainder of this article that the parameterization of (QGLE) is such that Assumptions 1 to 3 are all satisfied. 1.5. Limiting dynamics. The underdamped Langevin and overdamped Langevin dynamics can be obtained as limiting dynamics of the Markovian reformulation of the GLE. In what follows we briefly review two key results from (QGLE-scaled) where D a := diag(a 1 , a 2 , . . . a n ) and In the view of the stochastic integro-differential equation (GLE) the form of the matrices Γ μ , Σ μ corresponds to a rescaling of the memory kernel K(t) = diag(a 2 1 e -tb1 , . . . , a 2 n e -tbn ) as K μ (t) = μ 2 1 K(μ 2 t). Without loss of generality we assume M = I n here. Proposition 1.3 (White noise limit, Similarly, when considering the scaling λ = μ 1 = μ 2 = ǫ -1 one can show that the solution of (QGLE-scaled) converges weakly to the solution of an overdamped Langevin equation of the form where (q(t)) t≥0 denotes the solution process of the overdamped Langevin equation Proof. This result is a direct consequence of Theorem IV.1 in Fig. 2. Symmetric stochastic splitting methods for the QGLE. In this section we present the basic construction and implementation of the class of proposed stochastic splitting schemes for the Markovian reformulation (QGLE) of the GLE as well as an elementary analysis of the incurred weak error. As mentioned in the introduction, we construct splitting schemes using a similar procedure as that employed for the underdamped Langevin equation in By applying a Strang splitting with stepsize h > 0 twice (typically first to treat the Liouville operator L A + L B associated with the Hamiltonian vector field, and then subsequently to compute the combination of that operator with the term L O ), a symmetric stochastic splitting scheme with associated evolution operator is obtained: Similarly, by either changing the ordering within the Strang splitting or by changing the pair of operators selected for the first application of the Strang splitting, other splitting schemes can be obtained which are uniquely identified by palindromes of the form XYZYX where X, Y, Z ∈ {A, B, O} are distinct placeholders. (The symmetry of this decomposition is not essential but typically improves the accuracy and efficiency of the resulting scheme with little added computational cost.) This construction can be easily generalized to the Markovian reformulation of the GLE (QGLE) by using the fact that (QGLE) structurally resembles the underdamped Langevin equation (LD). That is, we consider a decomposition of L GLE as L GLE = L A + L B + L O , where L A , L B are defined as above and The only difference between this decomposition and the decomposition of the operator L LD is that L O corresponds to the generator of a linear SDE in p and s, whereas the operator L O in the otherwise identical decomposition of L LD is the generator of a linear SDE in p only. Thus, symmetric splitting schemes for (QGLE) can be constructed in the same way as for the underdamped Langevin equation resulting in numerical integrators with associated evolution operators of the form where X, Y, Z ∈ {A, B, O} are again distinct placeholders. where Φ X h , X ∈ {A, B, O} are the solutions maps of the differential equations associated with the operators L X , X ∈ {A, B, O}, respectively. A practical implementation of the above-described splitting schemes therefore requires that each differential equation associated with the operators L A , L B and L O can be solved exactly. Indeed, in the case of the operators L A and L B the solution of the associated differential equations q = M -1 p, and ṗ = -∇U (q) correspond to Euler updates of the form (2.3) Φ A h : (q, p, s) → (q + hM -1 p, p, s), Φ B h : (q, p, s) → (q, p -h∇ q U (q), s), respectively. The solution of the SDE associated with the operator coincides in law with z(h) = F h z(0)+S h R, (see e.g. The corresponding stochastic flow map which updates the combined state vector x accordingly, is of the form h at hand, one can find explicit algorithmic forms for the integration map Φgle-XYZYX h . We provide an algorithmic implementation of Φgle-BAOAB h in Algorithm 1. A numerical scheme with associated evolution operator P h is said to have global weak order p when applied to (QGLE) with x(0) ∼ π 0 if, for all φ ∈ C ∞ P (Ω x , R), and for all T > 0, there exists a constant C(T, φ) > 0, such that ), for all t n = nh ∈ [0, T ], for π 0 -almost all x, and for all sufficiently small h > 0. Here, as well as in sequel, P n = P n-1 P with P 0 = Id, denotes the n-th power of the evolution operator P. The above discretization schemes all have weak order p = 2: 2 ∇U (q); output: (q, p, s) Proposition 2.1. Let Assumption 3 be satisfied. Then, any symmetric stochastic splitting schemes with evolution operator Pgle-XYZYX h has global weak order 2. Proof. This result is a direct consequence of Theorem 2 in where [A, B] = AB -BA denotes the commutator of the two linear operators A, B. In other words the convergence order of the local weak error is 2. Assumption 3 ensures that for φ ∈ C ∞ P (Ω x , R) the remainder term r φ,h,5 as well as A 3 φ are both contained in C ∞ P (Ω x , R). For sufficiently small stepsize h > 0 the existence of a suitable Lyapunov functions (see proof of Theorem 3.1) ensures that moments, E x k 2m , of any order m ∈ N are uniformly bounded in the iteration index k ∈ N. All together, the conditions of 3. Error analysis of ergodic averages. As in the case of the underdamped Langevin equation and the overdamped Langevin equation, Markov chains of the discretized dynamics (3.1) can be used as approximate Markov chain Monte Carlo methods for the computation of expectations with respect to the extended Gibbs-Boltzmann distribution π. That is, expectations of observables φ ∈ L 2 (π), where L 2 (π) := {φ : Ω x → R measurable | φ 2 dπ}, are approximately computed as trajectory averages of the form φ N := 1 N N -1 k=1 φ( x k ) from a finite trajectory (x k ) k=1,...,N . Such approximate computations are performed under the premise that ( x k ) k∈N is ergodic with respect to the invariant measure π h ≈ π, so that lim for almost all realizations of the Markov chain ( x k ) k∈N . In this section we provide theoretical justification for such a computation by showing that the above-mentioned assumptions are indeed satisfied. We first show in subsection 3.1 that the proposed numerical schemes result in ergodic Markov chains and the validity a central limit theorem for the Monte Carlo error in the following decomposition of the approximation error Monte Carlo error . In the next subsection (subsection 3.2) we provide an analysis of the stepsize dependent systematic bias. 3.1. Ergodic properties and central limit theorem. In addition to showing the existence and uniqueness of the invariant measure π h , we show geometric ergodicity of the Markov chain ( x k ) k∈N . Geometric ergodicity is equivalent to exponential convergence of the corresponding evolution operator Pgle-XYZYX h in some suitably weighted L ∞ space. By Theorem 3.1. Let Assumption 1 and Assumption 3 be satisfied and let where C ∈ R n+m is a suitably chosen symmetric positive definite matrix (see Appendix A.1 for details) Then, there exists h * > 0, such that for any h ∈ (0, h * ) 1. the Markov chain associated with P h has a unique invariant probability measure π h , which admits a density with respect to the Lebesgue measure on Ω x and has finite moments, i.e., Ωx K l dπ h < ∞, for all l ∈ N. 2. there are constants C l > 0, r l ∈ (0, 1) such that A complete proof of this result can be found in Appendix A. Here, we provide a brief outline: the proof of the theorem relies on an application of Theorem 1.2 of where k = 2, and ν denotes the Lebesgue measure on Ω x . The validity of this minorization condition ensures that within any compact ball which is centered at the origin, the Markov chain (x k ) k∈N is mixing within a finite number of steps. As such it already ensures irreducibility of the Markov chain and thus guarantees the uniqueness of the invariant measure π h provided the latter exists. In order to ensure the existence of an invariant measure and exponential converge to that measure, the existence of a suitable Lyapunov function is shown in the second step of the proof. That is, Assumption 5 (Uniform Lyapunov condition). For any l ∈ N, l > 0, there exists h * > 0 and a l , b l > 0 such that for any h, 0 < h ≤ h * , Given the validity of both Assumption 4 and Assumption 5, the remaining statements of Theorem 3.1 then follow as a consequence of By is invertible and the corresponding inverse operator is bounded in terms of the operator norm induced by . By the results in For sufficiently small h > 0, there is finite σ 2 φ > 0 so that 3.2. Analysis of the systematic bias. In this section we provide results regarding the convergence order in h of the discretization bias in ergodic averages of symmetric splitting schemes. As discussed in subsection 2.3, the weak convergence order of these schemes is two, which together with the above shown ergodicity result implies that also the convergence order of the systematic discretization bias in ergodic averages is at least two, i.e., lim In what follows we discuss two special cases where the second order convergence can be improved upon. We first derive the explicit form of the measure π h of the gle-BAOAB scheme in the situation where the target measure π is Gaussian. Secondly, we analyze the behavior of the discretization error of the gle-BAOAB scheme in the overdamped limit. 3.2.1. Systematic bias for quadratic potentials. An important property of the gle-BAOAB scheme is that its invariant measure π h , when applied to a system with quadratic potential, is such that the marginal in q, π h (dq), coincides with the marginal in q of the exact invariant measure π(dq) ∝ e -βqΩ -1 q dq, so that lim for φ ∈ L 2 (π(dq)). More specifically, we have the following theorem. is invariant under gle-BAOAB with Q as defined in Proposition 1.1. Proof. We take a dual perspective and show that the above specified Gaussian measure π h is the unique stationary solution of the corresponding forward equation, i.e., where Pgle-BAOAB , is the forward operator of the gle-BAOAB scheme, which by construction is simply the concatenation of the forward operators corresponding to the respective B/A/O-steps in the order given by the splitting scheme. The action of these forward operators when applied to a multivariate Gaussian measure where where Thus, the Gaussian measure with density N ( • |μ, V ) is invariant under the action of Pgle-BAOAB which is satisfied if μ = μ h and V = V h with μ h = 0 and V h as specified in the proposition. Since for sufficiently small h > 0 the discretized dynamics are ergodic (see subsection 3.1), this solution is also the unique solution of equation (3.9). Remark 3.4. With the same techniques as in the proof of Theorem 3.3, one may show that for the same quadratic potential function, the invariant measure of the Markov chain generated by gle-ABOBA is identical to the invariant measure of gle-BAOAB, and that the unique invariant measure of the Markov chains generated by gle-OBABO and gle-OABAO is the Gaussian measure N (x; μ h , V h )dx with μ h = 0, and 3.2.2. Superconvergence of gle-BAOAB in the overdamped limit. The gle-BAOAB scheme possesses a superconvergence property in the discrete time version of the overdamped limit (see subsection 4.2). That is, for observables φ ∈ L 2 (π) which are purely functions of the position variable q, the incurred discretization bias of the corresponding ergodic average when computed using the gle-BAOAB scheme applied to rescaled process (QGLE-scaled) with λ = 1 and μ 1 = μ 2 = ε -1 behaves as as ε → 0 and h → 0. For sufficiently small values of ε, the magnitude of the leading order term of the discretization bias decreases linearly in ε. In particular, in the limit ε = 0, the leading error term O(ǫh 2 ) in We formally show this result for a particle of unit mass in a one dimensional positional domain and memory kernel corresponding to a matrix of the Γ of the generic form which is assumed to satisfy Assumption 1. Our derivation can be extended to more general forms of (QGLE), but we refrain from doing so in order to keep notation simple. As a starting point of the derivation we consider again a Taylor expansion of the evolution operator where A 1 = L GLE and A 3 as defined in (2.5) with X = B, Y = A, Z = O. By [29, Theorem 3.3] and under suitable regularity conditions on the generator L GLE and on the operators A k , k ≥ 1 (see Remark 3.5), there exists h * > 0 so that the expectation of test functions φ ∈ L 2 (π) with respect to the perturbed invariant measure π h can be expanded as with |R φ,h | uniformly bounded for h ∈ (0, h * ]. The correction term f 3 is obtained as the solution of where the explicit form of the right hand side can be computed as Here, and below, we denote L 2 (π)-adjoint of an operator A by A * so that Ag, f L 2 (π) = g, A * f L 2 (π) for all g, f ∈ L 2 (π), where f, g L 2 (π) := f g dπ. By virtue of the Fredholm alternative equation (3.14) possesses a solution iff g, A * 3 1 L 2 (π) = 0 for all functions g contained in the null space of L GLE . Since the SDE associated with the generator L GLE is by assumption ergodic, the null space of L GLE only contains constant functions for which g, A * 3 1 L 2 (π) ∝ 1, A * 3 1 L 2 (π) = 0 is indeed true. Finding a closed form solution of the PDE (3.14) is still intractable for general potentials. Instead, we employ a singular perturbation approach. Under the scaling λ = 1, μ 1 = μ 2 = ε -1 the generator decomposes as L GLE = ε -1 L O + L H and we can expand the solution f 3 in ε as f 3 = f 3,0 + εf 3,1 + ε 2 f 3,2 + O(ε 3 ). By plugging this into (3.14) we get from which we obtain the following collection of PDEs by equating powers of ε βpU ′ (q)U ′′ (q), (3.17) Solving this system iteratively, we find (see Appendix D for details): which can be verified to satisfy Ωx φ(q)f 3,0 (x)π(dx) = 0, for any observable φ ∈ C ∞ P (Ω x , R) which is purely a function of q. Thus, for such φ, (3.13) can be written as as ε → 0 and h → 0, which is the desired statement. Remark 3.5. The formal error analysis can be made rigorous by showing that the remainder terms in expansions (3.13) and (3.15) are uniformly bounded for sufficient small h, and ε, respectively. For the expansion (3.13) it would be sufficient to show that the conditions of [29, Theorem 3.3] are indeed satisfied. In particular, this would entail showing that the function set C ∞ P,0 (Ω x , R) := φ ∈ C ∞ P (Ω x , R) : φ dπ = 0 , is invariant under application of the operators L -1 GLE and (L * GLE ) -1 , as well as that C ∞ P (Ω x , R) is invariant under application of the operators A k , k ∈ N. Analogous estimates have been shown in for any ε > 0 and all test functions φ contained in the weighted Sobolev space H 1 (π) and which are such that for almost all q the mean with respect to the marginal measure π(dp ds) vanishes. 4. White noise and overdamped limit of the gle-BAOAB method. In this section we analyze the behavior of the gle-BAOAB splitting method in the overdamped and white noise limit discussed in subsection 1.5. For this purpose consider the stochastic flow-map of the gle-BAOAB method when applied to the rescaled process (QGLE-scaled), (4.1) Φgle-BAOAB with and Γ μ as defined in 4.1. White noise limit. The gle-BAOAB integration scheme, when applied to the rescaled process (QGLE-scaled) with λ = 1, μ 1 = ǫ -1 , μ 2 = ǫ -2 , reduces to the ld-BAOAB discretization of an underdamped Langevin equation in the white noise limit ǫ → 0. More precisely, we have the following result: Theorem 4.1 (White noise limit of gle-BAOAB). Let (q k , p k , s k ) k∈N be the Markov chain obtained by with the gle-BAOAB method Φgle-BOAOB h,(ǫ -1 ,ǫ -2 ) . Let (q k , pk ) k∈N denote the Markov chain generated by the ld-BAOAB method of and stepsize h. Then, for all N ∈ N, we have Proof. Since (q k , pk ) k∈N is a Markov processes, it is sufficient to show that the transition probabilities converge appropriately, i.e., for all (q, p, s) ∈ Ω x , where Φld-BAOAB h,μ denotes the stochastic flow map of the ld-BAOAB splitting scheme, and Π : (q, p, s) → (q, p) denotes the projection operator on the position and momentum component. The two methods only differ in terms of their respective O-steps. It is therefore sufficient to show that in the limit ε → 0, these become identical in distribution, which is exactly the case if where We show this by applying a suitable similarity transformation: without loss of generality let h = 1, and consider the orthogonal matrix, Î(2n) denotes the elementary matrix whose action when multiplied from the left to a matrix A ∈ R 2n×2n corresponds to a swap of i-th and j-th rows of A, so that When applied to the rescaled process (QGLE-scaled) with λ = 1, μ 2 = ǫ -1 , μ 3 = ǫ -1 the gle-BAOAB method reduces to the BAOAB-limit method ("Leimkuhler-Matthews method") of with q 0 and q 0 being identically distributed, R k ∼ N (0, I n ), k ∈ N independent, and stepsize h = h 2 /2, and Λ = I n . Then, for all N ∈ N, we have Proof. For μ = (ε, ε -1 ), we have and therefore also S h → β -1/2 I n+m , as ǫ → 0. Thus, which removes any coupling between the auxiliary variable s and (q, p). Consequently, in the limit of ε → 0 we can disregard the s-component in the corresponding updating sequence of the positions and momenta. Moreover, since the momentum variables are independently resampled at every iteration, we can eliminate the momentum component from the updating sequence to obtain (4.3) with Λ = I n , h = h 2 /2, R -1 = p 0 . In this section we assess the performance of the splitting methods which we introduced in Section 2 in numerical experiments. We first compare the performance of the methods discussed in this article against each other. For this purpose we consider a simple QGLE on a one-dimensional positional domain with potential function which is an uneven double-well. We evaluate the performance in terms of the incurred stepsize-dependent discretization bias for observables which are purely functions of the position variable. For the parameterization of the noise process in the GLE we consider the memory kernels where we let r take values in {0, 1, 2}. The r-dependent parameterization of the memory kernels is chosen such that in the limit of r → ∞, the corresponding GLE approaches an underdamped Langevin equation. We consider as an error measure where the equal sized bins B i ⊂ R, i = 1, . . . , n B are chosen such that they form a partition of an interval [a, b] ⊂ R, which contains 99.99% of the probability mass of the Gibbs measure associated with R. The quantity E MAE ((q k ) 1≤k≤N ) may be considered as the mean approximate error (MAE) of the discretization bias incurred for the observables φ Bi : q → 1⁄2 Bi (q), i = 1, . . . , n B , or, as an estimate of the total variation distance between the perturbed invariant measure π h and the exact target measure π. In total, 100 trajectories, all initialized in accordance with the exact equilibrium distribution π, were simulated over a physical time period of length T = hN = 10 7 to obtain the statistics. Figure We next compare the performance of gle-BAOAB with methods previously proposed in the literature using the same setup as in subsection 5.1. We compare the gle-BAOAB method with the methods proposed in For moderate variance and slowly decaying autocorrelation of the noise-process (that is r = 0, 1) we observe that the error incurred by the methods BB-BACOCAB and KLS-OBABO is very similar to the error of the gle-BAOAB method (Figure . For all choices of the memory kernel, the error in gle-OBABO and BB-BAOB is at least by a factor of 10 higher than the error of gle-BAOAB, and this factor increases further with increasing value of r. Similarly, with an increasing value of r, the accuracy of the KLS-OBABO method decreases and comparison of gle-BAOAB, and the maximum admissible stepsize of BB-BAOB and BB-BACOCAB decreases significantly, while the maximum admissible step size for schemes discussed in Section 2 is not affected. The high accuracy of BB-BACOCAB is not surprising as the authors in and the potential function In this section we consider Bayesian Gaussian mixture model as a simple application of the discussed sampling methods and we use this application to demonstrate how the gle-BAOAB method when used in combination with the GLE-dynamics developed in As a benchmark system we consider a Bayesian Gaussian mixture model applied to the Hidalgo stamp dataset That is, we choose the number of components as N c = 3 and assume isotropic Gaussian components resulting in a parameter vector q = (( , where ∆ 3 denotes the standard simplex in R 3 , and w k is the weight parameter, and μ k , λ k the mean and precision of the kth Gaussian component, respectively, and β ∈ R denotes an additional hyper-parameter of the prior distribution. The resulting target distribution is then given as the Gibbs measure of the corresponding negative log-posterior function where the exact form of the likelihood function p(x i | q) and the prior p prior (q) are both specified in Appendix E.1. We parametrize both the gle-BAOAB scheme and the gle-OBABO scheme with the pre-optimized memory kernel kv-8-8 obtained from the website GLE4MD (ii) in terms of mixing which we measure by estimates of the integrated autocorrelation times where q(0) ∼ π, and E[•] is the expectation with respect to q(0) and the Wiener process W in (QGLE). For ld-BAOAB we considered the commonly used parameterization with a single scalar friction coefficient, i.e., Γ = γI n . The simulation run corresponding to the parameter values γ = 1.0, h = .01 was obtained as the result of minimizing the integrated autocorrelation time for the slowest parameters by varying the stepsize after fixing the friction coefficient to γ = 1.0. The simulation run corresponding to the parameter values γ = .1 with h = .01 was obtained as the result of minimizing the integrated autocorrelation time for the "slowest parameter" (i.e., the parameter with the largest associated integrated autocorrelation time) by simultaneously optimizing both the stepsize as well as the friction coefficient γ. The results reported for gle-BAOAB and gle-OBABO use a stepsize h = .02, which was determined approximately as the maximum admissible stepsize with a few (short!) test runs. We find that in terms of sampling efficiency which we measured in terms of the integrated autocorrelation time of the "slowest" sampled parameter λ 1 , the GLE schemes clearly outperform these as Figure where Ψ A , Ψ B , F h , S h are h-dependent matrices as specified in (3.10), and A.1. Lyapunov condition. Recall the definition of K l in (3.3) of Theorem 3.1 as Here we show that K l , l ∈ N is indeed a family of Lyapunov functions satisfying Assumption 5 provided that C is chosen such that the matrix G T C+CG is symmetric positive definite, where denotes the linear component of the drift term of (QGLE). The existence of such a matrix C is equivalent to -G being a stable matrix. The latter follows as a special case of To show this, it is sufficient to show the existence of suitable constants a l > 0, b l ∈ R, so that for sufficiently small h * > 0. This can be seen since (A.2) implies Pgle-BAOAB Central to showing the Lyapunov condition (A.2) are the following two Lemmas. Lemma A.1 shows that E h = Ψ B Ψ A F h Ψ A Ψ B possesses a spectral gap and defines a contraction in • C , Lemma A.2 ensures that the remaining terms in (A.1) are O(h) as h → 0. Lemma A.1. There exists h * > 0 and a constant λ ′ > 0 so that ∀h ∈ [0, h * ) : where • B(C) is the operator norm induced by • C , i.e., for a matrix A ∈ R (2n+m)×(2n+m) , we have Proof. The result can be shown using the fact that E h is a symmetric splitting of the matrix exponential E h = exp(-hG) and E h being contracting in • C . The latter follows because for all h > 0 and all x ∈ R 2n+m by Grönwall's inequality. Now, rewriting E h as we see that E h is indeed a symmetric splitting approximation of E h = exp(-hG). For sufficiently small h > 0 the corresponding Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff expansion converges so that where the remainder term is of second order in h, i.e., R 2 (h) C ≤ ch 2 for some c > 0. Thus in particular which implies the statement for sufficiently small choice of h * > 0. Lemma A.2. There is a constant c > 0 so that S h S h T B(C) ≤ ch. Proof. Since S h T S h is symmetric and positive semi-definite it is by norm equivalence sufficient to show that the largest eigenvalue of this matrix is bounded from above by ch. Recall that by definition Using an upper linear bound of the exponential function this then implies for all x = (q, z) ∈ R 2n+m , suitably chosen c > 0 and sufficiently small h > 0. This concludes the proof. Equipped with the above two lemmas, we can now show existence of suitable constants a l > 0, b l ∈ R so that (A.2) is satisfied. We start with the case l = 1. Let where the last inequality follows from Lemma A.1. Using the inequality which holds for any value of x ∈ R, any non-negative ε < 1 and any non negative integer with b < 2l, as well as linear bounds on the exponential function, we find for all h ∈ [0, h * ) provided that h * > 0 is chosen sufficiently small. The last equality follows by choosing ε = λ ′ 4umax . Together with the observation that by Lemma A.2 the last summand in the last line of (A.4) is in O(h), this shows that for l = 1 the Lyapunov condition of (A.2) is satisfied with a 1 = λ ′ and b 1 chosen sufficiently large. For l > 1, we can write Pgle-BAOAB where the expectation of the remainder term R l ( E h x, R) can be bounded from above by P h ( E h x C ), where P h is a polynomial with degree of at most 2l-1 and coefficients which are products of multiples and/or powers of S h 2 C and hu max , (and thus by Lemma A.2 behave as O(h) as h → 0). In particular, by inequality (A.5) for all ε, 0 < ε < 1, where c 1 , c 2 are some l and h * dependent positive constants. Therefore, the stochastic flow map of the twice iterated gle-BAOAB scheme. Here, we explicitly include the Gaussian random variables R 1 , R 2 of the first gle-BAOAB step and second gle-BAOAB step, respectively. In particular, P ]. We deduce the validity of Assumption 4 by (i) showing the validity of a localized minorization condition via Lemma 6.3 in In order for the conditions of Lemma 6.3 in where x = Φ OABAO h (Φ AB (x), t 1 , t 2 ). The Differentials in this expression have the form where ∇ 2 U denotes the Hessian of the potential function, and where we suppressed the arguments t 1 , t 2 , and denote by P q : x → q and P z : x → z the orthogonal projection operators onto the position components and z-components, respectively. Since the absolute values of the eigenvalues of ∇ 2 U (q) are uniformly bounded from above by Assumption 3, (ii), it follows that D xΦ BA h/2 (x) is invertible for any x provided that the stepsize h > 0 is chosen sufficiently small. Likewise, observing that gives us that D t Φ ÔABA Ô h (x) has rank 2n + m for any value of x provided that h is sufficiently small. In conclusion, D t Ψ h,x (t 1 , t 2 ) has full rank, 2n + m for any x ∈ Ω x . In particular, Ψ h,x is surjective for any x ∈ Ω x by the inverse function theorem. By Lemma 6.3 in U (4) (q) 8β + U ′ (q)φ ′ (q) -1 8 U (3) (q)U ′ (q) -φ ′′ (q) β . for π-almost all q ∈ R n . The right hand side of (D.4) vanishes if and only if φ(q) = 1 8 U ′′ (q), and we conclude f 3,0 (q, p, s) = -1 8 βp Appendix E. Details on numerical simulations. E.1. Specification of Bayesian Gaussian mixture model for Hidalgo stamps dataset. We assume a likelihood of the form and a hierarchical prior specified by where ⊗ denotes the standard Kronecker product, n = 9, and Γ 1,1 = ( 1.336001E+1 ), Γ 1,2 = ( 8.327012E-6 1.850437E-4 2.551111E-3 -1.63314E-2-1.334317E-1 1.679873E+0 2.22050E+1 6.274743E+0 ), Γ 2,1 = ( 1.20137E-5 1.83376E-4 2.505216E-3 -1.625490E-2 -1.334317 1.68179E+0 2.22086E+1 6.09239E+0 ) T , Γ 2,2 =    E.3. Splitting methods based on alternative decompositions. For the sake of completeness and a self-contained presentation, we include a brief discussion of alternative splitting schemes for the GLE, and some previously proposed schemes. where Φ S h : (q, p, s) → q, F h (p, s) T +S h R+Γ -1 [I n+m -F h ](-∇U (q), 0) T , R ∼ N (0, I n+m ), and Φ A h and F h and S h are all as specified in subsection 2.2. These methods resemble the stochastic position Verlet (SPV) and the stochastic velocity Verlet (SVV) methods which have been proposed in which in terms of (QGLE) corresponds to a choice of Γ as, (E. It is easy to see that in the white noise limit, i.e., as τ k → ∞, the (exact) Euler updates corresponding to the solutions of the B-part in (E.3) and the C-part in (E.4), respectively, become unstable. For this reason the authors construct the scheme BB-BAOB as (E.5) k and the scheme BB-BACOCAB as (E.6) where R n k , 1 ≤ k ≤ m, n ∈ N are i.i.d. normal distributed random variables. and the coefficients θ k , α k are chosen as θ k = e -h/τ k , and (E.7) These schemes resemble splitting schemes in the sense that if the α k s were instead set to α k = (1θ k ) 2 , then, the above schemes would exactly correspond to splitting schemes corresponding to the integration sequences BAOAB and BACOCAB, respectively. By choosing α k instead as specified in (E.7) the scheme remains stable in the white-noise limit. Note that (QGLE) can always be transformed to a system with a isotropic mass matrix by applying a change of variable of the form q → M 1/2 q, p → M -1/2 to the process resulting in modifications as -∇U → -M -1/2 ∇U , Γ → diag(M -1/2 , Im) Γ diag(M -1/2 , Im), Σ → diag(M -1/2 , Im)Σ, of the force, friction matrix and diffusion matrix, respectively. (y iμ k )