We report a linear scaling law for an electrical voltage as a function of the pressure drop in capillary pipes and ducts. This voltage is generated by a process which is termed spin hydrodynamic generation (SHDG), a result of the collective electron spin-coupling to the vorticity field in the laminar flow in combination with an inverse spin-Hall effect. We study this phenomenon in laminar duct flows with different width-to-height aspect ratios ranging from 1 (square ducts) to infinite (two dimensional channels). First, we analytically solve the governing Valet-Fert spin diffusion equations for the SHDG by means of the method of small parameters together with proper boundary conditions for the set of inhomogeneous elliptic partial differential equations. Secondly, the proposed linear scaling law is validated through a series of experiments using capillary tubes with rectangular and square cross-sections. The experimental results show a very good agreement to the analytically found scaling law. A subsequent substitution of the bulk velocity of the laminar wall-bounded flows by the pressure drop reveals a universal scaling law for the electrical voltage that incorporates all pipe and duct geometries which we could study in our experiments. Finally, the efficiency of the system is estimated for circular pipes, rectangular and square ducts. This study shows that the efficiency of a spin hydrodynamic generator is the same for a circular pipe and a square duct with the same diameter and height, respectively. Hence, due to the ease of manufacturing and the possibility to scale the experiments up to parallel settings in a compact form, micro-channels with a square cross-section seem to be the optimum for a spin hydrodynamic generator. Spintronics The generated electricity is an indirect consequence of the spin current -" the flow of electron spins " -which is induced by a non-equilibrium spin state as a result of the vorticity gradient perpendicular to the flow direction. In case of a non-vanishing spin current in the system under consideration, the so-called inverse spin Hall effect (ISHE) In the present study, we extend these investigations and report an analytical universal scaling law to predict the generated voltage as a function of the bulk velocity U b (and thus of the pressure drop ∆p) due to SHDG for this class of laminar rectangular duct flows. Therefore the spin diffusion equation is solved, an inhomogeneous elliptical Helmholtz equation. The analytical solution is obtained by a series expansion with respect to a small parameter that Transported quantity Analogy of central physical quantities in electronics and spintronics. Indices k, l = 1, 2, 3. Quantity σ0 is the electrical conductivity, = h/2π is the smallest unit of the angular momentum containing Planck's constant h, and e is the elementary charge. Spin-up corresponds to sz = + /2, spin-down to sz = -/2. We list the definitions of both current densities by an Ohm's law. Since the electron spin can be considered as a vectorial quantity, the related current density has to be tensorial. relates the (ab initio unknown) spin diffusion length to the duct half height b = H/2. We also provide comprehensive experimental evidence for the reliability of the proposed scaling law using rectangular capillary tubes with square and rectangular cross section of different aspect ratio W/H (W is the width of the duct, H its height). The obtained measurement results are in agreement with the analytical predictions for the electrical voltage V ISHE and display the calculated linear dependence, V ISHE = const × U b . Finally, we discuss the efficiency of a spin hydrodynamic generator in case of using circular pipes, square and rectangular ducts. This paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we describe in brief the theoretical foundations of the SHDG and show how the inhomogeneous version of the Valet-Fert equation of spin diffusion can be used to explain the generated electricity in a liquid metal flow. Section III is dedicated to the analytical solution of this equation for laminar rectangular duct flows. As a results, the universal scaling law for the generated voltage in such geometries will be presented. Section IV of the paper is devoted to the verification of the proposed scaling law by means of experiments and also estimating the SHDG efficiency of different capillary tubes using measured voltages and mean flow velocities. We describe the setup and summarize the measurement results. A short discussion of the efficiency of this method is also provided before we conclude and give a brief outlook into future activities on this subject. We start with a brief overview on the basic principles that cause the spin hydrodynamic generation in the liquid metal flow. Table where klm is the fully anti-symmetric third rank Levi-Civita tensor and θ SHE is the spin-Hall angle, a materialdependent constant At the core of the theoretical modeling is a diffusion dynamics of the spin voltage which contains an important length scale, the spin diffusion length λ. In analogy to rarified gases, one can formulate a kinetic gas theory for the electron transport in solid and liquid conductors. Here, we discuss the one-dimensional case for simplicity that leads to a diffusion dynamics. The Ohm's law which we listed in table I can be extended by a drift term if the number density n of the electrons varies in space, Here, D is a diffusion constant and μ is denoted to as the electrochemical potential. Now we decompose the electron ensemble into spin-up and spin-down fractions with n ↑ , j ↑ , μ ↑ , σ ↑ , D ↑ and n ↓ , j ↓ , μ ↓ , σ ↓ , D ↓ and define the following number and currents densities, leaving aside the vectorial or tensorial character for the moment, Charge conservation is in line with a divergence-free electrical current density and thus with (2) one gets Spin flips from up to down or vice versa proceed on a time scale which is larger than a typical relaxation time, τ ↑↓ τ ↑ , τ ↓ . The spin conservation is captured by the following relation, for which we use j = env drift in general, A combination of eqns. ( and thus to We have used the fact, that a screening of charges is effective over microscopic lengths such that n ↑ ≈ n ↓ . Together with the definition of electrochemical potential (first term in (2) cancels) one gets We can finally combine eqns. ( Here D F is an effective diffusion constant composed of both sub-ensembles. In analogy to the classical diffusion, we can define a spin diffusion length -the characteristic length scale between a spin-flip by λ = D F τ ↑↓ (similar to a mean free path between two gas particle collisions). The potential difference μ S = μ ↑μ ↓ is denoted as spin voltage and ( This is a linear elliptic equation of second order. The coupling to the local vorticity field enters this equation as an additional inhomogeneity on the right hand side and for 3 dimensions follows [2, 4] Here, ξ is defined by Takahashi et al. We now obtain the scaling law for the generated voltage V ISHE from the Valet-Fert equation and follow to n-1 2 (πn) 2 8b 1 - Using u z (x, y) and the flow rate Q, the bulk velocity U b is given by, For a ≥ b , we use tanh(πna/2b) ≈ 1 and the series terms can be estimated using the Riemann Zeta function ζ(s) Hence, the pressure drop ∆p and the flow bulk velocity U b in a rectangular duct flow are related via the following approximation, Using the above expression, eqns. ( eq. ( To solve eq. ( x,inh = -3y/Γ 2 and μ S x,h = A sinh(Γy) + B cosh(Γy) where B = 0 due to the second boundary condition at the center, i.e. μ S x (0) = 0. From the first boundary condition at the walls one obtains, A = 3/(Γ 3 cosh(Γ)). Thus, the spin voltage distribution in a laminar channel flow is given by Now we consider the case of Γ 1 and discuss an approximate solution which is obtained by an expansion ansatz for (18) which is compared then to the analytical solution (20). It should be noted that Γ 1 is indeed a valid assumption as in practice the spin diffusion length λ ∼ 10 -8 m Hence, the approximated solution follows to which implies that for Γ 1, the first term in eq. (20) converges to zero and both eqns. (20) and (24) agree. Next, we apply the same procedure to solve eq. ( It should be mentioned again that here the spin voltage is a vectorial quantity (and thus k = x, y) and that (25) has to be solved for each component of the vorticity ω k as given by eqns. ( The vectorial spin voltage in a rectangular duct flow follows to Clearly, in order to consider more than one term in the above series solution, the vorticity profiles of eqns.( n-1 2 sin πny 2 We can see that μ y,2 = ∇ 2 ω y = 0 and μ x,2 = ∇ 2 ω x = 0 for y = ±1. Hence, there exits only one term (i = 1) in the approximate solution of eq. ( This shows that the spin voltage in each direction is directly proportional to the corresponding flow vorticity in that direction (see Fig. as we have listed in Table Differentiating eqns. (29) and substituting them in the above expression, the excited electric current in the system becomes where the series part converges to a constant value of 1/4. Therefore, the mean charge current j C z follows to Considering the relation between electrical voltage and resistance, A similar relation can be derived for the pipe flow case (with different prefactors due to geometry) which is given in ref. A. Experimental setup and measurement results We employ the same apparatus and working liquid -the eutectic alloy GaInSn -as in our previous experimental study Figure . 3 shows the measured voltages for different square and rectangular cross sections with respect to the flow Reynolds number Re. The linear evolution of the voltage can be clearly seen for all cases presented in this figure. The rescaled data points based on eq. ( where μ is the dynamic viscosity of the working liquid. The results show that the electrical output of the system at the same imposed pressure is independent of the aspect ratio and extension of the duct cross section in the range considered here. Figure Finally, following Takahashi et al. FIG. where r 0 is the pipe radius while the Reynolds number here is based on the pipe diameter D. Figure. 7(a) contains also the efficiency of three circular pipes with diameter of D = 0.1, 0.2 and 0.4 mm. For a high aspect ratio rectangular duct where the geometrical coefficient C asp -→ 1, the efficiency is less than a pipe with the same diameter as the duct height considering again ξ Circ lam ≈ 2ξ Rec lam . This can be seen from Fig. It is also interesting to see the system efficiency based on the required imposed pressure for generating the flow as indicated in Fig. In the present study, we first derived a scaling law for the spin hydrodynamic generated voltage in a laminar duct flow by solving the spin diffusion equation analytically. It was shown that the generated voltage in a laminar duct, similar to that in a laminar circular pipe flow, is linearly proportional to the flow bulk velocity U b with a different slope. Next, the proposed scaling law was experimentally tested using different capillary tubes with square and rectangular cross sections. The measured electrical voltages were found to be in very good agreement with the predicted linear scaling law. A universal scaling for pipes and ducts in the accessible range can be obtained when we convert the dependence on the bulk velocity to pressure drop. Moreover, we estimated the system efficiency based on the kinetic energy of the flow and the electric output of the system. Similar to a laminar pipe flow As already said in the text, the voltages and efficiencies are still very small. The next question would be if a further enhancement of the spin voltage into the microvolt range is possible by further geometric modifications, such as curved channels that induce Dean vortices and nano-structured surfaces. Another option is to construct devices in which the electricity generation by SHDG can run in parallel. These studies are currently under way and will be reported elsewhere. This series expansion is plugged into the inhomogeneous ordinary differential equation (19) and will be truncated after the first N terms (see below). Thus followsμ 0 Γ 2 + μ 1 Γ 4 + . . . + μ N Γ 2N +2 = μ 0 + μ 1 Γ 2 + . . . + μ N Γ 2N + 3y Γ 2 . (22)Sorting with respect to powers of Γ and stopping at N = 2, one obtains the following equationsμ 0 = 0 , μ 0 Γ 2 = μ 1 + 3y Γ 2 ,