We predict the existence of new two dimensional silicon carbide nanostructure employing ab initio density-functional theory calculations. These structures are composed of tetragonal and hexagonal rings with C-C and Si-C bonds arranged in a buckling plane. They are proven to be thermodynamically and mechanically stable with relatively low formation energy, implying potential fabrication in lab. They exhibit strong ductility and anisotropicity from their strain-stress relation and directional dependence of mechanical moduli. The materials maintain phonon stability upon the application of mechanical strain up to 27% with fantastic ductile property. The SiC2 structure possesses a tiny direct band gap of 0.02 eV predicted using HSE06 functional and the band gap can be opened up through multiple approaches such as hydrogenation and strain application. The gap values can be strategically tuned in the range of 0.02 ~ 1.72 eV and the direct/indirect gap nature can be further manipulated. In contrast, a closely related structure of SiC shows an indirect HSE band gap of 1.80 eV and strain engineering its value between 0.0 ~ 1.95 eV. The unique properties in these newly proposed structures might have potential applications in future nanomechanics and electronics. Successful fabrication of two dimensional (2D) materials such as group IV graphene Another way to engineer desirable band gap is to explore other 2D materials. In addition to graphene (silicene), various other 2D carbon (silicon) allotropes, such as penta-graphene For silicon-carbon binary compounds, silicon carbide is known to have more than 250 crystalline polytypisms including cubic SiC, 4H-and 6H-SiC. Silicon carbide compounds traditionally have four-coordinated tetragonal building blocks with remarkable electronic properties and superior thermal, chemical, and mechanical stability. Electronic devices based upon these properties have been utilized at temperatures in excess of 300 °C and in harsh environments. Recently, numerous 2D silicon carbide compounds were also fabricated and proposed, for instance, experimentally synthesized graphitic SiC In this work, we propose a new type of 2D silicon carbide nanosheet with a buckled geometry. Similar to the structure of tetrahex-carbon The first-principles DFT Wave functions of valence electrons are described using a plane wave basis set with kinetic energy cutoff 900 eV. The reciprocal space is meshed 15  13  1 by using Monkhorst-Pack method The relaxed lattice constants for the 2D TH-SiC2 are a = 5.52 Å and b = 7.20 Å. The buckling thickness d is 1.34 Å. The bond lengths r1 and r2 are predicted to be 1.90 Å and 1.35 Å, respectively. The calculated bond angles denoted in Fig. Table where E , E , E are the total energy of the material, and the energies of an isolated silicon and carbon atoms, respectively. The formation energy E per atom can then be obtained as follows where μ , μ , are cohesive energy per atom in silicene and graphene, respectively, E(Si), E(C) are the total energies per atom in silicene and graphene, respectively. Note that μ = E(Si) -E and μ = E(C) -E . The calculated cohesive and formation energies are provided in Table para SiC3 It is found that in Fig. where a and a are the lattice constants of the strained and relaxed structures, respectively. In the case of uniaxial strain applied in one direction, the lattice constant in the transvers direction is fully relaxed to ensure minimal stress in the transverse direction. The phonon spectra of the materials under various values of strain are shown in Fig. The mechanical properties and stability of the new structure are also studied thoroughly. Study of strain-stress relation in a material can determine its ideal strength (the highest strength of a crystal at 0 K) Fig. As mentioned previously, phonon instability occurs in TH-SiC2 when strain is beyond 27%, 9%, and 16% in the x, y, and biaxial directions, respectively. Solid symbols in Fig. since the referenced work does not consider phonon stability for the strained structure. Its reported ultimate tensile strength values 25, 23 and 21 N/m for x, y, and biaxial strains, respectively, occur at the strains which we have proved that the phonon spectrum of the structure is not stable as shown in Fig. The energy surface of the 2D TH-SiC2 and SiC structures are scanned in the small strain range -0.6% < ε < +0.6%, -0.6% < ε < +0.6%, and -0.6% < ε < +0.6% to calculate their elastic stiffness constants and various moduli. The strain energy is defined as the energy difference between the strained and relaxed structures, where E(ε) and E are the total energy of strained and relaxed structures, respectively. The calculated strain energy is then fitted parabolically using the following equation, to determine the coefficients a , and the elastic stiffness constants are readily calculated as, E = a ε + a ε + a ε ε + a ε (5) where i, j = xx, yy, or xy, A0 is the area of the simulation cell in the xy plane. The Young's and shear moduli for a 2D system can be derived as a function of ai When uniaxial strain is applied in one direction, the lattice constant in the transvers direction need to be fully relaxed to ensure minimal stress in the transverse direction. And the response strain in the transverse direction can be also calculated according to Eq. ( where ε and ε are the applied axial strain and its response strain in the transverse direction, respectively. The calculated mechanical parameters in TH-SiC2 and TH-SiC are listed in Table TH-SiC2, the maximal Young's modulus is along the However, it is opposite for TH-SiC. The Young's modulus has the minimum value of 99 N/m along the Electronic band structures of TH-SiC2 and SiC are presented in Fig. and conduction band minimum (CBM) in TH-SiC2 are located at . However, for the SiC structure, VBM is located at X while CBM is at Y. The electron density contour plots of VBM/CBM in both structures are also presented in Fig. 