In this manuscript we propose a calculation method where the magneto-resistive elements are modelled as fluctuating resistances to correct the output voltage noise of magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ) from standard electronic circuits. This method is validated on single elements, partial and full Wheatstone bridge circuits, giving rise to a correction factor affecting the output voltage noise as well as sensitivity values. Combining the correction factor and a normalization by the number of MTJs pillars and the pillar surface, we show that the performances extracted by this method allow universal comparison between any results from literature. agnetic tunnel junctions (MTJ) play an important role on current technological devices, such as non-volatile memories (MRAM) MTJ are based on spin electronics and are composed schematically of two magnetic layers separated by a tunnel barrier through which spin polarized electrons are transported. The tunnel magnetoresistance (TMR) ratio is in the order of 200% at room temperature, leading to high output voltages. However, the overall performances for sensing purpose include the evaluation of the noise of the MTJ elements. The noise provided by TMR sensors comes from the contributions of several sources such as the thermal noise, shot noise, lowfrequency noise (1/f) and random telegraphic noise (RTN) The performance of these type of sensors based on the TMR effect is mainly limited by the high 1/f noise level presents in the low frequency range. It might be induced by the presence of magnetic domain fluctuations on magnetic electrodes (free layer domains) and also by defects inside the insulator barrier (traps, oxygen vacancies, etc.) If a TMR sensor with a resistance R and a transversal area A is biased by a bias voltage V !"# , its noise spectral density S $ [V % /Hz] is composed of two contributions: the white noise (thermal noise S $,'( in the condition qV ≪ k ) T, where q is the electron charge, k ) the Boltzmann constant and T the temperature) and the 1/f low frequency noise S $,*/, A TMR sensor can be represented by an equivalent electronic circuit composed by one resistance R and a small fluctuation responsible of noise. The noise can have different origin: resistance fluctuations, current fluctuations or voltage fluctuations. Regardless of its origin, it could be summarized as a resistance R with a fluctuator e = 4S $ , as depicted in figures on table 1. For this method, the voltage source is supposed to be stable and thus its noise is neglected. By considering the general case of a Wheatstone bridge composed by four elements of resistance R / in series with small fluctuators e / and from small signal analysis, non-null resistances and the Millman theorem lead to the following equation for the output voltage of the bridge: (1) This relationship impacts directly to the output noise spectral density of the bridge which is the square of the output voltage. As the four sources of noise e / are considered not correlated, the diagonal terms of the equation are suppressed and the output noise can be expressed as: Assuming the TMR sensor as the only source of shot noise and main source of 1/f noise, then the output noise could be expressed by the equations given in table T corresponds to the temperature, f is the frequency, k ! to the Boltzmann constant, R is TMR sensor resistance, I the applied current, q the electron charge, N is the number of pillars, A is the pillar surface,V "#$ corresponds to the TMR sensor applied bias voltage and M = . The presence of RTN would lead to an additional term in the total noise, on which the CF should be applied. . It should be removed (divided) from each noise contribution (see equations in table The multilayer stack of the TMR sensor studied in this manuscript has the following structure (see Figure TMR sensors studied in this paper exhibit a variable number of pillars of various sizes, as depicted in table 2. In order to remain below the breakdown voltage or to avoid a possible degradation of the MgO barrier, the maximum Vpillar applied to the TMR sensors was around 1 V. In order to characterize correctly the 1/f noise from the TMR sensor, the setup is installed in a mumetal magnetically shielded room. A battery is used to provide a stable bias voltage to the devices through a balanced Wheatstone bridge (1/4 or complete bridge) or through the single element (in series with a high resistance to avoid shortcuts). The output signal of the bridge is amplified using an INA103 low-pass amplifier (gain=489) and then amplified again (gain=10) and bandpass filtered (0.1-3 kHz). For single element, the DC voltage is AC coupled using a band-pass filter (SR360) and no DC amplification could be used, because of the high DC component. Temporal signals are acquired by an acquisition card. A fast Fourier transform (FFT) is used to measure the noise spectral density (average of 30 times). Since the sensitivity is defined as the output voltage per unit field divided by the bias voltage, we use a complementary technique to measure the sensitivity of our devices. An alternative external calibrated magnetic field (H ?@AB! CD-)) of 850 nTrms at 30 Hz was applied along the sensitivity axis, so using the output signal at 30 Hz (V 6A9: CD-), we can calibrate the sensor. From the output noise voltage, we define the sensitivity and the detection limit as follows: Detection limit * " √') In this work, the voltage noise was measured as a function of the frequency at 0 mT for different V !"# values, using the single element, 1⁄4 and complete Wheatstone bridge configuration and for the different sensors listed in table 2 in order to validate the method developed in part II. For instance, the output voltage 4S $ on figure 2(b) corresponds to the complete Wheatstone bridge configuration of device 9. The red dashed line corresponds to the thermal noise 4S $,'( which varies from 3 to 30 nV/√Hz at room temperature depending to the TMR sensor resistances. A dashed black line is introduced to indicate the 1/f noise contribution. There is no signature of random telegram noise (RTN) in our devices As described in table Figure taking into account the same V T/112C . The 4S 0 normalized (divided by the factor 4N A ⁄ ) and corrected by one pillar are introduced on figure Thus normalization and correction factors (for a single pillar of area 1 μm2) for the noise, the sensitivity and the detectivity are important and are summarized in table Besides the detectivity normalized and corrected could also be extracted from the ratio of the corrected and normalized noise and sensitivity. In this work, we presented a method to implement the correction due to the electronic circuit and to normalize the output noise and detection limit using parameters such as the number of MTJ pillars and pillar surface. We validated this method on TMR sensors by performing multiple measurements with various parameters and circuits configurations. This correction and normalization procedure can now be used to reliably compare the performances of TMR sensors from literature. 