Electrical manipulation of magnetism via spin-orbit torques (SOTs) promises efficient spintronic devices. In systems comprising magnetic insulators and heavy metals, SOTs have started to be investigated only recently, especially in systems with interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (iDMI). Here, we quantitatively study the SOT efficiency and iDMI in a series of gadolinium gallium garnet (GGG) / thulium iron garnet (TmIG) / platinum (Pt) heterostructures with varying TmIG and Pt thicknesses. We find that the non-monotonic SOT efficiency as a function of the magnetic layer thickness is not consistent with the 1/thickness dependence expected from a simple interfacial SOT mechanism. Moreover, considering the insulating nature of TmIG, our results cannot be explained by the SOT mechanism established for metallic magnets where the transverse charge spin current can inject and dephase in the magnetic layers. Rather we can explain this non-monotonic behavior by a model based on the interfacial spin mixing conductance that is affected by the thickness-dependent exchange splitting energy by determining the phase difference of the reflected spin-up and spin-down electrons at the TmIG / Pt interface. By studying the Pt thickness dependence, we find that the effective DMI for GGG / TmIG / Pt does not depend on the Pt thickness, which indicates that the GGG / TmIG interface is the source of the iDMI in this system. Our work demonstrates that SOT and DMI can originate from two different interfaces, which enables independent optimization of DMI and SOT for advanced chiral spintronics with low damping magnetic insulators. Keywords: magnetic insulator; spin-orbit torque; Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction; spin mixing conductance Electrical manipulation of the magnetization in ferromagnet (FM) / heavy metal (HM) bilayers via spin-orbit torques (SOTs) has attracted great interest in the field of spintronics for its potential use in logic and memory applications The situation is different in ferrimagnetic insulators (FMI), where a spin-polarized charge current cannot flow. In FMI / HM systems, one can drive a charge current in the HM layer and generate a spin accumulation at the FMI / HM interface by the spin Hall effect In the case of a transverse spin current, the electrons in the HM are unable to enter the insulator, however theoretically it is predicted that the exchange splitting energy and spin mixing conductance can influence the magnitude of the SOT generated at the FMI / HM interface In particular, the magnetic insulator thulium iron garnet (Tm3Fe5O12;TmIG) was shown to host chiral spin structures that can be manipulated by SOT In this work, we perform a systematic thickness dependence study of the SOT efficiency and DMI in GGG / TmIG / HM heterostructures. We find that the SOT efficiency exhibits a non-monotonic dependence on the TmIG thickness (t TmIG ), with a peak at 5.4 nm. We explain this finding using a model that combines the thickness-dependent magnetic properties of the TmIG in the low thickness region, which influence the spin mixing conductance via the spin splitting of the magnon modes, and the decay expected from an interfacial mechanism for thicker TmIG. Comparing SOT and DMI, we find that the DMI energy density is almost constant as a function of the Pt thickness (t Pt ), which strongly suggests that the iDMI in this system is not originating from the TmIG / HM interface but is rather determined by the GGG / TmIG interface. Our results show that it is possible to independently optimize the interfacial SOT and DMI in TmIG (see schematic in Figure To obtain high-quality crystalline epitaxial samples, we have grown TmIG films with PMA on (111)-oriented gadolinium gallium garnet (Gd3Ga5O12, GGG) substrates by pulsed laser deposition. The deposition conditions have been reported elsewhere According to this interpretation, the t TmIG dependence of ρ xy AHE /ρ xx Pt indicates that the spin mixing conductance increases with t TmIG for low TmIG thicknesses. Also note that in the Supplemental material Figure With these experimental observations, we then develop a model to explain our experimental results. It has been reported that the increase of ξeff is influenced by the M s of TmIG in the thinner TmIG region In fact, the spin mixing conductance depends on the thickness t TmIG through the phase shift of the reflected electrons acquired inside the magnetic insulator. This dependence is controlled by the exchange potentials for spin-up and spin-down electrons ). Thinner magnetic layers influence this phase difference in two ways. The first is the direct impact through the reduced thickness t where the different exchange potential is experienced. When the magnetic insulator becomes thinner than the decay length, the electrons penetrate the magnetic insulator and reach the substrate (vacuum in our simple model), significantly reducing the phase difference and thus the efficiency of the SOT. Second, the larger atomic surface to volume ratio decreases the exchange interaction and Curie Temperature (T C ) The value of the |D| scales linearly with the inverse of the TmIG thickness, as shown in Figure Since the thicknesses of TmIG and the effective anisotropy field μ 0 H k = 45 ± 5 mT are the same for both samples (details, see supplemental material S3 [40]), the same DMI energy density can be estimated. Furthermore, the Pt thickness dependence of |D| in GGG / TmIG (5.4) / Pt (t Pt ) can be found in Figure Instead, we do not detect a significant variation of |D| with varying t Pt , which indicates that the GGG / TmIG interface is the origin of the iDMI To further check if the GGG/ TmIG interface is the source of the iDMI, we included a 3 nm Cu spacer layer between Pt and TmIG to make a GGG / TmIG (5.4) / Cu (3) / Pt (1.5) structure. Cu is a typical light metal with a long spin diffusion length and small spin-orbit coupling. As shown in Figure In summary, we have performed a systematic thickness dependence study to reveal the origin of the SOT and DMI in GGG / TmIG / Pt heterostructures. We quantify the SOT efficiency as a function of the TmIG thickness, revealing a non-monotonic dependence. We can explain our results by considering that the SOT is an interfacial effect in this system, but the spin mixing conductance of the TmIG / Pt interface is affected by the thickness-dependent exchange splitting energy and the resulting spin current penetration depths in TmIG. The reduction of the spin-torque efficiency at low TmIG thickness is correlated with the reduction of the saturation magnetization in the thin films and both originate from a thickness-dependent exchange interaction. Comparing SOTs and DMI, we find from the TmIG and Pt thickness-dependence of the DMI energy that the GGG / TmIG interface is responsible for the iDMI. Our results show that the thickness-dependent properties of the ferromagnetic insulators have a strong influence on the SOT and DMI that are crucial to manipulate the domain walls and magnetization electrically. Moreover, these results pave the way towards the control of the chiral magnetic textures in insulating systems, where the SOT and DMI efficiencies can be independently controlled by tuning the properties of the different interfaces. Corresponding Authors *E-mail: klaeui@uni-mainz.de