The laser interaction with an electron-positron-ion mixed plasma is studied, from the perspective of the associated high-order harmonic generation. For an idealized mixed plasma which is assumed with a sharp plasma-vacuum interface and uniform density distribution, when it is irradiated by a weakly relativistic laser pulse, well-defined signals at harmonics of the plasma frequency in the harmonic spectrum are observed. These characteristic signals are attributed to the inverse twoplasmon decay of the counterpropagating monochromatic plasma waves which are excited by the energetic electrons and the positron beam accelerated by the laser. Particle-in-cell simulations show the signal at twice the plasma frequency can be observed for a pair density as low as ∼ 10 -5 of the plasma density. In the self-consistent scenario of pair production by an ultraintense laser striking a solid target, particle-in-cell simulations, which account for quantum electrodynamic effects (photon emission and pair production), show that dense (greater than the relativistically-corrected critical density) and hot pair plasmas can be created. The harmonic spectrum shows weak low order harmonics, indicating a high laser absorption due to quantum electrodynamic effects. The characteristic signals at harmonics of the plasma frequency are absent, because broadband plasma waves are excited due to the high plasma inhomogeneity introduced by the interaction. However, the high frequency harmonics are enhanced due to the high-frequency modulations from the direct laser coupling with created pair plasmas. Electron-positron pair plasmas play a key role in the exotic physics associated with astrophysical objects in extreme (ultra-massive, ultra-relativistic, or extreme magnetic fields, etc.) conditions The BH process dominates the pair production in high-Z thick (width > mm) solid targets. This process occurs when energetic electrons move across the strong field of the heavy nucleus. The source of energetic electrons can be the hot electrons from the target irradiated by an intense laser The mBW process dominates the pair production from high-energy photons which propagate in ultraintense electromagnetic fields. An efficient mBW scheme is to initiate the QED cascade In the mBW scenario of a single laser striking a solid target, the formation of the pair plasma makes the laser directly interact with an electron-positron-ion mixed plasma with significant pair fraction. This kind of laser interaction with the mixed plasma has not yet been systematically explored, but it is critical in measuring, improving and tailoring the pair plasma generation. In the experiments which have been conducted or proposed for the pair production mentioned above, the currently available diagnostics for pair plasmas are remote detectors, such as magnetic spectrometers In this paper, the laser interaction with an electronpositron-ion mixed plasma is studied, from the perspective of the associated high-order harmonic generation (HHG) The spectra from the idealized target in extreme conditions (with extreme parameters, e.g., very high pair fraction or hot pair temperature), are examined, which help us to understand the simulations of self-consistent pair production. They show high-frequency modulations are present on the reflected laser field. These modulations enhance the high frequency components of the spectrum. Our study shows these modulations are produced by the direct laser coupling with the expanded pair plasma in front of the target. The features of the high-frequency modulations and enhanced high frequency radiation indicate a transition to the spectrum in the self-consistent scenario which also manifests enhanced high frequency radiation due to the laser interaction with the created highly dense and hot pair plasmas. This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, the HHG spectrum from a laser interaction with an idealized electron-positron-ion target is studied. Both theoretical analysis [Sec. II A] and particle-in-cell (PIC) simulations [Sec. II B] are performed to study the plasma dynamics and the associated harmonic spectrum. Furthermore, the finite temperature of the pair plasma, and other related parameters are examined in Sec. II C. In Sec. III, the HHG study is expanded to the self-consistent scenario by performing QED-PIC simulations where the pair plasma is produced by an ultraintense laser striking a solid target. In Sec. IV, the conclusions of the study in this paper are stated. In our study, the idealized electron-positron-ion mixed target is assumed to be an overdense plasma with a preformed pair plasma. The charge neutrality is satisfied, i.e., n e = n p + Z i n i , where n e , n p and n i are the electron, positron and ion densities, respectively, and Z i is the ion charge state. For simplicity, this target is assumed to have immobile ions, a sharp interface (L n ≪ λ 0 , where L n = n/∇n is the gradient length of plasma density and λ 0 is the laser wavelength) and uniform density distribution. The positron fraction is defined as α = n p /n e . A p-polarized, weakly relativistic (a 0 1) laser is incident with angle θ, where a 0 is the normalized field amplitude. The boost technique We use the well-established oscillating mirror model (OMM) Here, X e is the electron displacement with respect to the initial surface (at x = 0); a is the driving field for plasma motion; is the Lorentz factor of electron motion and β xe = dX e /dt. In the non-relativistic limit (a 0 ≪ 1), β xe ≪ 1, γ e ≃ Γ d where Γ d = cos -1 θ (see Appendix A). The leading ω 0frequency component of the laser field is used to drive the plasma motion is the inertial length, and is the amplitude at surface. Here, ω pe = Γ -3/2 d (n e e 2 /m e ε 0 ) 1/2 is the plasma frequency in the moving frame (see Appendix A) and ε 0 is the permittivity of free space. For overdense plasmas where ω pe ≫ ω 0 , d s ≃ Γ -1 d ω -1 pe and a s ≃ 2a 0 Γ d ω -1 pe . When the laser field displaces the electrons, an electrostatic field is established as a restoring force dragging the electrons back. When the laser is obliquely incident, "vacuum heating" Similar to Eq. ( This equation is nonlinear, but its analytical solution can be obtained with few assumptions. Because the electrostatic force and the Lorentz force acting on the positron largely cancel each other, Eq. ( where n c = m e ε 0 ω 2 0 /e 2 is the critical density. We have confirmed that Eq. ( Plasma radiation at ω pe has been previously identified from the plasma waves solely and impulsively driven by attosecond hot electron bunches produced in periodic vacuum heating We have verified the above physical picture by performing 1D/2D PIC simulations with OSIRIS Figure The E y power spectrum in the reciprocal space (ω, k x ) is shown in Fig. The time-integrated spectra via fast Fourier transform (FFT) in reflection/transmission, i.e., E y (ω) = FFT[E y (x 0 , t)], where x 0 is the fixed position of the observer placed in the left-hand/right-hand vacuum, are shown in Figs. and the bandwidth of the excited wave scales as ∆ω/ω 0 ∼ (∆v p /v p )(n e /n c ) 1/2 . In the low α regime, the positron beam is formed with a low temperature/emittance, i.e., small dispersion in both coordinate and velocity spaces, producing narrow nω pe spectral peaks. The 2ω pe -radiation power in this regime increases with an approximate power-law dependence on α [see Fig. We highlight the spectrum in the very high α regime (α > 0.1) in Fig. The plasma radiation identified in the idealized mixed plasma has been found to be robust, even when including additional effects. First, significant 2ω pe -radiation is generally observed for oblique incidence with θ < 60 • as predicted in Ref. When the pair temperature is even higher, i.e., T p ∼ MeV, the spectrum shows new features, as shown in Fig. We have so far assumed the ions form a fixed background, because their motion is generally negligible in the femtosecond and moderately relativistic laser-plasma interaction In this section, we expand the HHG study to a selfconsistent scenario of pair production. The study is focused on using an ultraintense laser to strike a solid target The simulation set up is shown in Fig. Significant pair production (pair density >100n c ) begins at t ≃ 7T 0 , and this timing is also verified by the positron energy evolution in Fig. The system energy drops after t ∼ 20T 0 , because the laser and energetic particles start to escape the simulation box. The laser coupling into the plasma (including the emitted photons and pair particles) saturates since t ∼ 13T 0 , indicating a higher coupling efficiency of 66% in the QED simulation than in the one (just 47%). The higher coupling efficiency is due to the QED effects, i.e., photon emission and pair production whose energies make up ∼ 44% and ∼ 15% of the plasma energy, respectively. We pay special attention to the electric fields polarized in the (x, y) plane [Fig. The field (E x ) profiles (not shown here), recorded by the same observer, begin to differ between the QED and non-QED simulations at t ≃ 17T 0 . Two differences are identified, i.e., the field amplitude is weaker in the QED simulation than in the non-QED simulation, and highfrequency modulations are present in the field from QED simulation but absent from the non-QED counterpart. The high-frequency modulations on the field are found to have frequencies 110ω 0 and they therefore enhance the high frequency harmonics in the QED spectrum. These two differences respectively corroborate the two features summarized for the spectrum in Fig. On the one hand, the QED effects deplete the laser energy, resulting in weaker laser reflection and thus weaker low order harmonics in the spectrum. On the other hand, the laser interaction with the dense ( a 0 n c ) and hot (∼ 200 MeV) pair plasma produces high-frequency modulations on the reflected laser. These modulations are recorded by the observer (mentioned above), and they enhance the high frequency components in the QED spectrum in Fig. The ultraintense laser-plasma interaction introduces high inhomogeneity (densities and momenta) in both space and time, to the mixed plasma. These inhomogeneities lead to the excitement of broadband plasma waves. The simulations suggest instabilities, analogous to the oblique filamentation instability As introduced in Sec. I, both and mBW scenarios have been conceived to produce pair plasma using intense lasers. The BH scenario has been demonstrated in experiments, but the pair yield is low (α < 10 -7 ) as analysed before. Therefore, the pair production in the BH scenario is unlikely to have significant impact on the HHG spectrum according to our scaling study in Fig. For the mBW scenario using a laser to strike a solid target, our results in Sec. III show abundant photon/pair production. The spectrum is modified due to the significant QED effects. Previous studies show that a plasma cushion, whose density far exceeds a 0 n c , can be formed in front of the target In conclusion, the HHG spectrum from the laser interaction with an electron-positron-ion mixed plasma is studied. In the idealized mixed plasma with a sharp initial plasma-vacuum interface and uniform density distribution, prominent nω pe -radiation peaks are observed in the spectrum. These signals are produced by the strong counterpropagating monochromatic plasma waves via the inverse two-plasmon decay. The dense laser-accelerated positron beam acts as the driver exciting the counterpropagating waves. 1D PIC simulations show the 2ω peradiation is discernible with a positron fraction α as low as ∼ 10 -5 , and its amplitude at the optimal α (∼ 2%) exceeds 5 orders of magnitude higher than in the electronion comparison target. However, if an idealized target is in extreme conditions, i.e., the pair plasma is very dense (high pair fraction α > 0.1) or hot (relativistic temperature ∼ MeV), the resultant spectrum shows different features. In both conditions, broadband plasma waves are excited. Therefore, broadband plasma radiation is generated and the characteristic nω pe -peaks are flattened (even completely smeared out). Furthermore, a pairdominated plasma is formed by the pair plasma expansion in front of the target. The direct laser coupling with this pair-dominated plasma gives rise to high-frequency modulations on the reflected laser field. These modulations enhance the high frequency components ( 3ω pe ) of the spectrum. The spectral features in these two conditions show a transition to the spectrum in the selfconsistent scenario [Sec. III] which also manifests enhanced high frequency radiation due to the laser interaction with the created highly dense and hot pair plasmas. With the parameters chosen in Sec. III, our results show dense ( a 0 n c ), hot (∼ 200 MeV) and relativistic (∼ GeV) pair plasmas are created. Furthermore, the target becomes highly inhomogeneous in both density and momentum within the interaction region. When the dense pair production begins, the reflected laser field is then found to be significantly depleted and have highfrequency modulations. On the one hand, the field depletion indicates a high laser absorption due to the QED effects, leading to weak power of the low order harmonics in the QED spectrum. On the other hand, high-frequency modulations are induced by the laser interaction with the created dense pair plasmas. The modulations result in enhanced high order harmonics in the QED spectrum in contrast to the non-QED spectrum where these field modulations are absent. Our study shows the HHG analysis has the potential acting as a side window into understanding the physics for pair production, e.g., the onset of the pair production and the distribution of pair density.