We investigate the tensile stress in freely suspended nanomechanical string resonators, and observe a material-independent dependence on the resonator length. We compare strongly stressed string resonators fabricated from four different material systems based on amorphous silicon nitride, crystalline silicon carbide as well as crystalline indium gallium phosphide. The tensile stress is found to increase by approximately 50 % for shorter resonators. We establish a simple elastic model to describe the observed length dependence of the tensile stress. The model accurately describes our experimental data. This opens a perspective for stress-engineering the mechanical quality factor of nanomechanical string resonators. Over the past decades, nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS) have received considerable attention as versatile elements in mesoscopic devices. For example, they are well-suited for sensor applications, and have been shown to act as highly sensitive mass Many of the underlying devices are based on a onedimensional string or two-dimensional membrane resonators Several approaches have been pursued to suppress the limiting dissipation mechanism and to further enhance the potential of this class of nanomechanical resonators. For example, clamping losses can be reduced by means of mechanical impedance mismatch engineering Here we describe a previously unappreciated aspect of nanomechanical string resonators: the one-dimensional tensile stress in the string is not solely determined by elastic material properties, but significantly depends on its length as well as other geometric parameters. This allows one to increase the tensile stress by approximately 50 % by using shorter strings and thus boost the dissipation dilution. The observed length dependence of the tensile stress is material independent. We demonstrate length-dependent tensile stress for nanomechanical resonators fabricated from four different wafers featuring the three complementary, tensile-stressed device layers silicon nitride (SiN), silicon carbide (SiC), and indium gallium phosphide (InGaP). A simple elastic model is developed that captures the observed features. It describes the geometric reconstruction of the string resonator by a combination of two effects that determine the stress distribution in the device layer: the vertical release of the string leads to a deformation of the clamping structure, while the subsequent lateral release undercuts the clamping pads. Our results entail important insights for strain engineering of nanomechanical devices and may be exploited to boost the mechanical quality factor of string We investigate nanomechanical string resonators fabricated from three distinct, strongly stressed material platforms, namely amorphous silicon nitride (SiN), crystalline silicon carbide (SiC), and crystalline indium gallium phosphide (InGaP). The 100 nm thick amorphous stoichiometric SiN film is deposited by low-pressure chemical vapor deposition on top of two different substrates, a fused silica wafer (material denoted SiN-FS) and a sacrificial SiO 2 layer atop a silicon wafer (SiN-Si). The 110 nm thick film of crystalline 3C-SiC is epitaxially grown on a Si(111) wafer (SiC). The III-V heterostructure hosts a 100 nm thick In 0.415 Ga 0.585 P film epitaxially grown atop a sacrificial layer of Al y Ga 1-y As on a GaAs wafer. See Tab. S.1. of the Supplemental Material Series of nanomechanical string resonators such as that depicted in Fig. For each resonator length we probe the fundamental out-of-plane mode as well as a series of up to 30 higherorder modes, and determine the corresponding eigenfrequencies by Lorentzian fits, as shown for the case of SiN-FS in Fig. Eigenfrequencies of the out-of-plane modes as a function of the mode number for SiN string resonators on fused silica (SiN-FS). The resonator lengths range from 10 to 110 μm. Fits of the eigenfrequencies using Eq. ( eigenfrequency of the n-th mode as where E 1 is Young's modulus, ρ is the mass density, h 1 is the thickness of the resonator, and σ is the tensile stress of the string. The resonance frequencies shown in Fig. A length dependence of the tensile stress in a nanostring has not been reported in the literature. We have developed a simple theoretical model to quantify this previously unappreciated phenomenon. Our model is based on elastic theory. As such, it is material independent and can be applied to all material systems under investigation. The model assumes a prismatic string of length L, width w and thickness h 1 . Its cross-sectional area is A s = w h 1 . On both ends, the string is attached to a rectangular clamping structure. It consists of a clamping pad in the device layer with lithographic dimensions 2a x and 2a y , as well as thickness h 1 (Fig. As we show in the following, the tensile stress in the device layer atop an unstressed sacrificial layer or substrate gives rise to a balance of forces that in turn leads to a length-and geometry-dependent change in the one- Second, the lateral release is considered. It accounts for the lateral etching during the nanostring release. As a result of this lateral release, the two-dimensional stress in the nanostring relaxes in the direction perpendicular to the string. At the same time, the undercut parts of the tensile-stressed clamping pad contract, which applies additional stress on the nanostring (Fig. To evaluate the shear of the pedestal induced by the vertical release of the structure, we first consider an isolated clamping structure and focus on its cross section along the x-z direction as indicated in Fig. where h 0 and h 1 are the heights of the pedestal and the clamping pad, respectively, G 0 is the shear modulus of the pedestal, E 1 is Young's modulus of the clamping pad, and σ 2D is the initial two-dimensional stress in the device layer. This results in the maximum contraction of the clamping pad ∆p from its original half-width a x : In consequence, the tensile stress in the clamping pad is reduced to σ p = σ 2D -E 1 ∆p ax according to Hooke's law. Note that a similar model that also accounts for additional shear in the device layer is presented in Ref. For the sake of simplicity, we neglect the minute counterforce exerted by the presence of the resonator, which will lead to a slightly reduced contraction of the pad to which it is attached. Similarly, the effect of shear of the pedestal underneath the resonator will be ignored. An experimental verification of the contraction of the clamping pad following the vertical release is discussed in the Supplemental Material The lateral release of the nanostrings results in an undercut of the clamping pads. More specifically, the width of the pedestal is reduced by a uc from either side such that the rim of the clamping pad gets freely suspended as shown in Fig. where σ p is the remaining tensile stress in the clamping pad following the vertical release, and E 1 ∆c auc is its reduction in the undercut part of the clamping pad, again according to Hooke's law. Note that in the absence of the nanostring, the suspended part of the clamping pad fully relaxes such that F c = 0. In the presence of the nanostring, however, the contracting force of the clamping pad is counteracted by a second force acting on the interface between the clamping pad and the nanostring which is associated with the elongation ∆L of the nanostring where σ ∞ is the one-dimensional stress of an infinitely long nanostring after the lateral release, and E 1 ∆L L is its modification according to Hooke's law. The equilibrium condition for the clamping padnanostring interface determines the final geometric reconfiguration of the clamping pad and the string, under the boundary condition that the total length of the compound between the centers of the clamping pads has to be conserved, 2∆p + 2∆c = ∆L. ( Equations ( This length change of the resonator directly translates into an additional strain ε = ∆L/L, giving rise to a length-dependent stress σ(L) of the doubly clamped string resonator via Hooke's law IV. DISCUSSION To validate the theoretical model, we fit Eq. ( , where a ∞ L (x) is the lattice constant of In 1-x Ga x P and a L is the in-plane lattice constant of the strained In 1-x Ga x P film. This allows to compute the two-dimensional stress of the thin In 1-x Ga x P layer σ 2D = ε E 1 /(1ν 1 ) The results of the fits are included in Fig. In Table A more general consideration of the length dependence of the tensile stress according to Eqs. ( For the nanostrings under investigation, this simple picture does not hold, as the stress relaxation along the y direction upon releasing the string assumes a more complicated stress configuration following the contraction of the device layer described in Sec. III A. Not only does the contraction of the clamps by an amount ∆p reduced the two-dimensional stress in the clamping pads from σ 2D to σ p . A similar contraction also occurs along the y direction of the string, such that the tensile stress in the string before the lateral release cannot be considered isotropic. Additionally, we wish to note that high-resolution xray diffraction measurements performed on In 1-x Ga x P wafers have shown a compositional variation in the direction normal to the substrate In conclusion, we report on the observation of a length dependence of the tensile stress in nanomechanical string resonators. This previously unappreciated effect is material independent, and experimentally observed on samples fabricated from four different wafers, featuring the three complementary material platforms amorphous silicon nitride, crystalline silicon carbide and crystalline indium gallium phosphide. We develop a simple elastic model that describes the observed 1/L dependence of the tensile stress, and which allows us to explain the observed length dependence by a combination of the elastic reconfiguration of the device under the vertical and lateral releases of the one-dimensional nanostring. The onedimensional tensile stress relaxes to a value considerably smaller than the initial two-dimensional stress value for long strings. For shorter strings, this value increases by approximately 50 %. Besides the length, particularly the height of the supporting pedestal and the size of the undercut of the clamping pads influence the resulting stress. Thus, the geometric parameters of the nanostring allow us to control the tensile stress, and enable stress engineering of the quality factor of the device without the need for complex phononic metamaterial processing. Data and analysis code are available onlschneg 