When two superconductors are connected across a ferromagnet, the spin configuration of the transferred Cooper pairs can be modulated due to magnetic exchange interaction. The resulting supercurrent can reverse its sign across the Josephson junction (JJ) [1-4]. Here we demonstrate Josephson phase modulation in van der Waals heterostructures when Cooper pairs from superconducting NbSe 2 tunnel through atomically thin magnetic insulator (MI) Cr2Ge2Te6. Employing a superconducting quantum interference device based on MI JJs, we probe a doubly degenerate non-trivial JJ phase () originating from the magnetic barrier. This phase JJ is formed by momentum conserving tunneling of Ising Cooper pairs [5] across magnetic domains in the Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 barrier. The doubly degenerate ground states in MI JJs provide a two-level quantum system that can be utilized as a new disipationless component for superconducting quantum devices, including phase batteries [6], memories [7,8], and quantum Ratchets [9, 10]. As a phase difference φ develops between two superconductors, a DC Josephson supercurrent Is = Ic sin(φ) flows through the junction. The vanishing supercurrent at the minimum energy imposes the condition that only φ = 0 or . For conventional superconductors with spin-singlet pairing, the spatially symmetric Cooper pair wavefunction enforces φ = 0 as the ground state. However, when the superconducting (S) electrodes are separated by a ferromagnetic barrier (F), Cooper pairs can acquire an additional phase when tunneling through the magnetic barrier, yielding a spatial oscillation of the superconducting order parameter in the barrier Engineering the system to achieve an arbitrary-phase between 0 and  is possible by coherently combining 0-and -JJs Van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures are ideal platforms for creating atomically thin Josephson coupling systems. Here, we use a few atomic layers of the vdW magnetic insulator (MI) Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 with a modified dry-transfer technique (see Methods for device fabrication). Our heterostructures clearly displays Josephson coupling for monolayer (ML) through 6 ML Cr2Ge2Te6 barriers. Fig. Interestingly, we find that while R N A increases exponentially with increasing d F , the critical current density J c decreases more rapidly. Fig. To demonstrate the role played by the ferromagnetism in Cr2Ge2Te6, we measure the JJ critical current as a function of applied magnetic field. Figs. Using Lorentz transmission electron microscopy (see Methods for details), we find that thin Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 flakes develop two different magnetic domain structures: stripe-like (Fig. The MI layer in JJs can create a nontrivial phase shift of the tunneling Cooper pairs. To probe this Josephson phase, we have realized SQUIDs consisting of one MI JJ (NbSe2/Cr2Ge2Te6/NbSe2) and one reference JJ (NbSe2/ NbSe2). After the assembly, we create the device by etching away the unnecessary areas (Fig. Φ as a function of magnetic flux Φ threaded through the SQUID loop. I Φ measured in the SQUID (fig. For our SQUID with the MI JJ, we use two schemes to measure the two different switching currents (Fig. The presence of these two nontrivial phases (i.e. not simple multiples of 180 degrees) is reminiscent of two switching current states in a metallic ferromagnetic (F)  -JJ Specifically, our Cr2Ge2Te6 barrier is an atomically thin insulator (dF = 1 nm), a case that is too thin to exhibit spatial order-parameter oscillations. Furthermore, the lateral size of our JJ, L < 5 m, is much smaller than λ ~10 m, estimated using our experimentally obtained J c and λ 0.1 m for NbSe 2 reported previously Therefore, the observed  -JJ formation in our atomically thin MI-JJ, signaled by the appearance of doubly degenerate nontrivial phase shifts, requires an alternative mechanism for explanation. The single-crystallinity of our vdW heterostructure combined with the strong spin orbit coupling (SOC) in the quasi-2D superconductor (S) constituent provides two new characteristics for Josephson coupling that are absent in conventional metallic F-JJs. First, in contrast to the F-JJs constructed by sputtered heterostructures The Josephson phase between Ising Cooper pairs (ICPs) on the surfaces of NbSe 2 across the MI barrier can be sensitively modified by the magnetization direction. For out-of-plane magnetization, the spin of the ICPs is aligned parallel or anti-parallel with the spin of the MI. Similar to a previous theoretical study of JJs with magnetic impurities As a result, the ground state of the Josephson junction is at φ=Fig. 4b Unlike metallic F-JJs, our heterostructure allows for both 0-and JJs by adjusting the direction of the magnetization in the MI. A parallel arrangement of 0-and JJ can lead to a degenerate  -JJ. Our MI-JJ offers such lateral arrays, created by magnetic domain structures in the MI, similar to what is shown in Fig. Experimentally, the presence of two minimal phase angles in E J () can be directly revealed by measuring the JJ switching current distributions. This distribution is sensitively determined by the escape rate  -1 from a tilted washboard potential that is created by biasing E J () with current I (insets of Fig. Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated the engineering of doubly degenerate  -JJs in a vdW system using an atomically thin NbSe2 Ising superconductor and the domain structure in the ferromagnetic insulator Crystal synthesis. NbSe 2 crystals were grown from pre-cleaned elemental starting materials in an evacuated quartz glass tube, in a 700 to 650 °C temperature gradient, by iodine vapor transport. Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 was grown out of a ternary melt that was rich in the Ge-Te eutectic. High purity elements we placed into fritted alumina crucibles Device Fabrication. NbSe2 and Cr2Ge2Te6 crystals of the desired thickness were mechanically exfoliated onto a p-doped silicon chip terminated with 285 nm SiO2. Exfoliated crystals were identified by optical contrast (some of them were separately characterized with atomic force microscope) in an argon-filled glove box. The NbSe 2 /Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 /NbSe 2 heterostructure was prepared by polymer-based dry transfer technique with the maximum process temperature of typically between 60 °C and 80 °C without taking out from the glove box to prevent degradation of the flakes Preparation of the states for different switching current. For the measurement in Fig. Lorentz transmission electron microscopy. Cr2Ge2Te6 flakes were obtained by mechanical exfoliation and transferred onto 50-nm-thick SiN membranes with holes supported by an Si frame in an Argon-filled glove box, by a similar procedure to the device fabrication. The samples were mounted on the liquid-Helium-cooling holder (ULTDT, Gatan) and inserted to the 300-kV field-emission TEM (HF-3300S, Hitachi High-Tech) specially designed for eliminating the magnetic field in the sample area. The Lorentz micrographs were taken using a defocusing condition in the electron optical system and the sample tilting condition (45°-30° tilt measured from the normal position for the optical axis) The spectrum of monolayer NbSe 2 has Fermi pockets around the  point and around the K and K ́ points, and the bands around the K and K ́ points have sizable spin splitting SOC ≃ 100 meV due to inversion-symmetry breaking spin-orbit interaction, which results in Ising superconductivity Josephson junction predominantly originates from the layer adjacent to the junction and as a result the supercurrent will be carried by ICPs. In our phenomenological model, we neglect any coupling between the layers. An effective low-energy Hamiltonian for the K and K ́ valleys in a single layer can be written in Bogoliubov-de Gennes form in the Nambu-spinor basis ψ ψ ↑ , ψ ↓ , ψ ↓ , ψ ↑ as where ,  and  are Pauli matrices acting in spin, particle-hole and valley space, respectively. The spin-orbit coupling is opposite in the two valleys thus preserving time-reversal symmetry. The superconducting phase /2 has opposite signs in the two leads, such that  is the phase difference across the junction. For concreteness, we here assume that the SOC has the same sign both sides of the junctions. In the case of opposite signs, a similar argument for a  junction can be made. We moreover assume the pairing strength  to be small compared to the spin splitting 2v pSOC and hence the Cooper pairs consist of two electrons with opposite spins aligned with the z direction. The magnetic layer is approximated by a single insulating band for each spin, whose energy bands are flat in two-dimensional momentum space. In the Nambu spinor basis d ↑ , d ↓ , d ↓ , d ↑ , the Hamiltonian reads where V and J denote the potential and exchange energy and n is a unit vector describing the direction of the magnetization. An extension to more complicated band structures is possible but will not qualitatively change our conclusions. The superconductors and the magnet are coupled by the hopping Hamiltonian where t is positive. We now calculate the spectrum of Andreev bound states in the junction. For off-resonant tunneling, t << V, J, we can obtain an effective hopping between the left and right superconductor from secondorder perturbation theory where the effective hopping strength is If the junction is nonmagnetic, J = 0, we obtain t ̃ =t 2 /V and the Andreev spectrum simply is that of a narrow Josephson junction in a BCS superconductor. where the transparency is D= 2 t ̃  2 /(1+ 2 t ̃  2 ) with the  normal density of states in the superconductors. This is a regular Josephson junction whose ground state is at  = 0. For a purely magnetic junction with n along the z axis, we instead obtain an effective hopping parameter The hopping has a different sign for the two spin components and, hence, a Cooper pair tunneling across the junction acquires an additional minus sign with respect to a nonmagnetic junction. We can show this explicitly by doing a gauge transformation ψ ,↓ → ψ ,↓ while leaving all other fermions invariant. In this new gauge the hopping is nonmagnetic t ̃→ t 2 /J and the pairing term in the left superconductor changes sign  L = 〈ψ , ψ , 〉 →- L while the remaining terms are unchanged. This shows that we obtain the same spectrum as before but with a  phase shift Hence the ground state of the Josephson junction is at  = . In fact, the system always forms a  junction when J > V as was first noted in ref. Now we consider a junction with magnetization along the x direction so that scattering in the junction can result in spin flips. Due to the strong spin-orbit coupling, however, the band structure in the superconductor is helical, meaning that at any particular in-plane momentum there is only one spin component at the Fermi level. Thus, if a spin flip occurs in the barrier the other spin component has a large momentum mismatch when entering the superconductor. The latter therefore acts as a hard wall for flipped spins as long as the superconductor-magnet interface is sufficiently clean, such that scattering approximately conserves the in-plane momentum. Andreev reflection can therefore only happen after an even number of spin flips in the barrier, which means the supercurrent is an even function of J in this case and all spin dependence drops out. This implies in particular that hopping has the same sign for electrons with different spins and hence the junction always has a ground state at zero. Now let us assume that the magnet is inhomogeneous and there are regions with magnetization along z and x. This means critical current changes sign as a function of the in-plane position. When the length scale of the spatial variations is smaller than the Josephson screening length the critical current is simply the spatial average of the current. As a simple model, we assume a fraction  of the plane favors a  junction described by Eq. ( The remaining fraction (1-) is instead described by Eq. ( Josephson current due to electron near the  point. In Fig. Figure The magnetization of bulk Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 does not show notable hysteresis (Fig. (i) Out-of-plane magnetization. For n=ẑ the Hamiltonian conserves spin and from Eq.(S6) we obtain in the σ ρ channel cosφ 1 cos 2α ρ sin 2α , (S7) which yields four energy levels when both valleys are taken into account (1). Closed analytical expressions for the energies can be easily obtained but are not very illuminating. We instead plot the result in Fig. (ii) In-plane magnetization. For n=x the spins can flip at the barrier. However, in the limit of large ∆ , the superconductors are essentially hard walls for electrons with spin z=- and thus spin flip scattering is suppressed. When the magnetization is out of plane, our simple model yields no Josephson current because of spin conservation. In that case, other contributions, e.g., from the  point or due to spin mixing around the K and K' point, would presumably lead to a ground state at zero phase. In conclusion, there is a similar competition between zeroand -junctions that can conceivably result in an overall ground state at a nontrivial phase  0, . 