Hyperdoping with gallium (Ga) has been established as a route to observe superconductivity in silicon (Si). The relatively large critical temperatures (T c ) and magnetic fields (B c ) make this phase attractive for cryogenic circuit applications, particularly for scalable hybrid superconductor-semiconductor platforms. However, the robustness of Si:Ga superconductivity at millikelvin temperatures is yet to be evaluated. Here, we report the presence of a reentrant resistive transition below T c for Si:Ga whose strength strongly depends on the distribution of the Ga clusters that precipitate in the implanted Si after annealing. By monitoring the reentrant resistance over a wide parameter space of implantation energies and fluences, we determine conditions that significantly improve the coherent coupling of Ga clusters, therefore, eliminating the reentrant transition even at temperatures as low as 20 mK. Superconducting silicon (Si) is considered a key to realization of all-Si hybrid superconductor-semiconductor (S-Sm) devices that are ideal for highly scalable quantum circuits. The superconducting phase in hyperdoped Si:Ga may be a plausible alternatives because of its larger T c ∼ 6 K and B c ∼ 10 T. In this work, we study the influence of processing condition on the superconducting properties of hyperdoped Si:Ga prepared by Ga + implantation. We first demonstrate that the implantation energy of 80 keV, which is used in all previous studies of Si:Ga superconductivity Furthermore, we demonstrate conditions where the superconducting network in Si:Ga reaches the connectivity level necessary to maintain dissipationless conductivity at temperatures as low as 20 mK. In order to prepare hyperdoped Si:Ga we started with undoped Si(100) wafers (ρ > 1000 Ω.cm). A 30 nm thick SiO 2 cap layer was deposited on each wafer using plasmaenhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD). Samples underwent Ga + implantation at ambient temperature with energies E IMP = 25 keV-80 keV, and fluences Φ Ga = 4 -6x10 • C for 1 min in N 2 using a rapid thermal annealer. Transport properties were initially evaluated by measuring differential resistance vs temperature down to 1.5 K in Van der Pauw (VdP) geometry (using an Oxford Instruments Teslatron PT measurement system). In Fig. • C. The resistive transition temperature T c for the superconducting samples is shown in Fig. arXiv:2012.04748v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 8 Dec 2020 In order to evaluate the superconducting behavior below T c , we examined the temperature dependence of sheet resistance R S (T) in 1.5 K -6 K temperature range. Fig. • C. In the inset we show the emergence of a reentrant resistance as temperature approaches 1.5 K. In order to compare the extent of reentrant behavior between samples, we identified R S at 1.5 K as the characteristic reentrant resistance (R r ). In Fig. • C may be attributed to the loss of Ga, leaving poorly-connected Ga networks behind. For the sample with the largest reentrant resistance (i.e., E IMP = 80 keV and T DA = 700 • C), we investigated the structural characteristics using cross-sectional Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM). Fig. • C • C) insoluble Ga is expected to precipitate into clusters within the bulk or below the SiO 2 barrier. The more closely-packed clusters at Si/SiO 2 may form a pseudo-2D Ga thin film to host the superconductivity. However, the layer appears to be granular with regions bridges with few nm wide Si weak-links. Although those weak-links are highly p-doped, their carriers could eventually freeze in large fractions at T < 1 K. This will limit their ability to carry supercurrents through the proximity effect, as their superconductivity eventually vanishes at very low carrier concentration Therefore, the coherent coupling coupling between superconducting Ga puddles can eventually be destroyed at near-zero temperatures To boost connectivity of Ga clusters, we lowered the Ga + implantation energy to less than 80 keV. In Fig. • C. Fig. • C yielded superconductivity. This is consistent with the TRIM simulation results for E IMP < 45 keV; a larger portion of the Ga peak resides within the SiO 2 cap (see Fig. • C, once again resulted in larger R r . Nonetheless, as seen in the inset of Fig. • C, R r was reduced by at least 5x when E IMP smaller than 80 keV was used. More importantly, the sample with E IMP = 45 keV & T DA = 575 • C exhibited a near-zero R r , which can be ascribed to improved coupling between the superconducting Ga clusters. Increasing the fluence during the implantation could further improve the connectivity of the Ga clusters. In Fig. • C has led to superconductivity. Additionally, majority of the T c values at that fluence fell below β -Ga T c , which may be a result of excess disorder. At high fluence, Si and O recoil events are more frequent throughout the implantation process leading to higher disorder in the superconducting phase. In Fig. The TEM images and EDS maps displayed in Fig. Table We provide supplementary material that includes the optical images of Si:Ga surfaces, detailed resistance vs temperature traces, complementary TEM images and EDS line-scans of samples with 45 keV implantation energy, the magnetoresistance measurements, and the details of critical field and superconducting coherence length calculations.