Motivated by recent advances in the fabrication of twisted bilayers of 2D materials, we consider the low-energy properties of a twisted pair of two-dimensional nodal superconductors. We study both the cases of singlet and triplet superconductors. It is demonstrated that the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) quasiparticle dispersion undergoes dramatic reconstruction due to the twist. In particular, the velocity of the neutral massless Dirac excitations near the gap nodes is strongly renormalized by the interlayer hopping and vanishes at a "magic angle" where in the limit of a circular Fermi surface a quadratic band touching is formed. In addition, it is shown that the BdG disperion can be tuned with an interlayer displacement field, magnetic field, and current, which can suppress the velocity renormalization, create finite BdG Fermi surfaces, or open a gap, respectively. Finally, interactions between quasiparticles are shown to lead to the emergence of a correlated superconducting state breaking time-reversal symmetry in the vicinity of the magic angle. Estimates of the magic angle in a variety of nodal superconductors are presented, ranging from the cuprates to the organic and heavy fermion superconductors, all of which are shown to be promising for the experimental realization of our proposal. The remarkable recent discoveries of correlated insulators and superconductivity in twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) From the theory perspective, TBG and related systems appear to realize a novel example of the interplay between strong correlations Recently, the existence of emergent physics in twisted bilayers of cuprate superconductors Here, we propose to apply twistronics paradigm at low twist angles to control neutral quasiparticle excitations in nodal superconductors (SC). Indeed, in the vicinity of the nodes, the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) quasiparticles have a Dirac dispersion Controlling the BdG quasiparticles using twisting can potentially help address two important issues in the field of superconductivity. First, topological superconductivity, which is related to the topology of the BdG bands, while predicted to exist more then a decade ago In this Article, a companion manuscript to the Letter [58], we derive an effective low-energy model for twisted bilayers of two-dimensional nodal superconductors and study the impact of external perturbations and interactions on the quasiparticles. The Dirac velocity of the BdG quasiparticles near the zeros of the superconducting gap (i.e. nodes) is strongly renormalized by the interlayer tunneling and vanishes at a "magic" value of the twist angle where the spectrum takes the form of a quadratic band touching in the limit of a circular Fermi surface. The application of a displacement field between the layers, a Zeeman splitting, and an in-plane current can be used to tune the dispersion, bringing the Dirac nodes back, or creating a BdG Fermi surface, thus mimicking the effect of gating in two-dimensional electronic materials. An interplane Josephson current, on the other hand, opens a topological gap, further analyzed in the Letter In the following, we determine the low-energy description of twisted bilayers of two-dimensional nodal superconductors. Each layer has Dirac nodes in the BdG spec- Illustration of the momentum space structure for a bilayer twisted at an angle θ for a square lattice and a Fermi surface appropriate for cuprate superconductors. Fermi surfaces of two layers are shown in red and black, with a pair of nodes located at KN and KN , forming a single "valley", emphasized by filled circles. Tunneling occurs between states of two layers overlapping in the figure and also the ones additionally shifted by reciprocal wavevectors of the original Brillouin zone (e.g., G1,2 shown by black arrows in the inset) or of the rotated one (e.g., G1,2, shown by gray arrows in main panel). The latter processes are, however, suppressed and may be neglected (see text). Inset shows the construction of the mini Brillouin zone (green) due to the moire superlattice formation with the inverse lattice unit vectors G M 1,2 . (b) Expanded nodal region from (a) showing the local coordinates for the case of symmetry-protected nodes: k is along the bisector of the two node lines, and k ⊥ ⊥ k . trum at the intersections of the normal state Fermi surface and the line node of the SC gap (see Fig. To describe the effective BdG Hamiltonian in a generic way, we use the Balian-Werthammer spinors Φ with The Hamiltonian in the vicinity of a gap node at momentum K N on the Fermi surface without twisting has the first-quantized form where k = K-K N . The tunneling Hamiltonian between layers can be written in second-quantized form as where T (R, R ) is, generally, a matrix in Gor'kov-Nambu and spin space. To capture only the most essential physics of TBSC we will assume that: (i) The tunneling is spin-independent; (ii) Only interlayer charge tunneling is considered that result in T (R, R ) = τ 3 t(R, R ) in Gor'kov-Nambu space; (iii) The two-center approximation t(R, R ) = t(R -R ) can be used where R and R are the coordinates of the lattice sites in the two layers and with R being rotated relative to R. In momentum space, the tunneling matrix element t K, K between states with momentum K and K (the latter taken in the rotated momentum space) takes the form where Ω is the unit cell area, t q is the continuous Fourier transform of t(r) and G and G are the reciprocal lattice vector of the original and twisted BZ, respectively. We assume a one-atom unit cell and the shift between twisted layers to be zero; for a generic twist angle the latter does not restrict the generality due to the incommensurability of the twisted lattices. The incommensurability also results in the reconstruction of the Brillouin zone into a smaller mini-Brillouin zone (mBZ), that at low twist angles can be approximately constructed with the vectors Let us consider the tunneling in the vicinity of a node. Unlike graphene, the nodes in a superconductor are not restricted to be at a high-symmetry point of the Brillouin zone. From the momentum-space picture (Fig. Alternatively, this argument is equivalent to K N being away from the edges of the mBZ, in contrast to graphene, where it is at the corner of the mBZ. Assuming that t q decays on the scale of inverse BZ size where k θ denotes k rotated by θ. We can then approximate the tunneling term as where Ω is a constant and k is now measured from K N -the node momentum. Note that the tunneling occurs with a momentum shift -Q N , when tunneling 2 → 1 and Q N for 1 → 2, implying that the momentum shift can not accumulate (e.g., to ±2Q N and so on) over repeated hopping, unlike in TBG It is then evident, that no tunneling between different nodes may occur in Eq. where ε(k) is the quasiparticle dispersion, ∆(k) -the superconducting gap, k is measured from K N and k ±(θ/2) denotes k rotated by ±(θ/2). Let us first ignore the effects of rotation of k, which are parametrically small in the limit θ → 0 (see discussion at the end of this Section and in Sec. V A). One can expand then ε(k ] and denoting the Pauli matrices acting in the layer space by σ i the Hamiltonian can be rewritten in a compact form: Equation ( where k is along v F and k ⊥ -orthogonal to it [Fig. Additionally, Eq. ( Finally, let us discuss the effects of the rotation of k → k ±(θ/2) . We will limit ourselves to the case of symmetry-protected nodes, since otherwise the most important correction is due to the τ 3 σ 3 term in Eq. where v (2) Both v (2) ∆ vanish for a circularly symmetric ε(k) and ∆(k) dependent only on the polar angle in K plane. For a generic non-circularly symmetric case, v ∆ ∼ v ∆ are expected. As will be shown below, the relevant energy scale at low twist angles is t, corresponding to v ∆ k ⊥ , v F k ∼ t. Consequently, the two new terms are of the order tθ(v F /v ∆ ) and tθ(v ∆ /v F ) compared to the overall scale of t. Thus, at θ 1 neglecting these terms is justified. Near the magic angle, their effect becomes important for the quasiparticle dispersion as discussed in Sec. IV D. They also can affect the weakcoupling instabilities at the magic angle, as discussed in Sec. V A. Here we analyze the low-energy spectrum of Eq. ( The eigenenergies are given by: It can be shown that the spectrum has zeros E 2 (k) = 0 at At each of these points, the Hamiltonian has two degenerate zero-energy eigenvectors, given by: for |α| < 1 and for |α| > 1, where the first (second) two entries in the eigenvectors correspond to the Gor'kov-Nambu space of the first (second) layer (spin degree of freedom is suppressed, as we consider singlet pairing here). One can further project Eq. ( where ζ i are Pauli matrices acting in the |e 1 , |e 2 (or |e 1 , |e 2 ) low-energy subspace. The renormalized Fermi velocities are given by ṽF,∆ = 1 -min{α 2 , α -2 }v F,∆ [see Fig. suggests a different form of the spectrum at the MA. Also, this clarifies the meaning of the dimensionless parameter α in Eq. ( Additionally, an interesting result is obtained by projecting the terms arising from the momentum rotation on a non-circular Fermi surface, Eq. ( which results in small corrections to ṽF and ṽ∆ . Importantly, this implies that the current-induced gap value (which appears due to the ζ 2 term) reported in the accompanying Letter [58] is unaffected by these terms at low twist angles. We now proceed to construct an effective theory at the magic angle. The Hamiltonian takes the form The zero-energy eigenvectors at ξ = δ = 0 are |a = (1, 1, 1, -1)/2 and |b = (-1, 1, 1, 1)/2. These states are equal superpositions of particles and holes and thus have zero charge, but the spin is well-defined. If we project the Hamiltonian, Eq. ( Evolution of the low-energy part of the BdG quasiparticle spectrum Eq. ( are eigenvectors of the last two terms in Eq. ( )/2 are states with energy ±2t, we get: where η matrices act in the |a , |b subspace. This Hamiltonian describes a quadratic band touching (QBT) [Fig. is characterized by an anisotropic effective mass m . For a two-dimensional system, this spectrum possesses a finite density of states (DOS) at zero energy: ν = 2t πv F v∆ per node. To obtain an orderof-magnitude estimate, we approximate v ∆ ∼ ∆0 K N , where ∆ 0 is the estimate for the superconducting gap maximum value and the size of the Fermi surface being of the order K N . This results in ν ∼ 2t ∆0 ν 0 , where ν 0 = m π is the density of states in the normal state. Interestingly, ν can constitute a rather large fraction of the normal state DOS, especially if the superconducting gap is not too large. A question may be raised of whether the enhanced DOS at θ MA in the superconducting state affects the self-consistency equation for the superconducting gap; in Appendix C we show that the corrections due to the presence of the QBT are small by a parameter ∼ (t/∆ 0 ) 3 log -1 Λ/∆ 0 (where Λ is the high-energy cutoff for the pairing kernel) at low temperatures and can be neglected. The physical reason for this suppression is that the most pronounced effects of tunneling are confined to the nodal region where the order parameter is small itself. We now show that the dispersion of TBSCs near the magic angle can be tuned by a number of external parameters accessible with currently available experimental techniques. For each external perturbation type, we first identify a corresponding term in the basis of Eq. ( In an experiment, the application of a back-gate leads to displacement field which technically leads to a difference in chemical potential between the two layers (a term proportional to τ 3 σ 3 in Gor'kov-Nambu and layer space). Interestingly, it has the same form as the term stemming from (v F • Q N ) = 0 in Eq. The addition of the term aη 1 to Eq. ( The spectrum is always Dirac-like and to quantify the renormalization of the Dirac velocities we compute the density of states per spin for a single valley at low energies: which can be compared to the result when a = 0 and This ratio vanishes at the magic angle, indicating the suppression of the Fermi velocity renormalization effects. Thus, a displacement field (or the nodes not being in a reflection plane) results in a splitting of the QBT into two Dirac points, such that the QBT is avoided for all twist angles. On increasing the twist angle, two Dirac points move towards one another, but avoid collapsing into a QBT, by preemptively turning in the direction of ±v ∆ [see Fig. On the other hand, this gives a way to suppress the renormalization effects with a displacement field without changing the twist angle. A Zeeman magnetic field (h • s) term, for a singlet SC or triplet SC with d h, commutes with Eq. ( As the orbital effect of the magnetic field induces inhomogeneities in the order parameter in the form of vortices, we leave its detailed consideration for a future study; however, qualitative description of the effect of an in-plane field is discussed in the accompanying Letter Finally, we consider the effect of a supercurrent flow in TBSC, that can be induced by applying an external current bias. For a single layer, the in-plane supercurrent corresponds to a finite Cooper pair momentum The effect of an interlayer supercurrent is dramatically different. Microscopically, it corresponds to a nonzero phase difference between the order parameters in the two layers ∆ 1 → ∆ 1 e iφ/2 , ∆ 2 → ∆ 2 e -iφ/2 , related via the current-phase relation I(φ) to the applied current If projected to the basis of Eq. ( The spectrum of this Hamiltonian is gapped; furthermore, in the accompanying Letter [58] we show, that the gap never closes for any value of the twist angle and is topological. Explicitly, we can recast the Hamiltonian Eq. ( The Berry curvature F ξ,δ (ξ, δ) for a two-band system is given by: For all cases, except Zeeman field h ⊥ d, the spectrum type in the third column is valid for all nonzero twist angles in the presence of the corresponding perturbation, such that the QBT at the magic angle does not occur. For the "interplane supercurrent" case with a singlet SC, iτ3 ∆ = -τ2. We now consider the influence of non-circularity of the Fermi surface near the magic angle, described perturbatively (i.e. for θ 1) by Eq. ( As v F arises from the single-particle dispersion and v (2) ∆ -from the gap amplitude, one expects that v (2) ∆ ∼ v ∆ (see Eq. ( where To discuss the form of low-energy spectrum, we first find the zero-energy states of (1) : δ 0 < t + ξ 2 1 8t : where two cases are indicated. Noticing that 8t one observes that there are four zero-energy points for t 8t and two otherwise. Near each of the zero-energy points we can expand the Hamiltonian to study the form of the dispersion: (1) : : where ξ = ξ -ξ N ; δ = δ -δ N . One observes then that the low-energy quasiparticle dispersion (or δ 0 ) is generally linear. For low twist angles δ 0 < t+ , there are two Dirac points (see 8t there are four zero-energy points; all of these show a Dirac (linear) dispersion. Importantly, the positions of three Dirac points come together at 8t . In the second case, the dispersion at the merging point is again of the semi-Dirac type ( 4t 2 ) Therefore, the semi-Dirac point is formed by a merger of three Dirac points. The latter has been also predicted to occur for special values of trigonal distortion in bilayer graphene IV D we summarize these findings with a numerical calculation of the spectrum of the full Hamiltonian (9) including non-circular corrections We now explore the role of interactions between the BdG quasiparticles close to the magic angle. Above, we have shown that the density of states at the magic angle is finite due to the presence of a QBT. In this case, correlations may manifest themselves as instabilities already at weak coupling where Â is a matrix of the form τ a ⊗ σ b ⊗ s c representing the order parameter, ε n = (2n + 1)πT are the Matsubara frequencies and a sum over valleys is implied. The critical temperature is determined by the gap equation χ Â(T ) = 2 λ Â , where λ Â is the coupling constant in the respective channel. We assume the interlayer interactions to be much weaker than the intralayer ones and thus we only consider orderings that do not involve layer degrees of freedom, i.e. Â = τ a ⊗ σ 0 ⊗ s c . To simplify the discussion, we first address the singlet ∆ = τ 1 case. Of all the possible order parameters, only the τ 2 (or its spinful version τ 2 s 1,2,3 ) order has a (logarithmically) divergent susceptibility as T → 0 leading to a weak-coupling instability. The susceptibilities for the other orders remain finite at T = 0, as only the τ 2 order opens the gap at the QBT (See Appendix B). The τ 2 order parameter corresponds to a secondary superconducting instability, while the purely imaginary character of the order parameter indicates a broken time-reversal symmetry state, such as a d + is state The results above for the Â = τ 2 instability apply also to the triplet TBSC case. Unlike the singlet case, Â = τ 1 (h • s) has a weak-coupling instability only for h ⊥ d, which has the same susceptibility as τ 2 . Above we considered the order parameters that do not break translational symmetry; in principle, order parameters such as spin-, charge-, or pair-density waves can couple different nodes, opening a gap. However, their properties would likely depend on the particular Fermi surface geometry and hence we leave the consideration of these order parameters for future studies focused on specific materials. In particular, our results are consistent with a non-topological gapped d + is state that has been predicted for a model of cuprate bilayers Away from the magic angle, the spectrum has Dirac nodes with a zero density of states instead of a QBT. This suggests that the secondary instability temperature T * (θ) should be suppressed. To find how T c is suppressed away from the magic angle we evaluate the lowenergy susceptibility Eq. ( where N is the number of nodes and χ 0 τ2 is the highenergy contribution to the susceptibility. Then, subtracting the equations for T * at the magic angle and away from it (χ τ2 (T = T * ) -χ t=δ0 τ2 (T = T * )) one gets: where cylindrical coordinates ε = ξ 2 +δ 2 2t , η for ξ, δ integration have been used. Solving the Eq. ( (35) Then, the critical twist angle is found to be θ Finally, let us discuss the expected magnitude of T * 0 . Evaluating the sum in Eq. ( where . The band structure schematics represent the qualitative form of the quasiparticle spectrum in each region (cf. Fig. where ν 0 = K N /(2πv F ) is of the order of the normalstate density of states. If the coupling in the secondary SC channel is weak, one expects λ τ2 ν 0 1. Then, λ eff 1 is expected and T * 0 should be smaller than t. However, if the system is close to a secondary instability with zero twist angle (i.e. that χ 0 τ2 /(2ν 0 ) is close to 1/(λ τ2 ν 0 ) ), λ eff can be seen to be strongly enhanced. A further observation is that due to the strong exponential dependence, T * 0 should be increased in systems with larger θ MA . This can be achieved in two ways: increasing t is possible with pressure that brings the layers of TBSC closer to one another. Another option is for v ∆ to decrease -which can be generically achieved by enhancing the temperature of the material; however, the temperature should remain much smaller than t, limiting the use of this approach. As has been shown In Sec. II there are parametrically small (in θ 1) corrections to the Hamiltonian (7) due to the rotation of k. As these corrections are expected to be generically present for non-circular Fermi surfaces they may nonetheless affect the weak-coupling instability discussed above, as its relevant scale is T * t. Projecting Eq. ( As v (2) F arises from the single-particle dispersion and v (2) ∆ from the gap amplitude one expects that v (2) ∼ v F and v (2) ∆ ∼ v ∆ (see Eq. ( where F tθMA 2v∆ . For t ξ ξ 0 , the QBT hamiltonian Eq. ( ] around these points. As neither of these yields a finite density of states at zero energy, one may expect a suppression of T * 0 . Using Eq. ( The numerical solution of Eq.( For θ MA 1 the condition T * 0 > T * (cr) 0 does not preclude a weak-coupling instability, since T t. However, for most materials one may also expect v (2) Thus, weakly coupled superconductors, where v F /v ∆ is expected to be extremely large, are not favorable for the observation of correlated states; on the other hand those with sufficiently strong coupling (such as cuprates) or heavy mass (such as heavy fermion systems) will suffer less limitations. Using the estimate Eq. ( One observes that larger θ MA are actually favorable; again, this is due to the exponential dependence of T * 0 on θ MA . Let us briefly recall our findings, focusing on the predictions for experiments. The flattening of the dispersion and the gap opening induced by the current or interactions near θ MA = 2t/(v ∆ K N ) [Fig. Having outlined the experimental scope, we now discuss some of the material prerequisites for the observation of the unconventional effects in TBSC. First, θ MA is of order t/∆ 0 , the ratio of interlayer tunneling to the maximal SC gap value ∆ 0 , implying that the interlayer tunneling should be weaker than ∆ 0 , for the magic angle to exist. Reducing t can be achieved by introducing an insulating barrier between the two layers, similar to conventional Josephson junctions. However, the correlation effects near the magic angle are expected to be stronger for larger values of θ MA (see Eq. ( For sufficiently small t, one can also reach angles larger than θ MA . In our study, we found the effects of hybridization to be most pronounced at θ MA , and suppressed if the twist angle is further increased (Fig. Another important question is that of disorder, as the nodal superconductors are usually strongly affected by it Presence of an energy gap also allows to neglect temperature effects for T T * 0 , t, due to exponential suppression of excitation. On the other hand, temperature provides an additional control parameter, as the value of v ∆ should decrease with increasing temperature, vanishing at T c . An increasing temperature consequently leads to an enhanced θ MA value, which can be used to achieve magic-angle conditions if the device is initially at θ > θ T =0 MA . Let us now discuss the materials that can be used to realize TBSC. We start with the ones already available in monolayer form. For each material we will provide estimates for the magic angle value and the related quantities, summarized in Table • Cuprates: Cuprates are known to host nodal d-wave superconductivity While the Fermi surface of the hole-doped cuprates deviates noticeably from a circular one, the smallness of the magic angle leads to these deviations being important for the correlated phases only for temperatures below 0.3 K (see Eq. F /v ∆ is taken to be 0.1 consistent with v F /v ∆ close to optimal doping • Organics, (BETS) 2 GaCl 4 : Many organic superconductors are believed to be unconventional, and dwave in particular We now move to the highly two-dimensional nodal superconductors, which are not yet available as monolayers. • Heavy fermions: CeCoIn 5 is characterized by the anisotropy m c /m a = 5.6 • Sr 2 RuO 4 : ARPES experiments reveals that this material is highly two-dimensional Finally, superconducting monolayers of transition metal dichalcogenides We have shown that twisted bilayers of nodal superconductors provide a versatile platform to control the properties of neutral BdG quasiparticles. In particular, the quasiparticle dispersion undergoes a dramatic reconstruction near the "magic" value of the twist angle where for a circular Fermi surface it forms a quadratic band touching [Fig. to keep only the linear terms in the expansion in the twist angle θ but will keep here terms up to order θ 2 for completeness: One obtains then ) where the terms due to the rotation of the Dirac cone are highlighted in red. All of these terms vanish for a circularly symmetric single-particle energy (implying β = v F /(2K N )) and gap amplitude depending only on the polar angle in the K space (which implies γ = -v ∆ /K N ). The constant term in ε(K θ/2 ) can be trivially absorbed into a shift of k : k → k -θ 2 8 K N [-1 + 2βK N /v F ], which leads to corrections in ∆(K θ/2 ) of the order θ 3 which can be ignored. The remaining terms, not included in where v (2) ∆ = v ∆ + γK N . For a generic non-circular dispersion and gap amplitude one may expect v (2) Appendix B: Low-energy projection of the perturbations at the magic angle In Tab. III we show the result of projection of the perturbation terms to the full Hamiltonian Eq. ( We consider first the singlet case and perturbation terms of the general form W 0 Â = τ i σ j . Below we consider all the possible i and j, and for each case, we indicate the corresponding term in the projected Hamiltonian Eq. • Â = τ 1 , τ 3 , τ 1 σ 3 , τ 3 σ 1 → (δ → δ + W 0 ), (ξ → ξ + W 0 ), η 3 , η 3 : these terms are already contained in Eq. • Â = 1 ≡ τ 0 σ 0 → η 0 Note that this term is not equivalent to a chemical potential shift represented by τ 3 in the Nambu notation. It leads to a creation of a single Fermi surface and can be realized in two ways. First, a nonzero in-plane supercurrent results in ∆ → ∆e 2iqr leading to H → H + v F • q • Â = τ 2 → η 2 : The spectrum is fully gapped and the lowest eigenvalues at the magic angle are given by: Such a perturbation can be implemented by applying an interlayer bias current (see below); a formation of a subleading superconducting order with a phase of π/2 (A + iB states) with respect to the original SC order parameter will introduce a similar term. The difference is in the signs of the τ 2 terms for different nodes. If the SC order parameter is even in parity, current generates τ 2 terms with the same sign for inversion-related nodes and opposite for odd-parity (triplet) ones. For example, for d-wave superconductor the induced τ 2 term would have the same sign for opposite nodes, but different signs for two pairs of nodes, while in d + is state the sign of the induced term is the same for all nodes. • Â = σ 2 → η 2 corresponds to an anomalous average ↓ which can be recognized as the expression for the normal interlayer current. Application of a bias current in the SC state would result only in a Josephson current, while normal current will be nonzero only above the critical current value, where the value of the gap may be affected. • Â = τ 1 σ 1 → η 1 is off-diagonal in both Gor'kov-Nambu and layer space and corresponds to interlayer Cooper pairing. Note that the Hamiltonian Eq. ( TABLE III. Effects of the the possible perturbations for the Hamiltonian Eq. ( • τ 3 σ 3 → -η 1 This order parameter represents charge imbalance between the layers; while it can be introduced externally by a backgate; additionally such a term appears in case the nodes not being in a reflection plane, i.e. (v 2t -W0ξ t -linear along ξ, but quadratic along δ. • σ 3 → W0 2t η 3 + δ t -similar to σ 1 with the roles of ξ and δ exchanged. • τ 1 σ 2 → -W0 2t η 3 QBT exists at the new magic angle 2t η 3 -ξ t η 2 at the new magic angle the spectrum is half-Dirac (linear along ξ, but quadratic along δ). • τ 2 σ 2 → η 0 -BdG Fermi surface is formed. 2t η 3 -Dirac points instead of a QBT. • Finally, any order parameter above can be converted to a spinful one by a direct product with one of the spin Pauli matrices. We now consider the case of a single-component triplet superconductor. In this case, triplet SC order parameter near a node takes the form δτ 1 (s • d), where s i are Pauli matrices in spin space. Consequently, the analog of Eq. ( where the k summation is restricted to half the Brillouin zone to avoid k → -k redundancy. Let us now discuss perturbations. For perturbations without spin matrices it is convenient to perform an SU (2) spin rotation that brings the d-vector to the form (0, 0, d). Then the two spin sectors decouple into two copies of Eq. ( For perturbations involving spin in the form of the matrix (h • s) there are two cases: • h d As above, the problem may be reduced to two copies of Eq. ( • h ⊥ d: Choosing the quantization axis along d, we apply a unitary transformation U = U † = 1-s3 2 τ 3 + 1+s3 2 (i.e. spin-down component is multiplied by τ 3 ). The Hamiltonian Eq. (B1) is transformed to: whereas the perturbation Hamiltonian is given by . In both cases the spin part of the perturbation is trivially diagonalized and the overall eigenvalues correspond to two copies of Eq. ( (recall that ξ and δ are defined in Eq. ( For ε n , ξ t the integrand is approximately: that can be shown to be independent of δ 0 with a variable shift δ → δ + δ 0 . Indeed, the expression above corresponds to the case t = 0 when the layers are simply decoupled. The integral can be estimated as follows: where Λ 0 is the cutoff for the ξ integral. Thus, for ε, ξ t the dependence on δ 0 appears only after an expansion in t. The second-order term in t at ξ, ε n ∆ 0 takes the form: and its contribution to the integral can be estimated assuming an upper cutoff Λ 0 and a lower one ∆ 0 . The result is ∼ t 2 δ 2 0 ∆0(2π) 2 v F v∆ , smaller by a factor of (t 2 δ 2 0 /∆ 4 0 ) log -1 (Λ 0 /∆ 0 ). At low values of ε, ξ t, δ 0 , on the other hand, the most important question is whether there is a divergence near the nodes. As it is expected to be strongest (if present) at the magic angle, we study the case δ 0 = t. The integrand can be written as: Close to the QBT at ξ, δ = 0 the integrand is approximately ξ 2 -δ 2 + (ξ 2 + δ 2 )δ 2 /t 2 (ξ 2 + δ 2 ) 2 /4t 2 + ε 2 , where a linear in δ term in the numerator is omitted as it vanishes after integration. The contribution of I(δ, ξ, ε n )| ε,ξ t=δ0 to the sum in the gap equation can be evaluated assuming a cutoff ∼ t yielding T εn,k which is smaller by a factor (t 3 /∆ 3 0 ) log -1 (Λ 0 /∆ 0 ) then the leading term, Eq. (C3), that is independent of twist angle. where the 2 in front is due to spin. Calculating the current yields Where the upper cutoff for the δ integral is ∆ 0 . We can divide the sum into high-and low-energy parts. The former one, assuming ξ, δ t, δ 0 , T can be approximated by The low-energy part ξ, δ t, δ 0 can be estimated as follows. The effects of this part are expected to be most pronounced near the magic angle, since the density of states near zero energy is the largest in this case. As increasing φ enhances the spectral gap, we may furthermore focus on the case of small phase φ 1. The characteristic values of ξ and δ can be deduced from the dispersion at the magic angle being ξ 2 +δ 2 2t and the current-induced gap ∆ J ∼ t| sin(φ/2)| implying ξ 2 , δ 2 ∼ t 2 | sin(φ/2)|, which is also evident from Eq. (D2). Moreover, for t 2 | sin(φ/2)| |δ 2 0 -t 2 | ∼ 2tv ∆ K N |θ -θ MA | and thus | sin(φ/2)| ∆ 0 |θ -θ MA |/t one can neglect the quadratic terms in ξ and δ with respect to the quartic ones (using sin 2 (φ/2) 1). One also observes that characteristic ε 2 n values are of the order t 2 sin 2 (φ/2) which can be neglected with respect to ξ 2 , δ 2 , leading to the estimate: There is a logarithmic singularity at low values of φ, however, its effect is important only for φ < t ∆0 e -4∆0/(πt) and T < te -4∆0/(πt) where both limits expected to be extremely small for t ∆ 0 . As the gap maximum is attained at φ ≈ π/2 we neglect this contribution, resulting in the conventional current-phase relation I(φ) ≈ I c sin(φ). Integrating the Berry curvature over k one obtains the Chern number equal to C = sgn[αt sin(φ/2)], consistent with the