Quantum materials having Dirac fermions in conjunction with superconductivity is believed to be the candidate materials to realize exotic physics as well as advanced technology. Angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), a direct probe of the electronic structure, has been extensively used to study these materials. However, experiments often exhibit conflicting results on dimensionality and momentum of the Dirac Fermions (e.g. Dirac states in BiPd, a novel non-centrosymmetric superconductor), which is crucial for the determination of the symmetry, time-reversal invariant momenta and other emerging properties. Employing high-resolution ARPES at varied conditions, we demonstrated a methodology to identify the location of the Dirac node accurately and discover that the deviation from two-dimensionality of the Dirac states in BiPd proposed earlier is not a material property. These results helped to reveal the topology of the anisotropy of the Dirac states accurately. We have constructed a model Hamiltonian considering higher-order spin-orbit terms and demonstrate that this model provides an excellent description of the observed anisotropy. Intriguing features of the Dirac states in a non-centrosymmetric superconductor revealed in this study expected to have significant implication in the properties of topological superconductors. Recent times has seen the emergence of a new class of insulating materials, which are topological in nature. While the bulk of these materials is insulating, surface harbours partially filled (metallic) spin-split two dimensional bands with cone like structure (Dirac cone) arising due to the topological nature of the bulk bands. Bi 2 Se 3 is one of the most studied materials in this category Due to the absence of inversion symmetry, (010) and (0 10) faces of BiPd are inequivalent and the binding energy at the Dirac nodes on respective faces are also different. Interestingly, the twinning in the samples allows photoemission experiments to capture properties of both the surfaces simultaneously; while the Dirac bands on (010) face appear clearly in the experimental spectra, bands on (0 10) face are often weak and appear in the immediate vicinity of the bulk states. Benia et al. Despite several studies, even the identification of the location of Dirac node and the dimensionality of the Dirac states are outstanding issues. Thirupathaiah et al. High-quality single crystals of BiPd were grown using modified Bridgman method. Crystal structure of the sample was determined via analysis of powder xray diffraction pattern and good crystallinity has been ensured employing Laue diffraction experiments. The lattice parameters found in the study correspond to the monoclinic structure as reported elsewhere. The crystal unit cell of BiPd and the crystal axes defined in the cartesian coordinate system are shown in Fig. To investigate the dimensionality of the Dirac states, we acquired spectra at various photon energies, which helps to decide surface or bulk nature of the bands. In Figs. in Figs. . Pieces cut from the same single crystal were used to obtain these two sets of spectra. A close inspection reveals interesting differences between the two sets. In the first set (sample position optimized using 74 eV photon energy), as the photon energy is lowered, the Dirac cone becomes more asymmetric and the bands do not cross each other. The energy gap at the Dirac node was derived by fitting two peaks in the EDC (blue curves in Figs. To address this perplexing scenario, we investigate the experimental geometry carefully and define an axis system as given in Fig. vector lies along the slit (probed k-vector). If the Dirac node is located at a finite momentum along the Γ -S direction, corresponding electrons will emerge at an angle, β with respect to the sample-normal which is dependent on the photon energy used for experiments; with the increase of the photon energy, β gradually reduces. For sufficiently low photon energy, β will be larger than θ 2 . It becomes equal to θ 2 at some photon energy and then becomes smaller for higher photon energies. The lower panel of Fig. Besides the widely discussed Dirac states, we discover few more two-dimensional states lying at higher binding energies. In Fig. We now address the issue of anisotropy of the Dirac bands; such anisotropy has also been reported in other materials. For example, Bi 2 Te 3 Experimentally observed dispersions of the Dirac bands along two orthogonal directions are shown in Fig. The choice of the crystal axes are shown in Fig. x-axis is chosen to lie at 45 o with respect to Γ -S -Γ direction. A model Hamiltonian with the S point as reference point is constructed as follows. m * x , k x and m * y , k y are effective mass of electron and momentum along the x and y axis, respectively. Due to isotropy near the S point, effective mass along the two axes are set to have equal value, m * . σ x and σ y are the Pauli matrices in the spin space; E 0 , θ, α, γ, δ, q, r, s and t are the parameters of the Hamiltonian. Band dispersion and spin splitting extracted from EDCs from the spectrum at 55 eV are shown by symbols in Fig. We now study the spin-texture of the concerned terms in the Hamiltonian to identify the correct form. Fitting of dispersion alone cannot decide whether the linear term with coefficient α or γ appears in the Hamiltonian; both of these produce identical contours. However, these two possibilities give rise to two different spin-textures of the states which can be determined by making two dimensional vector plot of the effective magnetic field arising due to the individual terms. α term produces helical spin texture In summary, we studied the Dirac states in a noncetrosymmetric superconductor, BiPd. High-quality of the sample and high-resolution of the ARPES technique employed in this study helped to reveal subtle features in the electronic structure. Our experimental results helped to identify the momentum of the Dirac node and establish the two dimensional character of the Dirac states resolving the outstanding disputes on these two issues. This study brings out the importance of deriving correct experimental geometry to reveal experimental results related to the properties of materials, in particular, the cases where the point of interest is not the center of the Brillouin zone (Γ-point). This is crucial for the identification of the symmetry properties, time reversal invariant momenta and their implication in various other exoticity of the material. In addition, we discover several other surface states at binding energies higher than the Dirac point revealing complexity of the system. Since the Rashba term alone cannot adequately capture the experimental results, we constructed a model Hamiltonian including spin-orbit coupling terms of higher-order in momentum. Our model provide an excellent description of the anisotropy of the Dirac states. The necessity of the higher-order terms including Dresselhaus type terms reveals importance of the absence of inversion symmetry in the electronic properties of such systems.