For field electron emission (FE), an empirical equation for measured current I m as a function of measured voltage V m has the form I m =CV m k exp[-B/V m ], where B is a constant and C and k are constants or vary weakly with V m . Values for k can be extracted (a) from simulations based on some specific FE theory, and in principle (b) from current-voltage measurements of sufficiently high quality. This paper shows that comparison of theoretically derived and experimentally derived kvalues could provide a sensitive and useful tool for comparing FE theory and experiment, and for choosing between alternative theories. Existing methods of extracting k-values from experimental or simulated current-voltage data are discussed, including a modernised "least residual" method, and existing knowledge concerning k-values is summarised. Exploratory simulations are reported. Where an analytical result for k is independently known, this value is reliably extracted. More generally, extracted k-values are sensitive to details of the emission theory used, but also depend on assumed emitter shape; these two influences will need to be disentangled by future research, and a range of emitter shapes will need examination. Other procedural conclusions are reported. Some scientific issues that this new tool may eventually be able to help investigate are indicated. has importance as such. FE is also important in technological contexts, as the emission mechanism of the electron sources used in many machines of nanotechnology, including electron microscopes, and as one of the mechanisms contributing to undesired vacuum breakdown in many contexts, in particular the development of new high-gradient particle accelerators at organizations such as CERN. There is a strong case for having good detailed understanding of FE theory. For some years, the Ioffe Institute FE research group has studied the experimental behaviour of "CNT LAFEs", i.e., large-area field electron emitters (LAFEs) formed using carbon nanotubes (CNTs) partially embedded in a supporting matrix (e.g., A convenient starting point is Murphy-Good (MG) FE theory The finite-temperature core form of the Murphy-Good FE equation gives the local emission current density (LECD) J L MGT in terms of the local work function φ, the emitter temperature T and the magnitude F L of the local surface electrostatic field (F L is called here the local barrier field). The equation for J L MGT can be written in the linked form ) Here: a and b are the Fowler-Nordheim (FN) constants (1.2) Here, the reference field F R is the barrier field necessary to pull the top of a SN barrier of zero-field height φ down to the Fermi level, and is given (originally, in older form, in Table1 in where the Schottky constant c Substitution of equation (1.2) into equation (1.1b), and algebraic manipulation, leads to the good approximation J kL SN ≈ aφ -1 (expη) F L (2-η/6) exp[-bφ 3/2 /F L ] , For illustration, φ= 4.600 eV yields η ≈ 4.5862. The expression (-η/6) will re-emerge as a contribution to the parameter k in eq. (2.1). For a practical FE device/system, the relationship between F L and the measured voltage V m can be written where ζ L is the local voltage conversion length (VCL). A FE device/system is termed ideal if (a) the measured current I m is equal to the emission current I e , and (b) emitter surface work functions can be treated as effectively constant, and (c) at every surface location "L" the VCL ζ L can be treated as constant, independent of the values of F L, V m and I m . Obviously, the value of ζ L depends on location. Many practical FE devices/system are non-ideal, over all or part of their range of operation, due to "complications", such as (amongst others) series resistance in the current path from the emitter to the high-voltage generator, current dependence in ζ L , heating-induced changes in work function, spacecharge effects, and/or field dependence or time-dependence in emitter geometry. This paper deals only with ideal FE devices/systems. Real emitters are often post-shaped or needle-shaped, with rounded ends, or are otherwise "pointy". We call such emitters point-form emitters. For an ideal FE device/system involving a pointform emitter, if some expression J L for LECD is available, and the local barrier field F L (and any other relevant parameters) are known at all relevant surface positions on the emitter, then the total emission current I e (and hence the measured current I m ) are found by integrating the LECD over the emitter surface "Σ", and writing the result in the form The LECD apex value J a (F a ) is a function of the apex barrier field F a , and possibly of other relevant parameters not shown explicitly, such as the apex radius of curvature. The parameter A n is defined by this equation and is termed the notional emission area. Old work 406-408 in For ideal FE devices/systems, these theoretical dependences on F a convert directly into corresponding experimental dependences on the measured voltage V m , via the formula F a =V m /ζ a (where ζ a is the constant apex VCL), and we can write Equation (1.1) above applies to FE from smooth, flat, planar structure-less surfaces. Strictly, when dealing with tunnelling from curved surfaces it is necessary to replace v F in equation (1.1b) by some more general barrier-form correction factor. However, for simplicity in our initial explorations, the present work uses the planar transmission approximation. For equation The planar transmission approximation is not, in fact, a good approximation if the emitter apex radius is "small" (often taken to mean "less than 10 to 20 nm" -though recent work Partly because there is non-integral field dependence in the pre-exponential in equation (1.4), and partly because there is expected to be voltage dependence in A n as well as in J a (but mainstream FE theories usually take A n as constant), the present work needs to employ a current-voltage FE equation different in form from those normally used. Hence, we use the so-called empirical FE equation where k is the pre-exponential voltage-exponent, and C and B are in the first instance treated as constants, at least over limited ranges of measured voltage and current. (The form of equation Equations of form (1.9) were first used in the early days of field electron emission, in particular by Abbott & Henderson This opens the possibility that, if effects due to LECD theory and effects due to integration over emitter shape can be disentangled, then measurement of the value of k might in principle provide a useful new tool for testing or distinguishing between different LECD theories. At the present time there seem to be few experimental results available that have sufficiently high quality to be useful. Our hope is that a demonstration, by means of simulations, of what seems a useful new tool will in due course stimulate the generation of high-quality experimental results, and thus facilitate FE theoryexperiment comparisons that are more precise and more reliable than has historically been the case. The purpose of the present paper is to establish a "proof of concept". Detailed investigation of how the methods discussed here might be applied to the advanced modern treatments of FE theory that can now be found in the literature needs to be the subject of future research. The paper's structure is as follows. Section 2 develops background FE theory further, presents existing predictions for the value of k, and discusses methods for extracting k-values from simulated or experimental data. Section 3 tests two of these extraction methods by means of simulations on planar emitter models; Section 4 then tests the methods using simulations on the so-called "hemisphere-on-cylindrical-post" (HCP) model for a carbon nanotube standing on a planar plate of large lateral extent. Section 5 looks again at the wider issue of how to compare FE experiment and theory, and outlines procedural conclusions reached in the present work. Section 6 provides a brief overall summary, indicates some experimental issues that will require attention, and indicates some of the scientific issues in FE theory that this new tool may eventually be able to help investigate. A preliminary account of this work was given as a conference poster in July 2019 When written in so-called "power-k coordinates", equation (1.9) becomes A data plot of this form is called here a power-k plot. For ideal FE devices/systems, a power-k plot can generate straight (or nearly straight) lines, and hence a constant or nearly constant value for B, whatever value is chosen for k in the range of present potential interest, namely -1≤k≤4. However, questions exist about expected values for k. There has been intermittent discussion (still largely unresolved) for many years. For simplicity in this initial treatment, we shall limit detailed discussion to situations where there is only one emitter, to temperatures near room temperature and below, and make the usual assumption that (as a first approximation) the local work function can be taken as uniform across the emitter surface. However, we first set out a slightly more general theoretical discussion. To discuss theoretical predictions (for an ideal FE devices/system), it is convenient to start from four linked equations that define a slightly generalised FE equation for I m in terms of V m , namely ) ) ) ) In these equations, the symbol D denotes tunnelling probability. In principle, this is being evaluated here using the Kemble formalism If the planar transmission approximation is used to apply the original 1928 FN FE theory to a point-form emitter, then the predicted "total" value k t of k is 2+k A , where k A is the contribution made by any dependence of A n on apex field F a and hence voltage V m . In 1939, Abbott and Henderson (AH) The Schottky-Nordheim (SN) barrier that includes the classical image potential energy (PE) is better physics As compared with the (zero-temperature) original 1928 FN equation, there is additional field and voltage dependence in the functions v F , t F -2 and λ T . The voltage-dependence in v F is particularly significant, as is obvious from the "-η/6" term in the field-dependence in the pre-exponential in equation (1.4). When φ=4.600 eV, then -η/6 ≈ -0.7644. For a smooth planar emitter this yields the predicted value k t =k p ≈ 1.236; for a point-form emitter (using the planar transmission approximation) There are also more recent discussions. These imply that the predicted value of k may depend on the emitter shape (e.g., In the literature, three methods have been suggested for determining k experimentally. The first is the AH (or least-residual) method The second method was suggested by Forbes Alternatively, result (2.3) can be written in the equivalent form Hence, one expects that k can be found from the slope of a plot of g F1 or g F2 against V m . We refer to this as the local-gradient method. In More recently Millikan-Lauritsen (ML) plot (i.e., a plot of the form ln{I m } vs 1/V m A third method, related to that of In fact, they considered an alternative empirical formula (thought to better represent emission from rough surfaces), but their method can also be applied to equation (1.9) and yields (2.5) When their graphs are interpreted in this way, the results (for three data sets, taken from different emitter materials) are k expt = 0.8, k expt = 2, and "data too noisy". Unfortunately, because the method involves extrapolation to an axis well away from the data, the lever effect operates and significant uncertainty exists in the extracted numerical value. In principle, the Forbes local-gradient method looks more useful. In the Ioffe FE Group experimental research, we attempted to apply both the least-residual (LR) method and the local-gradient (LG) method to IVC data taken from CNT LAFEs, but encountered severe problems with experimental data noise. Sections 3 and 4 originated as attempts validate/explore these extraction methods by means of simulations: current densities or currents are predicted using defined equations, and these predictions are then used as the inputs to the k-value extraction procedures. Both methods have been tested for the following two geometries: (a) the simple (but usually unrealistic) planar emitter case; and (b) the case in which a CNT is represented by a common literature emitter model, namely the "hemisphere-on-cylindrical-post (HCP)" model, where the post is standing upright on one of a pair of well-separated parallel planar plates. Sections 3 and 4 discuss the simulation results for these two cases. In all simulations the local work function was taken as constant across the emitter surface, and equal to 4.60 eV. In this part of the paper, in Murphy-Good FE theory, it is convenient to use as the independent variable the scaled field f defined by In the literature, this parameter f has also been called the "scaled barrier field" and also the "dimensionless field". In terms of f, equation (1.1b) can be re-written in so-called scaled form as [27] where η is given by equation (1.5), as before, and θ is a work-function-dependent parameter given by θ(φ) ≡ ac -4 φ 3 . (3.3) For illustration, φ=4.600 eV yields θ= 7.236×10 13 A/m 2 . Appropriate values for the parameters v F and t F are obtained from the formulae in Appendix A, by setting the mathematical variable x (the Gauss variable) equal to the scaled field f, when using any particular chosen mathematical approximation for v(x). A formal justification for this procedure is given in In the planar emitter case, the voltage conversion length ζ a can be put equal to a suitable separation d sep between parallel plates (we took ζ a = 200 nm). The various theoretical approximations used for the LECD J L , together with a "short name" for the related equation, are shown in Table Table and "MG300" refer to the zero-temperature and finite temperature (T= 300 K) versions of the Murphy-Good FE equation, and the label "KernelSN" to equation (3.2). Our implementation of the least-residual method was then as follows. First, a suitable voltage range was decided. In practice, we normally used a voltage range corresponding to values of the apex scaled-field f a [=F a /F R ] in the range 0.15≤f a ≤0.45, which is the "Pass" range for the orthodoxy test The software package LABVEW was used to carry out these calculations. LG method Results from the local-gradient (LG) method exhibit the same qualitative trends as do those for the LR method, but numerical results are systematically higher than the corresponding results from the LR method, by around 4%. The exact reason for this is not fully understood, but is assumed to be related to slight curvature in the plots shown in Fig. Specific conclusions from this set of results are as follows. (1) For "good" (noise-free) experimental data--the LR method would probably be more precise than the LG method. With real point-form emitters, the local work function φ, barrier field F L and LECD J L all vary across the surface. For simplicity in modelling, φ is usually taken as constant; this is also done here. To model CNT shape, the well-known "hemisphere-on-cylindrical-post" (HCP) model (e.g., Three-dimensional modelling of the field distribution over the HCP model surface was carried out using the COMSOL finite-element software package. The strategy was to calculate the electrostatic fields that apply to small surface segments with height δh, for the hemispherical cap and the top part of the cylindrical surface. The total number of segments used was 1000. The HCP parameters used were similar to those for the single-walled (SWCNT) and multi-walled (MWCNT) carbon nanotubes used in our experiments. For SWCNTs, this is radius r c = 1 nm and height h post = 2.5 μm (h post /r c = 2500); for MWCNTs, this is radius 4 nm and length 5 μm The simulation box was taken as a flat-ended cylinder with radius r sim =250 μm in both cases, and with height h sim given by Since the dimensions of the simulation box are very much greater than those of the emitter, depolarization effects due to the emitter images in the sides and top of the box will be negligible, as shown by In parallel-planar-plate geometry, the (dimensionless) local field enhancement factor (FEF) γ PL is given adequately by: where d sep is the separation of the plates (here identical with the simulation box height h sim ), and V P is the voltage between the counter-electrode (anode) and the vacuum-facing surface of the emitter substrate. For an ideal FE system, V P is equal to the measured voltage V m . Figure varies along the surface, in the case where the scaled-field value at the emitter apex is f a =0.3. Using the planar transmission approximation, and a chosen LECD formula, emission-current contributions from each segment were calculated and summed. Thus, current-voltage characteristics (IVCs) for HCP models representing SWCNT and MWCNT emitters were obtained. To explore the least-residual (LR) method, as applied to these HCP models, we used the same LECD expressions and methodology as before, but excluding the elementary FE equation. The results are summarised in Table We also explored the local-gradient (LG) method, using the same set of LECD expressions. The k-values derived from all the LG-method plots are shown in Table (1) The effect of pointed-emitter shape is to increase the value of the pre-exponential voltage-exponent k, by an amount k A relative to the corresponding planar-emitter case. This is equivalent to dependence of the notional emission area A n on the apex value F a of local barrier field, and hence (for ideal emitters) to dependence on the measured voltage. For an emitter with apex radius of curvature r a , this can be represented in terms of the behaviour of a notional apex area efficiency g n defined by The parameter g n represents the fraction of the surface area (of a hemisphere of radius r a ) that would be emitting if the current density within the emitting area were constant and equal to its apex value. Obviously for the HCP model, r a is equal to the cylinder radius r c . (2) With the exception of the Elinson-Shrednik approximation, all approximate versions of the Murphy-Good FE equation yield much the same value of k A , which is in the vicinity of 0.5 (for the work-function value 4.60 eV used). This is markedly less than the Abbott-Henderson value of k A =1, and shows that their linear-Taylor-expansion approach is a poor approximation. For the case of a hemisphere on a plane (h post /r a = 1), Jensen has developed an analytic expression for g n (see pp. 407-408 in Making detailed comparisons between FE theory and experiment has long been a weak point of the subject area. Historically, the situation has been as follows. The good (albeit not precise) linearity of Fowler-Nordheim plots taken from ideal FE devices/systems establishes convincingly that FE is a wave-mechanical tunnelling process. However, apparent linearity of a FN plot does not by itself provide useful information about the details of FE theory. In practice, it has proved extremely difficult to use comparisons between theory and experiment to distinguish decisively between different detailed FE models/theories. For example, the FN (1928) and MG (1956) approaches to metal FE theory make significantly different physical assumptions about the nature of the tunnelling barrier. For the last 60 years or so, FE theoreticians have been in no doubt that the MG approach is "better physics" This situation is a "gap in the background of FE science" that deserves to be filled. Unfortunately, the longstanding IVC analysis techniques based on the use of FN plots are not very helpful for making basic theory-experiment comparisons. For ideal FE devices/systems, the slope S of a current-voltage-type FN-plot basically gives information about the electrostatics of the FE device/system in use, in that an extracted value of the apex VCL ζ a can be obtained from the formula ζ a extr = -σ t bφ 3/2 /S. (5.1) In MG FE theory, it is usually adequate to take the slope correction factor σ t as 0.95. In the original 1928 FN FE theory, σ t = 1. Thus, any attempt to use the measured slope and the 5% difference in σ t to distinguish between these two theories needs a highly accurate independent determination of ζ a extr ; this would be very difficult in principle, and possibly impracticable in reality. For ideal FE devices/systems, estimates of formal emission area A f can be obtained from the FNplot intercept, most easily by using the relevant emission area extraction parameter (e.g., Estimates of A f derived, from a given experimental data set, (a) by using MG FE theory and (b) by using the original 1928 FN FE theory, can differ by a large factor, typically around 100. But there are extraordinary difficulties in making a reliable theoretical prediction of the value of A f , partly because of the limited information that currently exists about likely values of notional emission areas A n , but more so because of the lack of good knowledge about the value and behaviour of the "uncertainty factor" λ in equation (2.2b). It might be thought that study of total energy distributions would provide a good comparison method. Whilst there is certainly scope for further careful numerical investigations, initial explorations did not lead to convincing results, as reported above. Against this background, studies of the pre-exponential voltage-exponent k in the empirical FE equation, i.e., equation (1.9), appear to show significant promise as a tool for using experiments to distinguish between different detailed FE theories. The results in this paper should be understood as part of a preliminary exploration of the issues involved. From our experience in carrying out simulations and comparisons, as described above, we conclude the following. (1) At this point in time, theory and simulations need to work with ideal FE devices/systems, so that the complications associated with non-ideality can be avoided. Also, experiments should, as far as possible, be made on ideal devices/systems. The following remarks concentrate on ideal FE devices/systems. (2) In the context of "empirical" equation (1.9), when dealing with classical-conductor models of field emitters, it appears that the theory can assume (at least initially) that the parameter B has a constant value, and that the issue is the behaviour of the pre-exponential CV m k . (3) Comparison of equations (1.8) and (1.9) suggests that this pre-exponential CV m k can, at least conceptually, be decomposed as a product of two components: (5. 2) The second term relates to the behaviour of a current density defined at the emitter apex, and the first to the behaviour of an appropriately defined notional emission area. (4) Thus, we expect that the parameters C and k may both contain entangled information about the physics of the emission process and the shape of the emitter. In principle, what needs to be done is to untangle this information, in order to provide reliable information about the emission physics, the emitter shape and the effective emission area. This seems a research task that may prove complex and possibly lengthy. As things stand at present, it seems a higher priority to use extracted k-values to deduce conclusions about the emission physics, rather than to use extracted values of k and C to deduce conclusions about emission area. (5) There seem some obvious initial avenues of exploration, as follows. (a) Within the context of the planar transmission approximation, we need to explore more comprehensively how emitter shape affects the value of k. We also need to understand how these results are affected by the value chosen for the local work function. (b) We need to establish a link between (a) the results of simulations and (b) the analytical results of Jensen (c) We need to investigate the behaviour of the shape contribution k A in the limit of large emitter apex radius. If k A turns out to be small (or, alternatively, very well defined), then we need to explore whether experimental measurements on "blunt emitters" could provide decisive information about the emission physics for "nearly planar emitters". The mainstream approximation, as described at the start of this paper, involves the neglect of atomic structure, the use of the simple-JWKB tunnelling formalism and the assumption of a Schottky-Nordheim tunnelling barrier. As indicated above, it would be helpful to have it decisively confirmed experimentally that this is an "adequate physical approximation" for a blunt emitter. The following detailed procedural conclusions have also been reached. (7) Given that our results for k t depend noticeably on the accuracy of the approximate formula used for v F , there will be little physical merit, in future simulations, in using anything other than the high-precision formula for v(x) given in Appendix A (though, as noted earlier, computing resource limitations might indicate the use of the F06 approximation in particular circumstances). (8) There seems limited merit in using the Elinson-Shrednik approximation in future simulations. (9) The present simulations cover the scaled-field range 0.15≤f a ≤0.45, on the grounds that ideal FE devices/systems will normally operate within this range. In this range, extracted values of k appear (so far) to be nearly constant, and one would expect the least-residual and local-gradient methods to return nearly the same numerical result. However, when making comparisons between simulations and analytical models (e.g., for g n ), it may be useful to carry out simulation and extraction procedures over a wider range of values within the range 0≤f a ≤1. We have detected that, when considered over wider ranges of f a -values, k may need to be treated as a weakly varying function of f a , and hence of measured voltage. In this case, the least-residual method yields a reasonably precise "effective average value" of k, but the local-gradient method can indicate whether any significant variations in k exist as a function of voltage. This investigation started as an attempt to understand in more detail the current-voltage characteristics (IVCs) derived from CNT-based LAFEs operating in industrial vacuum conditions. However, we came to realize that more fundamental questions relating to the analysis of IVCs and the effect of emitter shape on IVCs need to be explored first, and, further, that experiments that seek to establish the value of the pre-exponential voltage-exponent k might eventually open a path towards quantifying fundamental uncertainties known to currently exist in tunnelling theory, particularly as this applies to curved emitters. should provide a useful new tool for comparing FE theory and experiments. Simulations have shown that small theoretical variations, both in the barrier form correction factor and in pre-exponential correction factors, can be detected, by the "least residual" and/or "local-gradient" methods. Using the planar transmission approximation, it has been shown that emitter shape makes a significant contribution to k, and that small shape differences may have a detectable effect: this is an unwelcome (though not unexpected) complication. This paper has aimed to establish a "basic proof of concept" for this methodology based on finding k-values. We believe this has been achieved. The paper does not aim to provide full discussion either of theoretical details of how this methodology might be implemented, or of how appropriate apparatus and experimental procedures might be designed. However, we briefly comment below on possible ways forwards. To address the whole problem of developing and testing truly reliable FE theory, using k-value methodology, one must assess what contribution each part of existing theory (and each new development) makes to the total value of k. This seems likely to generate a complicated progressive process of making comparisons between theory and experiment, in order to reach definitive or provisional (with caveats) scientific conclusions, and is likely to involve careful design of experiments. As is usual scientific practice, initial experiments need to have as few "complications" as possible, at least until some basic facts are built up. Thus, one would work with emitters fabricated from good metallic conductors (so that the system is "ideal"); one would work with single emitters rather than arrays, and would avoid using excessively sharp emitters; one would work at room temperature (or maybe below); and one would work within a voltage range that corresponds a scaled-field range well within the validity limits for Murphy-Good finite-temperature FE theory. It would be desirable to work with stable, clean emitting surfaces, and to avoid noise issues of all kinds. This indicates the need to operate in good ultrahigh vacuum, with appropriate surface cleaning techniques applied before experiments are begun. It also indicates the need to use computerised control of voltages, computerised measurement of currents, and computerised recording of currentvoltage data. Conceivably, as previously suggested Clearly, to avoid the complications associated with non-planar emitter shape, it would be desirable (if at all possible) to measure currents from a defined area on an atomically flat plane, across which the applied electrostatic field is as uniform as possible. If an experiment of this kind proves impracticable, at least in the short term, one might use something approximating to a traditional field electron microscope configuration, with a probe hole that limits the current to that drawn from a well-defined crystallographic region. To solve this and other problems, one needs to identify the theoretical effects likely to make the greatest-magnitude contributions to k, and to determine/estimate related contribution sizes. Obviously, the biggest is the contribution "+2" that comes from summation over emitter electron states, using elementary theory. Two of the next largest contributions (namely, using the SN rather than the ET barrier, and using non-planar emitter shapes) have already been discussed. There is a need for further simulation-based research into how k-values are affected by emitter shape and size, and by the value and behaviour of the local work function. The introduction of emission models that involve the atomic wave-functions of surface atoms (e.g., Beyond this, and possibly of significantly more physical interest (though necessarily topics for later exploration), there will be situations where the differences between different FE theories might be expected to be somewhat smaller. In particular, one might expect a theory of FE from curved surfaces, when the relevant LECD formula is used with a point-form emitter, to lead to a k-value slightly or somewhat different from that found using the planar transmission approximation. However, there is an issue of whether some existing methods of predicting tunnelling probabilities for curved emitters are strictly correct physical approximations; this is because careful reading of the analysis of hydrogen-atom field ionization by Landau and Lifschitz Further beyond this, there may be issues relating to the implementation and reliability of the more advanced FE theories that assess tunnelling probability by means of path-integral methods more sophisticated than those commonly used (for example, With these advanced modern theories, a suitable way forwards would be for their originators to use them to generate predicted current-voltage characteristics (or, where relevant, predicted plots of tunnelling probability versus field). These could then be analysed by the methods discussed above, to yield a predicted k-value or a predicted contribution to k. More generally, some of the known problems in FE theory appear, at least in part, to be general problems associated with tunnelling theory in quantum mechanics. The late Prof. Marshall Stoneham (a former President of the UK Institute of Physics) considered that some of the most difficult unsolved problems in theoretical physics were in field electron emission theory (private communication to RGF). There may be the hope that, eventually, future scientific developments in field electron emission could be of wider scientific use. Appendix A: Detailed formulae The field emission special mathematical functions are expressed here in terms of the Gauss variable x, i.e., the independent variable in the Gauss Hypergeometric Differential Equation (HDE). By appropriate choice x(1-x) Note that the symbol l' used in The principal field emission special mathematical function v(x) is the particular solution of equation (A1) that satisfies the boundary conditions A formal analytical solution for v(x) is stated, and an exact series expansion derived, in Related special mathematical functions u(x) and t 1 (x) are defined in terms of v(x) by u(x) ≡ -dv/dx , (A3) The typesetting convention used here is that (like "sin") the symbols for special mathematical functions are typeset upright. It can be shown Historically, the pure mathematics of "v" has been formulated in terms of the Nordheim parameter y [=+√x]. However, the discovery of equation (A1) as the defining equation for "v" has helped to show that this choice is inappropriate when discussing the pure mathematics of "v": the natural mathematical variable is the Gauss variable x. The Nordheim parameter y, when defined as +√f, remains acceptable as an alternative modelling variable, but strong reasons can be given equivalent complexity. The success of these F06 formulae presumably arises because the F06 formula for v(x) mimics the form of the lowest terms in the exact series expansion One of the most effective of the older approximations is the Elinson-Shrednik (ES) approximation (see equation (6.10) on p. 168 of where k B T is the Boltzmann factor, and the parameter δ F SN (called here the barrier-strength decaywidth, at the Fermi level, for the SN barrier) is obtained as follows. In the simple-JWKB tunnelling formalism, the tunnelling probability D for a SN barrier of zero-field height H can be written where: G is called here the barrier strength, but is also known as the "Gamow factor"; G SN is the barrier strength for the SN barrier; and v H is the value of v(x) that applies to a SN barrier defined by H and F L . The parameter δ F SN is then given by 1/δ F SN ≡ (∂G SN /∂H)| H=φ = (3/2)t F bφ 1/2 F L -1 , (A14) where, as before, t F is the value of t 1 (x) that applies to a SN barrier defined by φ and F L . Only the relative permittivity parameter (ε r ) is needed. The region outside the HCP model is vacuum, thus we set ε r = 1. The HCP model body is omitted from the calculation, since the electric field does not penetrate inside a classical conductor. In accordance with conventional practice, all surfaces in the system are treated as having the same work function, and the potential difference ΔΦ between the top and bottom "plates" of the simulation box is set equal to the voltage V that would be applied between these plates if they were good conductors in a real situation. The HCP model post and the base-plate on which it stands are set to potential Φ base =0. The top surface of the simulation box is set to potential Φ top =ΔΦ =V, as specified in Table Let f a denote the apex value of the parameter "scaled field" used in emission theory. For any given value of f a , the local scaled-field value f L at any location on the HCP-model surface can be obtained from the formula The above procedures need to be carried out for each of the two HCP models that represent, respectively, multi-walled (MWCNT) and single-walled (SWCNT) carbon nanotubes. For each of these two models, the next set of procedures need to be carried out for each assumed equation for emission current density. In this paper the range 0.15≤f a ≤0.45 (which corresponds to the "Pass" range of the orthodoxy test) has always been used. This corresponds to a given range of apex fields F a , and hence a given range of potential differences ΔΦ, and hence a given range of "simulated measured voltages V m ". 9. Also define the increments of f a (and hence the increments in F a , ΔΦ and V m ) that are to be used in compiling the I e (f a ) [and hence I m (V m )] data sets that are to be used in the regression analyses and in analyses by the "local gradient" method. 10. Carry out Integration over the emitter surface, by splitting the HCP model surface into 1000 "ring segments" each of small height δh . For each segment, carry out the following procedure, starting from the top of the model. a) Evaluate the local emission current density J L for the f L value appropriate to the segment. b) Evaluate the surface area a L appropriate to the segment. c) Evaluate the contribution δI e [=a L J L ] made by the segment to the total emission current I e . d) Add this contribution into a "running total" for the calculated emission current. e) The procedure is terminated at a point where the calculated emission current has plateaued. The above algorithm is carried out for each appropriate value of f a (typically 1000 values in the chosen range), and results in a data set that describes the simulated functional dependence I e (f a ) or, equivalently, the simulated functional dependence of I m (V m ). For illustration, Fig. The data relating to currentvoltage characteristics are used in the LABVIEW software package, to implement the "least residual" and "local gradient" analysis procedures, as described in the main text, and generate appropriate supporting outputs. These outputs include "best values" for the pre-exponential voltage exponent k. inclusion of the room-temperature correction term increases k p by about 0.08, i.e. about 7%; this increase is higher than was expected.