We present a method to identify distinct tunneling modes in tunable superconducting tunnel junction composed of superconducting tip and sample in scanning tunneling microscope. Combining the measurement of the relative decay constant of tunneling current extracted from I-V-z spectroscopy with its statistical analysis over the atomic disorders in the sample surface, we identified the crossover of tunneling modes between single quasiparticle tunneling, multiple Andreev reflection, and Josephson tunneling with respect to the bias voltage. The method enables one to determine the particular tunneling regime independently of the spectral shapes, and to reveal the intrinsic modulation of Andreev reflection and Josephson current that would be crucial for quantum device application of superconductors. The tunnel junction between superconductors is the heart of modern quantum information devices. Superconductor qubits, which are one of the most promising scalable qubits right now, heavily rely on the Josephson effect, which is quantum tunneling of Cooper pairs between the two superconductors The superconducting tunnel junction can also probe the nature of superconductivity, because tunneling behavior is highly dependent on the type of superconductors, such as either s-wave or d-wave Inside the superconducting tunnel junction, the interplay between electrons and Cooper pairs results in various modes of tunneling, i.e., single quasiparticle tunneling, multiple Andreev reflection (MAR) and Josephson tunneling In this letter, we used STM with a superconducting tip to make a superconducting tunnel junction with vacuum tunneling barrier that is controllable to picometer precision. The spectroscopy based on I-V-z characteristics allows us to extract the relative decaying constant of the tunneling current with respect to the tip height and display the crossover between the single quasiparticle tunneling, MAR, and Josephson tunneling. Moreover, the relative decay constant of different tunneling modes displays distinct spatial distribution relative to the atomic disorders, whose statistical analysis gives complementary information for the transitions between the tunneling modes. Theoretical calculation with tight-binding simulation shows the broad variability of tunneling probability of Andreev reflection as a function of quasiparticle energy, whose resonant tunneling at the superconducting gap edge ultimately translates into intermediate decay rate-constant between single quasiparticle and Josephson tunneling. Our results indicate that the superconducting tunnel junction can be viewed as a parallel resistor circuit of various tunneling regimes, which can be turned on/off or amplified by the junction geometry and tunneling energy. The experiment was performed in SPECS JT-STM operated at UHV condition (< 10 -10 mbar) and base operating temperature of 1.2 K. The surface of Pb(110) single crystal was cleaned by repeating sputtering-annealing cycles several times. The condition for sputtering was ion energy of 1 kV, Ne gas pressure of about 1 × 10 -5 mbar, emission current of 10 mA, ion current of 12 μA, and duration of 15 min, and the annealing condition was 150 °C for 40 min. The STM tip was coated with Pb by applying bias voltage of 100 V to the tungsten tip and then dip it into the Pb(110) single crystal while limiting the maximum current to be 100 μA with a 10 MΩ resistor in series In case of superconducting tunnel junction, single quasiparticle tunneling dominates when the bias is larger than the sum of the sample superconducting gap Δ s and the tip superconducting gap Δ t [Fig. The Ambegaokar-Baratoff formula shows that E J is proportional to the tunneling probability T N The decay constant κ(V b ) was extracted by fitting I-z or dI/dV-z curves to the exponential function We further defined the relative decay constant as κ/κ N , where κ N ≡ κ(V max ). In Fig. To probe the feasibility of differentiating the mechanisms via disorder, we acquired the distance dependent spectroscopy in a wide area of the Pb(110) surface with natural population of defects [Fig. For statistical analysis of the effect of disorder, we then acquired I-V-z curves on the regularly spaced grid. The maps of κ/κ N at specific bias in Fig. The crossover of mechanisms can be effectively captured by calculating the As seen in Fig. Overall, these results are qualitatively similar to the experimental observations in Fig. Both larger and smaller than 2 values for κ/κ N in the Andreev regime allows us to propose a simple conceptual picture of the crossover of tunneling mechanisms as three parallel channels whose resistance depends on tip height z and the tunneling energy e|V b |. When e|V b | > Δ s + Δ t and the density of states is considerable, single quasiparticle tunneling is dominant even though the MAR and Josephson tunneling is possible. Meanwhile, in the region of the superconducting gaps, the preponderance of Josephson vs Andreev tunneling will be determined by their decay constant, with the smaller decay constant determining the dominant current. Just below the gap, the resonance effect favors single Andreev reflection. Toward zero bias, higher order MARs appear successively, but also Josephson tunneling starts to compete with MAR, and eventually crossover to Josephson tunneling happens because MAR has higher decay constant than Josephson tunneling. The crossover will be sensitive to many specifics of the tunneling junction and the measurement conditions. For example, the role of prefactors in exponential decay of tunneling current remains to be understood in future analysis. Conversely, detailed understanding of the crossover is likely to provide a new window into the properties of impurities in superconductors. In summary, we combined the I-V-z spectroscopy of the STM-based superconducting tunnel junction with the statistical analysis over atomic disorders to provide the clear illustration of crossovers between single quasiparticle tunneling, MAR, and Josephson tunneling. The analysis enabled one to determine the particular tunneling regime independently of the spectral shapes, which provides a valuable complement to other methods of analysis of superconducting junctions. In particular, rigorously comparing and correlating the effects of disorder in different regimes will deepen our understanding on the nature of superconductivity. For example, revealing intrinsic modulations of the MAR and Josephson currents would provide a pathway to identify pairing symmetry 