In the past years, EUV lithography scanner systems have entered High-Volume Manufacturing for state-of-the-art Integrated Circuits (IC), with critical dimensions down to 10 nm. This technology uses 13.5 nm EUV radiation, which is transmitted through a near-vacuum H2 background gas, imaging the pattern of a reticle onto a wafer. The energetic EUV photons excite the background gas into a low-density H2 plasma. The resulting plasma will locally change the near-vacuum into a conducting medium, and can charge floating surfaces and particles, also away from the direct EUV beam. This paper will discuss the interaction between EUV-induced plasma and electrostatics, by modeling and experiments. We show that the EUV-induced plasma can trigger discharges well below the classical Paschen limit. Furthermore, we demonstrate the charging effect of the EUV plasma on both particles and surfaces. Uncontrolled, this can lead to unacceptably high voltages on the reticle backside and the generation and transport of particles. We demonstrate a special unloading sequence to use the EUV-induced plasma to actively solve the charging and defectivity challenges. The ongoing technological evolution in Integrated Circuits (IC's) is driven by an exponential growth in demand for computing power and data transport, and is expected to accelerate further in coming years with the advent of Artificial Intelligence running partly on highperformance centralized servers but also on local and mobile edge-computing devices. Power consumption and computing performance will be key drivers for improving architectures as well as further increases in pattern density. Driven by Moore's law Particles can come from parts and scanner integration, or can be generated by the moving parts in the scanner or can be carried in with the reticles and wafers. It was found that the EUV-induced plasma in the scanner can be a major factor in releasing and transporting particles via electrostatic release and under-etching Current EUV Sources for lithography are based on EUV emission by a hot Sn (tin) plasma: this Sn plasma is formed by irradiating a stream of Sn droplets by a high-power pulsed IR laser (LPPlaser-produced plasma) EUV lithography employs a low-pressure background gas of 1-10 Pa hydrogen (H2), to maintain self-cleaning conditions for the sensitive EUV mirrors in the optical system of the scanner. Hydrogen was chosen as background gas, because of high chemical activity of Hions The 92 eV EUV photons will lead to some absorption and photo-ionization of the hydrogen background gas, creating a plasma, as outlined in fig. The plasma sheath is the potential drop region near the wall surface, and will depend on the local plasma density and electron temperature For particle contamination control, the zone around the reticle is of specific interest, as particles on the reticle have the most severe impact Classically, the risk of discharges is described by the Paschen criterion. This describes the condition where the gain factor by cathode electron generation plus gas ionizations by accelerating electrons exceeds the loss factor of electrons to the anode surface, to trigger a self-amplifying discharge For a near-vacuum system, left of the minimum, the Paschen criterion in principle allows very high voltages but care should be taken for long discharge path lines (e.g. to vessel walls), and for points of field amplification, such as a sharp edge or protrusion, or a particle, especially at the anode In presence of plasma, the free electrons and ions invalidate the basic Paschen assumptions, and result in a significant shift of the avalanche threshold to lower voltages. In itself, the plasma will not focus either electrons or ions, so local discharge-like damage such as overheating is not to be expected from plasma. However, in combination with an external voltage, current focusing can indeed occur, and such a plasma-assisted discharge can induce surface damage and create particles. This is obviously a concern for the high-voltage electrostatic clamps used in the EUV scanner Interaction of a plasma with biased electrodes can lead to formation of different structures When the bias voltage of positively biased electrode becomes too high, formation of the socalled "fireball" structure may occur. Formation of a "fireball" in the scanner vessel is not intended, as it is very similar to a discharge, and a large current can be focused into a small area. In the presence of slits and complicated geometries the conditions for formation of the "fireball" and similar discharges will be different as compared to bulk plasma. We studied this with our PIC model, and validated experimentally in a set-up with a simplified geometry, as shown in fig. The model shows a breakdown or discharge towards the positive anode when the plasma is switched on. This can be explained by electrons being accelerated towards the anode and achieving sufficient energy for further ionizations of hydrogen molecules. As the electrons are accelerated further to the positive anode, a positively charged plasma cloud is formed which screens the electrode potential and moves the zone of electron acceleration away from the electrode, thus effectively forming a channel of current, as illustrated in fig. With the electrode potential drop φ ≈ 30-70 eV (to accelerate electrons to energies at which ionization is most efficient Equation 2 illustrates that the risk of plasma-assisted discharge needs to be re-evaluated for any increase in either EUV power, local pressures or external voltages. For the complicated internal geometries of an EUV-scanner, no analytical expression can be used. However, our 3D PIC model, with the same underlying physics and cross sections as the 2D PIC model as used and validated above, can now be used to check any design proposal for safe limits on local voltages and pressures plasma-assisted discharges. Also, as general guidelines, floating or insulating surfaces should be avoided as much as possible to minimize the risk of surface flashovers, and edges and protrusions should be sufficiently rounded to avoid dangerous field amplification points. As outlined in section II, floating surfaces and dielectrics close to the EUV-induced plasma may become charged. In particular the reticle needs to be considered in this respect, since it consists of an insulating glass substrate with a conductive coating on the backside (for electrostatic clamping purposes), and a conductive reflective multi-layer coating on the frontside; both conductive layers are floating independently; this is outlined in fig. With A cl the (constant) area of the clamping electrode, Uunl the backside potential during unload, Ucl the backside potential as clamped, dcl the distance as clamped, which is in order of microns, and dunl the distance during unloading, which is in order of cm's (as sketched in fig. The issue of backside voltage excursions during unload can be remedied in two ways: 1) by creating a (negative) offset in the clamping scheme to shift the equilibrium of the EUVplasma charging to (near) zero during the exposures, or 2) by supplying free charge carriers during the unload sequence to dynamically reduce the charge on the reticle as the voltage builds up. A negative clamping offset has indeed been observed to result in lower backside voltage, with near-zero backside voltages during unload being achieved for an offset of roughly -25 V, as shown in fig. Another electrostatic aspect of EUV is that, as shown above, during the EUV pulse the floating reticle surface will instantaneously charge positively by photoelectric effect to ~20-40 V, and subsequently will be neutralized within ~5 s to zero volt by charge compensation from the EUV-induced plasma. This process repeats after 20 s with the next pulse. So on average the reticle will be charged ~1-2 V positively with respect to the surrounding grounded surfaces. As the reticle top layers (Ru cap and Ta absorber) are conductive and continuous, all of the reticle will take on this average positive potential, also the (large) part of the reticle that is away from the actual EUV-beam. Away from the EUV-beam, plasma density is too low to effectively shield the resulting electric field between reticle and the nearby grounded reticle masking blades, which can be in order of >100 V/m given the small gap. Free particles are preferentially charged negatively in and around the EUV-beam With me,mi and Te,Ti the masses and temperatures of the electrons and ions respectively. With the ions close to room temperature, the particle potential is mainly determined by the electron temperature. Approximating the particle by a sphere, the particle charge Q p follows from the potential via the capacitance of a sphere, and scales linearly with the particle diameter d p In the transient EUV-induced plasma, no analytical equations exist for the potential or charge of a free particle, and PIC modeling is used to determine the evolution of particle charge over time. PIC simulations of the EUV-induced plasma in the region below the reticle show that micron-sized particles get a short positive charge, after which they reach an equilibrium between electron and ion currents, as illustrated in fig. Free particles next to the EUV beam will not experience the initial photo-electric effect, so will charge negatively by the more mobile electrons and will reach an equilibrium between electron and ion collection currents; this results in a similar steady-state value negative charge as for particles within the beam, or somewhat more negative for submicron particles. Further away from the beam, plasma density will drop and the charging will be much slower, but will still result in an average negative charge (again due to the more mobile electrons). Extending the PIC simulations for particle charge with dynamic reticle potential and resulting electric fields yields an electric force on the particle near the reticle surface. Comparing the resulting electric force against the other forces that might work on a free-floating particle (gravitational force, neutral and ion drag forces, and for completeness, thermophoretic force (driven by temperature differences between the irradiated reticle surface and reticle-facing masking blades)), it is clear that the dominant forces for submicron particles are the electric force and the neutral drag force, as illustrated by fig. Understanding of the specific nature of the EUV-induced scanner plasma and the interaction of this plasma with surfaces and particles has improved significantly in the past years. This has allowed scanner design optimizations as well as targeted improvements in manufacturing and cleaning processes, for both plasma and related electrostatics aspects, to continue to drive down the corresponding contributors behind defectivity. Analysis of plasma-assisted discharges has resulted in design guidelines for allowed voltages and pressures at various distances from the EUV-beam, to prevent discharges and improve the robustness of highvoltage electronics. Prevention of high reticle charging during unloading and handling, with the associated risk of discharges, removes a potential source of particles. These measures have brought particle contamination control of the EUV-scanner to a regime where customers have the freedom to operate without protective pellicle for high-volume manufacturing. For future EUV lithography systems, continued improvements in plasma models and understanding will ensure plasma-aware designs that will be compatible at increasing source powers and reducing critical particle sizes. as Product System Engineer. He is currently responsible for EUV Scanner Plasma Technology. He co-authored more than 30 scientific papers and holds more than 70 USA patents. Figure 