Millimeter wave (mm-wave) communications and radar receivers capable of processing small signals must be protected from high-power signals, which can damage sensitive receiver components. Many of these systems arguably can be protected by using photonic limiting techniques, in addition to electronic limiting circuits in receiver front-ends. Here we demonstrate, experimentally and numerically, a free-space, reflective mm-wave limiter based on a multilayer structure involving a nanolayer of vanadium dioxide (VO 2 ), experiencing a thermal insulator-to-metal transition. The multilayer acts as a variable reflector, controlled by the input power. At low input power levels, VO 2 remains dielectric, and the multilayer exhibits resonant transmittance. When the input power exceeds a threshold level, the emerging metallic phase renders the multilayer highly reflective while dissipating a small portion of the input power without damage to the limiter. In the case of a Gaussian beam, the limiter has a nearly constant output above the limiting threshold input. Millimeter wave (mm-wave) is a valuable network and sensing technology which utilizes frequency bands in between 30 GHz and 300 GHz [1] Optical limiting is a technique to protect photosensitive devices from damage caused by intense optical radiation However, a typical passive limiter absorbs a significant portion of high-level radiation, which can cause overheating and damage to the limiter itself To overcome this problem, the concept of a reflective photonic limiter, which reflects rather than absorbs high-intensity radiation, has been introduced incorporating a nonlinear In this Article, we report for the first time a free-space, reflective photonic limiter for the W band (75-110 GHz), inspired by recent optical designs. First, we design and fabricate a resonant multilayer structure incorporating a nanolayer of vanadium dioxide (VO 2 ), undergoing an insulator-to-metal transition when heated above the critical temperature of θ c ≈ 69 • C. Then, we investigate the mm-wave limiting properties of the multilayer by lowpower spectral measurements at successively increasing temperatures and by time-resolved continuous-wave (CW) measurements at high input powers. Our experimental findings are then corroborated by 3D multiphysics simulations, which allow us to gain deeper insight into the limiting process by exploring the dynamics of the limiter driven by the VO 2 phase transition. The approach based on the use of insulator-to-metal transition materials is highly scalable and can be replicated in any spectral range, from microwave (MW) to optical (see, for example, Mm-wave limiter design and low-power measurements at varying temperature. The reflective mm-wave limiter studied in this work is illustrated in Fig. According to literature The resonant setting of the limiter of Fig. Mm-wave measurements of the limiter carried out at low power and successively increased temperatures agree well with the transfer-matrix calculations. In Fig. High-power measurements of the mm-wave limiter. To investigate self-induced mm-wave limiting, time-resolved transmission measurements of the limiter have been carried out with the use of a high-power CW source centered on 95 GHz with a FWHM of 300 MHz (see Methods). To prevent adverse effects of back-reflected radiation on the mm-wave source, the reflective limiter was tilted by an angle of 6 • from the normal incidence direction, shifting the transmission resonance to a higher frequency than 95 GHz. Fig. The transition in the VO 2 layer was observed with a FLIR thermal camera which could distinguish between the dielectric and metallic phases of VO 2 because of their different emissivities in the infrared. Fig. To gain deeper insight into the mm-wave limiting process in the photonic limiter, we have performed time-domain 3D multiphysics simulations of a Gaussian beam propagating through the multilayer of Fig. where E 0 is the on-axis (r = 0) electric field amplitude, E 0 = 4η 0 P 0 /πr 2 0 , η 0 = 377 Ω is the wave impedance of free space, k = 2π/λ is the wave number for a free-space wavelength λ, and r 0 = 16.5 mm is the beam waist radius at which the field amplitude falls to 1/e of its axial value. The mm-wave propagation in the case of temperature-dependent permittivity of the VO 2 layer is described by the following set of coupled electromagnetic and thermal equations: where H is the magnetic field component, j = σE is the current density, σ(z, θ) is the electrical conductivity, ε(z, θ) = ε (z, θ) + iε (z, θ) is the permittivity, and μ is the permeability. In the second line of equations ( is the volumetric heat production rate. For computational convenience, we recast the above expression as Q = 1 2 ωε 0 |E| 2 , where ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity, and is the imaginary part of the effective relative permittivity, which can be directly obtained from our measurements. The other parameters in equations ( Transfer modules of COMSOL Multiphysics software The dependence of t s on P 0 can be understood from the solution of a heat balance equation where C is the heat capacity per unit surface area, h is the thermal exchange coefficient, A is the absorptance and I in ∼ I 0 exp(L/2ξ) is the internal intensity in the middle of the multilayer length L, ξ is the decay length associated with the spatial distribution of the resonant defect mode (see Fig. for θ 0 ≤ θ < θ c . At intensities I in > h A (θ c -θ 0 ), the temperature θ(t) grows until it reaches the phase transition value θ c at time, Note that in the case of the Gaussian beam of equation ( 2At exp(L/2ξ) ∝ t -1 , in agreement with Fig. According to Fig. At P 0 > 60 W, however, P T (t) falls further down as the metallic domain becomes comparable to the limiter aperture in size (see Fig. As seen from Fig. We have designed and demonstrated a free-space, reflective photonic limiter for the W band as an alternative or a complement to electronic limiting circuits used in mm-wave receivers. The proposed photonic limiter is a resonant air/sapphire multilayer structure, a few mm thick, incorporating a 150-nm VO 2 layer undergoing an insulator-to-metal transition when heated above the critical temperature, θ c ≈ 69 • C. The limiter acts as a variable reflector, controlled by the input power P 0 . If P 0 is below a certain threshold level P t , the VO 2 layer remains in the dielectric state, and the multilayer exhibits high transmittance in a finite frequency band, despite the fact that a portion of P 0 is absorbed by the multilayer, leading to some heating of VO 2 . When P 0 exceeds P t , a fraction of the VO 2 layer transitions into the metallic phase with sharply increased electrical conductivity, rendering the entire multilayer highly reflective. The time t s before the transition starts is inversely proportional to the input power, t s ∝ 1 P 0 , after which the multilayer is brought to equilibrium by a combination of positive and negative feedbacks between mm-wave absorption and heating of VO 2 . For a given input power P 0 ≥ P t , the equilibrium is determined by the fraction of the VO 2 layer transformed into the metallic phase. At that point, the limiter is capable of safely dissipating a small portion of the incident power while reflecting the rest of the energy back to space. The high reflectivity (as opposed to absorptance) prevents the limiter from overheating. Moreover, a combination of the resonant conditions and the high contrast in electrical conductivity between the two phases of VO 2 results in a significant enhancement of the limiter extinction ratio and allows drastic reduction in the limiting threshold -both highly desirable features in limiting applications. The limiter properties, such as operating frequency, bandwidth, threshold level and switching time, are determined by the limiter design, ambient conditions, as well as spatial and temporal characteristics of the incident radiation. In particular, in the case of CW Gaussian beam, the output power of the limiter operating above the threshold appears finite and virtually independent of the input power due to non-uniform heating of the VO 2 layer. This research has been supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (FA9550-19-1-0359, LRIR 18RYCOR013, LRIR 20RDCOR022), Office of Naval Research (N00014-19-1-2480), and DARPA (HR00111820042). We thank K. Leedy and E. Shin for technical help with the PLD system and helpful discussions. Thin-film deposition and structural analysis. The VO 2 thin film was deposited in a Neocera Pioneer 180 Pulse Laser Deposition system with a KrF excimer laser (Coherent COMPexPro 110, λ = 248 nm, 10-ns pulse duration, 10-Hz repetition rate) applied for the ablation of a high-purity vanadium disk. The chamber base pressure of a 5%-O2/95%-Ar gas mixture was maintained at 25 mTorr during the deposition. The 76.2-mm double-sidepolished C-cut (006) sapphire substrate was held at 600 • C. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of the VO 2 films was carried out using a PANalytical X-Pert diffractometer with a hybrid monochromator for Cu Kα 1 radiation (λ = 1.54056 Å) at room temperature. The presence of highly oriented monoclinic VO 2 crystalline phase is indicated by the characteristic XRD peaks (020) and (040) at 39.87 • and 85.97 • , respectively Mm-wave spectral measurements. Mm-wave field spectra of the photonic limiter and complex permittivities of its constitutive components were obtained using a W -band, hightemperature, free-space measurement apparatus The sample was located in the center of a Mellen tube furnace with an overall length and diameter of 31.75 and 15.24 cm, respectively, and a 15.24-cm-long, uniform heating region centered along the axial length of the furnace. A silicon carbide composite sample holder was used for the measurements. The temperature was controlled with a E-type thermocouple embedded in the sample holder immediately adjacent to the outer radius of the sample. In the temperature range from 27 • C to 110 • C, the thermocouple had an accuracy of 1.0 • C. High-power mm-wave measurements. For higher-power free-space measurements, a CPI VKB2463L2 Extended Interaction Klystron (EIK) power amplifier was used to provide a CW 95-GHz signal. EIK input and output mm-wave power was sampled utilizing calibrated directional couplers, and then measured using diode-based detectors. The input mm-wave drive signal was controlled with a LabView-based feedback circuit to maintain a consistent mm-wave power output over extended periods of time, which could otherwise drop due to heating of components. The EIK mm-wave output was coupled into the same lensed antenna that was utilized with the network analyzer measurement setup, to form a Gaussian beam directed into a shielded anechoic chamber and focused at the center of the sample being interrogated. At a peak power gain, the maximum incident power of the Gaussian mm-wave beam was 55 W. Multiphysics simulations. Equations (2) were solved numerically, using the coupled Microwave and Heat transfer modules of a finite-element software package from COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS 