We study the coherent propagation and incoherent diffusion of in-plane elastic waves in a two dimensional continuum populated by many, randomly placed and oriented, edge dislocations. Because of the Peierls-Nabarro force the dislocations can oscillate around an equilibrium position with frequency ω 0 . The coupling between waves and dislocations is given by the Peach-Koehler force. This leads to a wave equation with an inhomogeneous term that involves a differential operator. In the coherent case, a Dyson equation for a mass operator is set up and solved to all orders in perturbation theory in independent scattering approximation (ISA). As a result, a complex index of refraction is obtained, from which an effectve wave velocity and attenuation can be read off, for both longitudinal and transverse waves. In the incoherent case a Bethe-Salpeter equation is set up, and solved to leading order in perturbation theory in the limit of low frequency and wave number. A diffusion equation is obtained and the (frequency-dependent) diffusion coefficient is explicitly calculated. It reduces to the value obtained with energy transfer arguments at low frequency. An important intermediate step is the obtention of a Ward-Takahashi identity (WTI) for a wave equation that involves a differential operator, which is shown to be compatible with the ISA. The propagation of elastic (including acoustic) waves in complex media has evolved into a rich variety of fields and sub-fields, ranging from the very basic to the very applied. A basic tenet is that there is an elastic medium endowed with an heterogeneous structure, for example inclusions or defects. A problem that is simple to formulate is the computation of the scattering of elastic waves in an elastic medium by a static spherical inclusion that has different elastic properties. This problem is solved by use of the respective wave equation and appropriate boundary conditions at the surface of a sphere. A next step in complexity is taken by considering not one sphere but many. Here the problem becomes unwieldy very quickly and approximation methods must be used. The resulting phenomena can be very rich, depending on the relative spacing of the spheres, the impedance contrast, and the wavelength considered. Particularly important is the geometrical location of the spheres: At one end, they can be considered to be located in a periodic lattice, and this leads to phononic crystals. At the other end, they can be randomly distributed with, say, a uniform distribution. And once randomness is allowed, there is no reason to limit it to position: size and elastic properties can also be randomly distributed. A rich variety of phenomena can ensue, depending on the relative size of wavelength, sphere radius and inter-sphere distance. For example, at appropriate wavelength resonances may occur that will considerably influence the wave propagation. And instead of spheres, other obstacle geometry can be considered. In any case, there are two major possible approaches to any one of these problems: Either the properties of the obstacles are known, and it is desired to understand the behavior of the elastic waves therein, or the behavior of the waves is known, and from their behavior it is desired to infer the properties of the heterogeneous medium. When the obstacles to wave propagation have random intrinsic properties and/or are randomly placed, three major phenomena can occur: A coherent, average ("effective"), wave can exist. It being described by a complex index of refraction, whose real part gives an effective phase velocity, and whose imaginary part gives an attenuation. This attenuation in turn can have two origins: one, the intrinsic losses within the medium and its inclusions, and two, the loss of coherence due to the incoherent waves scattered by the random obstacles. Since the coherent wave attenuates, it will die out after a while. It may happen that the remaining, incoherent, radiation can be described in terms of a diffusion equation, with a qualitatively different wave behavior. And it may happen that the diffusion coefficient vanishes, in which case the wave can be localized ("Anderson localization") by the disordered medium. Experiments concerning this last phenomenon have been conducted with ultrasound traveling inside a 'mesoglass', an ensemble of aluminum balls brazed together to form a disordered solid Randomly placed elastic heterogeneities in an otherwise elastic medium can be described in two ways: On the one hand, specific obstacles can be considered, as with the spheres used for illustration in a paragraph above. In this case the randomness, so to speak, is "discrete". But one can also consider a medium described by a continuum random variable, for instance random, but continuously varying, elastic moduli. One object of study is the time and space evolution of the average field amplitude, also called the coherent wave. This approach was pioneered by Foldy Rather that deriving the diffusive properties of an elastic field from those of the wave amplitude, it is also possible to consider the evolution of the energy density from the beginning, bypassing the field amplitude description. In this way the specifics of wave interference arising from specific obstacles is lost, but the resuting algebra is much simpler to deal with. This approach has been describe by Ryzhik et al. The quantum theory has also been studied in some detail, leading to new insights into the role played by dislocations in thermal transport Section II has the basic layout of the problem to be studied: Equations in two space dimensions for the response of an edge dislocation loaded by an external, time-dependent, stress are written down, as well as the wave equation for dynamic elasticity when the source of elastic waves is a set of N edge dislocations. Section III sets the problem of the propagation of waves in the presence of many dislocations as the problem of a wave in the presence of a random external potential. Standard tools are used to solve this problem to find a solution in terms of a coherent, average, wave propagating through a medium with an effective, complex and frequency-dependent, index of refraction. There appear longitudinal and transverse phase velocities, as well as longitudinal and transverse attenuations. The problem of the diffusion behavior of the waves in interaction with many edge dislocations is treated in section IV. A Bethe-Salpeter (BS) equation is written down and a Ward-Takahashi identity (WTI) is established. As in the coherent wave problem of Section III, we use an independent scattering approximation (ISA). That is, the random variables characterizing each dislocation (in practice here, position and Burgers vector orientation) are statistically independent of each other. It is established that the WTI is consistent with the ISA. The low frequency and small wave number of said equations are considered, and the BS equation, written in the form of an eigenvalue problem, is solved perturbatively. A diffusion behavior is established, and an explicit expression for the diffusion coefficient is obtained. Section V has discussions and conclusions. As mentioned in the first part of this Introduction, the problem of waves interacting with topological defects that have their own dynamics has a number of different characteristics from the problem posed by static obstacles. For this reason we write down our calculations in some detail, relegating a number of the more cumbersome to several appendices. Also in an Appendix we compare the approach used here to obtain a WTI with the approach used in The problem of scattering of an in-plane wave on a single edge dislocation has been extensively treated by Maurel et al. where ρ is the (two dimensional) mass density, v a is a vector of in-plane particle velocity as a function of two-dimensional position x and time t, c abcd = λδ ab δ cd + μ (δ ac δ bd + δ ad δ bc ) is the two-dimensional elastic constants tensor with (λ, μ) the Lamé constants,and the source Here the superscript n denotes the corresponding characteristics of the n-th edge dislocation, ǫ ce = ǫ ce3 and ǫ ijk is the completely antisymmetric tensor with indexes i, j, k, b and X are the Burgers vector and position of the edge dislocation, respectively, with condition ̇ X b (that is, an infinite straight edge dislocation line, which is directed for definiteness along x 3 , moves only along its Burgers vector, to which it is perpendicular) and It should be also noted that within this model the edge dislocation was originally treated as a point in two dimensions, which performs a small free oscillation without damping around a certain resting equilibrium position X 0 (See Where L ln(δ/ǫ) is the mass per unit length of an edge dislocation In distinction from the original consideration of the coherent wave propagation problem formally presented by Eqs.(1,2,3)(See Given that τ = (0, 0, 1), as discussed above, we can write: Then, using Eq. ( With In Eq. ( In addition, again smallness of vibrations means that the right-hand side of Eq. ( Employing Eq.( Eventually, from Eqs. and where ω 2 0 ≡ γ/M. Notice that this coefficient is the same for all dislocations, since it depends on the magnitude, not the orientation, of the Burgers vector. Accordingly, we shall drop its superscript "n". The tensor M n ab , however, does depend on Burgers vector orientation and is randomly distributed over the various dislocations. Then, the 2D version of the tensorial perturbation potential for a single edge dislocation can be introduced in the way similar to 3D case And the total perturbation potential is written as a superposition It is worth mentioning that the 2D tensor from Eq. ( In what follows, we consider that all edge dislocations have a Burgers vector of the same magnitude, but randomly oriented in 2D. The coherent behavior of the elastic wave in the presence of many edge dislocations is described by the average Green function G , where G, according to and the brackets denote an average over the random distribution (of both position and Burgers vector orientation) of edge dislocations in 2D. The average Green function is expressed as the solution of the Dyson equation in 2D where G 0 is the Green's function of the medium without dislocations (i.e., "free" or "bare" ) giving as a solution or where k is the unperturbed wave number of the 2D medium described by G 0 , k T ≡ ω/c T , k L ≡ ω/c L , and with an implied small imaginary part in the denominator to insure causality. We note that, as can be easily verified, the result in Eq. ( Finally, the mass (or self-energy) operator Σ, is given by with T as the T-matrix, represented in terms of V (given by Eqn. ( In turn, the last equation can be easily transformed into a series in respect of a perturbation potential A statistical independence of the scatterers of each other is assumed in this paper, that is an Independent Scattering Approximation (ISA) is used to treat the coherent wave propagation problem analytically as it was done in 3D where t n is the T-matrix for scattering by a single object, similar to that defined in Maurel et al. with Here, we note that the mass operator from Eq.( We highlighted above an intermediate character (bearing scalar and tensorial attributes) of the problem under consideration to proceed with the incoherent (diffusive) transport of the elastic waves. Indeed, we naturally adopt some aspects of a scalar version of the spectral approach, that was applied to a medium with random scatterers of a screw dislocation type (See, A. Bethe-Salpeter (BS) equation and Ward-Takahashi Identity Following is formally rewritten as where the tensor scalar product : is defined as [(A⊗B):(C⊗D)] ab,ef =(A⊗B) ab,cd (C⊗D) cd,ef . Note that [(A ⊗ B) : (A -1 ⊗ B -1 )] ab,ef = δ ae δ f b . Second, the pole structure can be easily introduced from the last expression of the Eqn. ( and substituting it into Eqn. where K plays a role similar to the role played by the self-energy Σ in Dyson's equation, Eqn. where with And space variables have been introduced as x By applying the inverse Fourier transform to Eqn. ) and, as usual, the integration over the internal momentum variables, i.e. k ′′ , is assumed, with dk. Proceeding from Eqn. with I as a unit tensor. Now, acting with (< ) on the left of Eqn. (36) and using Eqn. and, using Dyson's equation Eqn. with and notations As is well-known (see, for example We start with two equations for Green tensors at two different set of variables: ( x 1 , x ′ 1 , ω 1 ) and ( x 2 , x ′ 2 , ω 2 ). It reads as follows Then, we take the inverse Fourier transform from both expressions according to the rule and substitute the advanced Green tensor Fourier transform at the terms, where operators act on it, as follows It yields = - . To underline the fact that frequency dependent part g(ω 1 ) of A n (ω 1 ) does not depend on n, we take it out of the summation over n. Acting similarly for the second set of variables one can come to the following system of equations So far, we have played only with advanced Green tensors, whereas in order to construct intensity we need to involve the equation for the retarded Green tensor. To achieve this we make a complex conjugate of the second equation of the system, which eventually goes to the form: Now we act on the first and second equations of the system from the right by , respectively. It leads to the following system The next step consists in subtraction at B = 0 (so that g(ω) = g * (ω)) of the second equation from the first one and evaluating at Otherwise, it is not possible to eliminate the remaining parts of the potentials in both equations that are subjected to the subtraction from each other, since the parts imply not only summation over defects but also contain components of the second rank tensor, i. e. to achieve identity of those parts between each other, the components must be also identical. As a result, we have lim By acting on the obtained identity with lim After making averaging and introducing notations : ) we come to the following result If we use Eqn. then, the pre-WTI reads as follows This is a relation between the averaged Green's function, and its two-point correlations. We now turn the relation between averages obtained at the end of the last subsection into a relation between their "irreducible" parts. In this subsection, based on Eqn. (54), we establish an explicit relationship between the irreducible vertex K and the mass operator Σ which is the essence of the WTI. Indeed, by acting with Φ -1 gh,bc (k ′′′ , k ′′′′ ; q, Ω) on Eqn. (54) from the right , we obtain According to Eqn. ( It gives Eventually, using It is worth mentioning that the WTI immediately reduces to the optical theorem when B = 0, i.e. g is real, q, Ω tend to zero, and the standard ISA expressions for Σ and K tensors, Eqn. (60) below, are taken (See C).Explicitly, the WTI reads in this case with the following expressions, valid to leading order in n, the density of scatterers: In terms of the general, i. e. symbolical, representation of the WTI there are two differences compared to a well-known tensorial version of the WTI for electromagnetic waves We now change to a compact notation for the WTI by introducing and come to the WTI in the form Eqn. (62) can be rewritten in a more compact form, as with with tensor U given by Eqn. The following relations for the self energy and for the Green function will prove useful: with where we introduced the shorthand notations for ) and in the same way for Σ ± db (k, ω). It should be emphasized that the last approximate equality in Eqn. (68) holds in the limit |Im The meaning of this inequality in terms of the dislocation parameters is explored in Section V A. In this section we follow the approach that was used in Refs. To this end, the BS equation Eqn. with the operator H defined by It is easy to see, using the explicit form of U, and the reciprocity of the tensor K, that H has the following symmetry: The solution of the BS equation will be found in terms of the eigenvalues and eigentensors of the operator H. The eigenvalue problem for H is set up as follows: where f rn (k ′′ ; q, Ω) (resp. f ln (k ′′ ; q, Ω)) are right (resp. left) eigentensors and λ n (q, Ω) the corresponding eigenvalues. Following (72) satisfy completeness and orthogonality conditions: Furthermore, the symmetry restriction for the operator H from Eqn. (71) determines the relation between left and right eigentensors: The eigentensor properties Eqns. (73, 74) allow for a representation of the solution Φ of Eqn. (69) as a series over the states n [34-37] : The existence of a diffusion regime assumes that in the limit q → 0, Ω → 0 the intensity Φ has a pole structure given by the lowest eigenvalue asymptotics λ 0 (q → 0, Ω → 0) → 0 that is separated from a regular part In order to solve Eq. ( +f 1q (k ′′ ; q, 0) + f 2q (k ′′ ; q, 0) + . . . λ 0 (q, Ω) = λ 1Ω (0, Ω) + λ 1q (q, 0) + λ 2q (q, 0) + . . . Substitution of the above expansions into Eqn. (72) leads to the following set of coupled integral equations: Within Eqns. (77-80) we have used a shorthand notation for the quantities appearing in Eqn. (76), in which the arguments q and Ω are omitted. The superscript indicates the variable and the order of perturbation for the operator H, right eigentensor f r0 , and eigenvalue λ 0 . The disappearance in Eqns. (77-80) of contributions from some terms that appear in Eqn. ( (63) and (71). Importantly, the first-order-in-wavenumber contribution to the eigenvalue vanishes: λ 1q = 0. Without this result there would be no diffusion behavior. This algebra follows closely Ref. With the aid of Eqns. ( Note that v ∆G cc,gg (v) is negative, but only B 2 appears in the expression for the diffusion constant. Integrating Eqn. (78) over k along with the subsequent implementation of the WTI from Eqn. (63) at the corresponding order, leads to the expression for the eigenvalue where we have introduced a parameter a defined by This is an analogue of the well-known parameter that appears in the diffusion of light, which, being positive, renormalizes the phase velocity downwards to a lower value for a transport velocity ) where the last approximate equality is obtained using expression Eqn. (E6) for the function F defined by Eqn. (D8) that enters the integrand of Eqn.(85) as a consequence of the Within the spectral approach that we are using, Eqns. (75-80) lead to the following expression for the singular part of the intensity, Φ sing : Then, with the assistance of Eqns. (83,86) the diffusion constant can be identified as with B given by Eqn. (82). To obtain Eqn. (88), in which the diffusion constant is written as the sum of two terms, we have substituted the values for λ 2q , λ 1Ω given by Eqns. ( and ( While the second term in Eqn. (89), D ∆G 1q , can be calculated straightforwardly (See E), the calculation of the first term, D R , is more laborious. Indeed, it depends on the unknown tensor function Φ. However, it is not the complete tensor function that is needed, but an integrated form over one of its variables that, as we now show, can be expressed as a function of the mass operator tensor Σ and the kernel tensor K using the BS equation and the WTI. In our case, in order to do this we apply, inspired by the treatment of light diffusion the method that uses an auxiliary tensor function Ψ ,s (k) defined by the relation Then, from Eqns. Eqn. ( As a next step, we define a tensor angular entity Υ that is analogous to the coefficient relating transport mean free path and extinction length in the diffusion of electromagnetic waves and an integral equation for Υ follows straightforwardly from Eqns. (91-93): Then, using Eqns. ( Furthermore, guided by the definition from Eqn. (93) we can make a conjecture that tensor Υ(p, q) should be linear in q. Keeping in mind this property of Υ(p, q) we seek for the corresponding solution in the form Υ gh (p, q) = αP gh,f f (p; q) (96) Then, by multiplying Eqn. (94) with P e 1 e 1 ,g 1 h 1 (p; q)G g 1 g (p)G * hh 1 (p) from the left and integrating over the p we remain with the relation where the ratio of two integrals is the analog of the cos θ term in the diffusion of electromagnetic waves It must be noted here that α included in the general expression for the diffusion constant from Eqn. ( and consequently Therefore, D R from the Eqn.( Finally, using approximation from Eqn. (E6) for Eqn. (D5) in Eqn. (102) we can write Then, the total diffusion constant reads as and the leading term in the limit of small Im[K 2 T,L ] is Explicitly, from Eqn.(82), we have Then, using Eqns.(68, 82, 85, 104) In the low-frequency limit it reads as V. DISCUSSION There are two approximations that are central to our results: The independent scattering approximation (ISA), and the restriction on the effective wave numbers K t , L given by The ISA means that each dislocation present in the two dimensional elastic medium is characterized by a position and Burgers vector that are statistically independent random variables. This leads to expressions (60) for the mass operator and for the irreducible kernel, that are linear in the density of dislocations n, and involve the single-scattering T matrix. This T matrix has been computed to all orders in a Born approximation expansion. The inequality (108) can be satisfied at fixed dislocation density by going to low frequencies (smaller than the renormalized oscillation frequency ω 0R defined in Eq. (B13)), and at fixed frequency by going to low dislocation densities. In the important case of resonance, ω ∼ ω 0R , the restriction (108) can be satisfied with interparticle distances that are small compared to wavelength. B. Nature of the wave-dislocation interaction and its consequences for coherent wave behavior In this paper we have considered the behavior of plane elastic waves in a two dimensional elastic medium in interaction with many edge dislocations that can oscillate around an equilibrium position, with a restoring force given by the Peierls-Nabarro force. The fact that there is a natural frequency associated with the dislocations implies the possibility of resonant scattering. The equation that gives the response to an external loading are solved, and the solution replaced into the wave equation for particle velocity in the presence of dislocations, to give an overall equation for particle velocity only in the presence of a random, frequency dependent, "potential", that is of second order in the space derivatives, provided by the dislocations. First, their coherent behavior has been elucidated: there exists average transverse and longitudinal waves, whose phase velocity and attenuation have been explicitly calculated as a function of dislocation density and wave frequency. This has been done solving for the mass operator in a Dyson equation, with the mass operator calculated using an ISA, according to which it is the product of the dislocation density and the averaged single-dislocation T -matrix. The latter has been calculated to all orders in a Born approximation scheme. This part of the work follows previous calculations of Maurel et al. C. Nature of the wave-dislocation interaction and its consequences for diffusive wave behavior The remaining bulk of this work has been devoted to the study of the diffusion behavior of said waves. The reasoning that has been followed is in accordance with procedures established in other contexts, but the nature of the "potential" term introduces unique characteristics. A Bethe-Salpeter equation is written for the irreducible kernel of the twopoint field amplitude correlations. Next a Ward-Takahashi identity, needed as a link between the irreducible kernel and the mass operator, is established. This is done following the methods of Barabanenkov The obtained diffusion coefficient appears to vanish when the wave frequency coincides with the resonant frequency of the dislocations. The vanishing of the diffusion constant of electrons, treated as de Broglie waves, in the presence of randomly placed impurities was linked to their ("Anderson") localization It will be of interest to see what is the behavior of elastic waves, in three dimensions, in the presence of dislocation segments of finite length, with a resonant frequency in the THz range We have studied the properties of elastic waves in interaction with many, randomly placed, edge dislocations both in the coherent and incoherent regimes. The basic scattering mechanism has the novel feature, compared with the more usual studies of wave propagation in random media, that dislocations are dynamical objects. This leads to properties of the "potential" term in the wave equations that are wave-vector dependent, also at variance with previous examples. The present study is part of an ongoing project to explore the consequences of such an interaction for coherent and incoherent wave behavior, both as a matter of principle and in light of possible applications. We have noted in the Introduction that in the coherent, low frequency regime, these studies have led to novel tools for the non-destructive evaluation of the plastic behavior of metals and alloys. As noted in the Introduction, there is an increasing amount of experimental evidence pointing to a role played by dislocations in thermal transport, to an extent that has not been fully understood to date. From this point of view, it is important to have as complete an understanding of the elastic wave-dislocation interaction, and of its consequences, as possible. The approach we have taken in this work is to consider dislocations embedded in a continuum elastic solid, and use the tools of continuum solid mechanics. It is of interest to note that, from this point of view, dislocations are just topological line defects ("Volterra dislocations" This has the consequence that the formalism can be appplied to any solid, not necessaarily crystals, as long as they can be described through continuum mechanics. This approach has led to a renewed understanding of elastic anomalies in glasses This work has been supported by Fondecyt Grant 1191179. n( The first Born approximation is specified as: Here, we used the expression for perturbation potential of a single edge dislocation from Eqn. The second order Born approximation is given by We notice that, to get the result of Eqn.(B4) we utilized explicit expressions for the potential and the free Green function from Eqns. ( . We notice that the integral (B5 diverges due to the use of continuum mechanics: there is no intrinsic length scale associated with the elastic medium and all wavelengths, including infinitely short , are included. To regularize this situation we proceed as in The third order Born approximation is given by Proceeding in the same way as for the second order yields: Based on Eqns.(B3, B4, B9), summation of the corresponding geometrical series for t n ab ( k, k ′ ) can be easily performed with the result Given that Eqns.(23, B10, A6), we have for the mass operator where is a renormalized frequency of dislocation oscillation about its equilibrium position, and is a dimensionless constant. In arriving at (B12) we have used (B7). Here we show that Eqn. (59) holds, in the ISA, when B = 0 . That is, when the mass and irreducible vertex operators are given in terms of the t matrix by (60), and the t matrix itself is given by (B10). Consider the left-hand-side first: And now the right-hand-side: which, using (A6) is easily seen to be equal to (C4). Appendix D: Solution for f 1q (k) To find f 1q (k) we need (79). Using (81) its second term can be rewritten as Where the first equality is a consequence of the symmetry property from Eqn. (71) and application the WTI to H 1q (k, k ′′ ). The second equality is a result of substituting δ k ′′ ,k ∆G(k) by its value given by and From Eqn. (87) we have where Eqn. (E1) has been obtained using Eqns. ( In Eqn. (E1) we have to deal with the following two types of integrals Then, using Eqn. (D5) we can write . The expression for J hg T,L in Eqn. (E3) contains an ill-defined term in the integrand, proportional to F 2 T,L (ω, k), that can be regularized as follows . They show that it is possible to make the replacements T,L + Im[K 2 T,L ] 2 -→ πδ(x T,L ), (E5) . which yield the same result after integration over x T,L . Moreover, both replacements give the proper asymptotic behaviour in the low-density limit (our case) when Im , J hg = 0 ⇒ Eventually, this expression provides us with a final form for pre-WTI (G 0-) -1 (k; q, Ω)g(ω + ) -(G 0+ ) -1 (k; q, Ω)g * (ω -) Φ(k, k ′′′ ; q, Ω)+ (F9) g * (ω -) < G > -( k ′′′ ; q, Ω) -g(ω + ) < G > + ( k ′′′ ; q, Ω) ≡ 0, with notations (G 0± ) -1 ( k ± , ω ± ) = (G 0± ) -1 (k; q, Ω) (F10) The form of pre-WTI for screw dislocations presented by Eqn. (F9) is formally considered to be a scalar version of pre-WTI for edge dislocations Eqn. (54) and would have reduced to the case of pre-WTI for screw dislocations published in with The definition of remaining entities in Eqns. where a Isc is the corresponding version of a parameter. In other words, According to Eqn.(95) from Substituting Eqn. with a from Eqn. This provides us with the approximation (see Eqn.(77) in Eventually, we get for There are two specific instances of interest for this result: The first is that D = 0 when ω = ω 0 , raising the possibility of elastic wave localization by scattering from dislocations. As discussed in Section V D, however, a strict equality cannot hold because in that case the scattering problem becomes singular. But the diffusion constant does decrease as the frequency approaches the resonance frequency from below. The second is the low frequency, or long wavelength, limit. Now, there are two length scales to compare the wavelength λ = c T /ω against: the mean distance between dislocations, 1/ √ n, and the Peierls-Nabarro frequency divided by the speed of shear waves c T /ω 0 . When λ is small compared to both, use of Eqs. ( with with α = (ln(δ/ǫ)) 2 /2π 2 a dimensionless constant of order one. This is of the form l ∼ 1/nσ where σ ∝ ω 3 is a scattering cross section corresponding to Rayleigh scattering in two dimensions.