The influence of carbon multi-walled nanotubes (MWCNTs) and halloysite nanotubes (HNTs) on the physical, thermal, mechanical, and electrical properties of EVA (ethylene vinyl acetate) copolymer was investigated. EVA-based nanocomposites containing MWCNTs or HNTs, as well as hybrid nanocomposites containing both nanofillers were prepared by melt blending. Scanning electron microcopy (SEM) images revealed the presence of good dispersion of both kinds of nanotubes throughout the EVA matrix. The incorporation of nanotubes into the EVA copolymer matrix did not significantly affect the crystallization behavior of the polymer. The tensile strength of EVA-based nanocomposites increased along with the increasing CNTs (carbon nanotubes) content (increased up to approximately 40% at the loading of 8 wt.%). In turn, HNTs increased to a great extent the strain at break. Mechanical cyclic tensile tests demonstrated that nanocomposites with hybrid reinforcement exhibit interesting strengthening behavior. The synergistic effect of hybrid nanofillers on the modulus at 100% and 200% elongation was visible. Moreover, along with the increase of MWCNTs content in EVA/CNTs nanocomposites, an enhancement in electrical conductivity was observed. In recent years, polymer nanocomposites containing various nanofillers such as graphite nanoplatelets and carbon nanotubes as well as montmorillonite nanoclays have attracted enormous interest in academic and industrial fields. The unique properties of the polymer nanocomposites, such as flame retardancy, improved thermal stability, increased mechanical properties, and gas barrier properties, depend not only on the properties of nanofillers and polymer matrix but also on the interfacial contact and interactions between the nanofiller and the polymer matrix. Among the vast range of nanofillers, one of the most promising are carbon nanotubes (CNTs). They were discovered in 1991 by Sumio Iijima Another type of nanotubular structures is naturally occurring halloysite nanotubes (HNTs). They were reported for the first time in 1826 by Berthier A range of novel materials can be obtained by the simultaneous introduction of two types of nanofillers to the polymer matrix. Hybrid materials combine the properties of both fillers, and may also exhibit additional properties, because of the synergistic effects Ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA) is an important copolymer, widely used in various applications such as wire and cable insulations, shoe soles, noncorrosive layers, and component packaging. EVA has good flexibility, low cost, and good barrier properties. On the other hand, EVA has low tensile strength, thermal stability, and high flammability. All these disadvantages can be overcome by adding nanofillers to the polymer matrix. There are relatively fewer works describing the effect of HNTs' content on the mechanical and thermal properties of EVA. Suvendu Padhi et al. reported that HNTs could improve the mechanical properties and thermal stability of EVA In this work, we manufactured and compared nanocomposites based on EVA copolymer containing MWCNTs, HNTs, and the mixture of both of them (hybrid system) in mass ratio 1:1. The morphology, thermal, mechanical, and electrical properties of the manufactured nanocomposites were characterized. Ethylene vinyl acetate copolymer (EVA Elvax 40L-03, DuPont DuPont Company, Wilmington, DE, USA) containing 40 wt.% of vinyl acetate was applied as a matrix in the obtained nanocomposites. According to producer data, it has a density of 0.967 g/cm 3 and a melt flow rate of 3 g/10 min (at 190 °C and 2.16 kg). Halloysite nanotubes (HNTs) with a diameter of 30-70 nm, length of 1-3 μm, density of 2.53 g/cm 3 , the pore size of 1.26-1.34 mL/g pore volume, and surface area of 64 m 2 /g were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. Multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs, Nanocyl ® NC7000 TM ) were purchased from Nanocyl SA (Sambreville, Belgium). The nanotubes had an average diameter of 9.5 nm and a length of 1.5 μm, and the specific surface area of 250-300 m 2 /g, the density of 1.75 g/cm 3 , volume resistivity of 10 -4 Ω•cm, according to the supplier's specification. The nanocomposites based on EVA containing MWCNTs, HNTs, or the hybrid system of MWCNTs/HNTs (1:1) were prepared by melt blending using a counter-rotating, tight intermeshing twin-screw extruder: Leistritz Laborextruder LSM30 (L/D = 23, D = 34 mm). The nanofillers and EVA granulate were fed separately using two gravimetric feeders into their feed section. The compounding was carried out at temperatures ranging from 50 to 115 °C from the feed section to the nozzle and at 40 rpm. The extruded strands of compounds were then cooled in a water tank and subsequently pelletized. Three series of nanocomposites with different content of nanofillers were prepared: nanocomposites containing MWCNTs with filler content of 2, 4, 6, and 8 wt.%, nanocomposites containing HNTs with filler content of 2, 4, 6, and 8 wt.%, and hybrid nanocomposites containing both MWCNTs and HNTs (at mass ratio 1:1) with the total fillers' content of 4 and 6 wt.%. EVA compounds with MWCNTs, so as with the mixture of MWCNTs with HNTs, were manufactured in one-step compounding. The compounds with HNTs in turn were manufactured in two-step compounding due to hindrance in the feeding of small portions of HNT nanoclay, which has high bulk density. For this purpose, the masterbatch of EVA/HNT 68/32 wt.% was manufactured and was subsequently diluted with EVA to the set filing ratios in the second compounding process. The set and obtained filling ratios of manufactured EVA compounds, as well as their corresponding volumetric filling ratios are presented in Table The morphology of the nanocomposites was analyzed using a scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, Hitachi SU-70, Naka, Japan). Before SEM analysis, the samples were cryofractured in liquid nitrogen and then coated with a thin film of palladium-gold alloy, using thermal evaporation PVD (physical vapor deposition) method to provide electric conductivity. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed on a 2100 F Jeol microscope. Prior to the analysis, the samples were cooled down in liquid nitrogen and cut into thin-layered pieces. The X-ray Diffraction (XRD) analysis of the EVA-based nanocomposites was conducted with the use of a Panalytical X'Pert diffractometer (Malvern Panalytical, Malvern, UK) operating at 40 V and 40 mA with CuKα radiation (λ = 0.154 nm). The samples were scanned from 2θ = 4° to 70° with a step of 0.02°. The Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) spectra of the EVA-based nanocomposites were recorded on a Tensor-27 spectrophotometer (Brucker, Ettlingen, Germany), in the range of 4000-400 cm -1 . Measurements were carried out using the attenuated total reflectance (ATR) technique. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements of the obtained nanocomposites were conducted on a Mettler Toledo DSC1 instrument (Mettler Toledo GmbH, Greifensee, Switzerland). The samples were heated up/cooled down under nitrogen flow with a heating rate of 10 °C/min in the temperature range -75 °C to 175 °C. The crystallinity degree (Xc) of the investigated materials was calculated using the following equation: where: ΔH & ( (= 293 J/g) is the enthalpy change of melting for a fully crystalline PE The melt flow rate (MFR) was measured on a melt indexer (CEAST, Pianezza TO, Italy) at a temperature of 190 °C and under 2.19 kg load, according to ISO 1133 specification. Hardness was measured using the Shore D apparatus (Zwick GmbH, Ulm, Germany) after 15 s of loading, according to a standard ISO 868. Ten measurements were conducted and then the results were averaged to obtain a mean value. The tensile properties of the prepared nanocomposites were measured using Autograph AG-X plus universal testing machine (Shimadzu, Duisburg, Germany) equipped with a 1 kN Shimadzu load cell, a non-contact optical extensometer, and the TRAPEZIUM X computer software (version 1.00 provided by Shimadzu, Duisburg, Germany). Tests were performed at room temperature, with a strain rate of 250 mm/min to break. Tensile strength and elongation at break of the nanocomposites were determined. The reported values are the average values of ten measurements. Cyclic tensile measurements were performed using the same equipment, with a testing speed of 100 mm/min. The samples were stretched until the specified strain value was reached and then the tensile force was released to the zero. This procedure was repeated, with increasing deformation value, until the sample broke. The following strains were established for our test: 5%, 15%, 25% 50% 100%, 200%, and 400%. The electrical conductivity of the obtained nanocomposites was evaluated by measurements of resistivity using Electrometer 6517A (Keithley Instruments, Inc., Germering, Germany) device together with a set of Keithley 8009. The measurements were performed accordingly to the standard PN-88/E-04405. The quality of the dispersion of filler in a matrix is a crucial factor that determines the final properties of composite material. The nanofillers dispersion was examined through scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The representative micrographs of the nanocomposites containing 4 and 6 wt.% of nanofillers are shown in Figure The XRD patterns of the pure HNTs, MWCNTs powder, and EVA nanocomposites with their different loading are shown in The DSC thermograms for EVA/CNT nanocomposites recorded during first (dashed line) and second heating, as well as cooling, as plotted in Figure Physical properties of EVA-based nanocomposites such as density, hardness, melt flow rate, and some mechanical properties are submitted in Table Since MWCNTs are characterized by high Young's modulus (~1 TPa) and aspect ratio their introduction in the EVA matrix increases the composite stiffness, which can be observed in Figure The polymer crystal phase transformation or polymer chain intercalation leads usually to such effect and has been recorded for some polymer/nanoparticle systems if the good distribution of nanoparticles in the polymer chains is provided, which can be obtained only by good compatibility between the matrix and particles The extent degradation of the EVA matrix upon processing may be ruled out as this would also decrease strains to break of manufactured composites. The addition of HNT's increases also the flow of EVA, which was reflected indirectly in the results MFR presented in Table To investigate the elastic deformability and reversibility of the obtained nanocomposites, cyclic tensile tests were carried out. Results are presented in Figures MWCNTs possess very high intrinsic electrical conductivity. Even their small content can significantly improve the electrical conductivity of insulating polymers. Figure Nanocomposites based on EVA copolymer containing MWCNTs, HNTs, or both types of nanotubes were prepared by melt blending. One found that relatively good nanotubes distribution in polymer matrix were obtained. In the case of EVA/CNT nanocomposites at high load (6-8 wt.%), the MWCNTs form the highly exfoliated network structure in EVA matrix, in which individual nanotubes and entangled CNTs in agglomerates are present. DSC studies showed that the addition of nanofillers caused no significant effect on the melting temperature and the degree of crystallinity. However, glass transition temperature slightly increased. At high temperatures (T50%), nanocomposites showed better thermo-oxidative stability than the neat EVA copolymer. A slight improvement in thermal stability was also noted. Moreover, the addition of CNTs has significantly improved the mechanical properties of EVA copolymer. Nanocomposites were stiffer and their tensile strength increased by about 40%. In turn, HNTs give an opposite effect in terms of composite stiffness and tensile strength. They decrease the strength of EVA. However, the strain to break increases by over 70% when HNTs are added. Furthermore, the cyclic tensile tests demonstrated that nanocomposites with HNTs have slightly better recovery properties, than pure EVA. Interestingly, in cyclic tensile tests significant improvement of tensile strength for hybrid nanocomposites was visible. Moreover, the extraordinary strengthening caused by synergism of the used nanotube fillers did not diminish the strain rates achieved by the hybrids. Nanocomposites with CNTs were found to be electrically conducting. For nanocomposites containing 8 wt.% of CNTs, an increase in electrical conductivity for about six orders of magnitude in comparison to the neat copolymer was observed.