We report a realization of three-dimensional (3D) electromagnetic void space. Despite occupying a finite volume of space, such a medium is optically equivalent to an infinitesimal point where electromagnetic waves experience no phase accumulation. The 3D void space is realized by constructing all-dielectric 3D photonic crystals such that the effective permittivity and permeability vanish simultaneously, forming a six-fold Dirac-like point with Dirac-like linear dispersions at the center of the Brillouin Zone. We demonstrate, both theoretically and experimentally, that such a 3D void space exhibits unique properties and rich functionalities absent in any other electromagnetic media, such as boundary-control transmission switching and 3D perfect wave-steering mechanisms. Especially, contrary to the photonic "doping" effect in its two-dimensional counterpart, the 3D void space exhibits an amazing property of "impurity-immunity". Our work paves a road towards the realization of 3D void space where electromagnetic waves can be manipulated in unprecedented ways. Transformation optics (TO) has provided a coordinate-transformation theory to freely manipulate waves in space and time The realization of such a void space is closely related to zero index media (ZIM). In the past decade, prominent achievements have been made in realizing electromagnetic ZIM with zero refractive index In this work, by using all-dielectric 3D photonic crystals (PCs) with effective double-zero indices, we demonstrate the realization of 3D electromagnetic void space. The PC is composed of a cubic lattice of dielectric meshes. When the dielectric meshes are of a certain filling ratio, the electric and magnetic dipolar states are accidentally degenerate at the Brillouin zone center, rendering a six-fold degeneracy. In the vicinity of this six-fold degenerate point, four Dirac-like linearly dispersive bands and two flat bands are formed in all directions, which is a signature of all the components of the effective permittivity and permeability simultaneously crossing zero at that frequency. The PC can thus be effectively regarded as a 3D electromagnetic void space. By fabricating such a PC at microwave frequency, we experimentally demonstrated some anomalous properties of the 3D electromagnetic void space. For instance, the profound influence of the boundary conditions of the 3D electromagnetic void space is revealed, which bestows boundary-control transmission switching and 3D perfect wave-steering mechanisms. More interestingly, we find the transmission through the space is "immune" to any impurities completely embedded in such a 3D void space, which is contrary to the photonic "doping" effect previously observed in 2D ZIM. These unusual properties, which are absent in any other electromagnetic media, clearly demonstrate that the 3D electromagnetic void space can provide a valuable and unique platform for unprecedented wave functional devices. formed by expanding a point to a cube via TO. First, we consider the void space bounded by two pair of plates which are, respectively, made of perfect electric conductor (PEC) and perfect magnetic conductor (PMC) in orthogonal directions, as shown in Fig. (see Supplementary Materials), which depends on the magnetic flux through a closed curve A1 and the electric flux through a closed curve A2, as shown in Fig. Such a contrast demonstrates that the ascension of dimensionality could bring fundamentally new physics. More examples of the impurity-immunity effect are demonstrated in Supplementary Materials. Although the transmission is almost "immune" to embedded impurities, it is very sensitive to the boundary conditions. As shown in Fig. Here are some additional comments. The unique new physics of 3D electromagnetic void space, such as the impurity-immunity effect, are not only essentially different from the 2D electromagnetic DZM, but also essentially different from 2D or 3D acoustic DZM. The detailed discussions and derivations about the transmission through electromagnetic/acoustic DZM with impurities in 2D and 3D space are in Supplementary Materials Note 2-5. The unit cell of the 3D PC that functions as a 3D electromagnetic void space is illustrated in Fig. where where , , , , i j k x y z  Given that sin ii  when i approaches zero, and The dispersion near the Dirac-like point can be obtained as Overall, the properties of the 3D electromagnetic void space are well maintained near the Dirac-like point at the Brillouin zone center. As mentioned earlier, the controllability of the boundaries on transmission is one of the unique physics of the 3D void space. This leads to boundary-control transmission switching and 3D perfect wavesteering mechanisms that are absent in any other electromagnetic media. In the following, a proof-ofprinciple experimental verification is performed. The experimental setup is illustrated in Figs. The 3D electromagnetic void space also enables 3D wave steering to other directions with high efficiency. As illustrated in Fig. Besides the amazing phenomenon demonstrated above, one fundamental physical difference Total transmission is guaranteed, regardless of the geometries, material properties and size of the finitesized impurities. The details of derivations can be found in Supplementary Materials. Such an impurityimmunity effect remains experimentally unexplored due to the lack of 3D electromagnetic DZM. In what follows, we shall demonstrate this counter-intuitive phenomenon. The experimental setups for measuring the forward scattering effect of a metamaterial scatterer without and with the PC are shown in Figs. As demonstrated above, the 3D electromagnetic void space exhibits unique physical properties that do not exist in any other electromagnetic media. In normal electromagnetic media, the wavelength is always finite and the influence of the boundary conditions on transmission is reduced to a negligible level at places far enough away from the boundary. In a 3D void space, the wavelength approaches infinity, therefore its boundary conditions always have a dramatic influence on the transmission. For the same reason, when the impurities are completely embedded in the void space, the scattering phenomenon is reduced significantly when the wavelength approaches infinity, enabling the impurityimmunity effect. For a random distribution of impurities, percolation-like phenomenon of light, i.e. squeezing through the gaps between impurities like water, are anticipated The design principle of the void space via the PC is general. By adjusting the permittivity of the dielectric meshes and the filling ratio accordingly, the 3D electromagnetic void space with unit cells at a deep sub-wavelength scale can be fabricated in principle. In a 3D PC with h O group symmetry, the accidental degeneracy between the electric and magnetic dipolar states is necessary for the creation of the Dirac-like conical dispersions with additional flat dispersions. The effective permittivity and permeability of the PC simultaneously cross zero at the frequency of Dirac-like point. The 3D electromagnetic void provides a platform for abundant physics and novel phenomena, such as the boundary-control transmission switching, 3D perfect wave steering, and impurity-immunity effect for arbitrary impurities. Our demonstration of the above unique physical properties not only proves the validity of the 3D electromagnetic void space, but also paves a road for unprecedented wave-functional devices. Fig. 