A superconductor with px + ipy order has long fascinated the physics community because vortex defects in such a system host Majorana zero modes. Here we propose a simple construction of a chiral superconductor using proximitized quantum wires and twist angle engineering as basic ingredients. We show that a weakly coupled parallel array of such wires forms a gapless p-wave superconductor. Two such arrays, stacked on top of one another with a twist angle close to 90 • , spontaneously break time reversal symmetry and form a robust, fully gapped px + ipy superconductor. We map out topological phases of the proposed system, demonstrate existence of Majorana zero modes in vortices, and discuss prospects for experimental realization. Introduction.-A key property of Majorana fermions in condensed matter systems, which makes them much sought after, is their non-trivial exchange statistics. This forms the basis for proposals to achieve fault tolerant topological quantum computation Prominent examples of systems believed to host MZMs include proximitized semiconductor quantum wires In this Letter, we show that chiral p x + ip y superconductivity can be actualized using proximitized semiconductor nanowires as building blocks. Such quantum nanowires have been extensively studied over the past decade and are known to behave as 1D p-wave superconductors Here α, β, γ and are real phenomenological parameters arXiv:2012.03986v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 7 Dec 2020 t 0 < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " h g V J P q P n 7 x + e 4 Q V e r S f r z X q 3 P u a t B S u f O Y Q / s D 5 / A E j a l i 0 = < / l a t e x i t > t < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " Z q q z m c FIG. that encode physical information of microscopic origin and a = 1, 2 labels the layers. For simplicity, we focus on the case of spatially uniform superconducting (SC) order and only include terms that do not involve gradients. Without loss of generality, the two layers can be assumed to be identical, in which case the order parameter amplitudes can be denoted by η = η and η 2 = ηe iφ , where φ is the SC phase difference. The free energy then becomes where F 0 is independent of φ. For > 0, free energy minima occur when φ min = ±π/2, which indicates a time reversal symmetry breaking p x ±ip y order. We next discuss microscopic models that realize this phenomenology. Microscopic models.-A 2D p-wave superconductor can be engineered using an array of proximitized semiconductor quantum wires. We demonstrate this using a simple model with each wire represented as a Kitaev chain In Supplementary Material, we analyze a more realistic model which includes spin-orbit coupling and the Zeeman field effect. Both models show phenomenology outlined above. A Kitaev chain is characterized by an inter-site tunneling amplitude t, a nearest neighbor pairing field ∆ and an on-site chemical potential μ. Consider chains that are stacked next to each other, parallel to the x axis. If they are coupled via an inter-wire tunneling amplitude t , one obtains a square lattice as shown in Fig. Similarly, one can imagine constructing another monolayer by stacking wires parallel to y axis to produce a p y superconductor. This layer may be aligned and stacked atop the first layer as shown in Fig. where δ is a direction parallel to the individual wires in layer a, while δ is the perpendicular direction. Henceforth, we will work in units where t = 1. An infinite periodic system can be described by defining a four-component Nambu spinor Ψ k = (c k1 , c † -k1 , c k2 , c † -k2 ) T , where the c † ka creates a fermion with momentum k in layer a. In this notation, we have and E 0 = k (ξ k1 + ξ k2 ). Therein, While the physical time reversal symmetry T that reverses the spin of the electron is broken in quantum wires due to the applied magnetic field B, the Kitaev chain model where Pauli matrices τ α act in the Nambu space. This is in addition to the charge conjugation symmetry K generated by τ x h * k τ x = -h -k . Formation of the p x ± ip y state in the bilayer structure is marked by a spontaneous breaking of this residual time reversal T . A diagonalization of (4) produces two pairs of bands ±E 1,2 k and the associated Bloch eigenstates |ψ 1,2 k . The ground state energy can now be minimized with respect to the phase difference φ between the order parameters of the two layers. We find that two degenerate minima exist at φ min = ±π/2 for the entire range of system parameters considered, in accordance with the GL theory with positive. In the case where the spectrum is gapped, one can characterize the topology of the bulk bands using the Chern number C. This can be conveniently calculated from the Bloch eigenstates using the gauge-invariant formulation of the Berry curvature given in Ref. We observe that the model shows five distinct phases with C ranging from -2 to +2. The origin of each of these phases can be attributed to the nature of the occupied bands in the normal state, which can be determined from the Fermi surface (FS). Starting on the electron doped side to the extreme left in the phase diagram Fig. Majorana zero mode in a vortex.-In addition to protected edge states, a p x ± ip y superconductor is expected to host a single Majorana zero mode in the core of an Abrikosov vortex To test these conjectures we solved the problem defined by the Hamiltonian (3) on a square domain with L × L sites, open boundary conditions and a single vortex placed at the origin. The vortex is encoded by attaching a position dependent phase factor to the SC pair field according to Here ∆ ij is the order parameter living on the bond connecting lattice sites r i and r j , while θ ij denotes the angle between the line connecting the midpoint of this bond to the vortex center and the x axis. Integer n denotes the vorticity. Analytical solution to the simple model For p xip y the situation is reversed. Fig. Experimental prospects.-During the time following the original discovery of Majorana zero modes in proximitized InSb wires One key ingredient is the recently demonstrated ability Conclusions.-In the absence of naturally occurring chiral p x ± ip y superconductors, our proposed construction outlines a new path towards artificially engineered structures that behave effectively as such. The Fu-Kane model Our proposed architecture builds upon quantum wires which themselves host MZMs. In the basic version of such wires In this section we construct a more realistic model of the twisted bilayer structure that takes full account of the electron spin degree of freedom. We use the now standard description of proximitized semiconductor nanowires as a 1D electron gas with strong spin orbit coupling (SOC) and induced superconducting order In the normal state, each standalone layer (labelled by a = 1, 2) that is composed of weakly coupled parallel nanowires, can be described by the Hamiltonian where ξ ka is the electronic dispersion as in Eq. ( For simplicity, we only retain the σ z terms in the above expression since σ x and σ y can be absorbed into the Zeeman energy h B = B x σ x + B y σ y . The σ z term is crucial because it anti-commutes with h B , as in the 1D nanowire model. To obtain a 2D p-wave superconductor, we introduce s-wave superconductivity in each layer and work with the Nambu spinor Ψ a = (c k↑a , c k↓a , c † -k↓a , -c † -k↑a ) T , where c kσa annihilates a fermion with momentum k and spin σ in layer a. In this basis, the BdG Hamiltonian of a single layer is where ∆ a = (∆ a + i∆ a ), which should be viewed as a 2 × 2 matrix in spin space, denotes the singlet pairing SC order parameter in layer a. In the simplest case where SOC is only along the wires, we have E 1 = (0, E y , 0) and E 2 = (E x , 0, 0) and the Hamiltonians for the two layers are where (τ x , τ y , τ z ) are Pauli matrices in Nambu space and the linear dependence of SOC has been regularized with the substitution k x(y) → sin k x(y) . This is justified because we intend to capture the physics near k = 0 in each wire. The two layers may now be coupled via nearestneighbor interlayer tunnelings of the form which results in a 8 × 8 BdG Hamiltonian. We find that this more realistic model supports qualitatively similar phenomenology as the spinless fermion model discussed in the main text. The parameter space for the present model is much larger, so in the following we only highlight the most interesting phase characterized by Chern number C = 1. Fig. We also consider a more general case (see Fig. 