Crack propagation in viscoelastic materials has been understood with the use of Barenblatt cohesive models by many authors since the 1970's. In polymers and metal creep, it is customary to assume that the relaxed modulus is zero, so that we have typically a crack speed which depends on some power of the stress intensity factor. Generally, when there is a finite relaxed modulus, it has been shown that the toughness increases between a value at very low speeds at a threshold toughness G 0 , to a very fast fracture value at G ∞ , and that the enhancement factor in infinite systems (where the classical singular fracture mechanics field dominates) simply corresponds to the ratio of instantaneous to relaxed elastic moduli. Here, we apply a cohesive model for the case of a bimaterial interface between an elastic and a viscoelastic material, assuming the crack remains at the interface, and neglect the details of bimaterial singularity. For the case of a Maxwell material at low speeds the crack propagates with a speed which depends only on viscosity, and the fourth power of the stress intensity factor, and not on the elastic moduli of either material. For the Schapery type of power law material with no relaxation modulus, there are more general results. For arbitrary viscoelastic materials with nonzero relaxed modulus, we show that the maximum toughness enhancement will be reduced with respect to that of a classical viscoelastic crack in homogeneous material. Viscoelasticity, crack propagation, cohesive models, bimaterial interfaces The problem of viscoelastic crack growth is of fundamental importance see the recent review of where V is velocity of peeling of the contact/crack line, a characteristic velocity was defined as V 0 = (ka n T ) -1 and k, n are (supposedly) constants of the material, with 0 < n < 1 where a T is the WLF factor to translate results at various temperatures T (Williams, From a more fundamental perspective, initially a paradox was identified by Both schools suggest results qualitatively of the form (1) and introduce the cohesive strength of the material σ c and therefore introduce the length scale where E 0 is the relaxed modulus (the modulus at zero frequency) and σ c is the cohesive stress. Also, all these models suggest looking at the remote stress intensity factor K as applied in remote regions as giving an effective toughness , where E 0 is expected in remote regions, and hence obtain the maximum toughness enhancement as For many polymeric or rubbery materials this ratio is very large possibly an increase of 3 or 4 orders of magnitude. Here, G (∞) stands for G (V → ∞) and E ∞ is instantaneous modulus or the modulus observed at infinite frequency of oscillatory loading. Remark however that in much of the literature on metal creep or polymers like that reviewed in where m depends on details of the rheology. Notice that the Gent-Schultz kind of result Eq. ( Therefore, as clearly explained by Wang et al ( However, analysis of the case of a bimaterial crack between an elastic material and a viscoelastic one has not been attempted before to the best of our knowledge, at least not from a simplified perspective as we shall provide here. This is surprising, since the bimaterial crack problem has received much attention for the elastic-elastic case (there are at least two papers with more than 1000 citations, for example, If we consider a bimaterial interface with a semi-infinite crack, see Fig. where G e is the ERR in the elastic material, and G v the ERR in the viscoelastic material. We consider the classical Schapery-Greenwood Dugdale cohesive model, and to address a semi-infinite crack, so we assume the conditions for K-field dominance, or Small Scale Cohesion (SSC) to be satisfied. In this case we have simply where we consider plane stress for simplicity. For the viscoelastic material, we have introduced an effective compliance C ef f given by where C (t) is the viscoelastic compliance, relating the instantaneous strain dt dτ to the history of stress σ (t) in uniaxial conditions. The function f (λ) is the opening (stretch) in the cohesive zone from the Dugdale model, given approximately in a bimaterial by and the cohesive stress σ c cancels the singularity (in the Dugdale form where the cohesive strength is constant and uniform in the cohesive region). Under SSC (small scale cohesion), the length of this cohesive zone is approximately b = π 8 In the appendices we justify the use of the Mode I stress intensity factor instead of the complex stress intensity factor in the rigorous treatment of bimaterial interfaces, and hence the approximations introduced in the last 3 equations. We are not interested in giving a full solution for a general viscoelastic material, as we shall discuss qualitative features later. A convenient case is however that of a Maxwell material which has no relaxed modulus. In this case where μ is viscosity. A full simple analytical solution is possible then by performing the integration (7) Hence, substituting in the energy balance equation ( and using ( where we define an combined modulus 1 This ( Obviously, the critical condition of fast fracture is at Vice versa, for very low K 2 I << 2G 0 E * , we can write from ( a simple scaling which does not depend on E * , and so on neither of the elastic moduli of the elastic and viscoelastic materials (but just on the viscosity). This is a typical results, when the viscous fracture-length scale is small and the stress field has the classical K-field dominance, see eqt.25 of More general exponents in the power law could be found if one uses a more general rheology for the material (but still assuming E 0 = 0) i.e. with more than one relaxation times or a continuous spectrum of relaxation times, like in much of the literature on metal creep or polymers as that reviewed by where d ≃ 1/3 is a corrective factor which depends very weakly on n ∈ [0, 1] (in our previous Maxwell model we showed it should be equal exactly to 1/3), and C 1 is a generalized viscosity with dimensions [ s -n M P a ]. For our bimaterial interface, repeating the analysis we obtain G = 1 2 which at low load leads to a scaling with The last two equations generalize Schapery's result to a crack on a bimaterial interface using his assumed generalized rheology. Notice that in the power law regime the role of elastic modulus disappears again for this class of materials. Notice also that fast fracture occurs at the same level of stress intensity factor, independently of n, as we expect. We can rewrite (21) by taking the dimensionless factor Fig. Our Maxwell material analytical result is clearly instructive, and the generalization to the Schapery creep compliance form has proved quite useful in the engineering literature, see and so we now define another combined modulus 1 Comparing this with ( and since we expect that for polymers or rubbery materials E∞ E 0 >> 1 (which is why we get the toughness amplification) Thus the limiting toughness enhancement is less than that for the crack with the viscoelastic material on both faces. Fig. We have obtained a simple closed form solution for the subcritical propagation of a crack at the interface between an elastic and a terial, in the of Maxwell material, or for the more creep compliance rheology of Schapery. We find that the "elastic" fracture occurs for K 2 Ic,∞ = 2G 0 E * ∞ where the "equivalent" modulus is the inverse of the sum of the compliances of the elastic material and the (instantaneous value) of the viscoelastic material. The subcritical crack propagation for the Maxwell material depends only on the viscosity of the material, and not on any of the elastic moduli, and scales at low speeds with the fourth order of the stress intensity factor. For the Schapery creep compliance form, the results are quite similar, except there is a more general power law dependence. We also argue that for any more general viscoelastic material constitutive equation, having a relaxed modulus E 0 > 0, the toughness amplification would be less than that expected for the viscoelastic semi-infinite crack in a homogeneous material. Wang, H., Lu, W., The complex stress intensity factor due to a set of point forces applied to the surface of the crack at x 1 = x1 is where the x 1 -axis is the bimaterial interface, the crack occupies x 1 ≤ l, where l = b will be the cohesive zone size, and ε is the usual bimaterial index where β is Dundurs' bimaterial constant, i = √ -1, R represents a pair of horizontal, equal and opposite point forces and Q pair of equal and opposite vertical forces. These forces are defined per unit thickness. The stress ahead of the crack on the x 1 -axis is The stresses in the cohesive zone are uniform and such that σ 22 + iσ 12 = σ c + iσ s , where σ c is the cohesive stress and σ s is a shear stress arising as a reaction to constraints on shearing motion relative to the interface. The net stress intensity factor is zero, so where the cohesive zone occupies 0 ≤ x 1 ≤ b, and K A is the far-field applied stress intensity factor. This integrates to give π We represent the cohesive zone σ c + = Σe (33) the applied stress intensity factor as and note that b -iε = e -iεlnb (35) As a result, we find that and Note that Eq. (37,39) must be solved simultaneously, probably by iteration. However, for possible material combinations that exclude auxetics ε ≪ 1 where K A is the mode I stress intensity factor in the far-field and we have assumed pure Mode I far-field loading. Now, return to the point force solution Eq.( The complex conjugate of K is The resulting energy release rate is where, in plane strain, and with E i being Young's moduli and ν i Poisson The subscript 1 indicates the material in x 2 ≥ 0 and the 2 indicates the material in x 2 ≤ 0. Note that both sides of Eq. ( and Furthermore, using the following generalized Castigliano's theorem and where Ψ is the total potential energy, sum of the strain energy and the potential energy of the applied loads. Notice that (48,49) reduce to the classical Castigliano's theorem for a linear system, in which Ψ = -U where U is strain energy. As a result, as noted by and Hence, with P 1 = P 2 = 0, these lead to ∂δ 1 ) where We convert Eq. ( and sinζ ≃ εln l-x 1 l-x 1 . Using this, we deduce that the numerator in the integrand will only have a small imaginary part and the real part will be close to unity, namely Hence, With ε small, we retain only the first term not depending on ε 2 , and integrate to obtain Now introduce x = b -x1 as the magnitude of the distance from the tip of the cohesive zone. The result above then becomes Based on the same deductions, the applied stress intensity factor causes a cohesive zone stretch given approximately by where eqt.39 has been used to eliminate K A in favour of b. The total cohesive zone stretch is given by Eq. ( as assumed for our calculations (8). In retaining the second order term, (62) Note that c 1 gives the contribution due to the upper material and c 2 that of the lower material. Fig. The viscoelastic constitutive law is given by where ε ij is the strain, t is time, C ijkl (t) is the viscoelastic compliance and σ kl is the stress. Within a homogeneous material, Eq. ( where C -1 klmn (0) is the tensor of instantaneous elastic moduli and ε el mn (τ ) is the elastic strain at the current stress. We can integrate this with respect to position in the homogeneous material to obtain where C (tτ ) is an appropriate measure of the viscoelastic compliance and C (0) is the equivalent elastic compliance. Following where G 1 is the shear modulus of material 1, λ = x/b, with an equivalent result for δ 2 , the contribution from material 2 in the lower half plane. In Eq.66, x is measured from the tip of the cohesive zone where δ el 1 = 0 and x = b at the tip of the crack where the cohesive zone will break. Thus, the length of the cohesive zone is b and we have, as an approximation, b = π 8 where K A is the applied Mode I stress intensity factor, used as an approximation of the complex stress intensity factor for a bimaterial crack, and σ c is the cohesive stress. We define the viscoelastic compliance by where γ is shear strain and σ s is shear stress. Therefore, C 1 (0) = 1/G 1 and thus the viscoelastic contribution of material 1 to the cohesive zone stretch is Now consider a crack growing on the bimaterial interface, taken to be the x 1 -axis. The crack is growing at a rate V such that its tip, where the cohesive zone breaks, is at x 1 = V t and the tip of the cohesive zone is at We consider steady state growth, with K A and b both constant, so that As a result, Eq. ( To obtain the crack tip stretch due to material 1 we set x 1 = V t so that where the lower limit on the integration arises as that is the time material point that is the crack tip at time t entered the cohesive zone. We note that Thus, we can write enabling a change of the integration variable so that Eq. ( where, as above, and thus df (λ) The equivalent result for material 2 is Note that for a Maxwell material where μ is the viscosity. Consequently, It follows that the crack tip stretch for a Maxwell bimaterial crack where the materials are incompressible is Obviously we could add the elastic halfplane compliance in the C (t) and C ef f function, and then remove the elastic contribution to G, and the results would not change.