In recent years, hematite's potential as a photoanode material for solar hydrogen production has ignited a renewed interest in its physical and interfacial properties, which continues to be an active field of research. Research on hematite photoanodes provides new insights on the correlations between electronic structure, transport properties, excited state dynamics and charge transfer phenomena, and expands our knowledge on solar cell materials into correlated electron systems. This research news article presents a snapshot of selected theoretical and experimental developments linking the electronic structure to the photoelectrochemical performance, with particular focus on optoelectronic properties and charge carrier dynamics. Hydrogen extracted from water, with the help of sunlight, can be a renewable, non-polluting fuel. Much is still unknown about hematite photoanodes, especially with regards to the relationship between the electronic structure, excited state dynamics and photoelectrochemical performance. The complexity of the electronic structure arises from the strong electron correlation in this material as a result of its crystal structure and composition. Hematite possesses a corundum crystal structure and may be visualized as a hexagonally close packed array of O atoms with Fe atoms in 2/3 of the octahedral sites leading to a crystal field splitting of Fe 3d orbitals into the t2g and eg states. A consequence of the existing open shell Fe 3d orbitals in hematite is the appearance of spin ordering, which may have an impact on charge carrier dynamics as found for other systems where there is spin-orbit coupling and associated selection rules for charge transport. Charge transport in hematite is often described using the small polaron model The ability to transport and extract photogenerated charge carriers under illumination is essential for the performance of hematite photoanodes. The incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE) links the illumination provided by the solar spectrum with the generated photocurrent as a function of wavelength. A common trend observed in many IPCE measurements of hematite photoanodes is that the IPCE spectrum generally does not trace the absorbance spectrum, especially at higher wavelengths as shown in Figure The absorption bands in hematite, originating from electronic transitions involving the Fe 3+ 3d orbitals, determine the nature of the excited charges. Four types of transitions have been considered to occur in hematite as depicted in Figure The roles of these various excitations in the absorption spectrum and photocurrent of hematite are still under debate. Over the years, numerous assignments have been given to features in the optical spectra on the basis of the aforementioned optical transitions, without a clear consensus. Insight into the charge carrier dynamics in hematite was obtained from transient measurements in the excited state immediately after illumination (pump probe measurements). Early transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS) measurements on epitaxial thin films and bulk single crystals attributed a fast 300 fs time constant to relaxation of hot electrons to the conduction band edge followed by recombination with holes and trapping in mid-gap states within ~3 ps. Beyond the charge carrier dynamics in the bulk, processes which govern interfacial charge transfer at the surface have been the focus of much study. Surface modifications have been used to reduce the overpotential and explore the effect of different surface states on water photo-oxidation. Annealing treatments and overlayers were found to give rise to cathodic shift of the photocurrent onset potential by few hundred mV. The correlated nature of hematite affects charge carrier generation and recombination, charge transport, and interfacial charge transfer, which have been shown to be generally complex, with multiple processes, timescales, or steps. Reports using different techniques to study these processes have often yielded similar observations of energies and timescales. While much progress has been made in the analysis of these observations, consensus of the specific interpretations and assignments to different features have yet to be established. Establishing a clear picture of the charge carrier dynamics will require multiple experimental techniques to bridge different timescales. Links should be established between ultrafast processes investigated by pump-probe methods such as TAS to slower processes occurring under longer timescales, such as those investigated by impedance spectroscopy and the related "distribution of relaxation times" analysis. One of the major issues related to the light absorption process are the ineffective optical transitions, which do not yield mobile charge carriers that contribute to the photocurrent. Future work would benefit from clearer understanding of what governs the wavelength dependent response of hematite photoanodes, focusing not only on the proximity of the absorption close to the surface, but also on the proportion of effective optical excitations which contribute towards generation of mobile charge carriers vs. ineffective excitations to localized states. One promising direction includes the use of doping to improve the IPCE in spectral regions where LF transitions dominate the optical response. Understanding of the surface water oxidation reaction has advanced significantly through DFT+U calculations. While much work is focused on overlayers and co-catalysts, modification of the back contact or insertion of underlayers has also yielded significant performance enhancements. 