A recent experiment reported two new non-centrosymmetric superconductors NbIr2B2 and TaIr2B2 with respective superconducting transition temperatures of 7.2 K and 5.2 K and further suggested their superconductivity to be unconventional [K. Górnicka et al., Adv. Funct. Mater. 2007960 (2020)]. Here, based on first-principles calculations and symmetry analysis, we propose that T Ir2B2 (T =Nb, Ta) are topological Weyl metals in the normal state. In the absence of spinorbit coupling (SOC), we find that NbIr2B2 has 12 Weyl points, and TaIr2B2 has 4 Weyl points, i.e. the minimum number under time-reversal symmetry; meanwhile, both of them have a nodal net composed of three nodal lines. In the presence of SOC, a nodal loop on the mirror plane evolves into two hourglass Weyl rings, along with the Weyl points, which are dictated by the nonsymmorphic glide mirror symmetry. Besides the rings, NbIr2B2 and TaIr2B2 have 16 and 20 pairs of Weyl points, respectively. The surface Fermi arcs are explicitly demonstrated. On the (110) surface of TaIr2B2, we find extremely long surface Fermi arcs (∼0.6 Å-1 ) located 1.4 meV below the Fermi level, which should be readily probed in experiment. Combined with the intrinsic superconductivity and the nontrivial bulk Fermi surfaces, T Ir2B2 may thus provide a very promising platform to explore the three-dimensional topological superconductivity. Topological semimetals (TSMs) have stimulated great interest in the fields of condensed matter physics and materials science in the last decade The coexistence of nontrivial topological properties and superconductivity in a material provides an opportunity to realize topological superconductivity and Majorana zero modes In a recent experiment, two new non-centrosymmetric materials NbIr 2 B 2 and TaIr 2 B 2 were synthesized and were found to be superconducting with T c of 7.2 K and 5.2 K, respectively The electronic structures of T Ir 2 B 2 (T =Nb, Ta) were studied with the density functional theory (DFT) calculations by using the projector augmented wave (PAW) method As shown in Figs. The electronic band structures of NbIr Here, we clarify the protection mechanisms of the nodal lines discussed above. First, for the hybrid node loop, it is located in the k y = 0 plane, which is the invariant subspace of the M y symmetry. Hence, each Bloch state |Φ n in the plane can be selected as an eigenstate where T 001 : (x, y, z) → (x, y, z + c) is the lattice translation operator. Hence the eigenvalue g y of M y must be ±e -ikz/2 . Particularly, at the time-reversal invariant momentum (TRIM) points A: (0,0,π) and M: (-π,-π,π), we have g y = ±i, and where T is the time reversal operator. Hence even without the SOC, all the bands must have a double degeneracy at the A and M points, consisting of Kramers partner |Φ n and T |Φ n with opposite eigenvalue g y . This can be clearly seen in Figs. This means all the bands along the two paths must have a Kramer-like double degeneracy. In other words, the nodal lines along D-M and A-H paths are of essential band degeneracy features, which are guaranteed to exist by the nonsymmoprhic space group symmetry. Next, we include the SOC effects. Then, the two nontrivial bands of T Ir 2 B 2 near the Fermi level split into four bands, as shown in Figs. Besides the hourglass Weyl rings, the more important feature is the existence of Weyl points off the highsymmetry paths. We carefully scan the whole BZ and find that there are To understand these features, we note that when the SOC is included, the glide mirror M y simultaneously acts on the spatial coordinates and the spin degrees of freedom, and we have where Ē represents the 2π spin rotation. Because each k point in the k y = 0 plane is invariant under the M y , thus each Bloch state |Φ n in the plane can be chosen as an eigenstate of M y , and it's eigenvalue g y of M y must be ±ie -ikz/2 . Importantly, on the paths D-M and A-H, one finds that the previous Eq. 3 for the combined symmetry M y T remains valid even in the presence of SOC, as here we have T 2 = -1. Thus the Kramer-like degeneracy dictates a double degeneracy on these paths. This explains the first feature listed above. The second feature can also be easily understood. The points Γ, M, A, and C are TRIM points, so in the presence of SOC, the double degeneracy just corresponds to the Kramers degeneracy at these points. As for D and H points, they are points on the D-M and A-H paths, so the double degeneracy is from the M y T . Finally, regarding the third feature of the hourglass dispersion, we note that at the M point: (π,-π,π) and the A point: (0,0,π), the eigenvalue g y = ±1 is real. Since M and A are TRIM points, which are invariant under T , each Kramers pair |Φ n and T |Φ n at A and M must have the same eigenvalue g y . In contrast, at TRIM points Γ and C, the eigenvalue g y = ±i is purely imaginary, so the Kramers pair there must have opposite eigenvalues. As a result, along an arbitrary path from M (A) to Γ (C) on the mirror plane, there must be a partnering switching between the four band states, which must lead to an hourglass dispersion In summary, we have identified a class of noncentrosymmetric superconducting materials T Ir 2 B 2 (T =Nb, Ta) as topological hybrid Weyl metals with Weyl points and hourglass Weyl rings. When the SOC is ignored, NbIr 2 B 2 has 6 pairs of Weyl points and TaIr 2 B 2 has the minimum number of four Weyl points under time-reversal symmetry, both of which possess a nodal net composed of three nodal lines. With the inclusion of SOC, a nodal loop on the mirror plane evolves into two hourglass Weyl rings enforced by the nonsymmorphic glide mirror symmetry; meanwhile, NbIr 2 B 2 and TaIr 2 B 2 have 16 and 20 pairs of Weyl points, respectively. The patterns of the Fermi arcs connecting the Weyl points with opposite chiralities are explicitly demonstrated, and the extremely long Fermi arcs (∼0.6 Å-1 ) near the Fermi level are also clearly observed on the (110) surface. Considering the nontrivial surface states near the Fermi level and the intrinsic superconductivity, T Ir 2 B 2 may offer a very promising material platform to realize the 2D and 3D topological superconductivity. of M y . One finds that