Modelling of single cellulose fibres is usually performed by assuming homogenous properties, such as strength and Young's modulus, for the whole fibre. Additionally, the inhomogeneity in size and swelling behaviour along the fibre is often disregarded. For better numerical models, a more detailed characterization of the fibre is required. Herein, we report a method based on atomic force microscopy to map these properties along the fibre. A fibre was mechanically characterized by static colloidal probe AFM measurements along the fibre axis. Thus, the contact stress and strain at each loading point can be extracted. Stress-strain curves can be obtained along the fibre. Additionally, mechanical properties such as adhesion or dissipation can be mapped. The inhomogeneous swelling behaviour was recorded via confocal laser scanning microscopy along the fibre. Scanning electron microscopy measurements revealed the local macroscopic fibril orientation and provided an overview of the fibre topology. By combining these data, regions along the fibre with higher adhesion, dissipation, bending ability and strain or differences in the contact stress when increasing the relative humidity could be identified. This combined approach allows for one to obtain a detailed picture of the mechanical properties of single fibres. Cellulose-based papers have promising applications in areas such as electronics, sensor technology, microfluidics, and medicine Young's modulus is a mechanical parameter that can be used to describe a single fibre. In tensile tests, a Young's modulus between 20 and 80 GPa was measured for single fibres To establish mechanical models of fibres and fibre networks that account for the intra-fibre variability in mechanical parameters, it is essential to locally characterize fibres Cellulose fibres were manually extracted from a linter paper sheet that was prepared according to DIN 54358 and ISO 5269/2 (Rapid-Köthen process). Further information on the fibre is given in table Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) measurements were conducted to detect the swelling of the paper fibre radius RFibre. With AFM, we could detect the local bending δ, adhesion, and dissipation to complete the mechanical property image with the calculated local occurring contact stress σ (unit: N/m 2 ) and strain ε (unit: %) at each bending point. For the calculation of contact stress σ, CLSM measurements with differences in RFibre were used. Regions with notably unique mechanical behaviour or an increase in RFibre were investigated and related to the local macroscopic fibril orientation on the fibre surface, which was recorded with SEM. In CLSM and AFM measurements, the relative humidity (RH) was varied. For every RH increment, the fibre was measured first with CLSM in a climate chamber and then with AFM in the climate chamber for uniform conditioning and reliable results. A VK-8710 (Keyence, Osaka, Japan) CLSM instrument was used to investigate the swelling behaviour of the paper fibre. To this end, the fibre was placed into a climate chamber, where the RH was set at 2 %, 40 %, 75 %, and 90 %. The fibre was exposed to the RH for 45 minutes before measuring. As shown in A Dimension ICON (Bruker, Santa Barbara, USA) was used to measure static force-distance curves along the cellulose fibre with a colloidal probe. The cantilever (RTESPA 525, Bruker, Santa Barbara, USA) with a nominal spring constant of 200 N/m was modified with a 50 μm SiO2 colloidal probe (Glass-beads, Kisker Biotech GmbH & Co. KG, Steinfurt, Germany) 50 μm in diameter. The deflection sensitivity of the cantilever (invOLS) was calibrated by performing a force-distance curve on a hard sapphire surface. All AFM experiments were performed in a climate chamber. Hence, it was possible to vary the relative humidity (RH) during the experiments. The chosen RH values were 2 %, 40 %, 75 %, and 90 %. As the RH was adjusted, the fibre was exposed to the environment for 45 minutes before starting the measurements. Force-distance curves were acquired every 5 μm along the freely suspended fibre. The fibre was fixed at both ends to strain the fibre and prevent twisting of the fibre as the force was applied. Twisting and sideway slippage of the colloidal probe during force curve measurement was investigated in preliminary experiments (data not shown). By trial and error, a colloidal probe diameter of 50 μm turned out to limit slippage on the fibre under test. A step size of 5 μm in the axial direction was set and automatically controlled by AFM software. The lateral position of the colloidal probe was corrected manually based on the camera image. Thus, the scan along the fibre was aligned stepwise along the fibre axis (figure Figure Via cantilever calibration, the recorded deflection-piezo position curves were transferred to force-distance curves. A schematic force-distance curve is shown in figure is a critical parameter that must be homogenized along the fibre to obtain Young's modulus The calculation of Young's modulus via the conventional three-point bending test includes the applied force F, the trench length L, the bending distance δ, and the second moment of inertia I. The second moment of inertia I includes the inner and outer radii (r1 and r2) of a schematic circular fibre, as shown in the cross section in figure and strain ε = ΔL L (4) for each loading point. The strain was obtained by dividing the applied force by the contact area of the colloidal probe and fibre surface. The stress is calculated as the elongation ΔL divided by the trench length L. The estimation of the variables contact area A and elongation ΔL is described in the following. The area A of contact between the colloidal probe and the fibre could not be measured directly; thus, it must be estimated to determine the contact stress. Because the colloidal probe is pressed against the fibre, we assume that rough features at the surface are compressed, which leads to a (nearly) conformal contact between the probe and fibre. To keep the estimation simple, we approximated the area of the elliptical contact area with the area of a rectangle, as shown in figure Therefore, the arc lengths S1 and S2 can be defined as The full contact area in the x-direction is then S1 + S2. The contact length in the y-direction is determined as the contact mechanics between two spheres, as the curvature of the fibre surface is similar to a sphere, as shown in figures 5b and c The equation includes the applied force F, the reduced elastic modulus E * , and the reduced radius of curvature R. Both variables are described as: and The elastic modulus of the SiO2 colloidal probe (EColloidal) is 35 GPa (AZoMaterials 2020). The elastic modulus of the fibre was determined as the DMT modulus The DMT modulus was 60 GPa for 2 % RH, 21 GPa for 40 % RH, 2 GPa for 75 % RH and 0.5 GPa for 90 % RH. The Poisson's ratio vColloidal was defined as 0.17, and the Poisson's ratio vFibre was defined as 0.3. The radius of the colloidal probe RColloidal was 50 μm. The local fibre radius RFibre was recorded via CLSM at every loading point. The full contact area in the y-direction is defined as 2c. Thus, the resulting contact area A between the colloidal probe and the fibre was To determine the strain along the fibre axis, elongation ΔL must also be estimated (see Eq.4). Often, the elongated bending length is determined based on a Euler-Bernoulli beam. However, this approach requires homogeneous parameters, and for a fibre, such homogenization is questionable. Thus, we limited bending to small values, and the maximum fibre bending δ was approximately 2 μm, which is rather small compared to the trench length L = 1 mm. Thus, the elongation could be estimated from simple geometrical assumptions with: as illustrated in figure The individual fibre topography was analysed using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (MIRA3, TESCAN, Brno, Czech Republic) in secondary electron (SE) imaging mode at a low acceleration voltage (3 kV). In the following, we first discuss how the radius of the fibre RFibre was measured with CLSM and evolved with increasing RH. Then, by combining CLSM and AFM colloidal probe bending measurements, we developed a mechanical image of a single fibre and related the mechanical behaviour and the increase in the fibre radius RFibre for each ROI. CLSM measurements were used to measure the swelling of the radius of the paper fibre RFibre. These results were used to estimate the contact area A of the colloidal probe and the fibre to determine the contact stress σ. Figure Mechanical properties such as local adhesion, energy dissipation, or the bending of the paper fibre were investigated with AFM. Properties such as contact stress and strain were calculated according to Eqs. 3 and 4. The measurements were carried out with a colloidal probe bending the fibre point by point along the axis. Thus, a detailed image of the mechanical behaviour along the fibre could be obtained. Mechanical properties such as adhesion, dissipation, and bending ability were estimated from the force-distance data together with contact stress and strain, as displayed in figure One must speculate about the reason for this correlation. Most likely, areas with a large number of disordered macroscopic fibrils have a different internal structure than regions without macroscopic fibrils. Thus, regions with disordered fibrils on the surface show a stronger response to water uptake. The most likely reasons for this behaviour are differences in the local mechanical properties or differences in the local water uptake. From the bending data in figure Here, the reduced bending at both ends is due to attachment to the sample holder. An interesting observation is marked in the ROI V in figure Increasing the RH further to 90 % RH, more water molecules diffuse in the other parts of the fibre, which leads to more uniform deformation along the fibre axis. To verify that the bending behaviour displays the actual bending behaviour with its features, we performed a second set of experiments where we characterized a fibre for two RH cycles (see S7 and S8). Additionally, in this verification experiment, the bending ability of the fibre was decreased at both fixed ends due to clamping. In other regions of the fibre, "soft spots" again developed. Furthermore, figure Thus, it can be suggested that with wetting of the fibre or exposing the fibre to RH, fibre strength is lost. This fact also highlights the value of our method. By reading out the "virtual setpoint forces" beneath the setpoint, the mechanical properties of the fibre can be displayed at different setpoint forces at a uniform fibre state. Nonlinearities or peculiar effects, such as local softening, can be detected in a straightforward manner. In the contact stress graphs in figure Figure With Hooke's law, the Young's modulus can be determined in the linear elastic area. The calculated Young's moduli for every RH in the three ROIs are shown in table We measured the mechanical properties of a free hanging cellulose fibre (clamped at both ends) with colloidal probe AFM along the fibre axis. The proposed method of scanning along the fibre axis provides a more detailed picture of the mechanical behaviour than conventional three-point bending tests, where only one measurement is performed. To demonstrate the potential of this approach, the mechanical properties of a single cellulose fibre were mapped for varying relative humidity. The colloidal probe data were analysed in correlation with data from confocal laser scanning microscopy and scanning electron microscopy. The combination of these methods allowed for insights into the interdependence of swelling, bending ability, contact stress, and the stress-strain curves depending on the macroscopic fibril structure and orientation. With the help of CLSM, the swelling of the fibre radius of different parts of the cellulose fibre could be identified. Regions with a lower order in the macroscopic fibril orientation on the surface showed immediate deformation, and regions with a more ordered orientation exhibited steady volume increase. With the help of force-bending curves obtained with a colloidal probe AFM, it was possible to create a detailed mechanical picture of the paper fibre. Mechanical properties such as adhesion and dissipation, bending ability, contact stress, and strain could be identified. In general, the bending ability increased as RH increased. Additionally, "soft spots" could be identified at an intermediate RH of 40 %. Increasing the RH, the soft areas became less distinctive when the entire fibre became softer. This implies that at intermediate RH, individual soft spots can occur in a cellulose fibre weakening the fibre locally, whereas the entire fibre softens at elevated RH. By analysing the AFM force curves, it was possible to generate stressstrain curves for local points on the fibre. The stress-strain curves were dependent on the macroscopic fibril orientation: regions with an ordered macroscopic fibril orientation on the surface appeared to be stronger than those with less order. From the stress-strain diagrams, the local Young's moduli could be identified, and the decrease in values with increasing RH was investigated. The decrease in Young's moduli from 2 % RH to 90 % RH was approximately 6-7 times. The measured local Young's moduli illustrate the variations within a cellulose fibre. Thus, our approach highlights the difficulties in the three-point bending test, where the fibre is assumed to be homogeneous along its axis. Depending on the loading point, the corresponding diameter and macroscopic fibril orientation, we found different Young's moduli. In future work, it will be interesting to address the internal fibre and fibril structure by microtomography or via fluorescent dyes in confocal fluorescence microscopy. Additionally, a better model for the contact area of a colloidal probe and the fibre will be relevant to further develop the method. Thus, better statistics of local mechanical parameters will help to develop computer models of fibres or fibre networks that account for the inhomogeneity of the fibres.