We investigated the material parameters of several single-layer cuprates, including those with fluorinated buffer layers, with the aim of identifying possible high-temperature superconductors. To evaluate the material parameters, we use the Wannierization techniques and the constrained random phase approximation. The obtained single-band Hubbard models are studied using the fluctuation-exchange approximation. Comparison among several cuprates reveals unknown high-T c superconductors. In, Ga, Al, and Cd compounds in particular show the potential to exhibit higher-T c superconductivity than Hg1201. Among single-layer cuprates possessing one single CuO 2 layer in a unit cell, HgBa 2 CuO 4+δ holds a world record critical temperature for superconductivity (T c ) for more than 20 years. In our previous research, we found that these two factors alone cannot fully explain the different T c 's between the two single-layer cuprates HgBa 2 CuO 4 (Hg1201) and TlBa 2 CuO 5 (Tl1201). The result suggests that the strength of U can be modified by changing or introducing the substitutional doping in the buffer layer. Namely, the components and dopants in the buffer layer can control not only the carrier concentration in * shingoteranishi@gmail.com the CuO 2 layer, but also relevant material parameters that affect the superconductivity. In the previous study, we concluded that, by oxygen control in the Tl layer the strength of the Coulomb interaction may become stronger, thereby enhancing T c . Motivated by previous research showing the importance of the components and dopants in the buffer layer, we analyze several cuprates including hypothetical compounds with chemical elements in groups 12 and 13, such as Cd, Zn, In, Ga and Al. Here we adopt fluorination of the buffer layers for the Tl, In, Ga, and Al compounds to adjust the doping rate in the CuO 2 layer to be the half-filling. The electronic structures are investigated by the firstprinciples calculations based on the density functional theory (DFT) with the generalized gradient approximation (GGA). Then the maximally localized Wannier function is employed with the Wannierization techniques In this research, we analyze αBa 2 CuO 4 F (α1201F) with α=Tl, In, Ga, Al and βBa 2 CuO 4 (β1201) with β=Hg, Cd, Zn. We also included the results of TlBa 2 CuO 5 for comparison. The crystal structures of these systems are shown in Fig. The electronic structures of these cuprates can be obtained from the first-principles calculations with Quantum ESPRESSO. To consider the strength of superconductivity, we investigate the obtained Hubbard models within the FLEX approximation and solve the linearized Eliashberg equation. A singleband Hubbard Hamiltonian is represented as where c † iσ (c iσ ) represents the creation (annihilation) operator of electrons at site i on a square lattice with spin σ. n iσ represents the particle-number operator at site i and spin σ. The energy dispersion ξ k of the tight-binding model is where μ represents the chemical potential and t,t ′ , and t ′′ represent the nearest-, second-, and third-neighbor hopping, respectively. The interacting Green's function G(k) is obtained as where G 0 (k) is the non-interacting Green's function, Here k = (k, iε n ), and ε n = (2n -1)πk B T denotes the the Matsubara frequencies for for fermions. The spin susceptibility within the FLEX approximation obtained as where is the irreducible susceptibility. Here, q = (q, iω m ), and ω m = 2πmk B T denotes the the Matsubara frequencies for bosons. N is the number of sites, and T is the temperature. The selfenergy is obtained as V Σ (q) = U 2 3 2 χ 0 (q) , within the FLEX approximation. In FLEX approximation, the interacting Green's function G(k) is determined self-consistently. In the self-consistent calculations, the filling is always fixed to be a given electron concentration by adjusting the chemical potential μ. The linearized Eliashberg equation for the superconducting gap function ∆(k) is given as Here, λ is the eigenvalue, where λ = 1 corresponds to T = T c ; thus, λ serves as a measure of the strength of superconductivity. V s is the effective interaction for a spin-singlet pairing and is represented as In our calculations, we take N = 128 2 sites with 2,048 Matsubara frequencies, and set k B T = 0.03 eV. We consider filling factors of n = 0.85 (15% hole doping) because T c takes maximum around 15% doping. Determination of the band parameters (t) is done using the mother compounds which are basically at the half filling of the CuO 2 plane except for TlBa 2 CuO 5 . The rate of change of hopping parameters by small rates of the substitutional dopants in the buffer layer is assumed to be the same across materials so the superconducting strength is then counted by the eigenvalue λ at the 15%-doping in the Hubbard model. This method gives us a reasonable estimation of the superconductivity because the spin-fluctuation mechanism can explain the material dependence except for the under-doped region of the phase diagram. In Table First, we compare TlBa 2 CuO 4 F with TlBa 2 CuO 5 . One can see that r for TlBa 2 CuO 4 F is large compared to TlBa 2 CuO 5 . According to previous studies, Both TlBa 2 CuO 5 and TlBa 2 CuO 4 F have similar values of the bare Coulomb interaction, but the former has a much smaller screened Coulomb interaction than the latter . This fact suggests that screening effect in TlBa 2 CuO 5 is larger than that in TlBa 2 CuO 4 F. In terms of the band structures in Fig. HgBa 2 CuO 4 exhibits the largest U screened . However, it has the smallest U bare among the cuprates considered in this research. Thus, we deduce that screening effects in HgBa 2 CuO 4 is small compared to the other cuprates. This strong U screened is one of the advantages of the high-T c of HgBa 2 CuO 4 . αBa 2 CuO 4 F(α=In,Ga,Al) and CdBa 2 CuO 4 have a smaller r than other compounds. This is an important factor for high-temperature superconductivity, because small values of r can enhance spin fluctuations through the nesting of the Fermi surface. Moreover, GaBa 2 CuO 4 F and AlBa 2 CuO 4 F have large U screened s. Then We can expect that this combination of small r and large U screened favors higher-T c . In the Sakakibara criterion, ∆E is another relevant quantity. The compounds we consider in this research have, however, similar values of ∆E. So, we conclude that it does not make the differences in superconductivity strength among the cuprates considered in this study. In Fig. The obtained eigenvalues suggest that TlBa 2 CuO 4 F has the potential to exhibit higher-T c than TlBa 2 CuO 5 owing to the stronger U of TlBa 2 CuO 4 F. Because αBa 2 CuO 4 F(α=In,Ga,Al), and CdBa 2 CuO 4 F have good nesting conditions (small r), the values of λs are larger than those of Hg1201, although the Us are smaller than for Hg1201. λ of ZnBa 2 CuO 4 F is close to the value of Hg1201 because it has similar r and U to Hg1201. Among these cuprates, those based on Ga and Al stand out conspicuously. In this section, we discuss stability of the fluorine-doped materials. When replacing one oxygen with fluorine in TBa 2 CuO 5 , there are three possible sites, namely the oxygen in the buffer layer (Site 1), the apical oxygen site (Site 2), and the oxygen in the CuO 2 layer (Site 3), as shown in Fig. Here, we consider the formation energy of fluorine doped into the buffer layer. The formation energy is defined as where E[:] is the total energy. Table Buffer layer (Site 1) 0.0 Apical (Site 2) 0.970 CuO 2 layer (Site 3) 0.876 Thus, we conclude that fluorine doping into the buffer layer is feasible. In this research, we analyzed various cuprates, including the structures that have not been synthesized. Al and Ga compounds were found to show a high potential for high-T c superconductivity. In and Cd compounds also possessed good parameters for high-T c . According to our model calculations, these cuprates have the potential to exhibit superconductivity at higher temperatures than Hg1201. If our proposed crystal structures are experimentally synthesized, they may break the world record for T c in single-layer cuprates. Moreover, comparison of TlBa 2 CuO 5 and TlBa 2 CuO 4 F shows that U and r are controllable by changing the components and dopants in the buffer layer. There are some reports that show the crystal phases related to the compounds considered in this research although there remains a problem in making the perfect crystal. For example, as for In-based cuprates, the relevant crystal phases have been synthesized. The calculations were performed in the computer centers of Kyushu University and ISSP, University of Tokyo.