We report on a pure 181 Ta-nuclear quadrupole resonance (NQR) measurement of PbTaSe 2 at zero magnetic field, which has the advantage of directly probing the intrinsic superconducting phase and electronic states of the TaSe 2 layer. We observed the 181 Ta-NQR spectrum of the intrinsic structure with space group P 6m2, which agrees well with density functional theory (DFT) calculations. The nuclear spin relaxation rate (1/T 1 ) shows an exponential decrease well below T c , indicating that the superconducting state is fully gapped in the framework of Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory. The gap size obtained by 181 Ta-NQR was smaller than the value in previous reports, which may imply that the Fermi surfaces composed of Ta-5d orbitals, where the average pairing interactions are expected to be weaker than in BCS model, are primarily probed. The temperature dependence of 1/T 1 below T c can be reproduced well by the superposition of quadrupole and magnetic relaxation mechanisms, together with the distribution of superconducting gap size inherent to multiple Fermi surfaces theoretically proposed in PbTaSe 2 . Space inversion symmetry breaking in crystal structure makes asymmetric spin-orbit coupling (ASOC), which often leads to unique superconducting properties beyond the conventional Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) framework The transition metal dichalcogenide-based layer compound PbTaSe 2 without inversion symmetry is a type-II superconductor with a superconducting transition temperature of T c ∼ 3.8 K Many experimental studies have been carried out for detection of the unique superconducting state of PbTaSe 2 . However, so far only the signatures of conventional BCStype s-wave superconductivity have been reported, including heat capacity In this paper, we report a pure NQR study of the 181 Ta-nucleus in PbTaSe 2 at zero fields, expected to be a sensitive probe of local electronic bands of the multiple FSs of TaSe 2 layer. In our results we found two inequivalent Ta sites: the Ta(1) site is identified as an intrinsic site derived from a non-centrosymmetric structure for P 6m2 symmetry using 181 Ta-NQR spectrum analysis combined with density functional theory (DFT) calculations, while the Ta(2) site is expected to arise from the inevitable structural impurity. The nuclear spinlattice relaxation rate (1/T 1 ) at the intrinsic Ta(1) site exhibits an exponential decrease well below T c , which indicates that the superconducting state is fully gapped in PbTaSe 2 . Temperature dependence of 1/T 1 is reproduced by the superposition of quadrupole and magnetic relaxation mechanisms in addition to the existence of distribution of gap size. The gap parameter 2∆/k B T c obtained in this work was near 3.1, which is smaller than the value obtained in other experiments. This may suggest that FSs dominantly composed of Ta-5d orbitals can be primarily probed by 181 Ta-NQR. Polycrystalline samples of PbTaSe 2 were synthesized via a solid-state reaction. Stoichiometric amounts of Pb (powder, 99.9%), Ta (powder, 99.9%), and Se (grain, 99.999%) were placed in a silica tube, sealed under vacuum, and heated for 3-5 days Figure 1(c) shows the result of the powder X-ray diffraction measurement, which is consistent with the space group P 6m2. The lattice parameters were estimated to be a = 3.4445(5) Å and c = 9.3798(18) Å by the Rietveld analysis. They are close to the values reported previously Figure where eQ is the nuclear quadrupole moment, eq = V zz is the electronic field gradient (EFG) along the principal axis defined by the maximum EFG direction, and to the impurity site, which arises from the impurity phase that was not observed in X-ray spectrum. Note that the comparable intensity of the Ta(2) signal to Ta(1) ensures that this impurity site does not arise from TaSe 2 , the amount of which is only 5%. For further verification, the values of ν Q and η for Ta sites with P 6m2 symmetry were simulated by DFT calculations. The calculated values are ν Q = 57.8 MHz and η = 0.0 as shown in Table Consequently, we determined that the Ta(1) site was derived from the non-centrosymmetric structure of PbTaSe 2 with P 6m2 symmetry. The calculation of P 6 3 /mmc, which is another possible structure in intercalated transition metal dichalcogenides Next, we focus on the nuclear spin-lattice relaxation rate, 1/T 1 . Figure In the superconducting state (T < T c ), 1/T 1 shows exponential behavior with decreasing temperature, as seen in the Arrhenius plots of T 1 (see the inset of Fig. Here we comment on the smaller superconducting gap size in 181 Ta-NQR at zero magnetic fields compared to 207 Pb-NMR results Finally, we discuss the temperature dependence of 1/T 1 . It is well known that even in BCS s-wave superconductors like Ta 3 Pd 4 Te 16 In summary, we performed a 181 Ta-NQR measurement without magnetic fields in the non-centrosymmetric superconductor PbTaSe 