We present a detailed investigation of the topological phases and Majorana fermion (MF) excitations that arise from the bulk interplay between (un)conventional one/two-band spin-singlet superconductivity and a number of magnetic texture crystals. The latter define inhomogeneous magnetization profiles which consist of a periodically-repeating primitive cell. Here we focus on magnetic texture crystals with a primitive cell of the helix, whirl, and skyrmion types, which feature distinct symmetry properties. We identify a multitude of accessible topological phases which harbor flat, uni-or bi-directional, (quasi-)helical, or chiral MF edge modes. This rich variety originates from the interplay between topological phases with gapped and nodal bulk energy spectra. The types of the emerging topological superconducting phases and the features of the arising MFs are solely determined by the properties and compatibility of the so-called magnetic and pairing point/space groups. Our analysis is general and does not rely on specific parameters of the models employed here to exemplify the topological scenarios which become accessible. Therefore, our results can be extended to systems with multiple bands, are relevant for a wide range of layered materials and hybrid devices, and provide predictions for strong, weak and crystalline topological phases. Since its discovery, superconductivity has served as an inspiration for countless new concepts and applications. A recent development in the field concerns the material discovery and synthetic engineering of topological superconductors (TSCs) In the majority of the most prominent engineered quasi-1D TSCs, where fingerprints of MZMs appear to have been experimentally recorded However, there is still a large number of proposals for engineered quasi-1D TSCs which instead rely on a synthetic SOC, which is either induced by a magnetic texture , or alternatively, by antiferromagnetism While a MHC is sufficient to guarantee the occurrence of topological superconductivity in 1D, engineering strong TSCs with a fully-gapped bulk energy spectrum in d > 1 dimensions requires a magnetic profile which winds in all d directions. Thus, while a MHC leads to spinless pwave pairing in 1D, a spin skyrmion crystal (SSC) phase is necessary to generate an effective spinless chiral p+ip TSC in 2D In this Article, we provide an in-depth exploration of the various 1D and 2D TSCs which emerge from the coexistence of (un)conventional one/two-band spin-singlet superconductivity with a set of representative magnetic texture crystals. Our starting point is the synthetic SOC mechanism displayed in Fig. The present work aims at setting a paradigmatic and general framework to study the topological properties arising from the interplay between magnetic texture crystals and spin-singlet superconductivity. Since our analysis relies on the symmetry properties of the magnetic and pairing terms, and not on particular details of the models employed for the concrete demonstration, it is applicable to a broad range of materials and hybrid devices, including platforms involving magnetic adatoms deposited on top of superconductors, alongside intrinsic TSCs that do not rely on ISB SOC. Our analysis naturally addresses topological superconducting phases in which magnetism and superconductivity are assumed to originate from the same electronic degrees of freedom. Such a scenario may be of direct relevance to iron-based superconductors (FeSCs), which feature coexistence of various magnetic phases and superconductivity Motivated by the above, in the following we focus on the accessible TSCs in layered tetragonal itinerant magnets, which possess a D 4h point group symmetry in the nonmagnetic normal phase. We also consider that spin transforms according to the spatial symmetry operations, and we restrict to a single Kramers doublet of the double covering D 4h group. We additionally assume that ISB SOC and spin anisotropies (cf Ref. To perform the systematic topological classification of the various TSCs induced by the magnetic texture crystals presented in Table A given magnetic texture crystal preserves the socalled magnetic point group M, which is here a group related to the subgroups of the normal-phase symmetry group D 4h . The elements of M are generally obtained from products of the original double point group operations and time reversal T . Products involving T give rise to antiunitary mirror symmetries The classification in HSPs is also affected by magnetic space group symmetries The final crucial factor which influences the topological properties is the type of the pairing point group associated with the pairing gap. In this work, we assume (un)conventional one/two-band spin-singlet pairing with possible symmetry-imposed or accidental nodes. Going beyond a single band picture allows us to capture salient features of realistic band structures of correlated magnets, such as the FeSCs rally find a different topological scenario in HSPs, since ∆ k may possess symmetry-enforced zeros in these. Our main findings regarding the rich diversity of TSCs are collected in Tables At this point, it appears vital to underline the various novelties of the present work in comparison to a number of previous studies concerning TSCs from MHCs in 1D and 2D, cf Refs. Our work provides a complete description of the topological properties of these systems, by means of a classification which accounts for strong, weak, and crystalline phases. Notably, our analysis also considers the possibility of unconventional pairing terms. We demonstrate how the interplay of the magnetic and pairing groups shapes the topological properties of these systems and gives rise to a multitude of MF excitations, with several of these not have been previously discussed in this context. Hence, our work naturally involves the construction of a number of topological invariants which have not been previously discussed for TSCs originating from magnetic texture crystals. In fact, we reveal that a number of these topological invariants are responsible for the quantization of physical quantities, such as the bulk staggered magnetization, which can be harnessed to experimentally infer the topological phase of the systems in question. In contrast to previous works, that are primarily focused on single-band systems, our work discusses two-band scenarios which open the door to engineering topologically protected Andreev zero/edge modes, as well as Kramers pairs of Majorana solutions. The latter is a notable result, given the fact that the magnetic texture crystal violates the standard time-reversal symmetry. The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In Sec. III we describe the modeling assumptions that we use throughout this work. In Sec. IV, we investigate TSCs in 1D systems induced by a MHC. In Sec. V we extend our study to 2D, and explore the full variety of possible TSCs and protected MF edge modes induced by the SWC 4 phase. The experimental implementation of the various topological scenarios of interest is examined in Section VI. There, we elaborate on the interplay of magnetic texture crystals and spin-singlet superconductivity, and enumerate prominent platforms that provide fertile ground for their viable coexistence. Section VII presents our conclusions and outlook. Lastly, Apps. A-D contain various definitions, further technical details, and complementary numerical calculations. Before proceeding, we specify the modeling assumptions employed in the upcoming analysis. While our analytical and numerical investigations also aim at predicting possible topological phases relevant to unconventional superconductors, we here treat these cases only in a qualitative fashion. Correlated systems generally exhibit complex band structures, which is an aspect that hinders a transparent discussion of the topological properties as pursued here. For example, an accurate description of the FeSCs typically requires five-or ten-band models Another aspect of realistic systems that needs to be accounted for, is the fact that the magnetic wave vectors may be incommensurate or exhibit a high-order degree of commensurability. As a result, such cases require an infinite or very large number of bands for an accurate description after downfolding to the magnetic Brillouin zone (MBZ). To avoid such a complication, we consider commensurate magnetic wave vectors Q 1,2 , with the pro- with the lattice constant set to unity throughout, and Q 2 = Q ŷ, since the latter is obtained via a counter-clockwise fourfold rotation of Q 1 . In most cases we consider that the magnetic wave vectors coincide with the FS nesting wave vectors Q N,1 and Q N,2 , see Fig. We note that our choice of Q does not affect the generality of the qualitative conclusions regarding the topological features of the systems under discussion, as the above wave vectors can be adiabatically connected to incommensurate ones. This is achieved by only deforming the FS of the system without modifying its topology, i.e., assuming that neither Lifshitz Furthermore, we point out that the upcoming analysis is not self-consistent with respect to the magnetic and superconducting order parameters. While our starting point partly builds upon the results of Ref. We also wish to stress that the crystalline topological properties induced by the magnetic point and space group symmetries, only give rise to topologicallyprotected modes at boundaries which preserve the symmetries in question. This is in stark contrast to strong topological phases, for which the bulk-edge correspondence enforces the edge states to appear for a boundary of an arbitrary direction. For this reason, in the upcoming sections we first carry out the classification of the strong TSC phases, and subsequently discuss the possible crystalline ones which result from the magnetic point and space group symmetries. On the other hand, weak TSCs are distinct to both crystalline and strong phases. Weak TSCs can be viewed as a network of strong TSCs in one spatial dimension lower. For instance, 2D weak topological phases emerge as a collection of strong 1D TSCs oriented along a given axis. Consequently, such weak 2D TSCs do not give rise to topologically-protected modes along edges which are parallel to the characteristic axis determined by the constituent strong 1D TSCs. However, topologically-protected modes appear for any other edge orientation, and the characteristics of the edge-mode dispersions vary depending on the orientation of the edge. To this end, we clarify that the results of Tables II and III are not only applicable to the specific magnetic texture crystals depicted in Table Concluding this section, we wish to emphasize that we have confirmed the validity of all the analytical results presented in the upcoming sections by means of numerical investigations of the respective lattice models in 1D and 2D, with open boundary conditions, and observed the predicted edge states. In the following analysis we first explore possible topological phases in 1D. Apart from being simple to investigate, the 1D case sets the stage and the formalism employed in the study of 2D systems, which is the main goal of this work. In 1D we consider the topological effects arising from the coexistence of either a conventional or an unconventional superconducting pairing with a MHC phase with either a constant or a spatially-varying magnitude of the magnetic moment. We begin our study with one-band models (1BMs), which are defined on a lattice and describe electrons with a band dispersion ξ kx set by the hopping matrix elements t nm . After including the chemical potential μ, we have: where the integers n, m label the positions R n,m on the direct lattice, and ψ n = (ψ n↑ , ψ n↓ ) , with denoting transposition. The operator ψ nσ (ψ † nσ ) annihilates (creates) an electron with spin projection σ =↑, ↓ at the lattice site R n . The magnetic part of the Hamiltonian describes a MHC texture winding in the xz spin plane: Here, Q = π/2 denotes the magnetic ordering wave number, which in low-dimensional itinerant magnets it often happens to coincide with the nesting wave number Q N . The texture mediates scattering between two distinct pairs of points. In this work, one pair usually lies at high energies and the other at low. When the condition Q N = Q is met, the latter pair is identified with the two nested Fermi points. See Fig. the MHC leads to a spatially varying (constant) magnetic moment. Below we examine each case separately. 1. MHC with a spatially constant magnetic moment: In this case, we follow Ref. with The dispersions read: One observes that the spin-dependent shift of the wave number splits the dispersion into an even and an odd function under inversion, i.e., ξ ± -kx;q = ±ξ ± kx;q . The emergence of the odd function reflects the induction of a Rashba-type SOC. By further considering a generic spinsinglet pairing gap ∆ kx , we obtain the Bogoliubov -de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian: where we introduced the superconducting gaps ∆ ± kx;q in a similar fashion to ξ ± kx;q in Eq. ( Hence, the many-body mean-field Hamiltonian reads In the above, we employed the τ 1,2,3 Pauli matrices defined in Nambu electron-hole space. From now on, we adopt the shorthand notation A ⊗ B ≡ AB for Kronecker products, and we omit writing all identity matrices unless this is deemed necessary for reasons of clarity. Leaving aside for the moment the magnetic point and space group symmetries present, the BdG Hamiltonian in Eq. ( When ∆ kx leads to a fully-gapped spectrum, the system harbors an integer number of topologically protected MZMs per edge, with the corresponding Z topological invariant given by the winding number w Given the above, we calculate det( Âkx ), which reads: and allows us to define the normalized complex function: and the associated winding number in the complex plane: To facilitate the evaluation of w, one relies on its invariance under smooth deformations of the Hamiltonian, i.e., deformations that do not lead to any gap closings of the bulk spectrum. Hence, one assumes that the parameters take such values, so that the system is close to topological phase transitions. In such cases the main contributions to w arise from the gap-closing points k c of the bulk energy spectrum, determined by | det( Âkc )| = 0. This equation yields the conditions Im det( Âkc ) = 0 and Re det( Âkc ) = 0, whereof the first one reads: The above is always satisfied at the ISPs (k I ≡ -k I ). If we momentarily assume that the k x dependence of the pairing gap does not lead to any additional gap closings besides the ones at the ISPs, and take into account the remaining gap-closing condition Re det( Âkc ) = 0, we obtain the topological phase transition criterion: because ξ - k I ;q = ∆ - k I ;q = 0. Since the 1D BZ contains only the two ISPs k I = {0, π}, the winding number reads: We note that when the magnetic wave vector Q x coincides with the FS nesting vector Q N x, the expression for the topological invariant further simplifies since ξ + k I ;q = 0 for at least one of the two ISPs. Remarkably, this special, but actually realistic situation, appears to be the sweet spot for entering the topologically nontrivial phase, since the minimum magnetic gap M c = |∆ + k I ;q | is required in this case. Away from this special point, the critical magnetic gap increases, and its value is controlled by the degree of the |Q -Q N | detuning, which is reflected in the size of |ξ + k I ;q |. Therefore, a topological phase transition still occurs even if the special condition Q = Q N is not met. We thus conclude that the system exhibits gap closings at wave numbers for which ξ kx+Q = ξ kx and dξ kx+Q /dk x = -dξ kx /dk x . Notably both conditions hold trivially for two nested Fermi points given that Q = Q N . For a 1BM model with ξ + 0;q = 0 and ξ + π;q = 2|μ|, which happens to hold for the 1BM in Fig. which implies that the topologically nontrivial regime is realized in the interval: Note, however, that the upper boundary may not be reached in practice, since for this purpose, magnetic gap values larger than the Fermi energy are required. In Fig. We now continue with addressing the case of an unconventional superconducting order parameter which generates additional gap closings away from ISPs. As a result of chiral and charge-conjugation symmetries, the additional gap closings come in pairs ±k * We conclude this section by discussing the impact of the various magnetic point group symmetries on the topological classification, given that the nonmagnetic part of the BdG Hamiltonian is invariant under the symmetry group of the normal phase. The addition of magnetism reduces the initial point group down to the magnetic point group M MHC = C 2 + (C 2v -C 2 )T , whose elements are presented in Table It is customary to describe these effects in terms of {Θ, Ξ} and their (anti)commutation relations with the generators of the induced unitary symmetries {O xz , O yz } Hence, by restricting to the HSPs, we find the expressions For the 1D system examined here R xz is trivial, while R yz is expected to only affect the bulk topological properties of the system, since it is violated when boundaries are introduced. Specifically, R yz can influence the classification at the mirror-symmetry-invariant points k Ryz = {0, π} satisfying R yz k Ryz ≡ k Ryz . For these points ξ - k Ryz ;q = ∆ - k Ryz ;q = 0, and the BdG Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where we used the eigenvectors of σ z , which are labelled by σ = ±1. The above Hamiltonian belongs to symmetry class AI⊕AI with Θ = K, which in 0D yields the mirror topological invariant n M ∈ Z. See Refs. 20 and 146. To calculate n M , we choose an approach which keeps the variety of the topological-invariant constructions used in this work to a minimum. This is achieved by evaluating the mirror invariant in an augmented space, which is spanned by the spatial dimensions relevant for the classification, and the continuous frequency ∈ (-∞, ∞) obtained as the zero-temperature limit of the Matsubara frequencies. Adding compensates the reduction of the physical dimensions by one, which occurs when restricting to a HSP. As a result, this allows us to describe both bulk and HSPs using a winding number defined in the natural and augmented 1D spaces, respectively. The topological invariant for the AI class in 0D is thus given here by the winding number of the normalized complex number Z , obtained from the normalized determinant of the inverse single-particle Matsubara Green function Ĝ-1 = i -ĤBdG . See Refs. 20, 187, and 188 for further details on topological invariants based on Green functions. In the present case, we have for each σ block: with We thus find: which has a form similar to that of the determinant in Eq. ( n M counts the number of mirror-symmetry protected edge states for edges preserving the respective mirror symmetry. However, as we announced, the above invariant becomes obsolete in 1D systems, since mirror symmetry is expected to be broken when termination edges are present. Nevertheless, here we rely on the translational invariance of the system and instead introduce a set of bulk mirror invariants. In analogy to the spin Chern number construction After evaluating n k Ryz ,σ , we find that n M ;k Ryz becomes: This bulk mirror invariant reflects the quantization of the z axis magnetization The measurement of the k x -resolved magnetization appears experimentally feasible by means of spin-resolved angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy, which has already been successfully applied to map out the spin character of the surface states of TR-invariant 3D topological insulators 2. MHC with a spatially varying magnetic moment: We now extend the study of the previous section to the more general situation, in which |M ⊥ | = |M || |. In this case, using a spin-dependent unitary transformation to gauge away the spatial dependence of the MHC is no longer possible, and one has to approach the problem in the MBZ, i.e., k x ∈ (-q, q], with q = Q/2 = π/4. To describe the downfolding to the MBZ, one can either consider a sublattice description which is briefly discussed in App. A, or choose to express the Hamiltonian in {k x , k x + Q} and {k x , k x + 2Q} wave-number-transfer spaces. The former is advantageous for carrying out the topological classification, since the resulting BdG Hamiltonian is 2π-periodic and thus suitably compactified. The results presented in Table where we introduced the Pauli matrices (ρ 1,2,3 ) η 1,2,3 defined in the (Q-) 2Q-transfer space. The above basis reveals more transparently the mechanisms underlying the nontrivial topological properties induced by the magnetic textures, it highlights the emergent Dirac physics, and it provides a simpler and more convenient framework to evaluate the various topological invariants. The wave-number shifts in the arguments of the above spinor were chosen to connect to the spinor obtained after performing the unitary transformation Û in the case |M ⊥ | = |M || |. See also Fig. kx + Ĥmag with: where the functions h kx and ∆ (s) kx appearing above with s = 0, 1, 2, 3, constitute linear combinations of ξ kx and ∆ kx , which follow from the general definitions: The above construction further implies that inversion kx . One observes that the four linear combinations resulting from the electron part h kx η 3 ρ 2 of the nonmagnetic BdG Hamiltonian, give rise to the four spin-degenerate band segments in the MBZ shown in Fig. We point out that the set of ISPs in the MBZ reads k I = {0, q ≡ -q}, while the k I = π of the original BZ coincides now with k I = 0 in the MBZ. Note that the inversion-symmetric nature of k x = ±q is established via the equivalence relation -q ≡ q + nQ with n ∈ Z. The magnetic point group dictating the above BdG Hamiltonian is identical to the one examined in the previous section for a MHC with a spatially-constant magnetic moment (|M ⊥ | = |M || |). However, before discussing its implications on the topological classification, we point out that given the enlarged basis in Eq. ( Specifically, as also presented in Table Notably, this is the mechanism underlying the persistent Kramers degeneracies at the purple-colored points of the MBZ shown in Fig. The extended BdG Hamiltonian belongs to class BDI and is classified by a winding number w ∈ Z. Applying the methods of Sec. IV A 1, and assuming for simplicity that Q = Q N , and ∆ kx = ∆ > 0 so that ∆ (0) kx = ∆ and ∆ (s) kx = 0 for s = 1, 2, 3, lead to (see App. C 1 for details): with The orange regions are phases with a single MZM per edge. While the anisotropic nature of the MHC does not lead to the removal of the topologically nontrivial phase, it still significantly modifies the phase diagram. It is straightforward to verify that for ∆ kx = ∆, the gap closings responsible for the topological phase transition take place only at k x = 0. Nonetheless, Eq. ( To gain deeper insight, we set ∆ kx = ∆ > 0 and restrict to the weak-coupling limit |∆|, |M ||,⊥ | 2|μ|. Since gap closings now occur only near the FS, Eq. ( Thus, the topological phases arising from gap closings occurring in the low-energy sector, are solely determined by the inequality: The spatial variation of the magnetic moment, which is reflected in the size of the difference sets a maximum value for the magnetic anisotropy that can still allow for the system to enter the nontrivial phase. For the specific parameters used in Fig. The results in the weak-coupling limit can be alternatively obtained by directly restricting the multicomponent spinor of Eq. ( The projection of the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( with ξ ± kx;q and ∆ ± kx;q following once again from Eq. ( It is straightforward to verify that n M,kx=0 = n M , since no topological gap closings can take place at k x = q. In a similar fashion, the offcentered We now proceed with the Z 2 topological invariants which emerge from the {T | π /Q} and {σ xz | π /Q} symmetries. In the presence of either one of these, the unitary symmetry Õ = ρ 2 σ y is induced, and allows us to blockdiagonalize the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( with σ = ±1 labelling the eigenstates of σ z . The two blocks see a chiral symmetry Π = ρ 2 τ 2 . Following the same approach that led to Eq. ( Within the weak-coupling limit, we obtain the result: Hence, here we end up with P G,kx=0 = (-1) n M,kx=0 , which implies that in the present model P G,kx=0 is nontrivial, i.e., equal to -1, when n M,kx=0 ∈ 2Z + 1. Concluding this section, we remark once again that in strictly 1D systems the above point and space group symmetries affect only the bulk topological properties, since these are all broken when edges are introduced. When this takes place, it is only w together with the weak Z 2 invariant of class BDI, 5 which are capable of predicting the number of the arising MZMs. This is in stark contrast to 2D systems, where certain edges also support crystalline and/or weak invariants, as discussed further in later sections. In this section, we extend the previous analysis to the case of two-band models (2BMs) with dispersions ξ e,h kx , where the superscript e/h reflects the type of electron/hole pocket that arises from the respective band. An example of such a 2BM is shown in Fig. 5 We define the weak invariant with Âk I the upper off-diagonal block of the block off-diagonalized Hamiltonian in Eq. ( The dispersions ξ e kx = te cos kx-εe (fuchsia) and ξ h kx = t h cos kx+t h 1+cos(2kx) -ε h (navy blue) in the first BZ. We set the parameters values t h = 2.86 te, t h = te, εe ≈ -0.92 te and ε h = -0.80 te. We also show the nesting wave vector QN x which, for the choice of parameters made here, coincides with the magnetic wave vector Q x. Thus, Q x connects two pairs of points at the Fermi level and two more pairs at higher energies. (b) The resulting eight band-segments in the MBZ. The points connected by the magnetic wave number (3Q = -Q) come in pairs due to C2 symmetry, and are depicted by green dots. For clarity, (a) depicts half of the ordering wave numbers. One notes that a term proportional to κ 2 is not allowed, since this violates the requirement that the magnetization field of the texture is odd under T . On the other hand, the spin-singlet pairing matrix reads: The required antisymmetry of the superconducting matrix order parameter in the combined spin, band and k x spaces, implies that the terms proportional to 1 κ , κ 3 and κ 1 are even under inversion, while the one proportional to κ 2 is odd. In the remainder, we focus on cases where the FSs associated with the various pockets neither overlap nor share similar shapes and, as a result, interband pairing is expected to be substantially suppressed In the present case we also consider that the magnetization possesses a MHC form, with the M ||,⊥ helix components of the previous section being upgraded to bandspace matrices according to Eq. Since the 2BMs bear similarities with the thoroughlyexplored 1BMs, we confine the analysis to the novel features brought about by the additional band. We extend the spinor defined in Eq. ( and consider the Hamiltonian where we introduced the electron-like [hole-like] band projectors Depending on the precise matrix form of the magnetization, one can interpolate between intra-and inter-band scattering. For M||,⊥ ∝ 1 κ , κ 3 , the magnetic scattering has only an intraband character, and the two bands are completely decoupled. Thus, the topological properties of the system follow from applying the results of the previous paragraphs separately to each band, and the symmetry class is BDI⊕BDI. In contrast, when M⊥ = M ⊥ κ 1 and M = M κ 1 , the Hamiltonian exhibits an additional unitary symmetry with the generator O = κ 3 σ y . Note that this symmetry is due to the specific form of the magnetic texture in band space, and intraband magnetic scattering terms M⊥, ∝ 1 κ , κ 3 generally violate it. Assuming the presence of O, we block diagonalize the Hamiltonian using the transformation S = (O + σ z )/ √ 2, and find that the nonmagnetic part of Eq. ( where σ = ±1 correspond to the eigenvalues of σ z . Each Hamiltonian block belongs to the symmetry class AIII with Π = κ 3 τ 2 . The procedure for carrying out the 1D topological analysis is here identical to the one presented in Sec. IV A 2 for systems in the BDI symmetry class, since also the AIII class supports a Z topological invariant in 1D, which is identified with a winding number. Such an analysis, see App. C 5, yields that the topological phase transition from the trivial to the nontrivial phase occurs when ξ e kx±3q ∆ h = ξ h kx∓3q ∆ e and ξ e kx±3q ξ h kx∓3q +∆ e ∆ h = M 2 σ , are simultaneously satisfied, for a given σ. When the magnetic wave vectors connect two points at the Fermi level, we have ξ e k±3q = ξ h k∓3q = 0 and the topological criterion reads ∆ e ∆ h = M 2 σ . Remarkably, the latter condition can be satisfied only when the two magnetically connected points exhibit the same sign for the pairing term. Figures We note the doubling of w compared to the case of the 1BMs, cf Fig. In the more general case, intraband terms which break the O = κ 3 σ y symmetry may also be present. These can be divided into nonmagnetic and magnetic. When these are nonmagnetic, e.g., various types of ISB SOC, they stabilize a DIII symmetry class which supports MZM Kramers pairs. For a similar situation see Ref. We proceed by investigating the effects of intraband magnetic texture terms. For this purpose, we recalculate the winding number (see App. C 5), and obtain the phase diagrams in Fig. This expression imposes severe constraints on the unconventional superconducting order parameter, as well as the relative contributions of intra-and inter-band magnetism, which can lead to topologically nontrivial phases in 1D. Nonetheless, this condition is not as stringent in higher-dimensional systems, since the pairing term may lead to a gap closing for some of the BZ points, which is a sufficient condition to allow, but not necessarily guarantee, the transition to a TSC phase. To this end, we remark that crystalline symmetries generally influence the bulk classification of multiband systems in a similar fashion to 1BMs when inter-and intra-band magnetic texture terms are simultaneously present. Instead, when only interband textures are considered, the presence of the O symmetry renders the effects of the crystalline symmetries trivial. Before proceeding to the 2D cases, we here summarize what we learned from the 1D models, and how this will help us explore the 2D cases. First of all, we discussed that a system in the presence of a MHC with a spatially varying magnetic moment |M || | = |M ⊥ | cannot be directly mapped onto the ISB SOC mechanism in Figs. Concerning the topological classification, we established that 1BMs and 2BMs in the MHC phase generally reside in the BDI symmetry class, regardless of the type of spin-singlet pairing gap. However, by considering interband-only magnetic scattering, we found that the 2BMs display an emergent unitary symmetry ultimately resulting in the class AIII ⊕ AIII. This class supports AZMs, which however, can be converted back to MZMs by including intraband terms. Lastly, we also performed the topological classification in the presence of magnetic point and space group symmetries, introduced the relevant invariants, and discussed how these can lead to new topological phases. For 1D systems, the additional unitary symmetries proved to be obsolete when it comes to the prediction of edge modes, since edges generally break these. Nonetheless, their presence sets constraints on a number of bulk topological properties which can be harnessed to experimentally infer the TSC phase of the system. In fact, the methodology employed in the study of unitary symmetries sets the stage and introduces the concepts for the upcoming 2D cases, where magnetic point group symmetries play instead an essential role in determining the type of Majorana or Andreev edge modes. We now extend our study to the case of 2D systems, which is the main topic on our agenda. We start with 1BMs and afterwards consider two-band extensions. We find that 2D systems exhibit a rich variety of MF-edgemode types, i.e., flat, uni-and bi-directional modes when nodes are present in the bulk energy spectrum, or, quasihelical, helical, and chiral modes when the bulk energy band structure is fully gapped. This MF diversity is obtained by considering 1BMs and 2BMs in the presence of a MHC, a SWC 4 and, finally, a SWC 4 combined with an external in-and out-of-plane Zeeman field, where the latter situation also reproduces a SSC 4 phase. In this section we extend the 1BM dispersion ξ kx to its 2D analog ξ k , with a focus on models leading to two hole pockets centered at Γ(0, 0) and M(π, π). The two pockets are assumed to feature intra-pocket FS nesting at the mutually orthogonal wave vectors Q N,1 and Q N,2 , thus generally supporting both single-Q and double-Q magnetic phases coincide with the nesting wave vectors. Such a type of band structure is shown in Fig. The construction of the Hamiltonian in 2D is straightforward, and is obtained by replacing the 1D dispersion in Eq. ( The extension to 2D is complete after the addition of k y as a second argument to h (s) kx and ∆ (s) kx defined in Eqs. ( and pairing point groups coincide or not. Below, we first focus on the 2D classification and study the influence of the magnetic point group at the end of this section. In analogy to our previous analysis, we define the winding number for each k y subsystem which, notably, for the BDI class in 2D defines a weak, instead of a strong, topological invariant where we considered M ||,⊥ = M > 0, exploited the property ξ -kx,ky = ξ kx,ky , and made use of the constraint on ∆ k . Evidently, the 1D criterion for a gap closing at a point k c , for a given k y , still holds, namely Thus, gap closing points appear for (k x = 0, k y ) and suitable values of k y . In Fig. So far, we studied the emergence of the MFBs by viewing k y as a mere parameter which controls the topological properties of each 1D k y subsystem. However, accounting for the correspondence of k y to the spatial coordinate y, and considering the stable character of the nodes in the bulk energy spectrum, allows us to characterize the 2D nodal TSC using local strong topological invariants where C is a contour encircling the node. Here, z k corresponds to the 2D extension of Eq. ( As an example, we consider the 1BM of Fig. We now consider the additional presence of the magnetic point/space group symmetries and the modifications that these bring to the topological classification. A common feature of the crystalline classifications in 1D and 2D for the MHC, is that the effects of R xz are trivial in both. On the other hand, we find crucial differences which mainly relate to (i) the enhancement of the dimensionality which generally leads to different topological invariants even within the same symmetry class, and (ii) the structure of the pairing gap. Specifically, we find two distinct cases depending on whether ∆ k is invariant under the action of the magnetic point group operations, or not. When ∆ k ∈ {A 1g , B 1g } (∆ k ∈ {B 2g , A 2g }), the magnetic point group M MHC is (not) conserved. Notably, the pair of D 4h IRs bunched together in a given set are equivalent under the action of the magnetic point group. Another key aspect of the crystalline classification in 2D, is that the Kramers degeneracy imposed by Θk at (q, 0) and (q, π), extends to the entire k x = q HSP. As discussed in App. B this is imposed by the pair of offcentered symmetries R yz and {σ yz | ( π /Q, 0)}. Hence, MHCdriven gap closings cannot take place anywhere in the k x = q HSP. Therefore, any possible crystalline topological features arising in this HSP originate from the structure of the pairing gap. For this reason, the remainder of this section focuses only on the k x = 0 HSP. The classification in the k x = q HSP appears in Table For ∆ k ∼ {A 1g , B 1g }, R yz and {σ yz | ( π /Q, 0)} lead to a AI⊕AI class in the k x = 0 HSP. While a similar result was also encountered in Sec. IV A 2, here the topological consequences stemming from these symmetries differ because of the increased spatial dimensionality. Specifically, new topological features emerge only when the spectrum contains point nodes. In this case, the class AI allows defining an additional Z crystalline topological invariant, which we denote ν k I , and associate with the following vorticity in ( , k y ) space: with C a path enclosing the node, and σ = ±1 labelling the respective AI block. Z ,ky,σ is obtained in a similar fashion to Eq. ( The remaining two space group symmetries, i.e., {σ xz | ( π /Q, 0)} and {T | ( π /Q, 0)}, need to be treated more carefully, since the former only leaves ISPs invariant, and thus does not introduce any changes to the topological classification in HSPs. The latter symmetry instead, combined with Θ, leads to a class BDI⊕BDI in the k x = 0 HSP. Hence, it only influences the topological properties of the system for a fully-gapped spectrum, since the BDI class cannot protect nodes in 1D with w kx=0,σ corresponding to the winding number of each BDI class Hamiltonian block of Eq. ( Nevertheless, the sign-changing behavior of ∆ k under mirror operations still allows us to define a point group G MHC , which is preserved by the total Hamiltonian and is isomorphic to M MHC . This group consists of the elements: with σ Q xz,yz = Qσ xz,yz , where we introduced the dimensionless electric charge operator Q = τ 3 . Such symmetries have also been previously discussed in connection to p-wave superconductors Closing this section, we point out that one can also introduce the BDI class weak Z invariants for k x points with a fully-gapped spectrum. These are given by the winding numbers w kx , which are defined in an analogous manner to w ky in Eq. In this section, we consider the case of a double-Q magnetic texture, with the ordering wave vectors depicted in FIG. Fig. The double-Q structure of the magnetic texture implies that the MBZ is obtained by folding in both k x and k y directions of the original BZ, and is defined as k ∈ (-q, q] × (-q, q]. The ISPs span the set k I = {Γ(0, 0), X(q, 0), Y(0, q), M(q, q)}. To proceed, we employ the wave-vector-transfer Pauli matrices η and ρ related to foldings in the k x direction, as in Sec. IV A 2, and the Pauli matrices λ 1,2,3 and ζ 1,2,3 related to foldings in the k y direction, acting in {k, k + Q 2 } and {k, k + 2Q 2 } spaces, respectively. The resulting enlarged spinor reads: where X 1BM k is the 2D analog of Eq. ( where F (h k ) and F (∆ k ) are defined in Appendix D. The band dispersions and the magnetic part of the BdG Hamiltonian of Eq. ( Similar to the previous section, also here, the point group G SWC4 preserved by the BdG Hamiltonian is decided by which one out of the possible four IRs {A 1g , B 1g , B 2g , A 2g }, is stabilized for ∆ k . In a one-to-one correspondence to these four IRs, we find the scenarios: In a similar fashion, depending on the IR of ∆ k , we ob-tain four space group symmetries generated by products of {1 | ( π /Q, π /Q)} and the mirror operations preserved by ∆ k . Note that the topological class remains D, irrespectively of the given point group G SWC4 . As it is customary in this work, the effects of the point and space groups are presented at the end of the section. For the 1BM in Fig. Similar nodes emerged for a MHC texture in 2D, cf. Fig. We anticipate that the gapping of these nodes becomes possible by considering suitable perturbations of even infinitesimally-weak strength. This is because class D does not protect nodes in 2D The absence of a topological protection for the nodes is reflected in the lack of MFBs in the energy spectrum obtained when open boundary conditions are imposed in one of the two main axes. Related numerical results for ∆ k ∼ {1, cos k x -cos k y } are discussed in Fig. modes with the distinctive feature that they do not have a fixed helicity or chirality. Even more remarkably, their spin-character and group velocity are k x dependent and become strongly affected by the type of crystal termination. See Ref. The properties of the bidirectional MF edge modes can be understood by viewing their presence as the outcome of the two coexisting MHCs. The MHC which winds spatially in the y direction gives rise to MFBs in the conserved k x space, as long as the other MHC is completely neglected. In this ideal situation one obtains a spectrum similar to the one of Fig. The emerging 1D physics implies that there should be suitable topological invariants that encode the presence of a persistent degeneracy at k x = q, thus enforcing the presence of the bidirectional MF edge modes. These are no other than the Z 2 weak invariants of class D, which correspond to the Majorana numbers M kx,y=q where Pf( Bks ) is the pfaffian of the skew-symmetric matrix Bk I = ÛΞ Ĥk I , where Ξ = ÛΞ K, with ÛΞ = τ 2 σ y . The presence of a C 4 -symmetric energy spectrum further renders the two invariants equal. Within rameter ∆ k , leads to an additional unitary symmetry and renders the spectra twofold degenerate. A weak violation of this symmetry gets the degeneracy lifted away from ISPs, but preserves the number of MF edge modes. the weak-coupling limit, these are nontrivial for M -< ∆ + k=0;q1,2 < M + , which is satisfied only after a simultaneous gap closing takes place at X(q, 0) and Y(0, q). This mechanism stabilizes the degeneracies at the edge ISPs. Alternatively, as a consequence of the antiunitary magnetic point group elements (C 4v -C 4 )T , each HSP resides in the 1D BDI class, for which, one can calculate the ensuing mirror winding number in 1D, wM,HSP , similar to the weak invariant w kx,y for the MHC models in 2D. wM,HSP is a crystalline topological invariant which is distinct from previously discussed mirror invariants in this paper, in the sense that the symmetries (C 4v -C 4 )T do not induce any block diagonal structure of the Hamiltonian in their respective HSPs, but rather an emergent TR symmetry. Note lastly that the invariants for the k x,y = q HSPs fulfill the relation M kx,y=q = (-1) wM,HSP . As we pointed out in the previous section, the Kramers degeneracy that the Θk symmetry imposes at the Γ(0, 0) point of the MBZ, does not allow the nodes moving along the ΓX and ΓY lines to annihilate, therefore prohibiting the emergence of a fully-gapped bulk energy spectrum and genuinely 2D topological superconducting phases. Nonetheless, a fully-gapped bulk energy spectrum is obtainable in the presence of additional Hamiltonian terms which achieve at least one of the following two possibilities: (i) either preserve Θk but enforce the nodes to meet and annihilate away from the Kramers degenerate points of the MBZ, i.e., away from k Θ = {Γ(0, 0), M(q, q)}, or (ii) violate Θk . In Fig. Apart from the abovementioned topological superconducting phases which have an underlying 1D character, the application of an out-of-plane field converts the SWC 4 phase into a SSC 4 for appropriate parameter regimes, and enables fully-gapped chiral topological superconducting phases. These are topologically equivalent to a p+ip TSC, and are classified according to the 1st Chern number C 1 of the occupied bands Concluding this section, we remark that the introduction of the above perturbations is expected to influence the structure of the considered magnetic texture when the latter is treated in a self-consistent manner. However, sticking to the spirit of the explorative nature of this work, we neglect these modifications as they do not qualitatively modify the topological properties. An inplane Zeeman field with a direction which is not aligned with the main or diagonal axes defined by the HSPs {xz, yz, d ± z} leads to the complete violation of the magnetic point and space group symmetries. In this case, it is the weak class D Z 2 invariants which predict the appearance of protected MZM crossings at edge ISPs independently of the orientation of the termination edge. However, considering a magnetic field which is aligned with one of these axes, still allows for a nontrivial magnetic point group. For a Zeeman field in the x (y) direction, the resulting magnetic point group becomes M SWCB2 = {E, σ xz T } (M SWCB2 = {E, σ yz T }), while the symmetry {σ yz(xz) | ( π /Q, π /Q)} also remains intact. See also Table In Figs. 15(a)-(b) we present the edge spectra for a B x and a B y Zeeman field, respectively, with the system being open in the y direction in both cases. By evaluating the respective weak invariant, we find protected degeneracies at the edge ISPs k x = {0, q}. These persist until a gap closing takes place, which occurs for a Zeeman field value which depends on its orientation. Moreover, we observe the appearance of dispersive MF edge modes. In the open-system geometry of Fig. In the case of an out-of-plane B z field, the resulting SWCB 4 texture possesses nontrivial topological properties itself. Indeed, it has been shown In connection to the detailed topological classification presented in the previous section for the SWC 4 phase, we observe that the addition of the B z field leaves the magnetic point group M SWC4 intact, but lifts the Θk and the space group symmetries {C 4v -C 4 | ( π /Q, π /Q)}. As a consequence, the classification of the SWCB 4 texture follows from the classification performed for the TSCs induced by a SWC 4 magnetic texture. Indeed, we find that the presence of the B z field still allows for MF edge modes crossings at ISPs, as seen in Fig. We now summarize the key results for 1BMs in 2D. For a MHC the energy spectrum is nodal and leads to MFBs. Moreover, the classification in HSPs strongly depends on the IR of the pairing term. Nodes emerge also for a SWC 4 but they are not topologically stable. Nonetheless, degeneracies at ISPs persist and give rise to weak and crystalline TSC phases, which result into bidirectional MF edge modes. In the SWC 4 case, a fully-gapped spectrum is accessible only by violating C 4 or TR symmetries. Indeed, including a Zeeman field leaves the bidirectional modes intact, converts them into unidirectional modes, or, opens a gap in the spectrum and stabilizes chiral Majorana edge modes. We now apply the classification methods discussed in the previous sections to 2D 2BMs. For an example of such a model see Fig. Recall from our previous discussion in Sec. IV B, that a multiband system allows for an interplay of interband and intraband magnetic scattering, as well as for a hereassumed intraband pairing gap which is a matrix in band space ∆k = (∆ e k + ∆ h k )/2 + κ 3 (∆ e k -∆ h k )/2. Even more importantly, we show here that the inclusion of the additional band, may in many realistic situations enrich the symmetry of the system. As we discuss below, a number of features that become unlocked for 2BMs open perspectives for new phenomena and TSC phases. The present section builds upon the analyses of the 1D 2BMs and the 2D 1BMs under the influence of a MHC. In the general case, in which intra-and inter-band magnetic scatterings are present, the system is dictated by the same magnetic point and space group symmetries discussed in Sec. V A 1. The nodes in the bulk energy spectrum therefore possess a topological charge reflected in their vorticity υ. Moreover, in HSPs one can also define the respective mirror vorticity ν HSP ∈ Z following the definition in Eq. As found previously for the 2BMs in 1D, the topologically-stable bulk nodes and edge MFBs become accessible even for ∆ e ∆ h < 0, when intraband magnetic scattering is assumed. In Fig. Notably, a very crucial difference compared to the 2D 1BM is that, here, the paths along which the bulk nodes move in k space do not coincide with the main axes of the MBZ. Remarkably, here the nodes generally move on arcs, as indicated by the white arrows in Fig. We now proceed by studying 2BMs with an interbandonly double-Q SWC 4 texture. As in previous sections, we employ the usual set of wave-vector-transfer Pauli matrices ζ, λ, η and ρ, in order to account for the magnetic scattering taking place in the two orthogonal directions, as displayed in Fig. Due to the interband nature of the magnetic scattering the BdG Hamiltonian now enjoys a TR symmetry Θ = κ 3 T . This satisfies Θ 2 = -1 and leads to Kramers pairs (KP) at all the ISPs of the MBZ, thus enlisting the BdG Hamiltonian in the DIII symmetry class. Nodes in the bulk spectrum of a DIII Hamiltonian are topologically stable only at ISPs, and are classified by a vorticity akin to the one in Eq. In the above, we defined the skew-symmetric "sewing" matrix Ŵk I ≡ ÛΘ Âk I at ISPs k I only. The Ŵ matrix is the DIII analog of the AII class sewing matrix introduced by Fu and Kane with P e,h ( F ) defined once again as in Sec. IV B (App. D). We now move on with the discussion of the various crystalline symmetries, which are identical to the ones dictating the 1BMs in Sec. V A 2. Specifically, the antiunitary mirror symmetries (C 4v -C 4 )T belonging to the related G SWC4 point group discussed in Sec. V A 2, combine with Θ and give rise to the unitary mirror operations R = (C 4v -C 4 )T Θ = κ 3 (C 4v -C 4 ). These lead to a AIII⊕AIII (D⊕D) class in the corresponding HSP when the pairing gap ∆ k is even (odd) under the given mirror operation, e. M M,HSP ]. On the other hand, nonsymmorphic symmetries can only influence the topological classification at ISPs. Remarkably, the Γ(0, 0) and M(q, q) points are under the simultaneous influence of two TR symmetries which square to -1, i.e., Θ = κ 3 T and {T | ( π /Q, π /Q)}, thus observing a fourfold degeneracy. This can be understood in terms of the unitary symmetry {κ 3 | ( π /Q, π /Q)} = e i(kx+ky)π/Q κ 3 λ 2 ρ 2 which emerges at these two ISPs. The presence of bulk nodes goes hand in hand with the emergence of bidirectional MF edge modes, as seen in Fig. Despite the fact that the DIII invariants are here all trivial, in Fig. We complete the study of the 2BMs in 2D, by considering the effects of an additional Zeeman field on the system discussed in the previous paragraph. In this case, the system undergoes the symmetry class transition DIII → D. Therefore, for a fully-gapped bulk energy spectrum, chiral edge modes become accessible. Even more, when the field is aligned with one of the HSPs, mirror-symmetry protected edge modes are also possible. For a magnetic field in the x (y) direction, the resulting magnetic point group becomes M SWCB2 = E + σ xz T (M SWCB2 = E + σ yz T ). HSPs now belong to the BDI symmetry class, since the antiunitary elements of the point group act as TR symmetries. Hence, we can define the mirror winding numbers wM,HSP ∈ Z similarly to the weak winding numbers w kx,y introduced in Eq. For concreteness, below we focus on a system with open boundaries along the y direction, and assume that the pairing gap is nonzero in the xz and yz HSPs. For a magnetic field in the x direction, the TR symmetry σ xz T is not preserved by the termination, thus not protecting the quasi-helical modes in the HSP. Evidently the quasihelical Majorana edge modes in Fig. This section discusses the most prominent categories of systems which exhibit the coveted coexistence of magnetic texture crystals and spin-singlet superconductivity, thus being compatible with the topological scenarios presented in the previous paragraphs. This section (i) associates the various TSCs discussed in the previous paragraphs with realistic physical systems that can support them, (ii) brings to the attention of the reader a number of already accessible 1D and 2D TSC platforms based on a MHC texture, whose properties neeed to be revisited in the presence of additional magnetic point/space group symmetries (see concluding discussions of Sec. II), and (iii) discusses the conditions for realizing novel TSCs based on the SWC 4 texture in itinerant magnets. The existence of such candidate platforms is here made plausible by relying on general symmetry arguments and results from previous theoretical studies, and does not resort to model specific self-consistent studies. It is important to note that for the qualitative discussion pursued in this section, carrying out self-consistent calculations appears non vital. In this manuscript we have mainly focused on topological phases for which the magnetic energy scale is required to exceed the pairing gap. See for instance Fig. A. Case of dominant magnetic energy scale The limit of interest in this subsection describes the scenario where the influence of superconductivity is much weaker than that of magnetism. Below, we discuss five general classes of systems that in certain circumstances can satisfy this condition and engineer a TSC. The first possibility is to engineer the desired magnetic texture crystal by means of tunable magnets. Such a direction has recently attracted significant attention from both theoretical Another platform where 2D TSCs with a fully-gapped bulk energy spectrum become accessible are interfaces of a magnetic insulator and a conventional superconductor To this end, we remark that SSCs arising in chiral magnets due to localized moments typically appear as metastable states which are stabilized by an external magnetic field. In contrast, metallic magnets do not conform to this constraint, and allow for the spontaneous appearance of SSCs In the previous section, the magnets in discussion were governed by direct couplings between localized spins which are described in terms of generalized Heisenberg models. However, another possibility is that the magnetic state arises due to indirect spin-spin interactions, which are mediated by conduction electrons. This indirect mechanism is a result of the Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) interaction The next general class consisting of systems known to support the coexistence of magnetic texture crystals and superconductivity concerns a conventional superconductor, on top of which, a single chain or a 2D lattice of magnetic adatoms are deposited. See for instance the proposals in Refs. The type of magnetic order governing these lattices is also here usually controlled by substrate-mediated RKKY spin-spin interactions. The arising magnetic ground state depends on various parameters In the above four cases, the interplay between magnetism and superconductivity can lead to non-negligible competition-type of effects. For example, in nanowire hybrids the superconducting phase exhibited by the metallic segment which is required to engineer the proximity effect "melts" beyond a critical value for the magnetic energy scale. In addition, in topological YSR lattices the pairing term can become substantially suppressed in the vicinity of the adatoms In spite of these notable consequences of the interplay between these two phases of matter, the competition between magnetism and superconductivity is typically weak in the abovementioned systems. The reason is that magnetism and superconductivity originate from different degrees of freedom. Therefore, the above four general categories appear prominent for realizing a number of TSCs discussed in this work, and in particular those possessing a fully-gapped energy spectrum. The suppressed competition arising above is however not relevant when discussing itinerant magnetic superconductors, in which case both magnetism and superconductivity arise from the same degrees of freedom. A representative category of such systems, which is currently receiving significant attention from the condensed matter physics community, is the quite broad family of FeSCs. While in these systems the competition between magnetism and superconductivity is generally expected to be substantial, FeSCs have been nonetheless experimentally captured to harbor magnetic superconducting phases In the limit of a dominant magnetic energy scale assumed here, magnetic texture crystals which lead to a full gap in the energy spectrum are expected to completely suppress the emergence of superconductivity. At least this picture appears probable to hold in the usual weak coupling limit, where superconductivity originates from Cooper pairing at the FS. This prohibits the appearance of TSCs in 1D, since the FS consists of points and any arising FS is due to accidental degeneracies. However, the 2D case does not present such stringent restrictions, since for non-perfectly nested FSs the stabilization of a magnetic texture crystal is expected to gap out only a fraction of the FS, thus leaving behind a reconstructed band structure consisting of Fermi pockets. This remnant FS typically occupies a smaller area than the original FS, and therefore provides a substantially reduced phase space for spin-singlet superconductivity to appear. Notably, while the shape of the remnant FS may retain inversion symmetry Indeed the presence of the two magnetic texture crystals gives rise to a spin texture in k space which is equivalent to a Rashba-type of SOC. Therefore, the emergence of Kramers partners stemming from points connected by inversion allows the spontaneous development of spinsinglet superconductivity. In contrast, the possible appearance of net spin-polarization in the remnant FS implies that spin-singlet superconductivity cannot arise for an infinitesimally weak strength of the interaction driving the Cooper pairing, but instead it needs to reach a threshold value since the pairing susceptibility is no longer divergent at zero temperature The structure of the spin-orientation along the FS is also distinct to the one that typically stabilizes finite Cooper-pair momentum phases To this end, an important aspect concerning the possible realization of a TSC needs to be discussed. Since the spin-singlet superconductivity emerges to gap out only the helical FS branch which was left ungapped by the magnetic texture crystal, one expects that the system will prefer to develop a highly selective k-structure, which mainly becomes nonzero in the vicinity of the remnant helical FS. If such a scenario is realized, then a TSC phase does not become accessible, since magnetism and superconductivity do not coexist in the same regions of k space. Nevertheless, such a situation appears highly unlikely for systems whose pairing instabilities are driven by interactions which favor only a low number of crystal harmonics. Consequently, nonzero pairing is expected to also appear in the vicinity of the FS gapped out by the magnetic texture crystals and mediate the electron-hole conversion which is required for the charge-neutral Majorana quasiparticles to appear. Concluding this section, we wish to briefly comment on what types of TSCs are still accessible in the antipodal limit than the one discuss above, i.e., in which the strength of the energy scale of the magnetic texture crystal is subdominant to the pairing gap. It is first of all straightforward to infer that, when magnetism and superconductivity coexist in this limit, TSC phases are not accessible when the system is fully gapped. Instead, if nodes appear in the spectrum, then one arrives at situations similar to the ones discussed in App. C 6. There, the nontrivial topology stems from the unconventional character of the pairing term itself, while the influence of the added magnetic texture crystal leads to qualitatively new effects only after its strength exceeds the required threshold to compensate the pairing gap at the nested points of the underlying band structure. Besides the above, we remark that an alternative topological scenario becomes accessible when the pairing term contains nodes and the magnetic texture crystal is such, so that it mediates the pairwise scattering of all the nodes. In the event that this process leads to a fully gapped energy spectrum, the bulk system may be classifiable as topologically trivial, but it still allows for the appearance of MZMs. This occurs by trapping the MZMs at the cores of vortex defects introduced in the magnetic texture crystal. Such a possibility is detailed in Ref. We provide a systematic classification of the rich variety of accessible topological phases and Majorana excitations that appear due to the bulk interplay of spin-singlet superconductivity and representative magnetic texture crystals. This work aims at inspiring new developments in a field which has recently attracted significant interest from both theoretical Our investigation first focuses on 1D systems. This allows bridging our work with previous known results [ By following the above approaches, we find a number of new interesting results in 1D. First of all, we construct new crystalline topological invariants which reflect the quantization of the staggered magnetic moment in such systems. In addition, our analysis includes the study of unconventional pairing gaps and discusses how multiple Majorana zero modes appear on a given edge. Another important component of this study is the consideration of two-band models (2BMs). Remarkably, the multiband structure of the magnetization allows interpolating between different symmetry classes, i.e., BDI, AIII and DIII. The former appears when both interband and intraband magnetic scatterings are present. The second becomes relevant for interband-only scattering, in which case the Majorana edge excitations come in pairs. However, these do not obey a charge-conjugation symmetry and thus each pair should be viewed as a single Andreev zero mode. On the other hand, true Majorana Kramers pairs appear when interband-only scattering is present and additional TR-symmetry preserving intraband terms are included, e.g., inversion-symmetrybreaking spin-orbit coupling terms. See also Ref. The emergence of Andreev edge modes in topologically nontrivial systems has recently attracted substantial attention The 2D investigation brings forward an equally rich list of results. By considering once again one-and two-band models, generally-unconventional multiband pairing, as well as various multiband implementations of representative textures, we uncover an intricate set of flat-band, uni/bi-directional, quasi-helical, helical, and chiral Majorana edge modes, that may be protected by strong, weak, or crystalline topology. Specifically, for a magnetic helix crystal (MHC) we obtain Majorana and Andreev flat bands, which can be viewed as direct extensions of the 1D phenomena. However, new physics appears here due to the interplay of the magnetic and pairing point groups, thus revealing a dichotomy when it comes to the topological classification in high-symmetry planes (HSPs). Depending on whether the irreducible representation (IR) of the pairing term belongs to either the {A 1g , B 1g } or {B 2g , A 2g } set, we find a different topological classification and, in turn, Majorana edge mode dispersions. Considering instead a spin whirl crystal (SWC 4 ) magnetic texture which eliminates the possibility of dispersionless edge modes, since the coexistence of two magnetic helix textures winding in different directions and spin planes, lifts almost all the degeneracies in the MBZ. Strikingly however, mirror and space-group symmetries consistent with the structure of the texture still impose a number of degeneracies in HSPs. These enable the conversion of the flat band edge modes into uni/bidirectional ones. The bidirectional modes constitute dispersive Majorana edge modes with neither a fixed chirality nor helicity, whose spin character depends on the conserved wave number. Notably, besides a few exceptions We find that the emerging topological phases in 2D are mostly of the crystalline or weak type, and become manifest through the appearance of the here-called quasihelical Majorana edge modes, which present a certain number of similarities with the standard helical edge modes in 2D. Remarkably, strong phases do not become accessible in 2D, because the crystalline symmetries present trivialize the respective strong topological invariants. Specifically, the presence of space-group symmetries imposes degeneracies at inversion-symmetric points (ISPs) which, in conjunction with the fourfold rotational symmetry (C 4 ) present, imposes a nodal bulk spectrum in the one-band models (1BMs), and do not allow for a strong Z 2 invariant in 2BMs despite the fact that a fully-gapped spectrum is accessible there. As we demonstrate, one possible route to unlock genuinely-2D topological phases, is by including terms which violate C 4 symmetry, while respecting the degeneracies imposed by the magnetic space group. Notably, the violation of C 4 symmetry can be either externally imposed via strain engineering, or spontaneously appear in systems with nematic correlations, cf Ref. Another possibility is to consider the additional pre-sence of a Zeeman/exchange field, which lifts the degeneracies at ISPs, but still retains a number of crystalline symmetries. As a result, the arising bidirectional modes can be converted into unidirectional depending on the orientation of the field, Majorana chiral edge modes become accessible in 1BMs, and mirror-symmetryprotected quasi-helical edge modes may persist or get gapped out. Despite the fact that space-group symmetries appear to be detrimental for the appearance of genuinely-2D topological phases, we remark that they still constitute a unique pathway to obtain multiplydegenerate Majorana excitations, such as, hourglass Majorana edge modes Among the possible systems that promise to provide a fertile ground to materialize such a possibility, the family of doped Fe-based superconductors (FeSCs) stands out. Some FeSCs are well known to exhibit a coexistence of magnetism and superconductivity Other physical systems which our results may be applicable to, include hybrid systems We continue with enumerating a number of possible experimental methods to infer the various topological phases discussed here, and detect the arising Majorana/Andreev modes. As mentioned already, spin-and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy Finally, we conclude by pointing out that magnetic texture crystals can generally harbor 0D topological defects, such as vortices, which can be further employed to trap Majorana zero modes. This was brought to light only recently in Ref. One verifies that the above kinetic part of the Hamiltonian is invariant under translations and inversion. The Hamiltonian for the MHC texture in Eq. ( Main target of this appendix is to shed light to the topological classification at ISPs/HSPs. At k x = 0, we find that I and {1 | π /Q} possess the twofold degenerate eigenvalues ±1 and ±i, respectively. Instead, at k x = π/4, we find that I possesses the eigenvalues {1, 1, 1, -1}, while {1 | π /Q} possesses the twofold degenerate eigenvalues ±1. The emergence of different eigenvalues for these symmetry operations at the two ISPs implies that the respective symmetry classes generally differ. In contrast, these symmetry operators are k x -independent in the wave-number-transfer description, thus implying that the various ISPs and HSPs are dictated by the same symmetry and topological properties. The apparent discrepancy is attributed to the fact that the Hamiltonian in the wave-number-transfer description is not compactified. Therefore, caution is needed when performing the classification using this formalism. In fact, we find that the topological classifications coincide for the the ISPs and HSPs where a magnetic gap opens. In contrast, at ISPs/HSPs where a Kramers degeneracy appears and the magnetization becomes ineffective, only the sublattice-based topological classification is valid. Appendix B: Space Group Symmetry-Protected Degeneracies Nonsymmorphic space group operations take the form {g |t}, where g defines a point group operation and t is a translation by a fraction of a Bravais lattice vector. A space group symmetry is referred to as nonsymmorphic, when no coordinate system can be chosen to remove the translation t in {g | t} The fact that a genuine nonsymmorphic symmetry requires that the equivalence gt = t should be met, further restricts the systems in which nonsymmorphic symmetries can provide topological protection to boundary modes and thus stabilize crystalline topological phases. Since such a boundary is required to preserve both g and t, only 3D systems can exhibit topological crystalline phases induced by nonsymmorphic symmetries. Indeed, edges of 2D systems generally fail to fulfill these criterion, and the presence of nonsymmorphic symmetries can only affect the bulk topological properties of the system. Consider, for example, a 2D system with the nonsymmorphic symmetry {σ xz | (1, 0)}. For this particular case, the edge (01) is invariant under σ xz while (10) is preserving {1 | (1, 0)}, i.e., we can never find an edge which is invariant under the symmetry operation {σ xz | (1, 0)}. Extending the example to 3D systems, we immediately observe that the surface (001) preserves both σ xz and {1 | (1, 0)}, and can thus potentially exhibit topological surface states protected by the nonsymmorphic symmetry. Hence we conclude that a nonsymmorphic symmetry cannot induce a crystalline topological phase in 2D systems, except in rare cases where gk = k For the MHC texture in 1D, our system is invariant under a set of symmetries shown in Table In fact, it is not possible to choose a coordinate system for which both {σ yz | π /Q} and R yz become regular point group elements. This leads to symmetry-protected degeneracies in the spectrum. To exemplify this, we rely on the relation: By further taking into account that Θ 2 = +1, which holds in the here-relevant BDI symmetry class, we obtain {σ yz | π /Q} 2 = +1e ik I π/q for k I = 0, q. This leads to the two eigenvalue equations: We thus observe that the two pairs |k I , ± and R yz |k I , ± have the same (opposite) eigenvalues at k I = 0 (k I = q). The two states are therefore mutually "parallel" (orthogonal) at k I = 0 (k I = q), ultimately leading to a protected degeneracy at k x = q, see Fig. From the above eigenvalues, in combination with Θ, we know that the spectrum in the MBZ must follow the sketch in Fig. The twofold degeneracy at k x = q is enforced because the eigenvalues ±i are connected by the antiunitary symmetry Θ. Notably, this degeneracy can be alternatively seen as the result of the emergent TR symmetry effected by Θ = {σ xz | π /Q}Θ ≡ {T | π/Q}, with Θ2 = 1e ikxπ/q . Similar arguments for the MHC in 2D establish once again that the symmetries {σ yz | π /Q} and R yz constitute a pair of offcentered ones, and impose a twofold degeneracy at k x = q for all k y ∈ [0, 2π). This gives insight about the key features of the generic band structure which is depicted in Fig. We conclude this section with a brief comment on the generic characteristics of the band structure for a 2D system under the influence of a SWC 4 texture. In this case, we do not find any offcentered symmetries. Nonetheless, twofold degeneracies still appear as the result of the presence of nonsymmorphic symmetries. See Fig. kx η 3 + h where M σ = (M || + σM ⊥ )/2, with σ = ±1 labeling the eigenvalues of σ z in the new frame. Both blocks reside in BDI class with Θ = K, Ξ = ρ 2 τ 2 K and Π = ρ 2 τ 2 . Consequently, the presence of the unitary symmetry effected the symmetry class transition BDI→BDI⊕BDI, which allows defining a winding number w σ for each block. One observes that each block leads to a fractional winding number ±1/2. As discussed previously in Ref. In order to retrieve the topological invariant of Eq. ( 2. Winding Number in 1D 1BMs for a generic ∆ kx Here we obtain an expression for the winding number in the case of a generic ∆ kx . To facilitate the derivation of an analytical result, we restrict to the weak coupling limit. We block diagonalize the low-energy BdG Hamiltonian in Eq. ( To evaluate the mirror invariant of Eq. (34) at k x = 0, we restrict to the weak-coupling regime, and block diagonalize Eq. ( Ĥlow-en kx=0,σ = ξ + 0;q τ 3 + ∆ + 0;q τ 1 -σ The above is further block-diagonalizable by introducing the eigenstates of ρ 3 labelled by ρ = ±1. Straighforward manipulations following after the definitions of Eq. ( Similar to the construction leading to Eq. (C3), also here one has to consider combinations of the invariants stemming from the ρ blocks. Specifically, here we need to define n kx=0,σ = -(n kx=0,σ,-+ n kx=0,σ,+ )/2. The glide Majorana parity is here defined as a Z 2 invariant for the BDI class in 0D. This is given as the parity of the winding number for an interpolation Ĥ with ∈ [0, 2π) connecting the Hamiltonian of interest Ĥπ and a reference Hamiltonian Ĥ0 . The winding number reads: To obtain the result of Eq. (37), we employ the above equation, where each one of the two σ blocks of Eq. ( (C9) We block-off diagonalize the above blocks via the transformation (ρ 2 τ 2 + τ 3 )/ √ 2 and find: Âkx=0,σ = -∆ + 0;q -M σ ρ 3 -iξ + 0;q ρ 2 . (C10) By obtaining the determinant of the above upper offdiagonal blocks, we directly find the result of Eq. (37). To obtain the winding number for an interband-only MHC, we restrict to the low-energy sector of the system and consider the projected spinor: For a gap function transforming as the B 2g or A 2g IR, the resulting point group becomes G MHC accompanied by the space group symmetries {T , σ Q xz,yz | ( π /Q, 0)}. As discussed in Sec. V A 1, these modified symmetries lead to a BDI⊕BDI class in the k x = 0 HSP and a AI⊕AI class for k y = {0, π}, since, for the latter, the gap function vanishes. Specifically, for these HSPs, denoted by the wavevectors k Rxz , the Hamiltonian takes the simple form in the weak-coupling regime: Ĥk Rxz ,σ,τ = τ ξ + k Rxz ;q1 + ξ - k Rxz ;q1 ρ 2 -M σ ρ 1 , (C17) where τ = ±1 labels the two AI blocks. This class only supports a strong mirror Z invariant for a nodal spectrum, with the associated invariant defined similar to Eq. ( Z ,kx,σ,τ = (C18) Instead for the k x = 0 HSP, the BdG Hamiltonian in the weak-coupling limit becomes: Ĥk=(0,ky) = ξ k=(q,ky) τ 3 -∆ k=(q,ky) ρ 2 τ 1 -(M ⊥ ρ 1 σ z + M || ρ 3 σ x )/2 . (C19) For this case we can only define a strong invariant for a fully gapped spectrum, namely the glide w G,kx=0 and mirror w M,kx=0 winding numbers, see Eqs. ( Ĥk=(0,ky),σ = ξ k=(q,ky) τ 3 -∆ k=(q,ky) ρ 2 τ 1 -M σ ρ 1 . (C20) After block off-diagonalizing the above Hamiltonian by means of the unitary operator (ρ 2 τ 2 + τ 3 )/ √ 2, we obtain: det( Âky,σ ) = ξ 2 k=(q,ky) -∆ 2 k=(q,ky) -M 2 σ + 2iξ k=(q,ky) ∆ k=(q,ky) . For the remaining two symmetries {σ Q yz | ( π /Q, 0)} and R Q yz , which in fact commutes with Õ, we find that their matrix representations coincide in each σ block. This leads to the additional block diagonalization by means of the unitary operator (ρ 1 τ 3 + ρ 2 )/ √ 2: Ĥk=(0,ky),σ,ρ = ξ k=(q,ky) τ 3 -ρ∆ k=(q,ky) τ 1 -ρM σ τ 3 , (C21) which we further block off-diagonalize with by means of a unitary transformation with operator (τ 2 +τ 3 )/ √ 2, and find Âk=(0,ky),σ,ρ = -i ξ k=(q,ky) -ρM σ + ρ∆ k=(q,ky) . In order to exemplify the above, we consider in the following the 1BM from Fig. In Fig. Note that each one of the band dispersions employed in the upcoming models is chosen to be independently invariant under all the D 4h point group operations. Note that the Green function approach could have been also used to evaluate the winding number w in Eq. Recall that the above is expressed in the local spin frame. Rotating back with Û † , implies that n M ;k Ryz leads to the quantization of the staggered magnetization in the xz spin plane. The nonmenclature highlights that this symmetry is not nonsymmorphic, because we can choose a coordinate system in the direct lattice for which {σyz | π /Q} → σyz. See also App. B. Note also that interband pairing appears more possible to arise in 1D rather than 2D systems, since the FS in the former case consists of points. For nonoverlapping FSs, the appearance of interband pairing requires a suitable bosonic "glue", such as antiferromagnetic magnons, which can provide the wave-vector transfer that is required to connect the different bands Note that the 1BM presented in Fig.7features additional gap closings at kx, ±π/2 . However, these solely stem from the nextnearest-neighbor character of the hopping term considered, and do not constitute universal properties. In fact, this band peculiarity can be removed by considering additional hopping matrix elements of a different range in the 2D version of Eq. (1). The particular choice of energy dispersion and pairing order pa- M M,HSP is defined as M M,HSP = sgn σ M σ,HSP , where σ = ±1 labels the D⊕D blocks. Each M σ,HSP follows from Eq. (59). Note that the above fourfold degeneracy does not lead to hourglass MFs. Following Ref. Magnetic-field-induced TSC phases: Majorana uni/bi-directional, quasi-helical, and chiral edge modes See for instance inTable I that the magnetic point groups of MHC and SWC 4 contain the C 2 point group element. This is due to the space group symmetries discussed in TableI. In certain systems the emergence of net spin polarization may significantly enhance the tendency to develop equal spin pairing phases