We use scanning tunneling microscopy to investigate Bi2Sr2Ca2Cu3O10+δ trilayer cuprates from the optimally doped to overdoped regime. We find that the two distinct superconducting gaps from the inner and outer CuO2 planes both decrease rapidly with doping, in sharp contrast to the nearly constant TC. Spectroscopic imaging reveals the absence of quasiparticle interference in the antinodal region of overdoped samples, showing an opposite trend to that in single-and double-layer compounds. We propose that the existence of two types of inequivalent CuO2 planes and the intricate interaction between them are responsible for these highly anomalous observations in trilayer cuprates. Despite the lack of consensus regarding the mechanism of superconductivity in cuprates, there are two well-established trends about the critical temperature TC. One is the dome-shaped doping dependence of TC, which reaches a peak at hole density p ~ 0.16 Most theoretical models focus on the unique character of trilayer cuprates, namely the existence of inequivalent inner and outer CuO2 planes. It has been proposed that the proximity between the underdoped inner plane (IP) with large pairing strength and the overdoped outer plane (OP) with strong phase stiffness provides an optimal condition for superconductivity The Bi2Sr2Ca2Cu3O10+δ (Bi-2223) system represents an ideal platform for studying the peculiar physics of trilayer cuprates because it can be easily cleaved for surface sensitive probes such as angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) A highly anomalous observation regarding Bi-2223 is that upon reaching the optimal doing, TC remains almost a constant with further increase of hole density In this letter, we use STM to study the evolution of electronic structure in Bi-2223 from the optimally doped to overdoped regime. We find that despite the nearly constant TC, the two superconducting gaps from the IP and OP both decrease rapidly with doping. Spectroscopic imaging reveals the systematic increase of hole density, but there is an absence of quasiparticle interference (QPI) in the antinodal region of overdoped Bi-2223. We propose that the distinct doping evolution of the two types of CuO2 planes and the intricate interaction between them are essential for understanding these anomalous properties in trilayer cuprates. A series of Bi-2223 crystals were grown by the travelling solvent floating zone method and post-annealed in different oxygen pressure and temperature conditions to achieve overdoping. Details about sample growth and treatment have been published previously Although the spatially averaged dI/dV in Bi-2223 is similar to that in other cuprates, a closer examination of each individual dI/dV curve reveals a highly unique feature. As shown by the representative dI/dV curves in Fig. Due to the rather broad distribution of ΔIP and ΔOP, the two-gap feature is smeared out in the averaged spectra displayed in Fig. We have performed spectroscopic imaging on each sample by taking dI/dV curves on a dense grid, which enables us to extract the momentum-space information through the QPI patterns. The conductance maps g(r, E) = dI/dV (r, E) at selected energies for each sample are displayed in supplementary Fig. With increasing doping, the energy range exhibiting pronounced QPI patterns becomes smaller, in accordance with the reduction of superconducting gap size. By applying Fourier transform (FT) analysis on the z map, the periodical modulations in real space can be converted into bright spots in q space. The last columns in Fig. Despite the similarity of the QPI patterns with that in other well-studied cuprates Our STM experiments reveal two highly anomalous behaviors in overdoped Bi-2223: the rapid decrease of both ΔIP and ΔOP in the presence of nearly constant TC, and the suppression of QPI in the antinodal region. Both trends are absent in the single-and double-layer Bi-based cuprates, thus are unique to the trilayer compound. We believe the key physics lies in the most unique trait of trilayer cuprates, namely the two types of inequivalent CuO2 planes. Due to the limited experimental and theoretical studies on overdoped Bi-2223, below we will only give some phenomenological explanations for these anomalies. The questions regarding what determines the TC of a cuprate and the overall dome-shaped dependence have been core issues in high TC superconductivity since its discovery. The most influential viewpoint is that TC is determined by two more fundamental temperature scales It can naturally explain the TC dome, but is apparently not obeyed here by Bi-2223. To reconcile such discrepancy, it has been hypothesized that the IP of overdoped Bi-2223 remains at the optimal hole density despite increasing oxygen content, which helps maintain the highest TC We find that a more applicable model for the anomalously high TC in overdoped Bi-2223 is by considering the effective superconducting gap size ΔSC of the two inequivalent CuO2 planes. It was proposed that due to the d-wave pairing symmetry in cuprates, TC is determined by the "coherent gap size" at the tip of Fermi arc because beyond that the coherent Bogoliubov quasiparticles are suppressed by the pseudogap The absence of QPI in the antinodal region of overdoped Bi-2223 is another manifestation of the peculiar electronic structure of trilayer cuprates. In overdoped single-and double-layer cuprates, the elongation of Fermi arc has been shown to generate strong QPI features over an extended section in k-space In summary, spectroscopic imaging STM experiments on the overdoped regime of Bi-2223 reveal highly anomalous doping evolution of superconductivity and QPI patterns that are distinctively different from single-and double-layer compounds. We propose that the existence of two types of inequivalent CuO2 planes and the intricate interaction between them are the underlying reasons for these anomalies. These results highlight the unique characteristics of trilayer cuprates, which are the key factors for achieving the highest TC. 