Achieving high power performance and durability with low Pt loadings are critical challenges for proton exchange membrane fuel cells. PtCo catalysts developed on new carbon black supports show promise by simultaneously providing good oxygen reduction kinetics and local oxygen transport. We investigate the role of nanoscale morphology in the performance of these catalysts supported on accessible (HSC-e and HSC-f) and conventional (Ketjen Black) porous carbons using 3D electron tomography, nitrogen sorption, and electrochemical performance measurements. We find that the accessible porous carbons have hollow interiors with mesopores that are larger and more numerous than conventional porous carbons. However, mesopore-sized openings (>2nm width) are too rare to account for significant oxygen transport. Instead we propose the primary oxygen transport pathway into the interior is through 1-2nm microporous channels permeating the carbon. The increased mesoporosity in the accessible porous carbons results in a shorter diffusion pathlength through constrictive, tortuous micropores in the support shell leading to lower local oxygen transport resistance. In durability testing, the accessible porous carbons show faster rates of electrochemical surface area loss, likely from fewer constrictive pores that would mitigate coarsening, but maintain superior high current density performance at end of life from the improved local oxygen transport. Hydrogen-based proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) are a promising clean alternative to the combustion engine. However, their widespread adoption for vehicle applications is limited by the high cost and platinum requirements of current fuel cell technology The structure and morphology of the carbon support, as well as the location of the metal catalyst particles on the support, have important impacts on fuel cell performance and durabiltiy Newly developed "accessible" porous carbons (such as the HSC-e and HSC-f carbons) were developed to mitigate these shortfalls. While the accessible porous carbon supports have been investigated using electrochemical diagnostics The baseline porous carbon black is KetjenBlack EC-300J, denoted as HSC-a in this study. The carbon has a large amount of interior pores allowing Pt catalyst particles to deposit both on the inside and outside of the carbon primary particles Fuel cell and electrochemical evaluations of each catalyst were performed in a membrane electrode assembly with the electrocatalysts of interest on the cathode. The active area of the fuel cell single cell was 50 cm 2 . The electrode Pt loadings were 0.1 and 0.025 mgPt/cm 2 for the cathode and anode, respectively. Perfluorosulfonic acid (PFSA) Nafion ® D2020 was used in the electrode at an ionomer to carbon weight ratio of 0.8. An 18 μm thick PFSA-based membrane was used to fabricate the MEAs. A 240 μm thick carbon paper with a 30 μm thick microporous layer (MPL) coated on top was used as the gas diffusion layer (GDL). The MEAs were fabricated using a catalyst-coated-membrane approach. The catalyst accelerated stability test (AST), recommended by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), consists of 30,000 trapezoidal voltage cycles between 0.6 and 0.95 V. The dwell time at each voltage was 2.5 s and the ramp time was 0.5 s. Each cycle takes 6 s. The AST were performed at 80°C, 100% relative humidity, and ambient pressure. The fuel cell performance, electrochemically active surface area, and oxygen reduction reaction mass activity were measured at 0, 10,000 and 30,000 cycles during catalyst AST. Fuel cell polarization curve is recoded under the operating conditions in the order of anode/cathode: H2/air, 94°C, 65/65% RHinlet, 250/250 kPaabs,outlet, stoichiometries of 1.5/2. ORR activity is reported at 0.9 VRHE at 80°C, 100% relative humidity, and 1 bar of O2. Pt ECSA was measured by CO stripping in an MEA. Catalyst powders were dispersed in ethanol by ultrasonication. Several microliters of this mixture were dropped on 100-mesh hexagonal copper grids coated with an ultrathin (nominally 3-4 nm) carbon film. These grids are well suited for tomography experiments by allowing a large tilt range and low background signal. To eliminate the possibility of etching the carbon supports, the samples were not plasma cleaned. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was carried out on an FEI T12 BioTwin with a lanthanum hexaboride filament. An accelerating voltage of 80kV was used to reduce beam damage to carbon in the samples while maintaining high imaging resolution and a tolerable effective sample thickness for tomography. Bright field imaging was used to provide strong phase contrast for carbon and a relatively small contrast ratio between platinum and carbon, allowing for improved visualization of the carbon structure and pores. No objective aperture was used. Electron tomography tilt series data was acquired manually using a Fischione Model 2020 tomography holder. Images were acquired over the full range of sample visibility, typically around 150° total, at either one-or two-degree increments. Tomography was conducted at room temperature. The bright field TEM imaging mode mitigates carbon contamination concerns for tomography because contaminant carbon is typically deposited outside of the field of view before reaching the area of interest. Alignment and reconstruction of tomography data was done in Matlab using custom tools. Images in each tomography tilt series were aligned manually to a common coordinate system using a single PtCo particle visible at all tilt angles as a fiducial marker. Low quality images where the fiducial marker is not very visible and the signal is weak were removed. Alignments were accurate to approximately one pixel in each direction, with pixel to length ratio of 1.7 pixels per nm. Aligned tilt series background intensity was removed by dividing by the modal intensity of all pixels from the tilt series. Tomograms were reconstructed using a weighted back projection algorithm implemented using the iradon function in Matlab. Reconstructed tomograms of each of the samples was segmented to identify PtCo particles using a threshold and active contour that employs the Chan-Vese method 3D electron tomography visualizations were created using the open source tomography platform tomviz (http://www.tomviz.org/) Carbon primary particle diameter were measured manually from sets of 2D TEM images using ImageJ including a range of carbon particles in each sample. Carbon pore sizes were measured manually from cross-sections of reconstructed tomograms using ImageJ. Measurements of segmented PtCo particles such as equivalent diameter were calculated using the regionprops3 function in Matlab and surface area was calculated using the equivalent diameter and spherical approximation (See supplemental Figure Overview of Catalyst, Support, and Pore structure Three different PtCo catalysts were examined for this study: one deposited on a conventional porous carbon, KetjenBlack EC-300J (PtCo/HSC-a) and two with 'accessible' porous carbon supports (PtCo/HSC-e and PtCo/HSC-f). HSC-e was modified from KetjenBlack, while HSC-f is a similar carbon but with smaller carbon primary particles The morphology of the carbon support was first examined using TEM images (Figure The statistical distribution of PtCo particles on the inside and outside of the carbon support (Figure In HSC-a, as expected for porous carbon catalysts, interior PtCo particles are restricted by the small internal pores and are thus smaller than exterior PtCo particles. . Interestingly, this difference in the size of interior and exterior particles is less noticeable for HSC-e and HSC-f. We also compared the interior and exterior PtCo size distributions for regions of the HSC-a and HSC-e samples with relatively hollow vs full carbons, and find similar trends (Figure From the tomography, we then calculated the specific surface area, and found it is very similar (within ~10%) to the electrochemically-active surface area (ECSA) measured by hydrogen adsorption-desorption (HAD) (Table In our earlier study However, mesopore-sized openings (>2 nm width) are rarely observed in the tomography experiments performed here for HSC-a, HSC-e, and HSC-f, and are too infrequent to quantify for any of the carbons. Although HSC-f may have slightly larger and more visible pore openings, these openings do not seem abundant enough to be the primary pathway for gas diffusion into the carbon interior. Instead, tomographic imaging (Figure The accessibility of interior pores was investigated further by comparison to nitrogen adsorption and desorption measurements (BET-BJH), as shown in Figure Pore size analysis from these nitrogen sorption isotherms (Figure Because of both the TSE and pore blocking effects, use of the desorption isotherm may lead to significant inaccuracies in calculated pore size distributions. The adsorption isotherm is mostly unaffected by the TSE and pore blocking effects, and therefore more accurately reflects the size distribution of the internal pores. In the pore size distribution calculated from the adsorption isotherm it is apparent that there is significantly more mesopore volume across the 3-16 nm size range in HSC-e and HSC-f when compared to HSC-a. This increase is even more pronounced for HSC-f because of the smaller carbon primary particles, resulting in comparatively more mesopore volume per mass. This result is consistent with the differences in carbon pore structure and primary particle size observed through TEM tomography (Figure Oxygen diffusing to PtCo particles in the carbon support interior therefore likely passes predominantly through these microporous channels. Despite their apparent tortuosity, these micropores may be capable of supporting significant oxygen diffusion because of the large open volume and cross-sectional area created by their slit-shaped geometry. The increased mesoporosity in HSC-e and HSC-f and decreased primary particle size in HSC-f, lead to shorter pathlength for diffusion through the micropores in the carbon shell. This shorter pathlength is likely responsible for the decreased local oxygen transport resistance in the accessible porous carbons HSC-e and HSC-f. It is also possible that empty pore volume in the immediate vicinity of PtCo particles on the carbon interior is an important factor in effective local oxygen transport. In HSC-a, pores are often only slightly larger than PtCo particles contained in them, which may limit the rate of oxygen diffusion to the surface. The larger mesopores in HSC-e and HSC-f create some open space surrounding embedded PtCo particles, where the oxygen flux is highly concentrated. These results explain why the accessible carbons simultaneously achieve good local O2 transport and high ORR kinetic activity. The larger interior pores and shorter, less tortuous diffusion paths together help lower the O2 transport resistance. At the same time, the small microporous openings in the carbon shell effectively exclude ionomer from entering carbon pores and poisoning the Pt surfaces, enabling the high ORR mass activities (Table Despite these large ECSA losses, surprisingly, the accessible porous carbons still retain the greater HCD performance after the AST (Figure However, the reduction in local oxygen transport resistance provided by the accessible porous carbon structure dramatically mitigates the negative impact of ECSA loss on HCD performance. This effect more than compensates for the more rapid ECSA loss caused by the more open support interior. New accessible porous carbon supports (HSC-e and HSC-f), which were previously shown to provide both good kinetics and high current density performance, were studied using TEM imaging and tomography and compared to a conventional porous carbon (HSC-a) to determine what characteristics of the carbon morphology contributed to their improved performance. Cross-sections of tomographic reconstructions show that all three porous carbons contain internal mesopores as well as narrow, ~1-2 nm wide microporous channels, which appear to have a flat, slit-like geometry formed between carbon sheets. Mesopore-sized (~3-4 nm or larger) pore openings appear rare and are therefore unlikely to support significant oxygen transport to the interior. We propose that microporous channels connecting interior mesopores and the carbon exterior are the primary pathway for oxygen transport to the support interior. This conclusion is supported by nitrogen sorption isotherms and BJH pore size distributions, which indicate that nitrogen adsorbed in mesopores desorbs through smaller, microporous openings. The slit-shaped geometry of the micropores may enable significant oxygen diffusion by creating a relatively large open volume and cross-sectional area. The lack of large pore openings also ensures that ionomer infiltration into the support interior will be blocked to preserve highly active catalyst surfaces. The accessible porous carbons HSC-e and HSC-f have internal mesopores that are relatively large (ranging from 7 to 14 nm) and prevalent in comparison to the mesopores in HSCa (ranging from 3 to 10 nm). HSC-f also has somewhat smaller carbon primary particles, averaging around 21 nm, compared to around 26 nm for both HSC-a and HSC-e, leading to a thinner shell of carbon surrounding the internal mesopores. The structure of the accessible porous carbons may lead to improved local oxygen transport in two ways. First, the thinner carbon shell surrounding interior mesopores and PtCo particles allows for a shorter, less tortuous path for oxygen diffusion through the microporous channels. Second, the larger mesopores in the accessible carbons also prevent PtCo particles from being closely confined by carbon, allowing for higher oxygen flux in the immediate vicinity of the Pt surface. Further investigations with transport modelling may be able to distinguish the relative importance of these two factors. The accessible carbons also tend to have a higher fraction of PtCo particles and active surface on the carbon exterior. This is likely because the larger interior pores lead to less interior surface area and thus fewer interior nucleation sites for PtCo particles. Development of accessible porous carbons with more internal surface area may thus allow further improvements in catalyst kinetics. The larger mesopores and higher fraction of exterior PtCo particles for the accessible porous carbons may also contribute to contribute to PtCo particle coalescence during accelerated stress testing, leading to the more severe ECSA and mass activity loss compared to HSC-a. Despite this, the accessible porous carbons maintain higher performance at high current densities because the improved local transport resistance decreases the performance penalty of ECSA losses. Accessible porous supports therefore offer a potential advantage for fuel cell durability as well as for performance. It is possible that accessible porous carbons could be further improved to extend durability through other approaches to suppress coalescence, such as anchoring of the catalyst particles.