Metal-organic framework (MOFs) are nanoporous materials that could be used to capture carbon dioxide from the exhaust gas of fossil fuel power plants to mitigate climate change. In this work, we design and train a message passing neural network (MPNN) to predict simulated CO 2 adsorption in MOFs. Towards providing insights into what substructures of the MOFs are important for the prediction, we introduce a soft attention mechanism into the readout function that quantifies the contributions of the node representations towards the graph representations. We investigate different mechanisms for sparse attention to ensure only the most relevant substructures are identified. Anthropogenic carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) emissions are a major contributor to climate change and ocean acidification MOFs are acclaimed as "designer materials" Here, we design and train a message passing neural network (MPNN) MPNNs We aim to predict the equilibrium CO 2 adsorption in a MOF at a given temperature and pressure, a ∈ R + [mmol/g]. Each MOF structure is represented as an undirected, node-labeled graph G = (V, E, X), where V is the set of n = |V| nodes or vertices, representing atoms, E is the set of edges, representing bonds, and X ∈ R d×n is the node feature matrix, whose columns are one-hot encodings of the chemical elements of the atoms (d possible elements). In a supervised manner, we aim to learn a function that maps a MOF to its predicted CO 2 adsorption: We constructed the node-labeled graph G representing each MOF from its unit cell, the list of atoms in the unit cell, and the crystallographic coordinates of those atoms. A bijection exists between the nodes V and the atoms comprising the unit cell of the MOF. Two atoms are assigned an edge (bond) iff, as in Refs. Fig. Message passing. First, our MPNN operates on nodes and learns a vector representation of the local bonding environment of each node in the graph. This is achieved by a chemical element embedding followed by iterations of message passing. The chemical element embedding layer maps the one-hot encoding of the chemical element of the node to a low-dimensional, dense representation: where x v is column v of X and Θ e is a r × d learned matrix, with r < d. Message passing is then used to learn a representation of each node encapsulating information about its local bonding environment. Let h v ∈ R k be the hidden representation of node v at time step t, with k ≥ r, initialized with the element embedding x e v padded with zeros. In each time step, every node receives information from its neighbors and updates its hidden representation accordingly, from an aggregated message, using a gated graph neural network (GGNN) where Θ m is a learned k × k matrix shared across all nodes and N (v) is the set of nodes that share an edge with node v. A Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) (shared across all nodes) then updates the hidden representation of node v: We conduct T time steps of message passing, after which h (T ) v contains information about the bonding environment of node v within a graph-distance of T . where θ s ∈ R k is a learned vector shared across all nodes. To introduce sparsity, we also try (1) the quasi-norm L(0.5) regularization of the attention scores and ( The attention score of node v then determines the contribution of its hidden representation h (T ) v to the representation of the graph, r: Finally, a neural network predicts the CO 2 adsorption (â) from the graph representation: where Θ a is a learned z × k matrix and θ a ∈ R z is a learned vector. The softplus ensures a > 0. As train, test, and validation data, we use simulated CO 2 uptake at 298 K and 0.15 bar from Ref. We include the attention score α v as a step towards an MPNN with explainable predictions. If α v is large, the hidden representation of node v had a significant contribution to the graph representation r used to predict adsorption, a. Our inspection of the attention scores across different MOFs did not yield any clear insight or chemically meaningful patterns. This leads us to believe that the attention score is not as meaningful as we have hoped for identifying important substructures. we further believe this is due to (i) h (T ) v of node v is enriched with information from all nodes within T steps from node v via message passing; (ii) neighboring nodes tend to have strong similarity; and (iii) the attention scores do not necessarily reflect the importance of node v for the predicted adsorption 