Hybrid multiferroics such as BiFeO 3 (BFO) and La 0.7 Sr 0.3 MnO 3 (LSMO) heterostructures are highly interesting functional systems due to their complex electronic and magnetic properties. One of the key parameters influencing the emergent properties is the quality of interfaces, where varying interdiffusion lengths can give rise to different chemistry and distinctive electronic states. Here we report high-resolution depth resolved chemical and electronic investigation of BFO/LSMO superlattice using standing-wave hard X-ray photoemission spectroscopy in the first-order Bragg as well as near-total-reflection geometry. Our results show that the interfaces of BFO on top of LSMO are atomically abrupt, while the LSMO on top of BFO interfaces show an interdiffusion length of around 1.2 unit cells. The two interfaces also exhibit different chemical gradients, with the BFO/LSMO interface being Sr-terminated by a spectroscopically distinctive high binding energy component in Sr 2p core-level spectra, which is spatially contained within 1 unit cell from the interface. From the electronic point of view, unique valence band features were observed for bulk-BFO, bulk-LSMO and their interfaces. Our X-ray optical analysis revealed a unique electronic signature at the BFO/LSMO interface, which we attribute to the coupling between those respective layers. Valence band decomposition based on the Bragg-reflection standing-wave measurement also revealed the band alignment between BFO and LSMO layers. Our work demonstrates that standing-wave hard x-ray photoemission is a reliable non-destructive technique for probing depth-resolved electronic structure of buried layers and interfaces with sub-unit-cell resolution. Equivalent investigations can be successfully applied to a broad class of material such as perovskite complex oxides with emergent interfacial phenomena. Transition metal oxides are known for their complex electronic structure. The interweaving of orbitals that forms the valence bands gives rise to myriad interesting physical properties Magnetic and electronic transport properties of LSMO are sensitive to thickness, growth techniques and parameters, showing different types of anisotropy depending on them A BFO/LSMO heterostructure is a prototypical candidate to study so-called hybrid multiferroics, since at the interface there is the coexistence of the ferroelectric behavior of BFO and the ferromagnetic properties of LSMO. The magnetoelectric coupling allows for an electric-field control of magnetism with huge implication in electronics and spintronics applications Here, we extend the past experimental results using high-precision depth selectivity across the buried BFO/LSMO interface using standing-wave hard X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (SW-HAXPES) BFO/LSMO superlattices were fabricated on TiO 2 -terminated (001) single-crystal SrTiO 3 substrates by pulsed laser deposition, with reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) control of the growth process, as discussed below and in the Supplemental Material 1 . The growth process of BiFeO 3 and La 0.7 Sr 0.3 MnO 3 were optimized in previous studies The standing-wave experiments rely on the interference between incident and reflected x-rays, with the incidence angle being varied around the first-order Bragg condition of the superlattice under study. The θ x relevant Bragg equation is where is the wavelength of the incident x-ray photon, is the period or bilayer thickness in the multilayer, and is the incidence angle relative to the sample θ x surface. Figure superlattice. The SW electric-field varies sinusoidally with the sample depth and can be swept through it in order to provide depth resolution to XPS. This can be achieved by either scanning the incidence angle (or θ x take-off angle ) or the photon wavelength over the Bragg reflection. Both approaches induce a phase θ xe λ x change in the SW electric-field and the anti-nodes are shifted vertically down the sample by one-half of its period. Finally, the SW will enhance or reduce the photoemission signal from different depths following an unique shape of the electric-field. Multiple core-level and valence band photoemission intensity rocking curves (RC) can be generated and the unique phase information contained in them can be translated into a depth distribution of all the elements in the sample. Beyond the Bragg peak modulation, an additional fine structure called Kiessig fringes is generated by interference effects due to the reflection of top and bottom surfaces of the superlattice. In this case, the relevant equation is , where m th -order interference, is the total thickness of the multilayer mirror with N repetitions, and are the incidence angles corresponding to the reflection order. θ K,m The SW-HAXPES measurements were performed at the undulator beamline BL15XU of the synchrotron radiation facility SPring-8. All spectra were measured using a photon energy of 5953.4 eV, with the total energy resolution at around 240 meV. Energy calibration was done using an Au reference sample and measuring the kinetic energy of the Fermi edge. The beam was focused to a 25 x 25 μm spot, which at ~1°grazing incidence angle translates to 30 x 1800 μm projection on the sample. The radiation polarization was in the photoemission plane with the polarization vector pointing in the direction of the analyzer. Information depth of the photoemission experiments is proportional to electron attenuation length, which in single-scattering approximation translates to the inelastic mean free path (IMFP) Using this sample structural model, photoemission rocking curves are then calculated and compared against the experimental rocking curves until the best fit is achieved. Figure The region of the samples that were used for the decomposition of the valence band spectra are shown in Figure As expected, both top and buried BiFeO 3 layers show a band gap with valence band maximum located at 1.6 eV. This is in agreement with the band gap and location of the Fermi energy reported in literature Interestingly, in region 2, which is a single terminating unit cell between BFO and LSMO, an in-gap state near Fermi edge can be observed. As discussed earlier, this region is chemically distinctive by a different HBE species of Sr. One can speculate that this in-gap state is responsible for the electronic coupling between BFO and LSMO and can be explained by a charge transfer across the interface from Fe to Sr atoms. First principle calculations will be used to confirm this hypothesis. Standing-wave hard X-ray photoemission was used to investigate the depth-resolved chemical and electronic composition of the hybrid multiferroic system BFO/LSMO and to identify the phenomena at the interface between these two perovskite oxides. Two X-ray optical effects were used to enhance depth selectivity of the photoemission experiments -near total reflection and Bragg reflection -for creating a non-monotonous X-ray strength profile inside the multilayer sample. In terms of roughness, the interfaces between BFO/LSMO and LSMO/BFO are different, with the first named (BFO on top) being sharp and abrupt and the latter (LSMO on top) having interdiffusion length of around 1.2 u.c. (4.8 Å). Apart from differences in roughness, the two interfaces also exhibit different chemical gradients, with the BFO/LSMO interface being Sr-terminated by a spectroscopically distinctive high binding energy component in Sr core-level spectra, which is spatially contained within 1 u.c. from the interface. As expected, due to sample exposure to the ambient atmosphere and no vacuum treatment prior to our experiments, Bi is present in a higher oxidation state in the topmost layer, contrary to other two buried BFO layers that are within the experimental probing depth. From the electronic point of view, unique valence band features were observed for bulk-BFO, bulk-LSMO and their interfaces. The in-gap state responsible for the electronic coupling between BFO and LSMO is observed at the BFO/LSMO interface and is connected to a charge transfer between LSMO and BFO layers. Apart from information on chemical and gradients in the sample, valence band decomposition based on Bragg-reflection standing-wave measurement also allowed for a direct observation of band alignment between BFO and LSMO layers. In conclusion, hard X-ray standing-wave excited photoemission experiments were used to obtain layer-resolved chemical and electronic structure of the BFO/LSMO hybrid multi-ferroic system with the depth resolution on the single unit cell level. To our knowledge, standing-wave photoemission is the only non-destructive method capable of probing electronic structure with depth-resolution of this level of accuracy. Our detailed analysis revealed the unique electronic signature at the BFO/LSMO interface connected to electronic coupling between these two ferroics. The equivalent investigations can be successfully applied to a broad class of material such as perovskite complex oxides with emergent interfacial phenomena. BiFeO 3 /La 0.7 Sr 0.3 MnO 3 (BFO/LSMO) superlattices were fabricated by pulsed laser deposition with reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) control of the growth process. Atomically smooth TiO 2 -terminated SrTiO 3 (100) substrates were prepared by a combined HF-etching/anneal treatment The low level of surface roughness was confirmed by atomic force microscopy (AFM) analysis of the surface of 10 bilayers thick BFO/LSMO superlattice. Figure The epitaxial relation between the individual BFO and LSMO layers in a 10 bilayers thick BFO/LSMO superlattice were studied by X-ray diffraction. The superlattice was in-plane fully strained to the SrTiO 3 (100) substrate, as shown by reciprocal space mapping around the (103) SrTiO 3 peak (see Figure Detailed analysis showed the presence of clear Kiessig fringes alongside the SL(002) superlattice peak indicating a highly ordered crystalline sample with very smooth interfaces and surface, see Figure The magnetic properties of a 10 bilayers thick BFO/LSMO superlattice were measured in a Quantum Design PPMS system. Figure In order to extract the rocking curves for the intensities of the photoemission standing-wave maps, the core-level spectra of each species in the superlattice are fitted for all incident angles. The procedure to fit the spectra started with the removal of the Shirley background of all measured datasets, which was performed using the KolXPD software. The data was then fitted using a model that consisted of sums of Voigt-function components, parametrized by their binding energy, amplitude, and Gaussian/Lorentzian widths. Each Voigt component is a convolution of Gaussian and Lorentzian profiles, which are required to adequately describe the experimental and core-hole lifetime broadening effects. The fitting was performed using the Python lmfit package. As discussed previously, due to the standing-wave electric field, the different spectral components in the photoemission spectra can be modulated differently at different depths. To pick up such modulations along the different incident angles, a fine fitting procedure is needed, specially to be able to discern beyond the most apparent components that compose the spectra. One key aspect of the fitting procedure adopted here was that the fitting for each dataset was performed all at once for all incident angles. More than that, the binding energy and broadening parameter values were set to be the same for all incident angles; the amplitudes of the components were left as the only angle-dependent parameters. These constraints enforce that the components are consistent for all incident angles. As an example, Figure 