Time-reversal symmetry breaking (TRSB) with a Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) -like superconductivity occurs in a small, but growing number of noncentrosymmetric (NCS) materials, although the mechanism is poorly understood. We present heat capacity, magnetization, resistivity, and muon spin resonance/relaxation (μSR) measurements on polycrystalline samples of NCS La7Pd3. Transverse-field μSR and heat capacity data show La7Pd3 is a type-II superconductor with a BCS-like gap structure, while zero-field μSR results provide evidence of TRSB. We discuss the implications of these results for both the La7X3 (where X = Ni, Pd, Rh, Ir) group of superconductors and other CS and NCS superconductors for which TRSB has been observed. The discovery of time-reversal symmetry breaking (TRSB) in polycrystalline La 7 Ir 3 has provided a new group of superconductors in which to investigate unconventional superconducting behavior Noncentrosymmetric (NCS) superconductors have garnered considerable interest in recent years. Their lack of a center of inversion means that parity is no longer a good quantum number A noncentrosymmetric superconductor with a mixture of triplet and singlet states may be expected to display unconventional superconducting properties. A large number of NCS superconductors have now been studied and many have indeed been shown to exhibit exotic superconducting behavior The possibility of spin-triplet superconductivity or singlet-triplet mixing make NCS superconductors prime candidates to exhibit time-reversal symmetry breaking. Muon spectroscopy studies of several NCS superconductors, including LaNiC 2 In this paper we discuss the properties of La 7 Pd 3 which is one of a group of hexagonal NCS superconductors with a Th 7 Fe 3 -type structure (space group P 6 3 mc). By investigating the superconducting ground state of La 7 Pd 3 using muon spectroscopy further insight can be gained into the unusual superconducting behavior of this group of intermetallic compounds. Pedrazzini et al. previously reported some of the superconducting and normal-state properties of La 7 Pd 3 as well as other members of this group of superconductors, however, the fact that this family of materials has a noncentrosymmetric structure was not emphasized Polycrystalline samples of La 7 Pd 3 were prepared from stoichiometric quantities of La (3N) and Pd (3N) in an arc furnace under an argon atmosphere on a water-cooled copper hearth. The sample buttons were melted and flipped several times to ensure phase homogeneity. The observed weight loss during the melting was negligible. The sample buttons were then sealed in an evacuated quartz tube, and annealed for 5 days at 500 • C. The material is air sensitive and was observed to rapidly develop an orange surface discoloration if exposed to air. The samples were stored in a glove-box under an argon atmosphere. A Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System was used to measure both the heat capacity and electrical resistivity between 1.8 and 300 K in applied fields up to 9 T. A Quantum Design He-3 insert was used to access temperatures down to 0.5 K. A Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System with iQuantum He-3 insert was used to measure the magnetization between 0.5 and 300 K in applied fields up to 7 T. Muon spin relaxation/rotation (μSR) measurements where performed using the MuSR spectrometer at the ISIS Neutron and Muon Source at the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, UK μSR measurements were performed in both transverse-field (TF) and zero-field (ZF) modes. A full description of the detector geometries can be found in Ref. To confirm bulk superconductivity in the La 7 Pd 3 samples the dc volume magnetic susceptibility as a function of temperature, χ dc (T ), was measured in an applied field of 1.2 mT between 0.5 and 1.7 K as shown in Fig. The temperature dependence of the electronic resistivity in La 7 Pd 3 is shown in Fig. The temperature dependence of the heat capacity in La 7 Pd 3 between 0.45 and 2.75 K is shown in Fig. gives the Debye temperature Θ D = 159(2) K. The large γ n is quite unusual for noncentrosymmetric superconductors, with the value for La 7 Pd 3 surpassing some heavy-fermion superconductors such as CeCoGe 3 (γ n = 32 mJ/mol K 2 ) The electronic heat capacity in zero applied field in the superconducting state can be used to look for evidence for an unusual superconducting order parameter. The normalized entropy S el /γ n T c is written as ǫ is the energy of the normal state electrons and ∆ (T ) = ∆ (0) δ (T ) where ∆ (0) is the magnitude of the superconducting gap at zero kelvin and the temperature dependence of the energy gap is approximated using a single-gap BCS expression The specific heat in the superconducting state is then calculated from Figure Fig. Values for the upper critical field, H c2 , of La 7 Pd 3 were estimated from the midpoint of the superconducting transition in the resistivity data [see Fig. , giving a good fit to the data and an estimated upper critical field μ 0 H c2 (0) = 652(5) mT, almost 2.5 times the previously reported value The macroscopic superconducting state of La 7 Pd 3 was probed using magnetization, resistivity, and heat capacity, however, in superconductors the microscopic magnetic environment formed by the vortex lattice can provide an essential insight into the superconducting state. Positive muons are an excellent probe of the local magnetic environment when implanted into a superconductor. The superconducting state of La 7 Pd 3 has been investigated using transverse-field, longitudinal-field, and zero-field μSR. Transverse-field spectra were collected at temperatures between 0.1 to 2.75 K in applied fields ranging from 10 to 50 mT, in the mixed state [μ 0 H c1 (0) = 6.9(2) mT]. In order to produce a well-ordered flux line lattice, the sample was field-cooled before collecting the data on warming. Figure A 1 and A 2 are the sample and silver sample holder asymmetries, B 1 and B 2 are the average fields in the superconductor and silver plate, φ is the shared phase offset, γ μ /2π = 133.5 MHz T -1 is the muon gyromagnetic ratio and σ is the total depolarization rate. By fitting the spectra collected at different temperatures and fields us-ing Eq. ( The nuclear depolarization rate is found to remain constant over all temperatures at σ N = 0.162(1) μs -1 . Since the upper critical field is comparable with the applied fields used in these measurements σ FLL has a considerable field dependence. This is due to significant shrinking of the inter vortex distances within the flux line lattice as the applied field is increased. The effect of the vortex cores and the expected field dependence of the second moment of the field distribution have been calculated using different models. From calculations based on the Ginzburg-Landau model the field dependence of σ FLL can be described using where h r = H/H c2 is the reduced field and λ -2 is the inverse square of the penetration depth where f is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function and the temperature dependence of the gap for an isotropic swave model is ∆ (T ) = ∆ (0) δ (T ) as in Section III B. The fit produced by this model is shown by the dashed line in Fig The response of the muons to the nuclear moments can be captured using the Kubo-Toyabe expression where σ ZF measures the width of the nuclear dipolar field experienced by the muons. The asymmetry can then be modeled by where A 0 and A bg are the sample and background asymmetries, respectively, and Λ measures the electronic relaxation rate. The sample and background asymmetries were found to be constant at all temperatures. σ ZF was found to decrease linearly with increasing temperature from 0.1 to 2.75 K across T c [see Fig. The increase in Λ occurs at a temperature slightly below the superconducting transition temperature as determined from magnetization, resistivity, heat capacity, and TF-μSR measurements. This temperature difference between the signal marking the onset of TRS breaking and T c is also seen in both La 7 Ir 3 Magnetization, heat capacity, resistivity, and μSR measurements reveal that La 7 Pd 3 is type-II superconductor with a T c = 1.45(5) K. Some of the fundamental superconducting parameters determined from these measurements are summarized in Table On the other hand, zero-field μSR measurements reveal an increase in Λ (T ) at low temperature of 0.005 (1) μs -1 . This is taken as evidence for the onset of time-reversal symmetry breaking although this change in Λ (T ) is only visible below ∼ 1.2 K. Similar behavior is observed in La 7 Ir 3 and La 7 Rh 3 (see Table An increase in Λ (T ) at T c in Sr 2 RuO 4 Similar challenges are faced by those investigating the properties of the Re-based α-Mn NCS superconductors. TRSB is reported for several compounds in this series, again with s-wave BCS-like gap structures Now that time-reversal symmetry breaking has been observed in La 7 Pd 3 it joins the small number of NCS superconductors that also show this phenomena. Single crystals of these superconductors are required in order to distinguish parity mixing effects in the materials that appear to have predominantly s-wave BCS-like superconducting gap structures. Studies of elemental superconductors and centrosymmetric superconducting analogues are also needed to clarify how important properties such as the lack of an inversion center and inhomogeneities are in driving time-reversal symmetry breaking in NCS superconductors. Temperature dependence of the magnetic susceptibility in an applied field of 0.5 T (in the normal state). An upturn at low temperature is consistent with the small quantity of paramagnetic impurities present in the La used to prepare the sample. Compound Tc (K) ∆Λ (μs -1 ) ∆σ (μs 