We investigate a two-dimensional (2D) heterostructure consisting of few-layer direct bandgap ReS2, a thin h-BN layer and a monolayer graphene for application to various electronic devices. Metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS)-type devices with two-dimensional (2D) van-der-Waals (vdW) heterostructures have recently been studied as important components to realize various multifunctional device applications in analogue and digital electronics. The tunnel diodes of ReS2/h-BN/graphene exhibit light tuneable rectifying behaviours with low ideality factors and nearly temperature independent electrical characteristics. The devices behave like conventional MIS-type tunnel diodes for logic gate applications. Furthermore, similar vertical heterostructures are shown to operate in field effect transistors with a low threshold voltage and a memory device with a large memory gate for future multifunctional device applications. An assembly of several two-dimensional (2D) crystals via a weak van-der-Waals (vdW) interaction in one vertical stack exhibits various exciting physical phenomena. Field-effect transistors (FETs) and non-volatile memory (NVM) devices have been studied experimentally and theoretically because large-scale CMOS compatible three-terminal FETs are convenient for application to integrated circuit technology. A highly insulating h-BN layer can be used as a 2D dielectric layer for ReS2 FET operation with atomically flat graphene as a local gate, where the strong electrostatic modulation of ReS2 channel conduction can be achieved. This can efficiently reduce the operating bias for ReS2 FETs with a reasonable ON/OFF ratio for low power operation. In another application to a memory device, a graphene layer isolated from the ReS2 channel with insulating h-BN can be used as a floating gate for charge storage. However, many challenges and problems still remain to be overcome before we can realize real device applications, and these include temperature dependence, high operating voltage, low operation speed, poor reliability, low integration density, low optical absorption and poor sensing bandwidth. Recent studies with direct bandgap multilayer ReS2 (~ 1.4 -1.5 eV) have reported various electronics and optoelectronics applications. The main purpose of this study is to build multifunctional devices using 2D-layered vdW materials as basic building blocks for diodes, for field effect transistors (FETs) operating at a low bias, and for logic gate applications and non-volatile memory (NVM) applications. Different layered material components were included in the vdW stack via a multistep transfer process to realize multifunctional device applications. Recently, we have developed a laser-assisted non-volatile memory device for multi-level storage applications using a heterostructure consisting of various 2D materials. Quantum tunnelling phenomena can be incorporated in a designed heterostructure in order to obtain almost temperature independent operation in the fabricated diodes. ReS2/h-BN/graphene vertical MIS-like heterostructures as quantum tunnelling diodes (QTDs) are studied in detail by characterizing the gate electric field dependence, temperature dependence and incident light excitation. We then realize logic gates operation by using a vertical MIS-type tunnel diode. The vertical geometry can lead to tunnel devices with a high rectification ratio and an atomically flat 2D surface as high tunnelling area for a large turn-ON current and a low turn-ON voltage. The fabricated diodes were realized by direct tunnelling (DT) at a lower field strength and Fowler-Nordheim (FN) tunnelling by the application of a high-strength electric field. These tunnel diodes can be used to design various logic gates. We obtained a large rectification, low ideality factor, temperature independent tunnel diodes and their logic gate operation. Furthermore, similar heterostructure geometry can be used for other active electronic devices such as low operating bias FETs transistors and memory devices by arranging different electrical contacts, which are described in the second part of this work. The key parameter of achieving multifunctionality of the device is the fine tunning of the h-BN thickness. The reduction of h-BN layer thickness enables low bias operating FETs, high gate bias modulated NVM operation and vertical MIS-type tunnel diodes. We found that h-BN thickness of 3-5 nm is suitable for the both tunneling, namely DT and FN-tunneling, leading to applications like vertical tunnel MIS-type diodes. Whereas, h-BN thickness of 6-10 nm is applicable for FN-tunneling, where low bias operating FETs and high gate bias modulated NVM devices can be fabricated. This study provides an overview of the use of all-2D atomically-flat layered materials to realize various electronic components including diodes, gate-tunable diodes, low bias operating FETs, logic gate devices and memory devices for multifunctional electronic device applications. These devices are candidates for use in the future smart technology Internet-of-Things (IoT) as building blocks in next generation VLSI architectures, which can potentially enable all-opto-electrical logic processing and quantum information processing. A MIS-type diode structure for logic gate application is a vdW heterostructure consisting of multilayer ReS2 supported by high-quality thin h-BN as a tunnelling layer, where we placed monolayer graphene (Gr) beneath the h-BN as a conductive layer. The 2D nanosheets were directly exfoliated on top of a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp and transferred to the top of another nanosheet on the SiO2/Si substrate. The standard dry transfer method was used to transfer various large-area high-quality 2D flakes onto an arbitrary substrate. The device fabrication is described in detail in the experimental section. In a vdW heterostructure with ReS2 as a semiconducting layer will have to reduce scattering from the charged impurities of the substrate and interfacial impurities resulting from the presence of the atomically flat vdW material h-BN. Figure It is worth noting that various defect levels and/or trap levels have also been reported in h-BN layers and ReS2, which might also affect the tunnelling process. shows effective ohmic contacts with the Cr/Au electrodes. The electrical performance of the MIStype diodes, namely the current versus voltage (I-V) curves, was measured across the heterostructure device consisting of a few-layer ReS2/h-BN/graphene to demonstrate the formation of vertical MIS-type diodes with high rectification and a low turn-on voltage. We evaluated the electrical characteristics (I-V) of the fabricated diodes as shown in the optical image in the Figure During the electrical probe measurements, the graphene was connected to the drain electrode and the n-type ReS2 was connected to the source electrode. Here, the graphene layer was found to be initially hole doped from the absorption of oxygen and/or water molecules from the air. where Is, q, kB and T represent the reverse-bias saturation current, electron charge, Boltzmann constant and absolute temperature of the junction, respectively. This suggests that high quality interfaces were formed between those ReS2, h-BN and graphene layers with minimal interface recombination/generation of carriers. We also found that the I-V characteristics of the diodes are less likely to be temperature dependent (Figure The FNT equation is expressed as follows: where A, φB, q, m, m*, d and h are the effective contact area, barrier height, electron charge, free electron mas, effective electron mass, barrier width of the tunnelling layer of h-BN and Planck's constant, respectively. The FNT equation (Equation We investigated the optoelectrical conduction process in the MIS-type diode structure with the possibility of light-assisted modulation in the rectification performance. Furthermore, the optical excitation might result in a new functionality for tuning the device application in digital optoelectronics. Here we found that visible laser illumination (532 nm) produced a photocurrent, which was gate tuneable and the photocurrent generation mainly depended on the photoconductive gain in the semiconducting ReS2, which is almost linear power law dependent in a low bias operation. The turn-on voltage of the diodes is modulated via different light intensities (Figure Next, we investigate logic gate operation using parallel MIS-type diodes with a low turnon voltage, which can be used for more complex and functional electronic devices. It should be mentioned that an assembly of more MIS-type diodes would produce a multiple-input-based OR gate logic operation. Here, the logic 0 input is -2 V and the logic 1 input is +2 V. In this circuit, the output is low (logic 0) when both input voltages are low (-2 V), and the output is high (logic 1), when either or both of the input voltages are high (+2 V). The output voltage levels (Figure Various applications including diodes, logic gates, transistors, and memory operation confirm the possibility of using a multifunctional device, whose individual functionality can be tuned further under laser light excitation to allow the possibility of use in the optoelectronics domain. First, a few-layer h-BN gate dielectric with a thickness of ~9 nm is used for ReS2 FET operation, where the bottom graphene electrode is used as a gate terminal. The local gated ReS2 FET performance, i.e. the transfer and output characteristics, are shown in Figure FETs that operate at low power. A very low negative threshold voltage (-0.16 V) further confirms the natural n-doping conductance of the few layer ReS2 channel, which is advantageous in terms of building a CMOS circuit for low power operation. ReS2 FETs with h-BN as their back gate dielectric provide superior transistors with negligible hysteresis in the transport characteristics. This could be due to the atomically flat 2D surface of the dielectric and channel material with a 2D atomically thin gate with the absence of interface defect states. Compared with the p ++ Si backgated few-layer ReS2 channel-based FET device (Figure On other hand, we can use same heterostructure as an NVM device as shown in Figure We described various multifunctional electronic devices with an ReS2 based 2D heterostructure. We reported a vertical metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS)-like configuration as a quantum tunnelling diode structure and the logic gate operation when using tunnel diodes with a detailed characterization of the gate electric field dependence, temperature dependence and incident light excitation. The vertical geometry can lead to the high rectification of tunnel devices with an atomically flat 2D surface as a high tunnelling area for a large turn-ON current. The fabricated parallel diodes facilitate both direct tunnelling (DT) at a lower field strength and Fowler-Nordheim (FN) tunnelling with the use of a high-strength electric field, which we used to design logic gates that depended on the various combinations we used. We obtained a large rectification, low ideality factor, temperature independent tunnel diodes and their `OR` logic gate operation. We demonstrated ReS2 FETs operating at a low bias and an NVM device with a large memory window in the same heterostructure device. These devices are candidates for future 2D ultrathin electronic devices, namely diodes, transistors and memory devices, as building blocks for logic circuits in next generation VLSI architectures, which can potentially enable all-optical logic processing and quantum information processing in the modern smart Internet-of-Things (IoT) technology. Standard dry-transfer techniques 