Several amorphous silicon structures were generated using a classical molecular dynamics (MD) protocol of melting and quenching with different quenching rates. An analysis of the calculated electronic properties of these structures revealed that the midgap state density of a-Si which is of interest for solar cell and thin film transistor applications can be correlated to bond angle standard deviation. We also found that this parameter can strongly determine the excess energy of a-Si, which is an important criteria in theoretically generating realistic atomic structures of a-Si. Amorphous silicon (a-Si) has been extensively investigated as the archetypal amorphous covalently bonded material and is widely used in numerous electronic and photovoltaic devices. These features have spurred an intense interest in their electronic properties over the last few decades. a-Si can be fabricated using different methods like laser melting, ion implantation, and growth techniques One of the main electronic features which makes a-Si different from its crystalline counterpart is the presence of electronic states in its energy gap which are called midgap states. The density of midgap states can control many electronic properties of the material by affecting trapping and recombination processes and consequently affect device functionality This paper presents quantitative insights on the relation between the midgap state density and several structural parameters. The specific aim of this paper is twofold: (i) to identify which of the structural defects including dangling bonds (DBs), floating bonds (FBs), bond length average (BLA), bond length standard deviation (BLSTD), bond angle average (BAA) and bond angle standard deviation (BASTD) are capable of accurately describing the nature of midgap state density (ii) to clarify the role of these structural defect on the excess energy of a-Si, which has been recently proposed as an important electronic property in the simulation of a-Si We use a melting and quenching approach to generate a structural model of a-Si as the starting atomic structure for the DFT calculations. The LAMMPS molecular dynamic code Molecular dynamics simulations in conjunction with DFT calculations have been demonstrated to yield amorphous material structures whose properties are commensurate with experimental results Figure The crystalline form of bulk Si shows clear valence band to conduction band energy gap without any midgap states inside the gap. However, midgap states only exist in the amorphous form of Si. The number of midgap states is highly dependent on the atomic structure of the amorphous network. In order to identify the struc- tural parameter having the most significant effect on the midgap states, the total number of midgap states in the obtained a-Si supercells were calculated by integrating the density of states of a-Si inside the energy range of band-gap of Si in its perfect crystal form. By performing DFT calculations on perfect crystal form of Si, we found that the energy range of Si band gap in crystalline form is 6.6-7.5 eV. Fig. Where I and σ BAST D stand for integrated midgap states and bond angle standard deviation, respectively. According this relation, the integrated midgap states monotonically increases as the bond angle standard devi-ation increases. Since any bond angle deviation from the ideal value (109.45 • ) cause bond strain, the bond angle standard deviation is an estimation of stored strain in an amorphous structure. Therefore, the obtained dependency of midgap state density and bond angle standard deviation indicates that strained bonds can significantly cause midgap states even more than dangling bond. This finding is in contrast with the common belief that the midgap states are only due to dangling bonds, and is consistent with the recent studies in the importance of strained bonds in creating midgap states The low regression values for bond length average and bond length standard deviation denote that none of these quantities are good descriptors for midgap state density of an amorphous structure. As seen from the graphs, bond length average and bond length standard deviation changes is negligble from one structure to another is negligible and therefore the low sensitivity of midgap states density to these quantities is not unexpected. In addition, the obtained regression indicate bond angle average is not a proper quantity for describing the midgap state density of amorphous Si. The reason for this observation might be due to missing the information about the negative and positive bond angle deviation by canceling them each other when they are added up. Our observation regarding the strong dependency of midgap states density to bond angle standard deviation is reasonable from a chemical bonding perspective. Bond angle standard deviation contains all the information about any deviation, regardless its sign, from ideal bond angle. An ideal bond angle of 109.45 corresponds to the perfect SP 3 hybridization which cause the bonding and anti-bonding orbitals locate only in the valence band and the conduction band sides, respectively, and no atomic orbital in the band gap. However, when a bond angle associated with a specific atom deviates from its ideal value, the hybridization of that Si atom transform from SP 3 to SP n where n is an integer number. When a bond angle is greater than 109.45 • , then n would be less than 3 and consequently some midgap states appear close to the conduction band edge, due to their S-like orbital properties. In vice versa, when a bond angle is less than 109.45 • , then n would be greater than 3 and consequently some midgap states appear close to the valence band edge, due to their S-like orbital properties. The accuracy of the integrated midgap states dependency on the bond angle standard deviation was checked by calculating the integrated midgap states and bond angle standard deviation of the low strained supercell simulated by Pedersen et. al. To further progress in generating an optimal a-Si model, Pederson et al. have recently proposed to focus on the excess energy of the amorphous structure relative to the crystal, a quantity which can be measured from calorimetry experiments In order to calculate the excess energy, we initially carried out a DFT relaxation calculation on a crystalline silicon (c-Si) supercell comprised of 216 Si atoms with the same size as the a-Si supercells. Then, we subtracted the energy of a-Si supercell from the energy of c-Si and finally the energy difference is considered as the excess energy stored in the a-Si model. Figure Where E ex and σ stand for excess energy and bond angle standard deviation, respectively. From equation, it is obvious that the excess energy linearly increases with bond angle standard deviation. The same ration as part a can be used for explaining the strong correlation between E ex and σ. As mentioned before, Si atoms with bond angle deviation from ideal value gets hybridized with SP n instead of SP 3 . The SP n hybridized orbitals can not create strong equal number of chemical bonds due to their weak overlap compared to SP 3 orbitals. Hence, regardless of the number of the dangling bonds which is usually considered as the criteria for estimating the stability of a-Si model, the bond angle standard deviation is more important in determining the stability of amorphous network. This finding also shows that the bond angle standard deviation is the more fundamental property of an amorphous network than excess energy that can describe the quality of generated a-Si models. Same as part A, we checked the accuracy of our obtained relation using the optimal a-Si model generated by Pedersen et. al. Molecular dynamic simulations and DFT relaxation calculations of various a-Si supercells comprised of 216 Si atoms revealed the strong dependency of both integrated density of midgap states and excess energy on the bond angle standard deviation. Consequently, the bond angle standard deviation is more deterministic in the a-Si stability evaluation than the conventional methods in which the number of the dangling bonds are being considered. This material is based upon work primarily supported by the Engineering Research Center Program of the National Science Foundation and the Office of Energy Ef-