In this study we have reported the borate-based glasses in the form of (75 mol%) for gamma-ray and neutron shielding applications, and for this purpose mass attenuation coefficients (μ m ) of these glasses have been investigated using Geant4 code and XCOM program in the energy range between 1 keV and 10 MeV. A good agreement between the simulation results and computed values was observed. The obtained μ m values were then used to calculate the other related shielding parameters such as half value layer (HV L), mean free path (MFP) and effective atomic numbers (Z ef f ). Exposure buildup factors of the glasses were also evaluated by using the geometrical progression (G-P) method. Additionally, neutron effective removal cross-sections of each selected glass have been computed. The results indicate that the Bi 2 O 3 content in the glass sample affects the radiation shielding properties. It can be concluded that the glass coded as F offers superior gammaray shielding properties, while the glass coded as D offers better neutron shielding features among the other samples. Radiation shielding by using heavy metal oxide (HMO) glasses is a significative field of study Literature has been enriched by several authors who provided successful studies on the radiation shielding properties for several glass systems 3 were calculated at energies between 1 keV and 1 GeV, the results concluded that the bismuth oxide is better than lead oxide in order to increase the shielding capacity In the present work, the gamma and neutron radiation shielding properties of some borate-based glasses have been investigated over a wide range of energies from 1 keV to 10 MeV. The values of μ m have been determined by using Geant4 simulations and XCOM program. The μ m values were then used to calculate Z ef f , HVL, and MFP of the present glasses. The exposure buildup factors have been calculated for the photon energies up to 15 MeV and penetration depths up to 40 mfp. Moreover, fast neutron removal cross sections have been calculated for each selected glass. The shielding properties of the selected glasses were compared in terms of MFP with conventional concretes and other HMO glasses. This study on shielding properties of the borate-based glasses would be useful in various radiation protection applications such as exposure control. The (75 were investigated by means of their radiation shielding competence. These glasses were coded as A, B, C, D, E, and F according to increase of Bi 2 O 3 content from 0 to 40 mol%, respectively. The weight fractions of the elements in GSC-X glass system along with the glass density are summarized in Table The gamma attenuation parameters of the glasses were investigated by using Geant4 toolkit for several energies Chemical compositions and the densities of the studied borate-based glasses are listed in Table The simulated results of μ m for the studied glass samples are shown in Fig. Fig. In summary, the nuclear shielding properties of the borate-based glass systems in the form of (75 mol%) have been reported to serve for gamma-ray and neutron protection applications. The μ m values of the selected glasses were computed by using both XCOM and Geant4 simulation codes. It is found that the μ m values of the borate-based glass vary with changing the photon energy and the amount of Bi 2 O 3 content. The results generated by XCOM and Geant4 simulation codes are almost overlapping. For shielding from gamma and neutrons radiation, the selection of an appropriate glass can be done based on data of Z ef f , HVL and MFP, consideration of neutron removal cross sections, exposure build-up factor and also, according to desired application. It can be concluded that the addition of Bi 2 O 3 has played a crucial role in protection ability for the glass F against gamma rays, while the glass D offers the best shielding features against the fast neutrons. This work on shielding properties of the borate-based glasses would be useful in various radiation protection applications such as exposure control. Energy (MeV)