We experimentally demonstrate fabrication of tunable high contrast periodic fishnet metasurfaces with 3 μm period on 200 nm thick Ge 2 Sb 2 Te 5 films sputted onto glass and sapphire substrates using direct laser writing technique. We find that the use of sapphire substrate provides better accuracy of metasurface segments due to high thermal conductivity. The advantages of the demonstrated method consist in its simplicity, rapidity, robustness, and the ability of tuning of fabricated structures. This is of crucial importance for the creation of robust and tunable metasurfaces for applications in the field of telecommunications and information processing. Metasurfaces have attracted great interest in recent years since they provide versatile possibilities for the manipulation of optical waves, including amplitude, phase, polarization, and angular momentum promising an effective method for miniaturization and integration of optical devices The reverse crystalline-amorphous phase transition, as well as the direct one, is realized due to heating of GST film up to 700°С. Thereby the high thermal conductivity of the substrate is a significant factor for the existence of an inverse phase transition. For example, at room temperature sapphire has a thermal conductivity perpendicular to the C axis of the crystal lattice κ = 25.2 W/(m*K) in comparison with glass where κ = 0.8 W/(m*K). For fast cooling of the GST film, the cooling rate must be at least 10 11 K/s, the calculation shows that the thermal conductivity of sapphire will achieve the required cooling rate for the reverse phase transition. Moreover, optical loss in sapphire is approximately the same as in glass in the telecom range and substantially smaller in the wavelength range of 2-4 μm, which is of great importance for various applications in medicine and biology. The silicon substrate has much greater thermal conductivity κ = 149 W/(m*K) and is commonly used in nontransmissive metasurfaces Metasurfaces structured from GST films can be fabricated using several nanofabrication technologies To date, the optical properties of GST metasurfaces are widely studied In this study, we present metasurfaces fabricated by laser scrabbing of GST in the form of periodic arrays of square islets of ~2.5 μm 2 in size with 3 μm period on 200 nm thick GST films thick on two types of substrates: from glass and from sapphire, using the DLW technique. Further, the samples were experimentally investigated by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). As a result of the comparative analysis, we conclude that proposed method guarantees quick manufacturing of high quality metasurface and of the use of sapphire substrate provides better accuracy of metasurface segments. To fabricate GST films onto silica or sapphire substrates we applied the laser electrodispersion technique. The technique consists of splashing of submicrometer droplets from the target surface by an intense laser pulse and their subsequent cascade fission. The targets were made of polycrystalline GST, synthesized from special-purity elements Ge, Sb, and Te. We used the Nd:YAG laser with wavelength of 1064 nm, a pulse repetition rate of 30 Hz, a focused spot diameter of 1 mm and power density of 109 W/cm 2 which was enough for an optical breakdown of the vapor to give a laser torch and evaporate the target material. In the vicinity of laser torch submicrometer droplets are divided into nanometer size ones under electrostatic forces and then deposited onto a substrate in the amorphous state. Transmission electron microscope (TEM) shows that the deposited films are composed of GST grains with sizes of 2-5 nm. We used DLW technique to fabricate metasurfaces from an GST film on a glass and sapphire substrate. The schematic illustration of the laser scrabbing process is illustrated in Fig. In our first experiment we focused on the selection of optimal parameters for fabrication of GST fishnet metasurfaces on glass and sapphire substrates using the laser scrabbing method. For this purpose, it is necessary to find out the conditions under which the film is pierced to the bottom, since this will provide a thinner cutting line and increase the accuracy of the metasurface segments. Thus, we made test arrays of holes on the films, gradually changing the fs-laser power and duration of exposure over the two axes. Fig. From our experiments, it can be unambiguously concluded that the use of a sapphire substrate has many advantages such as a thinner cutting line, as well as its clearer contour. Combined with the fact that sapphire is transparent for a wider wavelength range (0.17-5.5 μm), it becomes obvious that this material is better suited for creating GST structures by laser scrabbing. It is possible to create the metasurfaces with various segment sizes at the same period by changing power of fs-laser or number of pulses per μm. Fig. In conclusion we introduce a powerful approach to fabrication of micro-structured tunable metasurfaces utilizing chalcogenide phase-change media and DLW technique. We have presented fishnet metasurfaces with period of 3 μm fabricated by laser scrabbing of GST film on glass and sapphire substrates. We found optimal modes for each substrate -for glass the fluence was 4.2×10 2 J/cm 2 and dose was 8×10 5 pulses per μm, when for sapphire substrate the fluence was 4.4×10 2 J/cm 2 and dose was the same. The time to manufacture one well-ordered 20x20 μm 2 metasurface with the number of square elements of the order of 50 was approximately 10 seconds. We found that the use of sapphire substrate provides better accuracy of metasurface segments than the glass one due to the high thermal conductivity of the material (25.2 W/(m*K) for sapphire versus 0.8 W/(m*K) for glass), and it guarantees immutability to slight variations of fabrication parameters. Further, the samples were experimentally investigated by SEM and AFM. Our approach provides a flexible platform for fast and precise manufacturing of all dielectric optically rewritable metasurfaces for applications in the field of telecommunications and information processing.