Motivated by recent discovery of correlated insulating and superconducting behavior in twisted bilayer graphene, we revisit graphene's honeycomb lattice doped close to the van Hove singularity, using the truncated unity functional renormalization group approach. We consider an extended Hubbard model on the honeycomb lattice including on-site and nearest-neighbor Coulomb repulsions, and nearest-neighbor ferromagnetic exchange and pair hopping interactions. By varying the strength of the nearest-neighbor exchange coupling and Coulomb repulsion as free parameters, we present rich ground-state phase diagrams which contain the spin-triplet f -wave and spin-singlet chiral d-wave superconducting phases, the commensurate and incommensurate spin-and chargedensity-wave phases, and the ferromagnetic phase. In the absence of the exchange coupling and for small value of the nearest-neighbor repulsion, the four-sublattice spin-density-wave phase is generated right around the van Hove filling, while the chiral d-wave superconductivity emerges slightly away from it. Surprisingly, the chiral d-wave superconductivity is strongly suppressed by weak nearest-neighbor exchange coupling in our calculations. We argue that this suppression might be one of the reasons why the chiral superconductivity proposed for doped graphene has not yet been observed experimentally. The recent discoveries of correlated insulating and superconducting behaviors in twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) Chiral SC is characterized by the phase of the superconducting order parameter winding by multiples of 2π around the Fermi surface (FS), breaking parity and timereversal symmetry The chiral d-wave SC driven by the electronelectron interaction has been theoretically proposed for graphene's honeycomb lattice near half filling In the case of graphene, the electron-driven SC state is most likely realized when doped to the vicinity of the van Hove singularity (VHS). Near the VHS, a combination of the logarithmically divergent density of states and the approximate nesting of the FS strongly enhances the effect of interactions Both the random phase approximation The charge and magnetic instabilities have also been analyzed in previous works on graphene doped close to the VHS. A Pomeranchuk instability has been reported in the calculations by mean-field theory On the other hand, in the studies above, the electrons on the graphene's honeycomb lattice are mostly described by both the Hubbard model with on-site and nearestneighbor Coulomb interactions and the t-J model which is derived from the Hubbard model with strong on-site repulsion. A FRG study The above-mentioned facts show that a consistent picture of possible electronic instabilities on the honeycomb lattice described by the Hubbard model is still lacking, probably due to competition between several ordering tendencies upon varying the interaction parameters or the doping. Hence, it appears promising and necessary to investigate the system using a reliable and unbiased method that allows us to alter these parameters over a wide range. Here, we employ the recently developed truncated unity functional renormalization group (TUFRG) approach Our main result are summarized as follows. In the absence of the exchange coupling J and for small nearestneighbor repulsion V , the four-sublattice SDW phase is generated right around the VHS, while the chiral d-wave SC emerges slightly away from it, which is similar to the result in Ref. 36. Upon increasing V , the spin-triplet f -wave SC becomes dominant below the VHS. If V is further increased, the charge-density-wave (CDW) state with broken π/3-rotation symmetry and a charge transfer from sublattice A to B (or vice versa) will be favored for all doping levels studied. The incommensurate SDW and CDW orders are also found in some regions of the phase diagram. Remarkably, upon involving weak exchange coupling of J ≈ 0.14eV, the chiral d-wave SC completely disappears from our phase diagram. For an artificially large value of J, the phase diagrams have simple structures consisting of both the CDW and the ferromagnetic phases. This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we specify the model Hamiltonian and give a description of the TUFRG scheme. In Sec. III we present and analyze the schematic phase diagrams for electrons subjected to the on-site repulsion, the nearest-neighbor repulsion, and exchange interaction. Finally, in Sec. IV we draw our conclusions. We study spin-1/2 electrons on the honeycomb lattice doped close to the VHS which are described by an extended Hubbard model including ferromagnetic exchange interaction. The noninteracting part of the model is represented by a tight-binding Hamiltonian with nearestneighbor and next-nearest-neighbor hoppings, where the operator c † ioσ (c ioσ ) creates (annihilates) an electron at lattice site i with spin polarity σ in sublattice o, iA, jB ( io, jo ) denotes nearest-neighbor (nextnearest-neighbor) bonds, μ is the chemical potential, and N e is the total electron number operator. The doping level is controlled by the chemical potential and defined by δ = n e -1 where n e is the number of electrons per site. These parameters have the values of μ VHS = t + 2t ′ , δ VHS = 0.25 at the VHS filling. The interaction part of the model is given by where n ioσ = c † ioσ c ioσ is the local electron density operator for spin polarity σ, and the terms in Eq. ( We allow the extended ranges of the parameters V and J to investigate their effects on the ground state of the heavily doped honeycomb lattice, but not constrained by the actual values of graphene. We take t = 2.8eV, t ′ = 0.1eV, U = 3.6t, as suggested in Ref. 41 and used in Ref. 36. In our calculations we have considered the parameters δ and V in the ranges of [0.19, 0.31] and [0, 3t], respectively. Since graphene has the bandwidth (∼ 17eV) of the order of the interaction scale (∼ 10eV) and does not exhibit any Mott insulating behavior at half filling, it can be thought to be in the intermediate coupling regime. The FRG method As a modified version of the FRG, the TUFRG approach The regulated propagator G 0,Ω leads the generating functional of one-particle-irreducible vertex functions to be scale dependent as well, Γ → Γ Ω . By differentiating Γ Ω with respect to Ω, one can obtain the functional flow equation which is then Taylor expanded to produce an infinite hierarchy of flow equations for the vertex functions. In numerical implementation, the hierarchy has to be truncated at a certain order. In the study of ground-state properties, one generally use a truncation in which all n-point vertices with n ≥ 6 are set to zero, and the selfenergy correction and the frequency dependence of the 4-point vertex function are neglected. Such an approximation has proven to provide reliable results for many two-dimensional systems Within this approximation the 4-point part of the generating functional for spin-SU(2)-invariant systems can be represented by the effective interactions V Ω and the Grassmann variables ψ, ψ as Here where the expressions for J pp (Ω), J ph,cr (Ω) with the shorthand notation dp = dp SBZ The effective interaction is obtained by integrating Eq. ( Here Ω 0 is the initial value of Ω, V (0) ≡ V Ω0 is the initial bare interaction, and, e.g., Φ pp (Ω) = Ω Ω0 dΩ ′ J pp (Ω ′ ) is the single-channel coupling function. Three bosonic propagators are defined by projecting three single-channel coupling functions onto three channels, i.e., the particle-particle, crossed particle-hole and direct particle-hole channels (a more detailed description of these projections is contained in Appendix B): They have matrix structures and depend only on one momentum in contrast to the effective interaction depending on three momenta. For example, the bosonic propagator P Ω is a matrix that depends on the momentum transfer q and contains the elements P Ω o1o2m,o3o4n (q) with sublattice indices o 1 ∼ o 4 and basis indices m, n. Since the projections lead to the truncation in expansion of the single-channel coupling functions, the inverse projections of Eq. ( One can also project the effective interaction V Ω onto the three channels as whose inverse projections are (a more detailed description of these projection matrices is found in Appendix C) Taking the derivative of P Ω , C Ω and D Ω with respect to Ω one can derive the flow equations for the bosonic propagators: Plugging Eqs. ( dP Ω (q) dΩ =V P(Ω) (q) χpp (q)V P(Ω) (q), with The honeycomb lattice has C 6v point-group symmetry. This symmetry leads to symmetry relations for the Bloch states and the effective interaction, yielding the relations between the bosonic propagators with different momentum arguments. By these relations, the bosonic propagators in the whole BZ can be obtained from those within the irreducible region of the BZ, which reduces the computational effort to 1/12. In our calculation we use the plane-wave basis f m (k) = e iRm•k for the expansion of the single-channel coupling functions in terms of the bosonic propagators. Then we can derive the explicit symmetry relations for the bosonic propagators. Let us consider a symmetry operation Ĝ = (Q|t), i.e., a rotation Q followed by shift t. Under this operation the atom of sublattice o in the unit cell at the origin is moved to the site of sublattice õ in the unit cell at the position u o . It can be represented by where d o is the relative position of the sublattice o and u o is one of the Bravais lattice vectors. The symmetry operation Ĝ yields the following symmetry relations for three bosonic propagators In addition, the effective interactions have another symmetries, i.e., the particle-hole symmetry and the remnant of antisymmetry of Grassmann variables for the particle-hole symmetry and for the remnant of antisymmetry of Grassmann variables. In Eq. ( (a In order for the relation (17) to be exactly satisfied, some kind of filtering process is needed in each step of integration of the flow equations (14). From Eq. ( From the point of view of numerical implementation, only a limited number of bases are involved in real calculation. In this work we use only 13 plane-wave bases with the Bravais lattice vectors shown in Fig. To be specific, we take 2π/3 rotation about the origin as an example. It is easy to see that, in this case, the vector u o and the sublattice õ are According to Eq. ( Since the vector R 2 + R 2 is outside of the region of our consideration [see Fig. Table On the other hand, the TUFRG approach provides an unbiased analysis of possible many-body instabilities in interacting electron systems. Several methods for determining the leading instabilities and corresponding order parameters are suggested. In many FRG studies addressing multiband systems, the final effective interaction at a critical scale Ω C has been plugged into the mean-field equations. Wang et al. One can identify the leading instability of the system by introducing infinitesimal test fields that are coupled to the fermion bilinears corresponding to various types of order and have the strength of λ. The form factors of the order parameters can be determined by considering the linear responses of the system to the test fields. For the singlet pairing, the triplet pairing, the spin and the charge channels, the order parameters in real space are defined as follows, respectively: Here • λ means the ensemble average in the presence of corresponding test fields with coupling strength λ. All the order parameters above, except for the charge channel, vanish in the system without any spontaneous symmetry breaking. For the charge channel it exhibits the same symmetry as the system. However, if the system approaches a critical point, the corresponding susceptibility diverges and the order parameter could take a finite value. The fluctuation-dissipation theorem tells us that the divergent susceptibility leads to the divergence of related correlation function, which is, in the TUFRG calculation, represented by the divergence of the effective interaction and the bosonic propagator in corresponding channel. By Taylor expanding the ensemble averages in Eq. ( for X=SPN or CHG. ( Here the constants φ 1 oo ′ α (Q) are the elements of the eigenvectors, associated with the most positive eigenvalues, of the following matrices: with the particle-particle and particle-hole susceptibility matrices, For numeric implementation we discretize the irreducible region of the BZ by sampling points. The more sampling points involved, the more reliable results are expected, but the more computational effort is needed. This is true for the form-factor truncation. As mentioned above, we use 13 form-factor bases in TUFRG calculation. If we increase the number of bases to 19 (up to third intrasublattice nearest neighbors), the truncation error would be reduced, however, the required CPU time would become more than twice longer. So it is important to control the balance between both the reliability of the result and the computational effort. The choice of 13 bases truncation is justified by the fact that, in this case, the bare interaction is projected exactly onto three channels without any loss and the orbital picture used in this work ensures much faster convergence than the band picture in an expansion of the single-channel coupling functions in the bosonic propagators. This truncation has also been applied in previous work based on the band picture of TUFRG The projection matrices V P (Ω), V C (Ω) and V D (Ω) enter the flow equations for the bosonic propagators, so they should be found to integrate out the flow equation. Since the effective interaction is represented via the bosonic propagators, the projection matrices can also be expressed in terms of P Ω , C Ω and D Ω [the detailed expressions for the projection matrices are given in Eqs. (C8)-(C10) in Appendix C]: By substituting this into Eq. ( ABm,ABm (q) = J (m = 0, 2, 3), V D,(0) BAm,BAm (q) = J (m = 0, 5, 6), In our calculation the matrices P Ω , C Ω , D Ω , V P (Ω), V C (Ω), V D (Ω), χ pp , and χ ph have N D × N D structures with N D = 2 × 2 × 13 -14 = 38 reduced via the filtering process. The flow equations for the bosonic propagators, Eq. ( In the absence of the ferromagnetic exchange (J = 0.0t) and for small values of the nearest-neighbor repulsion (V = 0 ∼ t), a four-sublattice spin-density-wave (SDW 4 ) phase occurs at and close to the VHS filling, while the chiral d-wave superconducting (χ-dSC) phase away from it. An incommensurate spin-density-wave (iSDW) phase occupies the regions between the SDW 4 and the χ-dSC. This configuration is very similar to that in Ref. 36. For moderate values of V (V ≈ 1.5t), the SDW 4 is found again in the vicinity of the VHS, while two χ-dSC regions flank it. Two additional phases, namely, a spin-triplet f -wave superconducting (fSC) and an incommensurate charge-density-wave (iCDW) phases occur at lower doping levels (δ ≈ 0.19 for iCDW and δ ≈ 0.21 for fSC). For large values of V (V = 2t ∼ 3t), a chargedensity-wave phase with broken π/3-rotation symmetry and a charge transfer from sublattice A to B (or vice versa), which is denoted as CDW in Figs. When a weak exchange coupling (J = 0.1t) is involved, the structure of the phase diagram exhibits a remarkable change. The χ-dSC phase, found for J = 0, V = 0 ∼ 1.5t, completely disappears from our phase diagram. The phase turns into a metallic phase for V = 0 ∼ t, while into the fSC for V ≈ 1.5t, δ = 0.29 ∼ 0.31 and a coexistence phase of strong iSDW and weak fSC orders for V ≈ 1.5t, δ ≈ 0.23. In the coexistence phase, the two orders, i.e., the iSDW and fSC could coexist or exclude the other, or even may compete with each other leading to common suppression. Since we have not performed the mean-field calculation, we cannot determine whether these orders really coexist or not, as well as, the relative strength of corresponding order parameters, if they coexist It is very interesting that the metallic phase is induced by involving exchange coupling. This behavior can be attributed to competition effect, as evidenced by the suppression of critical scales near the boundaries between different phases. The present TUFRG scheme is apparently more sensitive to competition effects due to its high momentum resolution. Although the current version of TUFRG, as an approach from the weak-coupling perspective, is not certainly exact and is on its development, the physically plausible observation of a metallic state being stabilized by competition effects deserves to be considered thoroughly and compared with other methods. This interesting result has also been obtained in previous TUFRG studies on half-filled honeycomb lattice When the ferromagnetic exchange interaction is further enhanced, the phase diagrams have simple structures consisting only of two phases, i.e., the CDW and FM phases. For J = t, a transition from the FM to the CDW is found at V ≈ 2.25t, independently on doping level. The transition point is moved to V ≈ 2.75t for J = 2t, and finally, for J = 3t, whole parameter space of the phase diagram is covered by the FM phase. From Fig. The chiral d-wave SC phase manifests itself in the RG flow as two dominantly divergent and degenerate eigenmodes of W sSC (Q = 0) that obey the two-dimensional E 2 FIG. representation of C 6v symmetry What is most surprising is the annihilation of this intriguing order by a weak exchange coupling. As mentioned above, the chiral d-wave SC has completely disappeared from our phase diagram upon including the exchange coupling of J = 0.1t. The investigation by a fine tuning of the parameter J shows that the phase is fully suppressed by weak exchange coupling of J ≈ 0.05t = 0.14eV (see Fig. Four-sublattice spin-density-wave phase (SDW 4 ) The four-sublattice SDW phase manifests itself in our RG flow as a dominantly divergent eigenmode of W SPN (Q = M 1 ) which has real numbers φ AA0 = φ BB0 as its largest components. It is driven by nearly perfect nesting of the FS. The momentum transfer M 1 has two other partners, M 2 and M 3 , to which it can be transformed by symmetry operations. The spin distributions for the phases with three inequivalent momentum transfers M 1,2,3 are shown in Fig. with three nesting vectors, Various patterns can be generated by arbitrary selection of three amplitudes S 1 ∼ S 3 . If one selects as S 1 = S 2 = S 3 , the collinear SDW phase emerges as suggested in Ref. 28 [see Fig. Spin-triplet f-wave superconducting phase (fSC) The ferromagnetic exchange coupling and the nearestneighbor repulsion favor the spin-triplet f -wave SC phase. It is represented by a predominant eigenmode of W tSC (Q = 0) that follows the one-dimensional B 1 representation of C 6v symmetry which, by a Fourier transformation, presents the follow-ing order parameter in momentum space: The above expression leads to nodal gap which has nodes on the nodal lines, k x = 0 and k x = ± √ 3k y . For doping levels lower than the VHS filling, the FS is disconnected and the nodes of the gap do not intersect with the FSs. In this case the f -wave SC state could become fully gapped. In our calculation we have not found the f -wave gap that has been suggested in Ref. 35 This work has addressed the effect of enhanced exchange interaction on the ground-state orderings of electrons on the honeycomb lattice doped to the vicinity of the VHS. An extended Hubbard model, including the on-site and nearest-neighbor Coulomb repulsions, and nearest-neighbor ferromagnetic exchange and pair hopping interactions, has been considered. The effective interactions have been calculated by using the TUFRG allowing for high momentum resolution, while the ground states of the system have been analyzed employing the linear-response-based approach for identifying the type of order. The ground-state phase diagrams in the space of doping level and nearest-neighbor repulsion were obtained for several values of nearest-neighbor exchange integral. Inclusion of small and moderate ferromagnetic exchange coupling yields the phase diagram with diverse ordering tendencies, while for large value of the coupling the phase diagram has relatively simple constitution. In the absence of the exchange coupling J and for small nearest-neighbor repulsion V , the competition between the chiral d-wave SC and the SDW becomes a main ingredient of the phase diagram. The former emerges slightly away from the VHS, while the latter right around it. More specifically, the four-sublattice SDW phase occurs very near the VHS filling, flanked by the incommensurate SDW. When increasing V , the spin-triplet f -wave SC and the incommensurate CDW phases occur at lower doping levels. If V is further increased, the CDW phase, with broken π/3-rotation symmetry and a charge transfer between two sublattices, is preferred for all doping levels considered. The associated critical scales are considerably increased. When a weak exchange coupling is included, the structure of the phase diagram changes a lot. The chiral d-wave SC, found in the absence of J, completely disappears from our phase diagram and the region of the f -wave SC is extended. If the exchange coupling is further increased, the four-sublattice SDW turns into the ferromagnetic or incommensurate SDW phases. When the ferromagnetic exchange interaction is further enhanced, the phase diagrams have simple structures consisting only of two phases, namely, the CDW and FM phases. With increasing J, the region of the ferromagnetic phase gets extended more and more, ultimately leading to the whole phase diagram covered by the phase. From the experimental point of view, some previous works have reported the experimental observations of SC in single layer graphene by doping it with Li adatoms 56 or intercalating graphene laminates with Ca 57 . However, those are different from the unconventional SC addressed in this work, because the doping levels are much lower than the VHS filling and they are the conventional BCS superconductors mediated by dopant-enhanced electronphonon coupling. Another works on graphene have also found the conventional SC obeying the BCS mechanism Lastly, we give a brief comment on the relevance of our results to the TBG. As mentioned in the introduction of present paper, a number of studies on TBG 4-14 have pointed to the chiral d-wave SC as the nature of the SC state observed in the system. Due to the large lattice constant in TBG, it is expected that the ratio between the radius of the maximally localized Wannier orbitals (α) and the nearest-neighbor distance (R) for the system would be much smaller than that for single layer graphene. On the other hand, the ratio between the exchange integral and the hopping parameter, J/t decays exponentially with ξ = α/R, as shown in Fig. (repulsion between neighbors), One can take real functions as the Wannier orbitals for graphene's π-electron system, which gives the relation of J io,jp = K io,jp . In general, many of the above terms are neglected, except for the following parameters: on-site repulsion U, nearest-neighbor Coulomb repulsion V iA,jB = V jB,iA = V, nearest-neighbor exchange coupling J iA,jB = J jB,iA = J, nearest-neighbor pair hopping K iA,jB = K jB,iA = J. In this case the Hamiltonian H int is approximated as where n ioσ = c † ioσ c ioσ is the local electron density operator for spin polarity σ. It is easy to prove that the nearest-neighbor exchange coupling J is always positive. The coupling is expressed using a real function F (r) = φ jB (r)φ iA (r) as The Fourier transforms of F (r) and e 2 |r-r ′ | are given by By substituting these into Eq. (A3) we obtain Here we used the relation for any real function F (r), given by F (-k) = [ F (k)] * . Thus, the exchange integral J has always positive value. The third term in Eq. (A2) can be represented in the following form: The first term can be added to the nearest-neighbor Coulomb repulsion, while the second one is just the ferromagnetic (J > 0) exchange interaction with the tendency to align the spin orientations. Now we consider graphene's π electrons that move in the effective field produced by ion cores and σ electrons. As a crude approximation we assume that this effective field is identical with the one produced by an array (the honeycomb lattice) of effective point charges of strength +Qe. The parameter Q has a value in the range of 1 (complete screening by σ electrons) to 4 (no screening). The 2p z orbital of an electron moving in the Coulomb attraction of a point charge Qe at the origin reads where a B = 0.53 Å is the Bohr radius. On the other hand, in the case of graphene's π electrons, the maximally localized Wannier orbital centered at the site i, which should be orthogonal to the others, can be approximately written as is the overlap between the nearest-neighboring atomic orbitals, R i is the position vector of the site i, and the sites j = 1, 2, 3 are three nearest neighbors of the site i. In deriving Eq. (A7), we assumed the smallness of the overlap S and took into account the equivalence of all atoms. By using Eqs. (A6) and (A7) one can obtain the exchange coupling J: (A8) In the above equation, the integrals J AB , U, V AB , and X AB-A are defined by atomic orbitals f A = f (r -R A ) and f B = f (r -R B ) as follows: J AB ≡ dr dr ′ f A (r)f B (r) e 2 |rr ′ | f A (r ′ )f B (r ′ ), U ≡ dr dr ′ f 2 (r) e 2 |rr ′ | f 2 (r ′ ), For the distance between nearest neighbors of R, the overlap S is given by The hopping amplitude between two nearest-neighboring Wannier orbitals is written, to first order in S, as with the potential by the effective point charge Qe at the position R i , V i (r) ≡ -Q e 2 |r-Ri| . The on-site repulsion U for an atomic orbital in Eq. (A9) is approximately equal to that for a Wannier orbital. So we can extract the parameters α and Q from U , from which the exchange coupling J and the hopping parameter t are calculated using Eqs. (A8) and (A11). In Ref. 60 two values of on-site repulsions, U bare = 17.0eV and U cRPA = 9.3eV, have been obtained using both the bare Coulomb interaction and the screened interaction from the constrained random phase approximation (cRPA), respectively, while in this paper we used the parameter, U used = 3.6t = 3.6 × 2.8eV ≈ 10.1eV. Since graphene has the C-C distance of R = 1.42 Å, we get the results for these three values of U as shown in Table 2 ,o1o2 (p + q, p ′ ; p ′ + q, p), 2 ,o1o2 (p + q, p ′ ; p, p ′ + q). (B2) The inverse transformations of above equation read as follows: 2 ,o1o2 (p + q, -p; k + q, -k) = m,n(infinit sum) 2 ,o1o2 (p + q, k; k + q, p) = m,n(infinit sum) 2 ,o1o2 (p + q, k; p, k + q) = m,n(infinit sum) 