This feature article provides a critical overview of current developments on nanoelectronic biochemical sensors based on graphene. Composed of a single layer of conjugated carbon atoms, graphene has outstanding high carrier mobility, low intrinsic electrical noise, however, a chemically inert surface. Surface functionalization is therefore crucial to unravel the graphene sensitivity and selectivity for the detection of targeted analytes. To achieve optimal performance of graphene transistors for biochemical sensing, in this particular review we highlight the tuning of the graphene surface properties via surface functionalization and passivation, and the tuning of its electrical operation by utilizing multifrequency ambipolar configuration and high frequency measurement scheme to overcome the Debye screening to achieve low noise and highly sensitive detection. Potential applications and prospective of ultrasensitive graphene electronic biochemical sensors ranging from environmental monitoring and food safety, healthcare and medical diagnosis, to life science research will be presented as well. While the molecules always need to be specifically labeled for optical Retrospectively, the so-called electric field effect is at the core technology of nanoelectronic biochemical sensing for detection of the charges that are introduced by a molecule. This field effect has been harvested to design the first generation of nanowire, In this feature article we will cover the most recent developments in graphene-based biosensing devices, starting from basic principles of operation and moving towards current trends and future challenges. The discussion will begin with the advantageous electronic properties of graphene, i.e., the high carrier mobility, low intrinsic electrical noise, as well as the challenges ahead to achieve reliable biosensing operation of graphene electronic devices in biological environments. Functionalization of the chemically inert surface of graphene are at the core of graphene biosensors to unravel its sensitivity and selectivity performance for targeted analytes. In order to achieve optimal performance of GFET for biosensing, as illustrated in Figure Graphene is unique among solid-state materials as all carbon atoms are located on the surface and are extremely sensitive to environmental changes. Graphene electronic biochemical sensors have been explored to harvest not only the electronic properties of graphene for conductance detection in real time, but also its optical and mechanical properties for transparent and flexible sensor design, Nevertheless, we note here that the complexity of biochemical environment as well as the difficulty in understanding its interactions at the surface of biochemical sensors, make the origin of the sensor response not always fully clear, particularly disentangling the achieved sensing response from any kind of noise sources, for example nonspecific binding, surface chemical instability, drifts, to name a few. In addition, precautions have to be taken as surface condition (functionalization) of graphene as well as the device geometry might be different from sample to sample (and is not always reported in the literature). For example, annealing exfoliated graphene exhibited a comparable carrier mobility to as-fabricated exfoliated graphene (from ≈5000 cm 2 V -1 s -1 to ≈5500 cm 2 V -1 s -1 ), but also a strikingly decreased sensitivity to NH3 gas (from ≈1 ppm to ≈1000 ppm) due to mainly the difference in their surface conditions. Therefore it might not always be fair to make such comparisons with different samples. Carrier mobility Graphene field-effect biosensors come from the big family of ion-sensitive FETs (ISFETs), which detect the conductance changes of the semiconducting channel upon binding of charged ions or biomolecules due to the field effect. To ensure a stable operation of the electronic sensor devices in electrolyte solutions, insulating layers such as SiO2 and Al2O3 have been routinely adopted to isolate and protect the chemically reactive semiconducting channel from directly contacting the ions and biomolecules. Nevertheless, this relatively thick layer of insulating material also reduces the interfacial capacitive coupling between the sensor channel and the electrolyte solution, thus limiting the device sensitivity. Since graphene is a conductor with every atom on the surface and is chemically inert, one may use it as the conducting channel in an ISFET and at the same time as the sensing surface to reach the highest sensitivity. Indeed, as a modern version of the classical ISFET, electrochemically gated GFET (and FET based on other two-dimensional (2D) materials) enables the detection of charged molecules in a label-free manner on a small footprint, and has demonstrated improved sensitivity compared to traditional bioassays. where CI is the interface capacitance, μ is the carrier mobility, and VCNP is the gate voltage at the CNP. Conventionally, a GFET is favorably operated at its maximum transconductance g m to achieve the highest sensing response. As a result of the large interfacial capacitance and high carrier mobility, the value of the GFET transconductance can reach up to 200 μS, • g C I V DS , we model the direct current (DC, or low frequency) interfacial capacitor CI of an electrolyte-gated GFET as two capacitors in series. One part is the intrinsic quantum capacitance of graphene, CQ, which depends on the charge carrier concentration and can be determined as a function of the channel potential across the graphene sheet; and the other part is the virtual parallel-plate double layer capacitance, CDL, formed due to the separation of the charges adsorbed on the graphene surface and the solution side of the interface as governed by the Poisson-Boltzmann equation (and independent to the gate voltage). We note here that, for hydrophobic materials such as graphene, the air gap capacitance (Cairgap) should be included in the interface capacitance CI. For liquid-gated GFETs, the major challenges lie in the control of the chemical functionalization, the identification of the exact sensing reactions at the graphene surface, and in the characterization of the number of charges each biomolecules carry. Usually, we assume a constant interfacial capacitance and carrier mobility μ of graphene upon biomolecular adsorption, which is correct in most cases where the targeted biomolecules adsorbed on the receptors and interact weakly with the underneath graphene lattice. However, additional scattering centers might be formed if biomolecules directly bind on a graphene surface. Such scattering centers are able to trigger a suppression of the mobility of charge carriers. Usually, micromechanically exfoliated graphene has intrinsically higher quality with less defects. A back-gated GFET consists source and drain metallic electrodes bridged by a graphene conduction channel (Figure nm Cr/50 nm Au) can be prepared directly on top of the graphene. In comparison to the back-gate geometry, where the gate voltage is applied to the highly conductive silicon substrate, in a liquid-gate configuration a reference electrode together with the electrolyte serves as the 'gate electrode' (Figure For comparison, the typical area normalized transconductance of an electrolyte-gated GFET is reported in the range of 1-2 mS V -1 . Usually, even after the treatment of substrates (e.g., the SiO2 treated with HMDS The lack of electronic band gap of graphene leading to the metallic nature of graphenebased FET devices, that cannot be switched off at room temperature. In order to overcome the limitation caused by the zero band gap structure, the engineering of bandgap is one of the most critical points for graphene-based digital devices. In this respect, graphene derivatives, including graphene nanoribbons (GNRs), heteroatoms (N, S, B, P) doped, functionalized, and bilayer graphene, were explored to modulate the electronic structure of graphene and improve the on/off current ratios of GFETs. Heteroatom-doping is a process that some carbon atoms in the graphene structure are replaced by the heteroatoms. The size and electronegativity of the heteroatoms are often different from those of carbon atom. Therefore, regardless of whether the dopants have a higher (as N) or lower (as B, P, S) electronegativity than that of carbon, the introduction of heteroatoms into graphene carbon networks could cause electron modulation on the charge distribution and electronic properties of carbon skeletons, which in turn affects their performance for electronic applications. Granted by the excellent electrical properties, The sensing response of GFET is defined as S = ∆IDS/N, that's a minute field effect (the electrical current ∆IDS) induced by the binding of a biomolecule carrying electron charge Ne. According to Eq. 1, S is therefore proportional to the carrier mobility μ of graphene, as well as the slopes of the sublinear IDS(VGS) curves (i.e., transconductance g). In this respect, if the values of other parameters including the electrical noise amplitude are equal, a higher carrier mobility μ (up to 10 6 cm 2 V -1 s -1 under room temperature) implies a better sensor performance upon the adsorption of charged biomolecules. Although there are no direct evidences or theories that could unambiguously relate the high mobility of GFETs to their noise performances, a higher carrier mobility indeed complies with graphene bearing less impurities and defects, and therefore being favor of an improved noise performance. Applications that could exploit these unique properties such as label-free electronic biochemical sensors with ultrahigh sensitivities will be introduced in Section 5. Specifically, owing to its exceptional high mobility, graphene is potentially well suited to RF applications, However, μ of CVD grown graphene can be substantially improved (50 000-350 000 cm 2 V -1 s -1 ) by using single-crystal graphene free of grain boundaries In smaller devices there are fewer grain boundaries and defects, reaching a situation when a GFET consists of a single graphene crystal. In this case, a drastic increase in that transistor's charge carrier mobility is expected. While for the GFETs with channels over 100 μm 2 in area, the chance of meeting grain boundaries and defects increases, restricting the electrical performance of the GFETs, GFETs have exceptionally high carrier mobility, which results in high transconductance that endows the sensors with a significant current response to minute changes in the surface potential of graphene caused by the adsorption of molecules. However, to determine the maximum sensitivity of GFET, it is essential to investigate the electronic noise performance, which is ubiquitous in solid-state electronic devices and sets a limit on the smallest signal that can be possibly resolved. Generally, the inherent 1/f noise dominates the electronic noise of GFET at biologically relevant low frequencies (≲1000 Hz). Such low-frequency 1/f noise, whose power spectral density (PSD) inversely depends on the frequency f, is governed by surface over bulk noise in graphene up to seven layers Nevertheless, the current noise PSD shows a minimum at the CNP, which increases when moving away from the CNP for |VGS| >> VCNP. As a special application, the low-frequency electronic noise can be advantageously adopted for realizing selective graphene gas sensors. In liquid-gated GFET biosensors, the electrical current should be confined transversely in the graphene conductive channel, which can sustain a high current density over 1000 μA μm -1 before Joule-heating breakdown. Debye screening effect describes the tendency of plasma to eliminate internal electrostatic field. As a large system containing mobile ionic charges, an electrolyte solution can be regarded as plasma. The screening layer is composed of diffusive movable ions attracted to a charged surface via the Coulomb electrostatic force. At room temperature, the Debye length As a new sensing technology, radio frequency (RF) method is not restricted by Debye screening, and can detect biological molecules deep into the solution. This is because at RF frequencies (starting from ~10 MHz), due to the viscous effect of the solution, the movement of mobile ions in the electrolyte will lag behind the change of the AC electric field. Ideally, the crystal lattice of graphene is free of dangling bonds and intrinsically chemically inert. Therefore, to achieve graphene biochemical sensors, specific recognition moieties (antibody, antisense RNA enzymes, etc.) have to be introduced via both covalent Chemical functionalization of graphene is routinely achieved using either covalent Teflon. Alternatively, noncovalent functionalization has the major advantage of fully preserving the aromatic lattice and thus the electrical performance of graphene lattice, For instance, the π-π interactions of graphene-benzene leads to a considerable binding energy of about 0.1 eV per carbon atom, and the binding energy of graphene-tetraphenylporphyrin can be estimated as 3.2 eV, i.e., approximately 90% of the typical binding energy of covalent C-C bond (≈3.6 eV). Generally speaking, noncovalent approaches can be classified based on their intermolecular interactions with graphene, including π-π or hydrophobic interaction, electrostatic interaction, and van der Waals stacking. Phenyl rings can also be included in the ligands functionalized with trifluoromethyl groups. Such aromatic moiety helps to stabilize copper complex in its monocationic state for ethene sensing, as well as to induce π-π stacking interactions to enhance the electronic coupling and thus the attachment between the sensitizer molecules and graphene. As previously discussed, surface functionalization including noncovalent and covalent approaches are essential to unlock the sensing potential of graphene surface, but it is important to keep in mind that chemical passivation plays a critical role for surface functionalization of graphene to realize high selectivity. Here we specially focus on the passivation of active graphene surface of GFET in order to avoid unwanted non-specific binding, reduce electrical noise and leakage current. Chemical passivation is crucial to avoid false positive reactions when complex biological analytes are assayed and is of key importance to achieve very low detection limits in the presence of interference buffer solution background with high ionic strength. In the meanwhile, k 0 first sharply drops from 6.77 × 10 -4 cm s -1 down to ~1.70 × 10 -4 cm s -1 (within 5 s) and then stabilizes at 1.50 × 10 -4 cm s -1 after 30 s of hydrogenation (Figure Unlike traditional electronic devices that are carefully processed to remove any possible surface contaminants or trap states, graphene biosensors have to be functionalized with elaborated biopolymers as receptors against target biomolecules. To achieve in-situ biosensing, graphene biosensors are handled under liquid environments, i.e., far from ideal operation conditions of electronic devices, which are normally deliberately sealed against moist in the ambient air. Thus, the sophisticated sensing conditions in aqueous solutions have posted great challenges for achieving reliable operation of electronic devices with optimized performances. That is, biosensors have to overcome the interferences of external noise, as well as the ionic atmosphere screening in the physiological solution to detect a trace of the charges of the biomolecules, which call for interdisciplinary research efforts not only in materials and chemistry/biology, but also in physics and semiconductor devices. In the following, we will highlight our recent progress along these lines based on ambipolar operation near the CNP and high frequency measurements towards low noise and highly sensitive biodetections. By changing gate voltage VGS of GFET, the Fermi energy of graphene sheet (i.e., the electrochemical potential of the charge carriers) can be modulated and the type of charge carriers that flow in the graphene channel can be continuously tuned from holes to electrons, yielding the so-called 'ambipolar behavior'. Therefore, as a peculiar characteristics of GFETs, the ambipolar behavior of graphene stems from its lack of an inherent band gap, Conventionally, in order to achieve maximum sensing response, graphene transistors are operated at the maximum transconductance point. However, it is found that the electronic noise is unfavorably large, and thus representing a major limitation for realizing the next generation graphene biochemical sensors with ever-demanding sensitivity. Interestingly, for graphene supported on SiO2/Si substrate, the electrical noise exhibits a (local) minimum at the neutrality point with the lowest density of states. The first example of graphene sensors operated near the low-noise neutrality point in a transistor geometry is realized by making use of the unique ambipolar behavior of graphene. That is, applying a sine wave on the gate voltage of GFET near its CNP and monitoring the output current under a constant bias voltage Vbias (Figure Conventional GFETs are able to sensitively response to the adsorption of biomolecules with charge close to the surface of graphene. However, as mentioned in Section 2.3.4, GFET-based biosensors (and ISFETs in general) have the problem of ionic screening due to the mobile ions in the solution, also known as the Debye screening effect. As a promising alternative strategy to overcome the Debye screening effect in physiological conditions, measuring at high frequencies is able to achieve improved sensitivity while no special design or engineering of the sensor environments or the receptor molecules is needed. Due to the peculiar electronic band structure with linear dispersion, Compared to the most common break junctions, which consist mainly of gold as electrode material, monolayer graphene grants an easy access for not only optical and scanning probe imaging, but also ex-situ gating experiments owing to its ultimate thickness, flexibility and robustness. [179] Graphene nanoelectronic devices provide a versatile platform for a wide range of biosensing applications. The growth of population puts an increased requirement for high quality living conditions, and environmental monitoring and food safety appear to be serious problems in front of our society. As a new emerging material with unique properties, graphene shows its potential as highly sensitive and biocompatible material for gas and ion sensors that could be used for food safety and environmental monitoring. Nonetheless, it is now widely accepted that the previous reported sensitive responses of graphene to the presence of gas molecules or ions could be due to the sensitivities of polymer contaminations or defects introduced during graphene device fabrication and/or storage, and clean graphene should be insensitive. Indeed, after removing the possible surface contaminations by annealing at high temperature of 400 °C in Ar/H2 atmosphere, Only via deliberated surface functionalization of graphene, highly sensitive and selective detection of targeted biochemical molecules can be achieved. Monitoring the concentration of ethene is critically important for the storage and transport of crops to avoid ethene-induced spoilage, i.e., when the concentration of ethane rises, the resulting deleterious effects will lead to over-ripeness or even spoilage of crops. The use of 2D graphene materials instead of nanotube networks allows for the exploitation of the ultrahigh sensitivity granted by the carbon allotropes with all-surface-atom makeup like graphene and SWCNTs, but without the aforementioned practical shortcomings. Indeed, GFET functionalized with copper complexes (Figure7a) is able to detect ethene at a concentration of low part per billion (ppb, Figure Graphene electronic biosensors for POC applications may have a significant societal impact for medical diagnosis, including DNA and protein biomarker detection. The engineering of graphene-protein interfaces is crucial for efficient sensing. The simple sensing scheme is achieved by operating a GFET in an ambipolar mode close to its CNP, where the low-frequency 1/f noise is found to be minimized (see also Section 4.2). Using specifically designed aptamers anchored on the surface of GFETs (Figure and passivated with self-assembled Tween 20 to rule out possible false non-specific positives (Figure New generation of neuroprosthetic sensor development requires advances in material science, solid-state sensors, and actuators to further improve signal detection capabilities with good stability in biological environments and compatibility with living tissue. The drawbacks associated with the conventional silicon technology Improving further sensitivity with ever-demanding reproducibility and reliability should be the focus of future direction for GFET-based biosensor. To date, CVD graphene grown on Cu with meter-length crystals has been achieved in laboratory, Along this direction, novel approaches to minimize the flaws or fluctuations of epitaxially grown graphene However, such means are either invasive or not applicable to the characterization of the electrical properties of large-batch graphene films. In this respect, novel techniques with nondestructive, high accuracy and speed, are urgently needed. In pursuit of rapid property evaluations (conductivity, uniformity, continuity, etc.) of large-area graphene, researchers have developed terahertz time-domain spectroscopy Applying graphene-based electronic devices for biochemical sensing applications, including environmental monitors, portable POC devices for remote diagnostics, and even for DNA sequencing technologies, etc. has risen a vast interest from scientific community, industry, and society. Up to now, large-scale, high quality graphene sensors with average mobility ~5000 cm 2 V -1 s -1 can be routinely fabricated. 