In the following paper we investigate the critical temperature Tc behavior in the two-dimensional S/TI (S denotes superconductor and TI -topological insulator) junction with a proximity induced inplane helical magnetization in the TI surface. The calculations of Tc are performed using the general self-consistent approach based on the Usadel equations in Matsubara Green's functions technique. We show that the presence of the helical magnetization leads to the nonmonotonic behavior of the critical temperature as a function of the topological insulator layer thickness. Topological state of matter has been receiving a lot of attention for the past decade. According to the theory developed in Refs. 10 and 37, there are no Josephson critical current oscillations in hy-brid S/TI/S structures with a proximity induced uniform in-plane field in the TI layer. At the same time, as predicted in Ref. 37, the critical current demonstrates oscillatory behavior in case when the TI surface with helical magnetization serves as a weak link. Following the results of Zuyzin et al. Spin-orbit effects have been discussed actively in the framework of the quasiclassical Green's functions approach in layered structures. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we formulate the theoretical model and basic equations for the cases of h(y) and h(x) helical magnetizations. In Sec. III we present the results of the critical temperature calculations using the single-mode approximation. The results are concluded in Sec. IV. In this work we consider the 2D nanostructure, which is depicted in the Fig. where Q = 2π/λ and λ determines the actual pattern of helical magnetization. It is important to note that we consider the variations of the magnetization h in the x-y plane. Similar helical pattern with a period λ ≈ 10nm was observed experimentally in manganese on a tungsten substrate. To calculate the critical temperature T c (d n ) of this structure we assume the diffusive limit, when the elastic scattering length is much smaller than the coherence length, and use the framework of the linearized Usadel equations for the S and TI layers in Matsubara representation. (3) Such limit is experimentally feasible and can be easily achieved in the vicinity of the superconducting critical temperature T c or in a hybrid structures with low transparent interfaces. In this subsection we establish the equations for the magnetization pattern evolving along the S/TI interface indicated in Eq. (1), i. e. in y direction. Since the low proximity limit is assumed, near T c the normal Green's function in a superconductor is g s = sgn ω n , and the Usadel equation for the anomalous Green's function f s take the following form. In the S layers (0 < x < d s ) it reads In the TI layer we consider the Usadel equation derived in Ref. 37, (5) Since we consider the dirty limit, the spinless Green's function matrix ĝs is used in our calculations, whereas the spin texture is contained in the matrix ǧ(n F ) = ĝ (1 + η • n F ) /2, where n F = p F /p F and η = (-σ 2 , σ 1 ). The spin-momentum locking effect can be seen from the spin matrix ǧ, so that spin and momentum are always fixed at the right angle. Finally, the self-consistency equation reads, In Eqs. (4)-( 2 ), where n = 0, ±1, ±2, . . . are the Matsubara frequencies, T cs is the critical temperature of the superconductor S, and f s(T ) denotes the singlet components of anomalous Green function in the S(TI) region (we assume = k B = 1). As far as our 2D system is periodic in y direction and large values of helical magnetization parameter Q are considered such that λ W f , we can expand the anomalous Green functions using the Fourier series. The function f T then can be written as, The Usadel equation in the TI layer for the amplitudes f (p) T then takes the following form, where, h x (y) is a derivative of h x along the y direction. Whereas, in the S layer the singlet function f s as well as ∆ can also be expanded into a Fourier series, (Color online) (a) Schematic of a 3D topological insulator (TI) -superconductor (S) junction with a proximity induced helical magnetization pattern. The magnetization vector is given by h(y) = h0(cos Qy, sin Qy, 0) (b) and h(x) = h0(cos Qx, sin Qx, 0) (c). The junction resides in the x-y plane and the S/TI interface lie in the y direction at x = 0. dn and ds are the thicknesses of TI and S layers respectively, while W f is the width of the junction. γB is a transparency parameter which is proportional to the interface resistance. The amplitudes f (p) s obey the following equation, The self-consistency equation for the Fourier amplitudes in the superconductor can be written as, From the equations above, it is clear that the amplitudes of the Fourier series are decoupled in the vicinity of the critical temperature. Therefore, each Fourier component p satisfies certain Usadel equation and the boundary conditions. Moreover, every single Fourier harmonic p of anomalous Green function f (p) s and pair amplitude ∆ (p) determines particular T c through the corresponding gap equation. However, the physical solution is the one, which gives the highest critical temperature T c , i. e. the solution is energetically favorable. We also need to supplement the equations above with proper boundary conditions to solve the problem. Here we omitted the component index p. The parameter γ B = R b σ n /ξ n is transparency parameter which is the ratio of resistance per unit area of the surface of the tunneling barrier to the resistivity of the TI layer and describes the effect of the interface barrier The solution of the equation ( Here C(ω n ) is the coefficient, which is found from the boundary conditions and the wavevector acquires additional imaginary term due to fast oscillations of the anomalous Green's function along the y direction compared to the case of uniform magnetization (Q = 0). The introduced solution to the equation automatically satisfies the vacuum boundary conditions (15). As far as ∆ is assumed to be real valued function, we write our equations for anomalous Green's functions in real form. Also we consider only positive Matsubara frequencies ω n . Following the standard procedure we obtain final set of equations which are sufficient to calculate critical temperature as a function of d n . Using the boundary conditions ( where The boundary condition ( According to the Usadel equation ( where we used the notations, In the same way we rewrite the self-consistency equation for ∆ in terms of symmetric function f + s considering only positive Matsubara frequencies, as well as the Usadel equation in the superconducting S layer, To calculate the critical temperature in the system considered, we use the equations ( Here we consider the system consisting of a superconductor and topological insulator with helical magnetization pattern presented in the Eq. (2). In this case the Usadel equation should be rewritten in terms of magnetization h(x). We assume that the anomalous Green's function does not depend on y coordinate and thus the corresponding derivatives are neglected. The Usadel equation in the TI layer then takes the following form, In order to rewrite the Eq. ( Inserting this substitution into the Eq. ( For this system we utilize the same boundary conditions as in previous subsection and express them in real form using symmetry relation (18). After the substitutions the boundary conditions take the form, where C 0 = cos (2h 0 /αQ). Finally, the boundary conditions at the free edges at x = d s and x = -d n , Similarly, we introduce the self-consistency equation for ∆ in terms of symmetric function f + s treating only positive Matsubara frequencies, ∆ ln and the Usadel equation in the S layer, Since the Eq. ( In this subsection we present the single mode approximation method. The solution of the problems ( where δ and Ω do not depend on ω n . The above solution automatically satisfies boundary condition ( Substituting expression (31) into the ( To determine the critical temperature T c we have to substitute the Eqs. ( where ψ is the digamma function, Boundary condition ( Generally, in order to calculate the critical temperature T c , the problem is put on the grid with finite number of the Fourier harmonics N and the following condition should be used, The critical temperature behavior is found from the solution of the transcendental equations ( As far as the solution of the Eq. ( In this section we present the results of the critical temperature calculations using the single-mode approximation. Some of the parameters are set to the certain values and are not changed throughout the paper, otherwise it is indicated. Such parameters are: γ = 0.2, ξ s = ξ n and the width of the junction W f = 20ξ n . In Fig. In this subsection we compare the T c (d n ) behavior in S/TI bilayers with the uniform and helical magnetisation induced on the TI surface. In Fig. where h x is the magnetization component along the x direction. Here h x is responsible for depairing of the superconducting correlations and suppresses the critical temperature T c with the decay length ξ = 1/κ ≈ min 2ω n /D, α/2h x . However, h y component of the magnetization does not play role in suppression of superconducting correlations but introduces a phase shift in the wavefunction, which has no quantitative effect on T c . Thus, in Fig. Now we turn to the case of S/TI hybrid structure with the TI layer magnetized along the x-axis [Fig. The origin of such T c (d n ) curves is a coupling of helical magnetization and momentum of the quasiparticles. However, unlike the magnetization pattern h(y), here the topological insulator TI is magnetized by h(x) along the direction of d n . Hence, the effects on the critical temperature are more explicit and clearer to understand. As it was discussed above, h y component has no quantitative impact on the magnitude of T c , therefore, the observed effects are purely due to variation of h x and namely because of its periodicity. Obviously, the number of kinks demonstrated in the Fig. In Fig. In this work we have formulated a theoretical approach and presented the results of a quantitative investigation of the superconducting critical temperature in the S/TI hybrid structure, where an in-plane helical magnetization is induced at the TI surface. The calculations are based on the quasiclassical Usadel equations, taking into account SOC at the surface of the topological insulator. We have found that in the case of in-plane helical magnetization h(y), evolving along the interface, the calculations reveal nonmonotonic behavior of the critical temperature as a function of the TI layer thickness with a well pronounced minimum, the effect which is absent in the case of uniform magnetization. Moreover, in the case of helical magnetization, evolving perpendicular to the interface h(x), the critical temperature demonstrates highly nonmonotonic behavior as well. However, this dependence has been shown to be qualitatively different from the case of h(y), showing number of kinks, which depends on helical magnetization parameters. The results are important for further understanding of the underlying physics and potential future applications of superconductor -TI hybrid systems.