We demonstrate a high temperature performance quantum detector of Terahertz (THz) radiation based on three-dimensional metamaterial. The metamaterial unit cell consists of an inductor-capacitor (LC) resonator laterally coupled with antenna elements. The absorbing region, consisting of semiconductor quantum wells is contained in the strongly ultra-subwavelength capacitors of the LC structure. The high radiation loss of the antenna allows strongly increased collection efficiency for the incident THz radiation, while the small effective volume of the LC resonator allows intense light-matter coupling with reduced electrical area. As a result our detectors operates at much higher temperatures than conventional quantum well detectors demonstrated so far. The terahertz (THz) domain of the electromagnetic spectrum has well defined applications ranging from imaging, security, spectroscopy In our device we combine quantum detector based on electronic transitions in quantum wells (THz QWIP, As indicated in Figure Alongside metamaterial detectors we also studied a reference device where the absorbing region was processed into a square mesa of dimensions 200x200 μm2 We performed optical and electrical characterizations of the devices as a function of the temperature. In particular we compared the currentvoltage characteristics of the mesa and of the metamaterial device in dark conditions, as well as under illumination from ambient black body radiation at 300K. In dark conditions, the sample is enclosed in a metallic cryo-shield without aperture that is maintained at the same temperature as the detector. For measurements under background illumination, the cryo-shield has an opening such as the field of view of the sample is ~60°. Figure Figure The peak responsivity which corresponds to the maximum of the photocurrent spectra in Fig. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0033367 The external responsivity of all structures can be written in the form [4] R = eg/E21 where e is the electron charge, g the photoconductive gain (number of photo-excited electrons read-out by an external circuit per absorbed photon),  is external quantum efficiency (number of photons absorbed by the intersubband transition with respect to the incident photon number) and E21 is the energy of the electronic transition. In the case of the metamaterial resonators,  depends on the properties of the LC and antenna elements as described in Ref. In the case of metamaterial detectors, the photon absorption efficiency  can be evaluated by systematic studies of the reflectivity spectra of the arrays and by applying coupled-mode theory equations The background limited detectivity of the structure has the following expression (1) of DBLIP* on T resulting from equation ( We observe that, in comparison with the mesa device, the enhanced detectivity compensates the exponentially increasing dark current, and thus expands the temperature operation of the device by about 40 K. The P = 4 μm La = 8 μm device where the carrier depletion was less pronounced has a maximum detectivity D* = 0.6x10 11 cmHz 0.5 /W, at 15 K, an order of magnitude higher than the value of the reference mesa at 4K. This value corresponds to a Noise Equivalent Power, NEP = 0.2 pW. For the best high temperature performing metamaterial ( P= 4 μm, La =7 μm), we estimate a NEP = 150 pW at 60 K. The high temperature performance of our detector is thus comparable with recently demonstrated graphene based detectors In conclusion, we have shown that our metamaterial design has a strong impact on the performance of THz detectors. In this first demonstration we showed that such devices can operate up to 60 K. However, both the metamaterial structure and the absorbing region dispose of many degrees of freedom to further improve the detector temperature operation. For instance we can envision quantum cascade detectors that operate at 0 V and feature even lower dark current See supplementary material for full details on the sample fabrication, biasing scheme for the mesa and metamaterial detectors, method to estimate the reflectivity curves shown in Fig. The fabrication procedure closely resembles the one described in Refs. We first fabricate the LC resonators. We start by fabricating the 1.5x1.5 μm2 ohmic contact pads below the bottom (square) capacitor plates of the LC circuits using electron beam lithography (EBL) and electron beam evaporation (EBE) of a stack of Pd/Ge/Ti/Au (15/45/5/15 nm). Using a subsequent EBL step, we pattern the bottom part of the LC circuit consisting of two capacitor plates on top of the ohmic contacts, and the straight wire connecting the two pads. We also pattern the metallic leads (long vertical wires in Fig. Ultimately, the sample is annealed at 200°C on a hotplate for 30 min. We summarize below the electrical area of each device and compare it to the physical footprint on the sample. In Ref. Here a and A are the amplitudes of the LC resonator and the antenna mode; Sin and Sout are respectively the amplitude of the incident and reflected wave. The LC-antenna coupling is described by the coupling constant G. By solving the system (S1-S3) for a harmonic regime where all amplitudes evolve as ~eit , we obtain the reflectivity R() = |Sout|2/|Sin|2 as illustrated in Figure The system (S1-S3) includes several parameters that have to be determined experimentally. For this we use our prior results from Ref. [2] and the data from Figure From these measurements we extract the various parameters such as the resonant frequencies of the uncoupled LC resonator (Figure THz. As in Ref. The fit parameters from the data of Figure In order to determine the responsivity of our devices we have used calibrated black body source heated at 500°C and a lock-in amplifier. Details of the experimental set-up are provided in Figure Knowing the spectral shape R() responsivity we can determine the absolute value of the peak responsivity Rpeak. Responsivity can be cast in the form: Here Rpeak is the maximum responsivity at a frequency peak = 5.2 THz (see Figure Here dPBB/d(T) is the spectral density of a black-body radiation incident on the detector that has been computed taking into account the device area and the solid angle of the F1 focusing mirror (see, for instance, equation (2.6) on page 7 from Ref. By construction the optical response of our metamaterial is dependent on the polarization of the incident THz wave. Only the electric field component of the incident wave, that is parallel to the wire antenna excites the metamaterial resonance Here we provide the current voltage characteristics of the structures (P = 4 μm, La = 8 μm) and (P =4 μm, La= 10μm) that were used to obtain the results reported in Figure This expression reveals the effect of metamaterial detectors through the factor (/) 1/2 This is the author's peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0033367