Magnetic droplets, a class of highly non-linear magnetodynamical solitons, can be nucleated and stabilized in nanocontact spin-torque nano-oscillators where they greatly increase the microwave output power. Here, we experimentally demonstrate magnetic droplets in magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJs). The droplet nucleation is accompanied by a power increase of over 300 times compared to its ferromagnetic resonance modes. The nucleation and stabilization of droplets are ascribed to the double-CoFeB free layer structure in the all-perpendicular MTJ which provides a low Zhang-Li torque and a high pinning field. Our results enable better electrical sensitivity in the fundamental studies of droplets and show that the droplets can be utilized in MTJ-based applications. still a large challenge for conventional STNOs Here we experimentally observe and investigate stable magnetic droplets in a DFL pMTJ and find that the droplet enhances the emission power by more than two orders of magnitude with respect to the FMR mode precession in the same device. Furthermore, using micromagnetic simulations, we argue that the stable magnetic droplets in MTJs are mainly due to the combination of the low Zhang-Li torque and the strong pinning field in the DFL. Our findings provide a comprehensive understanding of the nucleation of magnetic droplets in MTJs. It will pave the way for further optimization for use of magnetic droplets in MTJs. Figure After having confirmed the static behavior, we study their magnetodynamics in Figure Meanwhile, the ~GHz signal, low-f noise could exist till -50 mT for -2.4 mA and 40 mT for 2.4 mA (see Figure As the dashed lines show, the saturated magnetic fields for DFL should be larger than 25 mT or less than -20 mT. However, it is obvious that the STT torques could form the intermediate resistance states (vanish over -60 mT) under saturated magnetic fields which are always accompanied by the low-f noise shown in Figure Upon further characterization, we found another state which has an intermediate resistance but no low-f noise. To further clarify the nature of this apparently nondynamical state, we measured frequency spectra under perpendicular field sweeps at I = -1.6 mA, and current sweeps at field of μ0H = -15 mT with an angle of θext = 30°; shown in Figs. As for the current sweep in Figure We note that the threshold current density of droplet nucleation in our devices can be as low as ~5 MA cm -2 with a magnetic field of ~20 mT which is quite less than that in the SVs (~130 MA cm -2 under 0.25 T) In contrast to our previous work on an SFL MTJ Consequently, it further hinders the observation of stable droplets in MTJs. To explain the reason for stable droplets in our DFL MTJ, we have carried out the same current distribution calculation and a micromagnetic simulation as shown in Figure Moreover, an inhomogeneous thin W insert layer between double-free layers can cause local DMI and non-uniform RKKY distribution, which induces a much higher pinning field compared with an SFL MTJs 30 . To figure out the influence of this pinning field, we performed a simulation for a DFL MTJ with RKKY distribution and DMI in Figure By using the DFL structure in pMTJs, a magnetic droplet is generated for significant power enhancement. In DFL structures, the low Zhang-Li torque and high pinning field have been identified to be responsible to stabilize the magnetic droplet. The high TMR of MTJs, compared to the low MR of SVs, enables one order of magnitude smaller current density to induce a comparatively higher power emission. Furthermore, the generation of magnetic droplets has been observed to increase the microwave power by at least two orders of magnitude compared to FMR-like modes. The droplet implementation in MTJs provides an effective method to improve the power of STNOs for radio frequency electronics. This new finding could launch an alternative path towards exploring applications of spintronic devices. Simulations. Micromagnetic simulations are performed on the graphics-processingunit-based tool Mumax3 The magnetization dynamics of each site in the free layer are numerically calculated using the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation with the STT and Zhang-Li torque included (see supplementary note 4). The following magnetic parameters are used: spin polarization ratio P = 0.4, exchange constant A = 15 pJ m -1 saturation magnetization Ms = 987 KA m -1 from VSM results, Gilbert damping α = 0.0218 and anisotropy energy density Ku = 0.66 × 10 6 J m -3 from FMR results. If no pinning effect is considered, the DMI strength D is set as 0 and the exchange stiffness between the coupled two free layers is set as 2.5 × 10 -14 J m -1 , which corresponds to an interlayer coupling strength of 0.1 mJ m -2 . When introducing the pinning effect, we set DMI strength D = ± 0.5 mJ m -2 for the two coupled layers, respectively. In the meantime, spatial distribution of interlayer coupling strength from 0.04 to 0.1 mJ m -2 is set using a Voronoi tessellation with an average size of 5 nm. The current distribution in the free layer is simulated by the COMSOL software (see supplementary note 5) and employed as an input in the micromagnetic simulations. 