The interconnectivity of the porous space is an important characteristic in the study of porous media and their transport properties. Hence we propose a way to quantify it and relate it with the intrinsic permeability of rocks. We propose a measure of connectivity based on geometric and topological information of pore-throat network, which are models built from microtomographic images, and we obtain an analytical method to compute that property. The method is expanded to handle rocks that present a higher degree of heterogenity in the porous space, which characterization requires images from different resolutions (multiscale analysis). Trying to expand the methodology beyond the scope of images, we also propose a new interpretation for the experiment that generates the mercury intrusion curve and calculate the permeability. The methodology was applied to images of 11 rocks, 3 sandstone and 8 carbonate rock samples, and to the experimental mercury intrusion curve of 4 tight gas sand rock samples. We observe as result the existence of a correlation between the experimental and the predicted values. The notions of connectivity developed in this work seek above all to characterize a porous material before a typical macroscopic phenomenology. The porous space does not have a regular geometry. Nevertheless, it is usual to assign to it someone to allow a mathematical treatment. The most common ones are the capilar tubes and the networks models. The first modeling attempts admitted that the porous medium is formed by capillary tubes An alternative idea is to consider the pore space as a network formed by pores, larger spaces that store fluid, and throats, which restrict the flow while performing the communication between the pores The representation ways of the porous medium by network are related to the development of computation, since a network is formed by many constituents, and due to imaging techniques, which can provide information from the material. In the 1950s, some authors used to circumvented the problem of excessive calculations by means of electromechanical analogies When geometrical shapes are signed to the pore space, it is called a pore-throat networks or morphological networks, where the phenomenum is described by the conservation laws, i.e., the continuum models. In random networks, in turn, the phenomenon is approached by statistical physical theories, based on results of theories of percolation, renormalization, fractals and cellular automata, for example; they are discrete models Although the idea of porous space connectivity is an intuitive truth, there is no single definition, and the attempts to quantify it vary according to the branch of research. In mathematics, connectivity is synonymous with topology Vasconcelos When dealing with random networks, the coordination number is an inherent and constant information of spatial organization. Therefore, the more complex the network, the more it tends to be useful for describing real situations From the pixel based statistical view, the connectivity of a random network can be defined from higher order moments of the phase function. The intention is the 3D volume reconstruction. Other examples of interpretation of connectivity in porous media are cited. Glover (2009) uses electrical parameters to propose a measure of connectivity, more precisely to the inverse of the resistivity of the rock formation. Considering a pore-throat network model, we propose a measure of connectivity in which the coordination number is not the only input data, the other is the radius of the pore. In other words, topology is not the only relevant information for connectivity, so geometry is. It is a phenomenological perspective, based on the weighting of the contribution of each object of the network to a flow. What is more important: a large pore with low coordination number, or a small pore with high coordination number? We propose that the interaction between the two informations can be the answer. And from the quantification of the connectivity, we propose a quantitative correlation with the intrinsic permeability of the porous medium. We start from the observation that the pore-throat networks exhibit interesting patterns: the pore size distribution can be fitted by the gamma distribuition, and the mean coordination number of a pore increases linearly with its radius. It is very difficult to define an ideal volume size at which physical properties tend to stabilize, and even if a certain physical property does, there are no guarantees that others will do so The images are: 3 sandstone rocks, named A1, A2 and A3, observed with the respective resolutions of 2.40 μm, 3.40 μm e 3.90 μm, from which a cubic volume of edges 300 voxels were cropped. 8 carbonate rocks, named sequentially from C1 to C8, observed with the respective resolutions of 5.90 and 20.0 μm to In a second moment, we work with experimental data from mercury porosimetry. They are 4 tight gas sand samples, named sequentially from T1 to T4. The length L of the samples follow respectivelly: 0.0340, 0.0325, 0.0315 and 0.0331 m; and the diameter D: 0.0370, 0.0380, 0.0375 and 0.0380 m; and the permeability ones: 4.00×10 -4 , 6.60×10 -4 , 4.60×10 -4 e 1.01× 10 -2 mD. It is observed that the Spherical Pore Size Distribution (S-DTP) R(r) for the sandstones can be approximated by a gamma distribution where α and β the parameters of the distribution, and Γ(x) is the gamma function. It is also observed the existence of a linear correlation between the mean coordianation number n * of a pore and its radius r (Fig. Theoretically a pore of radius r = 0 does not exist, and implies no connected throat, i.e., b = 0. Then, n * = ar . (2) The observed correlation implies that one can express N * (n * ) in terms of R(r) Faced with a flow in the pore-throat network, two quantities are relevant for the mass displacement: the pore radius and its coordination number. As said before, the first has a geometric nature and the second topological. Highlighting the interaction between these entities of spatial configuration, we define the connectivity function ξ as where r is the pore radius with distribution R, and n is the coordination number with distribuition N . The expression can be rewritten for the mean coordination number n * : The observed linear correlation, n * ∼ r, allows to rewrite the connectivity ξ as a function only of radius r, That is, the connectivity function ξ, which covers geometric and topological informations of the network, is completely characterized by only one of the variables, n * or r. In the case of eq. ( Fig. The permeability k is given by where η is the viscosity of the fluid, L is the length of the material, A is the area of the section, p in and p out are the pressures applied at the inlet and outlet ends, respectively, and Q is the flow through A. The flow Q is given by where Ω is he hydraulic resistance of the porous medium. Then, the eq. ( In the right side, L, A and Ω are all macroscopic (η is a fluid property). But the hydraulic resistance Ω is affected by the microscopic characteristics of the porous space. We then consider Ω as a mean from microscopic informations. Strictly speaking, the hydraulic resistance of a cell in the pore-throat network has two parts: where Ω p is the contribution due to the spherical pores, and Ω g is due to cylindrical throats. The connectivity ξ(r) explicitly considers only the radius r of the pores and the average number of throats that depart from that pore, but not the geometry of those links. However the Maximum Ball Algorithm establishes a relation between the geometries of the radius and its connected throat And since the objective of this work is to demonstrate the existence of a correlation, we write, without loss of generality, At this point the connectivity function ξ is used to weight an expected value of r 3 in eq. ( Replacing eq. ( The described methodology has two main limitations. The first is related to the anisotropy of the medium; it is known that the permeability is a tensor entitity For carbonates, which show a high degree of heterogeneity in their porous structure, we propose to interpret the porous medium as a succession of the involved scales in such a way that the equivalent hydraulic resistance is understood as a serial association of the resistances of each scale. We means and where i is the number of scales. Observation at different scales results in distributions that overlap in some region (Fig. A pore size distribution resulted from a mercury porosimetry is constructed from capillary tubes model through the Young-Laplace equation, PSD Y L , This model does not consider connectivity by definition. Therefore we propose to calculate R(r) from PSD Y L before estimates the permeability. A porous medium is considered to be completely saturated by a fluid. And for each pressure p applied, we measure the cumulative volume V that leaves the structure. In the n-th measurement, the medium reached the irreducible saturation, i.e., the curve has n points. And through Young-Laplace equation, we calculate the n values of radius Λ n = {λ 1 , . . . , λ n }. Let (p 1 , V 1 ) a point of the experimental curve. The Young-Laplace equation associates p 1 to λ 1 , meaning that all capillaries with radii greater than or equal to λ 1 are accessible at this pressure. Thus, the pressure p 1 can expel an amount of fluid from all connected spherical pores whose radii are greater than or equal to λ 1 . Mathematically it is expressed: Analogously, high pressures can reach the capillaries with smaller radii. Theoretically, when pressure p * → ∞, the radius λ * → 0. In this case all the capillaries are accessible to the pressure p * , as long as they are connected. Hence the total accumulated volume is The cumulative volume density v 1 is given by the division of The previous equation is one of the n equations, and is a transcendental equation of α and β, and its numerical solution is presented in the Ap. A. With the values of the parameters, we can go back to eq. ( For the sandstone samples, the hypotheses have already been observed in Figs. For the carbonates ones, follow Figs. Tab. 1 and Tab 2 show the parameters obtained from the pore-throat networks and mercury intrusion curves, respectively. The calculated permeability values are given in Tab. 3. The graphics of Fig. It is observed, therefore, a clear correlation between the experimental permeability values and those estimated by the defined connectivity function. In this paper we discuss some ideia related to the connectivity of porous media, which is an important intrinsic feature in the study of the transport properties of those materials. The main objetive was to quatify it and related it to the intrinsic permeability of rock samples. We start from the observation that the pore-throat networks exhibit interesting patterns: the pore size distribution can be fitted by the gamma distribuition, and the mean coordination number of a pore increases linearly with its radius. Our thesis was to suppose that both geometry and topology of the network are important for the mass displacement before a monophasic flow. Then, we propose a phenomenological connectivity function that assumed the form That equation can quantify how a pore is connected only by its radius, which can be know by different experimental techniques. We used it to calculate the permeability from a single network and for several networks coming from differente resolution images (multiscalar analysis). We still extrapolate its use beyound the scope of images, proposing a new interpretation of the mercury intrusion curves. Those expressions gave us a analytical formula for the intrinsic permeability, which results are consistently correlated with the experimental values. Those results make us affirm that the defined connectivity function is a relevant entity before a monophasic flow. During the study we have established two important characteristics to the pore space. The first is that, after observe the above explored patterns in some microtomographic images, we operate reciprocally and imposed them as quantitative criteria to evaluate if a volume is representative from its original material. The second is the new interpretation to the experiment that generates the mercury intrusion curves and how to build the ideal PSD from the PSD Y L . In a first moment, it is expected that the observed patterns can be explored in other rocks, even in other porous materials, and in other scales of observations. Secondly, we imagine that the connectivity function ξ can be applied to the other phenomena. If no, we still expect that one can start from a generic ξ(n, r) ∼ f ( N (n), R(r) ) ( to propose alternative expressions most suitable. We thank Prof. Carlos Appoloni for the valuable comments. We search the values of α and β that satisfy the eq. ( (15) None of the three terms in the preceding equation is still known. Therefore, the experimental data DTP-YL is used to approximate the right side of eq. ( An implicit consideration of the previous equation is that the DTP-YL experimental curve must also be close to a gamma distribution. We can now replace in the eq. ( Ideally the parameters should be unique for the existing n equations; But in practice only m < n equations have a solution. And the value of the parameter will be the mean of the set of m elements. Since α is known, we return to eq. ( They are named pixel/voxel based statistics or point-to-point statistics. The normalization condition requires that: α > 1 /2 e β > 0.