The efficacy of face masks, neck gaiters and face shields are predicted and contrasted. In particular, a Lattice Spring Model of a neck gaiter serves as the input to a Lattice Boltzmann simulation. The Lattice Boltzmann method is used to capture the fluid dynamics both through and around various face coverings. The evaporation and transport of respiratory droplets is simulated in this flow field, and the efficacy of the different face coverings at stopping the spread of respiratory droplets are elucidated and contrasted. In agreement with recent experimental studies, we predict that neck gaiters are at least as effective as cloth masks, and both are far superior to a face shield. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the World Health Organization (WHO) are now recommending face masks be used by the general public and it is believed that, in conjunction with other mitigating behaviors, the wide-spread use of face masks can reduce community spread of Covid-19 With the shortage and expense of respirators, the widespread adoption of single use masks was an initial response of some within the general public. However, the disposal of single use masks posses a potential environmental catastrophe Respiratory droplets are known to contain potential pathogens Limiting this mechanism of spreading is particularly important for the current COVID-19 pandemic. In particular, the presence of asymptomatic individuals The movement of respiratory droplets from one individual to another, however, is a complex phenomena, affected by the evaporation, the dispersion, and the deposition of the droplets In terms of the use of personal protective equipment, the role that airborne transmission plays in the spread of COVID-19 has been controversial as this might necessitate more stricter protocols, such as the use of airborne isolation infection rooms and fit-tested N95 face-piece respirators Larger droplets are unlikely to travel far before gravity deposits them on nearby surfaces. This is one of the reasons that social distancing, especially when individuals are facing one another The location within the respiratory track from where the respiratory droplets originate will dictate the concentration of pathogens contained within the respiratory droplets Significant inconsistencies have been reported in regards to the size distribution of respiratory droplets While some political and social resistance to wearing masks exists, it is widely agreed that wearing masks will reduce community spread without significant social or economic impacts The filtration efficiency depends on the size of the droplets with large droplets, that might be more likely to deposit on nearby surfaces, more effectively blocked by fabrics Recent computer simulations have been used to elucidate the role of fluid mechanics on the efficacy of masks. In particular, Dbouk and Drikakis To capture the ability of face masks, neck gaiters and face shields at containing respiratory droplets we combine a number of simulation techniques. First a Lattice Spring Model (LSM) os elastic mechanics is used to simulate neck gaiter configurations. Second the Lattice Boltzmann (LB) method is used to simulate the fluid mechanics through and around porous face coverings (and around an impermeable face shield). Lastly, the spatial evolution of evaporating respiratory droplets are simulated in the flow fields and the collection efficiency of the different face coverings contrasted. The Lattice Spring Model (LSM) is a coarse-grained simulation of elasticity and fracture mechanics. In particular, the coarse-grained components of the model (elastic springs) mirror atomistic processes (interatomic attractions) such that the correct continuum behavior (linear elasticity) emerges. The mechanics of the neck gaiter are captured using this coarse-grained spring model (with spring constants k i,j connecting nodes i and j) representation of a two-dimensional surface. The energy associated with the system is of the form where r i,j is the distance between nodes i and j, and r o i,j is the equilibrium distance. A square lattice is implemented with nodes connected to their nearest and next-nearest neighbors. While more complicated Hamiltonians can be implemented, this Hookean Spring Model can capture the deformation of a fabric mask with an elastic modulus of 8k/3 and a Poisson's ratio of 1/3 in the square lattice considered here. No bending motions are considered, and the fabric is free to fold or "bunch up" without any energy penalty. The equilibrium position of the LSM nodes is found by minimizing the energy of the system. The facial dimensions were obtained from the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) anthropometric survey The Lattice Boltzmann (LB) method is another coarse-grained simulation technique whose emergent behavior comes from coarse-grained components that mirror microscopic phenomena Second, a collision step that captures the particle collisions that take place during the movement of the particles in the fluid. The collision step relaxes the distribution functions towards an equilibrium distribution function of the form The density is ρ = i f i and velocity is found from ρu = i f i c i . The lattice weight factors for the D3Q19 model are w 0 = 1/3, w 1→6 = 1/18, and w 7→18 = 1/36. The lattice sound speed is c = ∆x/∆t and the viscosity of the fluid is μ = (2τ -1)c 2 ∆t/6ρ. Here ∆t = ∆x = 1, and the density is initially set to unity To capture the effects of turbulence on the fluid flow the Smagorinsky subgrid turbulence model is implemented, which essentially modifies the viscosity according to the Reynolds stress tensor to account for subgrid scale vortices. This modifies the relaxation time in the relaxation process of the lattice Boltzmann equations such that each node of the lattice relaxes at different rates The modified relaxation time τ s is computed as where C is Smagorinsky constant, for which a value of 0.04 is chosen, and S is the local strain tensor. where the tensor Π α,β is obtained for each cell from the second moment of the non-equilibrium parts of the distribution functions. α and β each run over the three spatial dimensions, while i is the index of the particle distribution functions for the D3Q19 model No-slip boundary conditions are implemented at the solid nodes, and partially at porous nodes that represent the neck gaiter and mask, with the following third step for the particle distribution function Where n s is the fraction of solid at a given node. When n s = 1 the above recovers the bounce-back boundary conditions, where incoming fluid particles are simply reflected in the opposite direction during the collision step; í is the opposite direction of i. Von Neumann boundary conditions are implemented at the boundaries In the current model we simulate individual droplets as they emerge from the mouth, shrink as the fluid evaporates, are subject to gravity and buffered by the surrounding air flow where t is time after the droplet is emitted, and β is the evaporation rate given by where D is the molecular diffusivity of water vapor, P sat and P ∞ are the saturation and ambient water vapor pressures, R v is the specific gas constant for water, and T is temperature. The minimum diameter is considered to be 44% of the original diameter, or d min /d 0 = 0.44 where RH is the relative humidity and the molecular diffusivity (in m 2 /s) of water vapor in air is given by The drag coefficient depends on the Reynolds number which is given as where μ is the viscosity of air. The particle acceleration is given by The first term on the right hand side is the drag force per mass. u is the velocity of the air, and u p is the droplet velocity. μ is the viscosity of the fluid. A Discrete Random Walk model is used to account for the effect of turbulent dispersion on the particle trajectories. This includes the fluctuating component of the velocity due to turbulence. The following velocity component is added to the local air velocity where ξ is a normally distributed random number that accounts for the randomness of turbulence about a mean value, and k is the turbulent kinetic energy of the fluid We simulate the efficacy of a standard face mask, a neck gaiter and a face shield. The neck gaiter is captured using the Lattice Spring Model. The face mask geometry is designed to be a relatively good fit, with a small leakage on either side of the nose. The face shield is considered as an impermeable barrier that encircles the face. The velocity at the mouth is set to 5 m/s and the neck gaiter has a porosity of 0.1 and a thickness 0.1 mm. The mask has a lower porosity and is thicker than the neck gaiter and the porosity is taken to be 0.05 and the thickness is 0.25 mm. The porosity of a node in the Lattice Boltzmann method is taken to be where L is the grid size, L i is the thickness of a layer (of either the mask or the air) and p i is the porosity of the layer (1 for just air). This assumes the layers of the mask are always perpendicular to the direction of flow, in terms of how the sub-grid porosity is handles, but allows us to calculate the flow of fluid through the permeable mask. In Figure The emission of 10,000 respiratory droplets (with a uniform distribution between 1 μm and 100 μ m) at the same time is simulated given the flow profiles from the Lattice Boltzmann method. In Figure The efficacy of the face masks are depicted in Figure At the outset of this manuscript, we presented a brief summary of the current state with respect to personal protective equipment and the mitigation attempts for the spread of COVID-19. The importance of facial coverings can not be overstated to mitigate the spread of COVID-19 in particular and airborne viruses in general. As mentioned, one study suggests that the economic benefit to society of each additional mask worn is upwards of $6,000. However, in order to get broad compliance on the wearing of masks, they need to be economically accessible to all, comfortable, without increasing our impact on the environment. Cloth gaiters fit all of the aforementioned criteria -they are reusable, comfortable, and economically accessible. We have demonstrated that neck gaiters may at least be as effective as more commonly accepted cotton face masks. In particular, we captured the fluid dynamics, and the transport of respiratory droplets, through and around various face coverings. We elucidated the role of droplet size on the collection efficiency and leakage fraction. We found that the neck gaiter was at least as effective as the cloth mask, and both were far superior to a face shield. The confirmation that the gaiter is as efficient as regular cloth masks may provides decision-makers with information to encourage individuals to use this intervention to help mitigate the spread of COVID-19.