-temperature Fermi-Dirac electron thermal excitation in conventional threedimensional (3D) or two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors generates hot electrons with a relatively long thermal tail in energy distribution. These hot electrons set a fundamental obstacle known as the "Boltzmann tyranny" that limits the subthreshold swing (SS) and therefore the minimum power consumption of 3D and 2D field-effect transistors (FETs). Here, we investigated a novel graphene (Gr)-enabled cold electron injection where the Gr acts as the Dirac source to provide the cold electrons with a localized electron density distribution and a short thermal tail at room temperature. These cold electrons correspond to an electronic cooling effect with the effective electron temperature of ~145 K in the monolayer MoS2, which enable the transport factor lowering and thus the steep-slope switching (across for 3 decades with a minimum SS of 29 mV/decade at room temperature) for a monolayer MoS2 FET. Especially, a record-high sub-60-mV/decade current density (over 1 μA/μm) can be achieved compared to conventional steep-slope technologies such as tunneling FETs or negative capacitance FETs using 2D or 3D channel materials. Our work demonstrates the great potential of 2D Dirac-source cold electron transistor as an innovative steep-slope transistor concept, and provides new opportunities for 2D materials toward future energy-efficient nanoelectronics. Fermi-Dirac electron thermal excitation is an intrinsic physical phenomenon that grants a tunable electrical conductivity of semiconductors at room temperature, but on the other hand, it also causes excessive power dissipation in various electron systems With the rise of graphene (Gr), two dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) layered materials have been explored as promising material candidates for future energy-efficient nanoelectronics due to the natural quantum confinement in an atomically thin body In this work, we demonstrated a novel Gr-enabled Dirac-source "cold" electron injection which possesses a more localized electron density distribution and a shorter thermal tail, compared to the conventional normal-source hot electron injection in 3D or 2D semiconductors. The cold electron injection has been implemented in a monolayer MoS2 FET to introduce an electronic cooling effect which can lower the transport factor and thus enable an outstanding steep-slope switching (across for 3 decades with a minimum SS of 29 mV/decade at room temperature), an excellent on/off ratio (~10 7 ), novel and strong on-current saturation (~10 μA/μm), and especially a record-high sub-60-mV/decade current density (over 1 μA/μm) compared to any TFETs or NCFETs using 2D or 3D channel materials. The effective electron temperature was extracted to be ~145 K, based on the energy distribution of the cold electrons at room temperature. Our work presents the 2D Dirac-source cold electron FET as an innovative steep-slope transistor concept to achieve the sub-60-mV/decade switching, and provides new opportunities for 2D materials toward future energy-efficient nanoelectronics. Considering a conventional FET structure where a gate-controlled potential barrier (φb) is established within the channel, the drain current is attributed to the thermionic injection of the electrons with E higher than φb. Due to the long Boltzmann thermal tail as E increases, the minimum SS for 3D and 2D semiconductor channels suffers from the "hot" electron injection and has a limit of 60 mV/decade at room temperature. As a comparison, the monolayer Gr has a linear energy dispersion near the Dirac point, and its DOS is a linear function of E as DOSGr(E) ~ EDirac-E where EDirac is the energy at the Dirac point. The corresponding n(E) of the monolayer Gr can be expressed as nGr(E) ~ (EDirac- nGr(E) always shows a super-exponential decay compared to n2D(E). The Boltzmann thermal tail in Gr is relatively short, because it is no longer infinite but terminated right at EDirac even at room temperature, as shown in Fig. To provide a quantitative comparison, we assume n(EF) is the electron density at E = EF, and calculate the normalized carrier density, i.e., n(E)/n(EF) for the monolayer Gr and 2D semiconductors, as shown in Fig. Furthermore, when we compare the energy distribution of n(E)/n(EF) in Gr at room temperature with that in 2D semiconductors at low temperature, it is intriguing to see that they are comparable in certain regimes, as shown in Fig. Sub-60-mV/decade switching of 2D MoS2 Dirac-source cold electron FET. Here we designed a 2D steep-slope Dirac-source FET (DSFET) using the monolayer Gr and MoS2 as the cold-electron source and semiconductor channel, respectively, and experimentally demonstrated the electronic cooling effect and thus the outstanding sub-60-mV/decade switching performance at room temperature. Schematic of a 2D MoS2 DSFET and the microscopic images of a device are illustrated in Fig. As VBG continues increasing, the minimum SS rises and stabilizes at about 210 mV/decade in the forward sweep and about 90 mV/decade in the backward sweep, as shown in Fig. where the on-current density is nearly constant (~ 10 μA/μm at VD = 0.1 V) across a wide sweeping range (~ 5 V in the forward sweep and ~ 3 V in the backward sweep). Such unique independence of the gate voltage is not obtained in either the back-gate Gr FET, MoS2 FET, or Gr/MoS2 FET (see Fig. To better understand the steep-slope switching mechanism of the 2D MoS2 DSFET and its dependence on the top-gate and back-gate electric fields, an energy band diagram along the channel is illustrated in Fig. EF in the p-type Gr and EC in the n-type MoS2 create a large φb at the Gr/MoS2 interface to prevent the electron injection. As VTG increases, both EDirac in Gr and EC in MoS2 in the heterobilayer region are lowered, resulting in a transition of Gr from p-type to n-type as well as a reduced φb. Thus the MoS2 DSFET is operated in the subthreshold regime, and the current increases due to the thermionic injection of the hot electrons which have higher E over φb. As VTG continues increasing, EC in MoS2 becomes lower than EF in Gr. Thus, an energy window defined as EDirac-φb is opened for the cold electron injection from the Gr source to the MoS2 channel. With the expansion of the injection window, JD increases accordingly and eventually reaches the maximum at the on state. Although the carrier transport during the subthreshold regime is still dominated by the thermionic emission over φb, the sub-60-mV/decade switching becomes possible due to the localized electron density distribution and the short Boltzmann thermal tail of the cold electrons from Gr. At the on state, because of a degenerate doping from the EDL effect In addition to the sub-60-mV/decade steep slope and the strong on-current saturation, another intriguing feature of the 2D MoS2 DSFET is the "double minima" in the SS during the operation (see Fig. Whereas in the 2D MoS2 DSFET operation, in addition to the minimum SS induced by the normalsource hot electron injection, the second valley with a sub-60-mV/decade SS occurs, owing to the Dirac-source cold electron injection. Because both the hot and cold electron injections are dominated by the thermionic emission (see Supporting Information Note 9), their currents can be described by the Landauer-Büttiker formula at the ballistic transport limit Owing to the ultrahigh capacitance of EDL, the body factor is assumed to be unity in the 2D MoS2 DSFET. This is also evidenced by the near-60-mV/decade achieved in the hot carrier injection regime. Therefore, the SS is predominated by the transport factor, as shown in Fig. Because of the novel electronic cooling effect from the cold electron injection, the transport factor can be lowered than 60 mV/decade at room temperature, and the effective temperature (Teff) of the cold electrons can be estimated from the SS. Based on the minimum SS of 29 mV/decade at room temperature, the lowest Teff can be calculated as Teff = SSq/(kBln10) = ~145 K, which is more than 50% reduced. Finally, we benchmark our 2D MoS2 DSFET with other state-of-the-art beyond-CMOS technologies. Compared to the 14 nm Si FinFET CMOS technology NCFETs The Raman spectroscopy was performed by Renishaw inVia Raman microscope. The atomic force microscopy (AFM) was performed by Bruker Dimension Icon with ScanAsyst. Both the Raman and AFM characterization confirmed the monolayer structure of MoS2 and Gr, as shown in Fig. The monolayer MoS2 was synthesized using a customized two-zone chemical vapor deposition (CVD) system A comparison of the JD-VD output characteristics among the Gr FET, MoS2 FET, Gr/MoS2 FET, and MoS2 DSFET is carried out at different VBG or VTG, as shown in Fig. It is also worth mentioning that all the devices show a clear linear JV relationship. This result indicates an Ohmic contact condition achieved for all the devices in this work. A comparison of the JD-VBG transfer characteristics among the Gr FET, MoS2 FET, and Gr/MoS2 FET is performed, as shown in Fig. A comparison of gm among Gr FET, MoS2 FET, Gr/MoS2 FET, and MoS2 DSFET is performed to investigate the intrinsic gain and switching speed, as shown in Fig. The MoS2 DSFET is operated through an EDL gating using the ionic liquid. The calculation of μFE in this case is challenging, as the setup for measuring EDL capacitance (CEDL) is complicated absorbates on the unpassivated device surface To confirm the reproducibility, we also fabricate additional MoS2 DSFETs with a similar device structure as shown in From the room-temperature JD-VTG characteristics, all the devices clearly show a strong on-current saturation across a wide VTG range (~5 V). The extracted SS is plotted as a function of JD. Some of the devices didn't possess a sub-60-mV/decade SS, probably due to the contamination at the Gr/MoS2 interface which was induced during the transfer process We fabricate another MoS2 DSFET to perform a temperature (T)-dependent measurement, as shown in Fig. Therefore, we choose a high-T range near and above the room temperature for this measurement. The highest T in this work is set as 358 K, in order to prevent possible failure or damage of the ionic liquid at the high T. We also closely monitor the JTG variations at the high T, and our results confirm that JTG was still well-controlled at around 10 -5 μA/μm at 358 K. For this specific DSFET, the extracted SS doesn't show a clear sub-60-mV/decade value. Nevertheless, the extracted SS still shows a clear increase as a function of T, suggesting the dominance of thermionic emission in carrier transport. This result is consistent with our theory and previous reports regarding the Dirac source carrier injection for CNT channels Both normal-source and Dirac-source carrier injection are dominated by thermionic emission, their current can be described by the Landauer-Büttiker formula at the ballistic transport limit [S14-S16] as 