Using an operator scattering approach, we analyze the quantum dynamics of an ultrasensitive electrometer -a Cooper pair transistor embedded in a quarter-wave microwave cavity (cCPT). While the cCPT is inherently a tunable, strongly nonlinear system affording a diverse range of functionalities, we restrict our present analysis to a necessary first investigation of its linear charge sensing capabilities, limiting to low pump powers corresponding to an average cavity photon number 1. Assuming realizable cCPT parameters (B. L. Brock et al., Phys. Rev. Applied 15, 044009), and not including noise from the subsequent amplifier chain, we predict the fundamental, photon shot noise-limited charge sensitivity to be 0.12 μe/ √ Hz when the pumped cavity has an average of one photon and the cCPT is operated close to charge degeneracy. This is to be compared with a first reported charge sensitivity value 14 μe/ √ Hz in the single-photon regime (B. L. Brock et al., Rapid detection of electrical charge on the scale of an individual electron has long been an important experimental technique in such areas as readout of qubits, 1,2 detection of individual tunneling events, As a result of its single-photon-level charge sensitivity, the cCPT is capable of mediating the standard optomechanical interaction in the ultrastrong coupling regime [see Eq. (51) in Sec. V]. The experimental realization of single photon optomechanical dynamics in this tripartite system (comprising the cavity, CPT, and mechanical resonator) will depend on the optimized non-linear charge sensitivity of the cCPT. While the present work does not take into account such a measured quantum dynamical system and the effects of backaction, it instead considers a deterministic sinusoidal charge modulated signal in the photon shot-noise limit as a necessary step towards such investigations. The layout of our paper is as follows. In Sec. II, we give a pedagogical introduction to the quantum scattering method (which is based on the superconducting circuit analysis methods introduced in Refs. It is worthwhile mentioning that the sources of the internal losses relevant to the scope of this paper originate from the interactions of the cavity with its local environment. Referring to Fig. where the phase field is defined in terms of the magnetic flux field Φ(x, t) through φ i ≡ 2πΦ/Φ 0 with Φ 0 = h/(2e) the flux quantum, L i , C i denote respectively the inductance and capacitance per unit length of the cavity (i = c) and transmission line (i = p), and l is the cavity center conductor length. Current conservation at x = 0 and the boundary condition at x = l give respectively: Working with the Heisenberg equations resulting from formally replacing the coordinates with their associated quantum operators φc (x, t) and φp (x, t), the general solution for the wave equation ( where 'h.c.' denotes the Hermitian conjugate and we have dropped the hats on the operators for notational convenience. Note that there should properly be a regularizing, upper frequency cut-off in Eq. (4). However, the actual measured quantities involve finite frequency bandwidths about the pump frequency that are well below (and independent of) the cut-off. The superscripts '→' ('←') correspond to right (left) propagating modes, with the photon creation/annihilation operators satisfying the standard commutation relation where m, n ∈ {' → ', ' ← '}. The cavity and transmission line impedances are given by and is the microwave phase field propagation velocity. In essence, the operator scattering approach involves substituting the wave equation solutions (4) into the boundary conditions (2) and (3) in order to express the left propagating (i.e., "reflected" or "scattered") probe operator a ← p in terms of the right propagating ("incident") probe operator a → p and cavity operator a → c . Starting with boundary condition (3), we have a ← c (ω, t 0 ) = -e 2iωl/vc a → c (ω, t 0 ), so that the cavity phase field solution (4) (with i = c) becomes × e iωx/vc -e -iω(x-2l)/vc a → c (ω, t 0 ) + h.c.; one may readily verify that solution (6) vanishes at x = l as required by the boundary condition (3). Using Eq. ( and where a in p (ω) ≡ e iωt0 a → p (ω, t 0 ) may be interpreted classically as the right propagating component of the pump/probe line field in frequency space that enters the cavity at time t = 0. Under the condition of weak cavity-probe coupling, Eq. (8) describes the Fourier transform of the quantum dynamics of approximately independent harmonic oscillators (i.e., cavity modes) subject to damping and noise. The resonant mode frequencies are obtained by setting the real, square-bracketed coefficient in the first line to zero and solving for ω, while the mode linewidths are given by the imaginary coefficient on the second line of Eq. (8). The term involving a in p (ω) represents the pump drive and noise. In particular, imposing the condition of weak coupling given by the smallness of the dimensionless parameter ξ ≡ C pc /(C c l) ≪ 1, and expanding to first order in ξ, we obtain for the mode frequencies which coincides with the lumped element expression (A3) for the cavity mode capacitance: Furthermore, under the Markovian approximation, the pump/probe damping rate κ ext is given by which matches Eq. (A5) near ω n with the external quality factor Q ext ≡ ω n /κ ext . We can now use these results to derive the standard quantum Langevin equation in the Fourier domain involving the familiar closed-system cavity mode Hamiltonian, along with the zero-point fluctuations of the cavity phase coordinate modes, the details of which are given in Appendix B. Experiments on the device performance require measurements on the steady state response of the cavity, subject to a pump with frequency ω p typically applied in the vicinity of the fundamental cavity resonance ω 0 given by Eq. ( e -βHp |{n(ω)} p {n(ω)}| p (11) where |{n(ω)} p is the transmission line Fock state, Z = Tr e -βHp is the partition function, β ≡ 1/(k B T ), and the transmission line Hamiltonian takes the form where we neglect the zero point energy term since it does not contribute to the measured quantities. The presence of driving may be approximated by a displaced thermal state for the pump/probe transmission line: with Here, P in p is the average pump power and θ p is the pump phase. The pump coherence time T p is assumed to be longer than all other characteristic timescales of the system so that the displacement wavelet is narrowly smeared about ω = ω p in this large T p limit. We can then extract the time averaged output power in the bandwidth ∆ω centered at ω p using where the output probe current is and the output phase field is Following a similar convention as for a in p (ω) given above [just after Eq. ( the standard input-output relation for the cavity in a reflection mode measurement, where we have used the explicit expression (10) for the pump/probe damping rate κ ext , and where the cavity mode annihilation operator is defined as follows: Substituting the quantum Langevin equation (B1) into the input-output relation (18) and using the definition (15) for P out p , we obtain where the cavity reflection coefficient r(ω) is defined as For ω p = ω 0 and ∆ω ≪ ω 0 , we obtain with the transmission line average thermal occupancy n p (ω) = (e β ω -1) -1 (which is small in the frequency bandwidth of interest at T 30 mK). Since we set κ int = 0, the pump microwaves are reflected without any absorption/emission as expected. Having validated the bare cavity-probe transmission line dynamics using the operator scattering approach, we can now extend the same approach to the cCPT system shown in Fig. We begin by following the same procedure as in the previous section; in particular, we write down the cCPTtransmission line boundary conditions, which now accommodate the current through the CPT at x = 0 (Fig. Referring to Fig. where f ′ (x, t) and ḟ (x, t) represent the spatial and temporal derivatives, respectively, and recall Φ 0 = h/2e is the flux quantum. The associated SQUID loop constrains the phase coordinates through the relation where Φ ext (t) is the externally applied flux bias, n is an arbitrary integer (set to zero without loss of generality). For our cCPT device, where the junction capacitance asymmetry The 'cCPT terms' contribution in Eq. ( where we have introduced a displaced cavity phase φ(t) to absorb the external flux bias as follows: The first term on the RHS of Eq. ( to be contrasted with the more familiar indirect CPT coupling to the probe line via the cavity. As we will see in the next steps, the former contribution appears as an unwanted gate modulation, which can however be neglected as long as C g ≪ C J . We may now similarly proceed as in Sec. II A to employ the equation of motion for the cavity phase φ c (x, t), and further determine the Lagrangian and Hamiltonian of the cCPT system. However, as this turns out to be a cumbersome task if no approximations are made, we will first focus on the half-difference CPT coordinate δφ, utilizing several valid approximations to simplify the analysis. Instead of writing down the open cCPT Hamiltonian which contains contributions from the cavity, CPT, and the pump/probe transmission line, we use Eq. (25) to first obtain the CPT contribution to the Lagrangian, which then yields the following CPT Hamiltonian: where p δφ is the momentum conjugate to the halfdifference CPT phase coordinate δφ, Qin p (0, t) = (C g + ∆C J ) C pc V in p (0, t)/C Σ , and the effective Josephson energy coefficients in the potential energy term are defined as follows: and with the Josephson energies of the junctions defined as The corresponding quantized CPT operators obey the commutation relations [ δφ, N ] = i, where N ≡ pδφ / . In the more suitable phase coordinate form with unit circle configuration space, the commutation relations take the form (neglecting hats): Equation ( i.e., N takes discrete, integer values which can be interpreted as the number of excess Cooper pairs on the CPT island. Similarly, we can also define the gate polarization number n g in single electron units as follows: The CPT Hamiltonian then becomes where φ is defined in Eq. ( where Treating φ(t) and N in p as static, commuting numbers, the Hamiltonian (35) can be diagonalized assuming an approximate, finite dimensional Hilbert space truncation to obtain the CPT energy eigenvalues. Figure Assuming small N in p , we see that the CPT approaches charge degeneracy as n g → ±1 (Fig. The adiabatic elimination of the CPT from the total Hamiltonian dynamics effectively replaces the Hamiltonian (35) by its ground state energy E The ground and first excited energy band-structure of the CPT. Note that the adiabatic approximation may break down in the vicinity of charge degeneracy: ng = ±1. (c) Energy splitting between the ground and first excited state in the vicinity of charge degeneracy. For |1 -ng| ≥ 0.1, the adiabatic approximation holds since the energy splitting is much greater than the characteristic frequencies of the system. The parameter values used for these simulations are provided in Table We identify the above expression as the modified boundary condition at x = 0 coupling the cavity and pump/probe transmission line, and including the dressed CPT contribution as a perturbation [c.f. Eq. ( restricted to the fundamental phase coordinate mode φ 0 , where L 0 = 8L c l/π 2 is the corresponding fundamental mode inductance (see Appendix B). The CPT introduces anharmonicity to varying orders when expanded about the equilibrium point φ0 (n g , Φ ext ) obtained through the condition, Φ 0 2π As is evident in Fig In the limit where the CPT weakly perturbs the cavity fundamental resonance, i.e., C CPT /C c l and L c l/L CPT ≪ 1 (Fig 3b ), we obtain for the renormalized resonance frequency of the cCPT system coupled to the probe transmission line (see Appendix C for the detailed derivation): (40) where the CPT inductance L CPT can be defined from the curvature of E CPT as The lumped element expression (A6) with C cav = C c l/2 and L cav = 8L c l/π 2 coincides with Eq. ( where renormalization and having the minimum potential at φ 0 ∼ 0 lead to vanishing terms for k = 0 and 1, respectively. Expression (42) also involves an expansion in the gate polarization variation δn g in order to account for gate voltage modulations relevant for electrometry (discussed in Sec. IV). The total Hamiltonian is where C 0 is renormalized to C 0 + C CPT following the renormalized frequency expression in Eq. (40). As for the bare cavity case (see Appendix B), the phase operator of the fundamental cavity mode is expressed in terms of the photon creation/annihilation operators as follows: φ 0 = φ zp a 0 + a † 0 , with the zero-point fluctuations given by [c.f. eq. (B4)] The generalized nonlinear cCPT Hamiltonian thus becomes where We now make a few remarks about the Hamiltonian (45). First, the tunability of the cavity frequency results in the tunability of the zero-point fluctuations of the cavity phase coordinate itself, i.e., φ zp = φ zp (n g , Φ ext ). Typical applications of similar devices generally operate in the high-photon limit, where the relatively small variations in the zero-point motion of the cavity do not have a substantial effect. In the low-photon limit however, the tunability in the zero-point fluctuations can become relevant, as this may potentially be utilized to access stronger quantum fluctuation regimes. For our device, the range of variation of φ zp is found to be ∼ 5% in the tunability range of our interest (Fig Second, the experimental characterization is typically conducted in the limit of small gate modulation magnitude |δn g | ≪ 1. Additionally, the noise N in p originating via the probe coupling to the CPT can also be neglected as long as C g ≪ C Σ . We may thus restrict the potential energy expansion in (45) to first order in δn g . Third, we may use a rotating wave approximation (RWA) to simplify the Hamiltonian to contain only terms leading to an unchanged photon number in the cavity. The validity of this approximation becomes explicit when we transform to the rotating frame of the pump frequency ω p , driven near the fundamental resonance ω 0 ; contributions leading to changing photon number rapidly oscillate in this frame, and can thus be neglected. Consequently, we arrive at the simplified Hamiltonian of the cCPT device, valid up to O(φ 2 0 ): where the gate polarization coupling g is given by The complete experimental characterization of the cCPT device following this theoretical model is given in Ref. 16. The highly tunable and strongly nonlinear nature of the cCPT is evident from the analysis in the previous section. In this section, we narrow our focus to examine the operation of the cCPT as a linear charge detector. A comprehensive understanding in the linear response regime is an essential first step before widening the scope of the device operation to include nonlinear contributions, for example to realize phase-sensitive amplification via squeezing. In the simplest terms, we see from Eq. ( In line with such a scheme, we will first look into the output power generation in the presence of an electrically simulated, sinusoidal gate modulation "signal" δn g (t) = δn (0) g cos (ω g t). This will enable a determination of the charge sensitivity of the cCPT in the lowaverage photon number drive limit, which we will find to be comparable to previously reported or predicted values for electrometers. The output power at the sample stage in the presence of a gate modulated signal can be estimated using the same series of steps as for the bare cavity in Sec. II. In particular, we proceed to derive a modified quantum Langevin equation (D1) and then extend the resulting input-output equation to find the analogous expression to Eq. ( Internal noise/losses are modeled as a second, internal thermal bath denoted as ρ ι , modifying the total input state: ρ in = ρ α,p ⊗ ρ ι . The thermal occupancies of the pump n p and internal bath n ι are usually assumed to be identical, as the temperature variations at different locations in the device are neglected. However, in reality, the internal bath may have a different noise temperature due, for example, to coupling with two-level defects. The charge sensitivity δq (e/ √ Hz) of an electrometer is defined as the rms charge modulation amplitude that corresponds to a signal-to-noise ratio of one (in a bandwidth of 1 Hz) at the amplifier input. where κ now denotes the damping solely due to the coupling to pump/probe line κ ext , given by Eq. ( The sensitivity may be further improved using a homodyne detection scheme, where the combined contribution of both the sidebands lead to values lower by a factor of √ 2. of one cavity photon [Fig. It is worthwhile noting that the highly anharmonic, effective potential (46) of the cCPT leads to non-negligible contributions from the quartic Kerr potential term even near an average of one cavity photon. In theory, it is possible to substantially improve the performance of the cCPT by driving the cavity at the onset of bistability (and where the cCPT still behaves as a linear electrometer) as long as the signal is within gδn (0) g /ω g ≪ 1. where a and b denote the cavity and mechanical resonator annihilation operators respectively, x is the oscillator position, ∆ = ω 0 -ω p , Ω is the mechanical oscillator frequency, and G determines the opto-mechanical coupling. As a result, the radiation pressure force power spectral density is given by where S N N is the cavity photon number noise and x zp is the mechanical resonator position zero-point uncertainty. Hence we expect a quantum-limited inequality with imprecision noise depending on the phase noise S θθ (ω). Investigations probing the standard quantum limits achievable in the combined cCPT-mechanical oscillator system in the presence of low average photon number drive thus requires considering ways to measure the phase operator itself. It is worthwhile noting that the typical approximation for the phase in terms of the quadratures, θ = Ŷ / X , no longer holds in this limit; 9 further studies at a fundamental level are required to understand the behaviour of the phase operator, both theoretically and experimentally. Most importantly, the increased sensitivity to minute variations in the gate voltage also makes the cCPT prone to gate charge fluctuations that are potentially due to the two-level fluctuators arising within the thin oxide layers of the device. λ/4 in given by where Z 0 is the characteristic impedance, Q int is the quality factor representing internal losses and δx = (ωω λ/4 )/ω λ/4 . Here, ω λ/4 = (2n + 1)πv c /2l, n = 0, 1, 2 . . . are the resonant frequencies obtained by applying the shorted quarter-wave condition of the bare cavity, with v c the phase velocity. For an attenuation constant α, this input impedance is equivalent to that of a parallel RLC circuit with resistance R cav = Z 0 /αl, cavity mode capacitance C cav = 4Z 0 ω λ/4 /π -1 , and cavity mode in- . which gives where we neglect the second possible solution owing to its high resulting impedance. The equivalent lumped element model of the combined system thus modifies to a series RLC circuit in this configuration of weak coupling. The input impedance near resonance is , where the external probe coupling quality factor is obtained using For the parameters of our experimental device, the relative variation in the external quality factor is small near resonance: ∆Q ext (ω)/Q ext (ω 0 ) ≪ 1. We therefore approximate the external damping rate to be constant over the frequency region of interest. This allows us to work under the Markovian approximation, which considerably simplifies the calculations. Equation (A3) for the cavity resonant frequency can be reexpressed in terms of a renormalized total capacitance C cav → C cav + C pc . Hence, the addition of the CPT shifts the resonance via an effective capacitance C cCPT = C cav + C pc + C CPT , and an effective inductance CPT . Consequently, under the conditions C CPT /C cav , L cav /L CPT ≪ 1, the cCPT resonant frequency is renormalized to Appendix B: Quantum Langevin equation for the bare cavity For completeness, here we verify that the standard quantum Langevin equation in the Fourier domain can be obtained using the results presented in Sec. II A. Furthermore, we can extract the familiar closed-system cavity mode Hamiltonian, and the zero-point fluctuations of the cavity phase modes. Simplifying Eq. ( This expression is the standard, Fourier transformed quantum Langevin equation, where the nth cavity mode photon annihilation operator is defined as for ω in the vicinity of a given mode frequency ω n [Eq. 9)]. This rescaling ensures that a n (t) = +∞ -∞ dωe -iωt a n (ω) satisfies the usual, discrete mode canonical commutation relation [a n (t), a † n (t)] = 1. The Hamiltonian of the closed system consisting of a shorted quarter-wave resonator with a coupling capacitance thus comprises discrete harmonic oscillator modes: where we use the notation a n for the mode 'n' cavity operator. The second line represents the Hamiltonian for the independent lumped element LC oscillators expressed in terms of the generalized mode phase coordinates and conjugate momenta respectively: The lumped element parameters are given by the mode capacitance C n = C c l/2+ C pc and the mode inductance L n = 8L c l/(2n+1) 2 π 2 , and the mode zero-point uncertainty can be written as with Z n = π L n /C n the cavity mode impedance and R K = h/e 2 the von Klitzing constant. In this appendix, we provide details of the derivation for the tunable resonance of the cCPT, following the same operator scattering method steps as utilized for the bare cavity case (Sec. II A), but now with the boundary condition (37) replacing the simpler, bare cavity boundary condition (2). For a sinusoidal gate modulation frequency ω g ≪ ω 0 and amplitude δn (0) g ≪ 1, the term in the RHS of Eq. ( where n k is the binomial coefficient, n g (t) = n (0) g +δn g (t) and the gate modulation δn g (t) = δn (0) g cos (ω g t)-N in p (t). Utilizing the operator scattering solutions in Eq. ( where we have limited the expansion to first order in φ c , leaving out anharmonic terms. As for the bare cavity case [Eq. ( Defining the dimensionless frequency as ω ≡ ωl/v c and the small dimensionless CPT-transmission line coupling parameter ξ = v c C pc Z c /l = C pc /C c l ≪ 1, we can express the term in curly brackets as cos ω -ωξ with the CPT inductance L CPT defined as This appendix details how a sinusoidal modulated signal at the CPT's gate introduces side-bands into the frequency spectrum of the output power, measured via the pump/probe transmission line. Limiting the relevant frequency space to the region of the fundamental cavity mode frequency: |ω -ω 0 | ≪ ω 0 , we obtain from Eq. (C2) the following, approximate modified quantum Langevin equation to first order in ξ = C pc /(C c l) ≪ 1: where a 0 is given by Eq. (B2) for ω in the vicinity of the cCPT renormalized, fundamental mode frequency ω 0 [Eq. (40)] and κ ext is given by Eq. ( We may further simplify Eq. (D1) by neglecting N in p (ω -ω ′ ) in Eq. (D2) owing to the smallness of its noise contribution, and noting also that the ω, ω ′ dependent terms multiplying a 0 (ω ′ ) in Eq. (D2) can be approximately evaluated at ω 0 since we assume ω g , κ ext , ∆ω ≪ ω 0 , where ∆ω is the measured output power bandwidth centered at the pump frequency ω p . Introducing internal effective cavity losses using a phenomenological constant damping rate κ int , channeled via an additional nonmeasurable input port a in ι (ω), we obtain: where Solving Eq. (D3) perturbatively in the limit of small g, we have where the zeroth order term in (D5) is and the iterative solution relation for I n (ω) is given by Considering the time-domain expression for a 0 (t) using Eq. (D3), we obtain the following necessary condition for linear charge detection: gδn (0) g /ω g ≪ 1. In this linear detection regime, the output power reaching the firststage amplifier is given by P out (ω 0 , ∆ω) = P in g /ω g ≪ 1, we neglect the noise floor contribution of g 2 order. We also neglect the order g 2 signal contribution at ω = ω p , which is dominated by the reflected pump tone; the actual signal is obtained from either (or both) of the sidebands at ω p ± ω g .