We conducted a joint experimental-theoretical investigation of the high-pressure chemistry of europium polyhydrides at pressures of 86-130 GPa. We discovered several novel magnetic Eu superhydrides stabilized by anharmonic effects: cubic EuH9, hexagonal EuH9 and an unexpected cubic (Pm3 ̅ n) clathrate phase Eu8H46. Monte Carlo simulations indicate that cubic EuH9 has an antiferromagnetic ordering with TN up to 24 K, whereas hexagonal EuH9 and Pm3 ̅ n-Eu8H46 possess a ferromagnetic ordering with TC = 137 and 336 K, respectively. The electronphonon interaction is weak in all studied europium hydrides, and their magnetic ordering excludes s-wave superconductivity, except, perhaps, distorted pseudohexagonal EuH9. The equations of state predicted within the DFT+U approach (U-J were found within linear response theory) are in close agreement with the experimental data. This work shows the great influence of the atomic radius on symmetry-breaking distortions of the crystal structures of superhydrides and on their thermodynamic stability. The high-pressure synthesis of new compounds of metal hydrides is a rapidly developing field, in view of unusual chemistry and record high-TC superconductivity of some hydrides. Some extraordinary compounds, such as CSHx, 1 LaH10, On the other hand, studies of lanthanoid superhydrides are motivated by the need of further developments in the description of strongly correlated systems. In the studies of the Pr-H At normal conditions, europium has the electronic configuration [Xe]4f 7 6s 2 , unusually low density and melting point, and bcc lattice with relatively large cell parameter a = 4.581 Å. To investigate the formation of new chemical compounds in the Eu-H system at high pressures, we loaded three high-pressure diamond anvil cells (DACs #E1-3) with metallic europium and sublimated ammonia borane NH3BH3 (AB), used as both a source of hydrogen and a pressure transmitting medium. A tungsten gasket was pressed to 20 μm. Additional parameters of the high-pressure diamond anvil cells are listed in Supporting Information Table Laser heating of the metal Eu sample in the AB medium at 1600-1800 K for 0.1 s yielded a complex mixture of various europium hydrides observed in DACs #E1 and #E3. The experimental X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns are shown in Figure Two other sets of reflections may be indexed in space groups Fm3 ̅ m or F4 ̅ 3m (a = 4.947 Å, V = 30.27 Å 3 /f.u. at 130 GPa) and P63/mmc (a = 3.591 Å, c = 5.509 Å, V = 30.76 Å 3 /f.u. at 130 GPa), which may be proposed by analogy with the chemistry of the Pr-H Additional laser heating of DACs #E1 and #E2 at 74 GPa under the same conditions (~1600 K, 0.1 s) with consequent registration of the X-ray diffraction at synchrotron radiation facility SPring-8 (Japan, λ = 0.413 Å) left the diffraction pattern almost unchanged. The analysis showed that the samples still contained a mixture of cubic and hexagonal EuH9 and Pm3 ̅ n phase (Supporting Information Figures In order to more accurately establish the composition and compute various physical properties of the synthesized phases, we performed a variable-composition search for stable compounds in the Eu-H system at pressures of 50, 100, 130, and 150 GPa using the Universal Structure Predictor: Evolutionary Xtallography (USPEX) algorithm. To construct the convex hulls, we used the experimental XRD data from the previous studies of phase transition of metallic europium. Bi et al. First, the predicted unit cell volume of Pm3 ̅ n-EuH5 is 22.8-23.9 Å 3 /f.u. at 130 GPa (without SOC, U -J = 0 eV and with SOC and U -J = 5 eV, respectively), whereas the experimental value is 25.1 Å 3 /f.u., about 1-2 Å 3 higher. The situation holds for other U-J=0-7 eV. To solve the problem, get closer to the experimental volume and find a better structural solution, we increased the hydrogen content x in Pm3 ̅ n-EuH5+x, performing two USPEX searches at 130 GPa with fixed ratios of Eu:H = 1:6 and 8:46 (1:5.75, Supporting Information Table As a result of the second USPEX search, Pm3 ̅ n-Eu8H46 was found to be the most stable phase with a cell volume of 25.21 Å 3 /Eu. This structure features H24 cages around each Eu atom (among 24 hydrogens, 8 are closest, with Eu-H distances below 1.87 Å). Among the 46 hydrogen atoms in the unit cell, 16 form pairs that can be described as stretched H2 molecules (d(H-H) = 0.99 Å vs 0.74 in the free H2 molecule) and the remaining 30 hydrogen atoms can be described as single atoms (their shortest H-H distance is 1.33 Å at 130 GPa). This phase corresponds to the experimental XRD and EoS, lies close to the convex hull with and without SOC and U -J (Figure It is curious to track how a series of stable europium hydrides changes with pressure. At 50 GPa, all europium polyhydrides except EuH4 are metastable (Figure The description of electronic structure in terms of delocalized canonical orbitals is almost completely devoid of an explicit chemical bonding picture of a given system. To understand chemical bonding in europium polyhydrides, we first analyzed model clusters (blocks separated from the infinite crystal lattice) via the adaptive natural density partitioning (AdNDP) algorithm. Starting our search from localized bonding elements such as 2c-2e, 3c-3e, and so forth, we found no highly occupied localized bonds in the present structures. Due to the absence of highly occupied localized bonding elements, the model clusters could be completely described in terms of fully delocalized canonical molecular orbitals (MOs). As was expected, for such sphere-like clusters, the canonical MOs mimic the spherical harmonics forming so-called superatomic orbitals. Following the analysis of the model clusters, we performed the solid-state AdNDP (SSAdNDP) calculations for ideal cubic and hexagonal EuH9 and Zintl-like clathrate Pm3 ̅ n-Eu8H46. Such analysis was first implemented for polyhydrides in the current work. The SSAdNDP revealed the same bonding picture as was found in the model clusters. A cognate pattern could also be seen in the comparison of the electron localization function (ELF) plots of the solid-state structures and model clusters (Supporting Information Figure Both cubic and hexagonal EuH9, as well as Eu8H46, demonstrate a large magnetic moment (absolute value) in the unit cell (Figure We performed a comparative analysis of superatomic orbitals of europium hydrides, recently synthesized cubic and hexagonal PrH9, The analysis of MOs revealed that all clusters could be described within the superatomic concept, according to which the most stable clusters emerge from completely filled superatomic shells. However, CeH29 20+ (Supporting Information Figure To analyze the magnetic structure of europium hydrides, we studied a series of ferromagnetic (FM) and antiferromagnetic (AFM) configurations. The enthalpies of the optimized structures are presented in Supporting Information Table The most stable collinear magnetic state of F4 ̅ 3m-EuH9 is AFM 1, which distorts to P1 during relaxation. The second most stable configuration is AFM 3, which distorts to Imm2. Finally, among the magnetic states that preserve the original ideal F4 ̅ 3m symmetry, the most stable is AFM 2. The same is observed for P63/mmc-EuH9. The most stable collinear magnetic state is AFM 3, but during relaxation the hexagonal structure is distorted and transformed into pseudohexagonal Cmcm, which lies on the convex hull (Figure For each of our three phases, we used the relaxed geometries of the most stable magnetic states to study magnetic anisotropy, by running calculations with SOC. We computed the single-point enthalpy of these structures both in the FM and in one AFM state, with the magnetic moments aligned along different directions (x, y, z, xy, xz, yz, xyz). Results are summarized in Supporting Information Table To study the Néel and Curie temperatures of F4 ̅ 3m-EuH9, P63/mmc-EuH9 and Pm3 ̅ n-Eu8H46, we modeled the magnetic interaction within the Ising Hamiltonian and obtained the critical temperatures for both EuH9 and Eu8H46 in our Heisenberg model from a Monte Carlo simulation as implemented in the VAMPIRE code Strong electron-phonon coupling (EPC) is expected for lanthanides and their polyhydrides under pressure. It has been shown for superhydrides of Ce, 9-10 Pr, The numerical analysis using the UppSC code Compared to PrH9 and NdH9, f electrons in europium hydrides are localized much deeper (-2 eV) below the Fermi level and N(EF) is ~0.95-1.17 states/eV/Eu in EuH9, similar to the values for LaH10 and YH6, with a high contribution of the H sublattice (~50% of N(EF)). If we consider the metal and hydrogen sublattices in EuH9 separately, disregarding the interaction between them (Figure In conclusion, continuing the studies of the stabilization of metallic hydrogen in compressed metal-hydrogen systems, we synthesized three novel europium superhydrides, with probably slightly distorted structures due to the abnormally large radius of the Eu atom: P63/mmc-EuH9, F 4 ̅ 3m-EuH9, and an unexpected clathrate phase Pm3 ̅ n-Eu8H46. The discovered cubic and hexagonal modifications of EuH9 are the new members of the nonahydride family, which currently includes the polyhydrides of Th, U, Y, Ce, Pr, and Nd. Similar to the Nd-H system, all europium hydrides are magnetic and strongly correlated systems with a significant contribution of the SOC interaction. They possess an antiferromagnetic (cubic EuH9) or ferromagnetic (hexagonal EuH9, Eu8H46) ordering with TN,C ~ 24-336 K. Although the projection of the DOS on the H sublattice in both phases of EuH9 is similar to that of high-TC superconducting hydrides, such as LaH10 and YH6, electron-phonon coupling is weak. Magnetic order and large effective spin splitting (>4 eV) in the electron band structure of EuH9 makes classical s-wave superconductivity impossible. An exception may take place for pseudohexagonal Cmcm-EuH9 which does not exhibit magnetism at finite temperatures. The chemical bonding analysis was implemented for polyhydrides first time. The analysis points to the contribution of 2P superatomic electrons as an important distinguishing feature in determining high-temperature superconductivity. It was found that the superatomic description of polyhydrides could be extended to other important superconductors, such as LaH10 and YH10. Analyzing the whole series of La-Ce-Pr-Nd-Eu superhydrides, we conclude that the role of magnetism is gradually increasing in this row, which leads to suppression of s-wave superconductivity. Most of the higher superhydrides of these metals have an antiferromagnetic ordering, whereas the lower hydrides have a ferromagnetic ordering. Europium hydrides, in addition to Y4H36 and BaH12, give us yet another indication of the great role of distortions of the ideal hexagonal and cubic structures in their stabilization. Without considering these distortions, theoretical explanation of the thermodynamic stability of europium superhydrides would be impossible. centered basis For calculations of the model clusters, the Gaussian 16 program The calculations of the electron-phonon coupling and superconducting TC were carried out with QUANTUM ESPRESSO (QE) package . Crystal structure of pseudohexagonal P1(hex)-EuH9 (=Eu4H36) with the disordered hydrogen sublattice, visualized using VESTA software. Table . Calculated convex hulls of the Eu-H system at 130 GPa for 0 K with the ZPE, SOC, and fixed U -J = 5 eV. Table Taking into account the crystal periodicity, in the unit cell of F4 ̅ 3m-EuH9 we found 24 links between the Eu atoms at 3.51 Å and 12 links at 4.96 Å at 130 GPa. In the unit cell of P63/mmc-EuH9, we found 12 links at 3.49 Å and 12 links at 3.55 Å. Then we modeled the magnetic interaction with the Ising Hamiltonian: where J1 and J2 are the coupling constants assigned to the two groups of neighbors, H0 is a constant term which does not depend on the magnetic interaction, and Si is +1 or -1, depending on the spin orientation of the respective Eu atom. This Hamiltonian for EuH9 takes into account the magnetic interactions only up to the second nearest neighbors. We chose to truncate the Ising Hamiltonian for the EuH9 phases to 2nd nearest neighbor interactions on the basis of a convergence test. For F4 ̅ 3m-EuH9, we first calculated J1 from all combinations of enthalpies listed in Table A somewhat more complicated case is pseudohexagonal Cmcm-EuH9 (Table In the Cmcm-Eu4H36 two more AFM configurations are possible other than AFM3. Together with the FM state, four magnetic configurations are enough to compute three coupling constants (J1, J2, J3) only if they give rise to a non-singular system of equations. Unfortunately, this is not the case for Cmcm phase, therefore the coupling constants were computed by using the FM state and three independent AFM configurations in the bigger supercell Eu8H72. As a result we found: J1 = 4.7416×10 -22 J, J2 = 1.1398×10 -21 J, J3 = -1.9388×10 -21 J. Monte Carlo simulation on the AFM3 magnetic state in the unit cell Cmcm-Eu4H36 using found coupling constants indicates that the AFM3 magnetic ordering is stable only at 0 K, while it collapses at any finite temperature. Among all 76 possible AFM configurations in the supercell Eu8H72 we found that one configuration, denoted here as AFM10, is more stable then the previously described AFM3. However, the Monte Carlo simulation on AFM10 gives the same result as for AFM3. Thus, we can conclude that Cmcm-EuH9 does not exhibit magnetism at finite temperatures. This conclusion is very important from the point of view of a possible manifestation of superconductivity in pseudohexagonal EuH9. The dynamic stability and phonon density of states of the europium hydrides were studied using classical molecular dynamics and interatomic potential based on machine learning. We used the Moment Tensor Potential (MTP). To train the potential, we first simulated studied europium hydrides in quantum molecular dynamics in an NPT ensemble at 130 GPa and 2000 K, with a duration of 5 picoseconds using the VASP code. For training of the MTP, sets of both EuH9 and Eu8H46 structures were chosen using active learning. Then, for the structures of europium polyhydrides relaxed at 130 GPa and 300 K, the phonon density of states was calculated within the MTP using the velocity autocorrelator (VACF) separately for each type of atoms: 43 The elastic tensors of the Eu-H phases were calculated using the stress-strain relations: where σi is the ith component of the stress tensor, ηj is the jth component of the strain tensor. The bulk and shear moduli B and G and Young's modulus E were calculated in GPa via the Voigt-Reuss-Hill averaging. where С11, С12 are the elastic constants, ρ is the density of a compound. The obtained values allow us to estimate the Debye temperature: 36 where h, kB, NA are the Planck, Boltzmann, and Avogadro constants, and vm is the average velocity of acoustic waves calculated with the following formula: response functions and calculated U for the Eu-H phases at 130 GPa. * n is the number of hydrogen atoms in the cage.