Structural stiffness plays an important role in engineering design. The analysis of stiffness requires precise experiments and computational models that can be difficult or time-consuming to procure. A novel relation between modal and static stiffness based on modal decomposition is introduced in this study. This relation allows analysing the smallest structural stiffness and its direction. Further, it is shown that the smallest stiffness can be found using an optimisation algorithm that is based on the maximisation of structural compliance. Both approaches are compared on several computational examples leading to similar results in terms of smallest stiffness and its direction. The proposed approaches serve as quantitative/qualitative tools for the analyses of structural stiffness, particularly in structural health monitoring. Modal properties provide useful information about the dynamic behaviour of a given structure. The most important property is the so-called eigenfrequency and the associated eigenvector. Those quantities provide unique structural information and are fundamental in the design and optimisation of engineering structures The modal properties are closely related to the term stiffness, which can be defined as "the capacity of the structure to resist deformation". It depends on both the material and geometric properties. The stiffness is one of the key objectives of an engineering design. It is of interest in many engineering applications The pointwise smallest static stiffness in a unit load direction t is the smallest possible stiffness magnitude defined over all points on the structure: where j represents j'th point and N the number of points. In terms of static compliance ||C||, the goal is to find the point of maximum static displacement magnitude ||u|| induced with the unit load in direction t: The point satisfying either (1) or ( Figure It will be shown that the static stiffness can be approximated by a finite sum of modal stiffnesses (see Figure where K represents the stiffness matrix, u is the vector of displacements, and p is the load vector. Structure of u and p can be defined as follows p = [p 1,x , p 1,y , p 1,z , . . . , p j,x , p j,y , p j,z , . . . , p N,x , p N,y , p N,z ] T , where the first subscript of the entries of the vectors ( The following generalised eigenvalue problem is considered in the form where φ k is the k'th eigenvector, λ k represents the corresponding eigenvalue, and M denotes the mass matrix. Moreover, the eigenvalues λ k are numbered in non-decreasing order, i.e., λ 1 ≤ λ 2 ≤ . . . ≤ λ 3N . The k'th natural frequency of a structure f k and its relation with λ k is given by The eigenvalues λ k define the diagonal matrices The eigenvectors φ k define the matrices the eigenvectors φ k are scaled such that where I k denotes the identity matrix. Therefore, it holds The mass matrix M is considered in the form of its spectral decomposition M = ΘΛ M Θ T , where Θ denotes the matrix of the eigenvectors of M such that Θ T Θ = I 3N and Λ M represents the diagonal matrix of the corresponding eigenvalues. After some manipulation of Eq. ( taking The truncated spectral decomposition of Ω 2 is introduced, such that the first (smallest) eigenvalues and the corresponding eigenvectors are considered, i.e., The eigenvalues of Ω 2 are the same as the eigenvalues of the generalised eigenvalue problem Eq.( Transformation of the original problem Eq.(3) to the Eq.( where the symbol Φ † denotes the Moore-Penrose inverse of Φ , here expressed in the form of its singular value decomposition (SVD). Let the 'th approximation of the vector of the generalised coordinates z based on the vector u be defined as which can be seen as the linear least squares solution of the minimisation problem min M Θ T u -Ψ z . By using Eqs.( which corresponds to the linear least squares solution of the minimisation problem min A unit point load applied in three linearly independent directions in the Euclidean space is considered. Therefore, for the j'th point multiple righthand-sides are considered in the form where e (N ) j is j'th Euclidean vector, symbol ⊗ represents the Kronecker product. First, second and third columns of In virtue of Eqs. ( where the matrix of the generalised coordinates is Z j = [z j,x , z j,y , z j,z ]. If the modal space matrix Φ l is reduced to a single k'th eigen-vector then the k'th modal point compliance tensor Ck,j at j'th point will be obtained as Finally, the magnitude of either the static or modal point compliance in the direction of load t at j'th point can be easily computed as || Ck,j || =t T j Ck,j t j (24) For practical reasons it is useful to reshape the vector φ k as follows , where symbol • denotes the Hadamard (element-wise) product. The formula Eq.( where the diag(•) operation applied on a matrix denotes its diagonal part. In this way analysing the maximum displacement magnitude resulting from the first smallest eigenvalues being considered is suggested. The goal is to find the smallest static/modal stiffness of a structure. Based on k'th eigenvector the corresponding point with the index j, its coordinates x cp j and the direction t j = φ rs k [j]/||φ rs k [j]|| is obtained. Another way to motivate the solution for the critical point j, as defined by Eq.( where It is clear from (32) that for || Ck || to be maximised, one needs to pick the smallest magnitude eigenvalue λ k and choose the point load p such that it maximises the inner product φ T k p. Since p must be a point load, one can find its critical application coordinate x cp , or equivalently, the critical node index j, by Eq.( The relation between modal and static stiffness is demonstrated for the case of a simply supported beam (B-SS) where E, I, ρ, A are Young's modulus, inertia moment, density and crosssection area respectively. The solution for the displacement u can be found in the multiplicative form: where Λ and Φ are temporal and time separable solutions of the Eq. (33). Further separating the temporal and spatial parts of the solution and introducing a variable ω 2 , this must hold: The spatial solution Λ(x) can be expressed as an expansion: The constants C 1 , .., C 4 can be found with suitable boundary conditions defined. Here the description of the solution for configurations B-SS and B-CF is ommited and instead it is suggested the reader the appropriate literature with precise description on how to compute coefficients C 1 , .., C 4 (for example in which are non-linear wave functions, for which the k'th solution is known to be: where k, is the k'th mode shape and e is an expansion strongly approaching zero: 0.386, 0.01, ... Now consider static bending stiffness for both configurations: apparently, the maximum for B-CF is at the right end x cp = L and the middle for B-SS x cp = L/2 (see Figure where δ k represents solution of associated k'th wave equation (37). The k'th eigenvalue can be computed from relation λ k = ω 2 k M k where the k'th modal mass M k is computed as: Finally, the k'th eigenvalue is given as: where the constant κ k represents irrational number from integration (45) and the k'th solution (43) for δ k . The static stiffness can be approximated by a modal stiffness in a form, which is a 1D simplification of ( 1 Comparing the resultant modal stiffness with the analytical and removing common terms, the following relation is obtained: For a sufficient number of modes, the ratio above tends to reach unity from above since the constants κ and the squares of the shape vectors are always positive. The limit of the series also implies that for a finite number of modes included the approximate stiffness S is always higher than the static stiffness at the critical point x cp . Another important fact is that the modal stiffness defined by only the first modal shape can approximate the static stiffness with sufficient accuracy (for example, S1 S B-CF = 1.029). Nevertheless, this is only possible for a static load and boundary conditions, which produce a "similar " deformation shape as the corresponding shape vector. This approach can be applied for the beam with configuration B-SS. The resultant expression is The constant κ is now given precisely as n 4 > 0 for even n (unsymmetrical modes). Again, if only the first modal shape is employed, the ratio S1 S B-SS = 1.0147 is obtained. The objective is to find the minimum stiffness of an elastic solid under some prescribed Dirichlet boundary conditions. The minimum stiffness deformation is one where a unit-magnitude external force does maximal work; or, equivalently, it is the force that causes maximal strain energy to be stored in the elastic solid. The aim is to find the point force that maximises the strain energy stored in an elastic solid. However, dealing with point forces in a numerical optimisation context is not practical; thus, we describe the force more generally as a body force field defined on the whole domain. The hope is that the optimal solution will result in the localisation of this body force into what could be considered as a point load. The objective is to find a unit-magnitude body-force f ∈ {L 2 (Ω)| Ω ||f || 2 dx = 1} that maximises the elastic strain energy U (u(f )) of the deformation u(f ). The optimisation problem can be summarized as follows Equation ( where W (u, f ) is the external work done by the force f and v is any admissible virtual displacement field variation. The notation ∂ a (•)[b] denotes a directional derivative with respect to an argument a in the direction of b. Equation (54) implicitly defines the function-like relationship between f and u, i.e. f → u(f ), since u(f ) is required to satisfy (54) for any admissible f . It is important to highlight that the force constraint (53) is an L 1 -norm constraint; it specifies that the total amount of force applied in the solid must be one unit. The force f that maximises U (u(f )) can be solved for by using a gradientbased solution strategy. To this end, we require the Fréchet derivative of U (u(f )) with respect to f where ∂ u U is the Fréchet derivative with respect to u. D f u can be obtained by differentiating the variational form (54) of the static equilibrium equations where ) denotes an inverselike operator of the bilinear form ∂ u F (u, f , v)[v ] (subsequently written as ∂ u F ) in which v and v are the first and second arguments associated with the admissible virtual displacement field variations. Substituting (57) into (55) gives Note that the inverse ∂ u F -1 need not be computed as only the effect of This presents a choice whether to compute the former or the latter term. As the dimension of ∂ f F (matrix-like) is usually much larger than that of ∂ u U (vector-like), it is computationally advantageous to compute ∂ u U ∂ u F -1 . This leads to the so-called adjoint method of computing D f U : where adj and λ is the so-called adjoint variable. In the context of linear elasticity, is always symmetric with respect to the arguments v and v ; hence, the adjoint of ∂ u F will be itself. Consequently, (60 The L 1 -norm constraint (53) poses a numerical difficulty in applying the gradient-based solution strategy in the maximisation of U (u(f )) because the gradient of the constraint becomes ill-defined as the body force approaches zero magnitude point-wise; specifically, Intuitively, the incremental solution for δf that maximises δ f U = D f U δf under the L 1 -norm constraint will be one that localises at a single point where the absolute value of D f U (x) for x ∈ Ω is largest. However, such δf is a spatially non-smooth change in f . The negative effect of such δf is that it tends to cause f to localise prematurely at that same point with subsequent iterations. Such a solution may not be globally optimal. For the numerical solution algorithm to be successful, a solution increment δf must be regularised so that the evolutions of f and U (f ) may be spatially smooth during the iterative solution process. In proposed implementation, the gradual and spatially smooth evolution of f was achieved by gradually thresholding f . Specifically, the solution algorithm is as follows 1. For the body-force threshold T i ∈ (0, 1) (a) Solve the equilibrium problem (54) based on the current f k (b) Compute the energy gradient D f U k using ( th-min for x ∈ Ω, otherwise 0} (g) Enforce constraint (53) on f k+1 th to obtained the solution for k + 1 If T i is below a user-prescribed maximum value, increment the bodyforce threshold T i+1 = T i + ∆T and continue from (a); otherwise, stop. The algorithm is implemented in computational library FEniCS The static and modal stiffnesses are assessed in the following benchmarks. The smallest stiffness is computed by spectral approach as well as by the gradient-optimisation method introduced in Section 3. Three simple examples, which are shown in Figure The material is defined by Young's modulus E=10 GPa for structures A, B and C and E=5 GPa for biological shapes. The Poisson's ratio is ν = 0.3 for all examples. The computational models assume linear elasticity. Under the small-strain assumption, the infinitesimal strain tensor ε is defined as: The constitutive relation for the stress tensor is expressed as: where the elasticity tensor C for an isotropic material can be written as: The static equilibrium solution of the linear elasticity problem in domain Ω is given by the solution to the weak form (which is a simplification of (54)): Moreover, the stiffness and mass matrices needed for solving the generalised eigen value problem are defined as: The homogeneous Dirichlet boundary conditions are applied at the algebraic level, i.e. by modifying the stiffness matrix (refer to the FEniCS library manual So far, it has been shown that static and modal stiffness is in close relation for a given set of boundary conditions. Nevertheless, there is a solution with free-free boundary conditions, for which the interpretation of the modal stiffness is not so obvious. The previously discussed relation of static and modal stiffness was demonstrated via simple analytical solutions to the transverse vibration problem of a slender beam. For a deeper exploration of the static-modal relation, a more complex computational model of a beam is presented. A second-order solid finite element approximation of the geometry and displacement field was used. The geometry and boundary conditions are shown in Figure The five eigenvectors of given tested structures are shown in Figures In the alternative approach for identifying the critical load configuration based on the numerical optimisation algorithm described in Section 3, the objective functional to be maximised is the deformation strain energy J ≡ U = Ω ε(u) : σ(u) dx. In Figures The free/fixed boundary conditions may be realised by considering alternative pseudo boundary conditions, such that the original free-free shape can be maintained. This is demonstrated in Figure The spectral analysis of structural stiffness as well as the proposed optimisation algorithm serve as tools for analysing the stiffness of a structure from both a quantitative and a qualitative perspective. The stiffness plays an important function in the design of mechanical structures. Its quantification, however, oftentimes requires sophisticated measuring methods. The advantage of the spectral method lies in the fact that the smallest stiffness and its direction can be obtained even for no Dirichlet boundary conditions. However, the absence of Dirichlet boundary conditions poses a difficulty with interpretation of the stiffness as the system is not well defined and can be instead used as a qualitative indicator in order to obtain a general behaviour of a structure itself. In this study, we touch on the question whether the absence of boundary conditions can be modelled by a system with certain boundary conditions such that the resultant spectral properties are equivalent (i.e., the same eigen values and eigen vectors). It was shown that for a simple example of a beam under suitable boundary conditions that mimic the free-free beam supports a sufficiently similar MAC measure and absolute difference of modal/static stiffness and natural frequencies could be obtained. The importance of the free-free conditions is that the system is unaffected by boundary conditions, which can often be imprecise and actually influence the behaviour of the structure itself. Nevertheless, proper analysis and proofs of our suggestion is necessary and will be part of a future study concerning the general stiffness analysis. The conditions on simple beam examples in Section 2 for which the k'th modal stiffness approaches the static one from above for two types of boundary conditions have been demonstrated in this study. It was supposed that the k'th modal stiffness can approximate the static one when the deformation given by a static load and k'th modal deformation associated with modal stiffness were similar. This can be interpreted from the perspective of reduced-order modelling, where only one modal shape is sufficient to approximate the static solution. Nevertheless, for more complex geometries it is not easy to obtain the static load that induces the same deformation as the modal one, see Table The location and direction given by the maximal amplitude eigenvector can still be used to identify the smallest static stiffness of a structure. Nevertheless, due to rescaling of the eigenvalue magnitude, the initial order of the eigenvalues is no longer valid. Although, the matrix Φ can be seen via SVD (after rearrangement of Eq.( An alternative to spectral analysis, the adjoint-based optimisation algorithm for finding the maximum compliance (or equivalently smallest stiffness) was developed in this study to compare with the spectral approach. The control field is the volume force field f , which is evolved such that the deformation energy is maximised. Both approaches gave similar results on tested examples. While the spectral approach provides more information about the stiffness of a given structure, its interpretation can be challenging. The difficulties arise from the fact that the magnitude and direction of the smallest static stiffness based on a point compliance tensor C can be found even for singular problems (i.e., no kinematic boundary conditions are required for modal analysis). The assumption of spatially constant Young's modulus is often violated in real mechanical structures and hence the smallest stiffness may be altered. The effect of spatial inhomogeneities in material tensor was not considered in the presented study and it is on a priority list for the next study. A similar effect occurs for cracked structures. Due to the weakening of the structure, the smallest stiffness could dramatically change. The stiffness of an engineering structure is one of the most important properties whose precise analysis can help design more performant structures or support the decision making process. The authors analysed the structural stiffness using spectral analysis and explored a relationship between the static and modal stiffnesses first analytically for a beam model and then numerically for geometrically more complex structures. Besides the spectral analysis approach, a simple optimisation approach was introduced. Its aim was to find the critical point load configuration that maximised the elastic deformation energy of a given structure. Although both approaches are significantly different, both led to consistent results in terms of point load localisation and its direction. To summarise our findings, the following sub conclusions are made: • Spectral analysis of the stiffness matrix provides useful information about the structure at hand, including localisation and direction of the smallest stiffness (or greatest compliance). • A relation between modal and static compliance/stiffness was explored. • Optimisation algorithm aimed at finding the critical point load configuration for which the structure exhibits the greatest compliance was developed and compared with the spectral analysis approach. The so called reshape operation on arrays is used in Numpy computational library