Electron-doped and hole-doped superconducting cuprates exhibit a symmetric phase diagram as a function of doping. This symmetry is however only approximate. Indeed, electron-doped cuprates become superconductors only after a specific annealing process: This annealing affects the oxygen content by only a tiny amount, but has a dramatic impact on the electronic properties of the sample. Here we report the occurrence of superconductivity in oxygen-deficient Nd2-xCexCuO4 thin films grown in an oxygen-free environment, after annealing in pure argon flow. As verified by x-ray diffraction, annealing induces an increase of the interlayer distance between CuO2 planes in the crystal structure. Since this distance is correlated to the concentration of oxygens in apical positions, and since oxygen content cannot substantially increase during annealing, our experiments indicate that the superconducting phase transition has to be ascribed to a migration of oxygen ions to apical positions during annealing. Moreover, as we confirm via first-principles density functional theory calculations, the changes in the structural and transport properties of the films can be theoretically described by a specific redistribution of the existing oxygen ions at apical positions with respect to CuO2 planes, which remodulates the electronic band structure and suppresses the antiferromagnetic order, allowing the emergence of hole superconductivity. Since the discovery of superconductivity in LaBaCuO by Bednorz and Müller in 1986 Perhaps the most puzzling anomaly of electron-doped cuprates is the fact that doping alone does not produce super-conductivity In this work, we report superconductivity in oxygendeficient Nd 2 -x Ce x CuO 4 (NCCO) thin films obtained by annealing in oxygen-free atmosphere, and we provide a theoretical framework to describe the electronic properties and the structural changes before and after annealing. Our samples are grown by DC sputter deposition in oxygen-free atmosphere, and exhibit a c-axis parameter shorter than the optimal value c SC , which indicates oxygen deficiency and the presence of a negligible amount of apical oxygens. Remarkably, these samples become superconducting after annealing in pure argon atmosphere, with a simultaneous increase of the c-axis parameter. This strongly indicates that the superconducting phase transition cannot be ascribed to a change of the oxygen content, but a microscopic reorganization of the crystal structure induced by annealing. Moreover, to obtain a complete phase diagram as a function of the c-axis parameter, we have grown thin films also in oxygen/argon atmosphere. These samples exhibit a c-axis parameter longer than the optimal value c SC and, as expected, become superconducting after annealing, with a decrease of the c-axis, in agreement with previous studies The undoped parent compound Nd 2 CuO 4 crystallizes in a tetragonal T crystal structure, containing CuO 2 layers stacked along the c-axis and sandwiched between the charge reservoir layers [see Fig. Our experiment used optimized DC sputtering to grow well-oriented NCCO films without spurious phases and with a fixed cerium content x = 0.17 ± 0.01. We obtained films with thickness 100-200 nm grown respectively in pure argon (type A samples) and mixed argon/oxygen atmosphere with O 2 /Ar> 2% (type B samples), at 1.7 mbar total pressure and heater temperature 850 °C (see also the film thickness. We deliberately fabricated samples with different growing and annealing conditions to study the interplay between structural reorganization and superconductivity, regardless of other factors (see Appendix). We measure the lattice parameters by x-ray diffraction (XRD) before and after high-temperature annealing. We found c = 12.04-12.07 Å and a = b ≈ 3.95-3.96 Å for as-grown type A samples, while c = 12.09-12.15 Å and a = b ≈ 3.94-3.97 Å for as-grown type B samples. After annealing, type A samples grown in oxygen-free atmosphere exhibit a slight elongation of the c-axis, whereas the in-plane lattice parameter remains unchanged. Conversely, type B samples grown in oxygen atmosphere exhibit a systematic decrease of the c-axis after annealing, in agreement with Refs. 21-26, and a small change of the in-plane lattice parameter in some samples. (00l) reflections in XRD patterns We measure the temperature dependence of the in-plane resistivity ρ(T ) with a four-probe method in the temperature range 1.6-300 K, before and after high-temperature an-nealing. As-grown type A samples (fabricated in oxygenfree atmosphere) exhibit a crossover between metallic and insulating regimes identified by the resistivity minimum at temperature T min , and a residual resistivity ratio RRR = ρ(300 K)/ρ(4.2 K) > 1 [see Fig. Annealing induces a modification of the oxygen content and a structural reorganization and redistribution of crystal defects and dislocations. To disentangle these two effects, we performed high-temperature ex situ annealing in oxygen-free, pure argon flow. Despite different environmental growth conditions, structural, and electrical properties of type A and B samples, similar thermal treatments are needed to induce superconductivity. All samples become superconducting after high-temperature annealing, regardless of the specific annealing conditions, and with similar critical temperatures T c 24 K. In contrast, no superconducting transition and no structural change are detected after annealing at temperatures below 900 °C and with the same environmental conditions, as reported elsewhere Figure To understand the role of the structural reorganization of oxygen atoms, and the effects of the presence/absence of apical oxygens on the properties of the three types of samples, we modeled the system by DFT using the VASP Concluding, the structural and the transport properties of NCCO samples shed new light on the microscopic mechanism underlying the annealing process, which is responsible for the onset of the superconductivity. Indeed, our experiments indicate that the removal of the excess oxygen is not sufficient to trigger superconductivity: Our oxygen-deficient samples, grown in oxygen-free atmosphere, become superconducting only after high-temperature annealing, which always occurs together with a change of the c-axis parameter. This strongly indicates that the superconducting phase transition is induced by a microscopic structural reorganization, even in almostoptimally doped samples. Our theoretical analysis supports this conclusion, indicating a clear correlation between oxygen content, c-axis parameter, and superconductivity. In particular, no apical oxygens, or too many, stabilize strong antiferromagnetic correlations and keep holes away from the Fermi level. In contrast, an intermediate number of apical oxygens induces the suppression of antiferromagnetic correlations and allows to have holes available right at the Fermi level. Hence, the presence of a sizable number of apical oxygens is necessary to allow the emergence of hole superconductivity. This points to the relevance of interlayer hoppings mediated by apical oxygens, analogously to the scenario evidenced in holedoped cuprates Morphology, phase composition, and sample purity were inspected by scanning electron microscopy combined with wavelength-dispersive spectroscopy Figure Figure The decomposition products in NCCO thin films include NdCuO 2 , Nd 2 O 3 , and Nd-Ce-O phases We have performed first-principles DFT calculations using the VASP The analysis of the structural phases of compounds with 4f electrons is a nontrivial problem in DFT due to the difficulties to catch the position of the energetic levels of the f electrons We included the effects of the Hubbard U on the Cu sites. We scanned the values of U Cu from 1 to 4 eV for the undoped and used J H = 0.15U for the Cu-3d states, and we assumed the value of U Cu = 3.2 eV because for this value the undoped T phase is a narrow gap semiconductor. The Coulomb repulsion was applied also on the rare earth Nd and Ce (4 eV) and O (6 eV) but it is much less relevant since these electrons are far from the Fermi level. To account for the G-type antimagnetism in Nd 2 CuO 4 we use a √ 2 × √ 2 × 2 supercell with 4 formula units. To investigate the structural properties as a function of doping, an additional calculation was done in the overdoped regime at x = 0.25. Using Vegard's law, we estimated the lattice constants for x = 0.17, which correspond to almost-optimally doping (as in our samples). Once we understood the structural properties, we study the electronic and magnetic properties of the compound relative to a value of the doping close to the experimental one. In order to do so, we used a √ 2 × √ 2 × 3 supercell with 6 formula units. One Ce atom in 6 formula units will give the concentration of x = 1/6 ≈ 0.17. This supercell can host 3 cuprate layers. However, in order to re- produce the T * phase we need an even number of layers. As a consequence, the √ 2 × √ 2 × 3 supercell cannot host the T * phase but it can host the T phase and a mixed phase with two T * cells and one T cell alternating along the c-axis. In this article, we call this phase the T SC = 2T * + T phase. The most stable configuration of the Ce atoms is obtained when the Ce atoms are far from each other. This means that during growth the Ce atoms have a tendency to avoid each other, which points to a homogeneous distribution of these Ce atoms during the growth. In the most stable configuration of the T * phase, the Ce atoms are not in the apical oxygen layer. In the most stable configuration of the mixed T SC phase, the Ce atoms are closer to the CuO 2 layers of the T cell. In this Section, we present the results of the undoped Nd 2 CuO 4 . The T and T * phases of the Nd 2 CuO 4 have the same stoichiometry but a different atomic position of the oxygen atoms and consequently of the atomic layers. The T phase consists of 4 atomic layers CuO 2 /O/Nd 2 /O while the T * contains 3 atomic layers CuO 2 /NdO/NdO. The different atomic composition of the atomic layers has a large influence on the lattice constant c and consequently on the in-plane lattice constant too. Considering just the effect of the packaging, we would expect that the T phase with 4 atomic layers should have a larger c lattice constant, but we also need to consider the effect of the charge. In an oversimplified ionic picture, the CuO 2 layers have a total charge -2, the O layers have a charge -2, the Nd 2 layers have a charge +6 while the NdO layers have a charge +1. Therefore, the 4 layers of the T phase have charge -2/ -2/ + 6/ -2 while the 3 layers of the T * phase have -2/ + 1/ + 1. Due to the greater charge, the 4 layers of the T phase attract each other much more than the 3 layers of the T * phase resulting in a shorter c-axis of the T phase. Therefore, there is an interplay and competition between the charge and the volume effect; as a result, the T phase has a shorter c-axis than the T * phase. As a consequence of the shorter c, the T phase presents a larger value of the in-plane lattice constant a. This simplified picture was verified in our DFT results. We performed structural relaxation for the undoped case for the T and T * phases. We obtained a = 3.91 Å and c = 12.12 Å for the T phase: The total volume is 92.7 Å The Cu states in T * are more ionic due to the larger number of nearest-neighbor oxygen atoms, indeed the Cu d orbitals are more localized and therefore the T * phase is more insulating. Instead, the T phase is a semiconductor. Once we fixed the equilibrium atomic positions, we investigate the electronic properties scanning the value of U Cu . We search for the critical value of U cr Cu such that the T phase is insulating, we get the value U cr Cu = 3.2 eV for the T phase and we assume this value for all the following calculations. The band structure of the semiconducting T phase is shown in Fig. At U Cu = 3.2 eV, the energy difference between the antiferromagnetic and the nonmagnetic phase is 22 meV per formula unit for the T phase and 70 meV per formula unit for the T * phase. Therefore, the T * phase has a larger gap and its antiferromagnetic ground state is more robust. Increasing the value of U , the antiferromagnetic phase will become more stable but the scenario described here does not change qualitatively.