We discuss an extension of the generator coordinate method (GCM) by taking simultaneously a collective coordinate and its conjugate momentum as generator coordinates. To this end, we follow the idea of the dynamical GCM (DGCM) proposed by Goeke and Reinhard. We first show that the DGCM method can be regarded as an extension of the double projection method for the center of mass motion. As an application of DGCM, we then investigate the particle number projection, for which we not only carry out an integral over the gauge angle as in the usual particle number projection but also take a linear superposition of BCS states which have different mean particle numbers. We show that the ground state energy is significantly lowered by such effect, especially for magic nuclei for which the pairing gap is zero in the BCS approximation. This suggests that the present method makes a good alternative to the variation after projection (VAP) method, as the method is much simpler than the VAP. Beyond mean-field calculations based on the generator coordinate method (GCM) have been rapidly developing in recent years . In this method, the wave function of many-body states is described as a linear superposition of many Slater determinants While the idea of GCM is conceptually simple, it has also long been known that a naive GCM cannot describe properly the center of motion of a nucleus. That is, the appropriate moment of inertia associated with the translational motion, i.e., the total mass of a system, cannot be obtained by simply superposing the wave functions located at different center of mass positions Recently, the idea based on the double projection method has been put forward by Borrajo et al. One can view these results form a different point of view. That is, the angular momentum projection is carried out by superposing many-body states with different orientation angles of the principle axes. To this end, the angular momentum projection is usually applied to the states with a single rotational frequency only. Superposing cranked states with different rotational frequencies implies that the quantity conjugate to the angle, that is, the angular momentum, is incorporated in GCM states. This suggests that one can achieve a better description of collective states by simultaneously treating a collective coordinate and its conjugate momentum in the GCM method. In addition to the double projection method, there are several ways to extend the GCM along this line, such as the complex GCM, in which collective coordinates are regarded as complex numbers The aim of this paper is to apply the DGCM to the particle number fluctuation in a BCS wave function, for which a pair of the canonical variables is known a priori, that is, the gauge angle and the particle number. Treating these variables as generator coordinates is nothing but an application of the DGCM. This amounts to superposing many BCS states with different particle numbers after performing the particle number projection, as in Refs. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we give a brief review of the DGCM. We then show that the DGCM is equivalent to a generalization of the double projection method when a constraint operator is considered. We discuss specific cases of quantum number projections for the angular momentum, the momentum of the center of mass, and the particle number. In Sec. III, we apply the DGCM to BCS calculations and discuss the effect of a fluctuation of mean particle numbers on the ground state of spherical nuclei. We then summarize the paper and discuss future perspectives in Sec. IV. A. A brief summary of DGCM In the generator coordinate method (GCM), one diagonalizes a Hamiltonian Ĥ in the space spanned by states {|q } which are parametrized by generator coordinates q. Usually, many-body Slater determinants are used for the states {|q } with a real number q. Notice that the states {|q } are not orthogonal to each other. For simplicity, in the following, we consider only a single generator coordinate, q. A many-body wave function is then expanded as In this equation, the weight function f (q) is determined by the variational principle, which leads to the Hill-Wheeler equation where E is an energy eigenvalue. q| Ĥ|q and q|q are referred to as the Hamiltonian and the overlap kernels, respectively. The GCM is often employed to describe collective motions, and in this sense q is called a collective coordinate. In principle, if one could generate a collective coordinate properly, the GCM could correctly describe a collective motion. This is the case, e.g., for a system described by the Lipkin model In order to overcome this problem, Goeke and Reinhard have extended the GCM by introducing the canonical momentum p conjugate to the collective coordinate q and defined the basis states which satisfy Here, ← -∂ q and -→ ∂ q act on the left-hand and the righthand sides of q, respectively, and similar for ← -∂ p and -→ ∂ p . Notice that we have set = 1. The path connecting |q, p is called a dynamical path. The condition (3) can also be written in a form of the commutation relation, where Q0 and P0 are generators of q and p defined as respectively, with an arbitrary smooth function, S = S(q, p), of q and p. The function S = S(q, p) originates from the freedom to choose any phase of the state |q, p . In Ref. After the dynamical path is somehow obtained, one can expand a wave function using the states |q, p as, This is called the dynamical GCM (DGCM) for an arbitral pair of (q, p), the wave function in the DGCM, Eq. ( Here, f GCM (q) and f DGCM (q, p) are the weight functions in Eqs. ( Another potential problem of the DGCM is that it is not obvious how to practically find a dynamical path. In this regard, we show below that there is a reasonable way to construct a dynamical path when a collective coordinate is generated by the constrained Hartree-Fock(-Bogoliubov) method. Suppose that |q is a many-body state which satisfies with a Hermitian operator Q0 . We then define a state It is obvious that this state satisfies Differentiating both sides of this equation by q, we then obtain which follows from the definition of the state |q, p , (11), we find This is nothing more than the conjugate condition, Eq. (3). That is, when one uses the constrained Hartree-Fock(-Bogoliubov) method to generate a collective coordinate with a Hermitian operator, one can always construct a desired dynamical path. If one employs the states |q, p so obtained in the DGCM, a many-body wave function is expressed as, We rewrite this equation using the Fourier transform of f (q, p), f (q, p) = dq f (q, q )e -iq p . This leads to |ψ = dqdq f (q, q ) dp e i( Q0-q )p |q . Notice that, apart from the normalization coefficient, is the projection operator which projects a state onto an eigenfunction of the operator Q0 with an eigenvalue of q . Thus, the DGCM state can be expressed as. This implies that the DGCM is equivalent to the GCM supplemented by a projection method. Let us apply the formula derived in the previous subsection to the center of mass motion and compare with the double projection method. To this end, we first generate the state |p which satisfies where P = ( Px , Py , Pz ) is the operators for the center of mass motion of a whole system. Since Px , Py , and Pz commute with each other, the wave function in the DGCM, Eq. ( Since the operators P commutes with the Hamiltonian, one would be interested only in the eigenstates of P . Acting the projection operator for the operator P onto Eq. ( This coincides with Eq. (2.6) in Ref. Let us next consider a rotational motion, thus, the angular momentum. For the sake of simplicity, we consider only a rotation around the x-axis. Using the operator Ĵx , we first generate a gerator coordinate imposing a condition of Following the same procedure as in the center of mass motion, one can write the DGCM anzatz for the eigenstates of Ĵx as This is also consistent with Eq. Here, m is the gerator coordinate defined by We next consider the particle number projection. Using the particle number operator N , we first generate a generator coordinate according to Here, the state |N represents either a BCS state or a Hartree-Fock-Bogoliubov state, in which several particle number components are mixed. If we construct the eigenstate of N , one can write the DGCM wave function as Here, φ is the gauge angle, which is a quantity conjugate to the particle number. If one considers a non-relativistic case, the particle number operator is semi-positive definite. In this case, the integral range of N is from 0 to ∞. On the other hand, for φ, the range of the integral is from 0 to 2π. Using the particle number projection operator defined by one thus has except for a normalization constant. This can also be interpreted as the double projection method for the particle number fluctuation. The Hill-Wheeler equation for (31) Notice that, in the case of the particle number, the usual GCM corresponds to the variation before projection (VBP) method, In addition to the gauge angle φ, if one treats N as a generator coordinate, one obtains the DGCM wave function, using the operator ∆ N = N -N . Following the idea of GCM, these wave functions are linearly superposed as It has been shown that such treatment of the pair fluctuation improves the description of the structure of 54 Cr In this section, we apply the DGCM to actual nuclei and numerically investigate the effect of the particle number fluctuation in a BCS wave function using Eq. We prepare a set of many-body wave functions |N which have the average particle number of N . Notice that N may be different from the actual neutron number N 0 for each nucleus, and that N may not necessarily be an integer number. For this purpose, we employ the BCS approximation for the pairing correlation among neutrons, while we ignore the neutron-proton pairing. We solve the Skyrme-Hartree-Fock equation in a box with 15 fm with a mesh spacing of 0.05 fm, and the continuum states are then discretized. To calculate the pairing energy, we employ the pairing energy functional given by where ρ(r) and ρn (r) are the total particle density and the neutron pair density, respectively, with ρ 0 being 0.16 fm -3 . The pairing energy is calculated with an energy cut-off at 15 MeV above the Fermi energy. For 18 O, 42 Ca, and 58,64 Ni, we determine the value of V n so that the average pairing gap, coincides with the empirical value, 12/ √ A MeV, where A is the mass number of a nucleus. For the doubly magic nuclei, 16 O and 40 Ca, we somewhat reduce the value of V n so that the pairing gap becomes zero in the BCS approximation. For the 56 Ni nucleus, this problem does not appear and we use the same value of V n as that for 58 Ni. The parameters are listed in Tab. I. We mainly show below the results with ∆N = 0.2 around N 0 in the range of N 0 -2 ≤ N ≤ N 0 +2. For simplicity, for each nucleus we ignore the non-orthogonality of single-particle wave functions for different values of N and assume φ i (N )|φ j (N ) = δ i,j , where φ i (N ) is the i-th single-particle wave function for a system with the average neutron number of N . We have confirmed that the deviation from this condition is negligibly small in the range of N considered in this paper. We thus use the single-particle wave functions for N = N 0 for each nucleus. Figure , with the particle number projection operator, We then apply the particle number projection, respectively. Here, u N i and v N i are the uv-factors for the single-particle state i in the BCS wave function with the average neutron number N . Other local mixed densities are given in a similar way. In our calculations, we superpose many similar states. The problem of overcompliteness may then arise Figure (VBP). To draw the figure, we increase the number of basis by adding two basis states symmetrically around N 0 , that is, N 0 , N 0 ± ∆N, N 0 ± 2∆N . . . . The solid, the dashed, and the dotted lines denote the results with λ cut = 10 -4 , 10 -5 , and 10 -6 for the cut-off of the eigenvalues of the overlap kernel, respectively. One can see that the results are almost converged at λ cut = 10 -5 . We thus use this value in all the calculations shown below unless otherwise mentioned. The figure also shows that the energy gain quickly converges as a function of N DGCM . In particular, the energy is significantly decreased even with a mixture of three basis states only, N DGCM = 3. We have repeated the same calculation with ∆N = 0.1 and have found that the converged energy remains almost the same as that with ∆N = 0.2, with a similar convergence feature to each other. Table In the mean-field calculations, the variation after projection (VAP) method is more consistent than the VBP method We have discussed an extension of the generator coordinate method (GCM) by treating both a collective coordinate and its conjugate momentum as generator coordinates. To this end, we have investigated the idea of the dynamical GCM (DGCM). We have first shown that a dynamical path relevant to the DGCM can be constructed whenever a collective coordinate is generated by the constrained mean-field method with a Hermitian operator. The DGCM can thus be applied once the operator relevant to a collective motion is identified. In such cases, the DGCM can be formulated in a form of a generalized double projection method. We have applied the DGCM to the particle number projection as an example. Here, we have superposed many BCS states which have different mean particle numbers, after performing the particle number projection. In this way, we have incorporated not only the fluctuation of the gauge angle but also the fluctuation of the mean particle number in the BCS wave functions. As a result, the ground state energy was found to be significantly lowered compared to the BCS+VBP method, which can be regarded as the usual GCM for the gauge angle. In particular, for magic nuclei, no energy gain is obtained in the VBP method due to a vanishing of pairing correlation in the mean field approximation, while this method yields a significant energy gain by mixing configurations with a non-zero pairing gap. This consideration may be important for the Mottelson-Valatin effect We have also found that the convergence of the DGCM calculations is fast with respect to the number of superposed states, and a considerable energy gain is obtained by mixing only three configurations. The method is much simpler than the VAP, and thus a numerical calculation is much easier. Moreover, the method works well for both open shell nuclei and magic nuclei, unlike the Lipkin-Nogami method which does not work for nuclei at shell closures. We thus advocate this method as a good alternative to the VAP method. In this paper, for simplicity we have carried out all the calculations assuming spherical symmetry. It would be an interesting future work to extend this by removing the restriction of nuclear shape. This would be important particularly for soft nuclei, for which the nuclear shape may change significantly as a function of the average particle number. In such cases, it is an advantage of our method that correlations associated with the shape degree of freedom can be largely incorporated by mixing a few configurations with different average particle numbers. In addition, even though we have focused in this paper only on the neutron number, it is straightforward to include the fluctuation of the average proton number in BCS states as well. The resultant DGCM wave function can easily incorporate the effect of a proton-neutron pairing, because it is no longer a form of the direct product of proton and neutron states. This may be a good advantage to explaining the Wigner energy Our calculations presented in this paper indicates that a better description can be achieved with the DGCM by incorporating the conjugate momentum of a collective coordinate. This would mean that GCM calculations reported in the literature may need to be reexamined from the view point of the DGCM. For example, for a GCM calculation with the quadrupole deformation operator Q20 , the DGCM wave function can be constructed according to Eqs. 