Gaussian Processes (GPs) has experienced tremendous success in geoscience in general and for bio-geophysical parameter retrieval in the last years. GPs constitute a solid Bayesian framework to formulate many function approximation problems consistently. This paper reviews the main theoretical GP developments in the field. We review new algorithms that respect the signal and noise characteristics, that provide feature rankings automatically, and that allow applicability of associated uncertainty intervals to transport GP models in space and time. All these developments are illustrated in the field of geoscience and remote sensing at a local and global scales through a set of illustrative examples. Spatio-temporally explicit, quantitative retrieval methods of Earth surface and atmosphere characteristics are a requirement in a variety of Earth observation applications. Optical sensors mounted on-board Earth observation (EO) satellites are being endowed with high temporal, spectral and spatial resolutions, and thus enable the retrieval and monitoring of climate and bio-geophysical variables The remainder of the paper is organized in two main parts: Section II reviews the main notation and theory of GP regression. Section III presents some of the most recent advances of GP models applied to remote sensing data processing. Section IV presents ways to extract knowledge from those GP models. We conclude in Section V with a discussion about the upcoming challenges and research directions. Gaussian processes (GPs) are state-of-the-art tools for discriminative machine learning. They can be interpreted as a family of kernel methods with the additional advantage of providing a full conditional statistical description for the predicted variable. Standard regression approximates observations (often referred to as outputs) {y n } N n=1 as the sum of some unknown latent function f (x) of the inputs {x n ∈ R D } N n=1 plus constant power (homoscedastic) Gaussian noise, i.e. GP regression proceeds in a Bayesian, non-parametric way, to fit the observed data. A zero mean If we consider a test location x * with corresponding output y * , priors GP induce a prior distribution between the observations y ≡ {y n } N n=1 and y * . Collecting available data in D ≡ {x n , y n |n = 1, . . . N }, it is possible to analytically compute the posterior distribution over the unknown output y * : which is computable in O(n 3 ) time (this cost arises from the inversion of the n × n matrix (K ff + σ 2 I), see The corresponding hyperparameters {θ, σ n } are typically selected by Type-II Maximum Likelihood, using the marginal likelihood (also called evidence) of the observations, which is also analytical (explicitly conditioning on θ and σ n ): When the derivatives of (5) are also analytical, which is often the case, conjugated gradient ascend is typically used for optimization. The core of a kernel method like GPs is the appropriate definition of the covariance (or kernel) function. A standard, widely used covariance function is the squared exponential, k(x i , x j ) = exp(-x i -x j 2 /(2σ 2 )), which captures sample similarity well in most of the (unstructured) problems, and only one hyperparameter σ needs to be tuned. Table In the context of GPs, kernels with more hyperparameters can be efficiently inferred. This is an opportunity to exploit asymmetries in the feature space by including a parameter per feature, as in the very common anisotropic squared exponential (SE) kernel function: where ν is a scaling factor, σ n is the standard deviation of the (estimated) noise, and a σ f is the length-scale per input features, f = 1, . . . , F . This is a very flexible covariance function that typically suffices to tackle most of the problems. Table Let us illustrate the solution of GP regression (GPR) in a toy example. In Fig. In this section, we review some recent advances in GPR especially suited for remote sensing data analysis. We will review the main aspects to design covariance functions that capture non-stationarities and multiscale time relations in EO data, as well as GPs that can learn arbitrary transformations of the observed variable and noise models. Commonly used kernels families include the squared exponential (SE), periodic (Per), linear (Lin), and rational quadratic (RQ), cf. Table Some simple kernel combinations are represented in the two last columns of the figure: a linear plus periodic covariances may capture strucutres that are periodic with trend (e), while a linear plus squared exponential covariances can accommodate structures with increasing variation (f). By summing kernels, we can model the data as a superposition of independent functions, possibly representing different structures in the data. For example, in multitemporal image analysis, one could for instance dedicate a kernel for the time domain (perhaps trying to capture trends and seasonal effects) and another kernel function for the spatial domain (equivalently capturing spatial patterns and auto-correlations). In time series models, sums of kernels can express superposition of different processes, possibly operating at different scales: very often changes in geophysical variables through time occur at different temporal resolutions (hours, days, etc.), and this can be incorporated in the prior covariance with those simple operations. In multiple dimensions, summing kernels gives additive structure over different dimensions, similar to generalized additive models Signals to be processed typically show particular characteristics, with time-dependent cycles and trends. One could include time t i as an additional feature in the definition of the input samples. This stacked approach which gives rise to the following periodic covariance function where σ t is a hyper-parameter characterizing the periodic scale and needs to be inferred. It is not clear, though, that the seasonal trend is exactly periodic, so we modify this equation by taking the product with a squared exponential component, to allow a decay away from exact periodicity: where γ gives the magnitude, σ t the smoothness of the periodic component, σ d represents the decay-time for the periodic component, and the period has been fixed to one year. Therefore, our final covariance is expressed as which is parameterized by only three more hyperparameters collected in θ = {ν, σ 1 , . . . , σ F , σ n , σ t , σ d , γ}. Note that this kernel function allows us to incorporate time easily, but the relations between time t i and signal x i samples is missing. Some approximations to deal with this issue exist in the literature, such as cross-kernel composition We show the advantage of encoding such prior knowledge and structure in the relevant problem of solar irradiation prediction using GPR. Noting the non-stationary temporal behaviour of the signal, we develop a particular time-based composite covariance to account for the relevant seasonal signal variations. Data from the AEMET radiometric observatory of Murcia (Southern Spain, 38.0 • N, 1.2 • W) were used. Table 2 reports the obtained results with GPR models and several statistical regression methods: regularized linear regression (RLR), support vector regression (SVR), relevance vector machine (RVM) and GPR. All methods were run with and without using two additional dummy time features containing the year and day-of-year (DOY). We will indicate the former case with a subscript, like e.g. SVR t . First, including time information improves all baseline models. Second, the best overall results are obtained by the GPR models, when including time information or not. Third, in particular, the proposed temporal GPR (TGPR) outperforms the rest in accuracy (root-mean-square error, RMSE, and mean absolute error, MAE) and goodness-of-fit (R), and closely follows the elastic net in bias (ME). TGPR performs better than GPR and GPR t in all quality measures. The standard GPR is essentially homoscedastic, i.e., assumes constant noise power σ 2 for all observations. This assumption can be too restrictive for some problems. Heteroscedastic GPs, on the other hand, let noise power vary smoothly throughout input space, by changing the prior over ε n to ε n ∼ N (0, e g(xn) ), and placing a GP prior over g(x) ∼ GP(μ 0 1, k θg (x, x )). Note that the exponential is needed 2 in order to describe the non-negative variance. The hyperparameters of the covariance functions of both GPs are collected in θ f and θ g , accounting for the signal and the noise relations, respectively. Relaxing the homoscedasticity assumption into heteroscedasticity yields a richer, more flexible model that contains the standard GP as a particular case corresponding to a constant g(x). Unfortunately, this also hampers analytical tractability, so approx-2 Of course, other transformations are possible, just not as convenient. imate methods must be used to obtain posterior distributions for f (x) and g(x), which are in turn required to compute the predictive distribution over y * . As an alternative to the costly classic heteroscedastic GP approaches, variational techniques allow to approximate intractable integrals arising in Bayesian inference and machine learning. A sophisticated variational approximation called Marginalized Variational (MV) approximation was introduced in Very often, in practical applications, one transforms the observed variable to better pose the problem. Actually, it is a standard practice to 'linearize' or 'uniformize' the distribution of the observations (which is commonly skewed due to the sampling strategies in in situ data collection) by applying non-linear link functions like the logarithmic, the exponential or the logistic functions. Warped GPR For both the GPR and WGPR models we need to define the covariance (kernel, or Gram) function k(•, ), which should capture the similarity between samples. We used the standard Automatic Relevance Determination (ARD) covariance where ψ = {a, b, c}. Recently, flexible non-parametric functions have replaced such parametric forms For illustration purposes, we focus on the estimation of chlorophyll-a concentrations from remote sensing upwelling radiance just above the ocean surface. We used the SeaBAM dataset Table The most widely known sites to obtain free source code on GP modeling are GPML An interesting possibility in GP models is to extract knowledge from the trained model. We will show in what follows two different approaches: 1) feature ranking exploiting the automatic relevance determination (ARD) covariance and 2) uncertainty estimation looking at the predictive variance estimates. One of the advantages of GPs is that during the development of the GP model the This does not necessarily mean that other bands are obstructing optimized accuracies. Only when less than 4 bands were left accuracies started to degrade rapidly Fig. Consequently, the σ b proved to be a valuable tool to detect most sensitive bands of a sensor towards a biophysical parameter. A more systematic analysis was applied by sorting the bands on their relevance and counting the band rankings over 50 repetitions. In In this section, we use GP models for retrieval and portability in space and time. For this, we will exploit the associated predictive variance (i.e. uncertainty interval) provided by GP models. Consequently, retrievals with high uncertainties refer to pixel spectral information that deviates from what has been represented during the training phase. In turn, low uncertainties refer to pixels that were well represented in the training phase. The quantification of variable-associated uncertainties is a strong re- quirement when remote sensing products are ingested in higher level processing, e.g. to estimate ecosystem respiration, photosynthetic activity, or carbon sequestration The application of GPs for the estimation of biophysical parameters was initially demonstrated in Within the uncertainty maps, areas with reliable retrievals are clearly distinguished from areas with unreliable retrievals. Low uncertainties were found on irrigated areas and harvested fields. High uncertainties were found on areas with remarkably different spectra, such as bright, whitish calcareous soils, or harvested fields. This indicates that the input spectrum deviates from what has been presented during the training stage, thereby imposing uncertainties to the retrieval. GP models were subsequently applied to the SPARC dataset that was re-sampled to different Sentinel-2 band settings and then uncertainties were inspected Subsequently the uncertainty values were analyzed. By using the extended training dataset not only further improved performances but also allowed a decrease in theoretical uncertainties. The GP models were successfully applied to simulated Sentinel-2 images covering various sites; associated relative uncertainties were on the same order as those generated by the reference image. This paper provided a comprehensive survey to the field of Gaussian Processes (GPs) in the context of remote sensing data analysis for Earth observation applications, and in particular for biophysical parameter estimation. We summarized the main properties of GP models offer as well a solid Bayesian framework to formulate new algorithms well-suited to the signal characteristics. We have seen for example that by incorporating proper priors, we can encompass signal-dependent noise, and infer parametric forms of warping the observations as an alternative to either ad hoc filtering. On the downside, we need to mention the scalability issue: essentially, the optimization of GP models require computing determinants and invert matrices of size n × n, which runs cubically in computational time and quadratically in memory storage. In the last years, however, great advances have appeared in machine learning and now it is possible to train GPs with several thousands of points. All the developments were illustrated at a local scales through a full set of illustrative examples in the field of geosciences and remote sensing. In particular, we treated important problems of ocean and land sciences: from accurate estimation of oceanic chlorophyll content and pigments, to vegetation properties from multi-and hyperspectral sensors. It is customary to subtract the sample mean to data {yn} N n=1 , and then to assume a zero mean model. http://www.gaussianprocess.org/ http://becs.aalto.fi/en/research/bayes/gpstuff/ http://isp.uv.es/soft.htm