A driven-dissipative nonlinear photonic system (e.g. exciton-polaritons) can operate in a gapped superfluid regime. We theoretically demonstrate that the reflection of a linear wave on this superfluid is an analogue of the Andreev reflection of an electron on a superconductor. A normal region surrounded by two superfluids is found to host Andreev-like bound states. These bound states form topological synthetic bands versus the phase difference between the two superfluids. Changing the width of the normal region allows to invert the band topology and to create "interface" states. Instead of demonstrating a linear crossing, synthetic bands are attracted by the non-linear non-Hermitian coupling of bosonic systems which gives rise to a self-amplified strongly occupied topological state. Topological physics relies on the specific structure of the eigenstates of Hamiltonians in a parameter space. It became one of the most active fields of research of the last decades. Topological invariants were successively used to characterise superfluid excitations (quantum vortices) The recent proposals and implementations of topological media supporting protected edge states in nonlinear systems opened new possibilities In this work, we study the analog of the Andreev reflection of an incident wave on a gapped driven-dissipative polariton superfluid. We show the existence of Andreevlike bound states between the two driven superfluids. The topology of the synthetic bands defined versus the phase difference between the two superfluids is found to be non-trivial. The interface states between the regions of inverted topology are found to be self-amplified. They are macroscopically-occupied topologically protected Andreev-like states. The model. We consider a resonantly-pumped 1D nonlinear optical media described by the driven-dissipative Gross-Pitaevskii equation for scalar particles, which is similar to the Lugiato-Lefever equation where P = e -iωpt is the quasi-resonant pumping term at normal incidence, α > 0 is the repulsive interaction term, and γ the decay rate. The pumped mode dispersion is parabolic (mass m), typical for photons or excitonpolaritons in a microcavity. All polarisation effects are neglected. The spatially-homogeneous solution ψ s e -iωpt shows a bistable behaviour Here, one plane-wave excitation is coupled by the nonlinear term to its complex conjugate. Inserting this wavefunction into Eq. ( where L = ( k -E p + 2αn). The coefficients u, v are the Bogoliubov coefficients, k = 2 k 2 /2m and ψ s = √ ne iφ . The energy E = ω, measured with respect to the laser detuning E p = ω p , is found by cancelling the determinant and reads: A bogolon is formed by the superposition of two plane waves of amplitude u and v * at energies E, -E. Considering E positive, the ratio |u|/|v| is fixed by Eq. ( Next, we consider two semi-infinite regions (Fig. The Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations read as Eq. ( The This evanescent solution has no propagative counterpart As shown in Fig. with k 1,2 = 2m (E p ± E)/ , valid for ∆ < E p (see To compute the reflection coefficients, we take are the normal and Andreev reflection coefficients for an incident "particle" (dominant positive energy component). The group velocities allow to conserve the current. Similarly, , the reflection coefficients for an incident "hole" having a dominant negative energy component. The continuity of the wavefunctions and of their derivatives at the interface gives an analytical expression for these reflection coefficients (see Andreev bound states analog. The next step is to consider a Superfluid -Normal -Superfluid (SNS) junction (Fig. The energy components of the Andreev bound states are computed using the scattering matrix formalism. The scattering matrices for the reflection phenomena at each interface read: The eigenvectors of S T determine the wavefunction via Eqs. (S12), The total probability current of one component at the energy +E is fully compensated by the current at the energy -E. Topological synthetic bands. Both positive and negative energy components of a bound state form synthetic energy bands with respect to φ. For a given energy band, the wavefunction is a superposition of two counterpropagating plane waves, as defined by Eq. (S12). The amplitudes of these two plane waves define a pseudospinor X + ∼ (A, B) T for positive energies and X -∼ (C, D) T for negative energies. The evolution of these pseudospinors along the band allows to compute the Zak phase Figure Fig. Numerical simulations. To confirm the analytical theory, we perform numerical simulations, solving Eq. ( To summarize, we predict an analogue of the Andreev reflection in a photonic driven-dissipative gapped superfluid. Such systems can be used to form bosonic SNS junctions hosting Andreev-like bound states. These bound states form topologically nontrivial synthetic bands as a function of the phase difference between the pumping lasers. By changing the width of the normal region, one can invert their topology, and the associated topologically protected interface states are found to be self-amplified, giving rise to strongly emitting topologically protected photonic modes. In the main text, the spectrum of elementary excitations of bogolons is proven to present a gap. This gap directly comes from the dispersion relation: At first glance, in the propagative case, this provides two solutions for the norm of the wavevector |k| (that is, four solutions for k): However, the solution k -is actually imaginary, since in the propagative case E > ∆, which yields (αn) 2 + E 2 > 2αn -E p . Thus, there are only two solutions with the same norm, but opposite propagation direction: This is obviously different from the case of evanescent bogolons considered in the main text, where the two inverse decay lengths are different. For comparison, the energy E = ω of a bogolon in the evanescent case can be expressed with respect to the inverse decay length κ: This expression should be compared with Eq. (S1). Finally, we note that the descriptions of the normal region based on the Schrödinger equation and on the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations (BDG) with exactly zero interactions are equivalent. While it may seem that the BDG equations have two solutions with opposite energies, zero interactions mean that the BdG matrix is already diagonal and the negative energy enters the wavefunction only with the minus sign. Thus, these two components simply correspond to two waves propagating in opposite directions with the same energy. This energy is positive when measured from the bottom of the band. In this section, we present explicit expressions for the reflection coefficients for normal and Andreev reflection. We start by commenting the limit of vanishing lifetime used for the analytical calculations. A finite γ reduces both reflection coefficients. Its effect is stronger for the case of large penetration length 1/κ ± , discussed in the main text. This occurs especially for E → ∆. Therefore, the analytical results that we obtain should not be applied for energies close to the edge of the gap and for particularly narrow gaps, ∆ → 0. As said in the main text, both the wavefunctions and their derivatives have to be continuous on the interface. This imposes: Matching the wavefunctions and their derivatives at the interface gives an analytical expression for the reflection coefficients: The precedent expressions can be reformulated to make the phase appear explicitly by considering the group velocities v 1,2 = k 1,2 /m and the relation be-tween the Bogoliubov coefficients u + = -v -e 2iφ and v + = u -e -2iφ : (S7) This form makes appear explicitly the role played by φ, and more specifically the change of sign of the Andreev reflection coefficient when φ = π/2. The reflection coefficients for holes are given as r N h (E) = r Np (-E) and The dependence on the different energies at stake is here hidden in the complexity of the formulas. However, for E E p , an approximate expression can be given for both coefficients: With these expressions, we clearly notice that the three crucial energies to consider are E p , αn-E p and 3α n -E p . It allows to find the asymptotic values of the reflection coefficients for ∆ → 0. The maximal value for Andreev reflection coefficients, |r A | 2 = 2/3 = 2|r N | 2 , is achieved for αn → E p (∆ → 0). However, we note that these values are beyond the domain of the validity of the theory, since for E = ∆ = 0 any finite decay γ plays a nonnegligible role. For realistic ∆, In the main text, we also consider the case of a SNS junction with a normal region of width a. In the derivation of the energy components of a bound state, based on the scattering matrices of the interfaces formed by the reflection coefficients discussed above, we also need the expression of the scattering matrix describing the propagation of the wave in the normal region S N . Regardless of the direction of propagation, this matrix reads: This matrix, together with the ones describing the reflection processes on both interfaces, allow one to find a condition for the existence of a bound state which takes the form of an cancellation of a determinant (see main text). This condition is equivalent to: where k ± = k 1 ± k 2 , which is more compact and makes appear the reflection coefficients explicitly. To compute the Zak phase, we use: As in the main text, the wavefunction in the normal (central) region is written as: and the associated vectors for each energy component ±E are written as: where the coefficients are the ones defined in (S12) but normalized to one (|A The coefficients themselves are computed numerically. Such vectors can indeed be plotted on the Bloch sphere. The vector corresponding to the dominant energy always gives Φ Zak = 0 while the other one gives Φ Zak = π. We note that both spinors are constrained to the great circle of the Bloch sphere by the symmetry of the probability density distribution. Indeed, since the problem is completely symmetric with respect to x = 0, the probability density has to exhibit mirror symmetry with respect to this point. For this, the relative phase between A and B and also between C and D has to be either 0 or π, which means that the pseudospin can only make a circle through the constant longitude plane (azimuthal angles 0 • and 180 • ). If one allows an arbitrary phase between these coefficients, the probability density is shifted and becomes asymmetric. Indeed, (S14) If the phase difference between A and B is 0 or π, we can assume that both are real. In this case, the probability density simply writes which is symmetric. We can now introduce the phase difference between the two coefficients explicitly: which gives an asymmetric probability density We conclude that the azimuthal angle on the Bloch sphere φ has to be zero, and that the pseudospin has to follow the great circle. Probability current The probability current J ± of each energy component ±E can be computed numerically from the expression: These currents can be plotted with respect to the phase difference (see Fig. This trend can be traced back to the definition of the current on the right interface. The probability current of each energy component measures the exchange between particles at +E and particles at -E. Thus, considering the positive energy component for instance, it follows: Regarding the expressions of these coefficients given in Eq. (S7), one can deduce that: Finally, we retrieve the expression: where J 0 has a small phase dependence, contrary to J 0 . This phase dependence comes from the dependence of the energy of the components of a bound state on the phase difference (via the norm of the reflection coefficients). In the main text, the case E p > ∆ is considered because it leads to propagative states in the normal region for both positive and negative values of E, which is the most interesting case. However, the case with E p < ∆ is possible as well. Then, for incident particles with energies E > E p , the reflected part at the energy symmetric with respect to the pump detuning is evanescent. We have solved the reflection problem in this case and obtained a non-zero amplitude of the reflected evanescent wave. Our calculations show that SNS junctions with this type of states can exist as well. They present the same global behaviour as for the propagative states (see Fig. To confirm that the band crossing and amplification observed in the main text are indeed due to the topology of the bands, we consider an alternative configuration where the bands do not exhibit any inversion of the topology with the variation of the parameter, and thus they anticross instead of crossing each other. We introduce an additional potential barrier at x = 0, splitting the trap into two parts with two distinct trapped states (left-and right-localized) having the same symme-try (s for the lowest state). We also introduce a potential step, responsible for the detuning of these two states. Instead of varying the width of the trap a, we vary the height of the step as a function of the second coordinate y. The total potential therefore reads U (x, y) = U 0 exp -x 2 2σ 2 + U 1 y l sign(x) (S23) where U 0 = 2 meV is the barrier height, σ = 0.6 μm is its width, U 1 = 0.2 meV is the characteristic step height, and l = 50 μm is the characteristic variation length of the step height. The results of numerical simulations of this configuration are shown in Fig. + | < |v + |. Its dominant component has an energy -E < 0 as |u +