All-dielectric metasurfaces exhibit exotic electromagnetic responses, similar to those obtained with metal-based metamaterials. Research in all-dielectric metasurfaces currently uses relatively simple unit-cell designs, but increased geometrical complexity may yield even greater scattering states. Although machine learning has recently been applied to the design of metasurfaces with impressive results, the much more challenging task of finding a geometry that yields the desired spectra remains largely unsolved. We explore and adapt a recent deep learning approach -termed neural-adjoint -and find it is capable of accurately and efficiently estimating complex geometry needed to yield a targeted frequency-dependent scattering. We also show how the neural-adjoint method can intelligently grow the design search space to include designs that increasingly and accurately approximate the desired scattering response. The neural-adjoint method is not restricted to the case demonstrated and may be applied to plasmonics, photonic bandgap, and other structured material systems. Electromagnetic metamaterials have been used to realize many exotic scattering responses over the last two decades. Effects including negative refractive index and cloaking have generated significant interest and have served to drive the community In principle, all-dielectric metasurface (ADM) unit-cells may also be used to tesselate a surface in an arbitrary fashion similar to that achieved with metal-based metamaterials. However, ADMs resonators are only marginally sub-wavelength, and modes utilized are often not confined within their physical bound -with an evanescent tail lying just outside their surface -resulting in significant neighbor interaction. Further, surface modes related to the periodicity are not restricted to nearest neighbors, and may persist over several spatial periods. Despite the success of ADMs A viable design alternative to numerical simulation for structured materials, including metamaterials While deep learning enables substantially faster evaluation of candidates, given the vast number of possibilities for many problems (e.g., approx. 10 12 in our case), it is nonetheless difficult or impossible to iterate over all or most candidate designs. From a design perspective, what would be of greatest utility would be to instead specify a desired frequency dependent electromagnetic response s, and have a model or solver compute a specific approximate geometry ĝ, which yields s (hereˆdenotes approximate). The solution used to search for such an ideal geometry may be cast as an inverse problem written as ĝ = f -1 (s). Hadamard described a solution method as well-posed if it met three criteria -H 1 : existence (at least one solution), H 2 : uniqueness (only one solution), and H 3 : stability (solution must depend continuously on s). A solution approach is then ill-posed if one of the H 1 -H 3 conditions fails Here we explore a recently-proposed deep inverse modeling approach, called the neural-adjoint (NA) method Here we adapt the NA method to solve a challenging problem involving the design of ADMs geometries with 14 free geometrical parameters; a much larger space than most recent work (e.g., 5 -10 free parameters in The DNN forward model is trained by pair of 14 geometrical parameters and 2000 frequency points from 100-500 THz. Results of the forward model trained on 60k {g, s} pairs (approximately 5.75 × 10 -8 of the entire geometry space) are shown in Fig. , where rectified linear unit (ReLU) is the activation function, μ g is the mean of the geometry training data, and R g is its range. This boundary loss punishes the inference process with increasing loss if the geometry search process steps out of the space of the training data, where the forward model may produce inaccurate estimates of scattering parameters. In our experiments we use the following total loss: L = (s -f ( ĝ)) 2 + L bnd . As an initial test of the NA inverse method, we feed in frequency dependent absorptivities A(ω) where we know apriori that a solution g exists, i.e. s is a numerical simulation from which f originates from. In Fig. Fig. patterns. From this initial investigation with UMAP in Fig. We have adapted the neural-adjoint inverse design method forward dictionary search (FFDS) inverse method was shown feasible for THz ADMs absorbers, where all 812 million possible geometries can be computed in a day [? ]. To compute our entire geometry space with a size of over a trillion parameters would take FFDS over three and a half years. Thus the NA method is a good choice when the parameter space become too large for a FFDS approach. We built the entire network and neural-adjoint method using the PyTorch platform. The DNN used for the neural adjoint method consists of twelve fully connected linear layers, four 1D transpose convolutional layers for upsampling, and one final 1D convolutional layer for spectrum smoothing. The linear fully connected layers have the following structure[14, 1000, 1000, 1000, 1000, 1000, 1000, 1000, 1000, 1000, 1000, 1000, 1000, 500 ], and all hidden layers except the last linear layer are batch normalized, activated by Leaky_Relu, followed by dropout layers with p = 0.05. The transpose convolutional layers have kernel size Because NA a gradient-based procedure, it will only converge to a locally optimal solution. Because the NA method is amenable to parallelization on graphics processing units (standard hardware for deep learning), this entire process can be computed in very little time. In our experiments, we can run the NA method with T = 1000 on our desktop computer with an Nvidia 2080ti GPU and complete processing in under 1 minute.Since the NA method finds the globally optimal solution even in its worst-performing cases, our results suggest that the NA always (or nearly always) finds the globally optimal solutions, even for highly complex problems like ours. Interestingly, this suggests that the main obstacle of custom design is no longer the inverse model, but rather the space over which we choose to search for designs i.e., the shapes we consider (cylinder, crosses, etc) and their parameter settings (e.g., radii, height). Although powerful, to use deep learning methods we must necessarily define a range of these settings so that we can collect simulations to train our models, and this space limits where we can search for designs. However, the design needed to realize our targeted scattering parameters may not exist in this initial search space. As we show subsequently, the NA method can also be used to identify where this initial search space can be expanded so that it is most likely to contain the desired solution, providing a solution to this emergent obstacle to complex material design. Our simulations' unit cell boundary conditions allow us to do four times data augmentation on our dataset because the infinite plane of unit cells consists of four different resonators' combinations that give almost identical spectra with fluctuations from CST software. However, we learned that the DNN could quickly learn the correlation between four different resonators' combinations. The forward model will know which input geometries share the same spectrum in high fidelity if the entire dataset is augmented before splitting into the training and validation dataset. Therefore, the forward model will give a false mean square error much lower than actual loss performance on an independent validation set. After applying data augmentation to the training and validation sets after the splits, we observe that the four times augmentation did not significantly improve accuracy. We believe that, with our 60000 simulations (24000 simulations after augmentation), the augmented data points are still too sparse to cover the entire geometry space defined by our geometry boundaries. We use Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) to explore our solution geometry space and realize that angles have more random impacts on distributing the best NA solutions. Thus, we plotted the UMAP with ten parameters, excluding rotational angles. The plotted UMAP demonstrates a clear trend that the MSE is decreasing in one direction. To confirm