An energy efficient spark plasma sintering method enabling the densification of large size samples assisted by very low electric current levels is developed. In this method, the electric current is concentrated in the graphite foils around the sample. High energy dissipation is then achieved in this area enabling the heating and full densification of large (alumina) parts (Ø 40 mm) at relatively low currents (800 A). The electrothermal mechanical simulation reveals that the electric current needed to heat the large samples is 70 % lower in the energy efficient configuration compared to the traditional configuration. The presence of thermal and densification gradients is also revealed for the larger size samples. Potential solutions for this problem are discussed. The experiments confirm the possibility of full densification (96-99 %) of large alumina samples. This approach allows using small (and low cost) SPS devices (generally limited to 10-15 mm samples) for large size samples (40-50 mm). The developed technique enables also an optimized energy consumption by large scale SPS systems. The spark plasma sintering (SPS) process has demonstrated a high potential for the fabrication of high performance materials ranging from polymers, metals to ultrahigh temperature ceramics The SPS process' industrial implementation requires addressing these three main issues: i) enabling complex net-shaping, ii) increase of productivity and iii) scaling up of the process. Concerning the fabrication of complex shape components, the reduction of the densification and microstructure inhomogeneities is the key point. The non-homogeneous densification caused by the component thickness differences To overcome the problem of wasteful energy consumption, the overall SPS process has to use more efficiently the high energy delivered by the power supply. In sinter-forging configuration it is possible to consolidate ultra-high temperature materials at low current and for a very short period of time In the present study, an energy efficient method, where the electric current lower than 1000 A is constrained in the graphite foil around the sample, is employed to fully sinter up to 40 mm diameter alumina sample. The feasibility of this method is first tested by an electrothermalmechanical simulation and then experimentally verified. In this work, three configurations called "traditional" and "energy efficient" and "spiral" will be considered. The difference between these three configurations is in the electric current path in the area of the punches, sample and die. In the traditional configuration, as reported in Figure In the energy efficient configurations (applied to the sample diameter of 30 and 40 mm, Figure For the 30 mm geometry, a different energy efficient configuration (so called "spiral" configuration), where the electric current is confined both in the sample/punch and sample/die graphite foil, has been investigated too. As reported in Figure All the experiments were performed using a Spark Plasma Sintering System (SPSS DR.SINTER Fuji Electronics model 515). This SPS device has the maximum current of 1500 A, voltage of 20 V and a maximum applied force of 50 kN. In the traditional configuration, the maximum recommended sample diameter is 15 mm which is adapted to conduct the consolidation of any kind of powder and the study of their material properties; this size limitation, however, constraints the elaboration of real-world large size components. was applied from the start and maintained up to the releasing of the current. The fractured specimens were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (FEI Quanta 450, USA). An electrothermal-mechanical (ETM) simulation of the SPS process has been employed to study and compare the efficiency of the traditional and energy efficient configurations shown in Figures 1. The ETM simulation encompasses the process Joule Heating where σ is the stress tensor, ε̇ the strain rate tensor, σ eq and ε̇e q respectively the equivalent stress and strain rate, i the identity tensor, φ and ψ respectively the shear and bulk moduli. The details of the ETM properties for graphite and alumina powder and the boundary conditions can be found in Refs. In this section, the beneficial potential of the energy efficient configuration is first quantified by the ETM simulation; then the homogeneity and the distribution of the main ETM fields are discussed. The energy efficient configurations are tested experimentally, the stability and homogeneity of the resulting densification and microstructures are compared with the simulations results. Finally, the optimization of this method by thermal confinement is investigated by the ETM simulation. The ETM simulation allows the comparison of all the aspects of the Joule heating and the densification of the alumina specimens for diameters of 15 to 40 mm. The calculated shrinkage curves for the three specimens' diameters (Figure The current lines and electric volumetric loss density (Joule heating) reported in Figure The experimental validations of the theoretically analyzed energy efficient configurations are presented in this section. All the energy efficient and spiral configurations are shown in Figure The "spiral configuration" shows a very high efficiency of the heating (1800 W) with electric current values of about 300 A up to 1000 °C. After reaching 1000 °C the nature of the electric contact suddenly deteriorates and the electric current rises to the values close to 1500 A (for an electric consumption 6000 W). However, the densification of the alumina sample up to 93 % was possible. For this configuration, the abrupt amount of current generates conditions for local temperature higher than the melting point of alumina 2072 °C. The 30 and 40 mm energy efficient configurations exhibit close values of electric current at the dwell values of about 800 A similar to those obtained by the simulations (see Figure The fracture surfaces of the three samples are shown in Figure In order to improve the microstructures homogeneity for the large samples, a method of thermal confinement can be explored. As shown in Figure and 1000× times results in the nearly complete homogenization of the sample temperature. This configuration is similar to the energy efficient mode presented above, but a highly thermally isolative material needs to be inserted at the sample/die interface to increase the equivalent TCR to the minimum of 100 × its natural TCR value, and this way to homogenize the temperature. This approach represents some difficulties because most of the highly thermally isolative materials have fibrous or highly porous structures In this work, various new energy efficient spark plasma sintering methods allowing the use of a large size tooling at low electric currents are presented. In the described approaches, the traditional electric current path is modified to concentrate the current in a very narrow area, such as the graphite foil volume near the sample's surface. This area dissipates a high amount of energy and acts like a thermal element that can heat very large volumes of processed materials. Using these approaches, it has been possible to sinter alumina specimens of 30 and 40 mm diameter under applied currents below 800 A (70 % lower than the equivalent value reaching the same level of densification in the traditional configuration). Both the electrothermal-mechanical simulation and experiment reveal that the magnitude of thermal and densification gradients in the specimens increase with the increase of their dimensions. The maximum temperature is located at the edge of the sample in the graphite foil which acts as a heating element. The locally higher temperature at the edge of the sample (radial thermal gradient) has an impact on the densification and the grain growth. Indeed, higher grain sizes are also observed at the edges of the processed samples where the temperature is expected by the simulations to be higher. This phenomenon can be reduced by using the thermal confinement of the heat generated in the sample. The experiment utilizing a spiral-shape foil shows even lower values of the electric currents, however, some instabilities may appear if the electric contact at the level the graphite foil evolves creating hot spot area and local melting of alumina. Besides the advantages of using a low-power SPS system to fabricate larger samples, the energy efficient configurations make feasible also the manufacture of very large scale samples that are so far limited in size to 40 cm under the maximum electric current level of 40 kA. 