To understand the most-recent experiment on room-temperature superconductivity in carbonaceous sulfur hydride (CSH) systems under high pressure, we have performed extensive stoichiometry and structure searches of ternary CSH compounds using generic evolutionary algorithms. Judged from the formation enthalpy of different CSH compounds, our studies conclude that certain levels of carbon doping (~5% to 6%) in sulfur hydride (H 3 S) in its R3m and 3 Im m phases gives rise to the most-stable structure (second to the H 3 S itself) among the various CSH systems found. The replacement of a small amount of sulfur atoms by carbon in compounds like C 1 S 15 H 48 and C 1 S 17 H 54 results in a stronger electron-phonon coupling and a higher averaged phonon frequency that increases with pressure, thereby leading to room-temperature superconductivity at ~270 GPa. The calculated superconducting transition temperature T c of C 1 S 15 H 48 and C 1 S 17 H 54 as a function of pressure shows reasonably good agreement with experimental measurements. Before transition to superconducting states at ~80 GPa, the CSH system is predicted to have a stoichiometry of C 2 S 2 H 10 with a stable structure of P1 symmetry, which is supported by the direct comparison of its Raman spectrum with experiment. Superconductivity is a physics phenomenon occurring in certain materials that shows no resistivity for electrical current at temperatures below a critical transition temperature T c . For conventional superconductors, the electron-phonon coupling mediates the formation of a Cooper pair of electrons with opposite spins, offering a physics picture to understand superconductivity by the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory Extensive studies on conventional superconductors had continued for decades after the establishment of the BCS theory, with a wide range of superconducting elements and alloys discovered. However, the highest transition temperature any conventional superconductors reached so far was T c = 39 K in MgB 2 For the past five years, exciting high-T c superconducting materials have been discovered from binary hydride or super-hydride systems of X m H n in both experiments In this Letter, we report on first-principles calculations and physics understanding of the stoichiometry and structure of the newly discovered room-temperature To determine the possible stoichiometry and stable crystal structures in a wide pressure range from 20 to 300 GPa, we used the evolutionary structure searching code USPEX We have mostly scanned the following range of combinations: i = 1 to 5, j = 1 to 5, and k = 3 to 36 for discrete pressure points at 43, 100, 120, 150, and 250 GPa. Using the electronic formation enthalpy defined as the criterion, we have identified possible ternary compounds that are stable [∆H(eV/atom) < 0 similar to the so-called convex-hull analysis] in the searched pressure and stoichiometry range. Here the enthalpy [H(C), H(S), and H(H)] for each individual element of C, S, and H are calculated separately from their own stable phases at the corresponding pressure. In all of our DFT calculations, we have used the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange-correlation functional As an example of our CSH-compound searches at 250 GPa (shown by Fig. is the averaged zero-point-motion (ZPM) contribution of ions to the total formation enthalpy of CSH systems. Finally, the total formation enthalpy (∆H total = ∆H + ∆E ZPE ) versus pressure is plotted in Fig. To examine if these identified carbon-doped sulfur hydrides exhibit any hightemperature superconductivity, we have employed the Allen-Dynes-McMillian equation The T c results from our VCA calculations for C 1 S 15 H 48 and C 1 S 17 H 54 are plotted in Fig. In the CSH experiment Namely, if there is one compound superconducting (R i ≈ 0) in the sample, one measures zero resistance for the whole sample; the measured curve of resistance versus temperature will have only one "jump" that is determined by the highest T c of any superconducting compound in the sample. These features seemed to be in line with experimental measurements of the CSH system j H k binary systems, even though it is twice as high as that of H 3 S; and (3) the C i S j binary compounds tend to be unstable