Recently, multifold fermions characterized by band crossings with multifold degeneracy and Fermi surfaces with nontrivial Chern numbers have been discovered experimentally in AlPt Noncentrosymmetric superconductors are superconductors without inversion centers. The broken inversion symmetry results in antisymmetric spin-orbit coupling (ASOC) which can lead to interesting superconducting properties, such as mixed pairing order parameters In recent years, tremendous progress had been made in the understanding of the topological properties of band structures. Particularly, many topologically nontrivial band crossings which describe unconventional fermions, such as Weyl, Kramers Weyl and unconventional multifold fermions have been discovered The case of multifold fermions is particularly interesting, as the nonsymmorphic and time-reversal (TR) symmetry can enforce multiple degeneracies and result in large Chern numbers on Fermi surfaces enclosing the band crossing points, even in the absence of ASOC. Unlike Weyl points, which usually result in short Fermi arc states, multifold fermion crossing points result in incredibly long Fermi arc states which span a large portion of the surface Brillouin zone. So far, two multifold fermion semimetals, namely, AlPt In this work, we point out that Li 2 Pd 3 B and Li 2 Pt 3 B, which are well-studied noncentrosymmetric superconductors In the case of Li 2 Pt 3 B, the superconducting state is gapless. The order parameters belonging to both the A 1 (the isotropic representation) and A 2 representations of the O point group can result in gapless superconducting phases. Importantly, the superconducting states can be topological and possess dispersionless Majorana modes on surfaces in both A 1 and A 2 representations. Therefore, we suggest that Li 2 Pt 3 B is a promising gapless topological superconductor candidate. In this manuscript, we first identify topological band crossing points in Li 2 Pd 3 B and Li 2 Pt 3 B which are relevant to the Fermi surface topology through ab initio calculations. Several 2-fold, 4-fold and 6-fold band crossings which correspond to Weyl, Kramers Weyl, spin-1 and multifold fermions were found and are listed in Table Both Li 2 Pd 3 B and Li 2 Pt 3 B have a perovskite-like cubic structure, and they belong to the nonsymmorphic space group P4 3 32 (No. 212) with point group O conductivity and normal state topology was not studied. To be more specific, the generators of the space group P4 3 32 (in Seitz symbols) are These crystal symmetries, together with time-reversal symmetry T , will stabilize a 6-fold degeneracy at Γ and 8-fold degeneracy at R in the absence of SOC. In the presence of SOC, the 6-fold symmetry will split into 4fold and 2-fold degenerate points, while the 8-fold degeneracy at R will split into 2-fold and 6-fold degenerate points. The effects of SOC can be seen by comparing the band structures in Fig. It is described by the two spin-1 fermions, each of which gives rise to quantized Berry flux of ±2 for a gapped surface enclosing R. Here the spin-n fermions are defined to represent the electronic states around a specific k-point that transform under the crystalline rotational symmetries in the form of exp -i Ŝ • nθ , where Ŝ is the spin-n angular momentum operator and the unit vector n and θ represent the axis and angle of a rotation operation respectively. In Li 2 Pd 3 B and Li 2 Pt 3 B, time-reversal symmetry forces two copies of spin-1 fermions to be degenerate at R On the other hand, the 4-fold degenerate fermions at Γ (e.g. labeled as No. 14 in Fig. In the following, we analyze the possible pairing sym- with a gauge-dependent phase θ(k). The pairing order parameter can be written as ∆ ν,k = φ ν,k ∆ φν,k With the crystalline symmetry of Li 2 Pd 3 B and Li 2 Pt 3 B, the pairing ∆ ν,k transforms as one of the irreducible representations (IR) of the point group O, which is the factor group of P4 3 32. This gives the symmetry of the pairing function, which decides the gap structure of quasiparticle spectrum We found that the space group P4 3 32 allows two one-dimensional representations, A 1 and A 2 , as listed in Table As shown in the previous sections, the band structure of Li 2 Pd 3 B is highly topologically nontrivial, and the Fermi surface topological properties cannot be captured by simple effective models. Therefore, in our calculations, we first construct the Wannier orbitals from first-principles calculations with the Wannier90 package 1, the pairing has the same sign in the whole Brillouin zone and the material is a topologically trivial superconductor. Interestingly, there is a large parameter regime, as shown Fig. where ∆ ν,kF is the pairing on the Fermi surface of the ν-th band with Chern number C ν In the topological regime, as the two nearly degenerate Fermi pockets enclosing the R point have a total Chern number of 4 and the same pairing sign, and the rest of the Fermi surfaces have a total Chern number of -4 which is opposite to the R pocket, the total topological invariant of the DIII class topological phase is N DIII = 4. As a result, we expect that four Majorana cones appear on the (001) surface of the material. This is verified numerically by setting η 1 /η 2 = -5, and four zero energy modes are found on the Brillouin zone of the (001) surface state. It is interesting to note that on the (111) surface, the C 3 rotational symmetry forces the Majorana cones to be pinned at the surface Brillouin zone center and result in two Majorana cones with linear and cubic dispersions, as shown in Fig. On the other hand, Li 2 Pt 3 B has been experimentally found to be a gapless superconductor It is important to note that the A 1 pairing phase can also result in a gapless spectrum. As shown in Fig. In this work, we show that the normal state topology plays an important role in determining the superconducting properties of Li 2 Pd 3 B and Li 2 Pt 3 B. We expect that the normal state topological properties are important in many other noncentrosymmetric superconductors as well. By revisiting the space group of noncentrosymmetric superconductors In this work, we showed that Li 2 Pd 3 B and Li 2 Pt 3 B are multifold fermion metals with unconventional degenerate points at time-reversal invariant momenta due to nonsymmorphic symmetry. This results in Fermi surfaces with higher Chern numbers, even in the absence of ASOC. We showed that there are long Fermi arc states in Li 2 Pd 3 B at the Fermi energy. Interestingly, Li 2 Pd 3 B, being a fully gapped superconductor, is a candidate material of a DIII class topological superconductor. On the other hand, superconducting Li 2 Pt 3 B, being gapless, is likely to be a nodal topological superconductor with dispersionless Majorana surface modes. We also identified several other superconducting multifold fermion superconductors, which can also provide new platforms to study the interplay between normal state topology and superconductivity. band basis. For the sake of simplicity, we set the pairing term in the same form for all bands, however, our method could be used in more generalized pairing configurations. With such obtained Wannier tight-binding and BdG Hamiltonians, we were then able to calculate surface spectral functions and topological invariants with the WannierTools package To find the possible pairing states and analyze their quasi-particle spectrum, one first has to classify all the pairing channels according to the point group symmetry. For multi-dimensional representations, symmetry has to be further identified by finding the local minima (stationary points) of the corresponding Ginzburg-Landau free energy. Resulting symmetry is described by the isotropy group, which can then be used to find the possible quasiparticle gap structures The H reflects the symmetry of energetics E k , which can be probed in spectroscopic measurements. We did not consider any further mixing due to the symmetry breaking of the pairing potential A 1 pairing-This pairing can be connected to the trivial s-wave pairing. Nodal structure is accidental. In this case, as argued in the main text, it is a DIII class topological superconductor, supporting chiral majorana fermions at its surface. A 2 pairing-In this phase, C 2,xy and C 4,z are accompanied by an e iπ phase. This forces nodes in pairing potential, which is discussed in the next section. E pairing-In the E-pairing case, the homogeneous GL free energy density can be expressed as B1) where η = (η 1 , η 2 ) is the two component order parameter, and α, β, γ are material dependent parameters. The sixth order term has to be included to split accidental degeneracy. Local minima of the free energy can be found at (1, 0), (0, 1) and (1, i). A multi-component order parameter allows a complex configuration (1, i), spontaneously breaking TR symmetry. T 1 /T 2 pairing. -In both cases, the order parameter has three components η = (η 1 , η 2 , η 3 ), and the GL free energy density can be written as . Now the distinct ground states are: (1, 0, 0), (1, 1, 1), (1, ω, ω 2 ) and (1, i, 0), with ω = e i2π/3 . Again, the last two terms are related to the time-reversal symmetry breaking (TRSB) phase. According to Table Appendix C: Symmetry of the pairing function Time-reversal symmetry can be written as T = CK with T 2 = -1 (spinful) so that (C1) Then we have: Also, TR symmetry has the properties that given a space group symmetry g ∈ G: This indicates that the C matrix can change a representation to its conjugate (adjoint) partner. Now given a superconducting BdG Hamiltonian: it is very helpful to define a TR basis when TR symmetry is present: In this basis, the BdG Hamiltonian now reads: Note that the last line only holds when TR symmetry is present. Now the new pairing function, ∆k = ∆ k C * k has the following properties required by TR/space group symmetry and Fermi statistics: Then we can expand this function ∆k = i,μ η iμ Γ iμ (k) into IRs of the point group. η iμ is the corresponding order parameter in Ginzburg-Landau (GL) free energy, which is real or complex when TR symmetry is present or absent, respectively. Isotropy group H Node type ∆k The local minima of various pairing states. TR and TRSB indicate time-reversal and time-reversal symmetry breaking phases, respectively. The isotropy group H describes the symmetry of the minima, which is isomorphic to the subgroup of the O. The explicit form of the generators is also given. For the node type in single band pairing, 'P ' denotes symmetry protected point nodes, 'L' denotes line nodes, and '-' denotes that there is possibility of finding accidental nodes. Examples of basis functions are given in the last column. These may have accidental nodes that will be eliminated when higher-order terms of k are included. Also note that when projected to a specific band, the pairing function should always be an even function of k. Here ω = e i2π/3 . At general points in chiral superconductors, strong asymmetric spin-orbit coupling lifts all degeneracy and superconductivity pairs electrons within a single band. This is also in line with the superconductivity fitness condition of In this eigen-band basis we can write the simple Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian as Pairing is within a single band in this case, which is a single-valued function of k. TR matrix C is an odd function of k, such that t(k) = -t(k) and |t(k)| = 1. For the pairing function ∆(k), it is an even function of k. We discuss such pairing in the computations within the main text. For such single band pairing, symmetries with an additional U (1) phase will stabilize nodes on the Fermi surface. For example, in an A 2 phase, there is a π phase accompanied with C 4,z rotation. Then, there must be at least two line nodes traversing through the rotation axis, since the pairing potential is a real function of k. For TRSB phase such as the (1, i) for E, the C 3 has a e i2π/3 phase. However, since the time-reversal symmetry is broken, we can only conclude that the pairing function is zero at the intersection between the rotation axis and Fermi surface, as the phase is not well defined only at this point. We list all the node types in Table On the Brillouin zone boundary, non-symmorphic symmetry combined with the time-reversal symmetry will force Kramers-type degeneracy. If a line node as classified in the last paragraph resides in this degenerate point, it is then necessary to ask whether this node is susceptible to inter-band pairing. Luckily, according to the results in Table For the results of the superconducting case in the main text, we first adopted the basis defined in Eq. C6 to write the BdG Hamiltonian: And the parameters for DIII topological phases (N = 4) (Fig. × (cos k y a -cos k z a)(cos k z a -cos k x a)1 8×8 , (C10) where the size of d 0 doesn't affect the physics and is set to be 0.02 eV. As is mentioned in the main text, we constructed a tight binding model from the Ē1 representation at Wyckoff position 4a to give a minimal model that is compatible with space group symmetry. This can be understood as a model describing s-wave-like spinful orbitals originating from distorted B(Pd,Pt) 6 octahedra centered at Wyckoff position 4a. This model is simple yet sufficient to capture the topology and symmetry of the band structure. Wyckoff position 4a is a maximal Wyckoff position The exact form of the tight binding model is shown as follows: with Here h ij are the hopping matrices acting on atomic sites, and σ i acts on spin basis. The minimal parameter set we adopted here is (t 0 , t 1 , t To analyze the low energy effect model of multi-fold fermions, it is ideal to construct a k • p model. We focus on the linear order in k, so that the Hamiltonian can be written in the form: For Γ8 of G Γ , we use the following form Here 1 d |0 denotes the 2π rotation. We first get two sets of matrices so that The four-fold fermion at the Γ point of a cubic lattice was previously identified as a spin-3/2 fermion In this way, the J i matrices form a 4-dimensional, spin-3/2 representation of SO(3): J i , J j = i ijk J k and J 2 = 1 2 l(l + 1)1 with l = 3/2. And the remaining T matrices introduce the effect of a cubic crystalline field. At the R point, the 6-fold degeneracy is composed of an R7 R8 representation, where R7 and R8 are connected by TR symmetry. They are interpreted as two spin-1 fermions. We can first write one of the spin-1 fermion as H k = k • Γ. We project the Γ matrices to the R7 representation, whose explicit form is , The same can be done for R8 , whose matrices are the complex conjugate of those of R7 since R8 = R * 7 . The full Hamiltonian can be written as: with a, b, θ being real parameters. The resulting Γ i and Ω i matrices are: (E6) TR operator here reads T = 0 1 -1 0 K, with K the conjugate operator. Here, we still have T 2 = -1, despite it being a 'spin-1' fermion, as the fundamental block is a spin-1/2 electron. Again, to make the feature of the spin-1 fermion more explicit, we have Here J 2 = 41, as it represents two copies of a spin-1 fermion. These double spin-1 fermions are also found in previous literature about chiral cubic crystals The origin of these various types of fermions in lattice systems is from particle physics. Given a relativistic fermion with spin-N, we have a Hamiltonian H k = v(k • J ) (2N +1)×(2N +1) , with a real coefficient v, and J = {J x , J y , J z } is the (2N+1) dimensional (or spin-N) IR of rotation group SO(3). The energies of the bands are E k = vnk, with n = -N, -N +1, ...N -1, N . For the n-th band |n k , the berry curvature can be calculated as whose result can be found by Then, after integration over the enclosing surface, the Chern number of the n-th band can be found to be C n = 2n, and the monopole charge can be identified as Due to the crystalline symmetry in these solids, the dispersions of these fermions are distorted. However, the Chern numbers of a given band and degeneracy at high symmetry points are unaffected and can be used to identify such fermions. For example, for the 4-fold fermion No. 14 of Table I in the main text, we numerically computed the Chern numbers of the four bands at a tiny sphere around Γ, and we found them to be 3, 1, -1 and -3 (from lower to the higher band). This indicates that the fermion has spin-3/2 with monopole charge -4. Numerical computation was done with the WannierTools package It is pointed out in Simple calculation tells us that T together with P requires that the surface Hamiltonian should only contain k (odd) σ x,y terms while Ĉ3 requires that H(k + , k -) = H(k + e i 2 3 π , k -e -i 2 3 π ) with k ± = k x ± ik y . Thus, to the lowest-allowed k terms, the surface Majorana Hamiltonian is where σ ± = σ x ± iσ y . In the contrast, for spin-1/2 fermions, the lowest-allowed terms are linear in k. In the weak pairing limit, the surface Majorana states are just linear combinations of particle and hole states near the Fermi level of bulk Li 2 Pd 3 B. In this sense, the exis-tence of cubic Majorana bands is the direct result of the spin-3/2 unconventional fermions on the Fermi surfaces of Li 2 Pd 3 B.