It is shown that producing PrBaCo2O5+δ and Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O2+δ nanoparticle by a scalable synthesis method leads to high mass activities for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) with outstanding improvements by 10× and 50×, respectively, compared to those prepared via the state-of-the-art synthesis method. Here, detailed comparisons at both laboratory and industrial scales show that Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O2+δ appears to be the most active and stable perovskite catalyst under alkaline conditions, while PrBaCo2O5+δ reveals thermodynamic instability described by the density-functional theory based Pourbaix diagrams highlighting cation dissolution under OER conditions. Operando X-ray absorption spectroscopy is used in parallel to monitor electronic and structural changes of the catalysts during OER. The exceptional BSCF functional stability can be correlated to its thermodynamic meta-stability under OER conditions as highlighted by Pourbaix diagram analysis. BSCF is able to dynamically self-reconstruct its surface, leading to formation of Co-based oxy(hydroxide) layers while retaining its structural stability. Differently, PBCO demonstrates a high initial OER activity while it undergoes a degradation process considering its thermodynamic instability under OER conditions as anticipated by its Pourbaix diagram. Overall, this work demonstrates a synergetic approach of using both experimental and theoretical studies to understand the behavior of perovskite catalysts. Renewable energy sources show great potentials to alleviate the ongoing environmental threats from the non-renewable energy sources. However, the implementation of renewable energy technologies is challenged by the intermittent production of electricity, which therefore requires an efficient energy storage system to mediate generation and consumption of energy. In this respect, the growing needs to store larger amounts of energy have recently angled the spotlight towards water electrolysis technologies.1 For an efficient water splitting process, an effective oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is required at the anode.2 In recent developments, members of the perovskite oxide family have been recognized as highly active electrocatalysts capable to facilitate an efficient water oxidation reaction relieving the need of rare and expensive precious metals.[2, 3] The perovskite oxide family has the general chemical formula -ABO3composed of rare-earth The importance of fundamental understanding of reaction mechanisms cannot be stressed enough as it is the key for designing an optimal perovskite OER catalyst. In early works, Bockris proposed a variety of plausible OER mechanisms assuming that there is one rate determining step for each proposed mechanism based on experimentally determined Tafel slopes.8 In recent years, quantum-mechanical computational methods, such as densityfunctional theory (DFT), have become a precious tool for thermochemical analyses to unravel catalytic mechanisms of oxygen evolution. In the last decade, number of descriptors Therefore, this work takes benefit of flame spray (FS) synthesis17 to produce nano-sized catalysts with remarkably high surface areas yielding not only high OER mass activities but also enabling better extraction of catalytic properties during electrochemical reactions. Overall, this study aims to provide a thermodynamic perspective in understanding the activities and functional stabilities of two among the most active perovskite catalysts for OER-PBCO and BSCF-combining with operando XAS to apprehend and compare their dynamic local electronic geometric structures under OER conditions. DFT computed Pourbaix diagrams are constructed to complement experimentally observed performances of the catalysts based on their thermodynamic nature. Furthermore, the selected perovskites are adopted in an operational alkaline exchange membrane water electrolyzer (AEMWE) cell as anode materials to exploit their practical performance in the technical application. Overall, we provide mechanistic overview behind the OER processes of BSCF and PBCO catalysts in alkaline environment. Moreover, we provide insights into employing BSCF and PBCO as the anode catalyst for a long-term functionality. Nanoparticulates of PBCO and BSCF are prepared via FS synthesis. Each of the constituent metal precursors are dissolved in a combustible solution and injected into the flame at a high temperature (possible up to ≈3000 °C) and the resulting precipitates are collected. The phases of FS synthesized perovskite oxides are identified using X-ray diffraction (XRD), and compared to those of the same composition prepared via SG synthesis (Figure Consistent with recent study,[3] and the FS synthesis method appears to promote accommodation of reduced Co (i.e., Co(II) rather than Co(III)) within the perovskite structure for a superior OER activity in alkaline electrolytes. The physical traits of the perovskites prepared via FS and SG are compared using highresolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM). Figure Meanwhile, the current density of BSCF-FS shows an increasing trend (see Figure Particularly, thermodynamically stable phases under alkaline conditions (pH 13) within the working potential range that corresponds to 1.0-1.7 VRHE (0.23-0.93 VSHE) are to be highlighted to draw remarks on their respective functional stabilities. Referring to Figure Likely, as mentioned above, this is also evident in the stability test during which BSCF-FS reveals a significant increase of mass activity in the course of the potential cycle. Unlike in the case of BSCF-FS, the Pourbaix diagram of PBCO anticipates the cation disintegration of its perovskite structure, where all of the constituent cations are dissolved out into their solvated phases. Consequently, this is clearly reflected during the stability test (Figure Here, one has to recognize that the dissolution mechanisms during OER are also certainly kinetic processes which obviously cannot be deduced solely from Pourbaix diagrams since they only describe phases of catalysts under equilibrium conditions. In this essence, the electrocatalysts would undergo different mechanistic pathways during the OER process depending on the reaction kinetics, which can diverge from the observations drawn from Pourbaix diagrams. Therefore, operando XAS was employed in order to monitor electronic and structural changes associated to the perovskite catalyst during the OER process (Figure First, the amplitude of the Co-O peak is increased indicating that the absorbing atom is bounded by more oxygen atoms at that radial distance. This is further supported by the observed positive shift in the Co K-edge from its operando XANES (Figure Regarding the operando FT-EXAFS of PBCO-FS, however, the cation dissolution is not evidently highlighted when comparing the spectra observed at the initial and the final potentials of the anodic polarization as they do not show significant changes (see Figure Based on the region 8 of Figure Coincidentally, the estimated Co-Co distance of edge-sharing polyhedron of PBCO are close to that of CoO(OH) (≈2.5-2.7 Å).23 Therefore, the peak of the Co-Co coordination shell in FT-EXAFS of PBCO-FS could be attributed both to Co-Co edge-shared polyhedron scattering and to Co-Co scattering from Co-O(OH) species (see Figure Additional to the fundamental understanding of thermodynamics and the operando changes of the catalyst during the OER process, the practical performances of BSCF-FS and PBCO-FS are corroborated by adopting these perovskites as anodic electrode materials in a full AEMWE. Figure In this work, we assess the state-of-the-art perovskite catalysts-PBCO and BSCF-from a thermodynamic perspective that evaluates their OER performances for AEMWE. In this context, we first report remarkably enhanced OER performances of PBCO-FS and BSCF-FS in alkaline electrolyte, which attribute to their uniformly distributed nanoparticles and a capability to facilitate changes in their Co oxidation states imposed by the FS synthesis method. Although similar current densities were attained for both perovskite catalysts (13 and 11 A g -1 for PBCO-FS and BSCF-FS, respectively), their current density show diverging trends during the stability test, with BSCF-FS showing an exceptional long-term performance. In order to elucidate the observed stabilities and activities of PBCO and BSCF, DFTcalculated Pourbaix diagrams are constructed. First, the Pourbaix diagram describes that the BSCF perovskite structure is thermodynamically meta-stable in alkaline electrolyte above pH 12.6 within the OER potential range; its A-site cations (Ba and Sr) are partially dissolved while the initial perovskite structure is retained. On this basis, the high-mass activity of BSCF-FS in the alkaline electrolyte, therefore, can be thermodynamically rationalized. This explanation is consistently valid for the previously reported behavior of BSCF.[3] In the case of PBCO, a decreasing trend of current density was observed which confirmed its thermodynamic instability as anticipated by the Pourbaix diagram. From the above findings, important remarks are drawn relating thermodynamically stable phases of perovskite catalysts to their respective functional stability. First, the loss of initial activity during the stability test corresponds to the loss of perovskite structure as a result of A-and B-site cation dissolutions. Exceptionally, BSCF is considered to be meta-stable while allowing its perovskite structure to serve as the substrate for the active oxy(hydroxide) to self-construct. This has been corroboratively confirmed by the results gathered from operando XAS study, which the comparison of FT-EXAFS spectra revealed evident growth of the peak associated with the active CoO(OH) species. This is further supported by the increase of oxidation state recorded from reading the energy shift of Co K-edge during operando study. On the other hand, in the case of PBCO-FS, the overlapping of Co-Co radial distance between those of CoO(OH) species and edge-sharing Co polyhedron veils the reading of geometric structural changes of the perovskite catalyst. However, an increase of the Co oxidation state of PBCO-FS was manifested below the oxygen evolution potential regime, suggesting the occurrence of chemical dissolution processes. Overall, insights into the dissolution mechanism of PBCO-FS is vital in order to completely understand its functional stability and activity towards OER as these processes are intertwined. Even though the cation dissolution is driven by thermodynamic forces, one should keep in mind that the dissolution is not an immediate process but occurs at a kinetically controlled rate. Therefore, kinetic parameters need to be clearly identified in order to come to a full understanding of OER activity of a perovskite oxide catalyst. Overall, the thermodynamically stable phases illustrated by a Pourbaix diagram show the most stable phase that a perovskite would transform into, but does not describe the transformation pathway. It is along this pathway that the OER activity of a perovskite catalyst is transpired, from which the understanding of its electrocatalytic behavior should hence be referred. Based on the knowledge obtained from this investigation, the degradation mechanism of perovskite oxides is the key to fully understand its functional stability during the electrochemical reactions, which then can be also related to its activity. The presented approach of unraveling the relationships between functional stability, structure, and activity of perovskite oxides during OER will pave the way for optimizing an active perovskite catalyst for technical applications. Material Syntheses: For the preparation of the PBCO precursor solution, stoichiometric amounts of praseodymium oxide (Pr6O11, 99.9%, Auer Remy) were dissolved in water and 5 vol.% nitric acid (70%, Alfa Aesar) at 80 °C, before mixing with stoichiometric amounts of barium carbonate (≥99.0%, Sigma-Aldrich) and cobalt nitrate hexahydrate (99.9%, Auer Remy), acetic acid (≥99.0%, Fluka) in 25 vol.%, and N,N-Dimethylformamide (≥99.8%, Roth) in 45 vol.%. The total metal concentration in solution was fixed to 0.1 M. The BSCF precursor solution was prepared by dissolving stoichiometric amounts of barium carbonate (≥99.0%, Sigma-Aldrich), strontium nitrate (≥98%, Sigma-Aldrich), cobalt nitrate hexahydrate (99.9%, Auer Remy), and iron nitrate non-ahydrate (≥98%, Sigma-Aldrich) in a solution of de-ionized water (DIW) and acetic acid (≥99.0%, Fluka) 25 vol. %. The total metal concentration in solution was fixed to 0.2 M. For all the syntheses, the flow rate of dispersing oxygen was fixed at 35 mL min -1 , while the flow rates of the combustion gases were fixed at 17 and 13 mL min -1 for the mixture of oxygen and acetylene. Material Characterizations: Phase characterization of prepared materials was performed using powder XRD (Bruker D8 system in Bragg-Brentano geometry, Cu K-α radiation (λ = 0.15418 nm)). Specific surface area was calculated by BET analysis of N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms (AUROSORB-1, Quantachrome). TEM and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (TECNAI F30 operated at 300 kV) were used to study the surface morphology and composition of the prepared materials. Electrochemical Characterization: The electrochemical activities of the prepared catalysts were evaluated in a standard three-electrode electrochemical cell using the thin-film RDE methodology. The setup for OER and CV consists of a potentiostat (Biologic VMP-300) and a rotation speed controlled motor (Pine Instrument Co., AFMSRCE). All the electrochemical measurements were performed at the standard room temperature using a reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) as the reference electrode in 0.1 M KOH. A piece of gold mesh was used as the counter electrode separated via a salt bridge. A homemade Teflon cell was used to contain the electrolyte with the working electrode immersed under potential control. A porous thin film electrode was prepared by drop-casting a catalyst ink on a polished glassy carbon electrode (5 mm OD/0.196 cm 2 ).26 The catalyst ink was prepared from a catalyst suspension made from sonicating (Bandelin, RM 16 UH, 300 Weff, 40 kHz) 10 mg of catalyst in a solution mixture of 4 mL isopropyl alcohol and 1 mL of Milli-Q water (ELGA, PURELAB Chorus), and 20 μL of Nafion (Sigma-Aldrich, 5 wt. %). The same method of preparation of the working electrode was used for all the samples. The 0.1 M KOH electrolyte was prepared by dissolving KOH pellets (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.99%) in Milli-Q water. Initially, 25 reverse potentiostatic sweeps of CV were performed in synthetic air-saturated electrolyte from 1.0 to 1.7 VRHE at a scan rate of 10 mV s -1 . Subsequently, chronoamperometric measurements were carried out holding each potential step for 30 s to obtain steady-state currents in the potential range from 1.2 to 1.7 VRHE while rotating the working electrode at 900 rpm. Tafel plots were constructed from the resulting polarization curves for all materials under study for an effective comparison of OER activities. The potential stability of catalyst materials was conducted using the same setup; alternating electrode potential between 1.0 and 1.6 VRHE for 500 times holding for 10 s each to reach steady state at each potential. Five cycles of CV and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) were carried out after every 100 cycles. All measured currents were normalized by the mass of catalyst loading, and potentials were corrected for the ohmic drop obtained from EIS. Alkaline Exchange Membrane Water Electrolyzer Test: For the MEA, each anodic catalyst (BSCF-FS, PBCO-FS, and commercial IrO2) and cathode catalyst (Pt) were prepared by mixing the catalyst with water, isopropanol, and ionomer into an ink.27 The ink also consisted of a non-functional binder in addition to the ionomer supplied by Tokuyama. The ink was made in several stages, with stirring in between each stage. The catalyst ink mixture was then sprayed onto the gas diffusion layer (GDL, Tokuyama) substrate using an airbrush to form gas diffusion electrodes (GDE). GDE's generally contained total catalyst loading of 3 mg cm -2 , and GDE composition was measured by mass change of the GDL. The cathode GDL's were carbon paper, while the anode GDL's were made from a titanium porous transport layer, which titanium oxide was purchased from Umicore AG & Co KG. Electrolysis testing was conducted using a modified 25 cm 2 Fuel Cell Technologies cell, where the graphite flow field on the oxygen evolution side was replaced with a stainless steel parallel channel flow field for stability at high electrolysis potentials. The cell was assembled by placing the appropriate GDE on each side of the anion exchange membrane (Tokuyama A201). The MEA was assembled using Tefzel gaskets and by applying 4.52 Nm torque to the bolts. GDE's and membrane were exchanged in 0.5 M sodium hydroxide solution for 1 h prior to testing. The cell was supplied either with DIW on the anode side of the cell only. The cathode side was not pressurized and no sweep gas was used. The temperature was maintained at 50 °C during operation. After the cell reached the operating temperature, galvanodynamic test was carried out to obtain a polarization curve, and then a galvanostatic test was carried out at 500 mA cm -2 to assess initial stability. Operando Flow Cell Test: For XAS measurements, catalyst powders were dispersed in a mixture of isopropanol and Milli-Q water in the equal ratio sonicated for 30 min, and spray coated on Kapton film. XAS spectra at the Co and Fe K-edge were recorded at the SuperXAS beamline of the Swiss Light Source (PSI, Villigen, Switzerland). The incident photon beam provided by a 2.9 T superbend magnet source was collimated by a Si-coated mirror at 2.85 mRad (which also served to reject higher harmonics) and subsequently monochromatized by an Si (111) channel-cut monochromator. Rh-coated toroidal mirror at 2.5 mRad to focus the X-ray beam to a spot size of Ø 1 mm on the sample position. The SuperXAS beamline28 allowed for the rapid collection of 120 spectra during a measurement time of 60 s (QEXAFS mode), which were then averaged. The spectra of samples were collected in transmission mode using N2 filled ionization chambers, where a Co foil between the second and third ionization chambers served to calibrate and align all spectra. EXAFS spectra were analyzed using the Demeter software package,29 which included background subtraction, energy calibration (based on the simultaneously measured Co or Fe reference foil), and edge step normalization. The resulting spectra were converted to the photoelectron wavevector k (in units Å -1 ) by assigning the photoelectron energy origin, E0, corresponding to k = 0, to the first inflection point. The resulting χ(k) functions were weighted with k 3 to compensate for the dampening of the EXAFS amplitude with increasing k. These χ(k) functions were FT over 3-12 Å -1 . The electrode materials were spray coated at the center of a Kapton film. Black Pearls (Cabot Corp.) were used as the counter electrode material. A silver chloride electrode (Ag + /AgCl) (Hugo Sachs Elektronik) was used as the reference electrode. During electrochemical testing, the electrolyte was drawn into the cell and collected in a syringe at the flow rate of 0.1 mL min -1 . The chronoamperometry measurement was carried out holding for 2 min at each increasing potential step from 1.2 to 1.54 VRHE, and again during the reverse sequence back to 1.2 VRHE. At each potential step, transmission XAS spectra at Co K-edge were collected simultaneously for 1 min. The position of the Co K-edge is determined at the half edge-step intensity. The operando XAS flow cell was described in detail in our previous study. 