In this work, the polymerization of Limonene Oxide (LO) has been achieved using an Earth abundant metal-based catalyst developed in our group, that is very active in ring opening polymerization (ROP) processes. The bio-based polylimonene ether (PLO) obtained had low molecular weight and good thermal properties, thus being a potential green polymeric additive for other bio-based polymers such as PLA. Hence, we have explored its ability to influence PLA properties. The addition of only 10 wt %, led to the modification and improvement of PLA properties in terms of flexibility, thermal stability, and hydrophobicity. The results obtained are promising and open up the potential industrial application of polylimonene oxide (PLO) for the melt-processing of blends based on PLA/PLO. These new materials are totally based on renewable sources and may be interesting for many applications where biodegradability and reduced water adsorption is required, such as food packaging or agricultural mulch films. Renewable resources are increasingly used in the production of chemicals, additives, and plastics. The synthesis of green polymers from biomass-derived monomers such as lactide, terpenoids, vegetable oils, epoxidized natural rubber and so on, is gaining more and more attention in recent years, due to the increased demand of sustainable alternatives for petroleum-based polymers Among those renewable feedstocks, terpene derived epoxides are potential monomers for the synthesis of green polyethers and polyesters by catalytic ring opening polymerization (ROP) There are quite a few studies reported on the copolymerization of LO with anhydrides However, low molecular polymers can be used as additives. The demand for non-toxic, environmentally friendly, and biodegradable green-plasticizers, for food and medical packaging has been constantly increasing in the past few years. In fact, plasticizers are among the most important functional additives required for the processing of biopolymers, such as polylactic acid (PLA) and starch In particular, PLA is a biodegradable polymer derived from renewable resources with very attractive properties, i.e. excellent mechanical properties, biocompatibility and good 3 transparency but its brittleness and rigidity impede its application in many fields, thus, additives are needed Plasticizer are typically low molecular weight polymers or oligomers which are used to improve flexibility, plasticity and processability of a polymeric matrix epoxidized oils In our previous work In this article, we have explored the activity of this highly active aryloxide aluminium derivative, in the catalytic ROP of LO to obtain green and bio-based additives for PLA. These studies have allowed us to synthetize polylimonene oxide (PLO) by catalytic ROP. The capability of the PLO prepared as potential plasticizer and additive for PLA has been evaluated. The miscibility, morphology, thermal properties, and wettability of the obtained blends have also been investigated. Materials. AlClMe2 (0.9 M in heptane) and (+)-Limonene oxide (43.5 % cisisomer and 56.5 % trans-isomer, calculated by NMR analysis) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Poly(lactic acid) (PLA) 3051D, with a specific gravity of 1.25 g cm -3 , a molecular weight (Mn) of ca. 1.42 x 10 4 g mol -1 , and a melt flow index (MFI) of 7.75 g 10 min -1 (210 °C, 2.16 kg) was supplied by Nature Works®, USA. Polymerization procedure of (+)-Limonene. The monomer was purified by vacuum distillation using CaH2 as drying agent. Once purified, it was stored at -20 °C under Ar and in the absence of light. The catalyst (0.011 g, 0.02 mmol) was dissolved in the (+)-Limonene oxide (0.818 ml, 5.0 mmol) in the glovebox. The polymerization was done in bulk, under inert ambient and magnetic stirring at 130 °C and at different reaction times At the end of the polymerization one aliquot was taken and quenched with wet CDCl3 to determine the conversion of cis-(+)-Limonene in polymer by 1 H-NMR. The conversion was determined by the integration of the signal of the monomer cis versus monomer trans, in comparison to the ratio in the starting monomer 1 H NMR spectrum. The residual unreacted monomer and active catalyst could influence the macroscopic properties of the polymer obtained. Thus, the polymeric samples were purified by washing the remaining monomer and catalyst using acidified methanol (1 M solution of HCl in methanol) and the precipitated polymers were filtrated by standard Buckner filtration. Finally, they were dried in a vacuum oven at 40°C overnight. The final product was characterized by NMR and IR spectroscopies (general procedures are reported in Supporting Information). PLA/PLO film preparation. PLA and PLO were blended by dissolving the polymers in chloroform. PLO, used as a green additive, was added to the PLA matrix at three different concentrations, 10, 20 and 30 wt % relative to the mass of PLA. The thin films were obtained by solvent casting method in a glass petri dish and evaporated at room temperature under ventilation for 24 h to obtain films with a thickness of about 100 μm. The obtained samples were named as PLA10PLO, PLA20PLO and PLA30PLO for the three different blends, thus emphasizing the respective PLO content. An unplasticized sample was prepared in the same way for comparison and it was named PLA. Thermal and morphological analysis. The thermal characterization was performed by dynamic differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) analysis and by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). For DSC measurements a Mettler Toledo DSC822e instrument was used performing heating/cooling/heating cycles program in the range of -40 to 200 °C with a heating/cooling rate of 10 °C/min and run under nitrogen purge (30 mL/min). The glass transition temperature (Tg) was calculated from the second heating scan and was taken at the mid-point of heat capacity changes. The melting temperature (Tm) and cold crystallization temperature (Tcc) were obtained from the second heating, and the degree of crystallinity (χc) was determined by using Equation (1): where ΔHm is the enthalpy of fusion, ΔHcc is the enthalpy of cool crystallization, ∆H m 100 is the enthalpy of fusion of a 100 % crystalline PLA, taken as 93 J/g. and 1-mf is the weight fraction of PLA in the sample. The TGA measurements were carried out using a TA-TGA Q500 analyzer. The experiments were performed using about 10 milligrams of sample from room temperature to 700 °C at 10 °C/min under nitrogen atmosphere (60 mL/min). The morphology of the samples previously sputter-coated with gold was studied by a Scanning Electron Microscopy (ZEISS DSM-950 instrument) operating at 25 kV. The wettability and hydrophobicity of the samples surface was tested using an optical contact angle meter (Krüss DSA25 Drop Shape Analysis System) operating at room temperature. Samples were placed on the test cell and drops of distilled water were placed on the surfaces by the delivering syringe. We performed the polymerization reaction of (+)-limonene oxide (LO) using [AlClMeOR] as catalyst, in bulk at 250:1 Mon:Cat ratio and checked the evolution at different times (Scheme 1). The aluminium compound proved to be a very active catalyst for the ROP and was able to polymerize LO in 30 minutes. Scheme 1. Catalytic polymerization of (+)-limonene oxide. In the reaction only the cis monomer was polymerized, while the trans isomer was left intact. This behaviour is somehow opposite to the one described by Coates and others in the copolymerization processes where only the trans isomer reacts In the FTIR spectra (Figure The polymers obtained have low molecular weights, up to 1300 Da, and moderate polydispersities (1.37-1.42) (table The limitation in the Mn obtained could be attributed to the presence of charge transfer agents (CTA) generated in lateral reactions. Several side reactions have been reported for LO in the presence of Lewis acids, such as the rearrangement described by Duchateau to a ketone and an allylic alcohol shown in Figure 3 Figure A MALDI-TOF study showed two major types of endcaps for the polymers (Figure The other end group includes a water molecule which could account for the diol coming from the reaction of the LO with water, peak at m/Z = 801.4 Da, (Figure In the ROP of other epoxides using [AlClMeOR] as catalyst the mechanism observed was coordination insertion, and when no other co-initiator is used, as in this case, the end group was the phenol ligand, as detected by mass spectra Aiming to apply the synthetized PLO as a new bio-based and environmental-friendly additive for blending with PLA and improve its properties, we chose the PLO obtained after 30 min of reaction since it showed complete conversion of LO cis-isomer and it has the lower polydispersity (1.37). The miscibility of a blend and consequently the phase behavior are key parameters to define its compatibility and how the properties of the blended polymers can change. Thus, when an additive is applied to a polymeric matrix, the study of the miscibility of this new blend is required as a crucial characterization to forecast the possible improvement of the matrix properties. There are many techniques to characterize the miscibility of a polymeric blend. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) is one of the most widely used since it is able to indicate the number of phases present in a blend detecting the Tg of the studied system However, the calculation of the crystallinity degree shows that all the samples are totally amorphous (χc<5%). The morphologies of the cryo-fractured surface of the blends were also analyzed in order to evaluate the thermodynamic miscibility and the phase separation by SEM analysis. As shown in Figure These results confirm the thermodynamic miscibility of the blend PLA/PLO, previously discussed, although they highlight a partial phase separated morphology composed by a PLO-rich phase dispersed into the PLA matrix that was not detectable by DSC measurements. Similar results in terms of thermal properties and morphology were previously observed for other systems in literature Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) experiments were also performed to investigate the thermal stability of the neat polymers and their blends, the results are showed in Figure Moreover, the addition of 10 wt % of PLO to PLA matrix did not affect the Tmax, which was maintained around 360 °C. However, for a higher amount of PLO the Tmax decreased of about 10 and 20 °C for PLA20PLO and PLA30PLO, respectively. Similar results were obtained for PLA/limonene systems However, it is observed that the incorporation of 10 wt % of PLO in the PLA film provides a slight increase in its hydrophobicity from 77° to 88° due to the hydrophobic character of PLO (Figure FTIR spectra were recorded for neat PLA and PLO as well as for their blends in order to investigate the chemical structure of the films and to study their characteristic peaks (Figure belonging to the C-C-O groups. Moreover, bending frequencies for -CH3 have been identified at 1452, 1380 and 1359 cm -1 Meanwhile, PLO shows the characteristic stretching frequency of C=C at 1642 cm -1 while the deformation frequency of CH2 and CH3 were detected at 1452, 1436 and 1373 cm -1 , respectively. Furthermore, the band related to the C-O group was observed at 1067 as well as a broad peak at 3434 cm -1 , which corresponds to terminal hydroxyl group of PLO The aluminium ROP catalyst [AlClMeOR], (OR = 2,6-bis(diphenylmethyl)-4-tertbutylphenoxide) developed in our group is an active catalyst for the polymerization of LO, which allowed us to obtain poly limonene oxide totally derived from renewable sources. The polyether obtained had a low molecular weight and good thermal properties being a promising green additive for other bioplastics. When testing its ability to modify PLA, just with a blend of 10 wt %, PLO was able to modify and improve PLA properties in terms of flexibility, thermal stability, and hydrophobicity. The results showed that PLO is stable within the range of PLA melting processing and opens its application as industrial plasticizer. Moreover, due to their increased hydrophobicity, PLA/PLO blends are also expected to have higher resistance to water adsorption than neat PLA. Thus, these new materials may be interesting for many applications where reduced water adsorption is required. Further studies on the influence of the microstructure of the PLO are ongoing as well as on the mechanical properties of the blend.