Ferromagnetic Co 2 MnGa has recently attracted significant attention due to effects related to nontrivial topology of its band structure, however a systematic study of canonical magneto-galvanic transport effects is missing. Focusing on high quality thin films, here we systematically measure anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR) and its thermoelectric counterpart (AMTP). We model the AMR data by free energy minimisation within the Stoner-Wohlfarth formalism and conclude that both crystalline and non-crystalline components of this magneto-transport phenomenon are present in Co 2 MnGa. Unlike the AMR which is small in relative terms (∼ 0.1%), the AMTP is large due to a change of sign of the Seebeck coefficient as a function of temperature. This fact is discussed in the context of the Mott rule and further analysis of AMTP components is presented. Electron transport phenomena in magnetically ordered materials span a vast range both historically and from the point of view of complexity. While some of them which have been known for a long time, such as the anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR) In this work, we extend the discussion also to effects which occur when magnetic field is applied in the sample plane. The studied thin film of Heusler alloy Co 2 MnGa represents an ideal model system because of its high crystalline quality, relatively strong magneto-thermal response, its high Curie temperature (T C = 694 K) and high spin polarisation Both AMR and AMTP refer to voltage variation as a function of the angle between magnetization and the driving force (electrical current j in case of AMR and temperature gradient ∇T in case of AMTP) or the angle between magnetization and the crystal axes in the respective setting. Although they could probe similar physical properties, there are many more reports about AMR than about AMTP, mostly due to experimental challenges in measuring AMTP. In the following, we give a brief introduction of both. Since the original observation of AMR by William Thomson AMTP is the thermoelectrical counterpart of AMR. The basic phenomenon (voltage drop induced by a temperature gradient) was discovered by T.J. Seebeck already in 1821, thus establishing the field of thermoelectrics. Hints at its anisotropy came much later Recent thermoelectric studies in solid state magnetism focus mostly on the evaluation of Σ (the Seebeck coefficient where ∆Σ yy is the difference between Σ yy and its average. These relations pertinent to polycrystalline materials can be straightforwardly derived by angular averaging the Seebeck tensor as given by Eq. 3.31 in Ref. In contrast to ANE, the AMTP is rarely a topic of systematic studies; with few exceptions This makes the AMTP experiment significantly more challenging than a simple resistivity measurement with a well-defined current direction. The thermal gradient quantification is even more complex in thin film samples where the substrate acts as a heat sink. The lack of detailed understanding of AMTP becomes obvious when considering systems with various contributions to AMR. In particular, very few reports show more complex symmetry of AMTP The Co 2 MnGa thin-film samples are fabricated by magnetron sputtering on MgO(001) substrates using a multisource Bestec UHV deposition system from Co, Mn and MnGa sputter targets. Growth and post-growth annealing was performed at 500 • C. After the Co 2 MnGa thin-film growth, 3 nm of Al were deposited at room temperature to prevent oxidation. Further details of the growth procedure can be found elsewhere While bulk Co 2 MnGa has a cubic L2 1 crystal structure the thin-films exhibit an epitaxial strain-induced tetragonal distortion with slight contraction along the out of plane [001] direction. Resulting c/a ratio is around 0.99 The phenomenological model used in this work was previously employed by Limmer et al. z because the cubic anisotropy can be neglected (FMR measurements The resistivity tensor is obtained by making a series expansion in powers of cartesian components of m up to the fourth order. This ansatz was first developed by Birss and Muduli et al. and applied for example where ρ ijk , ρ ijkl , ρ ijklm and ρ ijklmn are the expansion coefficients and magnetisation direction components The number of independent parameters is reduced owing to m k m l = m l m k , the Onsager relation ρ ij (m) = ρ ji (-m) and Neumann's principle The last mentioned is tetragonal in our case, whereas the tetragonal axis is in z-direction, since the thin-film samples are strained by the MgO substrate (see Sec. II). The complete form of the resistivity tensor is not needed for the further process and can be found in the Appendix. The longitudinal resistivity ρ long is obtained by projecting the resistivity tensor ρ along the current direction by making use of Ohm's law E = ρ • J and E long = j • E, where J is the current density vector and j = J/J is the corresponding unit vector, in our case (1, 1, 0) = y. The projection writes as: The longitudinal resistivity ρ yy in our configuration is therefore given by: where ρ 0 is the offset resistivity, a y2 and a z2 are the coefficients of the lowest-order AMR terms, a y4 , a zy2 and a z4 are the coefficients of the higher-order AMR terms and m y and m z are the y-and z-component of m in the coordinate system {x, y, z} as introduced above. The derivation of the longitudinal Seebeck coefficient Σ yy is analogous to the resistivity. The only difference is here that the Onsager relation connects the Seebeck tensor with the Peltier tensor and thus cannot be used to reduce the number of independent parameters. Hence, Σ yy contains an additional term: where analogously Σ 0 is the thermoelectric offset, s y2 and s z2 are the coefficients of the lowest-order AMTP terms and s y4 , s z4 , s zy2 and s zyx are the coefficients of the higher-order AMTP terms. Since the magnetic field is going to be rotated in either the XY-, the ZY-or the ZX-plane and amongst the anisotropies only the out-of-plane uniaxial term is significant, one of the m i is in every plane expected to be zero (e.g. m x in the ZY-plane), the term x is expected to be zero in every of our rotation planes and is thus ignored. Hence, the AMR and AMTP formulae contain the same terms in our measurement setup. We note that for polycrystals, only the first two terms in Eq. ( In the following, we will analyse experimental AMR and AMTP data using Eqs. ( Experimental data (symbols) and fits using the phenomenological model (lines) for both AMR and AMTP in the 50 nm sample are shown in panels (b), (d) and (f) of Fig. The phenomenological fit to AMR data (blue crosses in Fig. Inferred RT values of k u (438 and 416 kJ/m 3 for the 40 and 50 nm sample, respectively) are in a good agreement with ferromagnetic resonance measurements carried out independently Temperature dependences of the AMR parameters are shown in Fig. Such observations, however, lack any universal validity. Trends regarding the order of magnitude or the sign of the coefficients can be observed, yet they cannot be generalized. This is also confirmed by results of similar studies in Co 2 FeAl To fit the AMTP data, we used a procedure analogous to fitting AMR except for the anisotropy constant k u : this parameter has already been determined before and we now kept it fixed. Note, that due to the on-chip heating the actual temperature might be slightly different than indicated. However since the change of k u with temperature is small, it does not change the accuracy of our approach. Given our measurement geometry, m x m y m z = 0 at all times, hence Eq. ( In Fig. As mentioned in Sec. I, the sign of Σ 0 is attributed to the dominant charge carrier type, which are electrons for Σ 0 < 0. A negative Seebeck coefficient is reported not only in Co 2 MnGa, but in Co-based Heusler compounds in general However, other scenarios are also plausible which we discuss in the next subsection and we now turn our attention to the AMTP. We notice that neither s y2 nor s z2 , whose temperature dependence is shown in Fig. From our study it appears that comparing the lowest-order parameters, no common trend can be found between the AMR parameters and their respective AMTP counterpart when looking at the temperature dependence. Moreover, in case of the ZX rotation (see Fig. The fact, that in two different systems the AMR and the AMTP follow different trends is, however, a strong indication, that there might be a more fundamental reason behind this discrepancy such as the suppressed role of anisotropic scattering in the AMTP, which calls for further investigation; below, we discuss one possible direction of such tentative research. Electron and heat transport linear response coefficients are tensorial quantities which obey Onsager relations and set j = 0. Under the assumption of elastic scattering, the Mott rule holds (still in tensorial sense) where ρσ = 1 and the prime denotes the derivative with respect to energy E at chemical potential. For semiconductors, this derivative can be straightforwardly accessed through carrier-density-dependent conductivity Let us first assume that ρ which depends both on E and M can be written as Eq. ( On a careful inspection however, we notice that AMR and AMTP amplitudes in the left and middle panels of Fig. We note that thermopower is strongly temperature-dependent (data in Fig. This explanation is related to the phonon drag contribution to thermopower which is not included in the Mott formula Regarding Fig. V. SUMMARY In this study, we compared the AMR and AMTP in two Co 2 MnGa-thin-film samples using a simple Free Energy density and phenomenological symmetry-based models for AMR and AMTP based on a series expansion in powers of the magnetization direction vector m. We showed that non-zero resistivity-contributions up to 4th order are necessary for a sensible modeling, where in the AMTP only lowest-order contributions are necessary. The AMR and AMTP are not showing any trends in common, which is consistent with previous studies in (Ga, Mn)As. We experimentally confirm presence of a crystalline contribution to the AMTP. It appears that the universal Mott rule validity is broken due to a discrepancy of the symmetries of AMR and AMTP in one rotation plane. This discrepancy was discussed in terms of a significant phonon (magnon) drag contribution to thermopower, which might be the origin of such a discrepancy. The results of this study call for further enquiry: First of all, we need to broaden our understanding about the origins and governing influences in AMR, but also in AMTP. Theoretical studies discussing influences in AMTP similar to whose about AMR are desirable. Experimental studies using sets of samples which are systematic with respect to strain, composition or other influences can help us also along this way. which does not appear in ρ long the in-plane geometry (it corresponds to the anomalous Hall effect). The lowest non-trivial order thus becomes The third-order terms, ρ ijklm , again do not contribute in Eq. ( which gives rise to the last term in Eq. ( 