Superconducting cavity electro-optics (EO) presents a promising route to coherently convert microwave and optical photons and distribute quantum entanglement between superconducting circuits over long-distance through an optical network. High EO conversion efficiency demands transduction materials with strong Pockels effect and excellent optical transparency. Thin-film Lithium Niobate (TFLN) offers these desired characteristics however so far has only delivered unidirectional conversion with efficiencies on the order of 10 -5 , largely impacted by its prominent photorefractive (PR) effect at cryogenic temperatures. Here we show that, by mitigating the PR effect and associated charge-screening effect, the device's conversion efficiency can be enhanced by orders of magnitude while maintaining stable cryogenic operation, thus allowing a demonstration of conversion bidirectionality and accurate quantification of on-chip efficiency. With the optimized monolithic integrated superconducting EO device based on TFLNon-sapphire substrate, an on-chip conversion efficiency of 1.02% (internal efficiency, 15.2%) is realized. Our demonstration indicates that with further device improvement, it is feasible for TFLN to approach unitary internal conversion efficiency. With superconducting qubits recently emerging as one of the most promising platforms for quantum computation Without relying on intermediate excitations to assist the conversion process, the cavity electro-optics (EO) system directly utilizes the Pockels nonlinearity of the material to realize microwave-to-optical conversion The efficiency of cavity EO conversion critically relies on the strength of Pockels nonlinearity and the optical transparency of the transduction materials. Among the few Pockels materials other than AlN, thin-film Lithium Niobate (TFLN) is the most promising candidate because of its excellent optical properties In this article, we demonstrate a hybrid cavity EO converter based on TFLN optical cavities and superconducting niobium nitride (NbN) resonator reaching 1.02% on-chip efficiency and 15.2% internal efficiency. The PR effect and charge-screening effects in TFLN are mitigated by a significant margin by incorporating new microwave and optical resonator designs. High conversion efficiency is achieved at elevated pump power levels while maintaining stable device operation at cryogenic temperatures. The improved efficiency and stability not only lead to a demonstration of the desired bidirectional conversion process but also enable the measurement of the converter's full scattering matrix for accurate calibration of the system conversion efficiency. Currently, our device is limited by the use of high-throughput, albeit low-efficient grating couplers and the parasitic loss of microwave resonator due to radio frequency (RF) packaging. With further device improvement in light coupling and cryogenic packaging, we project that the TFLN EO converter could approach unitary internal conversion efficiency and provide a highly competitive transduction platform for future quantum network applications. Figure This triply-resonant enhanced EO conversion scheme, as illustrated in Fig. Here, a, b and c denote annihilation operators for the optical pump, signal and microwave modes, respectively. g eo denotes the vacuum EO interaction strength, which in turn is determined by the mode volume, triple-mode overlap and the Pockels coefficient. The optical frequency doublet (Fig. To initiate quantum frequency conversion, the lowerfrequency supermode in the photonic molecule, i.e. the antisymmetric optical mode a, is loaded with a strong pump to produce a photon-number enhanced electro-optical linear conversion. The advantage of the cavity enhanced coherent conversion is quantified by the cooperativity C = 4n p g 2 eo /κ b κ c , where n p is the intracavity pump photon number and κ b , κ c are the total energy loss rates for modes b and c, receptively. By fine-tuning of the DC bias, the frequency splitting of the optical doublet can be tuned to match the microwave resonance frequency, and fulfill the triply-resonant condition (ω a + ω c = ω b ). Under this ideal condition, the on-chip peak conversion efficiency is given by, (2) Here, κ b,ex (κ c,ex ) is the external loss rates for mode b (c), and 2 is the internal conversion efficiency. Optimal conversion is achieved when C = 1, and the corresponding on-chip efficiency is eventually limited by the extraction ratio κ b,ex κ c,ex /κ b κ c . As indicated by Eq. 2, the EO conversion efficiency η is proportional to pump photon number. One of the major obstacles hindering high conversion efficiency on TFLN platform is the strong PR effect and associated charge-screening effect, which limit achievable intracavity pump power Here we briefly outline the device fabrication process, which starts with 600 nm-thick TFLN bonded on a sapphire substrate (supplied by NANOLN). Figures Prior to cryogenic packaging, the as-fabricated device dies are characterized separately in microwave and optical domains. A pair of grating couplers designed for TE polarized light is used to couple light in and out the device. The average intrinsic quality (Q) factor of the fundamental TE modes of the microring resonator is measured to be ∼ 9 × 10 5 . For the microwave readout, we utilize a coaxial cable terminated with a hoop antenna In the final EO conversion package, additional microwave loss also arises from the cryogenic optical interfaces required to accommodate the fiber array. The fiber array is manipulated by a set of attocubes for precision alignment, preventing the use of a fully closed copper box. A copper box with open lid is utilized instead, similar to the configuration previously used in AlN microwave-to-optics experiment The schematic setup for EO conversion measurement is presented in Fig. able telecom laser (Santec 710) amplified by erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) is tuned to the anti-symmetric mode (lower frequency supermode) frequency as a parametric pump. In order to compensate for the residual PR-induced slow resonance frequency drift, 1% of the transmitted light from the device is sampled to provide wavelength feedback to the laser through its build-in piezo. RF signal from a vector network analyzer (VNA) is either directly sent to the device as the microwave signal input or used to generate the optical signal input through optical single-sideband modulation where S eo,p and S eo,p are the peaks of conversion spectra, S oo,bg and S oo,bg are the backgrounds of reflection spectra, respectively. We gradually increase the on-chip pump power from -12.0 dBm to boost the on-chip conversion efficiency which is obtained from the above-mentioned calibration method. Considering the loss and coupling characteristics of microwave and optical cavities, we could also extract the internal conversion efficiency η int and thus cooperativity C from Eqn. 2 under different pump power, as shown in Fig. The maximum on-chip conversion efficiency of 1.02% (internal efficiency of 15.2%) is extracted with a peak pump power adjusted to 13.0 dBm in the waveguides. The corresponding cooperativity reach a value of 0.041, which is significantly higher than the recent reported values According to Eqn. 2, the conversion performance of our current devices is mostly limited by the microwave Q affected by device packaging for cryogenic operation. The microwave Q, when measured on die-level, shows significantly higher value (∼ 10 4 ) compared to prior works In conclusion, we demonstrate that it is possible to mitigate the most detrimental PR effect and charge-screening effects in TFLN and achieve conversion efficiency up to 1.02% maintaining stable device operation at cryogenic temperatures. Such stable operation at cryogenic temperature not only allows us to reach high conversion efficiency but also is fundamentally critical for quantum applications such as generation of entangled microwave and optical photon pairs, conversion of non-classical photon states from the microwave to optical domain along with entanglement transfer Funding. This work is funded by ARO under grant number W911NF-18-1-0020. HXT acknowledges partial supports from NSF (EFMA-1640959), ARO (W911NF-19-2-0115) and the Packard Foundation. Funding for substrate materials used in this research was provided by DOE/BES grant under award number DE-SC0019406.