Metal contacts to two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors are ubiquitous in modern electronic and optoelectronic devices. Such contacts are, however, often plagued by strong Fermi level pinning (FLP) effect which reduces the tunability of the Schottky barrier height (SBH) and degrades the performance of 2D-semiconductor-based devices. In this work, we show that monolayer MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4a recently synthesized 2D material class with exceptional mechanical and electronic propertiesexhibit strongly suppressed FLP and widerange tunable SBH when contacted by metals. An exceptionally large SBH slope parameter of S=0.7 is obtained, which outperform the vast majority of other 2D semiconductors. Such surprising behavior arises from the unique morphology of MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4. The outlying Si-N layer forms a native atomic layer that protects the semiconducting inner-core from the perturbance of metal contacts, thus suppressing the FLP. Our findings reveal the potential of MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 monolayers as a novel 2D material platform for designing highperformance and energy-efficient 2D nanodevices. Introductions. Electrical contacts between metals and semiconductors are ubiquitous in modern electronic and optoelectronic devices. An interfacial potential barrier, known as the Schottky barrier (SB), is commonly formed at the metal/semiconductor interface. In electronics and optoelectronics applications, the presence of a sizable SB, typically larger than a few k B T, can severely impede the charge injection efficiency In a metal/semiconductor contact, SBH arises from the mismatch between the metal work function (W M ) and the semiconductor electron affinity E ea (n-type Schottky contact) or ionization potential E ip (p-type Schottky contact). Taking into account the inevitable presence of metal/semiconductor interactions and interfacial defects, the SBH across a metal/semiconductor contact can be phenomenologically captured by the modified Schottky-Mott (SM) rule Φ Bh = S(E ip -W M ) + c h In the few-atom-thick limit, two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors, such as MoS2 and WS2 optoelectronics In this work, we perform a first-principle density functional theory (DFT) investigation and Ohmic contacts (Fig. 2(f) and 3(f)], while the mid-gap states between the VBM and CBM are mostly located in the metals and a sparsely distributed in the outlying Si-N layers. In addition, the differential charge density (Δρ) reveals a significant charge redistribution across the metal/semiconductor contact interface [Figs. Importantly, the absence of mid-gap states in the inner core layer and the finite charge transfer at the outlying Si-N layers reveals that the metal/semiconductor interaction affects mostly the outlying S-N layers, predominantly via charge redistribution, without penetrating the semiconducting Mo-N and W-N inner cores. Here the Si-N layer serves as an encapsulating layer and plays a vital role in preserving the semiconducting characteristics of MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 monolayers. To verify the protective effect of S-N layers, we simulate a close contact type of Au/MoSi2N4 and Au/WSi2N4 heterostructures The electron tunneling probability across the interface is calculated as, where m e is the free electron mass. The T(Φ TB , d TB ) calculated via Eq. ( Particularly for Sc and Ti, both Φ TB and Φ B are zero in both MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 monolayers an indication of good Ohmic contacts with high charge injection efficiency. In contrast, the VDW type contacts, such as graphene and NbS2 with interlayer distances greater than 3 Å, exhibit very low T of less than 2%, which suggests a low electron transparency in such VDW interfaces. As interfacial defects and contact imperfections are inevitably presence, the SBH and S values presented in the calculations shall serve as an upper theoretical limit useful for guiding the optimization of device designs and fabrications. Importantly, Ni and Ti contacts, both of which form excellent Ohmic contact with zero interfacial tunneling barrier to MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 monolayers, are CMOS-compatible metals, thus revealing a viable CMOScompatible contact engineering strategy for the construction of high-performance nanodevices based on MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4. In conclusion, we show that the unique septuple-layered morphology of MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 monolayers offers a fundamentally new mechanism, alternative and complementary to the VDW contact paradigm, for suppressing the FLP effect and for achieving efficient tunable SBH in metal contacts to MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 monolayers. The DFT calculations presented here shall form a harbinger for the study of interfacial contact physics in the expansive family of MA2X4. Myriads of phenomena, such as the evolution of SBH and FLP with different number of layers black phosphorus 