The recently experimentally synthesized monolayer MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 (Science 369, 670-674 (2020)) lack inversion symmetry, which allows them to become piezoelectric. In this work, based on ab initio calculations, we report structure effect on intrinsic piezoelectricity in septuple-atomiclayer MSi2N4 (M=Mo and W), and six structures (αi (i=1 to 6)) are considered with the same space group. These structures can connect to each other through translation, mirror and rotation operations of double layer unit Si2N2. It is found that MSi2N4 (M=Mo and W) with αi (i=1 to 6) all are indirect band gap semiconductors. Calculated results show that MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 monolayers have the same structural dependence on piezoelectric strain and stress coefficients (d11 and e11), together with the ionic and electronic contributions to e11. The α5 phase has largest d11 for both MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4, which are larger than 2.9 pm/V. Finally, we investigate the intrinsic piezoelectricity of monolayer MA2Z4 (M=Cr, Mo and W; A=Si and Ge; Z=N and P) with α1 and α2 phases expect CrGe2N4, because they all are semiconductors and their enthalpies of formation between α1 and α2 phases are very close. The most important result is that monolayer MA2Z4 containing P atom have more stronger piezoelectric polarization than one including N atom. The largest d11 among MA2N4 materials is 1.85 pm/V, which is close to the smallest d11 of 1.65 pm/V in MA2P4 monolayers. For MA2P4, the largest d11 is up to 6.12 pm/V. Among the 22 monolayers, α1-CrSi2P4, α1-MoSi2P4, α1-CrGe2P4, α1-MoGe2P4 and α2-CrGe2P4 have large d11, which are greater than or close to 5 pm/V, a typical value for bulk piezoelectric materials. These materials are recommended for experimental exploration. Our study reveals that the MA2Z4 family have the potential applications in piezoelectric field. In semiconductors or insulators with broken inversion symmetry, an intrinsic electromechanical coupling between stresses and electric polarizations can be observed, which is called piezoelectric effect. Two-dimensional (2D) materials can show unique properties compared to their bulk counterparts, and the reduction in dimensionality of 2D materials can often eliminate inversion symmetry, which allows these materials to become piezoelectric has triggered an intense interest in piezoelectric properties of 2D materials. It is meaningful to explore piezoelectricity of new 2D family. Recently, the layered 2D MoSi 2 N 4 has been experimentally achieved by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) In this work, the role of crystal structure on intrinsic piezoelectricity in monolayer MSi 2 N 4 (M=Mo and W) are studied by using density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we shall give our computational details and methods about piezoelectric coefficients. In the third section, we perform symmetry analysis for elastic and piezoelectric coefficients of α i -(i=1 to 6) MA 2 Z 4 . In the fourth sections, we shall present main results and analysis. Finally, we shall give our conclusions in the fifth section. Based on the density functional theory (DFT) Å-1 . We calculate the coefficients of elastic stiffness tensor C ij by using strain-stress relationship (SSR) and the piezoelectric stress coefficients e ij by DFPT method The energy band structures of αi-(i=1 to 6) MoSi2N4 using GGA+SOC, and the VBM and CBM are connected by red arrow. The piezoelectric stress tensors e ijk and strain tensor d ijk is defined as: and where P i , ε jk and σ jk are polarization vector, strain and stress, respectively. The e elc ijk (d elc ijk ) is the clamped-ion piezoelectric tensors resulting from the pure electronic contribution. The relaxed-ion piezoelectric tensors e ijk (d ijk ) is obtained from the sum of ionic and electronic contributions. The d ijk can be connected with e ijk by the elastic stiffness tensor C ijkl . By employing the frequently used Voigt notation (11→1, 22→2, 33→3, 23→4, 31→5 and 12→6), the elastic tensor C ijkl , piezoelectric tensors e ijk and d ijk become into C ij (6×6 matrix), e ij (3×6 matrix) and d ij (3×6 matrix). The symmetry of crystal structure will further reduce the number of independent C ij , e ij and d ij tensors. By intercalating MoS 2 -type MZ 2 monolayer into InSetype A 2 Z 2 monolayer, six α i and six β i (i=1 to 6) MA 2 Z 4 monolayers can be constructed The forms of these piezoelectric and stiffness constants are the same as those for TMD monolayers Firstly, we discuss the structural relation among six α i crystal structures of MA 2 Z 4 . According to the relative positions of M and A atoms, the six α i crystal structure can be divided into three categories: A (α 1 , α 2 ), B (α 3 , α 4 ) and C (α 5 , α 6 ). The different categories can be connected by translation operation. The α 3 can be attained by translating A 2 Z 2 double layers of α 2 along the green line of top view of α 2 in Figure It has been proved that monolayer MA 2 Z 4 (M=Cr, Mo and W; A=Si and Ge; Z=N and P) expect CrGe 2 N 4 with 34 VEC are non-magnetic with α 1 or α 2 crystal structure, and are both dynamically and thermodynamically Next, we use optimized crystal structures to investigate their electronic structures. Although the SOC has little effects on the energy band gaps of MSi 2 N 4 (M=Mo and W) monolayers, the SOC can produce observed spinorbit splitting in the valence bands at K point To It is found that the ionic contribution of two structures connected by mirror or rotation operations in the same category has opposite sign. the different category, the ionic contribution of two structures connected by translation operation has the same sign. Calculated results show that the ionic contribution and electronic contribution have opposite sign for all α i except α 5 . For A and B categories, the electronic contribution has similar structural dependence with ionic contribution. In the C category, the rotation operation gives rise to the identical signs for electronic contribution from α 6 to α 5 . In considered six structures, the e 11 of α 5 has the largest value, which is due to superposed ionic contribution and electronic contribution. The e 11 with α 5 phase is 13.95×10 -10 C/m for MoSi 2 N 4 , and 12.17×10 -10 C/m for WSi 2 N 4 . These e 11 very larger than ones of 2D TMD, metal oxides, III-V semiconductor and Janus TMD materials For α 1 and α 2 phases, the monolayer MA 2 Z 4 (M=Cr, Mo and W; A=Si and Ge; Z=N and P) expect CrGe 2 N 4 are all semiconductors using GGA+SOC. The energy band gaps of α i -(i=1 to 2) MA 2 Z 4 (M=Cr, Mo and W; A=Si and Ge; Z=N and P) expect CrGe 2 N 4 using GGA+SOC are plotted in Figure The elastic constants C ij of α i -(i=1 to 2) MA 2 Z 4 (M=Cr, Mo and W; A=Si and Ge; Z=N and P) expect CrGe 2 N 4 are plotted in Figure The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. optimized lattice constants of αi-(i=1 to 6) MSi2N4 (M=Mo and W) using GGA ( Å). same P 6m2 space group due to inserting 2H-MoS 2 -type MZ 2 monolayer into α-InSe-type A 2 Z 2 double layers, which break inversion symmetry. The six β i are built by intercalating 1T-MoS 2 -type MZ 2 monolayer into β-