The temperature dependence of the superfluid density ρs(T ) has been measured for a series of ultrathin MBE-grown DyBa2Cu3O 7-δ superconducting (SC) films by sub-mm wave interferometry combined with time-domain THz spectroscopy and IR ellipsometry. We find that all films 10 u.c. and thicker show the same universal temperature dependence of ρs(T ), which follows the critical behavior characteristic of single crystal YBa2Cu3O 7-δ as T approaches Tc. In 7 u.c. thick films, ρs(T ) declines steeply upon approaching Tc, as expected for the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless vortex unbinding transition. Our analysis provides evidence for a sharply defined 4 u.c. non-SC interfacial layer, leaving a quasi-2D SC layer on top. We propose that the SC state in this interfacial layer is suppressed by competing (possibly charge) order. The commonality of the layered CuO 2 plane structure to all families of copper oxide high-T c superconductors (HTSCs) implies that understanding the effect of reduced dimensionality on superconductivity in the cuprates is key to elucidating the mechanism of HTSC. Even in the presence of strong anisotropy, the CuO 2 -bilayer material RBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ (RBCO), where R = rare earth, displays critical fluctuations belonging to the 3D-XY universality class, where the fluctuation correlations extend over many CuO 2 planes along the c-axis One way to make the manifestation of 2D-SC noticeable is to reduce the coupling between the CuO 2 planes by doping. Indeed in the underdoped regime, where adjacent CuO 2 bilayers are weakly Josephson coupled, the SC fluctuations persist over a wider temperature range both above and below T c Another route to approach the 3D to 2D crossover is to reduce the sample thickness to less than the c-axis correlation length. Early reports of the BKT transition based on dc transport measurements in ultrathin YBCO layers sandwiched between semiconducting (Pr,Y)BCO are controversial In this Letter, we report the temperature and thickness dependence of ρ s in a series of near-optimally doped DyBCO ultrathin films grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). For films thicker than 10 u.c. we observe a universal temperature dependence of ρ s (T ), while for thinner films signatures of the BKT transition emerge and reveal 2D-SC fluctuations over an exceptionally broad temperature range of ∼ 13 K above T c . Our results also provide evidence for a ∼ 4 u.c. non-SC layer at the substrate interface that shares a sharp boundary with the SC portion of the film, and we propose a picture wherein an epitaxially stabilized competing order suppresses the SC in the interfacial layer while leaving the CuO 2 planes above superconducting. DyBCO films with thicknesses ranging from 7 to 60 u.c. (8 -70 nm) were grown on (100)-oriented (LaAlO 3 ) 0.3 (Sr 2 AlTaO 6 ) 0.7 (LSAT) substrates of dimensions 10 x 10 mm 2 by ozone-assisted atomic-layer-bylayer oxide MBE, and the high crystal structure quality of the films was confirmed by X-ray diffraction and transmission electron microscopy measurements, as reported elsewhere Figure Strain effects in the films were investigated by highresolution X-ray diffraction measurements of the HKplane centered about the (4 0 10) reflection, depicted in Fig. From the measured complex conductivity the penetration depth λ, which corresponds to the superfluid density ρ s = 1/λ 2 , can be obtained as λ -2 (T ) = lim ω→0 μ 0 ωσ 2 (T ). The frequency used in Fig. Figure To draw a comparison to the effects of underdoping, ρ s (T )/ρ s0 for a near-optimally doped 20 u.c. film (OP20uc) is shown with that for annealed UD20uc in Fig. We now turn to the central issue, the evolution of the superfluid density ρ s (T ) when the film thickness is further reduced below 10 u.c. For the near-optimally doped OP7uc shown by the red squares in Fig. when ρ s (T ) for OP7uc is compared with the normalized superfluid density of OP10uc, it becomes evident that the two follow the same temperature dependence below 50 K. Above 50 K, however, ρ s (T ) of OP7uc falls rapidly to zero, suppressing T c by ≈ 13 K with only minor broadening of the SC transition ∆T c from 1.4 K in OP10uc to 2 K in OP7uc, as defined by the FWHM of the peak in ImMI(T ) It remains plausible that our films are not uniformly superconducting throughout their entire thickness. To address this issue, in Fig. The non-SC 4 u.c. interfacial layer plays the role of the semiconducting (Pr,Y)BCO buffer layer used in previous studies of ultrathin SC YBCO films In summary, we have carefully examined the temperature dependence of the superfluid density for a series of ultrathin DyBCO films. We find that films 10 u.c. and thicker near optimal doping display a universal temperature dependence of ρ s (T )/ρ s0 . This universality allows us to draw a clear distinction with the behavior of ρ s (T ) in a thinner 7 u.c. sample, where the steepness of ρ s (T ) as T approaches T c markedly increases. We assign the suppression of T c in this film to the emergence of 2D-SC fluctuations. Further studies of the magnetic field dependence of ρ s (T ) are important to elucidate this scenario. Our analysis suggests that a sharply defined 4 u.c. thick interfacial layer remains non-SC, leaving a quasi-2D-SC layer on top. We propose that this interfacial layer hosts an epitaxially stabilized non-SC CO state. Our results provide a promising platform to study 2D-SC and its interplay with CO in cuprate HTSCs.