Two novel three-dimensional (3D) crystal structures of carbon (C) and germanium carbide (GeC2) were predicted using first-principles density-functional theory (DFT) calculations. These newly discovered 3D carbon allotrope and GeC2 are in the space group of Fmmm (space group number 69). Their crystal structures have unique tetragonal/hexagonal rings formed by either C or Ge/C atoms. Both structures were proven to be thermodynamically stable through the phonon spectrum calculations. The C allotrope is a semiconductor with a wide band gap of 3.65 eV predicted by the hybrid density functional HSE06 method, while GeC2 is metallic. This indirect band gap of 3.65 eV in the C allotrope is between that in diamond and graphite and in the ultra-violet (UV) region. The new C allotrope has a low mass density of 2.84 g/cm  and is proven to be energetically stable with cohesive energy less than -7.5 eV/atom, which is lower than many other carbon allotropes. Such a carbon crystal structure with a low mass density and wide band gap once synthesized would have wide applications in gas adsorption sensors and photo-electronic devices. In group IVA of the Periodic Table of the Element, carbon, silicon, and germanium are three important elements for semiconductor materials. In particular, carbon in sp, sp 2 , and sp 3 hybridization, has much flexibility of bonding and exists in tremendous forms of allotropes For instance, CY carbon (1.93 eV and 2.27 g/cm 3 ) In addition to the classification of carbon allotropes according to their properties such as band gap and mass density, many literature work also assorts the structures according to their geometrical compositions, such as hexagonal, tetragonal, pentagonal, octagonal, heptagonal carbon rings, and some combinations of the mentioned rings. For example, the following structures show varying geometrical composition of carbon rings, 6-membered rings Similarly, based on this tetrahex structure and AB stacking forms, we also propose a new 3D GeC2 crystal structure with tetragonal and hexagonal rings named as 3D TH-GeC2. This 3D GeC2 is predicted to be metallic, opposite to the semiconducting nature of the multilayer honeycomb GeC crystal structure The first-principles density-functional theory (DFT) Heyd-Scuseria-Ernzerhof (HSE06) hybrid functional The energy convergence criterion for electronic iterations is set to be 10 -8 eV and the force is converged within 10 -4 eV/Å with the energy criterion 10 -5 eV for geometry optimization of the unit and conventional cells. The kinetic energy cutoff 500 eV for plane wave basis set was used for the HSE06 band structure calculations. The optimized crystal structures of the 3D TH-C and TH-GeC2 are in the space group of Fmmm (space group number 69) and are displayed in Fig. TH-C and TH-GeC2, respectively, which contain 6 atoms in the primitive cells. The parameters of the crystal structures are listed in Table The C-C bond length in the 3D TH-C has a value of 1.55 Å for both types of bonds, i.e. C1-C2 and C1-C1, which is almost as same as the C-C bond length in diamond SiC2 structure is unstable. To further investigate the energetically stability of the new 3D TH-C and TH-GeC2 structures, we calculated their cohesive energy E using Eq. ( where E , E , E are the total energy of the material, and the energies of an isolated germanium and carbon atoms, respectively. Fig. Its cohesive energy is lower by 0.4 eV, 0.69 eV, 0.75 eV, and 0.8 eV than that in CY carbon The band gap in the 2D monolayer of tetrahex-C is predicted to be 2.63 eV (direct gap) In summary, new 3D crystal structures of carbon and GeC2 are proposed via first principles DFT calculations. The structures are proven to be thermodynamically stable and energetically more The authors declare no competing financial interest. Data available on request from the authors.