We study the temperature dependence of electrical resistivity for currents directed along all crystallographic axes of the spin-triplet superconductor UTe2. We focus particularly on an accurate determination of the resistivity along the c-axis (ρc) by using a generalized Montgomery technique that allows extraction of crystallographic resistivity components from a single sample. In contrast to expectations from the observed highly anisotropic band structure, our measurement of the absolute values of resistivities in all current directions reveals a surprisingly nearly isotropic transport behavior at temperatures above Kondo coherence, with ρc ∼ ρ b ∼ 2ρa, that evolves to reveal qualitatively distinct behaviors on cooling. The temperature dependence of ρc exhibits a peak at a temperature much lower than the onset of Kondo coherence observed in ρa and ρ b , consistent with features in magnetotransport and magnetization that point to a magnetic origin. A comparison to the temperature-dependent evolution of the scattering rate observed in angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy experiments provides important insights into the underlying electronic structure necessary for building a microscopic model of superconductivity in UTe2. The recently discovered superconductivity in UTe 2 [1] is believed to be a strong contender for spin-triplet Cooper pairing driven by ferromagnetic spin fluctuations, as suggested by scaling of magnetization data [1], muon spin relaxation experiments To date, the majority of experiments have focused on elucidating the symmetry and topological class of the superconducting order parameter, or probing the landscape of proximate ground states, such as magnetism 5f electrons unanswered. Given the confluence of interaction-and dimensiondependent contributions to the normal state electronic behavior in UTe 2 , it is imperative to have an accurate measure and understanding of the conductivity anisotropy in this system in order to understand the Fermiology that leads to pairing. Here we accurately determine the electrical resistivity along all primary crystallographic directions in UTe 2 , focusing on the so-far elusive c-axis transport behavior in order to help elucidate the role of dimensionality and orbital contributions to the normal state electronics. We compare the measured transport anisotropy and its temperature dependences with ARPES in order to better connect peculiar behaviors with specific band components, providing a consistent picture of transport in UTe 2 . Furthermore, our magnetotransport analysis suggests magnetism as a potential origin of the qualitatively anisotropic scattering behavior at low temperatures. Although it is common to study transport anisotropy using the Montgomery technique Figure (1) Since the rectangular pockets are weakly dispersive in the c-axis direction, we ignore their contribution and only consider the Z-pocket, i.e. σ c ≈ σ Z . Using the Drude picture for transport, we can compare the transport data with ARPES data using an equation for the contribution of the 2D-like rectangular pocket along the a-axis direction, where n 2D , m 2D , and μ 2D refer to the carrier density, effective mass, and mobility of the 2D Fermi surfaces, respectively. The factor of two originates from the fact that two rectangular pockets exist in the Brillouin zone (BZ). We estimate the ARPES parameters (right side of Eq. ( Continuing the analysis, the Z-pocket mobility is 4.3 (cm 2 /V-sec) at 20 K. At lower temperatures, by extrapolating the T 2 behavior to the zero temperature limit, we find an improvement of mobility of 29.1 (cm 2 /V-sec) and 26.9 (cm 2 /V-sec), for the 2D-like Fermi surface and the Z-pocket, respectively. We note that this two channel model does not capture differences between the a-and b-axis resistivities since we have assumed the quasi-2D channel is isotropic in the ab plane. Further corrections to the two channel model, capturing this anisotropy difference, can be made by adding corrugations of the 2D-Fermi surface along the c-axis direction or the anisotropy of the Z-pocket. We await future ARPES studies estimating the anisotropy of the Z-pocket in all three directions and the quasiparticle lifetime along the Te-chain b-direction to resolve this. Next, we discuss the temperature dependence of the resistivities, focusing on three regimes. Although resistivities for all three axes undergo a large drop upon cooling to low temperatures, there is a qualitatively distinct temperature dependence between c-axis transport and that in the a-b plane. As shown in Fig. High temperature (50 K T 300 K): At high temperatures, the most apparent contrast in resistivity behavior is in the metallic-like (dρ/dT < 0) vs. nonmetallic-like (dρ/dT > 0) behavior of ρ c vs. ρ a and ρ b , respectively. The weak increase of ρ a and ρ b upon cooling is attributed to single-ion Kondo behavior preceding the development of lattice coherence (although extracting a Kondo temperature is problematic due to its weak behavior, as detailed in SM [29] Section IV). In contrast, ρ c instead exhibits a metallic-like decrease on cooling. While definitely not Kondo-like, its weak temperature dependence also suggests that it is not simply a linear behavior due to electron-phonon scattering, suggesting that a single scattering mechanism may not be dominating. We note also that all three resistivities in this temperature window are larger than 0.3 mΩcm, which for typical metals is approaching the Anderson localization regime Intermediate temperature (5 K T 50 K): In the intermediate-temperature regime, the richest qualitative anisotropy is apparent in the temperature range of ∼ 50 K, where ρ a and ρ b exhibit the classic drop in magnitude upon the onset of Kondo coherence, while ρ c begins to increase upon cooling, rising to a peak at 14 K before dropping precipitously. In the following, we compare the temperature dependence of resistivity with that of ARPES spectra, finding consistency with a Kondo lattice coherence picture for a-b plane transport, and investigate magnetotransport and magnetization data to help elucidate the c-axis behavior. To make further connection to transport, we focus on energies close to the Fermi energy (ideally E-E F k B T ; however this energy window is not adequately resolved in the measurement so we use the closest available energy that can be analyzed). From the MDCs at 25 meV bind- ing energy, we find the width of the Lorentzian fits (feature width) to be changing with temperature, as shown in Fig. (3) (d). Note that the fitting uncertainty is greater at higher temperatures due to irregular background intensity (see SM [29] Sect. VIII. for more detail). We can interpret that the temperature dependence of the ARPES feature width and the electrical resistivity is mainly governed by the temperature dependence of the mean free path of the carriers. The key finding is that the temperature evolution of the ARPES 6d band feature width, as shown in Fig. (3) (d), is qualitatively consistent with the steadily decreasing behavior of ρ a and ρ b on cooling below the Kondo coherence temperature, and inconsistent with the rising behavior of ρ c in the same temperature range. Taken together with the behavior of the quasi-elastically scattered photoelectrons, this confirms the connection between the Kondo mechanism and a-b plane resistivity and the anomalous distinction of c-axis transport. Interestingly, the existence of an unusual qualitative anisotropy in resistivity temperature dependence has been observed in other systems such as UCoGe Low Temperature (T c < T <∼5 K): Upon cooling, it is not clear how the two-channel model discussed above evolves below the rich anisotropic features at intermediate temperatures, but all three resistivities indicate the realization of a heavy Fermi liquid-like state at low temperatures, decreasing substantially and approaching a saturating behavior with a T 2 dependence as shown in Fig. Magnetotransport: To investigate the nature of the caxis peak, we use field orientation dependent magnetoresistance (MR) as a probe of scattering anisotropy, focusing on whether MR exhibits a dependence on current or field direction. In UTe 2 , uranium atoms form chains along the magnetic easy axis (a-axis), with nearest neighbor ions forming ladder rungs parallel to the c-axis. We therefore compare the response of ρ a and ρ c MR with fields applied both parallel (H a) and perpendicular (H b) to the uranium chains (other field orientations are presented in the SM [29] Sect. VI.), expecting an anisotropic current response similar to the temperature dependence. Surprisingly, we find a nearly isotropic suppression of resistivity (i.e., negative MR) for both ρ a and ρ c with fields applied along the magnetic easy axis (aaxis). As shown in Fig. An important reference is the magnetization at high fields. A Curie-Weiss (CW) susceptibility behavior, M/H = χ CW , was observed in UTe 2 at high temperatures for all three field orientations [1], consistent with the behavior of a Kondo lattice system above its coherence temperature. However, at lower temperatures, deviations from CW behavior occur, with M/H showing a maximum near 35 K for H b, and an inflection point near 10 K for H a [1], with both features persisting to higher fields (see Overall, the qualitative and quantitative differences observed between a-b plane and c-axis transport, as well as the crossovers in resistivity anisotropy as a function of temperature, suggest that 1) at least two different transport channels are responsible for transport in different directions, and 2) the scattering mechanism(s) involves energy scales that are quite sensitive to the temperature range under study. In addition, from magnetotransport studies, 3) the peak in ρ c and minima in MR and ∆M/H for H a occur at nearly the same temperature ∼ 10 K, which is quite different from the Kondo coherence tem- perature observed in ρ a and ρ b in Fig. This work provides a definitive measure of the electrical resistivity along all three primary axes of UTe 2 in the normal state. Given the expectation of strong anisotropy from electronic structure calculations, the magnitude of the c-axis resistivity is surprisingly comparable to that of the a-and b-axis resistivities in the entire temperature range, but exhibits a qualitative difference in behavior at temperatures below the onset of Kondo coherence. We understand this behavior as originating from electronic bands with distinct dimensionality, as well as a scattering mechanism that is intimately tied to a crossover in the magnetic spectrum near 15 K. Adding valuable information to our understanding of the normal state of UTe 2 , this information will be important for understanding the electronic structure and for building a microscopic theory of superconductivity. 