We report on the room-temperature switching of 1T-TaS2 thin-film charge-density-wave devices, using nanosecond-duration electrical pulsing to construct their time-resolved current-voltage characteristics. The switching action is based upon the nearly-commensurate to incommensurate charge-density-wave phase transition in this material, which has a characteristic temperature of 350 K at thermal equilibrium. For sufficiently short pulses, with rise times in the nanosecond range, self-heating of the devices is suppressed, and their current-voltage characteristics are weakly nonlinear and free of hysteresis. This changes as the pulse duration is increased to ~200 ns, where the current develops pronounced hysteresis that evolves non-monotonically with the pulse duration. By combining the results of our experiments with a numerical analysis of transient heat diffusion in these devices, we clearly reveal the thermal origins of their switching. In spite of this thermal character, our modeling suggests that suitable reduction of the size of these devices should allow their operation at GHz frequencies. Charge-density wave (CDW) phenomena have recently witnessed renewed interest, particularly in the context of two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals materials. CDW transitions can be induced by various perturbations, including heating, In principle, at least, the application of an electric field can trigger the CDW phase transition directly, by affecting the charged ions and electrons in the crystal. If CDW-device operation relies on depinning of the CDW from defects, the electric field can set the CDW in motion above a certain threshold field. Here, we report the results of an experimental investigation of 1T-TaS2 devices under ultra-short electric pulses, combined with a computational study of heat dissipation in these structures. The 1T-TaS2 CDW devices were fabricated on a highly resistive Si/SiO2 substrate in order to allow for ns-duration electrical pulsing. We find that hysteresis, characteristic of the NC-to IC-CDW phase transition, emerges in the current-voltage characteristics of these devices at pulse durations in excess of ~200 ns, and that it exhibits a non-monotonic dependence with increasing pulse length. The experimentally observed evolution of the hysteresis, and our numerical solutions of the heat-diffusion equation, indicate that the switching is thermally driven. Despite this thermal nature, however, our modeling also suggests that downscaling of the device dimensions, and finetuning of the thermal resistance of the structure, should allow for fast operation of such devices, in the GHz frequency range. High-quality single-crystal 1T-TaS2 (HQ Graphene Co.) was used as the source material in our studies. Thin films of 1T-TaS2 were mechanically exfoliated and transferred to a highly resistive (1-10 Ω-cm) Si/SiO2 substrate (525-/0.3-μm, p-type, <100>) with the help of a transfer system that was built in-house. Uniform rectangular flakes were selected for device fabrication to match the pattern of the required on-chip co-planar waveguide (see figure Structures were fabricated by electron-beam lithography and lift-off of Ti/Au (20-/180-nm), deposited by electron-beam evaporation. To avoid degradation of the quasi-2D 1T-TaS2 from exposure to chemicals and air, successive fabrication steps were performed with minimal delay. Fabricated devices were then stored and tested under vacuum conditions. Figure The straight line is an example of the load-resistance characteristic required to make the oscillator shown schematically in Figure The pulsed measurements were performed in a custom-designed setup with full impedance matching (50 Ω). The device chip was mounted on an FR-4 laminate carrier, which allowed the signal line of the previously mentioned on-chip coplanar waveguide to be connected to the measurement instruments, through semirigid coaxial cables and high-bandwidth SMA connectors. A 50-Ω RuO2 thick film resistor, soldered onto the chip carrier, provided a matched termination for the input signal. An Aim-TTi TGP3151 pulse generator was used to provide the pulses. In this study, repetitive (75 kHz) triangular pulses of various width (8 -13,333 ns) were applied to the CDW device input. The resulting output pulses were then captured at the 50-Ω input channel of the oscilloscope and correlated to the input signal to generate a pulsed I-V characteristic. All measurements were performed with the CDW devices mounted inside a customized, light-tight vacuum chamber (~10 -6 mbar), held at RT. [Figure [Figure The through-plane thermal resistance of the Si/SiO2 substrate includes three terms: R th = R c + R SiO 2 + R Si , where R c is the thermal contact resistance between the 1T-TaS2 film and the SiO2, and R SiO 2 and R Si are the thermal resistances of the SiO2 and Si layers, respectively. The thermal resistance of the SiO2 layer is defined as R SiO 2 = t SiO 2 (k SiO 2 × A) ⁄ , where t SiO 2 is the thickness (300 nm) of the SiO2, k SiO 2 is its thermal conductivity, and A is the cross-sectional area of the channel. The interfacial contact resistance is R c = [G interface × A] -1 in which G interface is the interfacial thermal conductance and varies in a rather limited range for common 2D materials and substrates. For example, G interface for graphene, WTe2, and MoS2 with Si/SiO2 substrates is 50, 33, and 15 MW/m 2 K, respectively. Thermally-Driven Charge-Density-Wave Transitions in 1T-TaS2 Thin-Film Devices: Prospects for GHz Switching Speed resistance. The in-plane thermal conductivity of 1T-TaS2 is almost three folds higher than that of SiO2. [Figure To further support our interpretation of the experimental results, we have simulated the I-V curves of the device tested experimentally (see Figure [Figure For a quantitative comparison of the experimental and modeled trends, we define the width of the hysteresis (V max -V min ) as the difference in the voltage values observed during the up and down ramps of the voltage at a constant current. This width is a meaningful parameter as it defines the operational range of voltages for CDW voltage-controlled oscillators and other types of switches. Measured and calculated values of this parameter, determined for a current of I SD = 8 mA, are presented in Figure [Figure Our experimental results show that for the tested device the hysteresis window appears for a pulse duration of ~200 ns. This corresponds to a CDW-device switching speed of ~5 MHz. From the discussion above, it is clear that the speed can be increased if one optimizes the device structure and decreases its size, to drive the desired phase transition by allowing heating to develop more rapidly. To demonstrate this point, in Figure The obtained data therefore suggest that CDW devices implemented with quasi-2D 1T-TaS2 channels can operate at high frequency, even if the NC-CDW to IC-CDW transition is thermally driven. We note that our study proves that this switching is achieved via thermal mechanism for the specific device design, and characteristic thermal resistance of the structure. This does not preclude the possibility of purely electrically driven CDW transitions in other device designs and structures. If the pure-electric field regime is achieved, our estimates for the device operational speed should increase to even higher values. [Figure In conclusion, we have reported on the room-temperature switching of 1T-TaS2 thin-film CDW devices using nanosecond-duration electrical pulses. The switching action utilized the NC-to IC-CDW phase transition, which has a characteristic temperature of 350 K. The results of our rapid pulsed measurements, and numerical transient analysis of heat diffusion in the device structure, indicate the thermal nature of the switching in this type of CDW device. The modeling results suggest that a proper tuning of the device size and thermal resistance can allow these devices to operate at GHz frequencies, even when the switching is thermally driven. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. The supplemental information is available at the Applied Physics Letters journal web-site for free of charge. The trend is similar to the previous experimental and simulation results. However, in this case, the hysteresis window can be observed even at smaller pulse durations. The hysteresis width has decreased compared to the larger devices. This confirms that, despite the dominant self-heating effect, careful tuning of the dimensions can lead to a device that can operate at GHz frequencies. Thermally-Driven Charge-Density-Wave Transitions in 1T-TaS2 Thin-Film Devices: Prospects for GHz Switching Speed