Acoustic waves at microwave frequencies have been widely used in wireless communication and recently emerged as versatile information carriers in quantum applications. However, most acoustic devices are passive components, and dynamic control of acoustic waves in a low-loss and scalable manner remains an outstanding challenge, which hinders the development of phononic integrated circuits. Here we demonstrate electrical control of traveling acoustic waves on an integrated lithium niobate platform at both room and millikelvin temperatures. We modulate the phase and amplitude of the acoustic waves and demonstrate an acoustic frequency shifter by serrodyne phase modulation. Furthermore, we show reconfigurable nonreciprocal modulation by tailoring the phase matching between acoustic and quasi-traveling electric fields. Our scalable electro-acoustic platform comprises the fundamental elements for arbitrary acoustic signal processing and manipulation of phononic quantum information. Acoustic waves in solids are the basis for numerous applications 1 including microwave filters, oscillators, delay lines, and sensors. They are also emerging as versatile interfaces between quantum systems such as superconducting circuits 2-8 , defect centers 9,10 , and optical devices been demonstrated, leveraging piezoelectric coupling with microwaves Among previous exploration to control on-chip acoustic waves, approaches based on acoustic four-wave mixing Here we demonstrate electrical control of the fundamental degrees of freedom of acoustic waves on an integrated lithium niobate (LN) platform , where , , can take values of 1 to 3, corresponding to crystal , and directions, and is subject to the material symmetry Our electro-acoustic modulators are fabricated on an X-cut LN substrate (Fig. We measure the performance of a 1-cm-long electro-acoustic phase modulator by inputting an acoustic wave at carrier frequency f c ~ 2.5 GHz and detecting phase and amplitude of the modulated acoustic wave (Fig. To reliably measure the half-wave voltage V π of the modulator, we apply a sinusoidal signal at f mod = 10 kHz on the phase modulator electrode and analyze the output by a real-time spectrum analyzer. The phase change increases linearly with the amplitude of modulating signal (Extended Data Fig. Next, we demonstrate two proof-of-concept applications -electro-acoustic frequency comb and acoustic frequency shifting. By driving the phase modulator with a 10 kHz sinusoidal signal of V pp =2.3 V π , we generate 19 equidistant frequency comb lines centered at f c = 2.483 GHz (Fig. To assess our electro-acoustic modulator for quantum applications, we demonstrate coherent modulation of single-phonon-level acoustic waves at 50 mK (see Methods and Extended Data Fig. We achieve amplitude modulation of acoustic wave by constructing an acoustic Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI) in the push-pull configuration (Fig. To achieve nonreciprocal transmission of acoustic waves, we employ a quasi-traveling electric field to break the symmetry of counter-propagating acoustic waves. By separating modulation electrode into three segments, we can control the wave number (momentum) of the quasi-traveling electric field by adjusting the relative phase of modulating signals applied to each electrode (Fig. To implement this concept, we fabricate such a nonreciprocal acoustic modulator with an overall electrode length of 1 cm and apply the required modulation frequency f mod = 1/(3t 0 ) = 336 kHz for maximum nonreciprocity. In this condition, we observe the presence (absence) of acoustic phase modulations in the forward (backward) propagation direction (Fig. We demonstrate an integrated electro-acoustic platform that provides arbitrary control of on-chip traveling acoustic waves, namely their phase and amplitude. Compared with previous approaches, our electroacoustic modulators show significant advantages in low-temperature compatibility, modulation efficiency, simplicity in fabrication, and scalability. Taken together, these advantages may enable large-scale integrated acoustic information processing systems. Furthermore, using advanced nanofabrication with tens of nanometers resolution, we could push the operation frequency of our device to tens of GHz, covering the 5G millimeter wave bands. We expect the half-wave voltage V π to decreases quadratically with higher frequency, as both the width of the acoustic waveguide and the acoustic wave number scale linearly with frequency. Our devices may find applications in emerging acoustically mediated quantum networks that allow connecting different solid-state systems and thus enable hybrid quantum networks that leverage the distinct functionalities of each system for quantum computing, communication, and sensing The interdigital transducers (IDTs) are optimized for maximum transduction between acoustic and electrical waves at 2.5 GHz. The aperture of the IDT is 75 μm, the pitch of the finger electrode is 650 nm, and the number of finger electrode pairs per IDT is 25. The maximum transmission between two IDTs at 2.5 GHz is -8 dB at room temperature, with -6 dB resulting from the symmetric design of the IDTs (-3 dB per IDT). The adiabatic taper that connects an IDT to an acoustic waveguide is 400 μm long. The insertion loss per acoustic taper is about 5 dB at room temperature, as extracted from the measured transmission of devices with and without the tapered structure. X-cut lithium niobate (LN) substrates are used for all devices. The direction of the acoustic waveguide is at an angle of 30° with respect to the crystal Z-axis (Fig. A 400 nm-thick silicon nitride (SiN) layer is deposited using plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition on the Xcut LN substrate. The SiN layer is patterned using a direct-write lithography tool (Heidelberg Instruments MLA150) and etched using reactive-ion etching with carbon tetrafluoride (CF 4 ), sulfur hexafluoride (SF 6 ), and hydrogen (H 2 ) gases. The metal layer is patterned using electron-beam lithography (Elionix ELS-F125) with polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) resist. A 115 nm-thick aluminum is deposited using electron-beam evaporation, followed by lift-off in 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) for more than 3 hours at 80 °C. The devices are mounted and wire-bonded to a printed circuit board (PCB). The transmission spectra of the devices are measured using a vector network analyzer (Keysight N5224A). For the modulation experiments, a microwave signal generator drives one IDT using a single-frequency tone around 2.5 GHz, and a real-time spectrum analyzer (RSA, Tektronix RSA 3303B) is connected to the other IDT. The RSA not only measures the power spectrum of the acoustic wave received by the IDT, but also demodulates the signal to provide real-time in-phase and quadrature data, which are converted to the phase and amplitude of the received signal. The microwave signal generator and the RSA are synchronized by a 10 MHz clock. An arbitrary waveform generator is used to provide any low-frequency modulating signals, and a 20 kHz-bandwidth voltage amplifier (Falco Systems, WMA-005) is used to provide a 20 times amplification in voltage when necessary. For nonreciprocal phase modulation, a four-channel arbitrary waveform generator (Tabor WS8104A-DST) is used to generate the three synchronized modulating signals with various phase delays. Two low-temperature setups are used in this work. For data in Fig. Our device is mounted on the mixing chamber plate of a dilution fridge (Bluefors) with a base temperature below 50 mK. The microwave input signal to the IDT of the electro-acoustic modulator is attenuated such that the mean phonon number on the 1-cm-long acoustic waveguide is less than one. The readout line includes a circulator, a high-electronmobility transistor (HEMT) amplifier at 4 K, and two room-temperature low-noise amplifiers. The output signal is recorded using a real-time spectrum analyzer (RSA). The detection bandwidth of the RSA is set to 78 mHz to realize a high signal-to-noise ratio, but this detection bandwidth limits the span to 50 Hz. To detect the spectrum in this configuration of RSA, the modulation signal is set to 10 Hz. The modulation signal is supplied by a function generator followed by a high-voltage amplifier (Trek 2210). A controlled and isolated thermal source, consisting of a heater, temperature sensor, and a 30 dB attenuator, is installed on the input line before the electro-acoustic modulator to calibrate the readout gain and added noise We investigate the noise performance of our electro-acoustic modulator at 50 mK (Extended Data Fig. The acoustic-wave profiles in the main text are directly imaged using the transmission-mode microwave impedance microscopy (TMIM) First, we measure the modulation bandwidth of the 1-cm-long phase modulator (Fig. Hooke's law says that the force on a spring is proportional to its displacement. The square of the resonant frequency of a mass-spring system is equal to the ratio of the spring proportionality constant to the mass. Thus, tuning the spring constant also varies the resonance frequency of the spring. Weakly-excited acoustic waves in solids follow a generalized Hooke's law that relates stress σ and strain by an elasticity (stiffness) matrix C, which is a 6-by-6 matrix in Voigt notation. LN is of point group 3m, which has a threefold rotation symmetry about its Z axis and mirror symmetry on its X axis. With vanishing components of C due to the symmetry of LN, the relation is The elasticity matrix of LN can be varied by an applied electric field, ∆ = , where i,j=1..6, k=1, 2, 3, E is the applied electric field, and D (d kij ) is the third-order piezoelectric tensor An applied electric field affects the traveling acoustic wave by tuning the elasticity of the material. When the applied electric field is small, such tuning in elasticity can be treated by the perturbation theory. The wave equation for a guided acoustic mode is -= ∇ • ( ), where is the mass density of the material, u is the displacement field, ω is the angular frequency of the eigenmode at given wavenumber k. For a guided acoustic mode, the first-order shift in the eigenfrequency at the given wavenumber k due to the perturbation of elasticity ∆ is given by ∆ The integral is over the whole cross section that perpendicular to the acoustic propagation direction. Further, the change of wavenumber ∆k at certain mode frequency ω is calculated by the dispersion relation of the acoustic mode, ∆ = ∆ , where and are the phase and group velocity of the guided acoustic mode. The overall acoustic phase change over length L due to the applied electric field is ∆ . , where is the noise of the electro-acoustic modulator and is the added noise from the readout chain. is mainly determined by the high-electron-mobility transistor (HEMT) at the 4 K stage. The electro-acoustic modulation adds negligible noise and is thus suitable for quantum phononics. The same device is measured as that in Fig. Extended Data Fig. 