The temperature dependencies of the excess conductivity σ 0 (T) and possible pseudogap (PG), Δ*(T), in a Dy 0.6 Y 0.4 Rh 3.85 Ru 0.15 B 4 polycrystal were studied for the first time. It was shown that σ 0 (T) near T c is well described by the Aslamazov-Larkin (AL) fluctuation theory, demonstrating a 3D-2D crossover with increasing temperature. Using the crossover temperature T 0 , the coherence length along the c axis, ξ c (0), was determined. Above the level of T 2D > T 0 , an unusual dependence σ 0 (T) was found, which is not described by the fluctuation theories in the range from T 0 to T FM , at which a ferromagnetic transition occurs. The range in which superconducting fluctuations exist is apparently quite narrow and amounts to ΔT fl ≈ 2.8 K. The resulting temperature dependence of the PG parameter Δ*(T) has the form typical of magnetic superconductors with features at T max ≈ 154 K and the temperature of a possible structural transition at T s ∼ 95 K. Below T s , dependence Δ*(T) has a shape typical for PG in cuprates, which suggests that the PG state can be realized in Dy 0.6 Y 0.4 Rh 3.85 Ru 0.15 B 4 in this temperature range. Comparison of Δ*(T) with the Peters-Bauer theory made it possible to determine the density of local pairs near T c , 〈n ↑ n ↓ 〉(TG) ≈ 0.35, which is 1.17 times greater than in optimally doped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ single crystals. Recent studies of physical properties of new materials have shown that researchers increasingly encounter so-called unconventional superconductivity. Thus, the study of physical properties of the Dy 1-y Y y (Rh, Ru) 4 B 4 boride family with different contents of dysprosium (responsible for magnetic interactions) and rhodium-ruthenium compound (responsible for both magnetic interactions and superconductivity) is of considerable interest in terms of studying various aspects of superconductivity-magnetism coexistence, as well as for revealing signs of non-conventional superconductivity. In this work, for the first time, we thoroughly investigated the behavior of excess conductivity of Dy 0.6 Y 0.4 Rh 3.85 Ru 0.15 B 4 near T c within the framework of existing fluctuation theories, and addressed the issue of the possible existence of a pseudogap state, its nature, and susceptibility to magnetic ordering. The samples of Dy 0.6 Y 0.4 Rh 3.85 Ru 0.15 B 4 were prepared by argon-arc melting of the initial components, followed by annealing for several days, as described in Ref 14. As a result, we obtained single-phase textured polycrystalline samples with a LuRu 4 B 4 structure (space group I4/mmm) (Fig. Both methods give the same values of T*. From resistive measurements, the fluctuation contributions to the excess conductivity σ 0 (T) were determined and the temperature dependence of the pseudogap parameter Δ*(T) was calculated and analyzed. The results obtained show that in the region of SC fluctuations near T c σ 0 (T) is well approximated by the Aslamazov-Larkin (AL) fluctuation theory for three-dimensional systems. The temperature dependence of excess conductivity was determined conventionally using the equation in Refs. 17 and 23 An important parameter for further analysis is the reduced temperature which is included in all equations in this article. Here, T c mf > T c is the critical temperature in the mean-field approximation, which separates the region of fluctuation conductivity (FLC) from the region of critical fluctuations or fluctuations of the SC parameter of the A order immediately near T c , unaccounted for in the Ginzburg-Landau theory. where ξ c (0) is the coherence length along the c axis and C 3D is the coefficient (C-factor) by which the theory data defined by Eq. ( Taking account of Gaussian fluctuations brings the critical temperature of an ideal 2D metal to zero (Mermin-Wagner-Hohenberg theorem), and its final value is only obtained when trimerization factors are included. mf ) [see Eq. ( It should be emphasized that, when T c mf is determined correctly, σ 0 (T) in the 3D fluctuation region near T c is always described by Eq. ( By determining T c mf = 6.62 K, Eq. ( which makes it possible to determine ξ c (0). On the upper panel of Fig. applied in the field of 2D fluctuations. steaming parameter and the phase relaxation time, τ w is given by equation where A = 2.998⋅10 -12 s⋅K. Factor β = 1.203 (l/ξ ab ), where l is the mean free path and ξ ab is the coherence length in the ab plane, takes into account the approximation of the pure limit (l > ξ). 58, which we designated as T 2D , the experimental points deviate upward from the MT curve, and the first derivative of the experimental curve becomes zero [Fig. In HTSCs, with an increase in temperature above the region of 2D fluctuations, the experimental data normally deviate downward from the MT curve. It must be emphasized that at this temperature, temperature dependence Δ*(T) displays a small but sharp minimum (Fig. In the local pairs model, it is assumed that in HTSC, Above T 01 (ln ε 01 ≈ -0.85), FLC increases rapidly, reaching a maximum at the Curie temperature, T FM ∼19 K, obtained from magnetic measurements. Accordingly, at this temperature, the first derivative is equal to zero [Fig. It can be assumed that at T < T FM , ordered magnetic moments begin to prevent the formation of FLC more intensively. This process slows down significantly at T ≤ T 01 , indicating the increasing role of SC fluctuations in the FLC formation. Curiously, according to our estimates, d 01 ≈ 4.08 Å = d/4. This result suggests that the forming quasicoherent FCPs restore the effective distance between the conducting layers to its geometric value. Below T 2D [ln ε 2D = -2.6 in Fig. In all probability, this is not only due to the rapid increase in the number of FCPs, but also to a sharp increase in the superfluid density ρ s in the region of 3D fluctuations, 44,48-50 since near T c , FCPs are already covered by the Josephson interaction in the entire bulk of the superconductor. In resistive measurements of HTSC cuprates, the pseudogap is manifested as the deviation of the longitudinal resistivity ρ(T) at T < T* from its linear dependence in the normal condition above T*. We also share the view that the PG in cuprates arises due to the formation of local pairs (LPs) at T < T*. where (1 -T / T*) and exp (-Δ * / T) take into account, respectively, the dynamics of LP formation at T ≤ T* and their destruction near T c ; A 4 is a numerical coefficient that has the meaning of the C-factor in the theory of FLC. Analysis of the ln σ 0 -ln ε dependence (Fig. The correct value of Δ*(T G ), which is used in Eq. ( in a specific sample. The experimental proof of the d-wave symmetry of the energy gap in cuprates (e.g. see Ref. 57 and references therein) served as a strong argument in favor of the spin-fluctuation HTSC model. However, recent findings of high angular resolution photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), Unfortunately, similar studies have not been carried out for Dy 0.6 Y 0.4 Rh 3.85 Ru 0.15 B 4 Therefore, the mechanism of the SC state implementation in these compounds is apparently even more complex, especially if we take into account the large intrinsic magnetic moment of Dy ions. A large value of 2Δ*/k B T c ∼ 7, which is not typical for such values of T c , also speaks in favor of this conclusion. It can also be assumed that the formation of excess conductivity in HTSCs, including Dy 0.6 Y 0.4 Rh 3.85 Ru 0.15 B 4 , corresponds precisely to Δ 0 , which explains the large values of 2Δ/k B T c observed in these compounds. We assumed that the temperature dependence of the PG can provide an answer to some of the questions raised. Solving Eq. ( where σ 0 (T) is the excess conductivity experimentally measured over the entire temperature range of T * to T c mf . The fact that σ 0 (T) is well described by Eq. ( observed at the corresponding characteristic temperatures. Thus, below T* = 167 K, a pronounced maximum is observed at T max = 154 K, which is typical of magnetic superconductors. At the same time, the form of dependence Δ*(T) in Dy 0.6 Y 0.4 Rh 3.85 Ru 0.15 B 4 near T c , with a maximum at T ∼T 0 and a minimum at T = T G (see the insert in Fig. Temperature dependencies of the excess conductivity σ 0 (T) and the possible pseudogap (PG), Δ*(T), were first studied in the magnetic superconductor Dy 0.6 Y 0.4 Rh 3.85 Ru 0.15 B 4 . It was shown that σ 0 (T) near T c well described by the 3D Aslamazov-Larkin equation, demonstrating a 3D-2D crossover with increasing temperature. Using the crossover temperature T 0 , the coherence length was measured along the c axis, ξ c (0) = (2.67 ± 0.02) Å, which correlates with the literature data for strong coupling HTSCs. The dependence Δ*(T) revealed a number of peculiarities typical of superconductors admit the possibility of the superconductivity-magnetism interplay. This is a high narrow maximum at T = 154 K, typical of magnetic superconductors, followed by a minimum at T min ≈ 95 K. In FeSe compounds, a similar minimum corresponds to the structural phase transition from the tetra-to the ortho-phase at T s ∼ 90 K, Meanwhile, the analysis of Δ*(T) in Dy 0.6 Y 0.4 Rh 3.85 Ru 0.15 B 4 reveals a number of peculiarities. The first is an unexpectedly large value of 2Δ*(T c )/k B T c = 7.0 ± 0.1. It is remarkable, however, that the same value of 2Δ(T c )/k B T c ∼ 7.2 is obtained from the Andreev spectral analysis of Au-Dy 0.6 Y 0.4 Rh 3.85 Ru 0.15 B 4 contacts measured in a zero magnetic field at T = 1.6 K. Published under license by AIP Publishing. Low Temp. Phys. 45, 000000 (2019); doi: 10.1063/10.0000125