It was recently pointed out that so-called "superhydrides", hydrogen-rich materials that appear to become superconducting at high temperatures and pressures, exhibit physical properties that are different from both conventional and unconventional standard type I and type II superconductors The 2015 discovery of high temperature superconductivity in pressurized sulfur hydride However, in recent work we To establish that superconductivity exists in these materials it would be important to show that they expel magnetic fields, i.e. the Meissner effect; alternatively even if somewhat less compelling, that they do not allow penetration of magnetic fields, i.e. magnetic field exclusion. In Refs. In Ref. As a control, the measurements were conducted simultaneously with two diamond anvil cells (DACs). One contained the H 3 S sample, the other contained only H 2 . Both had identical 119 Sn-enriched foils, and were in the same applied magnetic field and temperature. It was found that the spectra measured were similar for both samples above 100 K, but differed markedly for temperatures below 50 K. While the control sample response was consistent with having a magnetic field in its interior equal to the applied magnetic field, H ext ∼ 0.68 T, the response of the H 3 S sample indicated that the magnetic field in the interior of the sample dropped to zero for temperatures 50 K and below when the magnetic field was applied perpendicular to the sample, and to about a third of the applied field when the magnetic field was applied parallel to the sample. The experiment did not attempt to detect the Meissner effect, i.e. magnetic field expulsion, as the paper states, but rather magnetic field exclusion field was excluded from the interior of the sample at low temperatures due to the Meissner effect, and therefore the sample had to be in the superconducting state at low temperatures. In the following sections we show that a standard superconductor in thermodynamic equilibrium would not have excluded the magnetic field in the conditions of the experiment. Let us first consider the geometry where the applied magnetic field is perpendicular to the Sn foil, because it is in this geometry where the largest deviation from the expected behavior of standard superconductors occurs. Figure If this is a type I superconductor, it would imply that the thermodynamic critical field H c is larger than 2.5 T. This would be unprecedented. The largest known critical fields for standard type I superconductors are of order 0.05 T, i.e. 50 times smaller. If this is a type II superconductor in thermodynamic equilibrium, it would imply that the lower critical field H c1 is larger than 2.5 T. This would be even more unprecedented, since H c1 < H c within the standard theory of superconductivity. In Ref. It is clear that if this was a standard superconductor that will reach its thermodynamic equilibrium state, the applied field which is much larger than H c1 would penetrate throughout the superconductor, no matter what the geometry, in particular in the two configurations used in ( The upper critical field is given by so the area per vortex is so for H ext /H c2 = 0.01, so the distance between vortex cores is approximately which is half the estimated London penetration depth. This indicates that the magnetic field is nearly uniform in the mixed state of this superconductor, with magnitude in the range So using the parameters for this superconductor inferred by the authors of Ref. in thermodynamic equilibrium. However this is inconsistent with the experimental results presented in Fig. which for B = 0.68 T and a = 15 μm as shown in Fig. Therefore, the critical current density would have to be larger than the value Eq. To further explore the possibility that if H 3 S is a superconductor it is a nonstandard superconductor, let us ignore the values of λ L reported in Refs. Using the expression for the lower critical field we have for the London penetration depth at zero temperature and with and we obtain λ L (0) = 4.54 ξ(0) = 10.0 nm. So the material would have to be a weakly type II superconductor, with κ = λ L (0)/ξ(0) = 4.5, to exclude the applied magnetic field as found in the NRS experiment, instead of κ > 50 as inferred in Refs. has the value which is more than an order of magnitude larger than is found for any standard superconductor, and implies an enormous condensation energy. This in turn exerts an enormous 'Meissner pressure' H 2 c /(8π) where ∆(0) is the energy gap at zero temperature and g(ǫ F ) is the density of states per spin at the Fermi energy. So we would have to assume that this relation which holds for standard superconductors fails for the superhydrides for unknown reasons. Alternatively, this value of H c (0) would imply that either the density of states or the energy gap is much larger than in standard superconductors. Assuming the standard BCS relation between energy gap and critical temperature, the density of states that would be implied by the value Eq. ( This is an enormous density of states. For comparison, using the standard theory the density of states of sulfur hydride was estimated to be 0.019 states/(spin-eV / Å3 ) Assuming the density of states is given by the free electron expression with effective mass m * we have with n the number density. For the density of states given by Eq. ( The H -H distance in sulfur hydride at pressures above 150 GPa is approximately 1.4 Å. Assuming r s = 0.7 Å yields However, the effective mass enhancement resulting from the electron-phonon interaction is expected to be only around a factor of 3. The theoretical calculations that claim to explain the observed values of T c in H 3 S We conclude that if the experimental results reported in Ref. If sulfur hydride in thermodynamic equilibrium truly excludes magnetic fields of the magnitude claimed in the geometries used in this experiment, it would imply that its superconductivity is very nonstandard. It would have a "Meissner effect on steroids". This new property of nonstandard superconductors would be consistent with what was found in Ref. However, if these materials were so different from standard superconductors we also have to ask: why would it be that standard BCS-Eliashberg theory appears to be able to accurately predict their transition temperatures as claimed in the literature There is also the possibility that the experiment reported in Ref. We will consider the alternative possibility that the measurements in 