Advances in integrated photonics open exciting opportunities for batch-fabricated optical sensors using high quality factor nanophotonic cavities to achieve ultra-high sensitivities and bandwidths. The sensitivity improves with higher optical power, however, localized absorption and heating within a micrometer-scale mode volume prominently distorts the cavity resonances and strongly couples the sensor response to thermal dynamics, limiting the sensitivity and hindering the measurement of broadband time-dependent signals. Here, we derive a frequency-dependent photonic sensor transfer function that accounts for thermo-optical dynamics and quantitatively describes the measured broadband optomechanical signal from an integrated photonic atomicforce-microscopy nanomechanical probe. Using this transfer function, the probe can be operated in the high optical power, strongly thermo-optically nonlinear regime, reaching a sensitivity of ≈ 0.4 fm/Hz 1/2 , an improvement of ≈ 10× relative to the best performance in the linear regime. Counterintuitively, we discover that higher transduction gain and sensitivity are obtained with lower quality factor optical modes for low signal frequencies. Not limited to optomechanical transducers, the derived transfer function is generally valid for describing small-signal dynamic response of a broad range of technologically important photonic sensors subject to the thermo-optical effect. The rapid development in integrated photonics and nanotechnology has enabled a wide range of nanophotonic sensors, applicable for thermal Generally, signal-to-noise of nanophotonic sensors improves with higher transduction gains obtained by increasing the optical power in the photonic cavity. However, the very same beneficial qualities -small volumes and high Q -increase local optical heating, which quickly becomes significant at even modest input powers. This limits the power that can be used for better sensitivity since with further power increase the cavity frequency becomes power-and time-dependent due to the thermo-optical effects The present work aims to advance nanophotonic sensing, leveraging the highly integrated optomechanical AFM probes The nanophotonic sensor under study is an optomechanical device consisting of a curved cantilever probe held in the nearfield of a microdisk optical cavity supporting whispering-gallery modes (WGMs). The experimental demonstration of the full operation of this device as AFM sensors has been reported The integrated optical cavity works as a high Q interferometric motion transducer where the motion of the cantilever modulates the optical mode frequencies. The input laser is tuned to a shoulder of the cavity resonance, such that at small optical powers where the thermo-optical effect is negligible, the variations in the transmitted optical power are proportional to the displacement of the cantilever, as shown in Figure The broadening, asymmetry, and hysteresis in the transmission dip in such small Si cavities are generally attributed to the linear and nonlinear two-photon optical absorption in conjunction with the thermo-optical effect Temperature changes shift the cavity resonances via two main mechanisms, through the thermal expansion of the disk and the refractive index change of the cavity materials. For a small change in temperature ΔTT, the relative wavelength shift can be written as: where χχ = 2.6 × 10 -6 K -1 is the thermal expansion coefficient of silicon, nn 0 ≈ 3.48 is the refractive index of silicon at the working wavelength λλ 0 ≈ 1.5 μm at room temperature, is the temperature sensitivity of the refractive index where specifically for Si α ≈ Typical photonic cavities have short photon lifetimes, responding near-instantaneously to mechanical motion in the absence of heating effects. The thermo-optical effect complicates the optomechanical transfer function, coupling it to the thermal dynamics of the nanophotonic cavity. For a given microdisk incident intensity II ii (background intensity at off-resonance wavelengths), and a transmitted intensity II < II ii at O, the small transmitted intensity change ΔII near the working point is a linear function of both the displacement Δxx and the temperature change ΔTT: where gg oooo,λλ = ddλλ dddd is the optomechanical coupling coefficient for the cavity wavelength. In turn, the temperature TT is a function of the intensity lost into the cavity II ii -II. The small temperature variation ΔTT near O can be obtained by considering the thermodynamic equation for the optical cavity with a thermal time constant ττ: where ηη is the proportionality constant between the temperature change ΔTT and the transmitted intensity change ΔII, whereby decreased transmitted intensity corresponds to increased heating. ηη is proportional to the product of the thermal impedance of the sensor, and the ratio of the energy absorption to the total energy loss in the cavity (which also includes radiative leakage and scattering loss). The complete frequency-dependent transfer function of the linearized system (2),(3) can be obtained by considering the system's response at the working point O to a small harmonic cantilever motion, which perturbs the cavity resonance via the optomechanical coupling. The optomechanically induced periodic resonance frequency shift modulates the power entering the cavity, resulting in both a small harmonic temperature variation ΔTT as well as the transmitter intensity variation ΔII: where the harmonic displacement of the cantilever has an amplitude of xx 0 and frequency of ωω, TT 0 is the amplitude of harmonic temperature variation and ii 0 is the relative intensity modulation amplitude. By combining Eq. ( where rr is defined as rr = Physically, the transfer function is equivalent to a high-pass filter, which attenuates the transduction gain of the sensor in the adiabatic frequency limit, ωω ≪ 1 ττ ⁄ , by a factor of rr: |ii 0 | = rrββxx 0 . At high frequencies ωω > 1 ττ ⁄ the thermal dynamics does not play a role, |ii 0 | = ββxx 0 , since the temperature change cannot follow the quick intensity modulation. By comparing the transfer function at the adiabatic limit and high-frequency limit, we see that the attenuation factor rr describes the ratio of hot and cold cavity slopes, rr = kk hccoo kk cccccccc . Experimentally, rr is obtained directly from the ratio of the slopes of the measured normalized transmission spectra [Fig. One consequence of thermo-optical tuning is that the transduction gain at low frequency will saturate with increasing input power. In the linear regime, the transduction gain is proportional to the input optical power ∝ PP iidd ∝ II ii , i.e. the same amount of resonance shift induces a larger transmitted power variation for a higher II ii . However, the transfer function is attenuated by a factor of rr at the adiabatic limit The derived high-incident-power transfer function in the thermo-optically nonlinear regime is easily invertible and enables increased sensitivity for broadband measurements of probe displacement. To demonstrate the sensitivity increase, a probe response to an external drive force is measured in the high-power, nonlinear regime and compared to the best measurement in the linear regime. The measurement is performed on a regular probe with a double-clamped cantilever that we used in previous experiments Figure The Lorentzian fits (green lines) to the driven mechanical signal show the fundamental in-plane mode with a resonance frequency of ≈ 5.46 MHz and a Q of ≈ 31.4, and a much weaker signal originating from the out-of-plane mode at ≈ 1.35 MHz of a ≈ 9.8 quality factor. The AFM probe is designed to be used such that the measured physics quantities, such as topography and thermal properties of the substrate, generate mostly the in-plane motion In the linear regime in Figure Using the equipartition theorem and the measured thermal noise data, we calibrate the sensitivity to the in-plane displacement as ≈ 0.021 V/nm and ≈ 0.36 V/nm (at high frequency) for the linear and nonlinear cases, respectively [see Supplementary Materials]. We exclude the outplane signal by subtracting the Lorentzian fit of the out-of-plane mode signal. The readout gain in the linear regime is frequency-independent, and the measured voltage is directly converted to displacement shown in Fig. Conventionally, the low-loss optical cavity with high Q is always desired for nanophotonic sensing since increasing the photon lifetime leads to longer interaction, higher transduction gain and increased sensitivity. Additionally, as we present above, the sensitivity can be further improved by increasing optical power. However, the combination of the high optical Q and high optical power does not guarantee the best sensitivity as intuitively expected, i.e. an optical cavity with lower Q can have larger optimal (saturated) transduction gains and better sensing performance. Qualitatively, this counterintuitive conclusion is due to the fact that for the low frequency input signals, the gains of high-Q optical modes saturate more quickly with increasing input power, while the gains of low-Q modes saturate later and possibly at higher gain values. Figure We experimentally demonstrate the anomalous Q-dependence of the transduction signal on the AFM probe, shown in Figure In summary, we derived and experimentally validated a broadband, small-signal transfer function valid for the high optical power, thermo-optically nonlinear regime of photonic sensing. The transfer function uses the thermal time constant independently obtained from finite element modeling and the gain ratios separately measured from optical spectra. Excellent agreement with the optomechanically transduced power spectral densities of a nanocantilever is obtained without adjustable parameters, enabling quantitative optomechanical motion transduction with high sensitivity over a large frequency bandwidth down to DC. The displacement measurement noise of our optomechanical AFM probe improves from the best achievable performance ≈ 6 fm/Hz 1/2 in the linear regime to ≈ 0.4 fm/Hz 1/2 in the thermo-optical nonlinear regime. Not limited to optomechanical transducers, this work demonstrates a general and practical approach for improving the sensitivity of a broad range of technologically important photonic resonator sensors subject to thermo-optical tuning via optical absorption. Additionally, the interplay between the thermo-optical effect and the dissipations of the nanophotonic cavity reveals a new counterintuitive regime where the low-Q modes possess higher optimal transduction gain at low frequency. The new regime may inspire new strategies of design for nanophotonic sensors for low-frequency and static applications, such as topography scanning The numerical simulation of the thermal dynamics of the microdisk is performed by commercial finite-element-method software. The geometries used in the simulation include all relevant components, including the microdisk, supporting post, cantilever, frame, and substrate. Since the supporting post is the main thermal impedance we carefully measured its dimension on a testing sample released together with the device. The diameter of the top and bottom surface of the post defined by the hydrofluoric acid etching process is measured to be ≈ 1.5 μm and ≈ 2.2 μm. The whole setup is in an air environment. In the simulation, input power is applied at time zero to the rim of the microdisk where the optical modes are located. By fitting the thermal response of the microdisk, we obtain its thermal constant ττ ≈ 7.0 μs [see Supplementary Materials].