We theoretically study the indirect interaction between two ferromagnetic contacts located on the surface of a d-wave superconductor. When the magnets are connected to a {010} edge of the superconductor we find an oscillating RKKY interaction that varies in sign as the distance between the magnetic contacts is varied. However, when coupling the magnets to an {110} edge of the superconductor, we find that the presence of midgap states qualitatively changes the results. The ground state of the system is then found to always favor alignment of the magnets as this configuration most strongly suppresses the midgap states, leading to a larger condensation energy which dominates over the intrinsic RKKY interaction. Superconductors with d-wave symmetry have an anisotropic order parameter which drops to zero along some nodal directions The indirect exchange interaction between two localized spins, mediated by the itinerant electrons of a host material, was first introduced by Ruderman, Kittel, Kasuya and Yosida, and is known as the RKKY interaction For a system consisting of magnetic impurities embedded in a superconductor, the influence of superconductivity on the indirect impurity-impurity interaction has also been studied in the literature Conventional s-wave superconductors do however typically have coherence lengths far exceeding the decay length of the RKKY interaction. On the other hand, d-wave superconductors can feature very short coherence lengths of the order of nanometers As the gapped band structure of a superconductor suppresses the RKKY interaction, it is of interest to investigate the effect the presence of midgap states have on the interaction. We therefore consider a d x 2 -y 2 superconductor and calculate the exchange interaction between two ferromagnetic contacts located on a diagonal {110} edge, as illustrated in Fig. For magnetic contacts located on a diagonal edge of a dwave superconductor, we find that the system always favors alignment of the two magnets. The variation in the strength of the magnetic exchange interaction as we vary the distance between the magnets is small compared to the magnitude of the interaction itself. We attribute these results to the aligned magnets more efficiently suppressing the midgap states than the anti-aligned configuration. Although the aligned magnets induce a stronger spin-splitting in the superconductor, suppressing the gap, the reduction of the midgap states leads to an overall larger gap and increased condensation energy. The parallel magnet configuration is therefore the ground state of the system. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we introduce the model and methodology. Then, in Sec. III we present and discuss the results. Finally, in Sec. IV we provide a summary of the findings. The phase diagram of our d-wave superconductor model for a square system with continuous boundary conditions is included in the Appendix. By means of a tight binding Hamiltonian on a square lattice, we model the attractive electron-electron interaction in a superconductor Here, c † i α is a creation operator creating an electron with spin α on lattice site i = (i x , i y ). The hopping amplitude is denoted by t i j , and μ i is the chemical potential. The third term represents on-site attractive interactions between opposite spins, where the number operator is n i α = c † i α c i α . This term gives rise to conventional spin singlet isotropic swave superconductivity. The fourth and fifth terms represent nearest neighbour interaction between opposite or equal spins, respectively. These terms can give rise to d-wave, p-wave or extended s-wave pairing for an attractive interaction potential. For the purposes of this article, we will set V i j to zero as we will not be interested in the possibility of equal spin pairing. As shown in the Appendix, the above model without V i j can give rise to a d-wave superconductor for a suitable choice of chemical potential. Through a mean-field treatment, we simplify the interaction terms. The on-site part of the interaction becomes Defining the superconducting gap for the on-site interaction as Δ i = -U i c i↓ c i↑ , we obtain where we have defined The on-site interaction U i will be taken to a constant U ≥ 0 in the superconductor, and zero elsewhere. Once again, performing a mean-field treatment, the attractive nearest neighbor interaction term becomes We then define the nearest neighbor pairing amplitude transforming Eq. ( where As In the following, we will take the nearest neighbor interaction to be V ji = V i j = V ≤ 0 (corresponding to an attractive interaction) in the superconductor and zero elsewhere. The mean-field extended tight binding Hamiltonian now takes the form where H 0 = H S 0 + H d 0 . The metallic ferromagnets that are attached to the superconductor are described by the following tight binding Hamiltonian The last term represents the coupling between the spin of an electron at site i and the local magnetic exchange field, giving rise to ferromagnetism. The local exchange field h δ i is taken to produce a spin-splitting in the z-direction in spin-space, giving rise to a magnetization that could in general be either in-plane or out-of-plane in real space. Our model does not separate these cases as the magnetism is simply introduced through a spin-splitting. Orbital effects on the superconductor arising from the magnets, not considered in this model, can be limited by keeping the magnetization in-plane After diagonalization, the free energy of the system will be expressed as where E n is the quasiparticle energy associated with quantum number n, and N is the number of lattice sites. The magnetic exchange interaction is computed as the difference in free energy between the configurations with parallel and antiparallel magnets which includes both the RKKY interaction mediated by the quasiparticles as well as the effect of the magnetic configurations on the condensation energy of the superconductor. The Hamiltonian H = H SC + H F M is diagonalized by means of the BdG method in order to compute the eigenvalues E n and eigenstates γ n . The diagonalized Hamiltonian will then take the form In order to perform the diagonalization, we start by rewriting the Hamiltonian as H = H 0 + 1 2 i j B † i h i j B j where we have introduced the basis Here, h i j is a 4 × 4 matrix that takes the following form for and for i = j Writing the Hamiltonian on matrix form H = H 0 + 1 2 W † SW, and introducing the matrix P, we diagonalize the Hamiltonian such that We next use and the relations between the quasiparticle operators that are not independent of each other. As we are interested in the effect of the midgap states on the indirect interaction between two ferromagnetic leads connected to the superconductor, establishing the presence of midgap states is of importance. This can be achieved by calculating the single particle local density of states (LDOS) which should have a peak around zero energy in the presence of midgap states. The number of charges on lattice site i is given by ρ i = α c † i α c i α , but this quantity can also be expressed as N i (E) f (E)dE. Here N i (E) is the local density of states at site i, and f (E) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution with energy E measured relative to the chemical potential. At T = 0, we have f (E) = 1 for E < 0 and f (E) = 0 when E > 0. Comparing the two above expressions for the number of charges on lattice site i, the LDOS can then be expressed as Another quantity of interest is the magnetization on lattice site i, M i = S i . Here, the spin operator is defined as The magnetization in the z-direction can then be expressed as The computational part of this study consists of numerically diagonalizing the Hamiltonian and self-consistently solving the equations for either the on-site superconducting gap (Eq. ( We first investigate the presence of midgap surface states, i.e. zero energy states existing on an edge of a superconductor. As displayed in Fig. As the presence of midgap states has been established, we move on to results for the indirect interaction between magnetic leads attached to a normal metal, an s-wave superconductor, and finally a d-wave superconductor. To put the results for the superconductors into context, we start with the case of magnetic leads connected by a normal metal (V = U = 0). The indirect exchange interaction J is presented in Fig. FIG. We then move on to the case of magnetic leads connected by an isotropic s-wave superconductor (V = 0). The results for the indirect exchange interaction are presented in Fig. Finally, we consider the main result of this work, which is how the magnetic leads interact when separated by a d-wave superconductor (U = 0). The results for the indirect interaction between the magnetic leads is presented in Fig. The result that a parallel magnet configuration is strongly favored for the diagonal edge is surprising as one would expect that the parallel configuration induces a larger magnetization in the superconductor, which suppresses the gap and lowers FIG. The effect of the introduction of the magnets is, however, not solely to reduce the gap due to an induced effective spinsplitting in the superconductor. The induced spin-splitting also splits the midgap states away from their resonance point at zero energy, suppressing the midgap states. As the gap close to the edge to begin with is strongly suppressed by the midgap states, the effect of reducing the midgap states, causing the superconducting order parameter to recover at the edge, is stronger than the effect of the spin-splitting on the condensation energy. As the parallel configuration most effectively produces a spinsplitting in the superconductor, this configuration features the largest condensation energy, giving rise to the behavior that is observed in Fig. Investigating the constant term in the Hamiltonian H 0 = i H 0,i , the difference between H 0,i for the parallel and antiparallel configurations is presented in Fig. We close by discussing briefly experimental considerations and possible choices of materials for observation of the d-wave results presented in this paper. While the system sizes in the presented calculations are limited by computational considerations, the presented results are expected to be robust also for larger systems. As RKKY interaction typically decays below experimentally accessible values over short length-scales of the order of nanometers, the separation between the magnetic contacts typically needs to be kept small. This might however only apply to the RKKY dominated indirect interaction that we observe for the horizontal edge of the d-wave superconductor. The preference of alignment of the ferromagnets when attached to a diagonal edge of a d-wave superconductor is expected to also be observable for larger magnet separation as the indirect interaction in this case is not dominated by itinerant carriers, but rather arises from the parallel configuration more efficiently inducing a spin splitting, suppressing the localized midgap states. The distance the magnets can interact over is then limited by the length scale determining how far away from a magnet the midgap states still experience a spin-splitting. If the magnet separation is much larger than this decay length of the induced spin-splitting along the edge, the spin-splitting arising from each magnet decays before interacting with the spin-splitting arising from the other magnet. There is then no difference between the two magnet configurations when it comes to suppression of midgap states, and the parallel configuration is no longer favored. For an s-wave superconductor in proximity to a ferromagnet, the proximity-induced magnetization decays over a length scale of the superconducting coherence length Experimental investigation of our main finding would con-sist of attaching magnetic leads to a {110} edge of a d-wave superconductor. The indirect interaction between the magnets can then be established by determining the energy barrier of switching between the two magnet configurations through an external magnetic field. Our prediction is that ferromagnetic alignment of the magnets will be preferred for a wide range of magnet separation distances. Possible material choices could be YBCO We have investigated the indirect exchange interaction between two ferromagnetic leads connected to a superconductor as a function of the separation between the magnets, showing that the presence of zero energy surface states in a d-wave superconductor can qualitatively change the results. When the magnets are connected to an edge without zero energy surface states we find a normal oscillating RKKY behavior. However, when the magnets are connected to an edge featuring zero energy surface states, the strength of the magnetic exchange interaction is shifted away from zero, always favoring alignment of the magnetization in the two magnets, as the aligned configuration produces a larger superconducting condensation energy. Using the unitary matrix P k the diagonalized form of the Hamiltonian will be H SC = H 0 + For different values of chemical potential and temperature, we then solve the self-consistent equations for the pairing amplitudes through iteration, using the different sets of initial values listed in table I. We then compare the resulting free energies (Eq. (A8)) and determine the favored phase of the system. The phase diagram is presented in Fig. i j , α≠α V i j (c † j α c † i α F αα i j * i,n ν i± x,n -υ i,n χ * i± x,n ) f (E n ) + υ i,n χ * i± x,n , * i± x,n ν i,n -υ i± x,n χ * i,n ) f (E n ) + υ i± x,n χ * i,n , * i,n ν i± ŷ,n -υ i,n χ * i± ŷ,n ) f (E n ) + υ i,n χ * i± ŷ,n , F ±y i = 2N ∑︁ n=1 (ω * i± ŷ,n ν i,n -υ i± ŷ,n χ * i,n ) f (E n ) + υ i± ŷ,n χ * i,n . * -k,↓ ν k,↑ ν k,↓ χ * -k,↑ χ * -k,↓ ω k,↑ ω k,↓ υ * -k,↑ υ * -k,↓ χ k,↑ χ k,↓ ν * -k,↑ ν * -k,↓