Spin-orbit coupling in two-dimensional systems is usually characterized by Rashba and Dresselhaus spin-orbit coupling (SOC) linear in the wave vector. However, there is a growing class of materials which instead support dominant SOC cubic in the wave vector (cSOC), while their superconducting properties remain unexplored. By focusing on Josephson junctions in Zeeman field with superconductors separated by a normal cSOC region, we reveal a strongly anharmonic current-phase relation and complex spin structure. An experimental cSOC tunability enables both tunable anomalous phase shift and supercurrent, which flows even at the zero-phase difference in the junction. A fingerprint of cSOC in Josephson junctions is the f -wave spin-triplet superconducting correlations, important for superconducting spintronics and supporting Majorana bound states. Spin-orbit coupling (SOC) and its symmetry breaking provide versatile opportunities for materials design, brining relativistic phenomena to the fore of the condensed matter physics Through the coexistence of SOC and Zeeman field, a conventional spin-singlet superconductivity can acquire spin-dependent long-range proximity effects Extensive normal-state studies of SOC in zinc-blende heterostructures usually distinguishing the resulting spin-orbit fields due to broken bulk inversion symmetry, Dresselhaus SOC, and surface inversion asymmetry, Rashba SOC, and focus on their dominant linear dependence in the wave vector, k While typically k-cubic SOC contributions (cSOC) in heterostructures are neglected or considered just detrimental perturbations, for example, limiting the stability of PSH To address this situation and motivate further cSOC studies of superconducting properties, we consider JJs depicted in Fig. To study cSOC, we consider an effective Hamiltonian where H(p) = p 2 /2m * + σ • h + H cSOC (p), with momentum, p = (p x , p y , 0) [see Fig. expressed using cSOC strengths α c and β c , for Rashba and Dresselhaus terms, where p ± = p x ± ip y , and σ ± = σ x ± iσ y . The field operator in spin space is given by ψ(p) = [ψ ↑ (p), ψ ↓ (p)] T , with ↑, ↓ spin projections. To describe S regions in Fig. where μ is the chemical potential and ∆ is a 2 × 2 gap matrix in spin space. The field operators in the rotated particle-hole and spin basis are ψ = (ψ ↑ , ψ ↓ , ψ † ↓ , -ψ † ↑ ) T . To calculate the charge current, we use its quantum definition where no charge sink or source is present. Therefore, the time variation of charge density vanishes, ∂ t ρ c ≡ 0 = lim H στ σ τ is the component form of H, with spin (particle-hole) label σ (τ ), and and r ≡ (x, y, 0). From the current conservation, the charge current density is, The complexity of H precludes simple solutions and we evaluate the wavefunctions and supercurrent numerically. To reduce the edge effects, we consider Fig. To investigate the role of cSOC on the ground-state Josephson energy, E GS , and the CPR obtained from the supercurrent I(φ) ∝ ∂E GS /∂φ, we first consider a simple situation with only Rashba cSOC (α c = 0, β c = 0) and effective Zeeman field h x (h y = h z = 0). The evolution of E GS with |h x |, where its minima are denoted by dots in Fig. While our previous results suggest no direct cSOC influence on CPR, a simple in-plane rotation of h, h x = 0, h y = 0, drastically changes this behavior. This is shown in Figs. Simple harmonics used to describe anharmonic CPR in high-temperature superconductors where τ σ n is the normal region transparency for spin channel σ. With only few lowest terms in this expansion (N = 1, 2, 3), shown in Fig. Key insights into the CPR and an explicit functional dependence for the φ 0 state are obtained by a systematic I(φ) symmetry analysis with respect to the cSOC (α c , β c ) and Zeeman field or, equivalently, magnetization (h x,y,z ) parameters These properties are expressed as an effective phase shift to the a sinusoidal CPR, sin(φ+φ 0 ), extracted from Eq. ( where the parameters Γ 1,2,x,y are introduced through their relations, These relations are modified as μ and h change. For μ ∆, the functional dependence for the φ 0 state is simplified where Γ 2 > Γ 1 and Γ 1,2 > 1. Therefore, φ 0 state occurs when h shifts p ⊥ to I(φ) and thus alters the SOC An insight to the phase evolution and circuit operation of JJs with cSOC is provided by generalizing the classical model of resistively and capacitively shunted junction (RSCJ) where φ 0 is the magnetic flux quantum and I(φ) yields a generally anharmonic CPR, as shown from Eq. ( In JJs with ferromagnetic regions, I c is the tunable I c by changing the underlying magnetic state where s, s , s 1 are spin indices, the summation is implied While we are not aware of any Josephson effect experiments in 2D systems dominated by cSOC, our studied parameters are within the range of already reported measurements. Choosing m * of an electron mass, and ∆ = 0.2 meV, which is similar for both Al and proximity-induced superconductivity Our results reveal that the cSOC in JJs provides versatile opportunities to design a superconducting response and test its unexplored manifestations. The anomalous Josephson effect could serve as a sensitive probe to quantify cSOC. While identifying the relevant form of SOC is a challenge even in the normal state With the advances in gate-tunable structures and novel materials systems Supplemental Material for: Cubic spin-orbit coupling and anomalous Josephson effect in planar junctions Here we present the four-component spinor wave functions for spin-orbit coupling cubic in the wave vector (cSOC) considered for the geometry of a Josephson junction discussed in the main text. To simplify the notation, we introduce the parameterization k x = k cos θ, k y = k sin θ for the in-plane components of the wave vector, where θ is the incident angle of moving particles with respect to the interface. The out-of-plane component of Zeeman field is set to zero h z = 0 and the in-plane components are given by h x = h 0 cos φ, h y = h 0 sin φ. By diagonalizing the Hamiltonian in the main text, we find the following spinor wave functions for the electron (ψ e ) and hole (ψ h ) parts, where ε e (ε h ) are the electron (hole) quasiparticle energies, m * is the effective mass, μ is the chemical potential, while α c and β c are the Rashba and Dresselhaus cSOC strengths. The total wave function inside the middle region of the Josephson junction is a superposition of right and left moving electron and hole wave functions. The wave functions within the superconducting regions are the usual s-wave superconducting wave functions (±). In the calculations that follows, the energies are normalized by the superconducting gap ∆, lengths by ξ S = / √ 2m * ∆, and the cSOC strengths by ∆ξ 3 S . To obtain explicit functional form for the state of an anomalous superconducting phase difference in the Josephson junction, φ 0 , in both low-and high-chemical potential regimes, we have computed current-phase relations (CPRs) at μ = ∆, and μ = 10∆. A sample plot, of numerous plots produced is shown in Fig. I(+α c , 0, 0, -h y ) = I(-α c , 0, 0, +h y ); φ 0 < 0, (12b) The relations in Eqs. ( The relations in Eqs. (13a) and (13b) show that the nonzero β c reverses the sign of the φ 0 state compared to Eqs. (12a) and (12b) whereas the inclusion of α c in Eqs. (13c) and (13d) leaves the sign of the φ 0 state intact compared to Eqs. (12c) and (12d). Furthermore, the modulus of the φ 0 state in Eqs. (13c) and (13d) is the same. The same statement is true for Eqs. (13a) and (13b) although the modulus of φ 0 in Eqs. (13c) and (13d) is larger than Eqs. (13a) and (13b). The analysis so far offers φ 0 ∝ (α )h y α, in which we have defined the constants Γ 2 > Γ 1 , Γ 1 < 1, and Γ 2 > 1. To understand the influence of Zeeman field on the inferred φ 0 so far, we have computed CPRs with α c = 0, β c = ±1 and α c = ±, β c = 0 in the presence of h x = 0 and h y = 0. The results are given by Eqs. in which the parameters Γ 1,2,x,y are introduced through their relations: To complete the analysis, we have computed CPRs in the presence of both cSOC coefficients α c , β c and Zeeman field or, equivalently, magnetization components h x , h y . The resulting CPRs are presented in Eqs. As can be seen, the relations above confirm the obtained spontaneous (at I(φ = 0)) phase-shift given by Eq. ( I(+α c , 0, 0, -h y ) = I(-α c , 0, 0, +h y ); φ 0 < 0, (18b) Compared with Eqs. ( By setting nonzero β c and α c in Eqs. (18a), (18b) and Eqs. (18c), (18d), respectively, the main findings are summarized in Eqs. I(-α c , 0, +h x , +h y ) = I(+α c , 0, +h x , -h y ) = I(-α c , 0, -h x , +h y ) = I(+α c , 0, -h x , -h y ); φ 0 < 0, (20a) To investigate the influence of the components of Zeeman field on the φ 0 state, we have added the second component of Zeeman field in Eqs. Finally, to further confirm the obtained functional form for the phase shift, we have set both the cSOC coefficients, i.e., α c , β c and the components of Zeeman field, i.e. h x , h y to nonzero values. The corresponding CPRs are given in Eqs. in which the parameters are Γ 2 > Γ 1 and Γ 1,2 > 1. Using the common description of the two-dimensional electron gas with the Hamiltonian linear in the wave vector and the corresponding Rashba and Dresselhaus coefficients, α l , β l For providing a complete picture of the supercurrent profile partially presented in the main text, Fig. Figure To show how the increase of β c reshapes isoenergy contours, we plot the isoenergy band structure for 'α c = +1, β c = 0.4', 'α c = +1, β c = +0.8', 'α c = +1, β c = +1.2', and 'α c = +1, β c = +1.6' in Figs. To demonstrate the existence of zero-energy Majorana flat bands in a system hosting the three ingredients, cSOC, Zeeman field (magnetization), and superconductivity, we plot in Fig. The Green function in the Matsubara representation is defined as where ω = πk B T (2n + 1)/ is the Matsubara frequency with T as the temperature and n ∈ Z and the integration if performed over the imaginary time, τ . The normal G(τ ; r, r ) and anomalous F (τ ; r, r ) components of the Green function are defined by where s, s , s 1 are spin indices, the summation is implied over s 1 , τ is the imaginary time, ψ s is the field operator, and T τ denotes time ordering of operators. For comparison, we have also studied the linear SOC regime, using the common Hamiltonian in which α l and β l are the Rashba and Dresselhaus coefficients where for brevity we use γ = 2 /(2m * ) and set = 1 in the term involving ω. To further simplify analytical expressions we consider three sets of parameter values: (i) α l = 0, β l = 0 and (ii, iii) β l = ±α l . The resulting anomalous Green functions within the first parameter set considered (i.e. (i) α l = 0, β l = 0), can be expressed by: Additionally, or (ii, iii) β l = ±α l the Green function reads The same study with cSOC, given in the main text, results in where, to further simplify the expressions, we have defined new variables ak As can be seen, even by introducing these simplifying variables, the denominator of the Green function, Ω, is highly complicated. Therefore, in what follows, we present only the numerator of the anomalous Green function. For the case (i) α c = 0, β c = 0 we find whereas for the cases (ii, iii) β c = ±α c the anomalous components of Green function reduce to As can be seen from the above relations, the obtained Green functions are too complicated to be analyzed analytically. Therefore, we evaluate these expressions numerically to provide a detailed overview of these superconducting correlations. Figure To illustrate how well is the complete set of {sin, cos} basis functions in recovering the CPR, we have shown such study in Fig. We then make use of the following expansion to find a best fit to the solid black curve, I(φ) ≈ Here, I sn , I cn , φ sn , φ cn are considered as fitting parameters and are determined through a Monte-Carlo search sampling. The relative error is defined as the absolute difference between the original and fitted functions divided by the absolute value of the original function. The variable 'n' runs from 1 to N and includes up to N first harmonics. In Fig. As can be seen, even with N=10 (10 sin functions and 10 cos functions), the expansion ( 