We develop an inhomogeneous quantum mean-field approach to the behavior of collective excitations across the superfluid-Mott glass quantum phase transition in two dimensions, complementing recent quantum Monte Carlo simulations [Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 027002 (2020)]. In quadratic (Gaussian) approximation, the Goldstone (phase) and Higgs (amplitude) modes completely decouple. Each is described by a disordered Bogoliubov Hamiltonian which can be solved by an inhomogeneous multi-mode Bogoliubov transformation. We find that the Higgs mode is spatially localized in both phases. The corresponding scalar spectral function shows a broad peak that is noncritical in the sense that its peak frequency does not soften but remains nonzero across the quantum phase transition. In contrast, the lowest-energy Goldstone mode delocalizes in the superfluid phase, leading to a zero-frequency spectral peak. We compare these findings to the results of the quantum Monte Carlo simulations. We also relate them to general results on the localization of bosonic excitations, and we discuss the limits and generality of our approach. Systems of disordered interacting bosons find diverse experimental applications such as helium absorbed in porous media The influence of impurities, defects, and other types of quenched disorder on quantum phase transitions has been analyzed extensively since the 1990's. The resulting body of work has established that quantum phase transitions are generally more strongly affected by quenched disorder than their classical counterparts. Unconventional phenomena such as infinite-randomness criticality The majority of the past theoretical work on disordered quantum phase transitions was focused on the behavior of thermodynamic quantities across the transition. The character and dynamics of excitations has been explored less, despite the fact that they govern a variety of experiments ranging from inelastic neutron scattering in magnetic materials to various electrical and thermal transport measurements. Collective excitations due to the spontaneous breaking of a continuous symmetry are particularly important. They include Goldstone modes related to oscillations of the order parameter direction and amplitude (Higgs) modes related to oscillations of the order parameter magnitude (see, e.g., Refs. Recently, Monte Carlo simulations were employed to investigate the behavior of the Higgs mode across a paradigmatic disordered quantum phase transition, viz., the superfluid-Mott glass transition of disordered interacting bosons To unravel and distinguish possible causes, such as enhanced damping of the Higgs mode or spatial localization effects, a quantum mean-field theory was introduced in Ref. The localization physics of noninteracting bosonic modes has been studied quite extensively in the literature, with applications to phonons Our main results can be summarized as follows. The mean-field ground state in the superfluid phase features a spatially inhomogeneous local order parameter. The relative spatial variations of the order parameter are small deep inside the superfluid phase, but they grow as the transition is approached, reflecting the Griffiths region close to the transition. In the insulating (Mott) phase, the U(1) order parameter symmetry is not broken, thus both excitation sectors are degenerate and all modes are localized. In the superfluid phase, Goldstone and Higgs excitations show qualitatively different behaviors. The lowest Goldstone excitation (having zero excitation energy) is extended over the entire system, in agreement with the general symmetry analysis The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 defines the model. The inhomogeneous quantum mean-field theory is developed in Sec. 3. The effective Hamiltonians for the Goldstone and Higgs excitations are derived in Sec. 4, and their diagonalization is discussed in Sec. 5. Section 6 introduces the specific quantities and data analysis techniques we employ to study the excitations. For comparison purposes, Sec. 7 summarizes the results for a clean square lattice Bose-Hubbard model. Simulations for both the Goldstone and the Higgs mode are discussed in Sec. 8. We conclude in Sec. 9. The Bose-Hubbard model (BHM) describes interacting bosons on a lattice. Its Hamiltonian reads where a † i and a i are the boson creation and annihilation operator on lattice site i, and n i = a † i a i is the boson number operator. U i is a repulsive on-site interaction, and J i j denotes the hopping amplitude between sites i and j. Later, we will focus on the square lattice with nearest-neighbor hopping only, but the theory can be developed without these restrictions. n is the filling (or background "charge"). A nonzero chemical potential can be absorbed in a shift of n. We are interested in the case of large integer n for which the Bose-Hubbard model is particle-hole symmetric. In the clean case, consisting of an undiluted lattice with uniform U i ≡ U and translationally invariant J i j = f (r i j ) (where f decays sufficiently rapidly with the distance r i j between sites i and j), the qualitative behavior of the model is readily understood. If the interactions dominate over the hopping terms, J i j U, the ground state is a gapped, incompressible Mott insulator. In the opposite limit, J i j U, the ground state is a superfluid. These two phases are separated by a continuous quantum phase transition in the (2 + 1) dimensional XY universality class. In the presence of quenched disorder, the superfluid and Mott insulator phases are always separated by an insulating "glass" phase in which rare large regions of local superfluid order (superfluid "puddles") coexist with the insulating bulk We employ two different types of the (particle-hole symmetry preserving) disorder. The first disorder type is site dilution, i.e., we randomly remove a nonzero fraction p of lattice sites while the U i and J i j of the remaining sites stay translationally invariant. This can be formally written as U i = i U, J i j = i j f (r i j ) where the i are independent random variables that take the values 0 (vacancy) with probability p and 1 (occupied site) with probability 1p. Within the second disorder type, the lattice is undiluted but the values of the onsite interactions U i are independent random variables drawn from a uniform probability density of average U and relative width r, whereas the J i j remain translationally invariant. The values of r are restricted to 0 ≤ r < 2 to avoid finding sites where the onsite interaction is zero or even attractive, U i < 0. The strength of this "random-U" disorder can be tuned to zero continuously whereas the defects created by site dilution always have a finite strength locally. Our approach follows Ref. i,1 t i,0 . In the limit of large filling, n 1, the Bose-Hubbard model takes the simple pseudo-spin-one form with Ji j = nJ i j . The spin operators are given by and the eigenstates of the S z i operator, |+ i , |0 i , and |i correspond to the original boson number eigenstates |n + 1 i , |n i , and |n -1 i , respectively. The inhomogeneous mean-field theory is based on a product ansatz for the ground state wave function where θ j and η j are local variational parameters (0 ≤ θ j ≤ π/2, 0 ≤ η j < 2π). For θ j = 0, the wave function describes the Mott-insulating phase because the local boson number is fixed at n i = n, without any fluctuations. For θ j > 0, the wave function features a nonzero local superfluid order parameter a † j = √ n ψ j with ψ j = S + j = e -iη j sin(θ j ). Thus, the mixing angle θ j parameterizes the local order parameter amplitude and η j its phase. Evaluating the expectation value of H S in the product state (6) yields the variational ground state energy It is minimized by mixing angles fulfilling the coupled mean-field equations while the phases are uniform, η i ≡ η = const. In the following, we set these phases to zero without loss of generality. The trivial Mott-insulating state, sin(θ i ) = 0, is always a solution of the mean-field equations In the presence of disorder, the system of equations ( Having obtained the mean-field ground state, we now consider excitations on top of it. The goal is to derive effective Hamiltonians for these excitations. As a first step, we introduce a new set of local boson operators via the unitary transformation such that b † 0, j creates the local mean-field ground state out of the fictitious vacuum. b † G, j and b † H, j create states orthogonal to b † 0, j |vac and describe, respectively, a change in the local order parameter phase η j and a change in the local order parameter amplitude sin(θ j ). These operators fulfill the constraint b To express the Bose-Hubbard Hamiltonian in terms b bosons, we first rewrite the spin-one operators We eliminate ("fully condense") by means of the constraint Inserting these representations into the pseudo-spin Hamiltonian (3), and using the meanfield equations The Goldstone and Higgs modes thus completely decouple to quadratic order in b G, j and b H, j . H G and H H each take the form of a disordered Bogoliubov Hamiltonian describing a set of coupled harmonic oscillators with the local frequencies In the Mott-insulating phase, the local mixing angles θ i all vanish. Thus H G and H H are identical, in agreement with the fact that the two excitation modes are degenerate if the U(1) order parameter symmetry is not broken. where the d (Bogoliubov) bosons correspond to the excitation eigenstates of our system. The transformation coefficients u and v can be found efficiently by interpreting each of the fluctuation Hamiltonians as a system of coupled harmonic oscillators and switching to a firstquantization framework. The local oscillator energies in eqs. α,i /2 + α,i x 2 α,i /2 where p α,i and x α,i represent the momentum and position operators of the fictitious oscillator at the site i. (The mass can be set to unity without loss of generality.) The terms (b α,i + b † α,i ) that appear in the intersite couplings in eqs. ( In first quantization, the fluctuation Hamiltonians H G and H H thus take the form The coupling matrices are given by for the Goldstone and Higgs modes, respectively. The Hamiltonians ( where ν α,n is the n-th nonnegative excitation eigenfrequency (energy), and the n-th column of the matrix V α, jn contains the n-th eigenvector. Going back to second quantization in the eigenbasis of X α yields with the d bosons given by Here, xα,n and pα,n are the position and momentum operators in the eigenbasis of X α . Using the definitions R α, jn = V α, jn ν α,n / α, j and L α, jn = V α, jn α, j /ν α,n , the multi-modal Bogoliubov transformation can be written in the compact form implying that the transformation coefficients u and v in eq. ( As discussed in Ref. where Q is a real matrix. The fluctuation Hamiltonians thus fulfill the symmetries of the chiral orthogonal class (BDI in the Altland-Zirnbauer classification) In order to study the character and dynamics of the excitations, we analyze the eigenfunctions V α, jk , and we compute a number of additional observables. We are interested in the longitudinal and transversal order parameter susceptibilities as well as in the scalar susceptibility (the susceptibility of the order parameter magnitude). In terms of the pseudo-spin-1 operators introduced in eqs. ( For each of these operators, we define the retarded Green function. The longitudinal susceptibility reads The transversal and scalar susceptibilities, G ⊥ jk and G S jk , are defined analogously. Expanding the operators to quadratic order in the b bosons, the longitudinal, transversal and scalar susceptibilities can be decomposed into functions of the local order parameters (mixing angles θ j ) and the Green functions of the elementary excitations in the Higgs and Goldstone channels which are defined as To evaluate the ground state expectation values, we transform the b bosons to the Bogoliubov d bosons by means of eq. ( In the presence of disorder, the spectral functions A α jk (ω) are not translationally invariant in space. Translational invariance is restored after an ensemble average over disorder configurations. We can then perform a spatial Fourier transformation to wave vector q, where r j is the position vector of site j, and . . . denotes the disorder average. Let us briefly discuss some qualitative features of the longitudinal, transversal, and scalar susceptibilities. In the Mott-insulating phase, the Goldstone and Higgs Green functions G G jk (t) and G H jk (t) are identical because the corresponding fluctuation Hamiltonians agree with each other, as discussed at the end of Sec. 4. As the local mixing angles θ i all vanish in the Mott insulator, eqs. ( Because the Goldstone and Higgs excitations are the eigenstates of the spatially disordered fluctuation Hamiltonians H G and H H , they are expected to feature nontrivial localization properties analogous to those observed for other noninteracting bosonic excitations in disordered systems Within the multifractal analysis where the sum runs over all lattice sites k in the box. We then construct the q-th moment of these box probabilities, The sum runs over all sites j, i.e., it considers all possible (overlapping) boxes of size l. The prefactor 1/l 2 guaranties the proper normalization of the probability, P 1 (n, l, L) = 1. Note that P 2 (n, 1, L) corresponds to the inverse participation number of state n. For multifractal wave functions In our numerical analysis, we consider averages over the disorder distribution and/or over several states for a given disorder realization. They are obtained by averaging the moments P q (n, l, L) where . . . denotes the appropriate average. In addition to the multifractal analysis, we calculate the smallest positive Lyapunov exponent γ, characterizing the exponential decay of an eigenstate in a quasi-one-dimensional geometry by means of the recursive Green function approach We consider a system defined on a quasi-one-dimensional strip of size N × L sites with N L. (Geometrically, it can be considered a being stack of N layers, each containing L sites.) If the Hamiltonian contains nearest-neighbor interactions only, the coupling matrices X G and X H defined in eqs. ( The diagonal block X i contains the onsite terms as well couplings within the ith layer, while the upper diagonal block T i contains the interlayer couplings between the layers i and i + 1. We consider the Green function g(ω associated with X at energy ω. Here, I is the identity matrix and η shifts the energy into the complex plane to avoid singularities. We use the tridiagonal form The iteration is initialized by . In this formalism, the smallest positive Lyapunov exponent (inverse localization length) reads Localization properties are conveniently extracted from the finite-size scaling behavior of the dimensionless Lyapunov exponent Γ = γL. The matrix elements in g N 1,N usually decay quickly with increasing N. To sustain numerical stability during the iteration, we extract the leading order of magnitude of the elements after each κ = 100 iterations. Mathematically, this means that we rewrite the logarithm in eq. ( In this section, we apply our approach to the clean Bose-Hubbard model with nearest-neighbor interactions, defined on a Bravais lattice of N sites with coordination number (number of nearest neighbors) z. In the first sum, i j denotes pairs of nearest-neighbor sites. The results reproduce earlier work in the literature where J = nJ. In a Bravais lattice, all sites are equivalent. This implies that the variational parameters in the product ansatz where N is the number of sites. It is minimized by a mixing angle θ that fulfills the meanfield equation 4z J cos(θ) sin(θ) = U sin(θ). A superfluid solution cos(θ) = U/U c0 appears for interactions U below the critical value U c0 = 4z J. Its local order parameter ψ j = S + j = e -iη sin(θ) is uniform in space; it has magnitude sin(θ) = 1 -(U/U c0 ) 2 and arbitrary phase η (which we set to zero, as before). We now turn to excitations on top of the mean-field ground state. In the clean case, the fluctuation Hamiltonians ( with G = (U/2) cos 2 (θ/2)+z J sin 2 (θ) and H = (U/2) cos(θ)+2z J sin 2 (θ). These Hamiltonians are translationally invariant. After a spatial Fourier transformation, they can be written as where q is the wave vector. The coefficients read Here (q) = j Ji j e iq•r i j is the dispersion of the lattice. For a square lattice with nearest-neighbor interactions, it is given by (q) = 2 J cos(q x ) + 2 J cos(q y ). The Hamiltonians (50) can be solved by applying a (unimodal) Bogoliubov transformation to each (q, -q) pair. This yields with the excitation eigenenergies given by The same result can also be obtained by using the first-quantization framework of Sec. 5, i.e., by transforming the fluctuation Hamiltonians ( We now turn to the properties of the disordered Bose-Hubbard model for which the meanfield theory developed in Sec. 3 needs to be solved by means of computer simulations. Specifically, we focus on a square-lattice Bose-Hubbard model with nearest neighbor hopping. The quantum phase transition between superfluid and Mott insulator is tuned by varying the Hubbard interaction U whereas the scaled hopping amplitude is set to unity, J = 1, fixing the energy scale. As described in Sec. 2, we consider two types of (particle-hole-symmetry preserving) disorder, site dilution and random Hubbard interactions U i . In the case of site dilution, we employ dilution values (vacancy probabilities) p = 0, 1/8, 1/5, 1/4, and 1/3. For comparison, the site percolation threshold for the square lattice is p c = 0.407253 Most calculations are performed on lattices of L×L sites with linear sizes up to L = 256. For a few calculations of excitations at higher energies, we employ linear sizes as large as L = 1536. In addition, we analyze strips of up to 128 × 10 6 sites within the recursive Green function approach of Sec. 6.3. All results are averaged over a large number of disorder realizations. The first step in our approach is the numerical solution of the mean-field equations (8) which constitute a large system of coupled nonlinear equations. We implement two different numerical algorithms to solve these equations efficiently and accurately, a simple iterative method and a gradient descent method. In Appendix A, we describe these methods in more detail and discuss their accuracy and numerical stability. We now discuss the results of our computer simulations, starting with the properties of the mean-field ground state. To characterize the superfluid order, we compute the average and typical order parameters for a given sample (disorder realization), defined as the arithmetic and geometric means, respectively, of the local order parameters ψ j = sin(θ j ), Figure Figure To further elucidate the inhomogeneous mean-field ground state, the first row of Fig. We now turn to the excitations on top of the mean-field ground state, starting with a discussion of the excitation spectrum, i.e., the eigenvalues of the fluctuation Hamiltonians H G and H H given in eqs. ( At higher energies, the densities of state of both modes show sharp features. They are caused by the discrete nature of the dilution disorder, i.e., they stem from small finite-size clusters of sites which support excitations of fixed energies. Systems with random-U disorder feature analogous behavior, as can be seen in Fig. After having discussed the energy spectrum of the excitations, we now consider the eigenstates. The present section focuses on the lowest-energy excitations in both the Goldstone and Higgs channels. To analyze the localization properties quantitatively, we compute the generalized dimension τ 2 of the lowest Goldstone and Higgs excitations, as defined in eq. ( As the system enters the superfluid phase with decreasing U, the two excitation branches evolve in qualitatively different ways. The lowest Higgs excitation, is localized in the superfluid phase just as in the insulating phase. For strong disorder, the degree of localization even seems to increase in the superfluid phase as τ 2 further decreases. The lowest Goldstone excitation, in contrast, undergoes a striking delocalization transition upon entering the superfluid phase. Its τ 2 value rapidly increases with decreasing U. Importantly, the system-size dependence of τ 2 also changes sign, it now increases with increasing L towards the value τ 2 = 2 characteristic of an extended state. In fact one can show analytically that the lowest Goldstone excitation is extended over the entire sample if the system features superfluid long-range order. This can be demonstrated as follows. According to Goldstone's theorem, the lowest eigenstate of the Goldstone Hamiltonian H G must have zero energy, ν G,0 = 0, in the superfluid phase because the superfluid ground state spontaneously breaks the U(1) order-parameter symmetry. (We have verified this numerically for all samples.) For this state, the corresponding eigenvalue problem (21) simplifies to a system of linear equations, A non-trivial solution of this system is given by as can be easily checked by inserting it back into the system (57). Here, Υ is a normalization constant. Thus, the lowest Goldstone eigenstate depends on the order parameter sin(θ j ) and local interactions (via G, j ) only. The denominator of the solution (58) is bounded from both below and above. (For dilution disorder, G, j ≥ U/4 and G, j ≤ U/2 + 4 J.) Consequently, the localization character of V G, j0 is governed by that of the order parameter. A long-range ordered superfluid state features a nonzero macroscopic order parameter Ψ av in the thermodynamic limit. This implies either a more-or-less homogeneous superfluid or at least a nonzero density of superfluid puddles. According to Eq. ( The delocalization transition of the lowest Goldstone excitation as a function of U is also observed in the dimensionless Lyapunov exponent Γ G calculated from quasi-one-dimensional (strip) samples, as described in Sec. 6.3. Figure Our numerical results for the generalized dimension τ 2 and the dimensionless Lyapunov exponent Γ as well as the analytical construction We emphasize that the qualitative features of the localization properties of the lowest Goldstone and Higgs modes in the bulk phases are in full agreement with the general symmetry analysis We now turn to higher excitations in both the Goldstone and the Higgs channels. In the Mottinsulating phase their behavior is easily understood. As all local order parameters ψ j vanish in the Mott insulating phase, the disorder in the fluctuation Hamiltonians H G and H H or, equivalently, the disorder in the coupling matrices X G and X H is produced by the values of U i and Ji j only. The disorder is thus uncorrelated in space guaranteeing that all excitations in the Mott-insulating phase are localized in two space dimensions. The situation in the superfluid phase is more complicated because the coefficients of H G and H H (or the matrix elements X G, jk and X H, jk ) depend on the local mixing angles θ j . These angles are correlated because they fulfill the mean-field equations We first analyze the Higgs excitations in the superfluid phase. Figure We observe analogous behavior for other dilution values as well as for random-U disorder, as illustrated in Fig. It is interesting to compare Figs. 4. Also note that the sharp features at energies around ν = 6 observed in all panels of Fig. To make direct contact with the Monte Carlo simulations of Ref. within the Gaussian approximation and thus have no intrinsic width. This broadening stems from the fact that many localized eigenstates contribute to the zero-wave-vector spectral function, i.e., it is caused by disorder-induced localization effects. We also observe that the peak energy ω H of the Higgs spectral function does not soften at the superfluid-Mott insulator transition, in contrast to what is expected from naive scaling. This mirrors the Monte Carlo results. (Note that the peak energy ω H differs from the energy gap m H that marks the lowest excitation energy.) In contrast, the clean spectral functions show the expected δ peaks at energies corresponding to the Higgs and Goldstone masses. We also investigate the q-dependence of the Goldstone and Higgs spectral functions. Figure In summary, we have developed a quantum mean-field theory for a model of disordered and interacting bosons to complement recent quantum Monte Carlo simulations of the collective modes near the superfluid-Mott glass quantum phase transition. The theory describes the quantum ground state as an inhomogeneous product wave function. The mean-field theory needs to be solved numerically, but it is able to capture the spatial inhomogeneities of the superfluid order parameter. Collective excitations are then obtained from an expansion of the Hamiltonian in the fluctuations about the mean-field ground state up to quadratic order. Extensive numerical calculations have demonstrated that all excitations are spatially localized in the Mott-insulating phase (where the two modes are degenerate because the U(1) order parameter symmetry is not broken) for arbitrary excitation energy. The Higgs mode is still localized for all energies in the superfluid phase. In contrast, the lowest (zero-energy) Goldstone excitation delocalizes in the superfluid phase whereas all higher-energy Goldstone excitations are localized. This implies that there is no mobility edge for the excitations at a nonzero energy. These qualitative localization properties agree with the general symmetry classification for localization of bosonic excitations We have also computed the spectral functions of the collective excitations. The Higgs spectral function A H (ω) displays a broad maximum whose peak frequency remains nonzero across the transition, resembling the corresponding Monte Carlo results In this concluding section we put our results into a broader perspective, and we discuss open questions. Let us comment on the validity of the mean-field approach. Based on a comparison with recent Monte Carlo simulations The quadratic (Gaussian) approximation of the fluctuation Hamiltonians H G and H H does not take anharmonic (mode-coupling) effects into account. They could be included by keeping higher-order terms in the expansion of the Hamiltonian and would allow us to study the effects of damping. Exploring their influence and the interplay between the anharmonicities and the disorder remains a task for the future. As pointed out in Ref. Within the quadratic (Gaussian) approximation, the fluctuation Hamiltonians describe noninteracting quasi particles. It is interesting to ask whether concepts of many-body localization become important for the collective excitations once anharmonic terms beyond the quadratic approximation are included. Specifically, will mode coupling effects have delocalizing tendencies for higher excitations in the middle of the energy band where the density of states is large and anharmonic terms should be able to couple a large number of states? In this paper, we have focused on the two-dimensional Bose-Hubbard Hamiltonian. However, the mean-field approach can be applied to three-dimensional systems as well. The thermodynamic critical behavior of the superfluid-Mott glass quantum phase transition in three dimensions has recently been shown to be conventional and similar to the two-dimensional transition In conclusion, our results show that disordered quantum phase transitions can feature unconventional collective excitations that violate naive scaling even if their thermodynamic critical behavior is entirely conventional. This raises the question of whether or not one can classify the excitation dynamics of disordered quantum phase transitions along similar lines as their thermodynamics Preprint submitted to Annals of PhysicsDecember 15, 2021 Multifractality is usually a property of critical states only, but the scaling behavior of the associated observables can be used to identify the localization characteristics of all eigenstates in the thermodynamic limit. We have employed an arithmetic average over the disorder configurations; using a geometric average gives essentially the same results. This indicates that Ψ av and Ψ typ are already self-averaging for the system sizes considered. In the Mott-insulating phase, the local order parameters ψ j = sin(θ j ) vanishes on all lattice sites. Thus, the state For random-U disorder, the tail is expected to stretch to U c0 /(1r/2).