Janus particles self-propel by generating local tangential concentration gradients along their surface. These gradients are present in a layer whose thickness is small compared to the particle size. Chemical asymmetry along the surface is a pre requisite to generate tangential chemical gradients, which gives rise to diffusioosmotic flows in a thin region around the particle.This results in an effective slip on the particle surface. This slip results in the observed "swimming" motion of a freely suspended particle even in the absence of externally imposed concentration gradients. Motivated by the chemotactic behavior of their biological counterparts (such as sperm cells, neutrophils, macrophages, bacteria etc.), which sense and respond to external chemical gradients, the current work aims at developing a theoretical framework to study the motion of a Janus particle in an externally imposed linear concentration gradient. The external gradient along with the self-generated concentration gradient determines the swimming velocity and orientation of the particle. The dominance of each of these effects is characterized by a nondimensional activity number A (ratio of applied gradient to self-generated gradient). The surface of Janus particle is modelled as having a different activity and mobility coefficient on the two halves. Using the Lorentz Reciprocal theorem, an analytical expression for the rotational and translational velocity is obtained. The analytical framework helps us divide the parameter space of surface activity and mobility into four regions where the particle exhibits different trajectories. Artificial active particles can swim autonomously in a fluid even in the absence of an external electrical or chemical field. These particles convert the chemical energy of the solute molecules into mechanical energy; their asymmetric nature provides a sense of directionality/navigation. The self-propulsion of these micron to submicron sized particles falls in the regime of low Reynolds numbers (~10 Derjaguin Khair Pe ≥ O(1), Re → 0 Extended the work of Anderson et. al A qualitative study of chemotaxis of a Janus sphere. Pe → 0, Re → 0, δ a → 0 Provides a framework for quantitative understanding of artificial chemotaxis. Taking inspiration from immune cells (such as neutrophils and macrophages) that respond to chemical gradients and move towards the site of injury/ infection Motivated by the need to provide guidelines for rational fabrication of drug delivery systems, the quantitative chemotactic response and its dependence on different parameters must be analysed. It is hence important to seek answers to questions such as (i) what is the time required for reorientation? (ii) how does this re-orientation compare with that induced by Brownian noise? (iii) how does the swimming direction depend on the relative strength of the self-generated and the artificially imposed concentration gradients? (iv) how does the trajectory depend on surface activity, mobility coefficient. To obtain insights into the motion of biological swimmers and keeping applications such as drug delivery in perspective, in this work, we theoretically study the motion of an active particle placed in an external concentration gradient. The interaction between the external concentration gradient with the self-generated concentration gradient is characterised by a dimensionless activity number A which is the ratio of external concentration gradient to self-generated concentration gradient. We discuss the various characteristic scales governing the system and state the governing and boundary equations in section 2. In section 3, using the principle of linearity, the governing equations are decomposed into two subproblems: the first takes into account the external concentration gradient while the second accounts for the surface activity. The next section ( Using the derived translational and rotational velocity, dynamic equations are used to determine the trajectory of the particle. In section 5, we quantify the rotational and translational behaviour of the particle. Finally, in section 6, we discuss the key insights and conclusions. A Janus particle propels itself in a solution with uniform external concentration by creating a local tangential concentration gradient. The solute molecules interact with the surface of the Janus particle in a thin region. The interactions of solute molecules with the particle are characterised by a mobility coefficient. A positive mobility coefficient refers to repulsive interactions, while a negative value refers to attractive interactions. Through the concentration gradient, the interaction generates a pressure gradient, which drives the diffusion-osmotic flow inside the thin layer. The diffusioosmotic flow acts as an effective slip and results in a swimming motion of the Janus particle. In this work, we consider a particle which has two different axisymmetric surface activities (shown by red and blue colour in Fig. We study the motion of a Janus particle of radius 'a * ' under the influence of an external linear concentration gradient of strength γ * , where the superscript * is used to represent dimensional variables. We define two frames of reference centered on the particle: a frame of reference (e y , e z ) whose z-axis coincides with the axis of self-propulsion at every instant of time, and a stationary frame of reference given by (e y 0 , e z 0 ). The externally imposed concentration gradient is at an angle β 0 with horizontal axis, which is denoted by e z 0 in a stationary frame of reference. Fig. Here, α + * and α - * are the activities on the two faces, and θ is the polar angle. The activity is uniform in the axisymmetric direction. e z′ is the direction of external concentration gradient. Here the concentration field is of the form C ∞ * = γ * z′; where z′ is the distance of a point on e z′ from the origin (as shown in Fig The external concentration field can be expressed as, C ∞ * = γ * (z cosβ + y sinβ). Using z = rcosθ and y = rsinθsinφ, θ and φ being the polar and radial angles, we obtain: The solute and momentum transport around the particle is characterised by the following timescales: i)momentum diffusion t mom = a * 2 /ν * ∼ O(10 -4 )s ii) solute diffusion t diff = a * 2 /D * ∼ O(10 -1 )s iii) particle translation t swim = a * /u ch * iv) particle rotationa t rot = a * /μ * γ * . Here, D * is the solute diffusion coefficient, μ * is the mobility coefficient, ν * is the kinematic viscosity. The longest timescale (slowest process) characterises the temporal change in solute and momentum transport. The estimates of the different time scales were obtained by considering a Janus particle of size 10μm in a concentration gradient of 10 Mm -1 ; the diffusion coefficient of oxygen in water = 2.3 × 10 -9 m 2 s -1 ; kinematic viscosity of water = 1.05 × 10 -6 m 2 s -1 . The mobility coefficient for the Janus particle with oxygen gas as a solute is estimated as 2η * = 8.87 × 10 -33 m 5 s -1 ; For a swimming velocity of the order ~1μm/s, the various timescales are found to be related as The timescale of diffusion being lower than those of both swimming and rotation suggests that the concentration field is primarily determined by the particle orientation. This allows us to make pseudo steady state approximation i.e. we can neglect the unsteady terms in the governing equations. The characteristic velocity scale u ch * has two contributions: one arising from the We now seek bounds on external concentration gradient and the surface activity for the quasisteady approximation to be valid. For this we substitute the expression of t diff , t swim and t rot in equations ( The fluid velocity is governed by 2 Re 1 Subject to the boundary conditions No penetration condition 0 = nu (11) Here, the slip velocity u s = μ 0 (I -nn) ⋅ ∇c; where μ 0 is the scaled mobility coefficient, and I is the identity tensor. The equations ( here C ∞ = Ar(cosθcosβ + sinθsinφsinβ). Introducing the disturbance concentration field as, c′ = c -C ∞ and substituting in the governing equations, we obtain: Since the external concentration field is linear, ∇ 2 C ∞ = 0. The governing equation in terms of disturbance variable c′ is 2 '0 c = (18) Writing the equations in terms of disturbance field results in both the non homogeneities arising in the boundary condition at the particle surface. Simplifying ( In the next section, we seek analytical solution for ( The governing equations ( (cos cos sin sin sin ) cA and ) c 1 represents the disturbance concentration field of a passive diffusiophoretic sphere in an external linear concentration gradient. Whereas, the 'c 2 problem' represents the disturbance concentration field around a Janus sphere. The solute concentration field of this sub problem governed by equations ( Where x is the positional vector of a point, B is a constant which will be determined by the surface boundary condition (22). Substituting C ∞ = A(rcosθcosβ + rsinθsinφsinβ), results in 1 2 (cos cos sin sin sin ) BA c r The boundary condition (22) in spherical coordinates is ). Here, the red face of the Janus sphere absorbs the solute molecules due to which there is a drop in concentration near the red face, α + = +1, α -= 0. Following Golestanian et.al ( 1) 2 0 (cos cos sin sin sin ) ' (cos ) 2 1 And the complete concentration field c given by c = c′ + C ∞ . ( The concentration field around the particle gives rise to a diffusio-osmotic flow in a thin region around the particle. This can be visualised as a slip velocity u s . This slip velocity is obtained from the concentration gradients as 0 () Here μ 0 represents the scaled mobility coefficient along the surface. For μ 0 > 0, the relative interaction of solute molecules with respect to the solvent molecules is repulsive; for μ 0 < 0, the relative interaction of solute molecules with respect to the solvent molecules is attractive. A Janus particle has different surface coverage on its two faces, which may alter the particle-solute interactions along the surface. We define the mobility to be uniform in each half as, The dimensionless slip velocity is calculated using (34) and the concentration field from (33) as 0 0 (cos ) 3 3 ( sin cos sin cos sin ) cos sin 1 2 1 2 There are two contributions to the slip velocity; the first arises from the external gradient, while the second arises due to the asymmetry in activity. Additionally, the slip velocity has components in both e θ and e φ directions. The slip on the surface gives rise to a diffusiophoretic motion. It is determined using the Lorentz reciprocal theorem as V swim ⋅ f ̂i = -∫ ∫ S n ⋅ σ i ⋅ u s dA. Here, σ i is the stress tensor associated with a point force f ̂i, n is the normal vector on the surface and V swim , the swimming velocity. For a unit point force, n ⋅ σ i = 1/(4π)e ̂i; the swimming velocity then becomes, V swim = -1 4π ∫ ∫ S u s dA. Substituting, u s from (36), we evaluate: (i) the swimming velocity due to external concentration gradient V grad , and (ii) due to self-diffusiophoresis of Janus particle V Jan . We write V swim as (α + -α -)(μ + + μ -)e z The limit A → 0 translates to the case with no external concentration gradient. Here our result converges to that obtained by Golestanian et.al We now evaluate the second term in (37). The swimming velocity due to external gradient is given by, 0 3 (( sin cos sin cos sin ) cos sin ) 8 ( Here, e θ and e φ are unit vectors in the θ and φ direction. Converting to cartesian coordinates using : we obtain swimming velocity in x, y and z directions, respectively 2 2 , 0 00 ( sin cos cos cos cos sin cos sin cos sin sin ) sin 8 ( 1) 3 ( sin cos sin sin cos sin ) sin 8 ( 1) Evaluating the above integrals, yields: (μ + + μ -)e z Thus, the net swimming velocity is: 2( The unit vectors e y and e z are in the particle frame of reference, which rotates with the particle rotational velocity. The rotation of the particle changes the direction of the unit vectors with respect to the stationary reference frame. To account for this, we represent the velocity in terms of the stationary frame where the unit vectors are e y 0 and e z 0 as shown in Fig 1b . The transformation between these two reference frames is given by, e y = e y 0 cosθ 0 + e z 0 sinθ 0 e z = -e y 0 sinθ 0 + e z 0 cosθ 0 . A substitution of the above transformations in (41) and using β = β 0 + θ 0 , results in the translational velocity in the stationary frame as, 2( here, θ 0 is a function of time, given by θ 0 = ∫ t 0 Ω x dt, with Ω x as the angular velocity and β 0 is the constant angle between the concentration gradient and the stationary frame. We see that as A is increased (i.e. strength of applied concentration gradient increased), the relative contribution of self-diffusiophoresis to swimming velocity reduces. The slip velocity on the surface (36) has both θ and φ components, which may induce a rotational velocity. Using Lorentz reciprocal theorem and following H Masoud and H Stone Here, n is the surface normal vector n = e r . The slip velocity (36) can be written as u s = u Jan + u grad , where u jan is the contribution to slip from surface activity and u grad is the contribution to slip from the external concentration gradient. We evaluate the rotational velocity from both the contributions separately. The slip velocity due to activity, u Jan , is along e θ . Consequently the rotational velocity contribution from this has the direction n × u Jan = e r × e θ = e φ . To evaluate the integral, e φ is converted to cartesian coordinates, e φ = -e x sinφ + e y cosφ. This results in, The rotational velocity contribution from self-diffusiophoresis is zero because of the axisymmetry of the Janus particle. To evaluate the rotational velocity contribution coming from the external concentration gradient, we substitute u grad in (45) . This yields, 0 33 [( sin cos sin sin cos ) (sin cos )( )] 8 ( The unit vectors in spherical coordinates are transformed to cartesian coordinates as, e θ = cosθcosφe x + cosθsinφe y -sinθe z e φ = -sinφe x + cosφe y Using this, we obtain the x, y and z components of the rotational velocity. the integrals which determine Ω y and Ω z are zero as ∫ 2π 0 cosφdφ = 0. The particle has an angular velocity only along e x . After evaluating the integral for Ω x , we obtain 9 sin ( ) 16( The slip on the surface due to the external concentration gradient breaks the axisymmetry, causing the particle to rotate. This shows that asymmetry in surface mobilities is essential for the particle to rotate. The rotational and translational velocities are now expressed as, 0 ,0 and 2( 1) 9 sin ( ) 16( Integrating the above equation provides us the trajectory of the particle. The rotational velocity is integrated first as it is an independent equation. To solve for net displacement, we substitute solution for β given by ( ) From Fig 1 , θ 0 (t) = β(t) -β 0 and β is obtained from (52). Using this, the above integration is performed computationally to find the trajectory of the Janus particle. In the next section, we see how the theoretical framework helps analyse the different trajectories and reorientation for different Activity numbers. So far the theoretical framework which helps obtain the rotational and the translational velocity of a Janus particle placed in an external concentration gradient has been established. We will now discuss the effects of different parameters Activity number, asymmetry in surface mobility and activity on the reorientation time and the trajectory of the particle. We define Δμ = μ + -μ -and Δα = α + -α -to represent the difference in mobilities and activities. A Janus particle exhibits both rotational and translational motion.We first discuss the rotatioanl motion which helps the partilce orient itself along (either up or down) the concentration gradient. Using equation (52), we find the evolution of angular displacement with time for Δμ = ±1 ( Fig 4a ) and for different activity numbers ( Fig The rotation of the particle for Δμ = ±1 is shown in Fig From (55) we observe that as the activity number is increased, the reorientation time reduces, saturating to a value depending upon the initial orientation β 0 . Interestingly, for a fixed activity number, a Janus particle with a larger value of β 0 takes less time to reorient, as the rotational velocity is higher for a particle with higher initial angle. To obtain more physical insights, we look at the dimensional reorientation time. We convert (54) to dimensional form using the timescale, t ch = a * /γ k B T * here η is the viscosity of the fluid, 'a * ' is the radius of the particle and k B T * is the thermal energy. For a particle size of 10μm in water at 298K, t Brown * ∼ O(10 3 ) sec. For a 10μm particle in water with oxygen as the solute, the dependence of reorientation time on concentration gradient is shown in Fig 5b . When the reorientation time is larger compared to t Brown * , the rotational Brownian noise keeps changing the direction of motion hindering the reorientation of the particle. The direction of motion is randomized under these conditions and the particle shows a noisy or random walk. This situation prevails to the left of the dashed vertical line in Fig. In this work, we investigate the behavior of a Janus particle under the influence of an externally imposed linear concentration gradient of a non electrolytic solute. Exploiting the characteristic velocity. Thus, the trajectory of these particles can be expected to be qualitatively similar to the those shown in Fig The assumption of vanishingly small Peclet number neglects the effect of advection on the particle trajectory. Advective effects weakens the concentration gradient leading to a lower slip velocity, resulting in a low diffusiophoretic velocity * 