We numerically examine the ordering, pinning and flow of superconducting vortices interacting with a Santa Fe artificial ice pinning array. We find that as a function of magnetic field and pinning density, a wide variety of vortex states occur, including ice rule obeying states and labyrinthine patterns. In contrast to square pinning arrays, we find no sharp peaks in the critical current due to the inherent frustration effect imposed by the Santa Fe ice geometry; however, there are some smoothed peaks when the number of vortices matches the number of pinning sites. For some fillings, the Santa Fe array exhibits stronger pinning than the square array due to the suppression of one-dimensional flow channels when the vortex motion in the Santa Fe lattice occurs through the formation of both longitudinal and transverse flow channels. In an artificial spin ice (ASI) system In addition to studies in magnetic ASI systems, there are several particle-based realizations of ASI Santa Fe (SF) spin ice, shown in Fig. In this paper, we use numerical simulations to investigate the vortex configurations, pinning, and flow patterns in a system with a Santa Fe ASI geometry. We find numerous distinct vortex patterns for increasing magnetic field or different pinning densities. At the the half matching field, the vortex configurations are close to those expected for the ground state of the SF ice. Compared to the square pinning lattice, in the SF ice we find only weak or smeared peaks in the critical depinning current, and we show that the vortex flow patterns are much more disordered. For dense pinning arrays, the ice rule obeying states vanish but the vortices form a labyrinthine pattern. We consider a two-dimensional system of N v vortices interacting with an ordered array of pinning sites which are placed either in a Santa Fe artificial spin ice pattern or in a square lattice. The system contains N p pinning sites. The number of vortices is proportional to the applied magnetic field B, and N v = N p corresponds to the matching condition B/B φ = 1.0, where B φ is the matching field. There are periodic boundary conditions in the x and y-directions and the equation of motion for a vortex i is given by The damping constant η is set to unity. The vortex-vortex interactions are repulsive and given by , where K 1 is the modified Bessel function, R i j is the distance between vortex i and vortex j, and F 0 = φ 2 0 /2π μ 0 λ 3 . We set the penetration depth to λ = 1.8. In the absence of pinning sites, the vortices form a triangular lattice. A uniform driving force F d = F d x is applied to all the vortices, and the system is considered depinned when the average steady-state vortex velocity is larger than a non-trivial value. The pinning sites are modeled as localized traps of radius r p with the form the distance between vortex i and pin k, and we set r p = 0.6. We match our system geometry to the experiments on square vortex ice systems In Fig. In Fig. In nanomagnetic spin ice systems, the ice rules are lost as the distance between the magnets is increased due to the reduction in the pairwise interactions between neighboring islands We have numerically investigated vortex configurations, pinning and dynamics in a system with a Santa Fe artificial ice pinning site arrangement. This pinning geometry forces some vertices to occupy higher energy states. At half filling, the vortex configurations we observe are close to the ground state expected for the magnetic Santa Fe ice, with most of the vertices in low energy ice rule obeying states but with a small number of high energy vertices present. The critical depinning currents do not show a peak at the half matching field, but exhibit a rounded peak near the fist matching field. For certain fillings, the Santa Fe ice has higher pinning than a square pinning array array because the vortex flow in the Santa Fe ice runs both transverse and parallel to the driving direction, as opposed to the strictly parallel flow that occurs in the square array. For dense pinning arrays where the pinning sites begin to overlap, we find that the vortices can form an intricate labyrinthine state in the Santa Fe ice.