The origin of superconductivity in iron-based superconductors (FeSCs) remains elusive despite intensive research efforts over a dozen years For example, an in-plane resistivity anisotropy Using scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/S), we report the observation of orientation-dependent superconductivity at two types of wrinkle on LiFeAs surface. The tunneling spectra show an increase of superconducting (SC) gaps on type-I wrinkles and a reduction on type-II wrinkles. Temperature-dependent measurements of the SC gap show that the gap closing temperature on type-I wrinkles is enhanced by 20 ~ 30 %, but it remains almost unchanged on type-II wrinkles. While wrinkles are a commonly consequence of relieving transverse strain induced by the change of atom coordination The atomic model of LiFeAs is shown in Fig. Here we find the remarkable difference between type-I and II wrinkles lies in their LDOS. Figure Inspired by the novel gap features observed on the wrinkles, we carry out spatial dI/dV spectra line-cut across and along the wrinkles, as displayed in Figs. On type-II wrinkle, however, the coherence peaks of Δ1 are strongly suppressed when getting close to the wrinkle edge and totally disappear on the wrinkle region, meanwhile, the shoulder of Δ2 evolves into a pair of coherence peaks on the wrinkle [Fig. Note that the gap features are robust and homogenous along type-II wrinkle [Fig. We next perform the temperature-dependent dI/dV measurements. On type-I wrinkle, the SC gap Δ1 can be well differentiated at 17 K (Tc of bulk LiFeAs) and gradually closes at ~20.5 K [Fig. To explain the exotic superconducting behaviors we observed, the first step is understanding the circumstances on these wrinkles. Here, we image the vortex structure by zero-bias conductance (ZBC) map (large scale map in Supplemental Material Fig. Next, we plot the statistics of the orientation of the wrinkles and the corresponding SC gaps, which reveals that the [110] direction favors the type-I wrinkles while the [100] direction favors the type-II wrinkles. Interestingly, wrinkles along other orientations are also found in our experiment [Fig. Further analysis indicates that the switch of the superconductivity on two-type wrinkles is coincidence with the band structure changing under different orientations of local strain. First, the bump features in Figs. Based on the observations discussed above, we propose a possible scenario that the local strain on wrinkle cause a Lifshitz transition Nevertheless, we cannot rule out other scenarios of superconducting changing and further theoretical understanding of mechanism is required. In summary, we have identified two types of wrinkles on LiFeAs surface. The Single-crystal growth and scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/S) High-quality LiFeAs single crystals were synthesized by using the self-flux method Polycrystal tungsten tips were etched chemically and calibrated on Au(111) surface before use. All STM images were acquired in the constant-current mode. The differential conductance (dI/dV) spectra and maps were obtained by a standard lock-in amplifier at a frequency of 973.0 Hz, with a modulation voltage of 0.2 mV. Magnetic fields were applied perpendicular to the samples. The nc-AFM measurements were conducted at liquid He temperature with a base ultrahigh vacuum lower than 2 × 10 -10 mbar, where the samples were cleaved in-situ. A commercial qPlus tuning fork sensor in frequency modulation mode with Pt/Ir tip was used to obtain the data. The resonance frequency was about 27.9 kHz and the stiffness was about 1800 N/m. The STM topography images were acquired in constant-current mode. The constant-high and constant-force AFM modes were used to measure the real topography features of the two types of wrinkles. In STM, it is well known that the tunneling current is proportional to the integral of the density of states (DOS) from 0 to the setpoint bias. So the topography obtained from the constant-current mode is the contour of the constant DOS, which strictly speaking is not the real topography. To clarify the wrinkle structure observed by STM has a real hump on topography rather than a result from the high DOS accumulation or charge accumulation, we carry out the atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements. Unlike the STM, AFM acquires the atomic force between the tip and the sample, thus can be used to detect the real topography. We first use the constant-current STM mode to find the type-I and II wrinkles as well as the wrinkle-free region (Fig. The hump feature at ~30 meV corresponds to the band top of the dxy band, which shows a slight shift at different regions. The second differential curves (Fig. Although the type-I and II wrinkles have different orientations, the vortices on wrinkles present a lattice structure with equal distance (Fig. 