We investigate finite-size quantum effects in the dynamics of N bosonic particles which are tunneling between two sites adopting the two-site Bose-Hubbard model. By using time-dependent atomic coherent states (ACS) we extend the standard mean-field equations of this bosonic Josephson junction, which are based on time-dependent Glauber coherent states. In this way we find 1/N corrections to familiar mean-field (MF) results: the frequency of macroscopic oscillation between the two sites, the critical parameter for the dynamical macroscopic quantum self trapping (MQST), and the attractive critical interaction strength for the spontaneous symmetry breaking (SSB) of the ground state. To validate our analytical results we perform numerical simulations of the quantum dynamics. In the case of Josephson oscillations around a balanced configuration we find that also for a few atoms the numerical results are in good agreement with the predictions of time-dependent ACS variational approach, provided that the time evolution is not too long. Also the numerical results of SSB are better reproduced by the ACS approach with respect to the MF one. Instead the onset of MQST is correctly reproduced by ACS theory only in the large N regime and, for this phenomenon, the 1/N correction to the MF formula is not reliable. The Josephson junction is a quantum mechanical device made of two superconductors, or two superfluids, separated by a tunneling barrier The achievement of Bose-Einstein condensation with ultracold and dilute alkali-metal atoms The fully quantum behavior of Josephson junctions is usually described by using the phase model In this paper we study finite-size quantum effects in a Josephson junction avoiding the use of the phase operator. The standard mean-field theory is based on the Glauber coherent state |CS which however is not eigenstate of the total number operator The macroscopic quantum tunneling of bosonic particles or Cooper pairs in a Josephson junction made of two superfluids or two superconductors separated by a potential barrier can be described within a second-quantization formalism, see for instance where âj and â+ j are the dimensionless ladder operators which, respectively, destroy and create a boson in the j site, Nj = â+ j âj is the number operator of bosons in the j site. U is the on-site interaction strength of particles and J > 0 is the tunneling energy, both measured in units of the reduced Planck constant . Eq. ( ( The time evolution of a generic quantum state |ψ(t) of our system described by the Hamiltonian (1) is then given by the Schrödinger equation Quite remarkably, this time-evolution equation can be derived by extremizing the following action characterized by the Lagrangian Clearly, Eqs. (3-5) hold for any quantum system. The familiar mean-field dynamics of the bosonic Josephson junction can be obtained with a specific choice for the quantum state |ψ(t) , namely where is the tensor product of Glauber coherent states |α j (t) , defined as with |0 the vacuum state, and such that âj |α j (t) = α j (t)|α j (t) . Thus, |α j (t) is the eigenstate of the annihilation operator âj with eigenvalue α j (t) with N j (t) = α j (t)| Nj |α j (t) the average number of bosons in the site j at time t and φ j (t) the corresponding phase angle at the same time t. Adopting the coherent state where the dot means the derivative with respect to time t, is the average total number of bosons (that is a constant of motion), is the relative phase, and is the population imbalance. The last term in the Lagrangian ( In the Lagrangian L CS (φ, z) of Eq. ( which, explicitly, become These equations describe the mean-field dynamics of the macroscopic quantum tunneling in a Josephson junction, where φ(t) is the relative phase angle of the complex field of the superfluid (or superconductor) between the two junctions at time t and z(t) is the corresponding relative population imbalance of the Bose condensed particles (or Cooper pairs). Assuming that both φ(t) and z(t) are small, i.e. |φ(t)| ≪ 1 and |z(t)| ≪ 1, the Lagrangian (11) can be approximated as removing a constant term. The Euler-Lagrange equations of this quadratic Lagrangian are the linearized Josephson-junction equations which can be rewritten as a single equation for the harmonic oscillation of φ(t) and the harmonic oscillation of z(t), given by both with frequency that is the familiar mean-field frequency of macroscopic quantum oscillation in terms of tunneling energy J > 0, interaction strength U , and number N of particles It is straightforward to find that the conserved energy of the mean-field system described by Eqs. ( If the condition is satisfied then z = 0 since z(t) cannot become zero during an oscillation cycle. This situation is known as macroscopic quantum self trapping (MQST) the expression for the critical value of Λ above which the self trapping occurs. Indeed, is the familiar mean field condition to achieve MQST in BECs with n ∈ Z ,respectively with energies Ẽ-= -JN and Ẽ+ = JN . Due to the nonlinear interaction there are degenerate ground-state solutions that break the zsymmetry where n ∈ Z. These solutions give a minimum of the energy with φ = 0 only for Λ = U N/J < 0. Thus, the spontaneous symmetry breaking (SSB) of the balanced ground state (z = 0, φ = 0) appears at the critical dimensionless strength In other words, for Λ = U N/J < Λ SSB = -1 the population imbalance z of the ground state of our bosonic system becomes different from zero. Different results are obtained by choosing another quantum state |ψ(t) in Eqs. ( where (36) is the atomic coherent state Contrary to the Glauber coherent state |CS(t) of Eq. ( (37) Moreover, the averages calculated with the atomic coherent state |ACS(t) become equal to the ones performed with the Glauber coherent state |CS(t) only in the regime N ≫ 1 Adopting the atomic coherent state (36) the Lagrangian Comparing this expression with the Lagrangian of the Glauber coherent state, Eq. ( In other words, the term (1-1/N ) takes into account fewbody effects, which become negligible only for N ≫ 1. It is immediate to write down the corresponding Josephson equations which are derived as the Euler-Lagrange equations of the Lagrangian (38). Assuming that both φ(t) and z(t) are small, i.e. |φ(t)| ≪ 1 and |z(t)| ≪ 1, the Lagrangian (38) can be approximated as (41) removing a constant term. The Euler-Lagrange equations of this quadratic Lagrangian are the linearized Josephson-junction equations which can be rewritten as a single equation for the harmonic oscillation of φ(t) and the harmonic oscillation of z(t), given by both with frequency that is the atomic-coherent-state frequency of macroscopic quantum oscillation in terms of tunneling energy J, interaction strength U , and number N of particles. Quite remarkably, this frequency is different and smaller with respect to the standard mean-field one, given by Eq. In the same fashion as in the previous section, the conserved energy associated to Eqs. (39) and (40) reads and using the condition ) where Λ MQST,A is the atomic-coherent-state MQST critical parameter in terms of tunneling energy J, interaction strength U , and number N of particles. Remarkably this value is bigger than the standard mean field one, given by Eq. ( In addition to the usual ground-state stationary solutions (49) with n ∈ Z and Λ = N U/J. It follows that, within the approach based on the atomic coherent state, the critical strength for the SSB of the balanced ground state (z = 0, φ = 0) reads This means that for Λ = U N/J < Λ SSB,A = 1/(1-1/N ) the ground state is not balanced. Clearly, for N ≫ 1 from Eq. ( To test our analytical results we compare them with numerical simulations. The initial many-body state |Ψ(0) for the time-dependent numerical simulations is the coherent state |ACS(0) from Eq. ( with Ĥ given by Eq. ( In Fig. We investigate numerically also the onset of macroscopic quantum self trapping (MQST). In Fig. state |ACS(0) where z(0) = 0.5 and φ(0) = 0. In general, during the time evolution the many-body quantum state |Ψ(t) not remains close to an atomic coherent state. This is especially true in the so-called Fock regime, where U/J ≫ N In Fig. Let us conclude this Section by investigating the spontaneous symmetry breaking (SSB) of the ground state of the two-site Bose-Hubbard model, which appears for U < 0 above a critical threshold where |c j | 2 is the of finding the ground state with j bosons in the site 1 and N -j bosons in the site 2. Here |j 1 is the Fock state with j bosons in the site 1 and |N -j is the Fock state with N -j bosons in the site 2. The amplitude probabilities c j are determined numerically by diagonalizing the (N + 1) × (N + 1) Hamiltonian matrix obtained from distribution P(|c j | 2 ) becomes bimodal with a local minimum at |c N/2 | 2 (if N is even) when |U | exceeds a critical threshold In this paper we have adopted a second-quantization formalism and time-dependent atomic coherent states to study finite-size effects in a Josephson junction of N bosons, obtaining experimentally detectable theoretical predictions. The experiments with cold atoms in lattices and double wells reported in 