Thermal conduction in polymer nanocomposites depends on several parameters including the thermal conductivity and geometrical features of the nanoparticles, the particle loading, their degree of dispersion and formation of a percolating networks. To enhance efficiency of thermal contact between free-standing conductive nanoparticles were previously proposed. This work report for the first time the investigation of molecular junctions within a graphene polymer nanocomposite. Molecular dynamics simulations were conducted to investigate the thermal transport efficiency of molecular junctions in polymer tight contact, to quantify the contribution of molecular junctions when graphene and the molecular junctions are surrounded by polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS). A strong dependence of the thermal conductance in PDMS/graphene model was found, with best performances obtained with short and conformationally rigid molecular junctions. To evaluate the thermal properties of condensed matter, Non-Equilibrium Molecular Dynamics (NEMD) approach is an established technique used to investigate the thermal property of materials Figure The simulation procedure followed a stepwise scheme: at the beginning, the whole system was initially relaxed through an equilibration period of at least 125 ps in canonical ensemble at 300 K, a temperature in which the quantum effect is considered negligible In Equation Within this method, longer simulation time assures higher accuracy of the temperature calculation. From the plot of the averaged temperature of the slabs, as a function of the coordinate displacement, it is possible to evaluate the thermal jump across the junction. The thermal conductance is then computed through Equation where Gc is the thermal boundary conductivity, q̇ the heat flux flowing into the material, A the interface area and ∆T the temperature across the interface. PolyDiMethyl Siloxane (PDMS) modelling started by the design of a 49 monomer single chain, Si-methyl terminated, for a sum of 507 atoms (Figure Three different linkers, from the previous studied ones, were selected and incorporated in PDMS. As a first case study, an unjointed model made of two graphene sheets was designed to represent a classical "contact" between graphene flakes inside a polymer composite, referred as "No Linkers" and depicted in Figure The specifications of the model with embedded junction were: o Three molecular junctions (for C5OP or BP or ACN models) Overall, about 37000 atoms constitutes the assembly of polymer, graphene and thermal linkers. Figure The thermal transport across graphene platelets and molecular junctions was determined through NEMD calculations. At the beginning of the simulation, a 500 ps NPT high-pressure stage was performed to relax the structure and bring the system close to the PDMS actual density, allowing the PDMS polymer and the graphene junction to became a dense system, where the graphene junction is embedded in the surrounding polymer. The picture of Figure In suspended graphene junctions, the thermal linkers were the only possible paths from which thermal transport could occur between the hot and the cold ends of the system. The presence of polymer above and below the graphene platelets allows additional heat transfer modes, driven by VdW interaction. These include: o Heat transfer between the graphene surface and the PDMS parallel to graphene flakes. The large contact area made by graphene and polymer, from the upper and the lower surface of both flakes (corresponding to about 9500 Å 2 ) drains significant heat flux from the hot graphene flake to the matrix and from the matrix to the cold graphene. o Transfer between molecular junctions and the surrounding polymer molecules. This mode is due to presence of molecular junctions. o Transfer by molecules trapped between the graphene edges in the center of the model. In this case, PDMS molecules acts in series with graphene edges. This mode is relevant considering the creased shape that graphene assumes during simulation. For the four different PDMS-embedded molecular junctions described above, the energy transferred from the hot thermostat region to the cold thermostat region is reported in Figure The amount of the transferred heat reported in Table The thermal conductance between graphene platelets embedded in PDMS polymer matrix has been evaluated trough NEMD simulations. As expected from the study of the suspended junctions, the linker type influenced the overall conductance value also within the PDMS matrix. The aliphatic/aromatic C5OP junction yields a thermal conductance improvement of about 20% compared to the unbound sheets, while aromatic structures provided better enhancements, confirming trends previously reported for molecular junctions between self-standing graphene sheets. In particular, Biphenyl junctions enhanced thermal conductance by about 68% while anthracene linkers, considered as a sort of upper bound case study, yielded an almost 5-fold increase in thermal conductance. The strong dependence of the thermal conductance in PDMS/graphene model is related to both the length and the chemistry of the linker. On one hand, short linkers forces the flakes to keep a smaller distance between the platelets than longer ones and consequently the volume of interposed polymer is smaller. On the other hand, the length of the linker is not enough to justify the observations and it is therefore suggested that the chemistry of the linker strongly affects the efficiency of the junction, even within the polymer matrix. Furthermore, the thermal transport across the contact between two conductive particles was found to correspond to the sum of heat transfer through the molecular junctions and through the PDMS molecules surrounding the particle/particle contact.