We show that unconventional nematic superconductors with multi-component order parameter in lattices with three-fold and six-fold rotational symmetries support a charge-4e vestigial superconducting phase above Tc. The charge-4e state, which is a condensate of four-electron bound states that preserve the rotational symmetry of the lattice, is nearly degenerate with a competing vestigial nematic state, which is non-superconducting and breaks the rotational symmetry. This robust result is the consequence of a hidden discrete symmetry in the Ginzburg-Landau theory, which permutes quantities in the gauge sector and in the crystalline sector of the symmetry group. We argue that random strain generally favors the charge-4e state over the nematic phase, as it acts as a random-mass to the former but as a random-field to the latter. Thus, we propose that twodimensional inhomogeneous systems displaying nematic superconductivity, such as twisted bilayer graphene, provide a promising platform to realize the elusive charge-4e superconducting phase. Introduction. The collective behavior of interacting electrons in quantum materials can give rise to a plethora of exotic phenomena. An interesting example is charge-4e superconductivity An interesting question is which systems are promising candidates to realize charge-4e superconductivity. One strategy is to consider systems that display two condensates, and search for a stable state where pairs of Cooper pairs are formed even in the absence of phase coherence among the Cooper pairs. One widely explored option is the so-called pair-density wave (PDW) state, in which the Cooper pairs have a finite center-of-mass momentum Such an intermediate phase is called a vestigial phase PDW ground state rather than a uniform superconducting ground state. For these reasons, it is desirable to search for other systems that may host vestigial charge-4e superconductivity. In this paper, we show that nematic superconductors in hexagonal and trigonal lattices offer a promising alternative. A nematic superconductor breaks both the gauge symmetry associated with the phase of the gap function and the three-fold/six-fold rotational symmetry of the lattice. Importantly, nematic superconductivity has been experimentally observed in doped Bi 2 Se 3 , corresponding to Potts-nematic order, can onset even above the superconducting transition temperature T c In this paper, we show that the very same mechanism that favors a vestigial nematic phase also promotes a vestigial charge-4e phase characterized by a non-zero composite order parameter ψ = ∆ 2 1 + ∆ 2 2 , but ∆ i = 0 (see Fig. Vestigial nematicity: the standard scenario. We consider a nematic superconductor in a lattice with threefold or six-fold rotational symmetry, described by a two-component order parameter (∆ 1 , ∆ 2 ). For concreteness, hereafter we will focus on the case where the point group of the lattice is D 6 , and ∆ ≡ (∆ 1 , ∆ 2 ) † transforms as the E 2 irreducible representation (irrep), corresponding to d x 2 -y 2 , d xy -wave gaps. Importantly, our results are general and hold as long as ∆ transforms as one of the two-dimensional E-like irreps of the corresponding point group D 6 , D 3 , C 3v , etc. The Ginzburg-Landau superconducting action expanded to fourth order in ∆ is given by Here, χ -1 ij (q) is the inverse superconducting susceptibility in Fourier space, whereas u 0 > 0 and γ are Ginzburg-Landau parameters. Furthermore, q = (q, ω n ) and r = (r, τ ), where q is the momentum, ω n is the bosonic Matsubara frequency, r is the position, and τ is the imaginary time. Note that S has an enlarged continuous rotational symmetry ∆ 1 ± i∆ 2 → e ±iθ (∆ 1 ± i∆ 2 ). This emergent continuous rotational symmetry is reduced to discrete ones only when higher-order terms are included, as we discuss later. The superconducting ground state depends on γ: if γ < 0, the action is minimized by ∆ = ∆ 0 (1, ±i) † , corresponding to a time-reversal symmetry-breaking (TRSB) superconductor that preserves the six-fold rotational symmetry of the lattice. On the other hand, for γ > 0, the ground state is given by ∆ = ∆ 0 (cos θ, sin θ) † , with arbitrary θ. Such a pairing state is called nematic, as it preserves time-reversal symmetry but lowers the sixfold rotational symmetry of the lattice to two-fold. It is convenient to construct the real-valued composite order parameters ζ ≡ ∆ † σ y ∆ and Φ ≡ ∆ † σ z ∆, -∆ † σ x ∆ , where σ μ is a Pauli matrix that acts on the twodimensional subspace spanned by ∆ The sign of γ is ultimately determined by microscopic considerations. While weak-coupling calculations tend to favor γ < 0 The nematic superconducting state supports a vestigial nematic phase, i.e. a phase in which the composite nematic order parameter is non-zero, Φ = 0, but superconducting order is absent, ∆ = 0 (see Fig. Note that Φ and λ have been promoted to independent auxiliary fields. Because the action is quadratic in ∆ i , the superconducting fluctuations can be exactly integrated out in the normal state, yielding an effective action for Φ and λ . Since λ does not break any symmetries, it is always non-zero and simply renormalizes the static superconducting susceptibility. On the other hand, Φ is only non-zero below an onset temperature. A large-N calculation Competition between nematicity and charge-4e superconductivity. We now show that there is a hidden symmetry between the two-component real-valued nematic order parameter Φ and the complex bilinear ψ ≡ ∆ 2 1 + ∆ 2 2 . The latter breaks the U(1) gauge symmetry and is precisely the charge-4e order parameter (see Fig. To see the unexpected connection between these two order parameters, we need to consider, besides the real bilinears discussed above, complex bilinears formed out of the primary order parameter ∆, since the latter transforms as the irrep Γ = e imθ ⊗ E 2 of the group U(1) ⊗ D 6 . Writing the order parameter explicitly as a four-dimensional vector η T , where the prime (double prime) denotes the real (imaginary) part, the bilinears are generally given by η T (σ μ ⊗ σ m ) η. Here, the first Pauli matrix (with Greek superscript) in the Kronecker product σ μ ⊗ σ m refers to the subspace associated with the two-dimensional irreducible representation E 2 of the point group D 6 (dubbed the crystalline sector), whereas the second Pauli matrix (with Latin superscript) refers to the subspace associated with the U The other real bilinears are given by ζ = η T (σ y ⊗ σ y ) η and λ = η T σ 0 ⊗ σ 0 η. The charge-4e bilinear ψ ≡ ψ + iψ , on the other hand, is: The key point is that, although the Kronecker product (M ⊗ N ) is non-commutative, in the case where M and N are square matrices it satisfies the property (M ⊗ N ) = P T (N ⊗ M ) P , where P is the so-called perfect shuffle permutation matrix Physically, P permutes quantities from the crystalline and the gauge sectors of the four-dimensional space spanned by η. Note that P is an orthogonal matrix, P -1 = P T = P . As a result, upon performing the unitary transformation η = P η, we see that while the bilinears ζ and λ remain invariant, (Φ 1 , Φ 2 ) → (ψ , ψ ), i.e. the nematic bilinear is mapped onto the charge-4e bilinear. Consequently, provided that the susceptibility in the quadratic term of Eq. ( Selecting nematic or charge-4e order. While the competition between vestigial charge-4e and nematic orders is robust, their degeneracy is lifted by additional terms nematic charge4e T T δ ε FIG. More importantly, because the nematic order parameter Φ is real and transforms as the E 2 irrep of D 6 , there is a symmetry-allowed cubic term in the nematic action proportional to Φ 3 + + Φ 3 -, where Φ ± = Φ 1 ± iΦ 2 In contrast, because ψ is complex and transforms as the A 1 irrep of D 6 , such a cubic term is not allowed in the charge-4e action. This cubic term not only favors the nematic order over the charge-4e order, but it also lowers the symmetry of the nematic order parameter from U(1) to 3-state Potts We thus introduce the strain tensor . While strain can be externally applied, it is intrinsically present in materials as random strain caused by defects arising in the crystal growth or device fabrication. The key point is that random strain acts as a random-field to the Potts-nematic order parameter, but as a random-mass (also called random-T c ) to the charge-4e order parameter. This distinction is very important, as random-field disorder is known to be much more detrimental to long-order range order than random-mass disorder. In the specific case of the 3-state Potts model, random-field is believed to completely kill the Potts transition in two dimensions, and to suppress it in three dimensions The condition T 4e > T nem is not enough to ensure a vestigial charge-4e phase, as one needs to show also that the renormalized superconducting transition temperature T c inside the charge-4e state is split from T 4e Conclusions. In this paper, we showed that a nematic superconductor in lattices with three-fold or six-fold rotational symmetry supports competing nematic and charge-4e vestigial orders. Such a competition is rooted on a perfect shuffle permutation that transforms one order parameter onto the other in the four-dimensional space spanned by the multi-component superconducting order parameter. We showed that random strain provides the most promising tuning knob to favor charge-4e superconductivity over nematic order, due to the fact that it acts as a random-field disorder to the latter, but as a random-mass disorder to the latter. These results establish a new class of systems -nematic superconductorsin which charge-4e order may be realized. Nematic superconductivity has been now observed in doped Bi 2 Se 3 and in twisted bilayer graphene Supplementary material for "Charge-4e superconductivity from multi-component nematic pairing: Application to twisted bilayer graphene" Here we derive the explicit form of the effective nematic/charge-4e action by performing a large-N calculation, extending the general procedure outlined in Refs. where q ≡ (q x , q y ) and υ > 0, |κ| < 1 are constants. In terms of the vector η T , it can be rewritten as: χ-1 0 (q) = r 0 + q 2 + υq 2 z Î + κq 2 cos 2θ Â1 -sin 2θ Â2 (S3) Here, θ ≡ arctan qy qx , the hat denotes a 4 × 4 matrix and Î ≡ σ 0 ⊗σ 0 , Â1 ≡ σ z ⊗σ 0 , Â2 ≡ -σ x ⊗σ 0 . Explicitly: We now move on to the quartic terms. The first one is given by: Performing a Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation, we introduce the auxiliary field λ and obtain: As for the second quartic term, S there are two different ways to decouple it in terms of auxiliary fields. In the first case, we introduce the nematic field: S9) An alternative way to decouple it is by using the identity: We then introduce the charge-4e auxiliary field ψ and obtain: The action can thus be written as: or, equivalently, Here, to simplify the notation, we introduced ψ 1 = ψ and ψ 2 = ψ . Moreover, we defined: which corresponds to shifting the superconducting mass term to r = r 0 + λ. Integrating out the superconducting fluctuations: Tr ln χ-1 (q) -V gives the effective actions: where Vnem = i Φ i Âi and V4e = i ψ i Bi . Now, to relate Âi and Bi , we note the identity (M ⊗ N ) = P T (N ⊗ M ) P for 2 × 2 matrices M, N , where P is the perfect shuffle permutation matrix which is orthogonal. In our case, due to the extra minus sign in Eq. (S5), we need a slightly modified orthogonal matrix: which then gives Bi = P T Âi P as defined in Eqs. (S4), (S5), (S12), and (S13). Thus, we obtain: Tr χ (q) Vnem n = Tr χ (q) V4e n (S20) upon exchanging ψ i ←→ Φ i . Here, χ ≡ P T χ P . Thus, as long as κ = 0 in Eq. (S3), we have χ ≡ χ, implying that the two actions -nematic and charge-4e -are identical. We now proceed to investigate the impact of κ = 0. For simplicity, we focus on the two-dimensional case, setting υ = 0 in Eq. (S3). We also consider classical finitetemperature phase transitions. Performing the traces and integrals in Eqs. (S17)-(S18) and assuming uniform order parameters, we obtain the free-energy densities (the Ginzburg-Landau constants γ and u are rescaled by a factor of temperature): ∞ 0 qdq π q 2 + r 2 q 2 + r 2 + 2κ 2 q 4 κ 2 q 4 -(q 2 + r) κ 2 q 4 -(q 2 + r) qdq π q 2 + r 4 + 6κ 2 q 4 q 2 + r 2 + κ 4 q 8 κ 2 q 4 -(q 2 + r) The mean-field transitions take place when the quadratic coefficients vanish. This gives the following critical values of r, r nem = γJ nem and r 4e = γJ 4e , with: (S23) (S24) An explicit calculation gives: which implies that J 4e > J nem , i.e. r 4e > r nem . Now, r is generally a decreasing function of temperature, since r ∝ ξ -2 → 0 at the bare superconducting transition temperature (here ξ is the superconducting correlation length). Consequently, the κ term in the action favors the charge-4e instability over the nematic instability. Note that this analysis is valid for the case of triangular or hexagonal lattices. For trigonal lattices, there is an additional allowed term in the susceptibility (S3) that depends on q z 