We study an interacting quantum dot in contact with a superconducting island described by the Richardson model with a Coulomb repulsion term controlling the number of electrons on the island. This Hamiltonian admits a compact matrix-product-operator representation and can be efficiently and accurately solved using the density-matrix renormalization group. We systematically explore the effects of the charging energy Ec. For Ec comparable to the superconducting gap ∆, the subgap states are stabilized by the combination of Kondo exchange coupling and charge redistribution driven by the Coulomb interaction. The subgap states exist for both even and odd superconductor ground-state occupancy, but with very distinctive excitation spectra in each case. The spectral peaks are not symmetric with respect to the chemical potential and may undergo discontinuous changes as a function of gate voltages. The study of long-lived excited states inside the bulk spectral gap of superconductors (subgap states for short), induced by impurities and interfaces, drives the development of technologically important quantum devices. For example, the Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) states that result from the exchange interaction which binds a Bogoliubov quasiparticle at the magnetic impurity site A recent development are devices with the SC material epitaxially evaporated on the nanowire hosting the impurity (quantum dot, QD) Here we show that Richardson-type Hamiltonians with long-range (all-to-all) interactions coupled to an interacting QD admit a compact representation in terms of matrix product operators (MPO) with small 9×9 matrices and can be efficiently solved without any approximations in all parameter regimes using the density-matrix renormalization group (DMRG) In this work, we systematically investigate the subgap excitations of the simplest situation: a single QD coupled to a single SC island. The qualitative behavior depends on the ratio of E c over the SC gap ∆. For E c ∆, the Kondo coupling drives the YSR singlet-doublet transition. For E c ∆, even-odd effects arise from charge quantization: the occupancy of the SC island varies in steps of one electron similar to a QD in the Coulomb blockade (CB) regime. Subgap states are present also for odd occupancy of the SC, but they disperse very differently compared to even occupancy. The cross-over E c ≈ ∆ regime shows complex charging patterns and subgap states with unique properties that strongly depend on the parity of the number of electrons in the superconductor. For parameters that are typical of actual devices, the nature of the subgap states is mixed: it is different from the prototypical YSR states (large-U limit, E c = 0) and Andreev bound states (U = 0, E c = 0), as well as from the subgap states of QDs coupled to normal-state Coulomb-blockaded reservoirs. Model. The Hamiltonian we study in the present work is H = H imp + H SC + H hyb with Here d σ and c iσ are the annihilation operators corresponding to impurity and bath, σ =↑, ↓, nimp,σ = d † σ d σ and nimp = σ nimp,σ . is the impurity level controlled by the gate voltage applied to the QD, U the electron-electron repulsion, and ν = 1/2 -/U is the impurity level in units of electron number. The SC has N levels spaced by d = 2D/N where 2D is the bandwidth, the orbital indexes i and j range between 1 and N , the dimensionless coupling constant for pairing interaction is α, nsc = iσ c † iσ c iσ , and n 0 is the gate voltage applied to the SC expressed in units of electron number. The hybridisation strength is Γ = πρv 2 , where ρ = 1/2D is the normal-state bath density of states. A schematic representation of this Hamiltonian is shown in Fig. Results. The evolution from the YSR to CB regime is clearly visible in the charging diagrams in the (ν, n 0 ) plane, see Fig. A striking consequence of the Coulomb repulsion is the lack of symmetry in the subgap peak positions except for special points (e.g. ν = 1 and even n 0 ), see Fig. Discussion. The nature of the subgap states at E c ∆ is revealed in Fig. . Subgap spectral functions for even (upper row, n 0 = 800) and odd integer (bottom row, n 0 = 801) tuning of the superconductor occupancy, as a function of the gate voltage applied on the quantum dot. The positions indicate the excitation energies of particle-like (+1) and hole-like (-1) states, the grayscale shows the corresponding spectral weights w ± (see legend in the inset). The dots at E = 0 provide information about the ground state: the color encodes the GS charge sector, the size encodes the GS impurity occupancy n imp (see legend in the inset). The size of grey dots denotes the impurity occupancy in the corresponding excited states. The charge gap for even n 0 and Γ → 0 is ∆ + Ec (dashed lines). ing Γ, see Fig. The dispersion (ν-dependence) of excitations for large E c (e.g. E c 0.8∆) is strongly affected by the charging terms and it follows the variation of the difference in the impurity occupancy between the ground and excited states, as revealed by comparing Figs. Conclusion. Subgap states persist in the presence of large charging energy but they have properties quite unlike YSR states We have benefited from suggestions and discussions with Tadeusz Domansky, Tomáš Novotný, Volker Meden, Marion van Midden, András Pályi, Anton Ramšak, Roman Rausch, and with the members of QDev at the University of Copenhagen. R Ž and LP acknowledge the support of the Slovenian Research Agency (ARRS) under P1-0044. Calculations were performed with the ITensor library Here we discuss the failure modes of alternative approaches for solving the impurity problems with superconducting bath and Coulomb blockade (mean-field decoupling and charge-counting auxiliary operator approach), show a number of additional results that supplement those presented in the main text, provide the details on the method (including a detailed account of the Hamiltonian and its matrix-product-operator representation), and present some results of benchmark calculations for method validation. The Hamiltonian discussed in this work contains interaction terms of three types: 1) pairing interaction in the superconductor, 2) on-site charge repulsion on the impurity site, 3) charge repulsion in the superconducting island. This raises the question of possible simplifications of the problem through mean-field decoupling of certain terms. For problem sizes (number of levels in the SC island) considered in this work, the mean-field decoupling of the pairing interaction to the BCS mean-field form ∆c † i↑ c † i↓ is a perfectly valid approximation. In our scheme, we do not perform this step for purely practical reasons: it does not simplify the calculations (in fact, the loss of the the total charge as a conserved quantum number would only make them more difficult from the numerical perspective). The meanfield decoupling on the impurity on-site repulsion is well known to lead to qualitatively incorrect results (e.g., the well-known unphysical spontaneous spin symmetry breaking in the unrestricted Hartree-Fock solution of the Anderson impurity model for U > πΓ We thus look into this question more closely and consider two approximative schemes. One consists in the traditional mean-field decoupling of this term (the "mean-field" scheme), leading to the following quadratic form: The problem then needs to be solved self-consistently, for each state separately (we note that using ground-state expectation values for all states leads to unphysical discontinuities across the quantum phase transitions). The other scheme (the "static" scheme) is a more severe approximation. It consists in performing the calculations for E c = 0, then simply shifting the resulting energy by E c ( nsc -n 0 ) 2 , again for each state separately. We note that both the "mean-field" and the "static" schemes fully neglect the correlation effects of the E c term and retain only its average effect, but they depend in the implementation details: the first is self-consistent and incorporates the static effect of the E c term on the wavefunction, while the second is a one-shot calculation at E c = 0, where the wavefunction does not depend on E c and n 0 at all, only the energy is shifted. For purposes of comparing these approaches, we performed all calculations using the same DMRG impurity solver, the only difference being the different level of the approximation in the charging term. The E c dependence at even n 0 tuning are shown in Fig. For U/∆ = 30, the differences are only quantitative and relatively weak. This is expected, since large U enforces small charge fluctuations on the impurity site, thereby reducing the effects of the charging term in the range of E c values of interest (order ∆). We find that the discrepancy is larger for the singlet state, where the "static" method seemingly performs slightly better than the self-consistent "mean-field" method. For the doublet state, both approximate schemes produce the same result. This is due to the symmetry of the problem: the system is particle-hole symmetric in this case, with nsc = n 0 . The reason for the energy difference with respect to the exact solution is the charge fluctuations, i.e., the difference between (n sc -n 0 ) 2 and ( nsc -n 0 ) 2 , which is non-zero even in the presence of particle-hole symmetry. In addition, the inexact treatment of charge fluctuations on the SC island also affects the results for charge fluctuations on the impurity site (third row): the decrease of the impurity charge fluctuations in the doublet state with increasing E c is not captured at all at the mean-field level, while the fluctuations in the singlet state grow rather than slightly decrease. The plot of H (second row) shows that the error quantified by the difference in energy expectation values is small for the doublet states, but more significant for the singlet states. Interestingly, the differences in E are significantly larger than those in H for the "static" method, while the "mean-field" method shows the opposite. This implies that the differences in E (i.e., the measurable excitation energies, shown in the fourth row) are quite small for the "static" method, while the discrepancy is somewhat larger for the "mean-field" method. In spite of all these quanti- tative differences, we conclude that at this large value of U/∆ = 30, the charging term in the superconductor is for the most part adequately captured by the mean-field approximations (which will in fact be used in the following when discussing the large-U limit, see Eq. ( At realistic U/∆ = 4, the discrepancies are more se-vere (see the right-hand panels). This is especially the case when evaluating the energies E within the approximate schemes, rather than evaluating the expectation value of the original Hamiltonian, Ĥ . This holds in particu- lar for the singlet states, which arise from a strong coupling between the QD and SC electrons. The energies of the three aproaches start strongly diverging already at low E c /∆ (order 0.1), while at E c /∆ ≈ 1 the error is sufficiently large that the results are highly questionable. The mean-field approach fails even qualitatively, predicting a quantum phase transition which does not really exist. At the same time, the mean-field wavefunction appears to be reasonably good as far as its energy expectation value is concerned. The plots of charge fluctuations reveal that the mean-field methods nevertheless poorly describe the dynamical aspects of the problem. We thus conclude that at the experimentally relevant values only the full solution leads to acceptable results. The dependence of energies on the gate voltage n 0 at fixed E c are shown in Fig. We conclude that the treatment of the charging term at the mean-field level is sufficient to obtain some basic understanding of the overall trends in the limits of low E c [66], but it does not capture the changing nature of the subgap states (evolution from conventional YSR towards subgap states with Coulombic nature, characterized by local moment reduction via charge redistribution), produces spurious qualitative features (phase transitions which do not actually exist), and is insufficiently accurate at quantitative level to be of real use in the interpretation of experiments. Impurity models with a Coulomb term E c n2 can be mapped on an effective model using collective charge operators after introducing collective charge operators for electrons on the island, finally relaxing the constraint N = nsc and thus re- garding N as an independent degree of freedom. This approach is applicable when the dynamics of the collective charge operator is insensitive to the precise number of conduction electrons in the bands Ultra-small superconducting islands have excitation spectra which significantly differ from the BCS spectra in the large-N limit, with some elementary excitations which have no counterpart in the Bogoliubov picture Fig. For U = 10 D, E c , ∆ and ν = 1, the QD occupancy is pinned to n imp ≈ 1; the QD is then a pure exchange scatterer with the Kondo exchange coupling constant J K = 8Γ/ρπU . In this case, the phase diagram can be well reproduced using the following approximation to the many-body energy levels in even/odd n sc sectors: ) where E B (Γ) is the binding energy of the YSR quasiparticle, such that lim Γ→0 E B (Γ) = 0. The data for E B (Γ) can be taken e.g. from a NRG calculation. This is the idealized version of Fig. (n 0 = 800.5) the transition between singlet and doublet GS occurs at essentially the same value of Γ for all values of E c due to equal charging energies for both states, as follows from Eq. ( Eq. ( For U = 1, the system is essentially still in the deep Kondo regime. The quantitative differences at U = 0.1 (the value corresponding to all results shown in the main text) are, however, significant. They are most apparent in panel b) showing the phase diagram in the (Γ, E c ) plane. For even n 0 = 800, we observe a significantly slower approach to the E c = ∆ asymptote compared to the large-U limit. For half-integer n 0 = 800.5 the quantum phase transition value of hybridisation (Γ C ) exhibits a weak E c dependence, thus the transition line is no longer strictly vertical. This is due to the competition between the E c and U terms, i.e., due to the redistribution of charge which is now possible even at the half-way n 0 = 800.5 point because of the weaker electron-electron repulsion U on the QD. The diagram for odd n 0 = 801 appears to be less affected. Finally, for very low U = 0.01 the system is in a qualitatively different weak-interaction regime where the subgap states are better described as Andreev bound states (ABS). Here the increasing E c /∆ ratio drives a cross-over between the ABS and CB regimes that still shows some similarities with the YSR-CB cross-over. The discussion of this regime is beyond the scope of this work. In Fig. The subgap (discrete) part of the spectral function is easily computed from the wavefunctions of (0), (+1) and (-1) states as Here σ = σ 0 + σ and σ = σ 0 -σ, where σ 0 is the S z component of total spin of the ground state (0), while σ and σ are those of the excitations (+1) and (-1), respectively. In Fig. The left-most panels show the reference results for E c = 0, i.e. the conventional YSR regime. The model parameters used here correspond to the situation where close to half filling (ν = 1, particle-hole symmetric point) the ground state is an (unscreened) doublet, while sufficiently away from half filling it is a singlet. At ν ∼ 1, the doublet GS with n imp ≈ 1 is characterized by a nearly saturated local moment S 2 imp → 3/4 that is almost decoupled from the band electrons, i S imp • S i ≈ 0. Sufficiently away from ν = 1, the singlet GS has level filling closer to either zero or full (double) occupancy and correspondingly diminished local moment S 2 imp 0.15. The excited states in the central ν ∼ 1 region have level filling with a strong dispersion, and there is strong antiferromagnetic alignment of the local moment with the electrons in the band: this is a manifestation of the bonding of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle that generates these subgap YSR states. We note some small differences in the results for (+1) and (-1) excited states (in particular the red and blue symbols do not overlap completely): this is a consequence of the finite size (finite N ) of the system, as discussed earlier. For E c = 0 the results do not depend on n 0 . The results are therefore (anti)symmetric with respect to ν = 1 for both even and odd n 0 . For finite but small E c = 0.2∆, the main qualitative difference compared to E c = 0 is the observably different behavior of the (+1) and (-1) excitations, far exceeding the finite-N effects we noted for the case of E c = 0. Furthermore, we observe a lack of (anti)symmetry with respect to ν = 1 for odd n 0 = 801. The nature of the states remains, however, the same as for E c = 0. The regime of E c /∆ = 0.8 and E c /∆ = 1.2, where the electron-electron repulsion terms on the superconductor, E c , and on the quantum dot, U , are comparable in magnitude (specifically E c /(U/2) ≈ 0.4, 0.6), is controlled by the competition between the QD and SC filling. In the following we analyse this regime in more details, separately for even and odd n 0 . For even n 0 , close to the p-h symmetric point (ν ≈ 1), the ground state (0) is a doublet with the impurity local moment almost decoupled from the SC. The excited states (±1) are similar to conventional YSR singlets, but with n imp considerably different from 1 due to charging terms. Away from half filling, for large values of ν (ν 1.5), in the state (0) there are almost 2 electrons on the impurity and n sc is even. In (+1), the additional electron enters an empty SC level, which costs E c + ∆, thus E + lies at the bottom of the continuum. To obtain (-1), the electron removed from the GS does not originate entirely from the SC but also partly from the impurity ( n imp < 2 in the hole-like excited state), recovering some of the local moment S 2 imp and shifting E -inside the gap due to hybridisation. For odd n 0 , close to the p-h symmetric point the GS (0) and the excited states (±1) all have an occupancy close to 1 and a well developed local moment. The difference between these states consists in the fate of this moment: in the GS it forms a strong QD-SC singlet state with the lone Bogoliubov quasiparticle, while in (±1) states it is simply decoupled. The excitation energies are given by the sum of -∆ + E c = 0.2∆ and a contribution proportional to J K , as discussed in the main text. For large values of ν ∼ 2, the competition between E c and U is very prominent and we need to distinguish the regions where the GS has 802 or 803 electrons; the transition between them occurs at a value of ν that strongly depends on E c /∆. In the region with n GS = 802, the state (0) is a singlet with high n imp . It has a large SC charging energy, while the impurity e-e repulsion energy U 2 (n imp -ν) 2 is almost minimized. An additional electron predominantly enters the SC, hence the peak E + has low spectral weight. The states (-1) and (0) are, however, quite similar, except for the additional electron at the impurity site in the state (0). The spectral weight of the E -peak is thus large, on the order of 0.85, and the corresponding excitation energy is large because the low-energy impurity level is emptied. In the region with n GS = 803, the states (0), (-1) and (+1) all have close to maximal n imp , and differ only in the electron close to the Fermi level in the SC, leading to extremely small spectral weights of the subgap peaks. We note the existence of cases where the "subgap" state energy exceeds the Γ = 0 gap edge, see Fig. Figure . Spectral function for odd n 0 = 801 and Ec/∆ = 0.2, the case shown in Fig. The p-h asymmetry and discontinuities provide a means to determine the charging energy E c from experimental spectra. This is best done for the system tuned to odd n 0 where the asymmetries are maximal. In Fig. , where E x imp is the expectation value of H imp in the sector indicated by the superscript label x ∈ {(+0), (-1), (+1)}. This estimate is plotted in Fig. Here we provide some further details on the Hamiltonian used in the main text. We first introduce the notation for level and electron numbers. N is the number of levels in the SC, M = N + 1 is the total number of levels in the We furthermore define the following occupancy for the impurity, and for the SC, as well as n = nimp + nsc . We write n imp = nimp , n sc = nsc and n = n . Evidently, n imp +n sc = n. At half filling n imp = 1, n sc = N , and n = 1 + N = M . The SC parts of the Hamiltonian are The pairing terms only include the time-reversal conjugate states, i.e., the Hamiltonian takes the form of the reduced pairing model (see also Appendix C in Ref. The impurity part of the Hamiltonian is We introduce δ = imp + U/2, as well as ν = 1/2 -/U = 1 -δ/U , as two further ways to express the value of imp for a given fixed value of U . Both measure the departure from the p-h symmetric point at δ = 0 and ν = 1, δ in energy units, ν in units of electron number. Thus, alternatively, Finally, the hybridisation part is We define Γ = πρv 2 where ρ = 1/2D is the density of states in the conduction band. Conversely, v = Γ/πρ = 2Γ/π. In a strictly electrically isolated QD-SC system the number of electrons would be fixed. The presence of weakly coupled tunneling probes permits the transfer of charge to and from the QD-SC system. The total occupancy changes so as to reach the state of minimal energy. (Strictly speaking the thermodynamic variable that is minimized is H -μn, but μ may be thought to be absorbed in the parameters n 0 and ν). Nevertheless, for weak tunneling probe coupling the charge fluctuations may be neglected and the total QD-SC system charge does not change with time beyond the tunneling events when the system is probed. For this reason, one may take n ≡ n to be an integer constant. Of particular interest is the parity of n in the ground state. In the usual discussions of the YSR physics, where E c = 0 and n imp ≈ 1, the odd-parity state (doublet state) corresponds to an unscreened impurity, the evenparity state (singlet state) to a "YSR screened" impurity. At finite E c this picture is modified by the additional energy shift of E c for states with SC occupancy differing by one electron. We denote the lowest-energy eigenstate in each charge sector as ψ n and its energy as E n . The ground state is thus ψ ngs and the lowest excited states ψ ngs+1 and ψ ngs-1 . The excitation energies of the spectroscopically visible subgap states are defined as E + = E (+1) -E (0) for particle addition and E -= E (-1) -E (0) for particle removal. The corresponding spectral weights are w It is perhaps worthwhile to point out that since our model is based on a "microscopic" description of the pairing interaction and since the Hamiltonian is solved essentially exactly within the DMRG, the "gap renormalization effects" (the effect of the impurity back on the superconductor) is fully taken into account, thus no self-consistent correction of the pairing function is necessary as in mean-field approaches. This 1/N renormalization effect is, however, small even for the N = 800 SC levels used in the calculations in this work. For easy reference, let us consider the lowest particleaddition and particle-removal excitation energies for a pure SC island in the absence of the QD, i.e., the edges of the quasi-continua of Bogoliubov quasiparticles for finite E c . From Eq. ( Here n 0 is the continuously tunable experimental parameter proportional to gate voltage, while n sc = nsc is an integer at the charge degeneracy points). This reduces to E + E -= ∆ + E c for even integer n 0 = n sc , but one should note that + and -are shifted asymmetrically for any value of n 0 that is not an even integer. The total single-particle gap in the spectral function thus remains constant, E + + E -= 2∆ + 2E c . The largest asymmetry occurs for values close to odd n 0 . Exactly at odd-integer n 0 , n sc changes discontinuously by 2 for E c < ∆. On one side of this discontinuity one finds and on the other For E c = 0 we recover the standard BCS result with the SC gap edges at ω = E + = ∆ and ω = -E -= -∆ for all values of n 0 . For large E c > ∆, the excitation gaps of the even n sc states close at for particle-addition and particle-removal gap, respectively. In the range of n 0 where the GS has an odd number of electrons in the SC the following expressions hold: For odd n sc = n 0 we thus find In Fig. The particle-hole (p-h) transformation is defined as The Hubbard and hopping terms remain invariant. The charge terms transform as nimp The solution to the second equation for equidistant levels with spacing d is In the N → ∞ limit, this converges to a flat band with the density of states ρ = 1/2D on the interval [-D : D]. In Hamiltonian H sc , we truncate the spectrum of the SC levels at the Debye frequency ω D . For Γ = 0 this is no approximation, because the levels outside the range [-ω D : ω D ] play no role since they are fully decoupled from the levels participating in pairing Another observation is that typically the bath has a very large number of levels, while only a tiny subset of those is actually hybridized with the impurity. The effective quantum impurity problems with noninteracting baths fully disregard all levels which are decoupled from the impurity, because those live in a separate Hilbert space and are irrelevant for the solution of the impurity problem. In our work we also retain only the levels that hybridise with the impurity and neglect all others, but we need to keep in mind that in reality the Coulomb interaction connects the two subsystems which therefore do not fully decouple. We do not discuss effects resulting from such coupling in this work, but merely note that they are expected to be important for the transport properties. We first provide the matrix-product-operator (MPO) representation of the Hamiltonian studied in this work. Left-most site (impurity-site): Here F = (-1) n is the local fermionic-parity operator, which gives phase of -1 if there is an odd number of electrons on the site. In top rows, black stands for even nsc, red for odd nsc. For non-zero Ec, the charging has period 2e. For Ec/∆ < 1, the occupancy changes in steps of 2. For Ec/∆ > 1, the occupancy changes in steps of 1, yet the regions of even and odd occupancy have different widths and the 2e period is maintained. With increasing Ec/∆, the even-odd effects become less pronounced; in the large Ec/∆ limit a 1e-periodic pattern typical of Coulomb blockade is recovered. At the same time, with increasing Ec/∆ the nature of the gap is changing from the superconducting gap into a Coulomb gap. Generic site (with g = αd): mic discretization), while the DMRG has no systematic errors. Typical NRG errors for quantities such as excitation energies are of the order of few percent 