Exploration of new superconductors has always been one of the research directions in condensed matter physics. We report here a new layered heterostructure of [(Fe,Al)(OH)2][FeSe]1.2, which is synthesized by the hydrothermal ion-exchange technique. The structure is suggested by a combination of X-ray powder diffraction and the electron diffraction (ED). [(Fe,Al)(OH)2][FeSe]1.2 is composed of the alternating stacking of tetragonal FeSe layer and hexagonal (Fe,Al)(OH)2 layer. In [(Fe,Al)(OH)2][FeSe]1.2, there exists mismatch between the FeSe sub-layer and (Fe,Al)(OH)2 sub-layer, and the lattice of the layered heterostructure is quasi-commensurate. The as-synthesized [(Fe,Al)(OH)2][FeSe]1.2 is non-superconducting due to the Fe vacancies in the FeSe layer. The superconductivity with a Tc of 40 K can be achieved after a lithiation process, which is due to the elimination of the Fe vacancies in the FeSe layer. The Tc is nearly the same as that of (Li,Fe)OHFeSe although the structure of [(Fe,Al)(OH)2][FeSe]1.2 is quite different from that of (Li,Fe)OHFeSe. The new layered heterostructure of [(Fe,Al)(OH)2][FeSe]1.2 contains an iron selenium tetragonal lattice interleaved with a hexagonal metal hydroxide lattice. These results indicate that the superconductivity is very robust for FeSe-based superconductors. It opens a path for exploring superconductivity in iron-base superconductors. Exploration of new superconductors has always been one of the research directions for physicists since the discovery of superconductivity in 1911. Iron-based superconductors have attracted much attention over the past years due to its abundant structural and physical properties. Misfit layer structure compounds, generally described as (MX)n[TX2]m, where M =Sn, Pb, Sb, Bi, or a lanthanide, T=Ti, V, Nb, Ta, or Cr, X=S or Se, n=1.1-1.2, m=1,2, have an unusual structure which are formed by pseudo-hexagonal TX2 sandwiches and pseudo-tetragonal MX layer Material Synthesis. The [(Fe,Al)(OH)2][FeSe]1.2 is synthesized by a hydrothermal ion-exchange technique using an insulating K0.8Fe1.6Se2 single crystal as a matrix. Firstly, 0.003-0.005 mol of selenourea (Alfa Aesar, 99.97% purity), 0.0035 mol of nano iron powder (macklin, 99.9% purity, 50 nm), 0.0015 mol of Al(OH)3 (macklin, 99.99% purity), 0.008-0.015 mol of KOH (macklin, 99.99% purity) and several pieces of K0.8Fe1.6Se2 single crystals were mixed with 5 ml de-ionized water and loaded into a stainless steel autoclaves of 25 ml capacity with Teflon liners. The K0.8Fe1.6Se2 single crystal was synthesized by elements of Fe, Se and K, which had been reported elsewhere. The atomic ratio of Fe : Se : Al is determined to be 1.42 : 1 : 0.22 by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES), with an instrument error of 10 %. The as-synthesized samples were subsequently subjected to lithiation process in which the thin flakes were immersed in a solution of hexane using n-butyl lithium (n-BuLi) as the lithiation reagent. The lithiation reactions were carried out for 7 hours in an argonfilled glovebox with the dilute n-BuLi (0.22 mol/L) at room temperature. (CAUTION: the excess unreacted n-BuLi is very dangerous and must be dealed with carefully.) Characterization. 2 is characterized by a powder X-ray diffractometer (SmartLab-9, Rigaku Corp.) with Cu Kα radiation and a fixed graphite monochromator. The lattice parameters and the crystal structure are refined using the Rietveld method with the program GSAS package. The sample is easy to decompose during the grinding process at room temperature. In order to get polycrystalline sample to refine the crystal structure, the sample is ground in liquid nitrogen in an argon-filled glovebox. (In particular, liquid nitrogen is very dangerous, antifreeze measures must be done during the grinding process to avoid frostbite.) The resistivity measurement is carried out by Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS) with standard four-terminal method. The magnetic susceptibility is measured by a SQUID magnetometer (Quantum Design MPMS-5). Electron diffraction patterns are obtained using a JEOL 2010 TEM at an acceleration voltage of 200 KV. The as-derived [(Fe,Al)(OH)2][FeSe]1.2 polycrystal thin flake roughly inherits the original shape of its precursor K0.8Fe1.6Se2 single crystal. Figure 2 by the refinement, which is in accordance with the ICP-AES result. The ratio of Fe : Al in the hydroxide layer and the amount of Fe vacancies in the FeSe layer are all within a reasonable range compared with the natural tochilinite. Figure 