Enhancing the light-matter interactions in two-dimensional materials via optical metasurfaces has attracted much attention due to its potential to enable breakthrough in advanced compact photonic and quantum information devices. Here, we theoretically investigate a strong coupling between excitons in monolayer WS2 and quasi-bound states in the continuum (quasi-BIC). In the hybrid structure composed of WS2 coupled with asymmetric titanium dioxide nanobars, a remarkable spectral splitting and typical anticrossing behavior of the Rabi splitting can be observed, and such strong coupling effect can be modulated by shaping the thickness and asymmetry parameter of the proposed metasurfaces. It is found that the balance of line width of the quasi-BIC mode and local electric field enhancement should be considered since both of them affect the strong coupling, which is crucial to the design and optimization of metasurface devices. This work provides a promising way for controlling the light-matter interactions in strong coupling regime and opens the door for the future novel quantum, low-energy, distinctive nanodevices by advanced meta-optical engineering. Strong coupling of excitons to optical microcavity has received tremendous interest for its fundamental importance in basic quantum electrodynamics at nanoscale and practical applications towards quantum information processing Over the past decade, the strong coupling between the excitons of TMDCs and optical microcavities was mostly realized by metallic nanocavities supporting surface plasmon polaritons, which can strongly confine the electric field in ultrasmall mode volume In this paper, for the first time, we investigate the metasurface-enhanced strong coupling between excitons in TMDCs and bound states in the continnum resonance (BIC). In the hybrid structure consisting of WS 2 and titanium dioxide (TiO 2 ) nanobars, the magnetic dipole (MD) resonance governed by quasi-BIC is obtained by breaking the C 2 symmetry and analyzed using the finite element method (FEM), which provides the ideal number of photons to interaction with exciton. A remarkable spectral splitting of 46.86 meV and typical anticrossing behavior of the Rabi splitting can be observed in the absorption spectrum, which can be well described by coupled-mode theory (CMT). By further changing the asymmetry parameter and varying the thickness of the TiO 2 metasurface, it is found that the balance of line width of the quasi-BIC mode and local electric field enhancement should be reached to obtain the large Rabi splitting. Our work set an example for strong coupling in TMDCs/metasurface hybrid system and show great flexibility with diverse geometric configurations and different 2D TMDCs materials, which opens an avenue for smart design of novel integrated quantum devices. The proposed hybrid construction, as illustrated in Fig. To obtain a clearer insight into the physics of magnetic dipole quasi-BIC resonance in the metasurfaces, we analysis the transmission spectrum of the TiO 2 metasurfaces with different asymmetry parameters are shown in Fig. We then fit the transmission spectrum T (w) by the Fano formula where a 1 , a 2 , and b are the constant real numbers,w 0 is the resonant frequency and γ is the dissipation of the quasic-BIC, as depicted in the Fig. Fig. When the detuning ∆=E q-BIC -E exc =0, Eq. (3) become Then we obtain the Rabi splitting energy which is owning to the strong coupling between quasi-BIC and exciton. Here, we also calculate the γ q-BIC =14.93 meV and γ exc =15 meV from Fig. Fig. thickness H, which indicates that coupling strength g will reduce with the decrease of the asymmetric parameter. It can be described by CMT that when the dissipation loss of the quasi-BIC resonance gets close to the nonradiative decay rate of the exciton, the Rabi splitting reaches its maximum The weighting of the quasi-BIC and exciton constituents in the LB and UB can be drived from Eq. ( which are shown in Fig. In conclusions, we have theoretically investigated the strong coupling between the WS 2 excitons and quasi-BIC mode supported by TiO 2 metasurfaces. The Rabi splitting energy up to 46.86 meV is observed in the absorption spectrum of the hybrid structure. Furthermore, anticrossing behavior as a typical feature of strong cou-pling can be achieved by tuning the asymmetric parameters and the thickness of TiO 2 metasurface. More importantly, it is found that the line width of the quasi-BIC mode and local electric field enhancement should be balanced since both of them affect the strong coupling. Beyond this work, the proposed configuration can be extended to diverse kinds of strong coupling system, in principle, with various dielectric metasurface designs and different TMDCs (MoS 2 , WSe 2 etc.). Therefore, this paper provides a strategically important method for metasurface-enhanced strong coupling, and offers designable, low-energy consumption, practical platform for future research of quantum phenomena and nanophotonic devices.