We propose an analytical framework to model the effect of single and multiple mechanical surface oscillators on the dynamics of vertically polarized elastic waves propagating in a semi-infinite medium. The formulation extends the canonical Lamb's problem, originally developed to obtain the wavefield induced by a harmonic line source in an elastic half-space, to the scenario where a finite cluster of vertical oscillators is attached to the medium surface. In short, our approach utilizes the solution of the classical Lamb's problem as Green's function to formulate the multiple scattered fields generated by the resonators. For an arbitrary number of resonators, arranged atop the elastic half-space in an arbitrary configuration, the displacement fields are obtained in closedform and validated with numerics developed in a two-dimensional finite element environment. Modeling the propagation of mechanical surface waves in an elastic half-space is a long-lasting topic in physics and engineering. A cornerstone of this research topic is the seminal work by Lamb A canonical problem of particular interest concerns the propagation of elastic waves in a semi-infinite substrate supporting a cluster of resonant elements. This configuration can indeed illustrate problems of technological relevance across different length-scales, as seismic waves interacting with the built environment Several analytical formulations are currently available to derive the dispersive properties The calculation of the elastic wavefield of a finite-size, arbitrarily distributed cluster of resonators is instead obtained via numerical techniques (like standard Hence, in this work we develop an exact formulation which extends the classical Lamb's problem to the case of an elastic half-space coupled to an arbitrary cluster of vertical surface resonators. To this purpose, we calculate the incident wavefield generated by a harmonic source following the approach by Lamb. The Lamb's solution is also used as Green's function to describe the scattered field generated by each resonator when excited by a harmonic motion at its base. The overall substrate wavefield is then obtained as solution of the coupled problem due to the interference of the incident field and the multiple scattered fields of the oscillators. Our formulation can tackle a generic number of different resonators located at arbitrary distances from the source, as illustrated in the various examples discussed in the work and validated against numerical results (FEM). The article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present our analytical formulation. We begin by describing the solution of the Lamb's problem for a harmonic source applied on the free surface of a semiinfinite elastic substrate (Section 2.1). Then, we recall the response for an oscillator subjected to a harmonic motion at its base (Section 2.2) and formulate the interaction problem between resonators and the half-space (Section 2.3). In Section 3, we calculate the response of an elastic substrate with a single, a pair and a cluster of surface resonators and validate our predictions against numerics. Finally, in Section 4 we summarize the main findings of our work. We develop an analytical framework to calculate the response of an isotropic, linear elastic half-space coupled with N oscillators and excited by a harmonic line source (see Fig. Our investigation begins recalling (i) the solution of the Lamb's problem for a harmonic line load applied at the free surface of an elastic, isotropic half-space Let us consider a time-harmonic force per unit length Qe iωt applied normal to the free surface of an isotropic elastic medium. We resort to a two-dimensional (2D) plane-strain formulation in the x -z plane, where the x-axis is directed along the wave propagation and the z-axis is perpendicular to the free surface (see Fig. Given the plane-strain conditions, the displacement vector lies in the plane x -z with non-null components denoted as u(x, z, t) = [u, w]. It is here convenient to use the Helmholtz decomposition u = ∇Φ + ∇ × Ψ and to express the displacement components as: where Φ(x, z, t) is a scalar potential and Ψ y (x, z, t) is a component of the vector potential Ψ. Restricting our interest to the steady-state condition, the potentials assume the form: and satisfy the wave equations in which k p and k s denote, respectively, the wave number of pressure and shear waves in the substrate, namely: where: are the pressure and shear wave velocities, respectively, λ and μ the Lamé constants and ρ the mass density of the substrate. nents of the stress tensor σ can be expressed as function of the potentials: At this stage, we seek for the solutions of the wave Eqs. ( which admit general solutions of the form: with: and where the coefficients A 1 and A 2 in Eq. ( Fourier transforming the stress components in Eq. ( (1), lead to the following expressions: Solutions of Eqs. (11a) and (11b) provide the coefficients: where R(k) denotes the so-called Rayleigh function: The inverse Fourier transform of Eq. ( At last, by substituting Eqs. (14a) and (14b) into Eq. ( where the superscript (f ) is used to label these displacement components of the free field (no resonators). From Eqs. (15a) and (15b) the free field displacement components at z = 0 can be expressed as e ikx dk (16a) e ikx dk (16b) We now consider the steady-state dynamics of mass-spring-dashpot resonators located atop an elastic halfspace under harmonic motion. The set x-coordinate of the resonators. For each resonator we identify a footprint area S with a length 2a along the x-direction. The dynamic equilibrium equation of each resonator reads: where m n , c n and K n are the n-th resonator mass, viscous damping coefficient and spring stiffness, W n is the absolute vertical displacement of the n-th mass, and w(x n , 0) is the average vertical displacement of the resonator footprint: The use of an average base displacement is motivated by both physical and mathematical arguments. From a physical point, the average displacement represents the mean motion at the finite-size base of the oscillator. Mathematically, it allows to eliminate the divergence of the Green's function at the origin. According to Eq. ( where T Rn denotes the so-called transmissibility and the uniform stress exerted by each resonator over the contact area reads: These harmonic normal stresses behave as sources of additional wavefields in the half-space and interact with the free field generated by the source. The nature and implication of this interaction is described in the next section. As anticipated in the previous section, the resonators excited by a harmonic base motion generate additional wavefields in the half-space. We label the j-th resonator-induced wavefield u (s) j (x, z), where the superscript (s) is used to denote scattered field, so that the total displacement field of the coupled problem can be written as: where u (s) (x, z) is the total wavefield. The free wavefield u (f ) (x, z), except for the point of application of the harmonic force (x = 0), is characterized by null stress components at the surface: hence, the stress at each resonator footprint depends only on the scattered wavefield, namely: In force of Eq. ( where the average free-field vertical displacement w(f) (x n , 0) at the footprint of the n-th resonator can be obtained exploiting Eq. (15b) as: The average scattered field w(s) (x n , 0) can be instead obtained as described in the following. First Eqs. (15a) and (15b) are used as Green's functions to express the displacement components of the scattered field 100 u (s) j (x, z) generated by the normal stress exerted by the j-th resonator: Note that the calculation of each scattered wavefield u (s) j (x, z), and w (s) j (x, z), as per Eqs. (27a) and (27b), requires only the knowledge of the average vertical displacement, free w(f) (x j , 0) and scattered w(s) (x j , 0), at the contact points x j ∈ O. Since the free field component w(f) (x j , 0) is known from Eq. ( which can be equivalently rewritten as: Then, we substitute Eq. (27b) into Eq. ( where: For simplicity, we express Eq. ( where the corresponding coefficients are: The solution of Eq. ( At this stage, by substituting Eq. (34) into Eqs. (27a), (27b), we can obtain the j-th scattered field components u (s) j (x, z) and w (s) j (x, z) at any point of the x -z plane. The total wavefield is then obtained as the summation of the free and scattered fields: Equations ( The above Eqs. ( The closed-form Eqs. ( In this section, we discuss the behavior of a single resonator, a couple of resonators, and a graded array of resonators placed atop an elastic half-space and excited by a far field source. Our aim is twofold: (i) to test and validate the accuracy of our formulation against a numerical (Finite Element) solution; (ii) to discuss the coupling between free and scattered wavefields for different mechanical parameters and layout of the resonators. Before tackling these tasks, let us provide some useful parameters to facilitate our calculations and ease the further discussions: • to generalize our conclusions, we introduce the dimensionless mass parameter mj = m j /(ρSλ rj ), with ρ being the density of the half-space and λ rj = c R /f rj the Rayleigh wavelength at resonant frequency f rj ; this parameter compares the mass of the resonator to the mass of a portion of substrate under the resonator footprint area, with volume V = S × λ rj . Additionally, we introduce the parameter dmn = d mn /λ rj = (x n -x m )/λ rj to denote the normalized distance between the m-th and n-th resonator. • to account for wave energy dissipation, we assume a non-null damping ratio ζ for the resonator response and a non-null hysteretic damping ξ for the elastic substrate. The damping coefficient of the j-th resonator is calculated as c j = 2m j ω rj ζ [26], while the complex moduli of the substrate as λ = λ(1 + 2iξ) and μ = μ(1 + 2iξ) • to quantify the contribution of the resonators scattered field at the half-space surface (z = 0), we introduce the following amplitude ratio (A R ) and the normalized distance between the receiver and the first resonator d = d/λ r1 = (x -x 1 )/λ r1 where A R will be computed. We begin our investigation considering the case of a single surface oscillator. The resonator has a normalized mass m1 = 1, is located at a distance x 1 = 6λ r1 from the harmonic source, and lies over a half-space characterized by the mechanical properties collected in Table The total wavefield generated by a harmonic source at f = f r1 , computed by using Eqs. ( To interpret the different responses observed near and far from the resonator, we expand the expression of |A R | given in Eq. ( where ∆θ is the relative phase between the scattered and free vertical displacements, namely, w (s) /w (f ) . According to the Eq. ( Hence, the contribution of the scattered waves to the value of |A R | is negligible. Conversely, in the far field, scattered and free responses are out-of-phase, leading to destructive interference between the two wavefields and to a minimum value of the amplification ratio |A R |. Let us now investigate in more detail the variation of the coupled frequency f c1 with respect to the mechanical parameters of the system, namely substrate and oscillator. To this purpose, we calculate the absolute vertical displacement W of a resonator located on the half-space surface at distance d = 0 from the source and compare its response to the one of an identical resonator placed on a rigid substrate. The two resonators vertical responses, normalized with respect to the relative base displacements, are plotted in Fig. where the equivalent substrate stiffness K h can be estimated from Eq. (27b) by considering the averaged stress over the contact area (z = 0) and a null source-response distance (x = x j ): Note that the integral in Eq. ( The value of the coupled frequency vs. the resonator mass as predicted from Eq. ( To conclude this section, we remark that all these results have been validated with FE models (see black dots superimposed onto all the curves in Figs. Studies on the dynamics of coupled oscillators on elastic supports are receiving renovate attention both in the geophysical context, to assess the response of close buildings and their influence on ground vibrations, and in the design of SAW devices, where micro/nano resonators are proposed for application in classical and quantum information processing We begin our investigation considering two identical resonators, with parameters given in Table To investigate further the coupling between the responses of the resonators, we expand the expression of the amplitude ratio as: where ∆θ 1 and ∆θ 2 denote the phase of w (s) 1 /w (f ) and w (s) 2 /w (f ) , respectively. The above equation clearly highlights the presence of the cross-coupling contribution, namely, the last term in Eq. ( An effective mutual interaction requires resonators with similar (possibly identical) resonance frequencies located at a relatively short distance. That is because the scattered fields are maximized at the coupled resonance frequencies and in the near fields of the resonators, as shown in Fig. Similarly, the amplification factors of the two resonators, reported in Fig. We remark that the extraction of these features is eased by our analytical framework which allows to investigate and distinguish the contribution of each scattered field to the total response. So far we have gained some physical insights into the behavior of single and coupled oscillators lying over an elastic substrate. When the number of resonators increases to form a cluster, or a so-called metasurface, the propagation of surface waves in the elastic substrate can be characterized by intriguing phenomena, such as surface-to-bulk wave conversions (from classical the evaluation of the related wavefields require the use of numerical schemes. In what follows, we will show that our analytical framework can properly capture these phenomena. We begin by considering an array of 40 identical resonators ( mj = 0.5, f rj = f r1 ), arranged periodically with a lattice spacing 0.1λ r1 (see Fig. To visualize this phenomenon, we consider an incident Rayleigh wave with frequency f = 1.1f r1 , namely in the metasurface band gap, which is excited by the harmonic source Qe iωt sufficiently far away from the metasurface (x 1 = 6λ r1 ). The displacement wavefield is displayed in Fig. The same wave-conversion phenomenon can be extended over a broader frequency range by utilizing a series of resonators with a graded variation of frequency along the array As last example, we calculate the wavefield of a disordered metasurface, constructed by randomly changing the order of resonators considered in the discussed metawedge. The investigation of such a non-periodic resonant system is attracting increasing interest in the research community as a design strategy to enlarge the filtering bandwidth of metamaterials We also provide a comparison of the amplitude ratio |A R | calculated at d = 6 in the frequency range f = [0, 3]f r1 . The result is shown in Fig. This work proposes an analytical formulation to model and study the interaction of vertically polarized elastic waves with surface resonators. In particular, we have exploited the Green's functions of the canonical Lamb's problem to setup a coupled problem between the incident field generated by the source and the scattered wavefields generated by a set of resonators placed atop the half-space. The formulation can handle an arbitrary number of resonators arranged on the surface of the half-space in a generic configuration. The capabilities of the developed methodology have been discussed by modeling the dynamics of a single, a couple and a cluster of resonators arranged over an isotropic homogeneous half-space, and have been validated against finite element simulations. The method allows to capture the frequency shift of a resonator coupled to the elastic substrate, the mutual interaction between a couple of close resonators in terms of frequency splitting and amplitude variation and the According to the Hooke's law and employing the Helmholtz decomposition in Eq. (2), the in-plane compo-