Recently, advances in film synthesis methods have enabled a study of extremely overdoped La2-xSrxCuO4. This has revealed a surprising behavior of the superfluid density as a function of doping and temperature, the explanation of which is vividly debated. One popular class of models posits electronic phase separation, where the superconducting phase fraction decreases with doping, while some competing phase (e.g. ferromagnetic) progressively takes over. A problem with this scenario is that all the way up to the dome edge the superconducting transition remains sharp, according to mutual inductance measurements. However, the physically relevant scale is the Pearl penetration depth, L P, and this technique probes the sample on a length scale L that is much larger than L P. In the present paper, we use local scanning SQUID measurements that probe the susceptibility of the sample on the scale L << L P. Our SQUID maps show uniform landscapes of susceptibility and excellent overall agreement of the local penetration depth data with the bulk measurements. These results contribute an important piece to the puzzle of how high-temperature superconductivity vanishes on the overdoped side of the cuprates phase diagram. Prior to the discovery of cuprate superconductors with high critical temperatures (Tc) A systematic study of overdoped LSCO samples may provide insight into the underlying cause(s) of the decrease and disappearance of superconductivity with doping, and thus enable a better understanding of the high-Tc superconductivity mechanism in general. In the past, it was usually assumed that the physics of overdoped cuprates should conform to the standard BCS theory of the superconducting state and the Fermi liquid theory of the normal-metal state. However, the applicability of this conventional picture has been challenged recently, as the closer scrutiny of the overdoped region has generated several perplexing experimental discoveries With this in mind, it has been proposed that perhaps some sort of electronic phase separation occurs on the overdoped side. The samples are postulated to be very inhomogeneous, with one phase superconducting and the other not, due to some competing order, such as ferromagnetism One problem with such phase-separation scenarios, otherwise quite plausible, is that a dedicated search for such a competing order has so far failed to detect any Comparing the two length scales, the mutual inductance technique always operates in the regime L >> LP. This, in principle, leaves some possibility of local inhomogeneity to have been left undetected. In this work, we aim to quantitatively determine penetration depth locally, scan across the sample to image with a micrometer resolution what happens in the material at temperatures near Tc, and check for spatial inhomogeneities in Tc and Ns(T). We present a comparison between previous global measurements and our present local scanning Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID) measurements of susceptibility. The two data sets are found to be in excellent agreement, implying that gross disorder cannot explain the exotic behavior of the superfluid density. All scanning SQUID experiments were done at the University of Connecticut using the Montana instruments Fusion 2 Cryostation, with a home-built microscope (FIG. High-quality, single-crystal LSCO films were synthesized at the Brookhaven National Laboratory using atomic layer-by-layer molecular beam epitaxy (ALL-MBE) The LSCO films studied here were deposited on LaSrAlO4 (LSAO) substrates epitaxially polished with the surface perpendicular to the [001] crystallographic direction. Each of the two LSCO films under study consists of an active (superconducting) layer, 25 nm (19 unit cells, 1.32 nm each) thick, which is protected on both sides with a 13 nm (5 unit cells) thick layer of La1.60Sr0.40CuO4, which is metallic but not superconducting (FIG. The nominal composition of the active layers in the two films under study is La2-xSrxCuO4 with x = 0.32 and x = 0.33, respectively. We emphasize that this x, the Sr concentration, should not be conflated with the actual density p of mobile charge carriers in the film. The two are different because of the presence of an unknown concentration and distribution of oxygen vacancies. Local defects that may cause some electron localization, etc., are also possible. In fact, we are unaware of any accurate and reliable method of measuring p, and so it remains unknown. In the vast literature on high-Tc cuprates, it has been an accepted practice to infer p from the measured value of Tc, using the following conversion: T ! = B(p -p !" )(p !# -p) where p !" = 0.06, p !# = 0.26, and (for LSCO, specifically) B = 4.15 × 10 $ K. In both LSCO films studied here, the mutual inductance and SQUID measurements show Tc ≈ 12 K. If we use the above conversion, the hole concentration determined in this way would be p ≈ 0.25, indeed very close to the dome edge at p !# = 0.26. In any case, we are way on the overdoped side, which is of focal interest here. Since the overall superfluid density scales with Tc, it is 3.5 times reduced compared to that in the optimally doped LSCO, while the total carrier density is higher. In a naïve spatial-phase-separation model, one would expect most of the of film -more than three-quarters -not to be superconducting, even at the lowest temperature, and presumably we should not fail to observe that clearly. In what follows, we present the acquired SQUID microscopy data including scan images and susceptibility approach curves. The SQUID microscope scans are presented as images (FIG. For scan images (FIG. Otherwise, these are essentially raw data (FIG. The temperature dependence of both LSCO films reveal homogenous susceptibility, at the level of a few percent. This translates to similar characteristic homogeneity in the penetration depth and the superfluid density. The transitions to the normal state are well-defined and are very sharp with a width of about 0.5 K. In this respect, the present films rival the best superconducting crystals FIG. The susceptibility approach curve is a continuous measurement of magnetic susceptibility from the sample as it moves closer to the SQUID. From this approach curve, the Pearl length LP can be determined. Using a model developed by Kogan #(̅ √"+,(̅ # 7, where φ(z) is the measured susceptibility signal, φ -= 1711 Φ . A ⁄ is the mutual inductance between the field coil and the pickup loop determined numerically for a specific sensor used, a = 7 μm is the radius of the field coil, and z̅ = z/a is the distance between the SQUID and the sample, normalized by a. Both the susceptibility images and the susceptibility approach traces are acquired with the field coil current of ~ 15 μA at a typical frequency ~1700 Hz, corresponding approximately to ~10 mG amplitude at the center of the coil when it is at the closest position to the sample. Determining z̅ = (z . + kV)/a takes two considerations: a constant offset between the SQUID and the sample due to the SQUID alignment at a finite angle, z . , and a piezo calibration factor k to convert the voltage on the piezo, V, during approach to micrometers. Utilizing the gradiometric design of the SQUID chip necessitates a small angular alignment. The alignment angle in our cooldown cycles was ~ 2 -4° between the SQUID chip and the sample surface, as determined optically at cryogenic temperatures. This creates a distance z0 between the SQUID and sample when the capacitance measurements indicate a 'touchdown' (contact between the SQUID and the sample). As one can see in the expression for φ(z) for thin films, the penetration depth LP is simply a factor dividing the z̅ -dependent term. We estimate z . = 2.5, 2.3, 2.1, 1.8 μm, and k = 7.5, 6.6, 7.5, 7.5 μm/V for the four datasets shown in the text and the supplementary information (in the order of appearance, starting from FIG. The Pearl depth Λ / ∝ 1/N -is related to the phase stiffness ρ -= 2A/dΛ / , where A = ħ # c . /8μ . k 0 e # , ħ is the reduced Planck constant, c0 = 1.32 nm is the unit cell height, μ . is the vacuum permeability, k 0 is the Boltzmann constant, and e is the electron charge Several theoretical explanation of the unusual temperature and doping dependence of rs(T,p) in LSCO and other cuprates have been proposed already One conceptual problem is that, experimentally, the coherence length is much smaller than the mean free path right above Tc. Hence, if the standard BCS theory applied, we should be in the "clean-BCS" limit. In principle, this would be consistent with the observed temperature dependence of rs(T,p). But it is in contradiction with the facts that most carriers are not in superfluid even when T→0, and that rs0 decreases and vanishes as p → pc2, while the normal carrier density keeps increasing smoothly. This problem was clearly spelled out early on One inference that seems to be very robust and non-controversial is that the measured superfluid density decreases and becomes very low in the highly-overdoped region. When expressed as the superfluid stiffness in units of Kelvin, this can be interpreted as the characteristic temperature at which thermal phase fluctuations become strong enough to destroy global phase coherence. This characteristic temperature is roughly equal to Tc, implying that Tc is in fact controlled by phase fluctuations. We believe that this important problem is still open and calls for more theoretical work. To summarize, we found excellent agreement between the local SQUID measurements and the previous bulk measurements of the penetration depth. This confirmation allows for a closer inspection on the quantitative information garnered from local measurements. Scanning SQUID susceptometry provides a micrometer-scale spatial depiction of the development of superconductivity that cannot be achieved via other methods like the bulk mutual inductance technique. Using SQUIDs to find the penetration depth can be a reliable method, once the fitting parameters are reasonably constrained. SQUIDs are cited as being non-invasive and we note that it is only true when the samples are measured very carefully, and even a smallest bit of contact between the SQUID and sample may alter the results. When done carefully to avoid interference with the device, it's possible to gain new insight on micrometer-scale developments of magnetic properties of novel quantum materials. 