Acoustic wave resonators are promising candidates for gravimetric biosensing. However, they generally suffer from strong acoustic radiation in liquid, which limits their quality factor and increases their frequency noise. This article presents an acoustic radiation-free gravimetric biosensor based on a locally resonant surface phononic crystal (SPC) consisting of periodic high aspect ratio electrodes to address the above issue. The acoustic wave generated in the SPC is slower than the sound wave in water, hence it prevents acoustic propagation in the fluid and results in energy confinement near the electrode surface. This energy confinement results in a significant quality factor improvement and reduces frequency noise. The proposed SPC resonator is numerically studied by finite element analysis and experimentally implemented by an electroplating-based fabrication process. Experimental results show that the SPC resonator exhibits an in-liquid quality factor 15 times higher than a conventional Rayleigh wave resonator at a similar operating frequency. The proposed radiation suppression method using SPC can also be applied in other types of acoustic wave resonators. Thus, this method can serve as a general technique for boosting the in-liquid quality factor and sensing performance of many acoustic biosensors. The rapid and decentralized detection of biomolecules has been increasingly demanded for various applications, such as infectious disease diagnosis and food safety tests. This demand has been particularly evident during the recent outbreak of the novel coronavirus (COVID- 19), where the throughput of time-consuming laboratory virus tests significantly delayed the diagnosis of the disease. In recent years, various techniques have been developed to meet these rising needs, which can be classified into four major categories: electrochemical, thermal, optical, and mass-sensitive biosensors Mass-sensitive biosensors based on acoustic wave resonators are competitive alternatives to optical biosensors It was, however, reported that one-dimensional surface phononic crystals (SPCs) made of periodic high aspect ratio electrode strips can be used to significantly slow down Rayleigh waves Figure If the acoustic wave velocity is reduced to a value lower than the sound velocity in water, its propagation in water is inhibited. This eliminates the acoustic radiation of the wave and thus enables high Q resonance in liquid. By exploiting this principle, we used SPC made of periodic high aspect ratio electrodes to slow down the surface wave on a lithium niobate substrate. The SPC induces a hybridization between the Rayleigh-type surface wave and the elastic resonance of the high aspect ratio electrodes. This hybridization results in the occurrence of hybrid modes with velocities directly conditioned by the geometrical characteristics of the electrodes. Figure A scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the fabricated device is shown in Fig. The impedance curves of the resonators fabricated with these different photoresists are shown in Fig. Resonators with high quality factors will lead to lower frequency noise in the final sensor oscillator. The overall performance of a gravimetric biosensor can be described by its limit of detection (LOD), which is obtained by where S and n f are the mass sensitivity and frequency noise of the sensor, respectively. The frequency noise of the sensor is evaluated by its Q factor, as discussed in the previous section. To evaluate the overall sensing performance, the mass sensitivity of the SPC biosensor also needs to be characterized. The variation in the nickel electrode height across the wafer is used here to calculate the mass sensitivity, as a change in electrode height is equivalent to the variation in loaded mass on top of the electrodes. Nevertheless, it should be noted that this sensitivity is an underestimate of the actual mass sensitivity expected from an actual biosensing process where the mass loading would be homogeneous on the entire device surface rather than localized on the top of the electrode. The resonance frequencies of the SPC resonators operating in air and in water are shown in Fig. where ρ Ni and t are the density and height of the nickel electrode, respectively. The mass sensitivity is a negative number, as the mass loading results in a decrease in the resonance frequency. The mass sensitivities of the resonators in air (S a ) and in water (S w ) obtained from the linearly fitted curve are shown in Table The mass sensitivity under homogeneous loading conditions, or full coverage mass sensitivity, was then obtained by the same FEM simulation model. A polymer layer (PMMA) covering the entire device surface was added as the mass loading layer. The device frequency response as a function of added mass is simulated by changing the PMMA layer density. The simulated unit cells for the pPR and nPR SPC resonators operating at 120 MHz are shown in Fig. As mentioned in the "Introduction" section, the usual strategy for in-liquid acoustic sensing relies on the use of shear-polarized acoustic modes. The shear polarization indeed minimizes mechanical motion transfer to water. However, it does not fully prevent acoustic radiation in water: the wave velocity in the solid substrate remains higher than the sound velocity in liquid and coupling with the vertically polarized mode generally occurs. This radiation loss is one of the major limitations of these devices in achieving a high Q factor for in-liquid sensing. In contrast, the SPC resonator proposed in this work relies on the complete suppression of acoustic radiation in water; this suppression is accomplished by a significant slowing down of acoustic wave propagation in the solid substrate due to the hybridization mechanism between localized modes in the electrodes and the surface wave. Due to the complete suppression of acoustic radiation, the energy leakage can be theoretically fully stopped, hence enabling high Q factor in-liquid sensing. In the present work, the Q factor of the SPC resonators is mostly limited by the electroplating process. The sidewall surface roughness and the overall process inhomogeneity result in structural defects breaking the periodicity of the IDTs, which limits further improvement in the quality factor. Nevertheless, this technological shortcoming can be overcome, notably by using alternative thick-film deposition techniques, such as thermal evaporation and chemical vapor deposition. Another limitation of the SPC biosensor compared to conventional SAW devices is that it involves a more complex fabrication process. Although it is a trade-off to achieve better performance, the added cost will not be significant in a complete sensing system that includes other components, such as microfluidic channels and readout circuits. The proposed method for acoustic radiation suppression is applied here to devices initially operating on elliptically polarized Rayleigh waves. This method can be more generally transposed to any IDT-based acoustic wave resonator, including SH-SAW or Love-wave acoustic resonators. The combination of shear mode polarization and acoustic radiation suppression has the potential to significantly advance the performance boundary of acoustic wave biosensors. In summary, we proposed a gravimetric biosensor based on an SPC resonator that can achieve acoustic radiationfree operation in liquid. The SPC induced a hybridization between a Rayleigh-type surface wave and the elastic resonance of the high aspect ratio electrodes, which led to strong confinement of the elastic energy at the electrode-substrate interface. The acoustic wave velocity was then reduced to be lower than the speed of sound in water. This mechanism resulted in the complete suppression of acoustic radiation, leading to high Q resonance in liquid. This device principle was validated by FEM analysis and experimentally implemented through the fabrication of SPC resonators using the LIGA process. Q factors on the order of 50 and a mass sensitivity of 12.92 Hz/(ng/cm 2 ) were obtained by the pPR process. A comparison with a Rayleigh SAW resonator revealed that the SPC could improve the Q factor of the resonator by 15 times. The effect was demonstrated here for resonators operating on vertically polarized waves, and it could also be combined with existing shear mode acoustic wave resonators. This proposed biosensor has the potential to significantly advance the performance boundary of current acoustic wave biosensors. Numerical analysis based on the FEM was used to study the behavior of the SPC resonator. The analysis was performed using Comsol multiphysics software. The FEM model couples multiple physics, including solid mechanics, pressure acoustics, electrostatics, piezoelectric effects, and acoustic structure interactions. As a 3D numerical analysis is computationally heavy, a simplified unit cell of the resonator (Fig. Fundamental field parameters, such as the electrical fields, particle displacements, and acoustic pressures, were obtained from numerical analysis. Other needed information, including electrical impedance and mode shape, was further derived from those field parameters. To obtain the dispersion diagram of localized modes in SPC, Floquet periodic conditions were applied to the left and right sides of the model so that impedance curves under different wave vectors (k x ) were computed. The variation in k x covered the first Brillouin zone, i.e., from 0 to π=λ. This equivalently changed the periodic conditions on the two sides from continuity type (k x 1⁄4 0) to antiperiodic type (k x 1⁄4 π=λ). The final dispersion diagram was obtained by a color map representation of the impedance magnitude in the k x À f plane. The device was fabricated on a 4-inch 128°Y-cut lithium niobate wafer. The wafer was initially cleaned with a piranha solution and deionized water to remove potential contaminants. Following cleaning, 20-nm titanium and 100-nm copper thin films were deposited on the wafer surface. The copper layer was used as a seed layer for subsequently electroplating nickel, while the titanium layer was used to promote adhesion between the copper layer and lithium niobate substrate. Subsequently, photolithography was used to create the mold for electroplating. A thick pPR, AZ9260, and a thick nPR, AZ nLOF 2070, were used to create different electrode profiles. Two photolithography masks with opposite polarity were designed correspondingly. After the mold was created, 7-8 μm-thick nickel layers were electroplated by an automatic electroplating machine (Technotrans Microform 100). It should be noted that both the IDTs and bus bars were electroplated, which meant that the IDTs were mechanically clamped by the bus bars in their electrical connection nodes. The device was then immersed in a Microposit 1165 remover to strip the photoresist mold. Reactive ion etching (RIE) was then used to remove the copper and titanium seed layers between the nickel electrodes to define the electrically isolated IDT fingers. Subsequently, 200 nm of silicon dioxide was deposited on the sensor surface using chemical vapor deposition. This layer was used as a passivation layer and could also provide an interface for bioreceptor immobilization. Another photolithography step was then performed to create the photoresist etching mask for the area excluding the pads that will be used for external electrical connection. The removal of silicon dioxide covering the contact pads was completed by another RIE process. The complete process flow is shown in Fig. The variation in the nickel film thickness across the wafer was exploited for the calculation of the mass sensitivity of the sensor because the small height difference of the nickel electrodes across the substrate caused a natural mass loading variation for the sensor, which changed its resonance frequency. The thickness of the nickel layers was measured by a profilometer. The Q factor of the SPC resonator was used to evaluate the frequency stability (frequency noise) of the sensor. It was calculated from its impedance by the following equation: where ƒ and φ are the operating frequency and phase of the electrical impedance of the device, respectively. The measurement of the impedance was completed by a vector network analyzer (VNA). Two RF probes were used to connect the device to the VNA. To obtain the performance data of the sensor in both air and water, its impedance was measured under both conditions.