We have studied the superconducting gap structure of LaPt2Si2 by measuring the temperature dependence of the London penetration depth shift ∆λ(T ) and point contact spectroscopy of single crystals. ∆λ(T ) shows an exponential temperature dependence at low temperatures, and the derived normalized superfluid density ρs(T ) can be well described by a single-gap s-wave model. The pointcontact conductance spectra can also be well fitted by an s-wave Blonder-Tinkham-Klapwijk model, where the gap value shows a typical BCS temperature and magnetic field dependence consistent with type-II superconductivity. These results suggest fully gapped superconductivity in LaPt2Si2, with moderately strong electron-phonon coupling. The interplay between charge density wave (CDW) order and superconductivity has been a frontier subject in condensed-matter physics The RPt 2 X 2 (R = rare-earth/alkaline-earth element, X = Si, As) compounds which crystallize in the CaBe 2 Ge 2 -type structure (space group P 4/nmm) are a family of CDW superconductors with a variety of properties In the superconducting state of LaPt 2 Si 2 , the specific heat shows an exponential temperature dependence, indicating fully gapped superconductivity Single crystals of LaPt 2 Si 2 were synthesized using the Czochralski method, as described in Ref. The operating frequency of the TDO oscillator is about 7 MHz, with a noise level as low as 0.1 Hz. The samples used for the TDO measurements typically have dimensions of about 600 × 300 × 200 μm 3 and were mounted onto a sapphire rod. The small ac field generated by the coil, is about 20 mOe, which is much smaller than the lower critical field H c1 of the sample, ensuring that the sample remains in the Meissner state. The change in the magnetic penetration depth is converted from the frequency shift by ∆λ(T ) = G∆f (T ), where G is the calibration constant determined by the geometry of the sample and coil The soft-PCS technique was also applied to study its gap structure indicated by the pronounced hysteresis loop. The transition temperature in our data is a little lower than that reported for the polycrystalline samples Figure where λ(0) and ∆(0) are the magnetic penetration depth and superconducting gap magnitude at zero temperature, respectively. As displayed by the dashed line, our experimental data for two directions can be well described by an s-wave model below T is obtained, which indicates nodeless superconductivity. Therefore, our measurements clearly show that LaPt 2 Si 2 is a fully gapped superconductor. To further investigate the superconducting gap structure of LaPt 2 Si 2 , we also analyzed the normalized superfluid density ρ s (T ) derived by ρ s (T ) = [λ(0)/λ(T )] 2 , using λ(0) = 279.3 nm from Ref. where f (E, T ) = [1 + exp(E/k B T )] -1 and ∆ k (T ) = ∆(T )g k are the Fermi-Dirac distribution function and the superconducting gap function, respectively. The gap function is the product of an angle-dependent component g k and a temperature-dependent part ∆(T ). ∆(T ) was approximated using The results from fitting with different models are displayed in Fig. Dozens of soft point contacts on LaPt 2 Si 2 single crystals were measured to study its gap structure, and several representative conductance curves from different contacts at a low temperature of 0.3 K are shown in Fig. Figures Our TDO and soft-PCS results for LaPt 2 Si 2 both show that there is fully gapped s-wave behavior, giving a consistent zero-temperature gap size of about 0.3 meV. For TDO measurements, an exponential behavior of ∆λ(T ) was observed below T c /3, and the superfluid density ρ s (T ) could be well described by a single-gap s-wave model. For soft-PCS measurements, the temperature and magnetic field evolution of the conductance curves can be well fitted by a single-gap s-wave BTK model, and the extracted gap follows typical BCS behavior. However, we note that in Ref. 