In this paper, we employ the novel design of the metamaterial half-wave plate by using the multiple layers of the metamaterials with some specific rotation angles. The rotation angles are given by composite pulse control which is the well-known quantum control technique. A big advantage of this method can analytically calculate the rotation angles and can be easily extended to the multiple layers. The more layers of the metamaterials can present more bandwidth of half-wave plate. In this paper, we present 1, 3, 5, 7 configurations of layers of a metamaterial half-wave plate and we demonstrate that our device increasingly enhance the bandwidth of performance. The half-wave plate (HWP) is the essential linear optical device and it widely used in the basically all linear optical systems The normal all-dielectric THz metamaterial HWP only works at single frequency or narrow bandwidth Composite pulse control (a well-known coherent quantum control technique) is originally developed for use in nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) to suppress the pulses' errors, which replaces one pulse with multiple pulses to increase the robustness of nuclear spin system In this paper, each layer of HWP consists of three parts of the dielectric materials, such as the elliptical material (the long length D as the fast axis v and the short length d as the slow axis u) with length L 1 (as shown in Fig. In this paper, we firstly demonstrate the theory of Jones matrix of metamaterial THz HWP and composite pulse control. Subsequently, we obtain the rotation angles of each layer, given by composite pulse control (see Table In this paper, we employ the signal layer of alldielectric metamaterial HWP as shown in ref. where and the phase retardance is φ. The Jones matrix represents a half-wave plate, when the phase retardance is φ = π. Therefore, we use this Jones matrix to represent the single layer of metamaterial HWP. Subsequently, transfer the horizontal-vertical polarization (HV) to Left-right circular polarization (LR) basis, by employing J θ (φ) = W -1 J θ (φ)W, where W is given by Thus, the Jones matrix for single layer metamaterial HWP with a phase retardance φ and rotated by an angle θ is given as (in the LR basis), Based on composite pulse control We aim to implement an ideal half-wave plate propagator with Jones matrix J 0 on the LR basis (up to a global phase factor), through the modular half-wave plate propagator with Jones matrix J (N ) from Eq. ( where (k = 1, 2, ..., n). The anagram symmetry assumption for the angles θ k (θ k = θ N +1-k ), ensures that all even-order derivatives of J 11 and all odd-order derivatives of J (N ) 12 vanish. One well-known analytical solution is given in Table In order to demonstrate the transfer efficiency, we define the fidelity (polarization conversion rate (PCR) in optical language) of the Jones matrix of the modular halfwave plate, such as Based on above theory, we can theoretically calculate the multiple layers of metamaterial HWP P CR via a single layer of metamaterial HWP, as shown in the Fig. In order to illustrate the performance of our device, we demonstrate our device with full-wave simulation which is more reliable and realistic. In this section, we demonstrate the output polarization of our device with the single, three, five, seven layer(s) respectively, as shown in Fig. Finally, we demonstrate the P CR for multiple layers of metamaterial THz HWP with single (green solid), three (blue dashed), five (red dotted), seven (black dashed) layer(s) in the full-wave simulations, as shown in Fig. In this paper, we provide a novel design of broadband metamaterial THz HWP by employing multiple layers and the structure of each layer is the same with different rotation angles which are analytically given by composite pulse control (a well-known quantum control technique). Our design enhances the bandwidth (P CR over 90%) from 114% (three layers) to 201% (seven layers) comparing to the single metamaterial THz layer. k (in degrees) for modular broadband half-wave plates with different numbers N of constituent half-wave plates.