Recently, the microstructure transformation innovative concept derived from the modification of nano/microcavities in crystalline germanium during high temperature annealing led to the development of novel technologies such as germanium on nothing membranes The difference in chemical potential Δμ between a flat (no curvature) and a curved surface on a solid is given by, Δμ = γC m V at A predictive model for the evolution of porous Ge layer upon thermal treatment is reported. We represent an idealized etched dislocation core as an axially symmetric elongated hole and computed its dynamics during annealing. Numerical simulations of the shape change of a completely spherical void via surface diffusion have been performed. Simulations and experiments show individual large spherical voids, aligned along the dislocation core. The creation of voids could facilitate interactions between dislocations, enabling the dislocation network to change its connectivity in a way that facilitates the subsequent annihilation of dislocation segments. This confirms that thermally activated processes such as state diffusion of porous materials provide mechanisms whereby the defects are removed or arranged in configurations of lower energy. This model is intended to be indicative, and more detailed experimental characterization of process parameters such as annealing temperature and time, and could estimate the annealing time for given temperatures, or vice versa, with the right parameters. with a drift velocity υ along this arc obtained using the Nernst-Einstein relation, where Ds is the surface diffusion constant of the atoms, T the temperature, kB the Boltzmann constant and -δμ δs is the driving force for a single parameter parameterized surface. If the area density of particles is given by σ, using equations 1 and 3 the surface current is given by equation 4, Fig. When J2→J1, δl1→ δl2, then the left-hand side of equation 5 reads -δ(Jδl) and the average length is (δl1 The change in height δh depends on time and the position δs the void profile. Rearranging equation When substituting equation 4 in 7 it yields the same result than Mullins Equation 8 relates local mean curvature CM to morphology change. Curvature is defined as the variation of a unit tangent vector T about an arc s on the surface, see equation 9. Referencing to figure This definition is reasonable since it is expected that the tangent vector to a surface changes "rapidly" its orientation when the surface is highly curved. The curvature may be signed, if the tangent vector turns counter clockwise with the normal sticking out the surface then it is positive C > 0, otherwise it is negative C < 0. When the void space is axially symmetric as illustrated in figure For this symmetry δl becomes δl = ρ(z, t)dθ where θ is defined in figure where B = γV at 2 δD s /k B T. The expression for the mean curvature CM can be derived for axial symmetry. The idea now is to compute the local mean curvature, equation 8, using equation 9 considering an axial symmetry. For this, cylindrical coordinates are used and the local unit vectors are notedρ ̂, θ ̂, and z. Noting the Cartesian basis unit vector x ̂, y ̂ and z, the cylindrical basis can be written, ρ ̂= cos(θ)x ̂+ cos(θ)y ̂, θ ̂= -sin(θ)x ̂+ cos(θ)y ̂ From these definitions and equation 9, the first term of the mean curvature is obtained The second tangent vector to the surface and normal to T is -θ ̂. The elemental arc length about that direction is computed using the length of the red arrow in the right-hand side of figure Still computed with equation 9 the curvature about -θ ̂ is, The minus sign for rotation orientation of -θ ̂. Total mean curvature is the sum of equations 15 and 17, With the expression of mean curvature in hand, it is now possible to express equation 10 in cylindrical coordinates with a single variable, z. From chain rule derivation and using equation 14, the derivative with respect to profile arc is given by equation 19, where ρz = dρ/dz. Replacing equations 18 and 19 in equation 10, Knowing that ψ = tan -1 (ρz) the derivative with z is readily evaluated as where ρzz is the second derivative of ρ(z,t) with respect to z. Furthermore, cos(ψ) = 1/√1 + ρ z 2 from equation 14. Finally, δh/δt is the height variation perpendicular to the surface and oriented inwards since this is for a void, δh δt ⁄ = -N δr δt ⁄ . The product -N δr δt ⁄ is given by δh δt ⁄ = -1/√1 + ρ z 2 δρ(z, t)/δt equation 20 simplifies to, )) ( Equation 21 is a fourth order differential expression, the same as the one expressed by Coleman et al. One way to solve equation 21 numerically is simply using finite differences to express the spatial derivatives and the fourth-order Runge-Kutta method to drive the time integration. The following simulation was carried using centered finite difference scheme for spatial derivatives, d 2 C M dz 2 ~CM (z +1 ) -2C M (z i ) + C M (z i-1 ) (z i+1 -z i ) 2 (25) 12 t = 0 t = 0,002 t = 0,003 t = 0,005 t = 0,01 t = 0,07 t = 0,16 t = 0,18 t = 0,22 t = 0,43 t = 0,82 t = 0,66 t = 0,87 t = 1,00 t = 1,50 With, Equation 20 is transformed into a unit-less expression by setting time and spatial units at B = 1. Figure value. The profile is divided in 100 spatial elements with a height set to z ̅Max= 8, dz̅ = 8/100, where the top bar indicates that it is a unit-less quantity. The time integration is carried out using the GNU Scientific Library's (GSL) fourth-order Runge-Kutta ODE solver with adaptive time-step. First, the hole shrinks laterally near the opening via emergence of an overhang, whereas it expands near the bottom. The shrinking finally causes a topological change, forming a closed void. Next, relaxation of the void shape occurs and eventually the shape becomes spherical. The same operation happens simultaneously to form aligned voids. The spheroidization time increases with increasing size of voids having a larger diffusion surface. Neglecting evaporation, matter conservation implies that void volume remains constant during its evolution to an equilibrium state. Experimentally, the Ge porous structure, obtained by bipolar electrochemical etching We studied the mechanism of void formation by observing the change in shape of high-aspect-ratio holes on Ge surfaces during annealing. We compared the morphological transformation of the "deepetched dislocation shape" obtained experimentally with the surface-diffusion driven "rippled elongated" shape generated by numerical simulations. We found that the extremely strong morphological instability arises near hole openings, causing spontaneous closure of the hole and forming aligned and separate large spherical voids.