This paper investigates the transition from abrasive to adhesive wear in gross-slip fretting assuming contact oxygenation concept which suggests that adhesion appears in the inner part of the interface if the di-oxygen partial pressure is below a threshold value. In the lateral sides, where di-oxygen molecules are sufficient, oxidation and abrasion prevail. To assess this phenomenon, 34NiCrMo16 flat-on-flat contacts are tested. Contact oxygenation is quantified using the "oxygen-distance, " parameter defined as the averaged width of the external abrasion corona. Confirming this concept, decreases with contact pressure and frequency but remains constant versus sliding amplitude, fretting cycles and contact area. evolution is formalized using a power law formulation which allowed predicting wear transitions for plain and macro-textured surfaces. Gross slip fretting wear was extensively investigated during the past decades underlining synergic interactions between mechanical loadings and tribo-oxidational processes Higher "p.v" conditions promote composite adhesive-abrasive interface displaying metal transfers in the inner part of the contact surrounded by an abrasive wear corona on the lateral sides (Fig. Several authors in literature tried to predict transitions in wear mechanisms under different tribological parameters. Lim and co-authors The dioxygen diffusion process is controlled by the interface properties such as the clearance between the contact asperities and the diffusion properties of the porous debris layer. The dioxygen consumption rate is governed by the metal reactivity and the surface damage rate which could be qualified using the so-called "p.v" factor. Hence, the higher the "p.v" factor, the faster the degradation of the protective oxide layer, and the higher the fresh metal exposure, the faster the consumption of the available dioxygen molecules and therefore the faster the decreasing of the Interfacial di-Oxygen partial Pressure (IOP) or " ". According to the given "contact oxygenation" concept Alternatively, composite abrasive-adhesive wear process is observed when falls below this threshold value. Hence, there is a critical "oxygen distance " from the contact border above which IOP is no more sufficient so that seizure phenomena are activated (Fig. -pure abrasive wear if whatever < , [ ] > -composite adhesiveabrasive wear: To experimentally demonstrate such "contact oxygenation" concept, the given research work investigates the evolution of " " (i.e. the lateral width of abrasive zone) as a function of various contact loadings, contact size but also macro-textured surfaces. This is currently achieved thanks to a multi-scale experimental strategy applied on a flat-onflat contact configuration where oxygen distance evolution can be easily tracked as detailed in Fig. -pure abrasive wear if whatever < and < , > -composite adhesiveabrasive wear: Where and are the longitudinal and transverse widths of the studied crossed flat contact interface. wear at high oxygen partial pressure ( > ) to a mixed abrasive-adhesive wear regime at low oxygen partial pressure ( < ), After The samples used are made of a homogeneous tempered low steel alloy (34NiCrMo16) whose mechanical properties are shown in Table Fig. Secondly, the contact area is varied by reducing the length " " against the sliding direction from 5 to 2 mm while maintaining a constant length " =5 mm". The objective behind this is to evaluate the effect of contact orientation regarding the " " parameter. For such contact configuration the minimum distance from center of the contact to its borders is given by: Similar observations were detected by various authors for high strength steels MPa, δ g =±100 μm, f=5 Hz, and A=25 mm2). A direct estimation of oxygen distance " " parameter is not possible. This requires a local in situ analysis of the air composition which is currently technically unfeasible. However, it could be indirectly approximated by measuring the distance between the boundary marking the transition from abrasive to adhesive wear, and the contact borders (Fig. The abrasive corona also corresponds to the high EDX oxygen concentration which indirectly supports the correlation between and . To determine the representative " " value, postmortem EDX oxygen profiles along the longitudinal sliding axis (X) and the transversal axis (Y) were performed (Fig. Using the same concept, the adhesion area can be estimated from the regions where the oxygen intensity is relatively low: The abrasion area is deduced from the measured adhesion area so that: The relative proportions of abrasion and adhesion areas are expressed by: and ), is isotropic and non-dependent of the sliding direction and the related debris flow. Assuming such isotropic behavior, which corresponds to the average value of four measurements (Eq. 7-9) along X and Y directions, provides a representative value of the abrasive area extension. by compiling all the loading conditions. This section compiles the different results obtained from plain crossed flat-on-flat contact configuration then from the response of macro textured samples which permit decreasing the mean distance from the inner part of the contact to the external open air allowing an easier investigation of the contact oxygen access. The following section assesses the influence of the studied parameters (Fig. 3.1.1 Effect of the frequency Fig. Fig. Considering the reference test condition (f ref =1 Hz), the evolution of versus the frequency may be expressed using a decreasing power law function so that: With =1.51 mm, the oxygen distance related to the reference test condition (N=20000, p=100 MPa, δ g =±100 μm, f=1 Hz, and = x =5 x 5=25 mm2), n f = -0.22 the exponent marking the decreasing evolution of oxygen distance with frequency and =1.12, which is an experimental constant defined by the best fitting of the global evolution of from the chosen reference. The contact pressure is increased from 25 MPa to 175 MPa to detect its role on fretting wear regimes. Optical observations and EDX maps and line scans (Fig. This recession of abrasion area is translated in reduction of the oxygen distance by 53% when the contact pressure is increased by 150 MPa as reflected in Fig. The effect of the sliding amplitude on abrasion and adhesion is investigated by comparing optical observations and EDX maps and line scans at different sliding amplitudes (Fig. In this section, the evolution of the oxygen distance is investigated as a function of both the contact area and the contact orientation. The contact area is decreased from 25 to 10 mm2 (Fig. with the decrease of the contact area from 25 to 12.5 mm2 (N=20000 cycles, p=100 MPa, δ g =±100 μm, and f=1 Hz). Such transition in wear regimes from a mixed abrasive-adhesive to a pure abrasive wear is confirmed in Fig. The objective of the following part is to formalize the oxygen distance evolution as a function of the fretting parameters. The given experimental results suggest that the fretting cycles, contact area and sliding amplitude have a weak impact on oxygen distance at least for the studied interfaces. On the other hand, oxygen distance appeared to be significantly affected by the contact pressure and frequency. By combining Eqs. 13, 14, 15, 16 & 17, the oxygen distance " " can be estimated using a very simple power law function: The correlation between the "K" coefficients leads to: Hence, the predicted oxygen distance can be expressed using the simplified relationship: Fig. geometries. The significance of predicting oxygen distance is that it permits not only detecting the nature of the wear regime (i.e. pure abrasive or mixed abrasive-adhesive wear), but also helps forecasting the transition between these regimes at different loading conditions. To check this aspect outside the calibration domain, textured bottom samples are tested. One interest of macro-textured surfaces is the possibility of investigating a broad range of " " values (i.e. minimum distance from the contact center to the external air, (Eq. 5)) while keeping constant the longitudinal length " ". The texturing strategy consists of machining rectangular grooves on the flat surface of the bottom samples (Fig. The capacity of predicting wear transitions of textured surfaces is also tested for variable contact pressure and frequency as displayed in Fig. " by compiling all the tests for plain and textured samples. The former investigation allows us to quantify and formalize the relative extension of abrasive and adhesive wear areas within a flat-on-flat fretting interface. A simple parametric formulation was extracted taking into account most of the fretting loading parameters such as the sliding frequency, the mean contact pressure, the sliding amplitude, the test duration and also the contact size and contact morphology including complex macro-textured interfaces. There is however a crucial interest to interpret in a physical point of view the relative influence of each of these parameters. To do this, we consider the IOC concept previously introduced in The asymptotic decreasing of versus frequency (Fig. These combined effects tend to decrease the interface dioxygen partial pressure which can explain the reduction of the well oxygenated lateral abrasive domain and the corresponding extension of the inner oxygen-deprived adhesive wear area. However, it is difficult to determine which of the above effects is preponderant in the absence of available experimental tools indispensable for quantifying the dioxygen diffusion, rate of di-oxygen consumption, etc.,.. ). This suggests a dominant effect of contact pressure regarding the partition between abrasive and adhesive wear compared to the frequency effect. This dominant effect might come from the fact that increasing the contact pressure causes compaction of the debris bed which reduces the porosity and hence the permeability of the latter. This particular effect might not be significant when the frequency is increased, a possible reason why it has smaller exponent compared to the contact pressure. It is interesting to underline the very fast convergence of the interface toward a stabilized partition between abrasive and adhesive wear zone (Fig. Unfortunately it was not possible in the frame of this investigation to study different contact geometries. The given stable evolution of needs however to be considered with caution for very long test conditions where the progressive surface wear could eventually modify the dioxygen diffusion rate within the interface and therefore change the partition between abrasive and adhesive wear domains. It is surprising to notice a quasi-constant evolution of the length scale versus the studied ± 25 to ± 200 μm sliding amplitude range (Fig. However in the present situation the sliding amplitude remains smaller than 8% compared to the half contact width. This implies that most of the interface remains hidden from the outer environment which may explain the rather small influence of the studied sliding amplitude regarding the parameter. To interpret such constant evolution of , the "contact oxygenation" concept will be considered again. An increase in the sliding amplitude causes a proportional increase in the friction power density (i.e. μ.p.v with μ being the friction coefficient) and therefore acceleration in the dioxygen reaction rate with fresh metal surfaces exposed by the tribological processes. This implies a decreasing of the IOP profile and consequently a reduction of the abrasive domain. The fact that remains constant suggests that another mechanism is counterbalancing such effect. One hypothesis could be that an increase of the sliding amplitude also enhances debris flow and consequently the open access between interlocked asperities favoring in turn the diffusion of dioxygen molecules inward the fretted interface. These two opposite effects (increase of dioxygen consumption rate and easier diffusion of dioxygen molecule from outer ambient air) could explain the constant evolution of with the sliding amplitude at least for the studied condition. However, proving experimentally the validity of these hypotheses remains a scientific challenge. It is clear that the application of longer sliding amplitude may shift the balance between the two processes and consequently modify the oxygen distance parameter extending progressively the abrasive wear area when the sliding amplitudes approach the reciprocating sliding condition. Interfacial di-Oxygen Concentration concept (IOC) Assuming constant friction work density condition (i.e. constant pressure and frequency for the studied flat-on-flat interface), contact size is not involved in such description and therefore should be independent of contact area. This conclusion is confirmed experimentally in Fig. The isotropic distribution of around the fretted scar whatever the contact size and orientation (i.e. ) can be explained by the isotropic diffusion of dioxygen molecules (i.e. in Fig. Indeed, the studied crossed flat contact allows homogeneous friction power density dissipation over the whole fretted interface. Therefore, homogeneous dioxygen consumption rate is expected. However, it could be assumed that the longitudinal abrasive grooves along the sliding direction will allow easier oxygen diffusion inward the center of the fretted interface. In contrast, focusing on the transverse direction, dioxygen molecules need to overpass the perpendicular roughness barriers related to the longitudinal grooves. From this topographic consideration, it might be expected larger than values. The fact that similar and distances are observed suggests that isotropic diffusion conditions, (i.e. independent of the sliding and roughness directions) are ensured within the fretted contact. This result could be explained by assuming that the interfacial dioxygen diffusion process is mainly driven the isotropic 10 μm thick porous debris layer than by 1 μm anisotropic fluctuation of fretting scar roughness. To conclude, it can be stated that the proposed IOC concept and the related di-oxygen partial pressure distribution approach appear as a pertinent strategy to explain the typical abrasive-adhesive composite structure observed in large fretting wear interface. Using such simple concept, it is possible to explain the relative influence of frequency, pressure, loading cycles, sliding amplitude and contact size effects regarding the extension of the inner adhesive zone in fretting contact. A basic formulation is also introduced allowing the formalization of the length scale (i.e. surrounding "well oxygenated" lateral band of the fretted interface) as well as the corresponding adhesive and abrasive areas. The very good correlation with the experiments confirms the proposal and was even able to formalize the fretting wear response of complex macro textured interfaces. This formalization of the composite adhesive-abrasive fretting wear interface will permit a better description of the global wear rate such that different wear rates should be expected in the distinct adhesion and abrasion zones. It will also permit a better prediction of the fretting cracking process observed in large and low pressure interfaces where adhesive interface can localize contact stressing favoring fretting crack nucleation process Another aspect will concern the investigation of various materials like bronze, aluminum and titanium alloys displaying various oxidation rates and adhesive wear properties. Hence by tuning the balance between di-oxygen diffusion and di-oxygen depletion it will be possible to establish a more physical formulation of the length scale. However, the main objective of the current development consists of the establishment of an explicit formulation of the di-oxygen partial pressure profile thus to provide a robust prediction of and the related partition between adhesive and abrasive wear zones in fretting interfaces. This approach, though being fundamental, might be profitable for industrial practice as it allows better prediction of wear kinetics and wear depth by taking into account mixed abrasive-adhesive wear which is highly encountered in many industrial applications especially those operating in oxygen-starved environments like large press-fitted assemblies where seizure may occur. Note that seizure phenomenon can favor crack nucleation and fretting fatigue failures This paper aims at investigating the evolution and transition of wear mechanisms (abrasion and adhesion) for a 34NiCrMo16 dry flat-on-flat interface. This is achieved by introducing the "oxygen distance, " defined as the distance between the contact extremities and the limits of adhesion domain. Then, a multi-scale experimental strategy is applied where the number of cycles, contact pressure, sliding amplitude, frequency, and contact area and geometry are varied. Results showed that oxygen distance depends mainly on pressure and frequency. This is due to higher dissipated friction energy which leads to high plastic deformations and decrease in the time given for the oxidation to take place (in case of frequency). On the other hand, oxygen distance was shown to be stable with the number of cycles, sliding amplitude and contact area. Taking these results into account, an oxygen distance prediction model was proposed which depends on pressure and frequency. This model was validated by using textured samples with variable textures' width. In addition, to predicting abrasion area, this model helped detect the transition of wear mechanisms from full abrasion to a mixed abrasive-adhesive wear under coupled loading conditions. I, Siegfried Fouvry, the corresponding author of the submitted paper state that this work has not been submitted elsewhere. This paper develops an original experimental analysis to formalize the transition between abrasive and adhesive wear behaviour of a low alloyed steel interface subjected to gross slip fretting wear. The new innovative aspects are the following: -Development of an original crossed flat-on-flat fretting wear experiment. -Quantification of the partition between abrasive and adhesive wear zones in the fretting scar using the so-called d O "oxygen distance" parameter defined as the averaged width of the external abrasive wear corona observed in the fretting scar. -The analysis quantifies the evolution of d O as a function of the sliding frequency, contact pressure, fretting cycles, sliding amplitude but also contact area and siding orientation. -A power law function is introduced to formalize the evolution of d O as a function of the latter loading variables. -A very good correlation is observed between the experiments and the model. -The model is even able to predict the fretting wear response of complex macrotextured interfaces. -These different results are discussed regarding the "Contact Oxygenation Concept". Using this approach it is possible to explain why d O decreases with pressure and frequency but remains constant versus sliding amplitude, fretting cycles and contact area.