Adaptable, reconfigurable and programmable are key functionalities for the next generation of silicon-based photonic processors, neural and quantum networks. Phase change technology offers proven non-volatile electronic programmability, however the materials used to date have shown prohibitively high optical losses which are incompatible with integrated photonic platforms. Here, we demonstrate the capability of the previously unexplored material Sb2Se3 for ultralow-loss programmable silicon photonics. The favorable combination of large refractive index contrast and ultralow losses seen in Sb2Se3 facilitates an unprecedented optical phase control exceeding 10π radians in a Mach-Zehnder interferometer. To demonstrate full control over the flow of light, we introduce nanophotonic digital patterning as a conceptually new approach at a footprint orders of magnitude smaller than state of the art interferometer meshes. Our approach enables a wealth of possibilities in high-density reconfiguration of optical functionalities on silicon chip. The birth of coherent nanophotonic processors, photonic tensor cores, quantum computing and neuromorphic networks signifies a large paradigm shift towards emerging optical information platforms The fundamental benefits of using non-volatile phase change materials (PCMs) in reconfigurable photonics have resulted in their extensive exploration for photonic modulation and resonance tuning, with Ge2Sb2Te5 (GST) In several recent studies, the antimony-based chalcogenides Sb2S3 Here, we demonstrate the exceptional capabilities of the PCM Sb2Se3 for use in ultralow loss optical phase control of photonic integrated circuits. To achieve this, we make use of 23 nm thin patches of Sb2Se3 deposited on top of a 220 nm SOI rib waveguide, where the thickness of materials is chosen to maintain a single mode of propagation. An optical phase shift of the propagating wave is induced by changing the material of the PCM from a crystalline to an amorphous state. In our studies, following the example of optical storage media, we start from a fully crystallized PCM as this provides a uniform background, fast writing speeds and stable amorphous written areas. Switching of individual pixels in the PCM is achieved using tightly focused optical pulses from a diode laser operating at 638 nm wavelength (see Methods). From mode calculations we found that an amorphous (n = 3.29) single pixel in an otherwise crystalline (n = 4.05) Sb2Se3 layer changes the effective refractive index of the waveguide, neff, by an amount Δneff = -0.072. By selective switching of the PCM in one arm of an asymmetric Mach Zehnder Interferometer (MZI), the optical phase shift is translated into a change of the transmission function of the device. A first demonstration is shown in Fig. As the induced optical phase change scales linearly with amorphized distance and given the ultralow loss of the material, very large phase tuning ranges can be readily achieved by employing longer PCM structures. Figure To complement the broadband measurements, we performed additional narrowband measurements on a MZI with a shorter, 50 μm patch length as shown in Fig. Next, the endurance of the phase change was probed by repeatedly switching a single pixel of the MZI. We used a pixel at the -13.5 dB point of the MZI response curve on the steepest part of the slope where the sensitivity to individual pixels is high. By repeatedly cycling between the amorphous and crystalline phases in a single spot, the transmission modulation gives a good indication of the lifetime of the phase change. Figure Having successfully demonstrated than an optical phase shift can be induced by switching thin Sb2Se3 patch on top of a MZI, we moved on to demonstrate a new approach for a programmable optical router based on a multimode interference (MMI) patch. MMIs are of interest for their small footprint as well as for their significantly reduced sensitivity to the environment when compared to MZIs. The device principle is based on the concept of wavefront shaping where a distribution of weak perturbation pixels is used to effectively steer the light with very low loss A 1 x 2 MMI device of 33 × 6 μm 2 , covered with a 23 nm crystalline Sb2Se3 film, was simulated using a 2D FDTD approach, and a pixel perturbation pattern was optimized using an iterative scheme The designed pattern was subsequently written onto an experimental device. Figure Figure Other examples of writing pixel patterns are presented in the Supporting Information Fig. Both pre-calculated and iterative optimization patterns result in a target performance exceeding 8 dB extinction between the transmission from the two ports. Importantly, the impact of the patterning on the total device throughput is not strongly affected with up to 0.5 dB additional loss for all devices under study. In some cases an improvement in device transmission was seen, as shown for example in Fig. To show that the pixel pattern writing approach is both reconfigurable and free-form, the same pattern was written into an MMI multiple times, with a full reset between each pattern for both the simulated pattern and the mirror image of the pattern in the vertical direction which, due to symmetry, guides light towards the bottom output. Figure The results presented here unequivocally show the capabilities of the new phase change technology in providing low-loss programmable optical phase control. This approach is expected to open many new applications in post-fabrication device tuning, programmable weight banks, unitary matrix operations and ultimately all-optical field-programmable arrays In conclusion, we have demonstrated the first low loss reconfigurable approach for optical routing in an integrated silicon photonics device. The new phase change material Sb2Se3 allows the decoupling of optical phase control from amplitude modulation seen in the conventional PCMs. The advances in device footprint and energy consumption of this approach compared to conventional cascaded switch fabrics could enable a range of complex photonic circuits needed for applications such as on-chip LiDAR, photonic quantum technology, AI hardware, or optical tensorcores of the future, whilst providinga powerful post-fabrication programming technique for high-volume PIC ecosystems. Our demonstrated technique provides a general approach that could be easily extended to larger devices and could ultimately achieve a platform for a universal optical chip technology. The devices shown in this work were fabricated using an industrial deep UV scanner on a 220 nm SOI platform with a 120 nm etch depth. The UV scanner was used to open windows above the MMI and MZI regions, and 23 nm thin Sb2Se3 films were deposited using low temperature RF sputtering. Following removal of the photoresist, the whole chip was then capped with a 200 nm thick layer of ZnS:SiO2, using RF sputtering. A 150 mW, 638 nm wavelength single mode diode laser was used to crystallize and amorphize the Sb2Se3, using pulses of 50 ms at 19 mW and 400 ns at 35 mW respectively. A 0.42 NA 50x objective was mounted to a 3D piezo stage, normal to the devices under test, which was for focusing the laser and taking optical images with a white light source and CCD camera. Using the piezo stage the objective was moved to create the pixel patterns with high reproducibility. Spectral data was taken with an Agilent 8163B swept source from 1530 to 1600 nm at a power of 10 mW. A modulated narrow linewidth laser at 1550 nm was used for transmission data, in combination with a lock-in amplifier. The optical setup is shown in Fig. The second optical path consists of a directly modulated diode laser at 638 nm wavelength and with maximum power output of 170 mW in continuous wave operation. The light was linearly polarized and was transmitted with 100% efficiency through a polarizing beam splitter (PBS). A small fraction (<10%) of power is lost by coupling in a white-light source for inspection using a glass slide beamsplitter. A quarter waveplate was used between the PBS and the microscope to rotate the reflected light in order to route it to the inspection camera. A 50x, NA 0.55 microscope objective was used with working distance of 13mm to focus the write laser onto the D.U.T. The position of the objective is controlled using a closed-loop 3-axis piezo stage (Thorlabs) with 20 μm range in all three axes. In some of the experiments, an additional motorized translation stage was used for scanning in one direction along the waveguide. A computer-controlled short pulse generator (Berkeley Nucleonics) was used to modulate the diode laser on time scales from nanoseconds to seconds. A home-built Labview program was used to control the experiment. Insertion loss of devices was measured for the Mach-Zehnder interferometers (MZIs) presented in Figure The result in Figure Figure Figure Above 570 cycles, we observe a period of instability however the instrument settles back into a stable switching with only a few additional jumps. We note that the jumps are primarily observed in the amorphization (blue dots) while the crystallization (red dots) remains relatively stable. Both the drift observed in Fig. Writing of two-dimensional patterns in the Sb2Se3 phase-change layer requires a very high level of control over individual pixels. Pixels have to be consistent in size and shape, and should be unperturbed by adjacent domains that have already been exposed. In our work we have achieved control over pixels with pitch size as small as 750 nm. Figure In our studies we investigated the use of patterns generated by iterative optimization. For this purpose, for every pixel a test was performed to see whether switching increases the transmission at the output port. The initially crystalline MMI was switched to the amorphous phase while intensity at both output ports was monitored. If the intensity at the target output increased, the switch pixel was kept, while the pixel was reset when switching decreased the target output intensity. In this experiment, the entire device was optimized in one pass (pass 1), followed by a second pass which started again at the beginning of the device and which reoptimized the first 20 μm of the MMI (pass 2). Figure Figure A second example of an optimized MMI is given in Figure 