We report on a nanomechanical engineering method to monitor matter growth in real time via e-beam electromechanical coupling. This method relies on the exceptional mass sensing capabilities of nanomechanical resonators. Focused electron beam induced deposition (FEBID) is employed to selectively grow platinum particles at the free end of singly clamped nanotube cantilevers. The electron beam has two functions: it allows both to grow material on the nanotube and to track in real time the deposited mass by probing the noise-driven mechanical resonance of the nanotube. On the one hand, this detection method is highly effective as it can resolve mass deposition with a resolution in the zeptogram range; on the other hand, 1 Nanomechanical devices are exquisite sensors of mass deposition Developing new methods to engineer nanoscale resonators with high precision and providing them with a specific functionality is in high demand as it would enable a whole range of new technological and scientific applications. In this work we report a nanofabrication method enabling ultra-sensitive, versatile functionalization of carbon nanotube resonators The samples consist of carbon nanotubes grown via chemical vapor deposition on silicon substrates. The nanotubes stick to the surface due to Van der Waals forces. Some nanotubes extend over the substrate edge, forming cantilevers. We used cantilevers with lengths between 1 μm and 15 μm and spring constants between 10 -7 N/m and 2.6 × 10 -4 N/m in order to investigate the robustness of our method. All SEM and FEBID experiments were conducted in a Zeiss Auriga field emission electron microscope equipped with a gas injection system (GIS). The acceleration voltage of the electron beam was 5 kV and the typical beam current was 200 pA. The precursor gas was methylcyclopentadienyl(trimethyl)platinum(IV) in order to grow a Pt deposit onto the sample surface when illuminated by the electron beam. A schematic of the experimental setup used for the deposition experiments is depicted in Fig. where k B is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature. The mass of the Pt particle is monitored in real time during its formation. This is done by continuously acquiring the resonance spectrum of the noise-driven vibrations of the nanotube with the electron beam. We typically use high resolution bandwidth settings in order to enable a high sampling rate. Figure We attribute this behaviour to the increasing interaction volume resulting from the deposition process. Our frequency counting algorithm includes a dynamical discrimination procedure enabling to unambiguously keep track of the fundamental resonance frequency in real-time. As shown on Fig. The deposition was limited to the apex of the nanotube, such that the spring strength can be reasonably assumed to remain unchanged. Therefore, the deposited mass ∆m (t) yields to a frequency shift, independent from the shape of the eigenmode: 10 where f res,t and f res,0 are the resonance frequencies measured during the deposition at time t and prior to the deposition, respectively. We start with the default operation mode of the GIS, which was also used for the measurements in Fig. We explored lower Pt deposition rates by reducing the pressure. This is achieved by first purging the GIS nozzle with precursor molecules and then pumping the chamber for several minutes. As such, we investigated deposition of precursor molecules in a pressure range p = (1-1.7)×10 -6 mbar resulting in observed deposition rates ranging between 0.93 ag/s and 8.5 ag/s. A typical mass deposition measurement in this low-pressure regime is displayed in Fig. The lowest deposition rates were attained by pumping the chamber for more than 24 h with the GIS nozzle closed and heated so residual precursor molecules could desorb from the nozzle and be pumped away. It is assumed that in this regime the chamber gas is predominantly composed of organic molecules resulting in e-beam deposition of amorphous carbon. The base pressure in this background vacuum regime was in the range p = (0.8 -1) × 10 We assessed the material density of a Pt particle and its chemical composition by carrying out scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) measurements. The experiments were performed using a C s -corrected FEI Titan transmission electron microscope equipped with a FEI X-FEG high brightness Schottky emitter. The acceleration voltage was 80 kV. Chemical analysis was conducted via energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDXS) using an EDAX detector. Thickness measurements were performed by electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) employing a Gatan Tridiem 866 ERS energy filter. A nanotube grown on a STEM copper grid is shown in Figs. Next, we conducted spatially-resolved low-loss EELS measurements to map the particle thickness (Fig. In summary, we have reported a method allowing high-resolution mass monitoring of the growth of a Pt nanoparticle on a nanotube resonator via in situ electromechanical readout in a FEBID system. The method can be readily employed in any existing SEM or STEM setup without requiring any further modification. The demonstrated mass and time resolution offers a precise control on the deposited mass to engineer nanomechanical sensors, especially since various materials can be grown with FEBID. GaN, SiC, and InAs Experimental help by L. Casado from the Laboratory of Advanced Microscopies (LMA) is acknowledged. In order to confirm the resonance frequency f res determined by e-beam electromechanical coupling, we conducted optomechanical measurements. 