The symmetry of the superconducting condensate in Sr2RuO4 remains controversial after nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) experiments recently overturned the dominant chiral p-wave paradigm. Several theoretical proposals have been put forward to account for existing experiments, including a d + ig-wave admixture, conjectured to be stabilized by longer-range Coulomb interactions. We perform a material-specific microscopic theoretical study of pairing by spin-and charge-fluctuations in Sr2RuO4, including the effects of spin-orbit coupling, and both local and longer-range Coulomb repulsion. The latter has important consequences for Sr2RuO4 due to the near-degeneracy of symmetry-distinct pairing states in this material. We find that both the g-and d x 2 -y 2 -wave channels remain noncompetitive compared to leading nodal s , dxy, and helical (p) solutions. This suggests nodal time-reversal symmetry broken s + idxy or s + ip phases, promoted by longer-range Coulomb repulsion, as the most favorable candidates for Sr2RuO4. We analyse the properties of these states, and show that the s + idxy solution agrees with the bulk of available experimental data, including recent discoveries from NMR, muon spin relaxation (μSR), and ultrasound measurements. Introduction. Sr 2 RuO 4 is in many respects an unconventional superconductor simple enough that we should be able to understand why and how electrons pair. Superconductivity condenses around 1K from a wellcharacterized Fermi liquid, and samples are very clean. The electronic structure is nearly two-dimensional (2D), with three bands at the Fermi level that mix d-orbital content only weakly, and spin-orbit coupling (SOC) is relatively small. Yet after two decades of study, its pairing state is unknown, in part because a compelling narrative of a chiral p-wave ground state, based on early experiments, If these experiments are borne out, the ground state of Sr 2 RuO 4 is a dominant spin-singlet pair condensate (some admixture of spin-triplet pairing must be present due to SOC). The difficulty with such a suggestion, however, is that the available pairing channels in tetragonal crystal symmetry of even parity are one-component representations with the exception of the d xz /d yz (E g ) gap, which requires a pronounced three-dimensionality of the electronic structure Of course, such states must satisfy constraints imposed by a wide variety of other experiments. Specific heat, scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), and thermal transport experiments imply that low-energy quasiparticle states are present It is important to note, however, that nodal character deduced from low-order Fermi surface or Brillouin zone harmonics may be misleading. Realistic studies of unconventional superconductors, including Fe-based and heavy-fermion systems, often find ground states corresponding to higher-order harmonics because of strong momentum dependence of the interaction driven by orbital physics, together with the need to minimize the local Coulomb energy (see e.g. Refs. Explaining this result requires two irreducible representations whose product transforms as d xy The new experimental developments have inspired considerable theoretical activity Here, we perform a detailed theoretical study of the leading superconducting instabilities within a realistic electronic model for Sr 2 RuO 4 , and study the effects of both NN and next-nearest neighbor (NNN) Coulomb repulsion. The methodology includes as well the multiorbital nature of this material, its significant SOC, and onsite Hubbard-Hund interactions. We show that longerrange Coulomb interactions generally promote leading solutions of nodal s -and d xy -wave superconductivity over much of the phase diagram. This leads us to propose s + id xy -wave pairing as the most favorable superconducting candidate for Sr 2 RuO 4 . We analyze the properties of this TRSB even-parity state, and show that it exhibits a nodal spectrum, a superconducting spin susceptibility in agreement with neutron and NMR data Model and Method. x + cos 2k y ) -μ with {t 1 , t 2 , t 3 , t 4 , t 5 , μ} = {88, 9, 80, 40, 5, 109} meV Atomic SOC, parametrized by H SOC = λ soc L • S, gives rise to orbital mixing at the Fermi surface sheets, and a spin anisotropy of the magnetic susceptibility. We include SOC of λ soc 40 meV ( 0.5t 1 ). Additionally, we incorporate both onsite and NN Coulomb interactions where n i,μ,s = c † i,μ,s c i,μ,s and c † i,μ,s /c i,μ,s denotes creation/annihilation operator at site i for an electron in orbital μ with spin s. In the following we use the joint index μ = (μ, s). The vector δ denotes the lattice vector between the sites; [W (δ = 0)] μ1 μ2 μ3 μ4 includes all onsite interactions and [W (δ)] μ1 μ2 μ3 μ4 with δ = ±x, ±ŷ comprises NN Coulomb repulsion. Strong correlation effects important away from the Fermi surface are not included in our framework In order to include both onsite and neighboring Coulomb interactions in the effective electron-electron interaction, it is useful to define a generalized bare susceptibility which includes (δ, δ )-dependent phase factors, see Eq. ( The explicit form of the interaction matrices are stated in the Supplementary Material (SM). In Eq. ( is projected to band-and pseudospin-space, and the linearized BCS gap equation is subsequently solved for the eigenvalue λ and the gap function ∆ l (k f ) at wave vectors k f on the Fermi surface. The pairing kernel in band space is given by Γ l,l (k f , k f ), with spin information carried by the subscripts l, l = 0, x, y, z which refer to the components of the d(k)-vector in pseudospin space Even-parity solutions appear in the l = 0 channel. The Fermi surface is discretized by approximately 1000 wave vectors and v(k f ) is the Fermi speed. For further details we refer to the SM. Results. As discussed in Refs. 33-35, spin-fluctuationgenerated superconductivity for realistic models of Sr 2 RuO 4 including only local interactions tends to favor nodal s , d x 2 -y 2 , and helical pairing, depending on the amplitude of SOC and Hund's coupling J. In Fig. The clear dominance of s and d xy channels suggests a new candidate state as a natural two-component TRSB superconducting phase stabilized by longer-range Coulomb repulsion: a s + id xy condensate. Since it is comprised of A 1g and B 2g irreducible representations, the product clearly transforms as d xy . Superconductivity of the form s + id xy is therefore both consistent with a discontinuity at T c of the shear modulus c 66 associated with shear B 2g strain, and the absence of any discontinuity associated with B 1g strain symmetry-imposed nodes along k x = 0 and k y = 0, both s and d xy contain additional nesting-driven nodes slightly off the k x = ±k y diagonal directions. These nodes are driven by the joint requirement of 1) evenparity, and 2) gap sign changes on FS sheets connected by the leading Q 1 and Q 3 nesting vectors (see SM for further details and the robustness of these nodes). The nodes are positioned at points on the FS where the orbital content changes its main character because the pairing interaction is weakest at these locations. Because these nodes coincide for both components, the ground state s + id xy is also nodal, as shown in Fig. We note that while the existence of nodes seems to be well-established, their location on the Fermi surface is controversial. For example, Deguchi et al. Turning next to a discussion of NMR Knight shift data, the even-parity character of the s + id xy state is not sufficient to guarantee agreement with the experimental data, simply because of the significant SOC which mixes spin-singlet and triplet states. Therefore we perform a detailed microscopic calculation for 0 < T < T c , assuming BCS-like temperature dependence of all gaps. In the linear response regime, the Knight shift for an external magnetic field along α ∈ {x, y, z} is obtained from the static spin-resolved susceptibility where σ α denotes the Pauli matrices, and (q, iω n , δ, δ ), While the d x 2 -y 2 + ig xy(x 2 -y 2 ) state is not favored in our calculations, other competing states are not completely ruled out by the spin-fluctuation analysis. The helical triplet state, favored for larger J Furthermore, we provide information on the spin susceptibility and additional details about the superconducting order parameters obtained from spin-fluctuation mediated pairing and the detailed dependence on interaction parameters. We will develop a formalism that takes into account onsite and nearest-neighbor (and next-nearest neighbor) interactions on an equal footing in the effective pairing interaction within the formalism of spin-fluctuation mediated superconductivity. In addition, this SM section contains a survey of the parameter dependence of our results presented in the main manuscript. We define the bare Coulomb repulsion Hamiltonian (with onsite and longer range interactions) as where δ defines the lattice vector between sites and W (δ) is the strength of the bare Coulomb repulsion between those sites. In the second line we have introduced generalized indices for the longer-range Coulomb interaction and collected orbital and spin index in one common index μ = (μ, s). By Fourier transformation of the bare interaction we get: i.e. the bare interaction depends explicitly on the momentum transfer and k 3 -k 2 = k 4 -k 1 due to momentum conservation. First, we consider the summation of bubble diagrams. The second order bubble diagram is depicted in Fig. with the generalized susceptibility as defined below in Eq. ( where matrix multiplication in orbital and spin indices is implicit and the susceptibility is evaluated for δ = δ = 0. FIG. Note that the sign convention of Eq. ( In order to proceed with the ladder diagrams we consider the bare onsite interactions which are symmetry-related to the onsite interactions of Eq. ( As above, it is understood that μ = ν. The longer-range interactions contain an explicit reference to momentum. In the case of ladder diagrams, the δ-sum of Eq. ( and interorbital interactions (μ = ν) For simplicity we set the intra-and interorbital interactions to be the same. For nearest-neighbor Coulomb repulsion we have V (δ) = V NN with δ ∈ {x, -x, ŷ, -ŷ} and next-nearest-neighbor Coulomb repulsion, V (δ) = V NNN with δ ∈ {x + ŷ, -x + ŷ, -x -ŷ, x -ŷ}. In the derivation of the effective pairing interaction for longer-range interactions we transfer the δ-and kdependence of the bare interaction line (see Fig. where we have defined the generalized susceptibility which includes the real-space lattice vectors δ, δ as χ 0 (iω n , q, δ, δ ) with Here u μs nσ (k) is the eigenvector of the transformation from orbital and electronic spin basis (μ, s) to band and pseudospin basis (n, σ). The generalized susceptibility becomes a 5 • 36 × 5 • 36 matrix due to the phases e ik(δ-δ ) (when next-nearest neighbors are included as well, it becomes a 9 • 36 × 9 • 36 matrix). We will explore superconductivity arising from spin fluctuations and the interaction Hamiltonian restricted to the Cooper channel: includes the bare interaction as well as the effective interaction from bubble and ladder diagrams and vertex corrections consisting of admixtures of the bubble and ladder vertices. Thus we have μ3,μ4 The bare interaction is as stated in Eqs. ( with the same repulsion strength V NN for intra-and interorbital as well as same and opposite spin interaction. The RPA expression refers to the construction including the index δ. Note that the matrices W (δ) are block-diagonal matrices of 36 × 36 blocks for each value of δ. The interaction vertex Eq. ( In the above definitions, σ denotes pseudo-spin, s 0,y = -1 and s x,z = +1, and the Γ l matrices are constructed from the Pauli matrices σ l by This construction is similar to the well-known d-vector, but refers to the pseudo-spin structure. By use of the β-operators, we project the interaction Hamiltonian to band and pseudospin space: where the pairing kernel in band space is stated in Eq. ( Γ l,l (n This ends the discussion of spin-fluctuation mediated pairing in the presence of SOC and longer-range Coulomb interaction. Now we turn to a presentation of the spin susceptibility and superconducting instabilities arising from spin-fluctuation mediated pairing. (dashed red line), χ yy (full blue line) and χ zz (dashed-dotted black line). Interaction parameters U = 100 meV, J/U = 0.1 and V N N = 10 meV. The dominating peak is Q 1 , which displays a spin anisotropy with a stronger out-of-plane component, which is visible from the energy-resolved susceptibility depicted in Fig. As stated in the main text, the non-interacting Hamiltonian includes the three orbitals xz, yz and xy with dispersions given by ξ xz (k) = -2t 1 cos k x -2t 2 cos k y -μ, ξ yz (k) = -2t 2 cos k x -2t 1 cos k y -μ, and ξ xy (k) = -2t 3 (cos k x + cos k y ) -4t 4 cos k x cos k y -2t 5 (cos 2k x + cos 2k y ) -μ with {t 1 , t 2 , t 3 , t 4 , t 5 , μ} = {88, 9, 80, 40, 5, 109} meV. The three orbitals xz, yz and xy are coupled by the SOC parametrized by H SOC = λ soc L • S, and the splitting between the energy bands at the Fermi surface depends on the magnitude of the SOC. We include a SOC of λ soc = 35 meV, as well as λ soc = 45 meV for comparison. Note that since we parametrize the bands by renormalized hopping constants this corresponds to a relatively large value of λ soc 0.5t 1 , where t 1 is the largest hopping of the xz(yz) band. The resulting Fermi surface is shown in Fig. The susceptibility including interactions in the RPA approximation is given by: (q, iω n , δ, δ ) (27) where the (q, iω n )-dependence is carried solely by χ 0 and the summation in the indices μ, s, δ for the RPA expression is implicit. The physical susceptibility for the different spin channels a, b ∈ {x, y, z} is obtained by a projection to spin channels and summation in orbital indices: The RPA spin susceptibilities for the in-plane (xx/yy) and out-of-plane (zz) spin directions are depicted in Fig. shows a spin anisotropy with a dominant out-of-plane spin component, an anisotropy which arises from the SOC and is enhanced by increasing onsite Coulomb interaction as well as the Hund's coupling interaction. In Fig. In addition to the structure at Q 1 , the peak at Q 3 , which is indicated in Fig. The charge susceptibility is calculated from the generalized susceptibility Eq. ( [χ(q, δ = 0, δ = 0)] μ,s1;μ,s1 ν,s2;ν,s2 . ( The evolution of the different superconducting channels as a function of nearest-neighbor repulsion V NN was reported in the main text in Fig. In Fig. In this regime, the helical solution persists as leading or subleading for all values of V NN accessible before the proximity to a CDW instability renders the RPA formalism unreliable. The second leading solution in this case is s and therefore, for large Hund's couplings, the possibility of a s + ip solution appears, with p being short-hand notation for one of the four helical solutions. FIG. To further test the robustness of the s and d xy neardegeneracy induced by the presence of nearest-neighbor repulsion, we have investigated larger values of SOC as presented in Fig. The superconducting instabilities obtained from spinfluctuation mediated pairing deviate considerably from the simplest lowest-order harmonic gap functions of each irreducible representation. In order to quantify this, we have projected the linearized gap solutions ∆(k) as seen from Fig. The basis functions f (k) are stated in Table From Table the effect of next-nearest-neighbor repulsion in the case of V NN = 20 meV (U = 100 meV and J/U = 0.1). We observe that the near-degeneracy of s and d xy persists for increasing next-nearest-neighbor repulsion strength. In agreement with the expectations achieved from the projection procedure in Table In Figs. 9 and 11, the evolution of gap solutions belonging to different irreducible representations was depicted as a function of V NN for different values of Hund's couplings and SOC. Now we turn to a more detailed inspection of the gap structure in each case, and in particular we focus on the (near)-nodal structure of the combined solution s + id xy . Each gap solution will, with the exception of the s solution, display nodes, which are imposed by symmetry. In addition, we find that another nodal structure appears to be common for all solutions irrespective of the symmetry. These nodes we refer to as nesting-enforced nodes since, as we shall see, for spin-fluctuation mediated pairing in Sr 2 RuO 4 there is another source of nodal structure which is robust, and due to the strong nesting features and orbital character of the states at the Fermi surface. As a consequence, these additional orbital-induced nodes occur at similar k positions for solutions belonging to different irreducible representations. This means that a near-nodal structure is present for superpositions of superconducting solutions belonging to different symmetry classes, unlike what is generally true in the case of symmetry-imposed nodes. In order to visualize this property, we observe from in Fig. Finally, we discuss how to obtain a Knight shift response within our framework. As presented in the main text, we calculate the Knight shift in the linear response regime, i.e. we do not include an explicit magnetic field in the calculation and the results therefore corresponds to the very weak-field limit. For an external magnetic field along α ∈ {x, y, z}, the Knight shift response is obtained from the static spin-resolved susceptibility by where σ α denotes the Pauli matrices, and (q, iω n , δ, δ ), To investigate the effect of the Hund's coupling J, we addressed in Figs. 9 and 11 four different values of the Hund's coupling J/U = 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.25. In the regime of large Hund's couplings, the helical solutions become competitive to the subleading d xy (focusing on V NN = 15-25 meV), while s remains leading. The possibility of a TRSB superconducting instability of the form s + ip, where p denotes one of the helical solutions, thus becomes relevant. The three constituent parts of such a solution is shown in Fig. 