Materials with strong χ (2) optical nonlinearity, especially lithium niobate, play a critical role in building optical parametric oscillators (OPOs). However, chip-scale integration of low-loss χ (2) materials remains challenging and limits the threshold power of on-chip χ (2) OPO. Here we report the first on-chip lithium niobate optical parametric oscillator at the telecom wavelengths using a quasi-phase matched, high-quality microring resonator, whose threshold power (∼30 μW) is 400 times lower than that in previous χ (2) integrated photonics platforms. An on-chip power conversion efficiency of 11% is obtained at a pump power of 93 μW. The OPO wavelength tuning is achieved by varying the pump frequency and chip temperature. With the lowest power threshold among all on-chip OPOs demonstrated so far, as well as advantages including high conversion efficiency, flexibility in quasi-phase matching and device scalability, the thin-film lithium niobate OPO opens new opportunities for chip-based tunable classical and quantum light sources and provides an potential platform for realizing photonic neural networks. Optical parametric oscillators (OPOs) are critical sources of coherent radiation over a wide spectral range and have been workhorses for spectroscopy in the nearand mid-infrared regime Over the past decade, the demand for scalability in photonic components has stimulated efforts to produce on-chip OPOs via either χ (2) or χ (3) nonlinearity In this Letter, we present an ultralow-threshold, chipintegrated OPO using a periodically poled lithium niobate microring resonator (PPLNMR). With high optical confinement and strong spatial mode overlap via the quasi-phase matching, a threshold power as low as 30 μW * hong.tang@yale.edu is demonstrated for the parametric oscillation at the infrared band, which is a state-of-the-art value reported among all current integrated photonics platforms. Meanwhile, an absolute power conversion efficiency of 11% is obtained at a pump power of 93 μW. A tuning bandwidth of 180 nm (23 THz) could be addressed through a small change of 5 nm (2.5 THz) in pump wavelength (frequency). Alternatively, the temperature tuning is investigated to fine control the signal and idler wavelengths and a degenerate OPO is achieved at an optimal temperature. Overall, low-threshold, wide-tunability, as well as flexibility in phase-matching by domain poling make thin-film LN OPO the ideal candidate for compact, versatile light sources for various on-chip optical applications, such as sensing, frequency comb spectroscopy, and quantum squeezers. Figure where g is the vacuum coupling strength between the three interacting modes, Q(κ) s/i/p is their respective loaded Q factor (total dissipation rate), and Q(κ) p,1 is the coupling Q factor (external dissipation rate) of the pump mode. Therefore, a large g and high Q factors are always demanding to reduce the OPO threshold power. In the microring resonator, the coupling rate g is de- pendent on the material χ (2) coefficient and modal overlap factor γ through the relation: g ∝ χ (2) γ When pumping the device by a near-visible tunable laser (New Focus TLB-6712, 766-781 nm), the parametric oscillation at the infrared wavelengths could be observed if the pump power exceeds the threshold. In practice, due to the resonance frequency mismatch (δ = ω p -ω s -ω i ) induced during the fabrication process, the OPO threshold rises to P th • (1 + δ 2 /κ i κ s ). By controlling the chip temperature to adjust δ and varying the pump power, the parametric oscillation with the lowest threshold is observed when the device is pumped at the resonance near 774.1 nm at an optimal temperature of 125 • C, as indicated in Fig. Substituting the measured threshold, and Q factors [Fig. The theoretical predictions (solid black lines) based on Eq. ( )/4. The efficiency depletion at the high-power regime is mainly attributed to the back-conversion of the signal and idler fields. Different coupling conditions could be adapted by varying the gap between the bus waveguide and microring for various applications. For example, a η max of 0.25 is derived with the assumption that all three interacting modes are criticalcoupled whilst strong over-coupling condition provides a η max approaching unity. In our case, the under-coupling condition provides an ultralow threshold of 30 μW though limits our current η max to 11%. We further demonstrate the feasibility of our ultralowthreshold OPO in wavelength tuning over a large spectrum range, which promises flexible coherent optical sources for future on-chip applications. It is well-known that, in the microring resonators, the phase-matching condition could be satisfied simultaneously by many signal-idler mode pairs, with their wavelength difference increasing at intervals of 2 times of free spectral range (FSR) for a given pump mode and temperature. However, due to the inherent dispersion, the frequency mismatch δ varies for different mode pairs, and only one pair of modes oscillates with the lowest threshold. Therefore, we investigate the tuning of signal and idler wavelengths by varying the resonator temperature as well as the pump mode number. As indicated by the solid color lines in the middle panel of Fig. Firstly, PPLNMR device promises chip-based tunable classical and quantum light sources. For example, the poling grating number M could be tailored to realize parametric oscillation at the mid-infrared wavelengths for the molecule spectroscopy In conclusion, we demonstrate χ (2) optical parametric oscillation in lithium niobate nanophotonics. Leveraging the high optical confinement, as well as optimized quasiphase matching condition, an ultra-low power threshold (30 μW) of optical parametric oscillation is obtained and an on-chip conversion efficiency of 11 % is measured with an on-chip pump power of 93 μW. The tunability of the OPO wavelengths is also investigated via the pumpwavelength and temperature tuning, and the experimental results indicate a wide tuning range. By further pushing the Q factor to that of bulk LN WGRs, approaching 10 8 , a pump threshold down to several picowatts could be attainable in PPLNMR devices, allowing the study of OPO at a few-photon level and is critical for the scala- bility of photonic quantum systems. In light of the most recent works on near-octave comb generation, efficient SHG, and bright photon pair generation, PPLNMR devices hold promise for the chip-based tunable coherent light sources as well as the monolithic realization of nonlinear and quantum photonics. Nanofabrication. The devices are fabricated on a commercial LNOI wafer (supplied by NANOLN) with 610 nm thick Z-cut LN thin film on 1.8 μm silicon dioxide (SiO 2 ) on a silicon substrate. The bus waveguide is ultimately tapered to a width of 4 μm at both facets to improve the fiber-to-chip coupling efficiency. The pattern is defined by a 100 kV electron beam lithography system (Raith EBPG 5000+) with a negative FOx-16 resist, which is then developed in 25% TMAH solution to ensure a high contrast. The exposed pattern is transferred onto the LN thin film using an optimized inductively couple plasma (ICP) reactive ion etching (RIE) process with Ar + plasma. For the subsequent poling process, the radial nickel electrodes are initially patterned on top of the LN microring via the lift-off process. The periodic domain inversion is then enabled by keeping the silicon substrate as the electrical ground while applying several 600 V, 250 ms pulses on the electrodes at an elevated temperature of 250 • C. After removing the nickel electrodes, the chip is cleaved to expose the waveguide facets for fiber-to-chip coupling. The insertion losses are calibrated to be 8.4 and 11.1 dB/facet for the infrared and near-visible lights, respectively. Numerical simulation. The parametric signal and idler wavelengths as a function of the pump wavelength and temperature are numerically investigated using a commercial finite-difference-eigenmode solver (Lumerical MODE) based on the equations: n p (T ) where λ p/s/i and n p/s/i denote the wavelengths and refractive indices for the pump, signal, and idler lights, respectively. In the simulation, we used the Sellmeier equation for congruent LN in Ref. 