Antiferromagnetic (AF) spin fluctuations are commonly believed to play a key role in electron pairing of cuprate superconductors. In electron-doped cuprates, it is still in paradox about the interplay among different electronic states in quantum perturbations, especially between superconducting and magnetic states. Here, we report a systematic transport study on cation-optimized La 2-x Ce x CuO 4±δ (x = 0.10) thin films in high magnetic fields. We find an AF quantum phase transition near 60 T, where the Hall number jumps from n H = -x to n H = 1x, resembling the change of n H at the AF boundary (x AF = 0.14) tuned by Ce doping. In the AF region a spin dependent state manifesting anomalous positive magnetoresistance is observed, which is closely related to superconductivity. Once the AF state is suppressed by magnetic field, a polarized ferromagnetic state is predicted, reminiscent of the recently reported ferromagnetic state at the quantum endpoint of the superconducting dome by Ce doping. The magnetic field that drives phase transitions in a similar but distinct manner to doping thereby provides a unique perspective to understand the quantum criticality of electron-doped cuprates. * These authors contributed equally to this work. High-temperature superconductivity commonly lies within a special region as a function of tuning parameters (e.g., chemical substitutions), where quantum criticality governs the essential physics The c-axis-oriented LCCO (x = 0.10) films were deposited on the (00l)-oriented SrTiO 3 substrates by a pulsed laser deposition system. The thicknesses of the films were measured by scanning electron microscope: d = 230 nm (S1, S2) and 110 nm (S3, S4). Detailed transport measurements were carried out on four LCCO film samples with different T c0 's: 25.6 K (S1), 25.3 K (S2), 24.1 K (S3) and 23.1 K (S4) by slightly tuning the oxygen content during the film deposition. Here, T c0 is the critical temperature at which the resistance reaches zero. Magnetotransport measurements in field up to 58 T were performed using a non-destructive pulsed magnet with a pulsed duration of 60 msec at Wuhan National High Magnetic Field Center. Magnetoresistance (MR) and Hall resistance were measured simultaneously with a typical Hall-bar configuration. Data for the up-and down-sweeping of the pulse field were in good agreement, thus we could exclude the heating effect of the sample by the eddy current. Measurements with both positive and negative field polarities were performed for all samples and measuring temperatures to eliminate the effect of contact asymmetries. Relatively low upper critical field of electron-doped cuprates (e.g., typically < 10 T for LCCO) facilitates the study of phase transitions via electrical transport. Figure In Fig. ) n-MR (dρ/dB < 0) occurs below 30 K, which becomes more prominent at lower temperatures. We define a characteristic magnetic field B max that gives the maximum resistivity, which moves to higher field with decreasing temperature. Simultaneously, the isothermal Hall resistivity curves ρ xy (B) display minima at low temperatures as shown in Fig. To describe the universal quantum phase transition more quantitatively, we extract the Hall number, n H = V eR H (0) , which reflects the average carrier doping per Cu atom. Here, e is the electron charge; V is the volume per Cu atom in the CuO 2 planes and R H (0) represents the Hall coefficient extrapolated to zero temperature. Figure In order to understand the AF boundary in a quantitative way, two methods including the mean-field theory and holographic model are considered. The analysis of a magnetic system in the frame work of the mean-field approach involves its thermodynamic potential given by Lev Landau For the strongly correlated system, a new method, called holographic model is developed from the string theory and has been widely applied to study various strongly correlated phenomena, especially the AF phase transition Successfully utilizing this model not only provides another piece of evidence for the AF quantum phase transition, but also predicts a polarized FM state above B c , with an excited energy gap ∆ satisfying: Perhaps not coincidently, a recent work reported the existence of a FM order right beyond the endpoint of the superconducting dome in LCCO x AF = 0.14 and x FM = 0.175. Whether the involvement of superconductivity and its interaction with the AF state break the AF-FM QCP into two is an interesting issue worthy of future study. The n-MR is common in AF state For optimally-doped LCCO, the upper critical field is about ∼ 9 T. Previous experiments have clearly shown that superconducting fluctuations in electron-doped cuprates are weak above the critical temperature/field compared with their holedoped counterparts Recently, charge order has been disclosed in electron-doped cuprates as a function of temperature for different LCCO samples (white dots for x = 0.16 from Ref. Note that the greatly enhanced δ ρ at low temperatures occurs in the AF region, suggesting an unambiguous link between the p-MR effect and the AF order. It has been reported that the FS reconstruction induced by the AF order leads to the coexistence of electron and hole pockets, which may also result in a p-MR behavior A topological order coexisting with short-range AF order In each quadruplet there are four ordered plaquettes: two have positive chirality and two have negative chirality. There is a local C 2 symmetry similar to a d-wave-like state. Here, the sign is simply an indication of the spin-orbital current associated with each plaquettes. Each quadruplet forms four π-fluxons with zero topological charge and is nearly homogeneously distributed around CuO 2 plane. The π-flux is created together with spin and orbital currents. That spin-orbit coupling keeps the in-plane orientation of the spin involved in a particular π-flux. This naturally impedes the deflection of the spins and leads to a p-MR behavior. The magnetic field may induce an imbalance between the plaquettes of the positive and negative chirality. As the magnetic field increases, the plaquettes of one particular chirality are enhanced, while the plaquettes of the opposing chirality are suppressed. This leads to a decrease of the binding energy of π-fluxes in the quadruplet configuration. As a result, at some critical magnetic field the topological π-fluxons are decoupled from quadruplets and topological phase transition occurs as shown in Fig. As aforementioned, the δ ρ is generally larger for samples with higher T c in a window of 22 to 26 K by slightly tuning the oxygen of optimally Ce-doped samples [Fig. In summary, we carried out a systematic magnetotransport measurement on optimally-doped cuprate LCCO films. By tuning magnetic field, the Fermi surface reconstruction is suppressed and an AF-FM phase transition happens at the critical point B c . This phase transition can be well described by holographic model. In the AF region, the MR displays a quite difference from that in long-range AF state: there is a switching from positive to negative. The n-MR derives from canting AF order and the p-MR maybe derives from topological order which is closely related to superconductivity. It is possible that similar emergent novel topological properties may exist in other electron-doped cuprates -as the proposed mechanism for its formation is generic to the electron-doped CuO 2 plane. Further studies are still needed to elucidate the relationship among FS reconstruction, AF ordering, topological order and superconductivity. ), a = 1, 2 and μν . Here L 1 and L 2 are two bulk Lagrangians to describe the two different magnetic moments in staggered magnetization. The term V 12 describes the interaction between these two magnetic moments. The AF order parameter is the staggered magnetic moment, which is dual to xy-component M (1) xy in the interior. We fix the potential V (M (a) ) to be the following form μν M (a)μν -(ε μνρσ M (a)μν M (a)ρσ ) 2 . Here ε μνρσ is the Levi-Civita symbol with ε 0123 = 1. In probe limit λ → 0, the spacetime geometry in the interior is given by a dyonic AdS-Reissner-Nordstrom black hole which can be written as ds 2 = -r 2 f (r)dt 2 + dr 2 r 2 f (r) + r 2 (dx 2 + dy 2 ), A = μ(1r -1 )dt + Bxdy, where In this coordinate the boundary is at r → ∞ and the horizon is at r = 1. The chemical potential in the boundary is given by the constant μ, and B can be viewed as the external magnetic field of the dual boundary field theory. The temperature at boundary is given by the Hawking temperature of this black hole The equation of motion for two anti-symmetric tensor fields reads μν] -4M 2 . Then we have following two ordinary differential equations, They have following asymptotic solutions as r → ∞, The detailed forms of m 2 αeff , m 2 β eff , δ 1 , and δ 2 can be found in Ref. 