The elastocaloric effect (ECE) is a thermodynamic quantity relating changes in entropy to changes in strain experienced by a material. As such, ECE measurements can provide valuable information about the entropy landscape proximate to strain-tuned phase transitions. For ordered states that break only point symmetries, bilinear coupling of the order parameter with strain implies that the ECE can also provide a window on fluctuations above the critical temperature, and hence, in principle, can also provide a thermodynamic measure of the associated susceptibility. To demonstrate this, we use the ECE to sensitively reveal the presence of nematic fluctuations in the archetypal Fe-based superconductor Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 . By performing these measurements simultaneously with elastoresistivity in a multimodal fashion, we are able to make a direct and unambiguous comparison of these closely related thermodynamic and transport properties, both of which are sensitive to nematic fluctuations. As a result, we have uncovered an unanticipated doping-dependence of the nemato-elastic coupling and of the magnitude of the scattering of low energy quasi-particles by nematic fluctuations -while the former weakens, the latter increases dramatically with increasing doping. The ECE has been extensively studied in the context of refrigeration, typically utilizing first-order martensitic phase transformations A prominent example of a phase transition for which strain couples bilinearly to the order parameter is that of electronic nematic order. For example, in many tetragonal iron based superconductors, C 4 rotational symmetry as well as σ x and σ y mirror planes are broken at the nematic phase transition, yielding an order parameter with B 2g (i.e. xy) symmetry. Application of strain with the same symmetry (ε B2g = ε xy ) via external stresses for temperatures above the critical temperature induces a finite nematic order parameter (Ψ B2g ) due to this bilinear coupling (see Fig. Here, C ε is the heat capacity at constant strain, which can be adequately approximated 2 by C p . The subscript in ε i denotes that all strain components, except for one, are kept constant. Equation 1 is remarkable in several ways. First, the sign of the elastocaloric effect due to nematic fluctuations depends on the sign of the offset strain ε B2g . For materials with entropy changes dominated by nematic fluctuations, either a warming or cooling is observed when stress is applied depending on whether the material experiences tensile or compressive offset strain (see Fig. FIG. matic susceptibility, here from a truly thermodynamic measurement. While the presence of nematic fluctuations in the representative material, Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 , that we consider has been previously deduced from other measurements The measurements presented here were carried out by applying oscillating uniaxial stress to bar-shaped samples along the tetragonal [110] axis. This results in entropy oscillations (∂S/∂ε B2g ) T , which, if the stress frequency (here around 30 Hz) is chosen such that a quasi-adiabatic condition is met, translate into a temperature oscillation. The temperature oscillations (∆T EC ) were measured using a thermocouple attached to the center of the sample. Resistivity measurements were performed simultaneously using a standard four point technique and the elastoresistivity extracted using an amplitude demodulation technique 14 . The measurements were repeated in the presence of static offset strains introduced by an additional static stress component. As expected (compare to Fig. The strains that are induced by the [110] stress σ x ′ x ′ can be decomposed into symmetry-conserving (ε A1g ) and symmetry-breaking (ε B2g ) strains. As shown through an equivalent experiment applying stress along the tetragonal [100] axis (see Appendix E as well as Figs. 9 and 10), both, A 1g and B 1g symmetry strains yield significantly smaller elastocaloric signals above the nematic phase transition, such that the response observed here is determined to be predominantly due to B 2g symmetry strain. T -dependence of ∂χ/∂T (see Fig. (T -T * ) 2 , as long as χ follows Curie-Weiss behavior (i.e. χ = (a 0 (T -T * )) -1 . Hence, ECE measurements provide both a very sensitive test of the Tdependence of χ and an excellent means to estimate 5 the bare nematic critical temperature T * . A power law fit (red line in Fig. Figure The ECE measurements described above are especially revealing when compared to elastoresistivity measurements that are performed simultaneously. This comparison allows us to draw conclusions about the nematoelastic coupling and the nematic scattering cross section. While according to Eq. 1 the elastocaloric effect is proportional to dχ/dT , the antisymmetric part of the straininduced change in resistivity ∆ρ ρ B2g is given by: where g x,T is a proportionality constant and λ x is the previously defined nemato-elastic coupling, which we now explicitly allow to vary with composition, x. Thus if g x,T is temperature-independent (i.e. g x,T = g x ), then the normalized elastocaloric temperature oscillations as a response to B 2g strain are expected to be linearly proportional B2g . Put another way, comparison of ECE and ER data (described by equations 1 and 2 respectively) provide a direct window on the doping and temperature dependence of g x /λ x . Figure Comparison of elastoresistivity and elastocaloric effect for BaFe2As2.Panel (a), (b), and (c) show the temperature-dependence of the longitudinal elastoresistivity of Ba(Fe1-xCox)2As2 with x =0, 0.0387, and 0.0606, respectively. The elastoresistivity arises from oscillating uniaxial stress in the x-direction (which is aligned with the tetragonal [110] axis), while controlling for constant ε x ′ x ′ (values indicated in legend). Traces taken under different offset strain conditions are marked using the color map. Without nonlinear effects in the elastoresistivity irrespective of this correction, the strain condition during the elastoresistivity and the elastocaloric effect measure-ments is the same for each offset strain trace, respectively. It is thus possible to directly compare both measurements. This is what is shown in Fig. We finally compare and analyse our elastocaloric effect results on Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 with x = 0, 0.021, 0.0387, 0.0512, 0.0606, 0.064, and 0.073. Figure In addition to the onset of sub-Curie-Weiss behavior, increasing the Co conentration also results in a significant reduction in the magnitude of the elastocaloric effect. It is instructive to plot the same data in a color plot (Fig. effect shrinks by a factor of about 35 as the Co concentration increases from x = 0% to 6.06%. Considering only the ECE data, this effect could be caused by an x dependent change in dχ/dT and/or by a weakening of the nemato-elastic coupling λ x . To estimate the doping dependence of dχ/dT we revisit dynamic nematic susceptibility data χ dyn determined via Raman scattering measurements and published earlier by Y. Gallais et al. x (see Fig. It remains unclear why the nemato-elastic coupling decreases so dramatically with doping, and whether this is a ubiquitous effect -possibly associated with universal physics in the proximity of the nematic QCP -or rather some special feature of a specific family of materials. Independent of the origin of the effect, wherever it occurs, it has interesting implications for the mechanism of superconductivity. Both on the basis of perturbative analysis Bulk single crystal samples were grown by using a self flux technique described in detail in J.-H. Chu et al. Strain is applied to the sample using the commercially available uniaxial stress apparatus CS100 from Razorbill instruments. The CS100 cell is designed to compensate for the thermal expansion of the lead zirconate titanate (PZT) stacks The specific heat of all materials studied here has been measured using a standard relaxation time technique. For the measurements a commercially available Physical Property Measurement System from Quantum Design has been used. Presumably, the samples experience small symmetric offset strain due to the thermal expansion mismatch to the measurement platform made out of sapphire. Neglecting the strain dependence of the transition temperatures, the specific heat is relatively weakly strain dependent. Our elastocaloric effect data is thus normalized using as-measured C p /T values. Since the conclusions drawn here are supported through elastocaloric effect data above the phase transitions, this treatment causes only negligible errors. In the simplest case the Landau free energy expansion for an electronic nematic phase with nematic order parameter Ψ B2g can be written as: Here, b, c 0 66 , d, λ, and γ are temperature independent constants, and ε B2g is the conjugate strain component coupling bilinearly to the nematic order parameter. Note that to fourth order, also a biquadratic coupling term is allowed by symmetry, which in case γ takes on large values, will notably tune the cross over temperature. A commonly applied form for the nematic susceptibility satisfying the conditions for a continuous phase transition is: where a 0 is a temperature independent constant and T * is the bare electronic transition temperature. It is important to note, that this Curie-Weiss behavior constitutes the simplest out of many continuous functions changing sign at T * . Deviations from Curie-Weiss behavior for nematicity in real materials is entirely possible and even expected for instance in the presence of disorder Considering quasi adiabatic conditions (dS = 0), appropriate While the discussion above captures all the essential physics, relevant for the present manuscript, it is an oversimplification for uniaxial stress experiments. Under uniaxial stress a controlled deformation is applied only along one axis (here the tetragonal [110] axis). To consider this distinct thermodynamic condition we express the free energy in terms of ε x ′ x ′ , which corresponds to the controlled strain along the tetragonal [110] direction, instead of ε B2g . Considering ε B2g = 1/2(1 + ν 110 )ε x ′ x ′ , and neglecting contributions arising from symmetric strain (since these do not couple to Ψ B2g linearly ) to second order we have Here, is the in-plane Poisson ratio for uniaxial stress along the tetragonal [110] axis, which is due to the softening of c 66 temperature dependent. After minimizing the free energy with respect to the order parameter Ψ B2g we find for the elastocaloric coefficient at constant temperature: To first approximation, the second term in equation A6 can be dropped since 2χ∂ν 110 /∂T ≪ ∂χ/∂T (1 + ν 110 ). The magnitude of the resulting effect is, for small strains (see Appendix B), linearly related to ε x ′ x ′ (which is proportional to ε B2g ) such that a sign change is observed as the applied offset strain changes from compressive to tensile. This together with a diverging temperature dependence is the hallmark for nematic fluctuations dominating the observed signal. For the elastoresistive gauge factor GF , determined during our uniaxial stress experiments we expect: Here, m B2g B2g = λg x χ is the response of the antisymmetric part of the resistivity to B 2g strain, and m B2g ,B2g A1g = aλ 2 χ 2 +bλχ+c the response of the symmetric part of the resistivity to the square of the B 2g strain. Details on the non-linear elastoresistive response are found in Ref. 21. We find for the temperature derivative of the gauge factor: The term ∂T can be written in terms of ∂S ∂ε x ′ x ′ as The term in [...] is -4 For small strains ε x ′ x ′ and small ∂ν 110 /∂T , the above equation is approximated to (A11) Therefore, as long as non-linear effects to the elastoresistivity are small (at small strains and temperatures well above the nematic phase transition) we find an approximately (1/ (1 + ν 110 ) is weakly temperature dependent.) linear relation between the temperature derivative of the gauge factor and the elastocaloric coefficient. This linear relation only holds as long as g x does not itself show a strong temperature dependence. This is what we find for the representative compositions described in the main text, parent (x = 0%), x =3.87%, and x =6.06% Co doped BaFe 2 As 2 (see Fig. The elastocaloric coefficient at constant temperature (∂S/ε x ′ x ′ ) T can be calculated from the measured elastocaloric temperature oscillation through a product with the heat capacity over temperature. We thus have measured the heat capacity for a selection of compositions of the Co doped BaFe 2 As 2 series (see Fig. Figure -2 behavior (star symbols in Fig. -0.002 0.000 0.002 FIG. In addition, the kink marked by the black arrows, signifies a strain tuned nematic cross over. tributions of the heat capacity. We find that, (i) the nematic and antiferromagnetic transition are clearly split by about 1K and (ii) the antiferromagnetic transition is of second order or first order involving a very small latent heat. The latent heat has to be significantly smaller than the entropy oscillations induced by the AC elastocaloric effect in order to translate into elastocaloric temperature oscillations. Figure Appendix F: Determining the strain neutral point from elastocaloric effect data The CS100 uniaxial stress cell from Razorbill instruments is equipped with a capacitance sensor allowing for the measurement of the relative displacement of the two sides of the stress cell and thus the nominal strain in stress direction. The strain neutral point of the sample is, however, not determined from the relative displacement of the mounting plates alone, but also from its differential thermal expansion as compared to the cell body/mounting plate material. Therefore, FIG. it is desirable to find another way to determine the strain neutral point during such measurements. One way is to make use of physical properties of the sample itself. Here, we determine the strain neutral point using two different methods. For samples with low Co concentration, it is possible to determine the strain neutral point from studying the temperature dependence of the elastocaloric temperature oscillations above the nematic phase transition. If uniaxial stress is applied along the tetragonal [110] axis, the elastocaloric effect is dominated by its B 2g strain response. This contribution is as discussed in our manuscript, linearly related ε B2g and follows a (T -T * ) -2 temperature dependence. A temperature sweep taken close to the strain neutral point should thus show only a very small elastocaloric effect. For low Co conentrations, the strain neutral point can be well determined using this approach (see Fig. x'x' FIG. When uniaxial stress is applied to the tetragonal [110] axis of Co doped BaFe 2 As 2 , the in-plane Poisson ration ν 110 is expected to be temperature dependent and vary from about 0.3 at high temperatures to 1 at the nematic phase transition as c 0 66 softens to zero. A temperature dependent Poisson ratio causes a temperature dependent magnitude of B 2g strain in our experiments since only the strain along the stress direction ε x ′ x ′ is controlled. This is a thermodynamic condition different from controlling B 2g strain (see Appendix A) and yields a slightly more complicated expression for the elastocaloric temperature oscillation as a response to oscillating strain ε x ′ x ′ . The in-plane Poisson ratio as well as the ratio between B 2g strain and ε x ′ x ′ , which corresponds to 1/2 (1 + ν 110 ), can be calculated assuming a softening of c 0 66 according to a Curie-Weiss behavior of the nematic order parameter. Here we show, that a measurement of the elastoresistive gauge factor GF = d (∆ρ/ρ 0 ) x ′ x ′ /dε x ′ x ′ allows for estimating the in plane Poisson ratio as function of temperature when compared to the 2m 66 elastoresistivity component available in literature 1 Anharmonic effects of the lattice are typically small in solids. for Co doped BaFe2As2 it has been shown that the lattice part of the Grueneisen parameter is, compared the electronic signatures around the phase transitions, small and weakly temperature dependent 