We numerically demonstrate an all-optical nonlinearity pre-compensation module for state-ofthe-art long-reach Raman-amplified unrepeatered links. The compensator design is optimized in terms of propagation symmetry to maximize the performance gains under WDM transmission, achieving 4.0dB and 2.6dB of SNR improvement for 250-km and 350-km links. Optical technologies are currently being pushed to their limits due to the ever-increasing traffic demands In this work, we revisit the OPC requirements, and numerically demonstrate how the technique can be applied to a state-of-the-art Ramanamplified unrepeatered link by using an OPCbased pre-compensation module at the transmitter side. We only consider commercially available equipment and optimize the symmetry of propagation through the design of the optical pre-compensation unit by means of: (1) scaled down compensation medium, (2) novel dispersion mapping, and (3) Raman amplification for fine power profile tuning. Ultimately, we establish a high degree of propagation symmetry, and achieve net signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) improvements ranging from 2.6 dB up to 4.0 dB, depending on the link configuration. The standard split-step Fourier method (SSFM) is employed for the propagation, and the particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm is used for finding the optimum system parameters. The fundamental principle of OPC is based on reversing the sign of distortions by phaseconjugation of the optical field, and reapplying them throughout the transmission system. Perfect cancellation requires identical accumulated nonlinear phase-shifts to be induced on both sides of the OPC device, for the signal and its conjugated copy, respectively. As the phase-shift is both power and pulse shape dependent, it is necessary to continuously restore the nominal power at the correct pulse shapes over the entire propagation distance. Pulse shape is predominantly determined by the accumulated dispersion, and so it is common to express the degree of nonlinearity matching through power versus accumulated dispersion diagrams (PADD), where perfect compensation is attained for identical powers at the opposite values of accumulated dispersion We aim to apply the above OPC design principles to a state-of-the art unrepeatered link, shown in Fig. The proposed pre-compensation setup is presented in Fig. PSO algorithm is employed to maximize the SNR by joint optimization of the compensation unit and the link (see Fig. The optimized parameters for both scenarios including optical pre-compensation are presented in Table In this work, we proposed a general method for achieving OPC symmetry through more accurate nonlinearity versus accumulated dispersion mapping. We applied this technique to a state-ofthe-art Raman-amplified unrepeatered system, and we designed and optimized an all-optical nonlinearity pre-compensation module for it. The unit consists of three main components: DCF for nonlinear pre-distortion, FBG for dispersion matching, and OPC for phase-shift reversal. We were able to engineer the symmetry of the system, scale down the compensation structure to a fraction of the link, and provide efficient nonlinearity suppression for seven channel WDM transmission. PSO algorithm was employed to tune the setup parameters, leading to 4.0 dB gain in SNR for a 250 km link, and 2.6 dB for a 350 km system including ROPA and backward pumping. 