We find excellent agreement between tunneling and optical conductivity gap values in superconducting granular aluminum films, up to the metal-to-insulator transition. This behavior, in strong contrast with that recently reported in atomically disordered samples for which the optical gap becomes smaller than the tunneling gap, suggests that disorder is not at the origin of the transition. The large increase seen in the strong coupling ratio and a finite value of the gap at Tc near the metal-to-insulator transition are consistent with a BCS to BEC crossover. In conventional BCS theory When disorder on the atomic scale is increased, Larkin and Ovchinnikov (LO) theory predicts that the coherence peak in the DOS located at ∆ broadens. It has a universal shape which depends on a single parameter η that increases with disorder. As it does, the absorption threshold becomes smaller than the mean value of the gap ∆ given approximately by the location of the maximum in the DOS If one assumes that the system is homogeneous, the gap should be homogeneous as well. Determinations of the gap by optical and tunneling measurements should give the same results. The insulating state can be driven by the competition between the bandwidth and the Coulomb interaction i.e., a M/I transition of the Mott type. Experiments on atomically disordered SCs such as InO x and NbN x show indeed that as disorder increases, Ω indeed becomes smaller than ∆ In this work we present a study of granular aluminum (grAl) films approaching the M/I transition using planar tunneling junctions. We find that in these films, consisting of nano-scale metallic grains weakly coupled together, the tunneling energy scale ∆ and the optical energy scale Ω Rather, in the smooth crossover from highly overlapping fermionic pairs (k F ξ pair 1) to tightly bound bosonic molecules (k F ξ pair 1), it is the energy scales ∆ (the pairing energy) and T c (the condensation temperature) that are progressively decoupled from each other The grAl films were prepared by thermally evaporating clean Al pellets under controlled O 2 pressure onto liquid nitrogen cooled substrate or onto room temperature warm substrate, for more details see In order to obtain samples with varying normal state resistivity along the phase diagram we varied the O 2 pressure arXiv:2101.04994v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 29 Jul 2021 while keeping the deposition rate around 5 ± 1 Å/s . To obtain high quality, homogeneous samples (in the sense of grain coupling), we made sure that the pressure and deposition rate were stable during deposition. For the tunneling experiments we first evaporate 50 nm of grAl film onto liquid nitrogen cooled Al 2 O 3 substrate, patterned to a rectangle with dimensions of 0.5x4 mm, by using a hard mask. After evaporation, we expose the film to atmosphere for a few hours, resulting in a native thin oxide barrier. We then use a second mask to evaporate two 50 nm thick, 0.5 mm wide aluminum strips, perpendicular to the grAl film, resulting in a grAl-oxide-Al tunneling junctions. In addition, this geometry allows us to measure the resistivity of the film vs. temperature and therefore to determine the critical temperature T c and the normal state resistivity ρ 4.2K for each sample. For each junction we took current-voltage (I vs. V) and differential conductance-voltage (dI/dV vs. V) characteristics using Keithley 6221 current source and Keithley 2182A nano-voltmeter, operated in differential conductance mode. The same set of equipment, operated in delta mode, was used for the resistivity measurements. Measurements were taken in three different systems: a commercial 3 He probe by Quantum Design PPMS with a base temperature of 0.4 K, commercial Oxford Instruments Triton 400 dilution refrigerator with a base temperature of ~20 mK and a liquid 4 He bath cryostat with a base temperature of about 1.5 K. Each dI/dV spectrum was fitted to a standard tunneling form (1) where f (E) is the Fermi function, N n (E) is the constant density of states (DOS) of the Al electrode and is the Dynes DOS V behavior To extend the comparison between tunneling and optical conductivity to samples having larger grain size, additional samples were prepared on 10 × 10 × 2 mm 3 MgO or 10 × 10 × 1 mm 3 (LaAlO 3 ) 0.3 -(SrAl 0.5 Ta 0.5 O 3 ) 0.7 (LSAT) substrates, held at room temperature, for THz optical spectroscopy. All samples are 100 nm thick, except the lowest resistivity one, which is 40 nm thick. Measurements were done by utilizing a quasi-optical Mach-Zehnder interferometer with backward-wave oscillators (BWO) in a frequency range of 3-17 cm -1 (or about 0.1-0.5 THz). Commercial optical 4 He cryostat with a home built sample holder, provides us dynamic temperature range down to 1.5 K. The complex transmission was measured for all samples at 4.2 K and at various temperatures close to and below T c down to 1.5 K. We then obtain the optical conductivity σ(ω) = σ 1 (ω) + iσ 2 (ω) from the measured complex transmission function. We take σ 1 (ω) at 4.2 K as the normal-state conductivity and then fit the resulted σ(ω, T )/σ n to Mattis-Bardeen (MB) theory The resistivity curves for selected 2 nm grain samples are shown in Fig. The zero temperature value of the gap was determined by fitting ∆(T ) to the BCS gap equation We observed a few percent change in the gap relatively to its zero field extrapolated value up to a field of 1 Tesla. The change in the value of Γ with increasing magnetic field is more significant, as expected since it introduces spatial inhomogeneities in the gap due to the normal cores of about 6-7 nm in size μΩ cm sample at 0.4 K, resulting in a gap of 0.26 meV for the Al counter electrode with the grAl film having a gap of 0.32 meV, even though its critical temperature of 1.37 K is than the one measured for the Al counter electrode of 1.78 K. More details can be found in the supplemental material Tunneling gap values ∆ 0 for 2 nm grain size samples having resistivity values ranging from ~100 to ~66,000 μΩ cm are shown in Fig. We can gain more insight on the role of the grain size by making a similar comparison between optical and tunneling data for samples with a grain size of 3 nm. We have compared Ω 0 as measured from the optical conductivity data (see supplemental material [24]) to the tunneling ∆ 0 as measured by Dynes et al. Figure Tunneling differential conductances in zero field (SIS) and 0.1 T field (SIN) for a sample having a resistivity of 4134 μΩ cm, measured at 30 mK. Circles are data points and lines are fits to Eq. 1. Extended data in magnetic fields up to 1 T can be found in the supplemental material Besides the anomalously large values of the strong coupling ratio seen in high resistivity samples, a closer look at their tunneling data near T c reveals that their gap is not being fully closed, as it should in a conventional SC. We have observed such behavior for resistivity values above ~800 μΩ cm, within a temperature range which increases with sample resistivity (see supplemental Fig. In atomically disordered SC, the M/I transition is of the Anderson type. As disorder increases, the tunneling and optical conductivity gaps are being progressively separated, as was observed in NbN x 1,000 μΩ cm. Therefore, disorder effects are small in our case and plays little role, if any, in the M/I transition of grAl. Recent scanning tunneling microscope (STM) measurements on samples prepared on room temperature substrates shows that the gap value does not change within the sample Rather our two central results: the large increase of the strong coupling ratio and the anomalous behavior of the gap near T c , point out to a different interpretation: a BCS-BEC cross-over as the M/I transition is approached. We find remarkable that for our highest resistivity 2 nm grain size sample, which is very close to being insulating, the value close to 6 that we have obtained for the strong coupling ratio is that predicted at cross-over A Mott transition has been shown to occur in granular aluminum films having a resistivity of about 50,000 μΩ cm at room temperature In conclusion, we have measured the evolution of the SC gap ∆ by tunneling and THz spectroscopy in granular aluminum films, and have found them to be in good agreement up to the vicinity of the M/I transition. We have shown that the coupling ratio 2∆/k B T c is increasing up to about 6 for 2 nm grain size samples, and that as the transition is approached there is no closure of the gap at T c . Both features are characteristic of a BCS-BCS crossover, which we have proposed is induced by the vicinity to a Mott transition. A quantitative analysis of the tunneling data, in particular regarding the behavior of the conductance near T c for high resistivity samples, is needed to bring a definite proof of a BCS-BEC crossover. This requires a tunneling theory for that regime that is not yet available. Helpful discussions with Ioan Pop and Giancarlo Strinati are gratefully acknowledged. We thank Yoram Dagan for granting us access to his dilution refrigerator. (normalized) Figure 