The angular momentum of an electron is characterized well by pseudospin with J = 3/2 in the presence of strong spin-orbit interactions. We study theoretically the Josephson effect of superconductors in which such two J = 3/2 electrons form a Cooper pair. Within even-parity symmetry class, pseudospin-quintet pairing states with J = 2 can exist as well as pseudospin-singlet state with J = 0. We focus especially on the Josephson selection rule among these even-parity superconductors. We find that the selection rule between quintet states is severer than that between spin-triplet states formed by two S = 1/2 electrons. The effects of a pseudospin-active interface on the selection rule are discussed as well as those of odd-frequency Cooper pairs generated by pseudospin dependent band structures. Spin-orbit interaction is a source of exotic electronic states realized in topological semimetals, topological insulators and topological superconductors. The Josephson effect is a fundamental property of all superconducting junctions consisting of more than one superconductor. in all Josephson junctions consisting of time-reversal symmetry respecting materials. The lowest order term I 1 disappears when the Cooper pairing states in the two superconductors are orthogonal to each other. In a case of two spin-triplet superconductors of S = 1/2 electrons, for instance, I 1 ∝ d L • d R represents a selection rule for spin-triplet states, where d j with j = L (R) is d-vector in the left (right) superconductor. The second term I 2 , on the other hand, is nonzero for most of the Josephson junctions. In this paper, we will make clear the selection rules among even-parity J = 3/2 superconducting states. We theoretically calculate the Josephson current between two superconductors, where two J = 3/2 electrons form an even-parity Cooper pair in each superconductor. The Josephson current is calculated in terms of the anomalous Green's functions obtained by solving the Gor'kov equation. This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we describe a time-reversal superconducting state belonging to even-parity symmetry class for a Cooper pair formed by two J = 3/2 electrons. We formulate the Josephson current by using tunneling Hamiltonian between two superconductors. In Sec. III, the Josephson selection rule among J = 3/2 superconducting states is studied. In Sec. IV, we discuss odd-frequency pairs in anisotropic band structure and following subdominant pairing correlations. The conclusion is given in Sec. V. Throughout this paper, we use the units of k B = c = = 1, where k B is the Boltzmann constant and c is the speed of light. A COOPER PAIR CONSISTING OF TWO J = 3/2 ELECTRONS Let us consider a superconductor in which two J = 3/2 electrons form a Cooper pair belonging to even-parity symmetry. Its Hamiltonian of the normal state is given by where c k,jz is the annihilation operator of an electron with momentum k and the z-component of angular momentum being j z . The Hamiltonian with spin-orbit coupling is described as with i = 1 -3. The pseudospin part of a pairing state is described by γ matrices, 25 The five matrices γ ν for ν = 1 -5 anticommute to one another as γ μ γ ν + γ ν γ μ = 2γ 0 δ μν . The pseudospin matrices can be expressed in terms of γ j , The Hamiltonian in Eq. ( with coefficients, , The functions are defined as where ki = k i /|k| and e ν ( k) is normalized, i.e. 5 ν=1 e 2 ν ( k) = 1. Time-reversal symmetry (TRS) of H N is represented by where K means the complex conjugation. Under the time-reversal operation, γ ν and J i show the relation, therefore γ ν remains unchanged, whereas J i changes its sign. A pair potential in even-parity symmetry is classified into two symmetry class in terms of its pseudospin configuration: pseudospin-singlet and pseudospin-quintet. Also, the symmetry class is divided to corresponding representation of crystal symmetry of the superconductor. We list the pair potentials in a cubic symmetric superconductor with on-site (s-wave) symmetry in Table In this paper, we focus on a superconductor preserving TRS and inversion symmetry. The pair potential of such a superconductor has the form 25 The first term refers to the pair potential of pseudospinsinglet state and the second term refers to that of pseudospin-quintet states. The amplitudes η k,0 and η k are even in momentum and real in the presence of TRS. It is easy to confirm that Eq. ( due to Eq. (15). Because electrons obey the Fermi-Dirac statistics, the pair potential must be antisymmetric under the permutation of two electrons forming a Cooper pair, where the permutation of pseudospin is carried out by taking the transpose of the matrix (T). The pair potentials under the consideration are even-parity, [i.e., ∆(k) = ∆(-k)], and odd-pseudospin symmetry. Therefore, the relation is satisfied because of (γ ν ) T = (γ ν ) * and Eq. ( The BdG Hamiltonian is expressed in terms of the normal Hamiltonian H N and the pair potential ∆(k) as which preserves particle-hole symmetry, where τ i for i = 1 -3 is the Pauli matrix in the particlehole space. The Gor'kov equation becomes where the Matsubara Green's functions are defined by Each Green's function is a 4 × 4 matrix. The relations can be derived due to the particle-hole symmetry of the BdG Hamiltonian. The solution of the BdG equation is given by The anomalous Green's functions are calculated as Especially, when the dispersion relation is independent of the pseudospin, i.e. E k = ε 0 (k)γ 0 , Eq. ( for both pseudospin-singlet or pseudospin-quintet states. We discuss the Josephson effect in a superconductor/insulator/superconductor(SIS) junction consisting of two J = 3/2 superconductors. The Josephson current flows in the x direction and the interface is located at x = 0 as shown in Fig. To satisfy the Hermicity of the Hamiltonian, t * βγ = t γβ is required. The electric Josephson current through the junction is derived within the linear response theory with respect to H T . where Tr means the summation over the pseudospin space, F L(R) is the anomalous Green's function of the left(right) superconductor and t k,p represents the tunnel element, {t k,p } s,s ′ = t βγ . The wave number k is decomposed into a component in the x direction k x and those parallel to the interface k . The summation ′ k is carried out over k for k x > 0. We assume that the tunnel elements are independent of the wave numbers as where δ k,p implies the presence of the translation symmetry in the direction parallel to the interface. The tunnel event happens between two states on the Fermi surface : one is a state at k F p in the left superconductor and the other is a state at k F k in the right superconductor. The coefficients t i are real numbers for i = 0 -3. The element t 0 denotes the tunnel amplitude preserving pseudospin, whereas t i for i = 1 -3 refer to a Zeeman field which couples angular momentum of an electron. The complex conjugation of the hopping element is represented by because of Eqs. ( We will calculate the lowest order term of Josephson current between two J = 3/2 superconductors by using Eq. (39) in Sec. III. The Josephson effect is sensitive to relative structures of pair potentials in two superconductors. In S = 1/2 superconductors, the Josephson current by the lowest order coupling vanishes between a spin-singlet and a spintriplet superconductor, which is the part of the selection rule due to the spin structures of Cooper pairs. In this section, we discuss the selection rule of the Josephson current between two J = 3/2 superconductors. We first consider s-wave superconductors with simple band structure as E k = ε 0 (k) -μ. Namely, the dispersion is isotropic in the momentum space and is independent of pseudospin. We also assume that the tunneling Hamiltonian is independent of pseudospin for a while, i.e. T ± = t 0 γ 0 . When both superconductors of a Josephson junction are in pseudospin-singlet state, the Josephson current should be represented by the Ambegaokar-Baratoff formula for the left and right superconductor, respectively. The Josephson current in Eq. (39) becomes while the summation over momentum is carried out as follows, The summation over the momentum is decomposed into two parts. One part is the summation over its amplitude |k|, which can be replaced by the integration over ξ k . The density of states at the Fermi level is denoted by N 0 . The details of the integral is summarized in Appendix. A. The other part is summation over the direction of k on the Fermi surface for k x > 0. It is calculated as the average over the Fermi surface, where Finally the Josephson current is calculated as where R N is the normal resistance of the junction. As the most simple case, we assume that the amplitudes of the two pair potentials are identical to each other, ∆ L = ∆ R = ∆. Then the Josephson current results in The expression of the current is identical to the Ambegaokar-Baratoff's formula Secondly, we discuss a junction where a pseudospinsinglet s-wave superconductor is on the left and a pseudospin-quintet superconductor is on the right side. The pair potentials are given by The vector q is normalized vectors in five-dimensional pseudospin space, i.e. ν=1-5 |q ν | 2 = 1. When the tunneling elements are independent of pseudospin T ± = t 0 γ 0 , the lowest order of the Josephson current vanishes by the selection rule due to the pseudospin configuration of Cooper pairs. Pseudospin of a Cooper pair is J = 0 in a singlet superconductor, whereas it is J = 2 in a quintet superconductor. To make the Josephson current finite, an electron must change its angular momentum while tunneling the insulating barrier because of the difference in the angular momentum, δJ = 2. We switch on a weak Zeeman field to make the interface magnetically active. Then the tunnel elements become pseudospin dependent and can have finite t i (≪ t 0 ) for i = 1-3 in Eq. (37). The Josephson current is calculated as Although the lowest order current can have finite value because of the Zeeman field, the contributions of ν = 1, 2 terms vanish. As far as we study, the current-phase relationship is sinusoidal even if a Zeeman field breaks time-reversal symmetry. The results in Eq. ( , where U M is the magnetic scattering potential (Appendix. B). Thus the current is written in the first order terms in the coefficients of the spin-dependent tunneling Hamiltonian. This implies that a single operation of a Zeeman field can couple the Cooper pairs with difference of the angular momentum, δS = 1. In this subsection, we discuss the Josephson effect in a junction consisting of two superconductors in pseudospin-quintet states. First, we consider a junction of two s-wave pseudospin-quintet superconductors described by The anomalous Green's function can be calculated as Eq. (32). By substituting the anomalous Green's function in Eq. ( The result indicates that the Josephson current is given by the scalar product of two vectors, I QQ ∝ q L • q R , which describes the selection rule due to the pseudospin configuration of Cooper pairs. It is easy to confirm that Josephson current cannot flow between two superconductors with Cooper pairs corresponding to different representations in Table where d is the d-vector in three-dimensional spin space of the spin-triplet Cooper pair with pair potential ∆( k) = id( k)•σσ 2 . By comparing Eq. ( Additionally, we study a case with two J = 3/2 superconductors in which pair potentials are anisotropic in the momentum space. With the general even-parity pair potential the Josephson current is calculated as The average of η R k • η L k k on the Fermi surface leads to additional selection rule for the pair potentials depending on momenta. For example in a case of η L k ∝ e 1 ( k) and η R k ∝ e 2 ( k), the Josephson current vanishes irrespective of relative pseudospin configurations of Cooper pairs in the two superconductors because of the selection rule in momentum space e 1 ( k)e 2 ( k) k = 0. In this section, we have assumed that electronic structures are independent of pseudospin, i.e., E k = ε 0 (k) -μ. The effects of a pseudospin-dependent electronic structures on the selection rule will be clarified in the next section. In this section, we show that anisotropic dispersion depending on pseudospin generates an odd-frequency Cooper pair and discuss how it affects the Josephson current. For simplicity, we consider a simple superconductor in which the dispersion and the pair potential are described by Here we assume |ε λ | ≪ |ε 0 |. When λ = ν, E k and D k commute to each other. Then the symmetry of the pair potential and that of the anomalous Green's function are the same because F(k, iω n ) in Eq. ( The details of the derivation are shown in Appendix C. The extra term δF νλ describes an unusual Cooper pairing correlation belonging to odd-frequency symmetry. Since both ε λ (k) and η k are even-parity functions, δF νλ (k, iω n ) = δF νλ (k, iω n ) U T is also an even-parity function. The product γ ν γ λ U T suggests that δF νλ is symmetric under the permutation of two pseudospins. To meet the requirement of the Fermi-Dirac statistics of electrons, δF νλ must be odd under the permutation of imaginary times. As a result, δF νλ is confined to be an odd function of the Matsubara frequency. It is easy to confirm that Eq. (65) corresponds to the condition for the appearance of an odd-frequency pair, λ = ν. We first consider a junction that consists of two identical superconductors described by Eq. ( The details of the derivation are shown in Appendix C. The first term of Eqs. ( As shown in Eq. ( The anomalous Green's function of the right superconductor is described by The Josephson current in this junction is calculated as The positive sign of the trace is derived from the order of pseudospin matrices as Tr[γ ν γ λ γ λ γ ν ] = 4. The first term in Eq. ( In this paper, we discussed the Josephson effect of a superconductor in which an electron with angular momentum J = 3/2 characterizes the electronic structures near the Fermi level as a result of strong spin-orbit interactions. We assume that a J = 3/2 superconductor preserves time-reversal and inversion symmetries simultaneously. In the presence of inversion symmetry, J = 0 pseudospin-singlet and J = 2 pseudospin-quintet state are possible. The latter is described by the combination of five even-parity orbital functions and five pseudospin tensors. The Josephson current within the tunnel Hamiltonian description is calculated in terms of the anomalous Green's functions on either sides of a junction. We found that the Josephson selection rule for quintet states is stricter than that for well-established S = 1 spintriplet states. A magnetically active junction interface enables the Josephson coupling between a pseudospinsinglet J = 0 superconductor and a pseudospin-quintet J = 2 superconductor. We also discussed a Josephson current carried by odd-frequency pairing correlations which are generated by the complex commutation relations among pseudospin tensors. We find that the oddfrequency pairing correlation favors the π-state as long as it is a subdominant pairing correlation in a superconductor. In a J = 3/2 superconductor, in addition to pseudospin quintet states, pseudospin-septet states with angular momentum J = 3 can exist where a Cooper pair belongs to odd-parity symmetry. The physics of such a high angular momentum pair and specification of the pair potential are issues in the future. The physics of topological surface states could be an another open issue. is the d-vector of the spin-triplet state. For the barrier potential, V (r) = (U 0 σ0 + U M • σ) δ(z) is given where U 0 is the charge scattering potential and U M = U M (cos αê x + sin αê y ) is the magnetic scattering potential. α is the angle between the d-vector and the magnetization M in the insulator. Using the tunneling perturbation theory, Brydon et al. calculated the Josephson current I and showed The lowest order term is proportional to cos φ because the magnetic field breaks time-reversal symmetry. From cos α = (U M • d)/(|U M ||d|), we find that the current is proportional to the scalar product of d-vector and U M . Appendix C: Odd-frequency pairing Here we first derive the anomalous Green's function in a superconductors in the presence of pseudospin-dependent dispersion. Then we show the derivation of the Josephson current. When a superconductor is described by Eq. ( with ρ = κ. When an insulator is magnetically inactive i.e. T = t 0 γ 0 , the Josephson current becomes As shown in the equation, there are two cases where finite Josephson current is allowed, ν = κ, or λ = κ and ν = ρ simultaneously. The condition ν = κ corresponds to the selection rule I ∝ q L • q R . For the case ν = κ, the Josephson current is calculated as If we assume η R = η L = ∆, the Josephson current is simplified as The first term is equivalent to the Josephson current without the pseudospin-dependent dispersion, Eq. (58). The second term represents the Josephson current carried by induced odd-frequency pairs in the two superconductors. It is finite for λ = ρ, where symmetries of both superconductors are identical. Its negative sign is derived from Tr[γ ν γ λ γ ν γ λ ] = -4. For λ = κ and ν = ρ, the Josephson junction consists of two superconductors described by Eq. (61) for the left and Eq. (68) for the right side. The Josephson current is calculated as For the last line, we assumed η R = η L = ∆. The positive sign is from Tr[γ ν γ λ γ λ γ ν ] = 4.