Laser based ranging (LiDAR) -already ubiquitously used in industrial monitoring, atmospheric dynamics, or geodesy -is key sensor technology. Coherent laser ranging Multi-heterodyning two synchronously frequency-modulated microcombs yields distance and velocity information of all individual ranging channels on a single receiver alleviating the need for individual separation, detection, and digitization. The reported LiDAR implementation is hardware-efficient, compatible with photonic integration, and demonstrates the significant advantages of acquisition speed afforded by the convergence of optical telecommunication and metrology technologies. We anticipate our research will motivate further investigation of frequency swept microresonator dual-comb approach in the neighboring fields of linear and nonlinear spectroscopy, optical coherence tomography. Three dimensional (3D) imaging based on lasers (Li-DAR) is ubiqitiously used in numerous applications, ranging from airborne imaging for cartography of geological sites To unlock the potential of massively parallel FMCW ranging, requires overcoming the challenge that the num- Parallel FMCW Velocimetry and Ranging ber of optical balanced photo-receivers, amplifiers and analog-to-digital converters is identical to the channel number that is employed, which necessitates custom, large-area silicon photonic solutions Here we overcome these limitations and demonstrate a hardware-efficient massively parallel coherent FMCW LiDAR based on multiheterodyne mixing of two photonic chip-based soliton microcombs on a single coherent photoreceiver (cf. Fig. In our experiments, we utilize a single highly coherent FMCW laser that is amplified, split and coupled into two size-mismatched photonic chip based integrated Si 3 N 4 where v μ cosθ μ is a projection of the target velocity on a comb line and ν μ is an optical frequency of the μ-th comb line. Figure To demonstrate the capabilities of dual-comb massively parallel coherent imaging, we perform proof-ofprinciple parallel ranging experiments. The setup is depicted in Fig. In a second proof-of-principle experiment, we demonstrate dense coherent hardware-efficient parallel velocimetry with our dual frequency-modulated soliton microcomb platform at even higher rates of 6.4 megapixel per second. Lowering the repetition rate to 35 GHz only, illustrates the advantage of the dual comb approach, which alleviates the need to operate at large line spacings compatible with multiplexers and facilitates mode spacing related limitations of channel isolation. To this end, we employ two low repetition rate solitons microcomb operating at f rep of 35 GHz allowing to have more than 60 channels within our EDFA gain window. While spectral compression of the microcomb from 99 GHz to 35 GHz does limit the triangular chirp frequency excursion to 700 MHz (while preserving the same pump power), this does not limit the accuracy of Doppler velocimetry and we can retain the 100 kHz modulation frequency. The optical spectra of the signal and LO solitons are shown in Fig. In summary, we have demonstrated a megapixel-rate parallel coherent laser ranging based on multiheterodyne detection of chirped carriers on a single coherent receiver. Two integrated soliton microcombs driven by the same chirped pump laser provide a minimalist implementation of the dual chirped-comb system. The approach is free of channel separation, photo-detection and processing of individual channels. Utilization of arbitrary, and in particular very dense, frequency comb channel spacing is possible since multiplexers are not required. When combined with phase arrays, or other compact non-inertial scanning solutions, our approach provides a route to field deployable MPix/s LiDAR systems, that provide sufficient frame rate to allow video rate 3D imaging. Moreover, high-bandwidth I-Q detectors are already offered commercially in silicon photonics -making our method fully compatible with photonic integration. A recently demonstrated full heterogeneous integration combining InP/Si semiconductor lasers and ultralow-loss silicon nitride microresonators for DKS generation Integrated Si 3 N 4 microresonators are fabricated with the photonic damascene process We use an external cavity diode laser (ECDL) for our proof-of-principle, which is coupled to a dual Mach-Zehnder Modulator driven by a frequency-agile VCO and biased for single-sideband modulation. The laser is amplified, split and coupled into two photonic chips using lensed fibers and double inverse tapers The precision of coherent laser ranging is directly impacted by the linearity of the chirps that constitute the triangular frequency modulation. The chirp is applied to narrowband CW laser via single side-band modulator driven by a VCO. An iterative linearization algorithm was applied to the pump frequency chirp based on chirp measurement in an imbalanced Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI) The experimental setup is illustrated in extended data Fig. The imaging experiment (Fig. The velocimetry measurements are carried out with 35 GHz microcombs and 140 MHz ∆f rep allowing us to increase the number of operational channels μ = ±5, ±40. Channels μ = -4, +4 are filtered out by the WS due to the excess ASE. The frequency excursion B μ ranges from 500 up to 950 MHz (extended data Fig. According to our notation, positive frequencies in the complex RF spectrum correspond to optical carrier frequencies larger than than the pump, negative frequencies to channels with smaller optical carrier frequencies than the pump. The distance and velocity can be inferred from these expressions and are depicted in the inset of Fig. Our coherent receiver consists of 90 • optical hybrid coupler, two balanced photodetectors and subsequent RF amplifiers. This type of receiver is commonly referred as "phase-diversity homodyne receiver" The post-processing relies on short time Fourier transform over the half of the period to retrieve f u μ , f d μ RF frequencies. In this regard, the 'image' peaks do not pose a problem, since we know that the positive frequencies will give a higher frequency beat note first while for the negative ones it would be the lower one (extended data Fig. To evaluate the real-time digital processing requirements, we give an estimate of computational complexity. The main computational operation is a discrete Fourier transform (DFT), which can be computed via the Fast Fourier transform (FFT) method. The complexity of FFT can be estimated as ≈ 4N*log 2 (N), where N is a sample size In general, the soliton repetition rate f rep depends on the laser cavity detuning, because of intrapulse stimulated Raman scattering Heterodyne beat spectroscopy is well suited to characterize the chirp waveforms, but not practical for ranging and velocimetry, as it requires an independent reference laser. Hence, during the experiments presented in figures 3 and 4, we utilize a reference optical fiber MZI that is derived by tapping a fraction of signal and LO and beating them together on a second balanced photodiode (cf. extended data Fig. Due to the channel-dependent excursion ±μ channel would give a beat note consisting of four lines (cf extended data Fig. Hence, we are able to conduct the experiments with freerunning soliton microcombs. Extended data Fig. Multiheterodyne mixing of dual-chirped soliton microcombs necessitates not only soliton generation to preserve chirp linearity from the pump to the comb teeth, but also requires that chirps are transduced equally, so as to avoid a difference in the frequency excursion B μ between the signal and LO comb teeth that would broaden the ranging beatnote and penalize detection precision and sensitivity. We have two contributions effecting soliton repetetion rate given change in pump frequency: the chromatic dispersion of the cavity D 2 , i.e. frequency dependency of the free-spectral-range D 1 , and Raman shift Ω The overall change in repetition rate as a function of the detuning δ (frequency difference between the pump and 'cold' cavity resonance) can be written as For dielectric integrated microresonators it is generally found that δ Ω(δ) and hence the first term in the round brackets can be omitted. We also neglect the weak dependence of the free-spectral range and dispersion on the laser-cavity detuning that can be derived as . The linear dependence of the instantaneous f rep on the laser-cavity detuning δ induces a channel-dependent frequency excursion B μ without introducing nonlinearity into the trian-gular chirp where τ R is Raman shock time and is the chromatic dispersion term. Extended Data Fig. In a real-world deployment of our system, a feedforward scan scheme A significant advantage of heterodyne detection is that it can approach the photon shot noise limit of detection and attain single photon sensitivities for low signal powers on a conventional semiconductor photodiode, if sufficient LO power is supplied for amplification. In the multiheterodyne case all individual channel LO are impinging on a small number of photodiodes (4 in case of a phase diversity receiver with balanced photodiodes). Generally, for a heterodyne LiDAR detection P LO > P sig and the shot noise (mainly contributed by the LO) is a dominating source of noise (i.e., higher than the thermal noise) if sufficient LO power is supplied to the photodiode. Where B RF is the resolution bandwidth of the analysis FFT. For simplicity, we consider quantum efficiency of the photodiode to be 100%, thus the electric current is I = RP = e ω P . If an optical amplifier is used, than for the shot noise limited detection the total SNR would be at least 3dB lower: Below we elaborate a more detailed analyzes for the case of multiple channels detected on a single balanced photodiode. Consider N distinct signal-LO channels distributed over the photodiode bandwidth with equal powers of the signal channels P sig μ = P sig and LO channels For heterodyne detection the photodiode current of channel μ is 2R 2 P LO P sig , while the total noise ∆I 2 effecting channel μ would consist of shot noise, thermal noise, spontaneous-spontaneous beating noise, and signal/LO-spontaneous beating noise The photon shot noise is proportional to the mean current impinging on the photodiodes σ 2 sh = 2q I B RF = 2qR(N GP LO + N GP sig + P LO ase + P sig ase )B RF ≈ 2qRN GP LO B RF We consider the thermal noise of the photodiodes at room temperature where kT is a thermal energy and the impedance Z of the load is 50 Ohm. Spontaneous-spontaneous and signal/LO-spontaneous beating noises include cross terms only, because we employ balanced photodetection, In the experiment, we use two optical amplifiers for the signal comb: a booster-amplifier before free-space emission and a detection pre-amplifier after light collection. In the above equations, P sig denotes the optical power of the signal comb line at the input of the 90 • optical hybrid. The ASE noise of the booster amplification stage is irrelevant in the coherent ranging application, as the optical loss in free space (> 60 dB) generally surpasses the single stage amplification gain. Thus the photon shot noise would be dominating at the post-amplification stage. Combining all noise terms and neglecting minor contributions, we determine the SNR for a given channel: Thus, in the case of shot-noise limited operation, the SNR of a channel μ is reduced by the shot noise of the additional local oscillators and N times lower than in case of its detection on N separate photodetectors. This multiheterodyne penalty is well known in the realm of dual comb spectroscopy 