Magnetic droplets are dissipative magnetodynamical solitons that can form under current driven nanocontacts in magnetic layers with large perpendicular magnetic anisotropy. Here, we extend the original droplet theory by studying the impact of the dipolar interactions on the dynamics of droplet solitons. By varying the thickness of the free layer of a spin torque nano-oscillator, we systematically tune the internal field of the free layer to investigate the dynamics of droplet solitons. Our numerical results show that increasing the free layer thickness increases the droplet's threshold current, decreases the droplet's frequency and diameter, enlarges the current hysteresis and also modifies the structure of the droplet. The Oersted field of the current breaks the precessional phase coherency and deteriorates the stability of the droplet in free layers with larger thicknesses. Moreover, our findings show a simple relation to determine the impact of the free layer thickness on the droplet's nucleation boundaries. Our study presents the missing brick on the physics behind magnetic droplet solitons, and further illustrates that magnetic droplets in thinner layers possess more promising characteristics for spintronic applications and enable devices with higher speed of operation. Introduction Spin-waves (SWs) are the collective eigen-excitations of a magnetic order parameter The abundant nonlinearity of SWs provides rich opportunities to investigate the basics of nonlinear wave dynamics. Examples can be nonlinear multi-magnon scattering processes Magnetic droplet solitons (droplet hereafter) are strongly nonlinear and localized SW solitons that can form in thin magnetic layers with sufficiently large perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA). To nucleate a droplet, it is necessary to overcome the viscous magnetic damping of the system by utilizing the STT. This can be achieved using a nanocontact (NC) geometry in spin-torque nano-oscillators (STNOs) In addition to the gain-loss balancing, the nucleation of the droplet depends on the counteraction of the PMA against the exchange energy. Indeed, the original theory of the droplet considers an ultrathin magnetic layer in which the SW dispersion is dominated by the exchange interactions Moreover, recent progresses on the growth of low damping thin films with large PMA featuring larger thicknesses compared to Ni/Co multilayers Here, we use micromagnetic simulations to investigate the role of dipolar interactions on the dynamics of magnetic droplet solitons. To fulfill this task, we tune the free layer thickness of a STNO with large PMA. Using this approach enables us to systematically tune the internal field of the free layer only due to the dipolar interactions, while it keeps the rest of the parameters unchanged. It will be shown how increasing the thickness influences the threshold current, frequency, shape and the diameter of the droplet. Moreover, stability and hysteresis of the droplet as a function of the thickness will be discussed. Finally, the role of the dipolar fields on the droplet nucleation boundaries will be presented. The Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert-Slonczewski equation which describes current-driven motion of magnetization in a magnetic layer has the form in which = ሺ, ‫ݐ‬ሻ = /‫ܯ‬s is the unit magnetization vector and Ms the saturation magnetization. The first term on the right-hand side describes the magnetization precession in an effective field ୣ that reads, which includes the standard contributions of the demagnetizing field due to the magnetostatic energy, exchange, perpendicular uniaxial magnetic anisotropy and the external bias field. The second term on the right-hand side of the Eq. ( In order to study the magnetization dynamics, the dynamical components of the magnetization mx(x,y,t) or mz (x,y,t) are collected for the duration of 20 ns starting from the nucleation time of the droplet. The intensities of the excited modes were calculated by performing a fast Fourier transformation (FFT) on the collected data. The nucleation time of the droplet is defined as the moment when the magnetization below the NC reverses, which was found by analyzing the time trace of the out-of-plane component of the magnetization below the NC We first set the external field to μ0He = 0.4 T. In order to show the impact of the thickness on the internal field of the free layer, we present the spatial distribution of the out-of-plane component of the demagnetizing field inside the free layer with various thicknesses in Fig. To better compare the obtained results in different devices, in Fig. The droplet is a magnetodynamical soliton featuring a precessional frequency in the GHz range The droplet soliton has a very narrow condition to form due to its dissipative nature We now investigate the hysteresis characteristics of the droplet as a function of the free layer thickness. To this end, we sweep up the current from I = 0 mA to I = 40 mA, and then sweep down the current from I = 40 mA to I = 0 mA. We record the out-of-plane component of the magnetization below the NC and plot it with respect to the applied current. Figure To investigate the stability of the droplet as a function of the free layer thickness, we implement the Oersted field produced by the current in our simulations by considering the NC as an infinite wire The droplet is characterized by a field-current nucleation boundary in which He is the external field and ࣛ is a function of the saturation magnetization, NC diameter, spin torque asymmetry, electron charge, vacuum permeability, reduced Planck's constant, the spin-torque efficiency, and the free layer thickness d. In the systems we investigate here, only the thickness d varies. Therefore, one can find the following simple ratio between two systems with different thicknesses, FIG. Figure In conclusion, we have investigated the impact of the dipolar interactions and the demagnetizing field on the dynamics of magnetic droplet solitons in spin-torque nano-oscillators. To this end, we have tuned the internal field of the system by varying the thickness of the free layer. Our results demonstrate that the droplet requires a higher current to nucleates in thicker films. Moreover, the droplet features a larger current hysteresis loop, a smaller precessional frequency and a semi-elliptical shape with a smaller effective diameter in thicker films. In addition, the presence of the Oersted field of the current leads to stronger droplet instabilities in free layers with larger thickness. The droplet nucleation boundary strongly depends on the thickness of the free layer, nevertheless, a simple relation was used to elaborate the nucleation boundary in thicker films, which can be employed in experimental investigations. Our study uncovers an additional degree of influence on the dynamics of magnetic droplet solitons, and further enlighten the suitability of ultrathin layers for using droplets in spintronic applications. Moreover, it motivates further investigations on the nonlinear SW dynamics in magnetic layers with large PMA.