In this paper, we study the wave propagation in a metallic parallel-plate structure with glide-symmetric elliptical holes. To perform this study, we derived a mode-matching technique based on the generalized Floquet theorem for glidesymmetric structures. This mode-matching technique benefits from a lower computational cost since it takes advantage of the glide symmetry in the structure. It also provides physical insight on the specific properties of Floquet modes propagating in these specific structures. With our analysis, we demonstrate that glide-symmetric structures with periodic elliptical holes exhibit an anisotropic refractive index over a wide range of frequencies. The equivalent refractive index can be controlled by tuning the dimensions of the holes. Finally, by combining the anisotropy related to the elliptical holes and transformation optics, a Maxwell fish-eye lens with a 33.33% size compression is designed. This lens operates in a wideband frequency range from 2.5 GHz to 10 GHz. M ETAMATERIALS are artificial materials formed by subwavelength periodic structures that exhibit extraordinary macroscopic properties Recent studies have demonstrated the distinctive dispersive properties related with the presence of higher symmetries in periodic structures. For example, introducing glide and twist symmetries in periodic structures can increase their equivalent refractive index Previous works have studied in detail the implementation of isotropic holey metasurfaces Glide-symmetric periodic structures require specific modelling tools due to the strong interaction between the layers This paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the general mode-matching formulation applied to the elliptical holey structure. The fields inside the holes are described by means of Mathieu functions, and they are subsequently used to obtain the dispersion equation. Section III presents the dispersion analysis for all the geometric parameters of the structure. Furthermore, a study on the anisotropic behavior of the equivalent refractive index is also carried out. Section IV presents the design of a compressed Maxwell fish-eye lens made of glide-symmetric periodic elliptical holes. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section V. The gap region is filled with a dielectric of relative permittivity ε r and the elliptical holes are filled with a dielectric of relative permittivity ε rhole . The z = 0 plane is chosen to be on the top of the non-glide-symmetric unit cell, and in the center of the gap between plates in the glide-symmetric case. The gap between the plates is g and g/2 in the glide-symmetric and non-glide-symmetric structures, respectively. In this section, first, we briefly present the mode-matching formulation for this problem in a suitable coordinate system. An elliptic cylindrical coordinate system is used due to the geometry of the hole. As stated in Appendix A, the elliptic cylindrical coordinate system is defined by three coordinates: radial ξ, angular η, and longitudinal z. Using this coordinate system, the tangential fields in the surface of the hole can be expressed as where C i is the coefficient of the i-th mode, Φ i (ξ, η) is the modal function that represents the i-th mode inside the hole, and Y i is the wave admitance of the i-th mode. The elliptical hole can be regarded as a short-circuited elliptical waveguide. Thus, the coefficients r ± i in (1) and ( The term k zi = ε rhole k 2 0 -k 2 ti is the wavenumber in the longitudinal direction of the elliptical waveguide, ε rhole is the relative dielectric constant inside the hole, k ti is the transversal wavenumber and h hole is the hole depth in Fig. On the other hand, the tangential fields in the gap region can be expressed as a series of Floquet harmonics: p s e -j(kx,px+ky,sy) ẽGAP t,ps (z) p s e -j(kx,px+ky,sy) hGAP t,ps (z) where k x,p = k x,0 + 2πp d , k y,s = k y,0 + 2πs d , p and s are the integer values specifying the order of the Floquet harmonics, and ẽGAP t,ps (z), hGAP t,ps (z) are the field amplitudes of each transversal electric and magnetic Floquet harmonic. Both field-amplitude terms are expressed as a sum of sine and cosine functions By applying the boundary conditions (continuity of electric and magnetic tangential fields at z = -g/2 and z = g/2 for the glide case, and at z = -g/2 and z = 0 for the non-glide case), the following linear system of equations is obtained where N is the number of modal functions considered in the elliptical hole and By setting the determinant of the coefficient matrix α ri to zero, the dispersion equation can be obtained. In where k z,ps = ε r k 2 0 -k 2 x,p -k 2 y,s is the vertical wavenumber of the (p, s)-th harmonic, ε r is the relative dielectric constant in the gap region, φ x i and φ y i are the x and y-components of the Fourier transform of the i-th modal function, and the symbol (*) denotes the complex conjugate. Finally, the vertical spectral function f ps in and in the glide-symmetric case, it is Elliptical holes can be seen as short-circuited elliptical waveguides. The foundations of elliptical waveguides were first established in After obtaining the modal functions, the next step is to calculate the coefficients α ri , as expressed in The two-dimensional Fourier transform of the modal functions is defined as Φ i e j(kx,px+ky,sy) dS. ( The differential surface dS in an elliptic coordinate system can be expressed as dS = h 2 ξ dξdη, since the scale factor of the ξ and η coordinates is the same (see Appendix A). From Appendices A and B, we know how both φ x i and φ y i components of the modal functions can be derived from the φ ξ i and φ η i components. Thus, the components of the Fourier transform are written as × e j(kx,px+ky,sy) h ξ dξdη. ( where h = √ a 2 -b 2 . In addition, the inner product of the r-th and i-th modal functions is expressed as For the case of perfect metallic waveguides, the modal functions are orthogonal regardless of the geometry of the hole The integrals ( As a difference with respect to In this section, we study the anisotropic behavior of the unit cell for different values of the parameters of the elliptical hole. In order to check the validity of the results, all dispersion analyses are compared with the commercial software CST Microwave Studio. We will use a reference unit cell to study the individual effect of each parameter in the equivalent refractive index. The dimensions of the reference unit cell are: period d = 4.5 mm, eccentricity e = 0.8, gap g = 0.5 mm, semi-major axis a = 1.9 mm, and hole depth h hole = 1.5 mm. In addition, the gap region and the holes are filled with air (ε r = ε rhole = 1). Fig. Fig. The constitutive parameters represent the transverse components of the permeability and the normal component of the permittivity for a wave propagation in x and y-directions. It is important to remark that the refractive indexes are cross-related with the constitutive parameters (n x ∝ √ μ yy , n y ∝ √ μ xx ), as later depicted in Section IV. As observed in Fig. Fig. In Fig. Fig. In Fig. The variation of the propagation constant as a consequence of modifying the eccentricity of the hole is studied in Fig. Finally, Fig. In this section, we take advantage of both the broadband response due to glide symmetry and the anisotropy related to elliptical holes to produce a broadband compressed Maxwell fish-eye lens (MFE). Thus, we present a proof-of-concept design with a compression factor of 33.33% and wideband capabilities. The Maxwell fish-eye lens is a rotationally-symmetric graded-index lens that focuses any point-source excitation to the opposite side of the circle where r = x 2 + y 2 , R is the radius of the lens and n 0 is the background refractive index, assumed to be one here. Here, we attempt to compress the lens by a factor β while maintaining the same aperture in the other direction. Transformation optics (TO) and the anisotropy related to elliptical holes can be used for our purpose. Essentially, TO relates the electromagnetic fields and constitutive parameters of the original space, namely virtual space (x, y, z coordinates), to the desired transformed space, known as physical space (x , y , z coordinates). Since we are compressing the lens along the y direction, the coordinates of the transformation are: In the physical space, we are interested in having isotropic materials outside the lens, similar to the virtual space (air: ε 0 , μ 0 ). Thus, the formulation of where r = x 2 + (βy ) 2 . From the material properties of the physical space, the refractive index can be calculated: Note that, since the refractive index is cross-related with the constitutive parameters (n x ∝ μ yy , n y ∝ μ xx ) and β > 1, it follows from equations ( The schematic for the compressed MFE lens is shown in Fig. The map of the required refractive indexes is displayed in Fig. Fig. In order to implement the compressed MFE lens, for each spatial point, we must select from Fig. In this paper, we analyzed the wave propagation in a glidesymmetric metallic structure composed of periodic elliptical holes. For this purpose, a mode-matching based on the generalized Floquet theorem has been applied. The dispersion diagrams of the unit cell have been obtained for the different values of all the geometric parameters. It has been demonstrated that glide-symmetric structures with periodic elliptical holes exhibit an anisotropic refractive index over a wide range of frequencies. Furthermore, it has been confirmed that the refractive index can be tuned in a wider bandwidth in the glide-symmetric case. In order to validate the capabilities of the presented structure for practical scenarios, a compressed lens has been designed. With the use of periodic elliptical holes in a glide-symmetric configuration, the profile of a MFE lens has been compressed of 33.33 %. The simulated MFE lens is wideband, operating from 2.5 GHz to 10 GHz. It is reported how the use of glide symmetry increases the equivalent refractive index, so higher compression factors can be achieved. For the same dimensions and materials in the unit cell, the non-glide version only offers a maximum compression factor of 3.05 %, while with glide symmetry, a 43% is achieved. Finally, a comparison between isotropic and anisotropic materials is done. The use of anisotropic materials substantially reduces the required range of refractive index when compressing the lens. Thus, periodic elliptical holes arranged in a glide-symmetric configuration are a promising candidate for the manufacturing of reduced-size low-loss low-cost wideband planar lenses. Elliptic cylindrical coordinates, depicted in Fig. where h = ae is the focal distance of the ellipse, a, b are the semi-major and semi-minor axes of the ellipse, and e = √ a 2 -b 2 /a is the eccentricity of the ellipse. From the definition of a vector r = xx + yŷ + zẑ and the use of ( Furthermore, the surface differential dS can be derived by applying the formulas of an orthogonal coordinate system. Thus, Other differential operators as the Laplacian of a scalar field ∇ 2 φ, the gradient of a scalar field ∇φ, the divergence of a vector field ∇ • Φ, or the curl of a vector field ∇ × Φ can be derived in the same manner As previously discussed, the elliptical hole can be seen as a short-circuited elliptical waveguide. The i-th modal function is expressed in terms of elliptical coordinates as For TE modes (Y i = k zi /(k 0 η 0 )): Ce m (ξ, q emn ) ce m (η, q emn ) (even) Se m (ξ, q omn ) se m (η, q omn ) (odd) In the case of TM modes, the parameters q emn , q omn are the n-th roots of Mathieu Radial (cosine and sine) functions: Ce m (ξ 0 , q emn ) Se m (ξ 0 , q omn ) = 0 . In the case of TE modes, the parameters q emn , q omn are the nth roots of the first derivative of the Mathieu Radial functions: Ce m (ξ 0 , q emn ) Se m (ξ 0 , q omn ) = 0 . The radial value ξ 0 delimits the metallic surface of the waveguide. This parameter is related with the eccentricity of the elliptical hole according to the expression cosh ξ 0 = 1/e Afterwards, the modal functions are computed using ( 