Multidimensional or multiplex bioanalysis represents a crucial approach to improve diagnostic precision, increase assay throughput and advance fundamental discoveries in analytical industry, life science and nanomedicine. Along this line, bio-interfacing magnetic particles have been playing an important role. Fully exploiting the properties of magnetic particles is the key to tailoring recent technology development for better translational outcomes. In this mini-review, typical magnetophysical dimensions of magnetic particles are introduced. Recent progress of implementing these dimensions with advanced sensor and actuator technologies in multiplex bioanalysis is discussed. Outlooks on potential biomedical applications and challenges are provided. A substantial part of research in analytical chemistry, biosensing and nanomedicine requires the identification of intercorrelated molecular or cellular parameters to shape translational outcomes. For instance, biomarkers discovered through such a process could be promising as surrogate clinical endpoints. Following this trend, there has been a surge in the pursuit of multiplex bioanalytical capability, i.e. the ability to profile multiple variants at the same time or in a common biological specimen. However, challenges are as significant as regard to the lack of efficient tools for highdimensional analysis. While innovations in functional materials can impact many advanced sensors and actuators technologies, progress made should ultimately expand the capacity in both fundamental research and applications. Owing to the advances in synthesis chemistry As of to date, numerous review articles have been devoted to the physics of magnetic field sensor B-H curves are generally used to describe the behavior of a magnetic material, which provide B, magnetic flux, as a function of H, namely, external magnetic field, in different directions. The susceptibility (denoted by χ) of a material can be defined by the tendency of increase or decrease of the resultant magnetic field inside the material comparing with the applied magnetic field. Many materials in the bioassay volume, such as glass slides, plastic tubes, water, cells, molecules or polymer matrices are paramagnetic (χ >0) or diamagnetic (χ<0). Their B-H curves are linear with the change of magnetic field. In contrast, ferromagnetic materials such as cobalt, iron and rare earth alloys exhibit large magnetic susceptibilities (χ >>0). Their magnetization remains after the removal of magnetic field. Superparamagnetic particles with size about 10 nm do not carry remanence upon field removal and possess a kind of strong and non-linear magnetization behavior. This property distinguishes them from other materials, in particular, those biological species, endowing the particles one of the most promising labels of biological cells or molecules. The nonlinear magnetization property of magnetic particles has been successfully implemented in a "Frequency Mixing (FM)" sensing technique Magnetic relaxation describes the process during which a magnetic system establishes an equilibrium or steady state condition under a pulsed magnetic field. Three types of magnetic relaxation have been majorly explored for in-vitro bioanalysis: Brownian relaxation (BR) BR refers to the physical rotation of particles with a hydrodynamic volume of VH that are swimming in a solution. The relaxation time is expressed as: 3ηV ' k " T where η is the viscosity of the solution, VH is hydrodynamic volume of the particle, kB is Boltzmann constant, and T is absolute temperature in Kelvin. NR corresponds to the reorientation of the magnetic moment of particles. Its relaxation time can be given by: where the time constant τ0= 10 -9 , K is the anisotropy constant of magnetic particles, Vm is the volume of the magnetic particle. For magnetic nanoparticles, the time for Neel relaxation is in the order of milliseconds to seconds, while for Brownian relaxation, it can take place in microseconds. Both BR and NR have been implemented in relaxometry with highly sensitive magnetometers such as superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUID), low-noise fluxgates, Hall sensors Spin-spin relaxation refers to the process by which the transverse component of the magnetization experiences an exponential decay or dephasing towards its equilibrium state. It can be measured by the spin-spin relaxation time, known as T2, a value characterizing the signal decay. M 56 = M 56 (0)e 89/; < Spin-lattice relaxation and its time, T1, characterizes the process of the longitudinal magnetization recovering to its initial state. Both T1 and T2 can be used in nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), while in biomolecular assays, T2 is more broadly used. T1 can be altered by the dipolar coupling between the proton moments with surroundings. T2 is dependent on the molecular structures and the amounts of hydrogens in the tissues (e.g. 6.6x10 As the most intrinsic properties of magnetic particles, magnetic flux is another signature to distinguish magnetic labels from other non-magnetic biological cells or molecules that do not emit magnetic flux. However, certain antiferromagnetically-coupled structures or those carrying vortex domains are designed not to emit magnetic flux. Magnetic field sensors can be implemented to detect the magnetic flux of particles in the time domain that gives rise to relaxometry, or in the spatial domain resulting in static field magnetometry (most often based on magnetoresistance sensors and Hall sensors). The magnetic flux of a magnetic particle is frequently estimated by assuming the particle as a magnetic dipole. The magnetic dipole field is expressed as where r is the vector connecting the dipole center and the position of the magnetic field, μ + is the vacuum susceptibility, and m is the magnetic moment. This equation suggests the inherent 3D nature of magnetic flux that can decay rapidly with the increase of the separation distance. Sectioning the magnetic flux in various time and space can also reveal distinctive patterns. All the features have posed a significant detection challenge. Magnetic particles with differentiable magnetic moments can bring in a so-called concept of magnetically-defined 'barcodes' (with total coding capacity of 6-7) The tailorable coupling can result in tunable critical rotation frequency of magnetic particles Depending on the size of magnetic particles, magneto-mechanics can involve ferrohydrodynamics (FH), magnetorheology (MR) and magnetophoresis (MP) Where V is the volume of the magnetic entity, B is the magnetic field, χ Q and χ R is the susceptibility of the magnetic entity and surrounding fluid, respectively, μ + is the permeability. Permanent magnets, electrical coils or patterned ferromagnetic microstructures can be designed to locally alter the magnetic field gradient experienced by the magnetic entities to realize magnetophoretic focusing, levitation and sorting. As the above equation implies, the magnetic force is reliant on the susceptibility contrast between the particles and surrounding environments. Diamagnetic bioparticles, such as cells Magnetic particles can release heat when exposed to a magnetic field alternating at high frequencies in the order of kilohertz and megahertz. The heat is generated because of the hysteretic and relaxation losses. In this respect, ferromagnetic particles with multidomain structures may have different magnetothermal properties from superparamagnetic particles possessing single-domain structures. For biomedical applications, the latter has broader interest due to its small size allowing them to be internalised into cells and tissues or conjugated to biomolecules with minimum steric hinderance. Single-domain superparamagnetic nanoparticles do not have hysteretic magnetization properties, thus at low field frequencies, they don't exhibit magnetic heating effects. However, at higher frequencies, the Neel relaxation of the particles can become hysteretic. This corresponds to frequencies closed to the relaxation frequency. Alternatively, Brownian relaxation of the particles can also generate heat due to the shear stress between the particles and surrounding environments. As noted previously, both the Neel and Brownian relaxation can be controlled by the intensity of the applied magnetic field. Neel relaxation is related to the magnetic anisotropy of the whole system. By adding a static magnetic field to the existing alternating field Quantification of multiple biomolecular analytes, such as DNA and proteins using the multidimensional properties of magnetic particles has been applied for disease diagnosis, pathogen testing, environmental monitoring and drug screening. For instance, femtomolar (10 -15 ) proteins labelled by magnetic nanoparticles have been detectable with magnetoresistance-based nanosensors Real-time binding of the antigen to the surface antibodies brings the magnetic nanoparticle tags to the proximity of sensors, causing graduate increase of the magnetic flux detected by the sensors. The realtime biding signal curve can be used to quantify the interaction between labelled macromolecules and targets immobilized on a sensor surface Profiling cellular targets allow for identifying tumor types, monitoring tumor burdens and therapies. For instance, the availability of serial tumor tissue has been limited because traditional biopsies are procedural time-consuming, costly and invasive. The small amounts of cells or tissues obtained by fineneedle aspirates are not sufficient for conventional molecular profiling approaches, such as immunohistochemistry, proteomics analyses or flow cytometry, which often require considerable quantities of cell samples. More sensitive technologies to detect limited quantities of lesion cells are of intense interest. A micro-NMR technology by measuring the transverse relaxation rate (T2) of magnetic nanoparticles attached to the cells can be used for multiplex molecular biomarkers profiling of cells obtained by fine-needle aspirates from suspected lesions from patients Blood is inherently a mixture of many abundant cell types, such as erythrocytes and monocytes and rare cells, such as circulating tumour cells. Adapting magnetic assays for flow cytometry can enable rare cell analysis (<100 cells/mL whole blood), including enumeration and profiling of specific biomarkers at the single cell level. Using magnetic nanoparticles to selectively target the biomarkers of rare cells, such as EpCAM, HER2/neu and EGFR, allows differentiating different cell lines. Issadore et al. presented a micro-Hall sensor chip to detect the magnetic flux of rare cells labelled by functionalised magnetic nanoparticles The differentiable amounts of magnetic particles on the cells also enables magnetically activated sorting of the cells based on the abundance of expressed biomarkers. The subsequent molecular profiling can be virtually done with dye staining for deep characterization. Magnetic ranking cytometers based on multiplex magnetic sorting can be used for profiling rare cells (10 to thousand cells) and for large number of cells (up to tens of millions), respectively transcriptomics analysis of single cells At the molecular level, in-vitro analysis could go beyond the single physical dimension of magnetic particles. Suspension assays utilizing beads as molecular carriers are generally advantageous for its fast reaction kinetics compared with planar arrays At the living cell level, growing efforts are devoted towards single cell analysis in order to decode the inherent complexities of cell heterogeneity, where magnetic particles could play an important role. For instance, DNA barcoded hydrogel particles are co-loaded with single cells in droplets to profile single cell omics At the tissue level, sensing or actuation of magnetic particles may create a myriad of opportunities although challenging. Optical evaluation of multicellular samples or tissue-like structures is challenging because of light penetrating and scattering issues. Magnetic particles modified with hydrogel surfaces can be used as carriers of 3D cellular constructs, the actuation of which could be navigated by external magnetic field for high-quality optical evaluation of tissue-like samples In this mini-review, I have been able to highlight a limited number of key bioanalysis applications of magnetic particles that have leveraged the essential multidimensional magneto-physical properties. They have enabled 'passive' sensing in cooperation with magnetic field sensors, or the 'active' actuating of biological cellular or molecular species using magnetic field. It is envisioned that the coalescence of multiple magnetic dimensions of magnetic particles may go well beyond the simple addition effect and can significantly increase the depth of basic bio-discoveries and the breadth of clinical applications in the long term. E I J,