The axion, a hypothetical elementary pseudoscalar, is expected to solve the strong CP problem of QCD and is also a promising candidate for dark matter. The most sensitive axion search experiments operate at millikelvin temperatures and hence rely on instrumentation that carries signals from a system at cryogenic temperatures to room temperature instrumentation. One of the biggest limiting factors affecting the parameter scanning speed of these detectors is the noise added by the components in the signal detection chain. Since the first amplifier in the chain limits the minimum noise, low-noise amplification is of paramount importance. This paper reports on the operation of a flux-driven Josephson parametric amplifier (JPA) operating at around 2.3 GHz with added noise approaching the quantum limit. The JPA was employed as a first stage amplifier in an experimental setting similar to the ones used in haloscope axion detectors. By operating the JPA at a gain of 19 dB and cascading it with two cryogenic amplifiers operating at 4 K, noise temperatures as low as 120 mK were achieved for the whole signal detection chain. Axions are spin-0 particles that emerge as a result of the Peccei-Quinn mechanism which was originally proposed as a solution to the strong CP problem of quantum chromodynamics The power spectral density of the noise accompanying a signal measured in an impedance matched environment can be given as where h is Planck's constant and k B is Boltzmann's constant. The first term in the brackets is the mean number of quanta at frequency f at the bath temperature T and the second term is the contribution from zero-point fluctuations. The lower limit on noise temperature for linear phase-insensitive amplifiers is given by When there is no pump tone present, the JPA can be modeled as a resonator with a well-defined quality factor and resonance frequency which are functions of flux. The resonance frequency is estimated from the frequency domain phase response using a parameter fit During the experiments, the MC plate temperature was stabilized at 50 ± 1 mK. With the temperature fixed, the frequency response of the JPA is determined by three experimental variables: the coil current (i b ), the pump frequency (f p ), and the pump power (P p ). The measurements shown in this work had i b confined to the region where the flux through the SQUID loop is given by -0.5φ 0 < φ < 0, where φ 0 is the magnetic flux quantum. Therefore, f r can be unambiguously converted to φ or i b . All experiments began with a transmission measurement, with the resonance frequency tuned to 2.18 GHz. This becomes the baseline measurement to be used for the duration of the experiment. When the result was compared to a separate measurement, in which a microwave short was put in place of the JPA, it was found that the baseline obtained via such an off-resonance measurement was at most 0.2 dB lossier than an ideal mirror. The JPA gain (G J ) was estimated by dividing the transmission magnitude response with the baseline's magnitude response. To investigate the gain behavior, a sweep over the parameters i b , f p , P p was made and the maximum gain was measured at each point. After each i b tuning step, the resonance frequency is estimated by performing a phase measurement and applying a parameter fit. With the detuning defined as δ = f p /2 -f r , the equigain contours had a minimum in necessary pump power around δ = 0, as shown in Figure sweeping the coil current and measuring the phase response at each step. One period corresponds to a current of 324.4 μA. The inset shows the fit performed to estimate the resonance frequency for each applied flux. To investigate noise temperature, a methodology similar to the well-known Y-factor method where S n (T s ) is the noise PSD of the source, G tot is the total gain seen from the reference plane, G L is the loss factor between the 50 Ω terminator and the reference plane and T n is the noise temperature. The reference plane is at the end of the superconducting cable connected to the noise source (see Figure Since the amplifier needs to be tuned along with the cavity during the axion experiment, the noise temperature was investigated at different frequencies. The measurements were done in 5 MHz steps from 2.28 to 2.305 GHz. At each step, the pump power and resonance frequency were tuned such that the JPA gain was about 20 dB. From these measurements (Figure Another important characteristic is the saturation that occurs when a narrowband signal is applied. For stable and predictable operation the JPA must be operated away from the effects of saturation. A common way to quantify the saturation of an amplifier is to determine the input power at which the gain is reduced by 1 dB (P 1dB ). The P 1dB was measured at δ = 0 for different frequencies and different pump powers corresponding to different gains. It is evident from the results (see Figure In conclusion, a flux-driven JPA, tunable in the range 2.2 to 2.305 GHz was demonstrated and determined to be operational for use in axion search experiments. The added noise temperatures of the receiver chain were measured using a noise source at a location as close as pos- Each measurement was done by sweeping the signal powers from the VNA and observing at which input power the gain reduces by 1 dB. The horizontal axis corresponds to the unsaturated gain measured with the lowest signal power available from VNA. sible to the origin of the axion signal. With an added noise temperature of 120 mK the system was shown to reach T sys ≈ 1.7T SQL . This is the first record of T sys below 2T SQL for an axion haloscope setup operating below 10 GHz. The saturation input power for the JPA was observed to be more than adequate for an axion-like signal. Currently, the tested JPA is being used as part of a KSVZ The system is taking physics data with a scanning speed that has been improved more than an order of magnitude. We expect that further optimization of the JPA design could result in improved instantaneous bandwidth and tuning range. This work was supported by the Institute for Basic Science (IBS-R017-D1-2021-a00) and JST ERATO (Grant No. JPMJER1601). A. F. van Loo is supported by a JSPS postdoctoral fellowship. The output PSD from a component with its input connected to a matched source can be written as : where S in is the source PSD, G is the power gain of the component, and S added is the noise added by it. The noise temperature (T n ) is a measure of the added noise at the output of a component. By convention, it is defined as if it is for noise entering the device itself: The entire detection chain (see Figure The simplified model used for the noise temperature estimations conducted in this work. Bold letters denote the power gains of components. The reference plane marks the input of the detector chain. Arrows denote the flow of power entering the nodes shown with a small circle. G L is a composite gain factor for everything between the noise source and the reference plane. G c is the circulator gain factor. G J is the signal and G I is the idler gain for the JPA. The amplifier gain G R and noise temperature T nR contain the effects of all elements after the last circulator, including SA noise. For simplicity, circulators are assumed to have complete rotational symmetry with respect to their ports and to be completely identical to each other. can be described as a single composite component with G = G tot and noise temperature T n . The noise temperature can be defined for a situation similar to the experimental one where a narrowband axion signal with power A is present. This signal enters the chain from a source connected to the reference plane. Assuming the source is thermalized to the MC plate with the temperature T f , then the defining relation for T n can be written as : where S O is the PSD at the output, G tot is the total power gain for the signal from the reference plane, S n is the noise coming from the source itself. The main idea here is that if one has a reliable estimate of T n , and understands the source environment well (S n (T f )), it is straightforward to estimate A without the precise knowledge of G tot . This is possible since S O can be easily measured at two frequencies f s and f s using a spectrum analyzer. Provided that |f s -f s | is small enough so that T n is approximately the same for both frequencies, A can be estimated from these two measurements. This approach forms the basis of the analysis methods applied in axion dark matter search experiments The detection chain consists of passive components, the JPA and the HEMT amplifiers. Each one of these adds noise in a different way. A passive component at physical temperature T f has S added = (1 -G)S n (T f ). The HEMT amplifier noise is usually estimated from measurements. The JPA adds noise by two main mechanisms. The first one is by amplifying the input noise at the idler mode onto the signal mode. The second one is via the losses or other dissipation mechanisms inside or before the sample. Ideally, the latter can be made zero, whereas the former will approach to the half-photon added noise in the limit of a 0 K bath temperature. Using the model shown in Figure The idler gain is denoted by G I , and is substituted using G I = G J -1 30 in the following derivations. As shown in Equation (A3), the idler contribution to the noise appears as G I S D . The symbol S j denotes an unknown noise density added at the JPA stage which does not contribute to the quantum limit but rather contains losses or other mechanisms of stationary noise. Note that the noise propagating back from the later stages is also included in S j . The output S O can be written for two cases. In the first case, the noise source is operational at temperature T s , and in the second case, a signal source at temperature T f is connected to the reference plane. The former case describes the measurement situation, whereas the latter case is only used to define T n in terms of the parameters in the model. For the first case, i.e. S A = S n (T s ), the output PSD can be written as : Gnoise [S n (T s ) + S α ] (A4) The output for the second case, where S B = Aδ(ff s ) + S nf , is written as : Here, the unknowns are S j , T nR and G R . It is clear from Equations (A9) and (A10) that T n approaches T Q as expected in the limits of G J 1, G c → 0, and G L → 0. Using Equations (A4), (A5) and (A9) , S O can be rewritten as : This relation is used to perform a fit with G tot and T n as the fit parameters. For the estimations, the parameters G L and G c were taken as -0.05 dB, and -0.4 dB respectively. Some typical values for r and γ/k B can be found in Table 