Fano resonances and Rabi splittings are routinely reported in the scientific literature. Asymmetric resonance lineshapes are usually associated with Fano resonances, and two split peaks in the spectrum are often attributed to a Rabi splitting. True Fano resonances and Rabi splittings are unequivocal signatures of coherent coupling between subsystems. However, can the same spectral lineshapes characterizing Fano resonances and Rabi splittings arise from a purely incoherent sum of intensities? Here we answer this question through experiments with a tunable Fabry-Pérot cavity containing a CsPbBr3 perovskite crystal. By measuring the transmission and photoluminescence of this system using microscope objectives with different numerical aperture (N A), we find that even a modest N A = 0.4 can artificially generate Fano resonances and Rabi splittings. We furthermore show that this modest N A can obscure the anti-crossing of a bona fide strongly coupled light-matter system. Through transfer matrix calculations we confirm that these spectral artefacts are due to the incoherent sum of transmitted intensities at different angles captured by the N A. Our results are relevant to the wide nanophotonics community, characterizing dispersive optical systems with high numerical aperture microscope objectives. We conclude with general guidelines to avoid pitfalls in the characterization of such optical systems. Fano resonances and Rabi splittings have inspired countless efforts in photonics research Interest in Fano resonances and Rabi splittings is so large that a complete list of references in photonics only is beyond our reach. Nonetheless, we can highlight a few scenarios where Fano resonances are relevant: sensing Figure Figure Figure We first analyze the T spectra in Figs. Our measurements clearly demonstrate that even a moderately large N A can generate spectral features reminiscent of coherently coupled systems. Two important questions remain. First, are these spectral features due to the presence of an excitonic material in our cavity? Second, are interference effects responsible for these spectral features in any way? In the following, we will demonstrate that the answer to both of these questions is negative. We will analyze T spectra for an empty Fabry-Pérot cavity, in experiments and theory. While this analysis is necessarily restricted to T (there is no P L in an empty cavity), the insights obtained from it are general. Figure Our transfer matrix calculations are done for a DBRvacuum-DBR cavity. We model each DBR as a stack of 6 pairs of layers with refractive index n 1 = 1.45 and n 1 = 2.3. These values correspond, within the frequency range of interest, to our experimental DBRs made of silica and Ta 2 O 5 . We calculate the transmittance (i.e., transmitted power normalized to the incident power) when the cavity is illuminated by a single plane wave, and we vary the angle of incidence in steps of 0.005 degrees. Then, we average the transmittance over the angular range corresponding to the N A e of interest. We also sum the contributions of the two orthogonal polarizations, in correspondence to our experiments which were done using unpolarized light. Figure Having shown that the N A can generate spectral lineshapes resembling those characterizing coherently coupled systems, we turn our attention to the complementary question: Can the N A obscure spectral features of bona fide coherently coupled systems? To answer this question, we inspect T and P L spectra of our perovskitecavity system for shorter cavity lengths than considered in Figs. Let us first consider the results for the smallest N A e shown in Fig. The measurements in Fig. In conclusion, we have shown that a moderately large numerical aperture can artificially generate and obscure spectral features of coupled light-matter systems. In particular, we have seen Fano-like resonances and apparent Rabi splittings entirely due to the incoherent sum of transmitted intensities at different angles collected by the N A. Moreover, we have seen how the spectral signature of a bona fide strongly coupled system -the Rabi splitting -can be obscured in measurements with a large N A. While these results were obtained using a tunable Fabry-Pérot cavity, we believe that the spectral artefacts we report can also be found in other dispersive nanophotonic systems of contemporary interest, such as plasmonic gratings and metasurfaces. In general, Fano-like lineshapes can be artificially generated whenever the resonance frequency of an optical mode is not constant across the angular range of the measurement. Meanwhile, spectral features resembling Rabi splittings can emerge whenever the frequency separation between two (orthogonal) modes is smaller than the apparent linewidths which are artificially broadenend by the numerical aperture. These spectral artefacts can be avoided by measuring with the smallest possible N A, such that the resonance frequency is constant over the limited angular range of the N A. Alternatively, angle-resolved measurements can also avoid pitfalls. We recognize that these recommendations may be difficult to implement when measuring the transmission of small samples, as often the case in nanophotonics research. In that case, a full energy-angle-resolved theoretical study reproducing the measured lineshapes with good accuracy seems to be the only way to assess the true nature of Fano-like lineshapes and Rabi-like splittings. In any case, the mere experimental observation of spectral lineshapes resembling Fano resonances or Rabi splittings cannot by itself be taken as solid evidence of coherent optical phenomena.