Nonlocal quasiparticle transport in normal-superconductor-normal (NSN) hybrid structures probes sub-gap states in the proximity region and is especially attractive in the context of Majorana research. Conductance measurement provides only partial information about nonlocal response composed from both electron-like and hole-like quasiparticle excitations. In this work, we show how a nonlocal shot noise measurement delivers a missing puzzle piece in NSN InAs nanowirebased devices. We demonstrate that in a trivial superconducting phase quasiparticle response is practically charge-neutral, dominated by the heat transport component with a thermal conductance being on the order of conductance quantum. This is qualitatively explained by numerous Andreev reflections of a diffusing quasiparticle, that makes its charge completely uncertain. Consistently, strong fluctuations and sign reversal are observed in the sub-gap nonlocal conductance, including occasional Andreev rectification signals. Our results prove conductance and noise as complementary measurements to characterize quasiparticle transport in superconducting proximity devices. conductance measurements Conductance measurement provides only partial information about quasiparticle non-equilibrium in proximity structures. A sub-gap quasiparticle entering the proximity region carries the electric charge, q < 0 for electronlike and q > 0 for hole-like quasiparticles, and the excitation energy ε = |E| > 0, where E is the kinetic energy relative to the chemical potential of the superconductor. On its way, apart from possible normal scattering, a quasiparticle experiences a few Andreev reflections (ARs) from the superconducting lead In this article, we investigate the nonlocal response in NSN InAs NW-based devices. We show that a quasiparticle non-equilibrium can be understood if the nonlocal conductance is accompanied by a shot noise measurement substituting the heat conductance measurement, that allows to separate the contributions of transmission processes involving even and odd number of the ARs. Experiments performed in a trivial superconducting phase demonstrate that quasiparticle transport is practically charge-neutral, so that the heat transport component dominates the nonlocal response in our devices. Our results prove shot noise as a valuable, complementary to conductance, tool to probe the sub-gap states in proximity structures. We start the discussion from the energy diagram of the NSN NW-based hybrid structure in a nonlocal experiment sketched in Fig. where the positive direction for the electric current is from the lead into the scattering region and opposite for the heat current. T 21 and A 21 are the probabilities of transmission, respectively, preserving and changing a quasiparticle type, sometimes also called normal and crossed-Andreev transmission , where Q 2 2 = T + . Thus, in spirit of Ref. that contains T + and can substitute J 2 in a nonlocal measurement. In the limit of suppressed AR A 21 → 0 eq. ( is bounded by unity F nl = 1 -T 21 ≤ 1. In the opposite limit of T 21 = A 21 the shot noise and the heat current remain finite, S 2 ∝ J 2 , whereas I 2 = 0. Here, the nonlocal quasiparticle response is charge-neutral and F nl → ∞. Eqs. (1-2) illustrate our main idea that nonlocal conductance G 21 ≡ ∂I 2 /∂V 1 and shot noise S 2 can serve as two complementary electrical measurements required to fully characterize quasiparticle transport. We apply this paradigm to explore the nonlocal response in InAs NW-based NSN devices. The outline of the experiment is depicted in Fig. hold within a few percent accuracy. Experiments are performed at bath temperatures of T = 120-150 mK unless stated otherwise. Back-gate voltage (V g ) dependencies of the linear response diagonal conductances are shown in Fig. The non-diagonal conductance probes quasiparticle transport via InAs-NW section underneath the Sterminal F nl = 100 show that at sub-gap biases in the superconducting state |G 21 | strongly increases compared to its above-gap values, which is expected since quasiparticles are forbidden to enter the superconductor. The G 21 is much smaller than e 2 /h and occasionally changes sign, implying that |ΣT -| 1 and fluctuates around zero as a function of energy and chemical potential. Below we present the nonlocal shot noise experiment that uncovers charge-neutral origin of the quasiparticle transport. The layout of the shot noise measurement in a nonlocal configuration is sketched in Fig. Next we analyse the same data in terms of the nonlocal Fano factor where the nonlocal current is obtained via Here we use that the electric current caused by non-equilibrium quasiparticles is compensated by an extra current flowing in the opposite direction, so that the net current is zero in the floating configuration. This extra current flows near the Fermi level and is noiseless, since the junction N 2 -NW-S remains essentially unbiased throughout the experiment, |V 2 | < k B T /e, see the Supplemental Material. Figs. 3c and 3d plot S 2 vs I 2 for both devices. Two main features are evident. First, the symmetry inherent to S 2 vs V 1 data is in many cases lost here, since I 2 is not an anti-symmetric function of V 1 . Second, the noise slope corresponds to nonlocal Fano factor values in the range 30 F nl 100, as shown by the dotted guide lines. Such giant values of F nl rule out a heretical interpretation that normal quasiparticle scattering from a poor quality Al/InAs interface is the main source of nonlocal signals, that would correspond to F nl ≤ 1, see the dashed guide line. It is convenient to define the average charge of transmitted quasiparticles as the ratio between the transmitted charge and total number of transmitted quasiparticles q T = ΣT -/ΣT + . The value of q T = 1 corresponds to the case when quasiparticles conserve their charge during the transmission process, whereas in the case q T = -1 they invert the charge. As follows from the Eqs. (1-2), | q T | < 1/F nl , i.e. the observation of a giant Fano factor implies nearly charge-neutral nonlocal quasiparticle transport with | q T | 1. This can be easily understood in case of a metallic diffusive NW covered by a superconductor with a transparent interface. Traversing the proximity region a quasiparticle experiences a number of ARs given on the average by N AR = (w/d) 2 , where w is the width of the S-terminal and d ≈ 100 nm is the diameter of the NW. Given the randomness of diffusion the mean-square fluctuation is δN 2 AR = N AR ≥ 2, so that the parity of N AR and thus the sign of the transmitted charge are completely uncertain. More rigorously, for the device NSN-II we find | q T | < 0.01, meaning that it takes at least a hundred quasiparticles to transmit a unit of elementary charge. Our observations in a trivial superconducting phase have common features with the predicted nonlocal response at the topological phase transition in Majorana NWs. Here, even in presence of a moderate disorder, a finite transmission occurs in just one eigenchannel with T 21 = A 21 = 1/4 and results in a pure heat transport characterized by a universal peak of the thermal conductance G th = G 0 th /2 As a final step, we demonstrate a crossover from nearly charge-neutral to normal nonlocal quasiparticle transport in a magnetic field in the device NSN-I. Fig. In summary, we performed nonlocal transport and noise experiments in InAs NW-based hybrid NSN devices. Such a combination of all-electrical measurements allows to estimate the thermal conductance and reveals a predominantly charge-neutral origin of the nonlocal response. We expect that our approach will be generally useful for the studies of non-equilibrium proximity superconductivity, including unequivocal identification of the topological phase transition in Majorana devices. Differential resistance and conductance matrices. Here we outline a relation between the quantities measured in transport experiments with either fixed currents or fixed voltages applied to the normal terminals 1 and 2 in the NSN device. The voltages V 1 , V 2 are measured with respect to the (grounded) S terminal. The positive direction of the currents I 1 , I 2 is from the respective lead into the device, ensuring positive signs of the diagonal transport responses. In a conductance experiment the independent (externally controlled) variables are voltages and the currents are measured. The elements of the differential conductance matrix are: A relation to the resistance experiment is straightforward. In this case externally controlled are currents and measured are voltages. As follows from the conductance matrix, the condition I 2 = const is satisfied provided G 21 δV 1 + G 22 δV 2 ≡ δI 2 = 0. With this constraint we have: where δ denotes an infinitesimal increment of the current/voltage and DET is the determinant of the conductance matrix DET ≡ G 11 G 22 -G 12 G 21 . Similar relation holds for δI 2 under condition of I 1 = const. Thus, for the differential resistance matrix we obtain: Nonlocal I-Vs and differential conductance. Measured V 2 (I 1 ) curves in the nonlocal configurations show similar non-universal behavior for both devices as evident from Fig. InAs nanowires grown by molecular beam epitaxy on Si substrate 