Electron-boson spectral density functions (EBSDFs) can be obtained from measured spectra using various spectroscopic techniques, including optical spectroscopy. EBSDFs, known as glue functions, have a magnetic origin. Here, we investigated EBSDFs obtained from the measured optical spectra of hole-doped cuprates with wide doping levels, from underdoped to overdoped cuprates. The average frequency of an EBSDF provides the timescale for the spin fluctuations to form Cooper pairs. This timescale is directly associated with retarded interactions between electrons. Using this timescale and Fermi velocity, a reasonable superconducting coherence length, which reflects the size of the Cooper pair, can be extracted. The obtained coherence lengths were consistent with those measured via other experimental techniques. Therefore, the formation of Cooper pairs in cuprates can be explained by spin fluctuations, the timescales of which appear in EBSDFs. Consequently, EBSDFs provide crucial information on the timescale of the microscopic mechanism of Cooper pair formation. Since the discovery of copper-oxide superconductors (or cuprates) In this study, we demonstrate that the superconducting coherence length can be obtained from the experimental EBSDFs of cuprates at various doping levels (from underdoped to overdoped). The experimental EB-SDFs were obtained from the measured optical spectra of Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ (Bi-2212) and YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.50 (Y123-orthoII). First, we obtained the average frequency of the EBSDF, which provides the timescale for the retarded interaction between two electrons in a Cooper pair. The coherence length is directly related to the size of the Cooper pair, and is determined by the Fermi velocity and timescale obtained from the experimental EBSDF. We also considered both the two-dimensional transport character and the anisotropic (d-wave) superconducting gap to obtain the ab-plane coherence length. The resulting coherence lengths at various doping levels are reasonable, compared with the coherence lengths measured using other experimental techniques. Based on this study, we propose a microscopic pairing mechanism that is conceptually similar to that of conventional Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) superconductors. However, there are some differences between the two superconductor types. The force-mediating boson is associated with spin fluctuations above the background (antiferromagnetic) spin in cuprates, whereas the boson is associated with the charge fluctuations above the background (lattice ion) charge in BCS superconductors. Spin fluctuations in cuprates play the same role as charge fluctuations in BCS superconductors. Therefore, magnetic retarded interaction is the force required to form Cooper pairs in cuprates. The coherence lengths of cuprates are much shorter (usually two orders of magnitude) than those of BCS superconductors. This can be understood by considering that spin fluctuations have much shorter timescales compared with those of charge fluctuations, and the Fermi velocities of cuprates are slower than those of BCS superconductors. Let us first consider a conventional BCS superconductor, Pb, which has been thoroughly studied. The electron-phonon spectral density function (EPSDF), α 2 F (ω), of Pb was obtained using theoretical calculations and experimental spectroscopic techniques, including optical spectroscopy where λ is the coupling constant given by λ ≡ 2 ωc 0 [α 2 F (ω)/ω]dω, with a cutoff frequency of ω c . The inverse of the average frequency (2π/ Ω 1 ) is the average period of charge fluctuations in the EPSDF. The average charge fluctuation (F luc charge (t)) is described as F luc charge = 0.10 cos( Ω 1 t). Note that the amplitude of the fluctuation is arbitrary. The fluctuating charge with the average frequency is shown in Fig. . The Fermi velocity of Pb is ∼1.83×10 6 m/s Here, 1/2 comes from the timescale reduction by a factor of 2. The average coherence length can be written as Here, 1/ cos(2θ) θ = (2/π) ln[1/ cos(2θ) + tan(2θ)], which shows a logarithmic singularity along the nodal direction (or at θ = π/4). To estimate the average coherence length, we assumed that 1/ cos(2θ) θ ∼ = 3.33. In this case, we used π/4 ∼ = 0.78 rad. Although some uncertainties exist in determining the experimentally reliable value of 1/ cos(2θ) θ the assumption might be reasonable if the size of the maximum superconducting gap and the experimental accessibility to the lowest frequency cutoff are considered; if ∆ 0 = 30 meV, ∆(0.78 rad) = 0.32 meV (or 2.6 cm -1 ). In general, optical spectra exclude data below approximately 50 cm -1 , which is well above the ∆(0.78 rad). The average coherence lengths of the cuprate samples were estimated at various doping levels and at two (lowest and room) temperatures using the modified formula for cuprates, as discussed previously: ξ θ = v F /(2 Ω 1 )× 3.33. The Fermi velocity of Bi-2212 is approximately 2.7×10 5 m/s The Cooper pair formations are summarized through the spin (or charge) fluctuations in Fig. 5 be understood through the microscopic mechanism, in which spin-1 bosons with an antiferromagnetic spin texture are involved. The coherence lengths obtained from the experimental EBSDFs are consistent with those obtained from other experiments. The concept of the microscopic mechanism of Cooper pair formation in cuprates is similar to that in conventional BCS superconductors, except for some detailed differences. The first is in the force-mediating boson, which is associated with the spin fluctuations instead of the charge fluctuations in BCS superconductors. Other differences include the shorter timescale of spin fluctuations by one order and slower Fermi velocities by one order compared with the corresponding quantities for conventional superconductors. These differences result in shorter coherence lengths of cuprates by two orders compared with those of BCS superconductors. One interesting question might be how the microscopic pairing information is encoded in the measured optical spectra. The optical spectra show the optical transitions averaged over the k-space, which are the transitions of electrons from occupied states below the Fermi level to unoccupied states above it. When the bands are renormalized by correlations between electrons caused by many-body effects, the band renormalization effects will be naturally encoded in the measured spectrum indirectly in the case of spin (or magnetic) fluctuations. From an appropriate analysis (or decoding) process, the correlation spectrum can be extracted from the measured spectrum, which is the EBSDF spectrum. The coherence length obtained from the timescale in the extracted EBSDF spectrum and the Fermi velocity is reasonable. In addition, the superconducting transition temperatures estimated from the EBSDF using a generalized McMillan formula are acceptable The author acknowledges Prof. Choi at Department of Physics, Sungkyunkwan University for his helpful comments on the manuscript. JH also acknowledges the financial support from the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRFK Grant No. 2019R1A6A1007307912).