The field distribution inside the superconducting radiofrequency (SRF) film with different mean free path is studied using niobium (Nb) as an example. The surface resistance of clean Nb film with different substrate and different film thickness is calculated. We also show the study of a special structured multilayer superconducting film called Superconductor-Insulator-Superconductor (SIS) structure. Recent advance in the surface treatment study pushes SRF cavities for accelerator made from bulk niobium (Nb) to its theoretical limit, both in the peak field and surface resistance For bulk superconductor with diffuse reflection, its surface impedance can be calculated from , , 1 2 cos sin e 1 2 cos sin e λL is the London penetration depth, VF is the Fermi velocity, Δ is the energy gap, ħω is the photon energy, T is the temperature, R is the position, and p is the momentum. In order to calculate the RF field distribution within the film thickness d, a semi-infinite metal was considered, with its surface in the xy-plane and the positive z-axis directed towards the interior of the metal, and z=0 the interface between vacuum and metal. The electric field E(z)e iωt is in the x-direction. One needs to first do an inverse Fourier transform to K(p) to get ka(z), and then apply it to a discrete equation, in which the film thickness d (normalized to ) is divided into K equal segments // D d K = . Please note K(p=0) is infinite and is replaced by . This method was first crosschecked in normal conductor where both K(p) and ka(z) have analytical expressions Here k=ω/c, Ed and Ed ' are E and E' at z=d. They are determined by the substrate with its surface impedance, noted as Zsub, in the normal skin effect regime. The boundary condition is . The above equation can be solved by matrix inversion to get En, with the results normalized to Ed (Ed =1), one exception is that for Perfect Electrical Conductor (PEC) boundary contion, Ed =0 and the results are normalized to Ed' (Ed' =1). The surface impedance of the superconducting film can be calculated from the E field on the surface z=0 and its derivative over depth: ' 0 00 / Z E i E  =-. For metal substrate with anomalous skin effect, one also needs to calculate ka(z) for the substrate and take into account the electrons coming out/going into the substrate. This case is not considered in this paper. The material properties of Nb are listed in Table Using Nb film on Cu substrate to replace bulk Nb for SRF applications has many figure of merits including improving thermal conductivity, reducing acid usage in surface treatment, no need of electron beam welding, etc. It is cost effective, especially when high gradient is not required. At CERN, Nb film cavities are successfully adopted in LEP and LHC, with frequencies range from 350 to 500MHz at 4.3K temperature The idea of using SIS multilayer films to enhance the peak magnetic field in SRF cavities was proposed by A. Gurevich Nb film without substrate was first studied in this paper, the amplitude of E field along the depth of 500nm thick Nb film was found to be non-monotonic in clean films, and for dirty films the behave is close to normal skin effect with exponential decay. For clean Nb film without substrate, and clean Nb film with Cu substrate, minimum surface resistance is found at ~200nm film thickness, a number between penetration depth and mean free path, and it is not sensitive to resonant frequency. Clean Nb film with SIS structure is also studied, two local minima were found at ~10nm and ~200nm top layer film thickness, and maximum surface resistance was found at top layer film thickness around penetration depth, with its value increasing with increasing insulator thickness. III. Anomalous skin effect of Nb film without substrate