The multifractal superconducting state originates from the interplay of Anderson localization and interaction effects. In this article we overview the recent theory of the superconductivity enhancement by multifractality and extend it to describe the spectral properties of superconductors on the scales of the order of the superconducting gap. Specifically, using the approach based on renormalization group within the nonlinear sigma model, we develop the theory of a multifractal superconducting state in thin films. We derive a modified Usadel equation that incorporates the interplay of disorder and interactions at energy scales larger than the spectral gap and study the effect of such an interplay on the low-energy physics. We determine the spectral gap at zero temperature which occurs to be proportional to the multifractally enhanced superconducting transition temperature. The modified Usadel equation results in the disorder-averaged density of states that, near the spectral gap, resembles the one obtained in the model of a spatially random superconducting order parameter. We reveal strong mesoscopic fluctuations of the local density of states in the superconducting state. Such strong mesoscopic fluctuations imply that the interval of energies in which the superconducting gap establishes is parametrically large in systems with multifractally-enhanced superconductivity. Anderson localization The paradigm of suppression of superconductivity by Anderson localization has been challenged in Refs. The hallmark of the multifractally-enhanced superconductivity in disordered systems is strong mesoscopic fluctuations of the local order parameter and the local density of states For temperatures above the critical temperature, T > T c , the point-to-point fluctuations of the local density of states observed in the tunneling experiments are in qualitative agreement with the theory The experimental data on the fluctuations of the local density of states below T c , as well as recent numerical data on the disordered Hubbard model represent a new challenge for an analytical theory. In the present paper, we develop a theory of the mesoscopic fluctuations of the local density of states in the multifractal superconducting state. For the sake of concreteness, we shall focus on the case of thin superconducting films. We assume the absence of long-range (Coulomb) interaction, which can be achieved in structures put on a substrate with a high dielectric constant, and consider the regime of an intermediate disorder strength We demonstrate that the gap in the disorder-averaged density of states at zero temperature is proportional to the superconducting transition temperature, i.e., it is also enhanced by multifractality. In spite of the enhancement of the spectral gap, we find that the combined effect of disorder and interaction results in the suppression of the coherence peaks. Their height is finite and controlled by the ratio of a bare disorder and interaction. We also show that the mesoscopic fluctuations of the local density of states in the superconducting state are enhanced in the same way as in the normal phase for temperatures above T c . On the technical side, in order to describe the superconducting state, we derive the Usadel equation modified by renormalization effects due to interplay of disorder and interactions (in both particle-hole and particle-particle channels) at short scales. This modified Usadel equation can be reformulated as a standard Usadel equation, but with an energy dependent gap function, and yields the same estimate for the superconducting transition temperature as the one derived by means of the renormalization group in the normal phase. We discuss the relation between the approaches based on the renormalization of the sigma model and the self-consistent solution of the gap equation in the presence of multifractal correlations of matrix elements. The structure of the paper is as follows. In Sec. 2 we overview the formalism of the Finkel'stein NLSM as applied to superconducting systems The action of the Finkel'stein NLSM is given as the sum of the non-interacting NLSM, S σ , and contributions resulting from electron-electron interactions, S (ρ) int (the particle-hole singlet channel), S (σ) int (the particle-hole triplet channel), and S (c) int (the particle-particle channel) (see Refs. where Here, Q(r) is the matrix field in the replica, Matsubara, spin, and particle-hole spaces. The trace Tr acts in the same spaces. The matrix field obeys the nonlinear constraint, as well as chargeconjugation symmetry relation: The nonlinear constraint on the matrix field Q suggests the following parametrization: where α, β = 1, . . . , N r stand for replica indices and integers n, m correspond to the Matsubara fermionic frequencies ε n = πT (2n + 1). The representation (4) implies that the diffusive fluctuations in the normal state are associated with smooth variations around the metallic saddle point The action (1) contains three constant matrices: The sixteen matrices, operate in the particle-hole (subscript r) and spin (subscript j) spaces. The matrices τ 0 , τ 1 , τ 2 , τ 3 and s 0 , s 1 , s 2 , s 3 are the standard sets of the Pauli matrices. The bare value of the coupling constant g coincides with the Drude value of the conductance (in units e 2 /h and including spin). The parameter Z ω describes the frequency renormalization upon the renormalization group flow The symmetry breaking that leads to the appearance of the superconducting state changes the saddle point of the NLSM Let us single out the term with n = 0 from the expression for S (c) int , Eq. (2d). Then, upon the Hubbard-Stratonovich decoupling by spatially dependent fields ∆ α r (r), r = 1, 2, we find where Since, by construction, the action depends quadratically on ∆ α r (r), we can solve the equation of motion instead of performing the functional integral. The equation of motion reads We note that the charge-conjugation symmetry, Eq. ( The presence of nonzero ∆ α r (r) changes the saddle-point equation for Q. Performing variation of the NLSM action (1) with S (c) int replaced by S (c) int , we derive the following saddle-point equation: Here, γ 0 ≡ γ s and γ 1 = γ 2 = γ 3 ≡ γ t , and we have introduced the diffusion coefficient D = g/(16Z ω ). We mention that in the absence of interaction Eq. ( The spatially varying part, δ∆ α r (r), contains information about the mesoscopic fluctuations of the superconducting order parameter. These mesoscopic fluctuations turn out to be large (see Appendix A) where V denotes the volume of a superconductor, and After integrating over δ∆ α r (r), the saddle-point equation ( where It is worth noting that the information about the disorder-induced spatial fluctuations of the Hubbard-Stratonovich field ∆ α r , and, hence, about the spatial fluctuations of the order parameter, is not lost after the integration over δ∆ α r (r) and remains encoded in Eq. ( Let us seek the solution of the Usadel equation ( Here, we assume that the spectral angle θ ε n is an even function of ε n . We note that the above ansatz, Q, satisfies the charge-conjugation condition. Substituting Eq. ( The self-consistency equation ( Since the superconductor order parameter ∆ is spatially independent by construction, we consider a spatially independent solution for θ ε n . Then, we find: where ∆ satisfies the self-consistency relation This is nothing but the standard self-consistency condition for the gap ∆ in the BCS theory The saddle-point solution ( We note that the matrix R satisfies the relation, CR T = R -1 C. We emphasize that although the spatially independent saddle point ansatz In order to see the effect of disorder and residual interactions between quasiparticles, one needs to go beyond the mean-field approximation of the previous section. The fluctuations of the matrix Q around the saddle-point ansatz Taking into account the fluctuations of Q, we renormalize the NLSM action. For this purpose, we shall develop a peturbation expansion around the saddle point Q, using the square-root parametrization of the matrix field Q: We adopt the following notations: where n 1 0 and n 2 < 0. The blocks w and w satisfy the charge-conjugation constraints: These constraints imply that some elements (w αβ n 1 n 2 ) r j in the expansion w αβ n 1 n 2 = r j (w αβ n 1 n 2 ) r j t r j are purely real and the others are purely imaginary. In this paper, we restrict our considerations to the expansion of the renormalization group equations to the lowest order in residual electron-electron interactions. This is justified in the case of weak short-ranged interaction, which corresponds to small magnitudes of the bare interaction parameters, |γ s0 |, |γ t0 |, |γ c0 | 1. Then, in order to study the effect of fluctuations, we shall need the propagators for diffusive modes in the noninteracting theory. In other words, the propagators are determined by the NLSM action in which terms S (ρ) int , S (σ) int , and Ŝ (c) int are omitted. Within this perturbative-in-interaction scheme, one finds We note that we have not yet fixed θ ε n at this stage. The interaction of the diffusive modes encoded in W renormalizes the NLSM action. Since we consider the spatially independent saddle point, Q, and S (ρ) int , S (σ) int , and Ŝ (c) int are zero at this saddle point, we are interested in modifications of these terms in the NLSM action by the quantum corrections that can be expressed through the diffusive propagators This results in Then, using Eq. ( Here, in the last line, we omitted the term proportional to Γ s +3Γ t that involves θ ε n in the diffusion propagator only, as it yields a negligible correction with respect to the term we retain. In a similar way, one can renormalize the interaction in the Cooper channel, As above, we have neglected here the terms that involve θ ε n in the diffusion propagator only. As one can see, the renormalization of Ŝ (c) int results in the non-extensive term, proportional to V 0 . In what follows, we shall safely neglect this term in the thermodynamic limit V → ∞. We mention that the above computation is similar to the background field renormalization in the normal state but with the specific slow field Q (see Supplemental Materials of Ref. Equations ( This action will serve as a basis for the modified equations of motion with the quantum interference and interaction effects included. Minimizing Eq. ( It is convenient to introduce the energy-dependent quantity that we shall term the gap function. Then, we can write the modified Usadel equation in the following concise form (ε > 0), Solving Eq. ( Supplemented by Eq. ( A few remarks are in order here. First, we note that a similar form of the modified Usadel equation has been derived in Refs. where L ε = √ D/ε. We note that for energies larger than the spectral gap edge the transformation from ∆ to ∆ ε is not essential. Finally, the form of the second term in the curly brackets in the right hand side of Eq. ( where the dependence of γ c on L is governed by the following equation Here y = ln L/ and t = 2/(πg) denotes the dimensionless resistance. Comparison of Eq. ( The modified self-consistency equation ( see Eq. ( We start by reminding the reader on how the superconducting transition temperature can be estimated from the renormalization group equations in the normal phase. In the case of weak short-range interactions, these renormalization group equations, to the lowest order in t, read It is worthwhile to mention that, within the lowest order in t, the dependence of the renormalization-group functions on the interaction parameters can be computed exactly The renormalization group equations are supplemented by the initial conditions t = t 0 , γ s = γ s0 , γ t = γ t0 , and γ c = γ c0 at y = 0 (L = ). We assume that the initial values of resistance and interaction parameters are small, t 0 1 and In addition, we limit our discussion to the case of t 0 |γ c0 |. We mention that for t 0 |γ c0 | disorder modifies the BCS transition temperature only slightly. Under the above assumptions, we can neglect the γ 2 c term in the r.h.s. of Eq. (40d) at the initial stage of the renormalization group flow. Then, the interaction parameters flow towards the BCS line, The initial value of γ is equal to γ 0 = (3γ t0 + 2γ c0 -γ s0 )/6. We assume that γ 0 < 0. Projecting renormalization group equations (40a) -(40d) onto the BCS line, we find Let us emphasize that the disorder-induced correction to the renormalization group equation (the term 2tγ in Eq. ( According to the renormalization group equations where The divergence of γ at the finite length scale signals instability of the normal phase towards superconducting order at temperature . Hence, we obtain We emphasize that T RG c is enhanced parametrically in comparison with the clean BCS transition temperature T BCS c given by Eq. We note that Eq. ( In order to make connection of Eq. ( where that can be obtained from Eq. (40d) upon the substitution γ c = (dΥ/dy)/(2Υ). Equations ( Then the condition Υ ε=πT = 0 determines a certain temperature T c for which L πT c = L c . Temperature T c defined in this way is given by Eq. ( Now we shall compare the prediction for the transition temperature (44) that stems from the renormalization group flow in the normal state with the one obtained from the accurate analysis of the modified self-consistency equation Solving the above equation for t(L) and γ(L), we find Equation ( The above approximate analysis of the self-consistency equation suggests that in the case ζ 1, the maximum eigenvalue of M(ζ) behaves as λ (M) max ∝ 1/ζ. The numerical data for λ (M) max can be viewed in Fig. Therefore, the self-consistency equation ( We note that the assumption ζ = 2/t c 1 is indeed satisfied. The fact that ζ is large allows us to find the eigenvector ∆ n that corresponds to the maximum eigenvalue λ (M) max . Let us use the Euler-Maclaurin formula for the summation over n in Eq. ( where The quantity u ∞ = |γ 0 |/t 0 1 corresponds to u n with the maximally allowed index n 1/(2πT c τ). Let us parametrize ∆(u n ) as ∆(u n ) = ∆(u 0 ) f (u n ), where a function f (u) satisfies the normalization condition f (u 0 ) = 1. Then the function f (u) satisfies the following differential equation, where Using the smallness of u ∞ , the solution of the above equation can be written as Here, J 2 (x) denotes the Bessel function of the first kind. The yet unknown parameter u 0 can be found from the boundary condition at u = u 0 , f (u 0 ) = Cu 0 . To the lowest order in C 1, the parameter u 0 can be found as where u c ≈ 0.92 is the solution of the equation F (u c ) = 0. Hence, neglecting the difference between u 0 and u c (proportional to t 2 0 /|γ 0 | 1), we find that the superconducting transition temperature is given by [cf. Eqs. We note that the 25% discrepancy in the numerical values of u c and u M indicates that the approximation ln(n + n + 1) by ln(max{n, n } + 1) is not justified by any small parameter. Nevertheless, our approximate solution for the eigenvector with the maximum eigenvalue, Eq. ( 6. The energy dependence of the gap function The non-trivial energy dependence of the gap function at the transition temperature suggests that ∆(z 0 ) vanishes at T = T c . The dependence of the gap function on temperatures at T c -T T c can be found in a way similar to the BCS theory. We expand the modified self-consistency equation We note that the expansion of γ L √ in powers of ∆ ε and ∆ ε leads to the terms which are proportional to a small factor t 4 0 /γ 2 0 1. Such terms can be safely neglected. Let us parameterize the gap function as Then taking into account that the sum over ε in the last term of the right-hand side of Eq. ( where u T = |γ 0 |t(L πT )/t 2 0 . The above integral equation is reduced to Eq. ( We note that the corrections to the BCS-type temperature dependence are controlled by the small parameter t 2 0 /|γ 0 | 1. Let us first analyze the energy dependence of the gap function ∆ ε at the zero temperature. We expect that the function ∆ ε has a form similar to the one at T = T c , see Fig. Since the dependence of γ on L, governed by Eq. ( This result implies that ∆ ε is constant at ε < ε 0 up to corrections of the order of t 4 0 /γ 2 0 . With the same accuracy the energy scale ε 0 coincides with ∆ 0 . Further, we can substitute u ∆ 0 for u ∆ 0 + √ 2ε 0 in Eq. At ε ε 0 ∆ 0 we approximate the self-consistency equation ( Here, the dependence of γ on L is governed by Eq. ( Expressing the right-hand side of Eq. (65) in terms of the function f (z) and setting ε ∼ 1/τ, we retrieve We note that ∆ ∆ 0 . All in all, we can summarize the energy dependence of the spectral gap at T = 0 as The overall dependence of the gap function ∆ ε on ε is shown in Fig. Dependence of ratio ∆ ε /∆ 0 on ln(ε/∆ 0 ) at T = 0 for γ 0 = -0.005 and t 0 = 0.03. The monotonously decreasing part of the curve corresponds to the function f (z ε ). In order to consider the effect of nonzero but low temperatures, T T c , we need to perform summation over Matsubara frequencies in the interval 0 < ε n ∆ 0 more accurately. We assume that the parameter ∆ 0 becomes temperature dependent, ∆ 0 → ∆ 0 (T ). Then Eq. ( dε ∆ 0 (T ) Using the parametrization, ∆ ε = ∆ 0 (T ) f (u ε ), one can check that the function f (u) satisfies Eq. ( Using Eq. ( Therefore, the dependence of the magnitude of the gap function on temperature T T c at ε < ∆ 0 is the same as in the BCS theory. We note that there are corrections to this result which are of the order of t 2 0 /|γ 0 |. In this section, we analyze the disorder-averaged density of states of single-particle excitations in the superconducting state. Within the NLSM formalism, the average density of states can be obtained as where the analytic continuation to real energies, ε n → E + i0, is performed. Here symbol 'sp' denotes the trace over particle-hole and spin spaces. Plugging in the parametrization The factor Z ε can be written as ), where Projecting Eq. ( This factor encodeds the interaction-induced corrections to the density of states of the type that leads to the zero-bias anomaly in the normal state As one can see, in order to compute the average density of states, we need to make an analytic continuation for the gap function ∆ ε from Matsubara energies to real energies. We emphasize that the nontrivial dependence of ∆ ε on ε implies that the spectral gap at real energies, ∆(E), has both real and imaginary parts. The symmetry implies that Re ∆(E) is an even function of E whereas Im ∆(E) is an odd function of E. We restrict our consideration to the case of zero temperature, T = 0. Performing analytic continuation in Eq. ( At energies E ∆ 0 , the imaginary part of ∆(E) appears. To show that the nonzero imaginary part does exist, one can consider the perturbative expression where Here, we have used the fact that t(L E ) 1. The real and imaginary parts of ∆(E) read: Expression (78a) has the same range of validity as Eq. ( The above results suggest that there is an energy E g such that Im ∆(E) = 0 for E E g and Im ∆(E) > 0 for E > E g . Making analytic continuation to the real frequencies in the selfconsistency equation For energies close to the energy E g , we can expand the right hand side of Eq. (79) as We shall demonstrate below that the parameter α ∼ t 4 0 /γ 2 0 1. Solving Eq. (80a) for α 1, we find the dependence of the gap function for real energies close to E g , In agreement with our assumptions, Im ∆(E) = 0 for E E g . We note that ∆(E) E for E E g . For E > E g the imaginary part of the gap function is non-zero, Im ∆(E) = -iα E 2 -E 2 g . We note that negative sign of Im ∆(E) at energies E > E g is needed for positivity of the density of states (see below). However, away from E g the imaginary part of Im ∆(E) has to change sign in order to be consistent with the asymptotic at large energies, Eq. (78b). The change of the sign of Im ∆(E) occurs at the energy of the order of a few E g . Now we can estimate the parameter α. The comparison of Eq. (81) with Eq. (75) implies that E g is of the order of ∆ 0 . The sum over ε in Eq. (80b) is dominated by ε ∆ ε ∆ 0 . Then we find Here, we have taken into account that ∆ 2 (E g ) -E 2 g = αE g ∆ 0 . With the help of the above results for ∆(E), we can derive the expression for disorderaveraged density of states as a function of energy. For large energies, E ∆ 0 , the imaginary part of ∆(E) can be neglected in comparison with its real part, see Eqs. (78a) and (78b). Since for E ∆ 0 the energy is always larger than the real part of ∆(E), we find Here and hereinafter we neglect the factor Z ε , see Eq. ( As expected, the energy E g determines the gap edge in the disorder-averaged density of states. Using Eq. (84), we derive a square-root dependence of the density of state near the gap edge: The square-root growth of ρ(E) turns into the maximum at E = E max = E g (1 + α 2 /2). The magnitude at the maximum is given as ρ(E max ) = ν/(2α) ∼ νγ 2 0 /t 4 0 ν. For energies larger than E max , the density of states decays, We note that Eq. ( We start analysis of the mesoscopic fluctuations of the local density of states from the calculation of its dispersion. It can be expressed in terms of bilinear in Q operators where δρ(E, r) = ρ(E, r) -ρ(E, r) and Here α 1 α 2 are some fixed replica indices and A• B = AB -A B . Using parametrization and By means of Eqs. ( Making an analytic continuation to real frequencies in accordance with the prescription in Eq. (87), we obtain the following result for the dispersion of fluctuations of the local density of states: At energies below the gap edge, E E g , the gap function is real and satisfy ∆(E) E. Therefore, the fluctuations of the local density of states are zero identically, Above the superconducting gap, E > E g the mesoscopic fluctuations are non-zero. At energies close to the gap, 0 < E -E g E g , we find where L stands for the system size and the average density of states, ρ(E) is given by Eq. ( Finally, at large energies, E ∆ 0 , the general expression (92) can be simplified as We have neglected Im ∆(E) everywhere except the denominator of the first diffusive propagator on the right-hand side of Eq. (92). Here, the length L * is defined through Since Im ∆(E) is small, the length scale L * is large, L * L 2∆ 0 . In particular, at E ∼ ∆ 0 one can find the following estimate: We note that the diffusive propagators in Eq. ( At the spectral edge, E = E g , L φ diverges due to restriction of the phase volume for quasiparticles (there are no quasiparticles below E g ). Therefore, for energies close to the spectral edge, E -E g E g , the dephasing length exceeds the length L g . This is the reason why L φ is absent in Eq. (94). The above results ( We remind the reader that the lengths L g , L * , and L φ are defined in Eqs. ( The perturbative result (99) has exactly the same form as the perturbative correction to the dispersion of the local density of states above the superconducting transition. Essentially, the superconducting state leads to the specific infrared cut off length scale, min{L * , L g , L φ }, only. This suggests that one can use the one-loop renormalization group equation for m 2 ≡ [ρ(E, r)] 2 /ρ 2 (E) derived in Ref. upto the length scale min{L * , L g , L φ }. Solving Eqs. (100) and ( We note that the length scale L * starts from the value of the order of L g and, then, it grows with increasing E. The dephasing length L φ has the opposite behavior: it decreases with increasing energy. Therefore, there is an energy E * at which the lengths L * and L φ become of the same order. Using where u E = |γ 0 |t(L E )/t 2 0 , we can find the following estimate, We note that E * ∆ 0 . Substituting expressions (102) for the length scales L * , and L φ , into Eq. (101), we obtain the following energy dependence of the disorder-averaged second moment of the local density of states (in the case L = ∞), ) Interestingly, in accordance with Eq. ( Since the right hand side of the relation ( This indicates the strong mesoscopic fluctuations of the local density of states at energies E g < E < E * . With further increase of energy, the disorder-averaged second moment of the local density of states decreases. Using Eq. ( Thus, the mesoscopic fluctuations of ρ(E, r) are suppressed at the ultraviolet energy scale, E ∼ 1/τ. The dependence of [ρ(E, r)] 2 on the energy is illustrated in Fig. [ρ(E, r)] 2 = ρ(E). Using Eq. ( As shown in Fig. For energies E > E g * , the mesoscopic fluctations are not enough to reduce significantly the local density of states below its average value. In a similar way as it was done for the temperatures above T c We note that according to Eq. (104), the function A(E) > 1 in the energy interval E g < E < E g * , i.e. for region of strong mesoscopic fluctuations. The expression (109) implies the following log-normal distribution for the normalized local density of states, ρ = ρ(E, r)/ρ(E), (see Ref. The log-normal distribution (110) predicts that the most probable value for the local density of states is given as This result implies that the most probable height of the coherence peak can be estimated as ρ mode (E ∼ ∆ 0 )/ν ∼ |γ 0 | 5 /t 7 0 . We note that for |γ 0 | t 0 |γ 0 | 5/7 the magnitude of the coherence peak in ρ mode is much larger than ν. In the region |γ 0 | 5/7 t 0 |γ 0 | 1/2 the coherence peak is absent. We also introduce the typical value of the normalized local density of states, ρtyp = exp ln ρ where . . . denotes the average with respect to the distribution (110). Then we obtain, This result leads to the following estimate: , the magnitude of the coherence peak in ρ type is much larger than the bare value of the density of states. For |γ 0 | 3/5 t 0 |γ 0 | 1/2 , the coherence peak is absent. We note that, strictly speaking, the typical value of ρ should be determined not from the distribution (110) but from the modified distribution in which rare events of extremely small or extremely large values of ρ are suppressed (see Ref. We mention that the following relation holds: This means that for energies E g < E < E g * , an experimentally measured local density of states will be typically much smaller than its average value given by Eqs. ( To summarize, we have developed the theory of the multifractal superconducting state in thin films. Treating the fluctuations around the mean-field spatially homogeneous solution, we derived the modified Usadel equation that incorporates the interplay of disorder and interactions at energy scales larger than the spectral gap. Our key findings are as follows: (i) The modified Usadel equation, in combination with the self-consistency equation, yields parametrically the same estimate for the multifractally enhanced superconducting transition temperature as the one derived by considering the instability in renormalization group equations in the normal phase. (ii) The mutual effects of disorder and interactions result in strong dependence of the superconducting gap function on energy (see Fig. (iii) The spectral gap at zero temperature is multifractally enhanced in the same way as the superconducting transition temperature. (iv) The energy dependence of the gap function in the Usadel equation results in the profile of the disorder-averaged density of states that, near the spectral gap, resembles the one derived in the model of a spatially random superconducting order parameter (see Fig. (v) The mesoscopic fluctuations of the local density of states in the superconducting state are strong at E < E g * (see Eq. ( Based on these findings for the statistics of fluctuations of the local density of states in thin films with multifractally-enhanced superconductivity, we conclude that disorder-induced interference effects dramatically affect spectral properties of these superconducting films, by fully governing the physics in a wide energy interval where the spectral gap for single-particle excitations establishes. Specifically, we have identified a parametrically large energy range, E g < E < E g * , where the quasiparticle spectral gap can be zero in some spatial regions and non-zero in the other. The distribution function of the local density of states has a log-normal form, such that the typical value of the density of states is lower that the average value. In other words, the system may locally look as superconducting at energies much higher than E g . Our results for strong mesoscopic fluctuations of the local density of states are in qualitative agreement with tunneling spectroscopy data on thin superconducting films On the technical side, within our approach, we have integrated over the spatial fluctuations of the superconducting order parameter from the very beginning. Therefore, they are hidden in the term Ŝ (c) int that describes the interaction in the Cooper channel. The renormalization group analysis of the NLSM in the normal phase suggests that such a procedure is more convenient, since it allows one to take into account the interplay between the spatial fluctuations of the superconducting order parameter (the interaction in the Cooper channel) and charge and spin fluctuations (interaction in the particle-hole channel). This interplay leads to strong renormalization of the NLSM action at length scales of the order of L T c . In our approach, the mesoscopic fluctuations of the local superconducting order parameter manifests themselves in the course of the renormalization group flow as the energy dependence of the gap function. Since we considered a macroscopically homogeneous sample, it was natural to address fluctuations around the spatially homogeneous mean-field solution. The emergent fluctuations of the order parameter encoded in the mesoscopic fluctuations of the density of states, as observed in experiments of the "gap tomography", are due to mesoscopic quantum interference effects above the gap-edge energy. At the same time, it is interesting to see whether nonperturbative tails of the density of states inside the gap would appear in spatially homogeneous disordered films studied within the NLSM formalism. For this purpose, one should consider a possibility of existence of non-trivial saddle-point solutions of the NLSM action. A more straightforward way to obtain such tails would be through the introduction of macrocroscopic inhomogeneities (say, in the local concentration of impurities) that could induce "background" fluctuations of the superconducting gap. We restricted our consideration to the case of a weak short-ranged interaction (suppressed by, e.g., high dielectric constant of the substrate), for which a strong effect of the enhancement of superconductivity by multifractality was predicted. The approach developed in this paper can be generalized in several directions. Our theory can be extended to include a strong shortranged interaction, as well as the Coulomb interaction. In particular, it would be interesting to study how the multifractality affects the BCS -BEC crossover Here we have used the self-consistency equation Using Eqs. ( In this appendix, we demonstrate how the Kramers-Kronig relations for ∆(E), We note that here we have neglected the contribution to Im ∆(E) from energies close to the spectral gap E g . As one can see, when the approximation (B.3), which is valid for E ∆ 0 , is used for all energies, an additional contribution to the real part of ∆(E) appears, which is of the order of (t 4 0 /γ 2 0 )z 2 (z 2 f (z)) . The latter is of the order of t 4 0 /γ 2 0 at E ∼ ∆ 0 . This implies that, in order to be able to compute the imaginary part of ∆(E) from the Kramers-Kronig relation, one needs to derive expression for Re ∆(E) with the accuracy of the order of t 4 0 /γ 2 0 . It is worth mentioning that in Refs. The Cooperon screening factor of Ref.