Materials with reduced dimensionality often exhibit exceptional properties that are different from their bulk counterparts. Here we report the emergence of a commensurate 2 × 2 charge density wave (CDW) in monolayer and bilayer SnSe2 films by scanning tunneling microscope. The visualized spatial modulation of CDW phase becomes prominent near the Fermi level, which is pinned inside the semiconductor band gap of SnSe2. We show that both CDW and Fermi level pinning are intimately correlated with band bending and virtual induced gap states at the semiconductor heterointerface. Through interface engineering, the electron-density-dependent phase diagram is established in SnSe2. Fermi surface nesting between symmetry inequivalent electron pockets is revealed to drive the CDW formation and to provide an alternative CDW mechanism that might work in other compounds. Charge density wave (CDW) represents a static modulation of conduction electrons that is commonly accompanied by a periodic lattice distortion On the other hand, layered main-group metal dichalcogenides like SnSe 2 have recently attracted substantial interest owing to their potential applications in field-effect transistors All experiments were carried out in an ultrahigh vacuum cryogenic STM system (Unisoku), which is connected to a molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) for in-situ sample preparation. The base pressure of both chambers is better than 1.0 × 10 -10 Torr. Arsenic-doped Si(111) wafers were cleaned by repeated flashing to 1200 • C, leading to a reconstructed Si(111)-7×7 surface, while niobium-doped SrTiO 3 (001) substrates were heated at 1200 • C for 20 min to get a clean surface. High purity Sn (99.9999%) and Se (99.999%) sources are co-evaporated from standard effusion cells onto the substrates at 210 • C Layered 1T -SnSe 2 has a trigonal symmetry and consists of hexagonally packed Sn sheets sandwiched between the anionic Se sheets with an in-plane lattice parameter of approximately 3.81 Å Provided that the lattice mismatch between SnSe 2 and the Si(111) substrate is negligibly small, we exclude that the observed CDW phase origins from any possible effects associated with the epitaxial strain Figure The formation of CDW phase and E F pinning in ultrathin SnSe 2 films are closely related to emergent electronic states in the semiconducting gap, i.e. the cyanmarked finite DOS in Fig. In order to provide more insights into the CDW phase of SnSe 2 , we also prepare ultrathin SnSe 2 films on SrTiO 3 substrate. Distinct from a recent report We now discuss possible mechanisms for the observed CDW phase. The large semiconductor band gap of 1.07 eV prevents an excitonic insulator scenario from being responsible for the CDW order in SnSe 2 , where an exciton binding energy larger than the band gap is needed but hardly fulfilled Next we resort to a classical concept of CDW order induced by Fermi surface nesting Finally, we note that as the applied bias is lowered far below E F , i.e. roughly at the midgap energy of -0.7 eV [Fig. Our detailed STM study has revealed a commensurate 2 × 2 CDW phase in ultrathin SnSe 2 epitaxial films prepared on both √ 3-Sn/Si and SrTiO 3 substrates. Such a collectively ordered state is found to correlate intimately with the band bending and emergent VIGSs at the semiconductor heterointerfaces. We propose a novel mechanism associated with Fermi surface nesting between the symmetry inequivalent electron pockets at M to account for the formation of CDW nicely. The present method of interface engineering opens up possibilities in searching for novel states of matter at the 2D limit.