As one of the most fundamental physical phenomena, the anomalous Hall effect (AHE) typically occurs in ferromagnetic materials but is not expected in the conventional superconductors. Here, we have observed a giant AHE in kagome superconductor CsV3Sb5 with transition temperature (Tc) of 2.7 K. The anomalous Hall conductivity reaches up to 2.1×10 4 Ω -1 cm -1 which is larger than those observed in most of the ferromagnetic metals. Strikingly, the emergence of AHE exactly follows the higher-temperature charge-density-wave (CDW) transition with TCDW ~ 94 K, indicating a strong correlation between the CDW state and AHE. Furthermore, AHE disappears when the CDW transition is completely suppressed at high pressure. The origin for AHE is attributed to enhanced skew scattering in CDW state and large Berry curvature arose from the kagome lattice. These discoveries make CsV3Sb5 as an ideal platform to study the interplay among nontrivial band topology, CDW and unconventional superconductivity. A kagome lattice, representing a two-dimensional network with corner-sharing triangles, provides a fertile ground to study the frustrated, novel correlated and topological electronic states owing to its unusual lattice geometry Recently, a new family of quasi-two-dimensional kagome metals AV3Sb5 (A = K, Rb, Cs) have attracted tremendous attentions Single crystals of CsV3Sb5 were synthesized via a self-flux growth method similar to the previous reports The crystal structure of CsV3Sb5 is presented in Fig. To further elucidate its electronic properties, we have performed magnetoresistance measurement under external magnetic field along both the c-axis and the ab-plane, and the results are shown in Fig. , where α = 14.69 T/K is a constant, B = μ0H is the magnetic flux density (taking the average value of the field window used for the FFT of QOs), and m* = m/me is the cyclotron mass ratio (me is the mass of free electron). The temperature dependence of FFT amplitude of F1 and F2 can be fitted very well as shown in the inset of Fig. In order to check the AHE in CsV3Sb5, we have performed the Hall effect measurements at various temperatures as shown in Fig. With temperature decreasing below T*, ρ xy AHE at ambient pressure exhibits a rapid increasing around 20~40 K as shown in Fig. The MR shows a sudden jump below T* indicating its strong correlation with the CDW order. The carrier mobility is enhanced and the scattering can be effectively suppressed when entering CDW state, thus giving rise to the enhancement of MR. More interestingly, below T*, σAHE can be well scaled with MR as shown in Fig. In a short summary, a giant σAHE is revealed in a kagome superconductor CsV3Sb5, which is the first case of AHE material which shows bulk superconductivity to the best of our knowledge. Usually AHE occurs with broken time-reversal symmetry, typically in a ferromagnetic phase which is not favored for conventional superconductivity. The discovery of AHE in the superconducting kagome metal indicates either superconductivity or AHE hosts an unconventional mechanism in this type of materials. AHE is usually ascribed to the Berry curvature of band structure in magnetic phase or electron scattering due to magnetic impurities In conclusion, we observed a giant AHE in superconducting CsV3Sb5 single crystals with kagome lattice. The concurrence of AHE and CDW indicates the unconventional origin of AHE, which may be possibly relate to the enhanced skew scattering in CDW state and large Berry curvature due to kagome lattice. Our work suggests unconventional superconductivity in CsV3Sb5 and stimulates broad interests in studying the correlation between CDW state and AHE in the kagome materials. 