The magnetic excitations in Sr2RuO4 are studied by polarized and unpolarized neutron scattering experiments as a function of temperature. At the scattering vector of the Fermi-surface nesting with a half-integer out-of-plane component, there is no evidence for the appearance of a resonance excitation in the superconducting phase. The body of existing data indicates weakening of the scattered intensity in the nesting spectrum to occur at very low energies. The nesting signal persists up to 290 K but is strongly reduced. In contrast, a quasi-ferromagnetic contribution maintains its strength and still exhibits a finite width in momentum space. A quarter century after the discovery of superconductivity in Sr 2 RuO 4 The picture of chiral p-wave superconductivity was fully shaken, when the two experiments yielding the strongest support for triplet pairing Since then, numerous proposals for the superconducting state were made mostly invoking some d-wave state and the discussion of the superconducting pairing has become very active Assuming a simple boson-mediated pairing following BCS theory, phonons and magnetic fluctuations or a combination of both On the other side there is clear evidence for strong magnetic fluctuations deduced from NMR In addition to the incommensurate nesting-induced fluctuations, macroscopic susceptibility Here we present additional neutron scattering experiments on the magnetic fluctuations in Sr 2 RuO 4 , which focus on several aspects that are particularly relevant for the superconducting pairing mechanism involving mag- netic fluctuations or for the general understanding of magnetic excitations in a strongly correlated electron system. We discuss the possibility of important out-of-plane dispersion in the magnetic response in the superconducting and normal states, the shape of nesting scattering away from the peak position and the non-local character of the quasi-ferromagnetic response. INS experiments were carried out on the ThALES A polarized neutron scattering experiment was performed on the thermal TAS IN20 using Heusler crystals as monochromator and analyzer. A spin flipper in front of the analyzer enabled the polarization analysis. The scans were performed with a fixed final momentum of k f = 4.1 Å-1 , where the graphite filter in front of the analyzer cuts higher order contaminations. Longitudinal polarization analysis was performed with a set of Helmholtz coils. A. q dependence of fluctuations associated with nesting The TOF technique enables an imaging of the complete Q-E-space, which gives insight on the distribution of scattering intensity in the reciprocal space. Throughout the paper, the scattering vector Q=(H,K,L) and the propagation vector in the first Brillouin zone q=(q h ,q k ,q l ) are given in reciprocal lattice units (rlu). We mostly consider only the planar wave vector Q 2d =(H,K) projection. Fig. Neglecting electronic dispersion perpendicular to the planes and assuming an idealized scheme of flat onedimensional bands originating from the d xz and d yz orbitals, one expects nesting induced magnetic excitations FIG. for any two-dimensional vector Q 2d =(0.3,ξ) and (ξ,0.3) and accordingly a peak at (0.3,0.3) To analyze the ridge scattering and the anisotropy of the incommensurate signals in detail, Fig. The asymmetry of the nesting peaks and the ridge scattering between the incommensurate positions can also be seen in the data of lower incident energies (see Fig. The opening of a superconductivity-induced gap in the spectrum of magnetic fluctuations would have strong impact on the discussion of the superconducting character in Sr 2 RuO 4 . Previous INS experiments using a TAS revealed the clear absence of a large gap at the nesting position Following the claim of Iida et al. To study the low-energy response and its L dependence in more detail and with better statistics the TAS is better suited since measurements can be focused to single Q,E points. Using ThALES and its high flux and energy resolution constant Q scans at the incommensurate position (0.3,0.7,L) with L=0, 0.25, and 0.5 were mea-FIG. sured to investigate the L dependence of the low energy response (see Fig. Since no L dependence of the magnetic low energy response can be established (Fig. For the previously assumed superconducting state detailed theoretical analyzes of the magnetic response were reported The polarization analysis of inelastic neutron scattering provides the separation of the magnetic from any other scattering contribution. It is therefore possible to identify a tiny magnetic response that is little structured in q space. This technique was used to detect quasi-ferromagnetic fluctuations and to determine their strength in comparison to the incommensurate fluctuations in Sr 2 RuO 4 The polarized neutron study was performed on the thermal TAS IN20 and the results are shown in Fig. Polarized and unpolarized neutron scattering experiments were performed to study several aspects of the magnetic fluctuations in Sr 2 RuO 4 that are particularly relevant for a possible superconducting pairing scenario. The TOF instrument LET yields full mapping of the excitations and reveals the well-studied incommensurate fluctuations at (0.3,0.3) in the two-dimensional reciprocal space. There is also ridge scattering at (0.3,ξ) reflecting the one-dimensional character of the d xz and d yz bands, as first reported in references 43 and 44. These ridges are stronger between the four peaks surrounding (0.5,0.5), i.e. for ξ>0.3, but the suppression of the signal at smaller ξ is gradual. The TOF data confirm the pronounced asymmetry of the nesting peaks. Concerning the study of the nesting fluctuations at very low energy in the superconducting phase, TAS experiments yield higher statistics due to the possibility to focus the experiment on the particular position in Q,E space. Data taken at different out-of-plane components of the scattering vector exclude a sizeable resonance mode emerging at L=0.5 in the superconducting phase. Only by combining the results of several experiments one can obtain some evidence for the suppression of spectral weight at very low energies. With neutron polarization analysis the magnetic excitations were further characterized at 290 K. The incommensurate nesting signal is strongly reduced but still visible, while the quasi-ferromagnetic contribution is almost unchanged. At this temperature there is a suppression of this quasiferromagnetic scattering at the Brillouin-zone boundaries, which underlines that this response is not fully local.