Excessive evaporative loss of water from the topsoil in arid-land agriculture is compensated via irrigation, which exploits massive freshwater resources. The cumulative effects of decades of unsustainable freshwater consumption in many arid regions are now threatening food-water security. While plastic mulches can reduce evaporation from the topsoil, their cost and nonbiodegradability limit their utility. In response, we report on superhydrophobic sand (SHS), a bio-inspired enhancement of common sand with a nanoscale wax coating. When SHS was applied as a 5 mm-thick mulch over the soil, evaporation dramatically reduced and crop yields increased. Multi-year field trials of SHS application with tomato (Solanum lycopersicum), barley (Hordeum vulgare), and wheat (Triticum aestivum) under normal irrigation enhanced yields by 17%-73%. Under brackish water irrigation (5500 ppm NaCl), SHS mulching produced 53%-208% higher fruit yield and grain gains for tomato and barley. Thus, SHS could benefit agriculture and city-greening in arid regions. The importance of irrigation toward humanity's ability to produce food cannot be overstated. For example, while only 20% of cultivated land is irrigated, this fraction contributes 33%-40% of the total world food production However, due to intense solar radiation and direct exposure to dry air and winds, a significant fraction of the water supplied to soils is lost to evaporation (Fig. Technologies for enhancing the water-use efficiency of irrigated agriculture, i.e., growing more food/biomass with less water, are warranted for a sustainable future. Subsurface impermeable layers are sometimes employed to limit water loss due to percolation; however, their installation is expensive and labor-intensive Recently, engineered nanomaterials (ENMs) have been demonstrated to enhance the water-use efficiency of soils Based on the aforementioned concerns, in the present study, we developed an innovative approach to control evaporation from soils by combining (i) common sand, a material readily available in soils of arid regions, and (ii) paraffin wax, a low-cost and biodegradable hydrophobic material that is available at an industrial scale We drew inspiration from several super-water-repellent plants and animals that exploit waxy cocktails and micro-or nano-textures to achieve extreme water-repellency, also known as superhydrophobicity, to perform critical functions, including fog harvesting in arid conditions, The water repellency of sand grains dramatically increased after the above-described surface enhancement (Fig. as the pressure at which water penetrates into the microtexture We evaluated the effects of SHS mulching on evaporation rates from the topsoil and actual moisture content and compared them with the effects of mulching with common sand and unmulched (control) sand. For this, bottom-closed pots were filled with 75 g potting soil and saturated with 130 g water. Some of these pots were then covered with either SHS or common sand, both with layer thicknesses ranging from 2.5-20.0 mm; the remaining unmulched pots were used as controls. The pots were exposed to day/night cycles for 26 days and the loss of soil moisture via evaporation was recorded (Fig. Compared to mulching with untreated sand and unmulched controls, SHS mulching dramatically decreased water loss via evaporation (Fig. Fig. Next, we investigated the effects of SHS mulching on agricultural productivity under true arid conditions at our field station located at Hada Al-Sham, Saudi Arabia (21.79° N, 39.72° E). Here, we conducted multiyear field trials using a high-value crop (tomato, Solanum lycopersicum applied twice a day through subsurface drip irrigation and (ii) brackish irrigation (5000 ppm NaCl) applied twice a day (Fig. Compared with unmulched controls, SHS mulching led to significant improvements in tomato yields under both normal and brackish water irrigation (Fig. All of these results were statistically significant at p < 0.05 (Kruskal-Wallis H test). We also observed statistically significant enhancements in the yield of barley mulched with the 5 mm-thick SHS mulch under normal (73%) and brackish water (208%) irrigation compared with unmulched controls (Fig. In 2020, we established an experiment with 450 tomato plants. However, this time, instead of assigning separate plots for specific treatments, we intercalated SHS and bare treatments in the same plots. These tomato plants produced a modest 10% increase in fruit yield compared with unmulched controls (Fig. Unlike plastic mulches, which must be disposed of via landfilling This finding was supported by the number of SVs shared between the treatment with SHS mulches and normal soil, 4,954 (78%) for barley and 5,024 (79%) for tomato, accounting for 98% of the relative abundance in both crops, (Fig. The results of the present study underscore the potential of SHS mulching for growing more food and vegetation with limited freshwater resources in arid regions. In this section, we explain the mechanisms and factors underlying the water-repellency of SHS and its ability to reduce water loss via evaporation from the topsoil, followed by some arguments for the scalability of this approach. First, we explain why micron-scale water droplets on individual SHS grains exhibit apparent contact angles of θ + ≈ 105° (Fig. Next, we explain how SHS governs the fate of water loss via evaporation from the topsoil. First, we emphasize that all the field-scale experiments reported in this study utilized subsurface irrigation. When water comes in contact with common hydrophilic soil particles, the mechanical equilibrium between the interfacial tensions creates a concave meniscus, which drives it in all directions, including upwards, due to capillarity (Figs. is the mean curvature of the liquid-air interface, and R1 and R2 are the mutually orthogonal radii of the interfacial curvature. Assuming spherical symmetry of the air-water interface, R ( = R 4 = r 2 ≈ 5 μm , which yields P 5 ≈ 29 kPa . This pressure drives the water radially from the subsurface dripping point in all directions, including upwards to the topsoil-air interface, where it evaporates (Figs. Conversely, when soil moisture rises upward and touches the SHS mulch, the curvature of the air-water interface at the interface of the SHS grains becomes convex (Fig. Therefore, the same Laplace pressure that drives the capillary rise of water prevents its imbibition into the SHS layer; thus, keeping it dry (Fig. We presume that the average value of the C 3 of the air-water interface in contact with SHS grains of sizes ranging from 100-700 μm is ≈ 1/60 μm -1 , which yields P -= 1.2 kPa, a result in reasonable agreement with that of breakthrough pressure experiments. This analysis explains how an SHS layer facilitates a dry porous barrier for water vapor (and other gases). (red arrows). This results in the capillary rise of water, leading to evaporation loss. (C) Water from subsurface irrigation is imbibed by the soil, but this imbibition is arrested at the soil-SHS interface due to (D) negative Laplace pressure. Subsequently, SHS acts as a barrier limiting dry diffusion, significantly reducing water loss from the soil. While liquid water is unable to spontaneously imbibe into SHS, water vapor can diffuse through the SHS mulch layer. In fact, the evaporation flux of water from the topsoil and across the SHS mulch can be estimated using the Fick's diffusion model J = -D × ∆φ/L %&% , where ∆φ is the gradient in the water vapor concentration across the SHS layer, L %&% , and D = D w ×ε ×δ τ is the effective diffusivity that depends on the diffusivity of water vapor in air, D ' , porosity, ε , constrictivity, δ, and tortuosity, τ, of the granular mulch During the course of the trials, the field station experienced dust storms and daily wind speeds of ~0-15 ms -1 without noticeable loss of SHS or its water-conserving properties Taken together, the results presented in this study underscore the potential of our bioinspired approach for boosting food production in arid regions. Among its ingredients, paraffin wax is the most inexpensive hydrophobic coating available at an industrial scale, in contrast with costly organic/perfluorinated silanes To summarize, this translational research demonstrates how sands or sandy soilsabundant resources in arid regions -can be processed into SHS via nanoscale wax coating to produce more food with limited water resources. The simplicity of this manufacturing process is underscored by the fact that we manufactured over 10,000 kg of SHS in our laboratory and that we could manually apply it to conduct these field trials (Movie S2). In addition to annual crops, we believe that SHS can be applied to perennial orchards, vineyards, or green zones in cities, such as public parks and green corridors. Arid lands with limited freshwater sources, including parts of South America, Africa, the Middle East, the United States, Australia, China, and India, present vast underused regions with untapped potential to expand their agricultural operations by leveraging this sustainable technology. 1. Starting materials: a. Common sand (characteristic size in the range: 100-700 μm; Fig. b. Blocks of paraffin wax (molecular weight, 487 Da, melting point 60-65°C), grated to shavings of <1-mm size. 2. These wax shavings were dissolved in approximately 10 L of hexane. 3. Then, 50 kg of common sand was added to a 60-L evaporator (Fig. 4. The wax/hexane mixture was added to the evaporator flask to achieve a wax-to-sand ratio of 1:600. Note that concentrations as low as 1:2000 (wax/sand) achieved superhydrophobicity. 5. Next, the temperature of the evaporator was gradually increased from 22°C to 55°C and the pressure was reduced from 1 atm to 100 mbar to evaporate the hexane, which was condensed and collected for reuse (recovery rate of ~99%). 6. The pressure was normalized and SHS was collected and stored for use. Note: Due to the flammability of the organic solvents used in this manufacturing protocol, potential sources of electrical sparks, such as cell phones, match sticks, and static charge, must be avoided and the setup must be installed in a well-ventilated area. All components of the setup were electrically grounded to avoid any electric spark. More recent developments have shown that the solvent can be completely eliminated and replaced by vigorous mixing at 70°C-80°C for approximately 30 min without noticeably compromising the coating. The wax used was characterized via gas chromatography-mass spectroscopy (Agilent 7890A-5975C) (~10 -1 M in cyclohexane). The wetting of individual particles was observed under an environmental scanning electron micrograph (FEI Quanta 600). Contact angles on a 10mm bed of SHS were measured by placing a 10-μL water droplet with advancing and receding rates of 0.2 μL/s (Kruss Drop Shape Analyzer DSA100, Advance software). The thickness of the wax layer on the sand granules was estimated from the surface area of sand grains and the volume of wax used. The surface area of the sand was estimated using the Brunauer-Emmet-Teller (BET) method using krypton gas Tomato fruits were harvested weekly and collected in plastic bags labeled with plant identity number, followed by counting and weighing. Weekly harvests were conducted for 6 weeks, and the total number and mass of fruits per plant was considered for data analysis (Fig. Pots containing 75 g of Metro Mix 360 TM soil and 132 g of water were covered with either SHS mulch (0-, 5-, 10-, 15-, and 20-mm thick) or common (uncoated) sand (0-, 5-, 10-, 15-, and 20-mm thick) or were not subjected to any mulching (bare) and placed outside the lab under environmental conditions (Fig. We buried 30 L plastic buckets with a diameter of 35 cm at the ground level and filled them up with local sandy soil (Fig. The experiments were performed from January to April (2018) at the same site as our field trials (21.79° N, 39.72° E). The weather conditions of the site are presented in Fig. Samples were collected during the 2018 crop season on February 20 at the same site as our field trials (21.79° N, 39.72° E). For each field treatment (irrigation: fresh/brackish water and overlay: SHS mulches presence/absence), the root systems of barley and tomato plants were randomly selected from each experimental plot (barley, n = 18; tomato, n = 18; Table DNA was extracted from 0.5 ± 0.05 g of bulk and rhizosphere soils using the PowerSoil® DNA Isolation kit (MoBio Inc., USA). Surface-sterilized root tissues were ground in a mortar and pestle using liquid nitrogen, followed by DNA extraction from 1 gram of the ground root tissues using the DNeasy Plant Maxi kit (Qiagen, Germany). The V3-V4 hypervariable regions of the 16S rRNA gene were PCR-amplified using the universal primers 341F and 785R Libraries were constructed using the 96 Nextera XT Index Kit (Illumina) following the manufacturer's instructions and sequenced using the Illumina MiSeq platform at the Bioscience Core Lab at KAUST. Raw sequences were analyzed using the DADA2 pipeline, including quality filtering, trimming, dereplication, and paired-end merging of the sequences Chloroplast-and mitochondria-classified SVs were discarded and non-prevalent SVs (defined as SV present in <1% of our samples) were removed from the SV table. A total of 13,568,983 sequences (barley: 8,611,818 and tomato: 4,194,505) divided into 6,912 SVs were obtained. Only samples with suitable sequencing depth and diversity (Good's coverage value > 99%) were used for the further analysis. The raw reads have been deposited in the Short Reads Archive of NCBI under the accession numbers SUB7136748, SUB7211346, and SUB7137862. The beta-diversity of the bacterial communities in barley and tomato was analyzed using the compositional similarity matrices (Bray-Curtis) of the relative log-transformed SV tables using a previously reported methodology Data and materials: Raw data have been deposited in the Short Reads Archive of NCBI (Accession numbers: rhizosphere, SUB7136748; root tissue, SUB7211346; and bulk soil, SUB7137862); remaining data are available in the main text and supporting information. Code is available upon request. functional groups, such as acids, esters, or alcohols. In the 1 H-NMR spectra (Fig. Using energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), coupled to the SEM, we obtained a semiquantitative analysis of the chemical composition of the surface of our sand granules. The results demonstrated that the SHS surface was, as expected, richer in carbon content in comparison to that of ordinary sand. Specifically, the atomic percentage (At.%) of carbon in normal sand was 3.3% (organic contaminants) 3 while in SHS it was 19.5% (Fig. The addition of paraffin wax to the surface of the sand grains slightly increased the friction between then, evidenced by the decrease in the angle of response (cone angle) from ~38.5° to ~49°. We performed the gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GCMS) in a 7890A Agilent Gas Chromatograph. equiped with DB-5ms GC column (30 m, 0.25 μm). We dissolved the wax sample in cyclohexane (~10 -1 M) and analyzed it with a temperature ramp of 50 °C to 120 °C, at 15 °C/min, then holding for 5 min., then up to 320 °C, at 15 °C/min, then holding for 7 min. We used hexadecane (n = 16) as a reference point. We fitted a quadratic equation to the number of carbons in the alkane as a function of the retention time and then aligned the peaks with the known peak for hexadecane (Fig. We conducted field trials at KAU agriculture research station, Hada Al Sham, Saudi Arabia (21.7963° N, 39.7265° E). The region has a loamy sand soil (Fig. For the season of 2018, we divided the field into two sections, one for fresh water irrigation (<900 ppm NaCl) and another for brackish water (~5000 ppm NaCl). For each water treatment, we split the tomato fields into alternating plots of SHS and bare soil (control). Similarly, for barley, for each of the two water treatments we split the barley field into alternating plots of SHS and bare soil (control). We planted tomato seeds in trays and then we transplanted the seedlings to the field after 30 days, while we planted barley directly in the field. We set the irrigation time to 2 periods of 10-20 mins (depending on the plant growth stage and weather)-first at 7 a.m. and then at 5 p.m. In Fig. For the season of 2019, we divided the field into two sections: (i) normal fresh water irrigation and (ii) reduced (50%) fresh water irrigation; we irrigated with (i) for 2 periods of 10-20 min at 7 a.m. and at 5 p.m., and with (ii) only in the morning at 7 a.m. for 10-20 min. In Fig. For all crops we calculated the amount of fertilizer based on the water volume in the tank and the usage rate. We dissolved the fertilizer externally and added it to the tanks filled with about 6000 L of water. We added the compound fertilizers (N:P:K 20:20:20 during vegetative stage and N:P:K 10:10:40 at flowering and fruiting stages) from a local market (2 g/L) on a weekly basis. All treatments and their respective controls were supplied by the same water tanks. We thus ensured that they received the same amount of irrigation and fertilizer. We also tested the efficacy of SHS mulch under reduced irrigation, where we applied only 50% of the amount of freshwater (Fig. We collected three soil samples from each plot at different locations within the plotin total, nine samples per treatment. We removed the top 1 cm layer of the soil, and then collected the samples from 2-10 cm depth, homogeneized them and put them in sealed plastic bags. We identified the samples and shipped them to Geomar Lab (Germany) for analysis. (2-50 μm) and nitrogen results yielded the particulate inorganic carbon and nitrogen, PIC and PIN respectively. We chose the factor 2.0 to convert POC to POM We used the hexaamminecobalt (III) chloride method to determine CEC, adding CaCO3 as the pH of the samples was basic. We followed the standard method according to ISO 23470:2018. We weighed the sample of air-dried soil and transferred it to a tightly stoppered polyethylene centrifuge tube of about 50 mL capacity. Then we added 50 mL of 0.0166 mol/L hexaamminecobalt (III) chloride solution to the soil and shook it on the rotary shaker for 1 h. After this we balanced the tubes and centrifuged them at 3000 g for 10 min. We determined the cobalt concentration in the extract by ICP-AES. We calculated the CEC on the basis of the difference between the initial concentration of cobalt in extraction solution and the quantity remaining in extract. 