We report the synthesis and physical properties of the single crystals of TaC, which are proposed to hold topological band structure as a topological superconductor (TSC) candidate. Magnetization, resistivity and specific heat measurements are performed and indicate that TaC is bulk superconductor with critical temperature of 10.3 K. TaC is a strongly coupled type-II superconductor and the superconducting state can be well described by s-wave Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory with a single gap. The upper critical field (Hc2) of TaC shows linear temperature dependence, which is quite different from most conventional superconductors and isostructural NbC, which is proposed to manifest topological nodal-loops or type-II Dirac points as well as superconductivity. Our results suggest that TaC would be a new candidate for further research of TSCs. Exploration of topological superconductors (TSCs) is progressively becoming a fruitful subject in condensed matter physics. A TSC has topologically nontrivial superconducting phases, characterized by a full superconducting gap in the bulk, but supporting a protected Majorana zero-energy mode (MZM) at the vortex core, as well as gapless edge or surface states TaC and calculated their topological band structures, pointing out the potential TCSs states among these compounds In this work, we successfully grow the single crystals of TaC and report the magnetism, resistivity and specific heat properties. The results indicate that TaC is BCS superconductor with s-wave single gap in bulk state. However, the electron-phonon coupling (EPC) strength of TaC is larger than most conventional BCS superconductors. In addition, the upper critical field shows anomalous linear temperature dependence at low temperature, which is usually present in some iron-based superconductors. Single crystals of TaC were grown by using Co-flux mothed. Starting materials of high-purity Ta, C and Co were mixed and loaded in an alumina crucible at a molar radio of Ta : C : Co = 1 : 1 : 9. The alumina crucible was then placed in an argon-filled furnace and heated to 1500 °C. After a dwell time of 20 hours, the crucible was slowly cooled to 1300 °C at a rate of 1 °C/h and then cooled naturally down to room temperature. Finally, the excess Co was removed by immersion in nitrohydrochloric acid for one day, yielding golden TaC single crystals in rectangle shape. To investigate the crystalline structure, single-crystal x-ray diffraction (XRD) was carried out on Bruker D8 Venture diffractometer at 293 K using Mo Kα radiation (λ = 0.71073 Å). The crystalline structure was refined by full-matrix least-squares method on F 2 by using the SHELXL-2016/6 program. Selected crystals were used for magnetic susceptibility (χ), electrical resistivity (ρ) and specific heat (C p ) measurements. The magnetic properties were measured in a Magnetic Properties Measurement System (MPMS-III, Quantum Design Inc.) under fixed applied magnetic field of 20 Oe in fieldcooling (FC) and zero-field-cooling (ZFC) modes. Isothermal magnetization (M-H) was measured at several fixed temperatures by sweeping applied field. The electrical resistivity and specific heat were measured in a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design Inc.) by using a standard dc four-probe technique and a thermal relaxation method, respectively. The single-crystal XRD study reveals that TaC crystallize in a centrosymmetric NaCl-type structure with space group of Fm-3m (No. 225). The detailed crystallographic parameters are summarized in Table where N = 0.27 is the demagnetizing factor estimated for the cuboid sample where ρ 0 is the residual resistivity of the nomal state, α is proportional to electronphonon coupling constant and θ D is Debye temperature. The fit is shown as a red solid line in Fig. With fitted parameters of θ D and T c , the EPC constant λ ep can then be calculated by using the inverted McMillan equation where the μ * represents the repulsive screened Coulomb part, which is set to 0.13 for transition metal element. This yields a value of the superconducting parameter λ ep = 0.986. Typically, materials with λ ep 1 are classified as strongly coupled superconductors, while λ ep 0.5 indicates weak coupling The specific heat data in various applied fields are given in Fig. We fit ∆C P with different gap functions as done in refs dependence of H c2 (T) is similar to some iron-based superconductors with multiband superconductivity In addition, other parameters related to superconductivity can be calculated. By using λ ep , γ n , and k B , the density of electronic states at the Fermi energy N(E F ) can be calculated from the formula Thus the N(E F ) was estimated to be 0.69 eV -1 per formula unit (f.u.). The mean free path l can be determined by using following equation where V M is the molar volume. Assuming that m * m e = 1, the l was calculated to be 448 Å. The determined H c2 (0) value can be used to calculate the Ginzburg-Landau coherence length ξ GL by using the equation where Φ 0 is the quantum flux h 2e . The value of ξ GL for TaC was calculated to be 331 Å. Using the result of ξ GL with H c1 (0) , the Ginzburg-Landau penetration depth λ GL = 595 Å of TaC were estimated by the lower critical field equation From the Ginzburg-Landau penetration depth and the coherence length, the Ginzburg- , which again confirms that TaC is type-II superconductors The relationship between the BCS coherence length ξ 0 and the Ginzburg-Landau coherence ξ GL at T = 0 K is From the above equation, we get the value of ξ 0 is 543 Å. The value of ξ 0 /l is close to 1, indicating that TaC superconductor is on the boundary between the dirty and clean limits. In summary, the observed and estimated superconducting parameters of TaC and NbC are listed in Table Superconductors with nontrivial band structure provide possibility of realizing topological superconductors. Superconductivity can be combined with novel band structures by charge carrier doping or heterostructures constructed by superconductors and topological insulators. For instance, topological insulator Bi2Se3 becomes superconductor when intercalated by Cu, Sr, or Nb atoms The difficulty of fabricating heterostructure and observing the interface-related phenomena also limits further studies of TSC. Different from the two strategies mentioned above, the coexistence of the bulk superconductivity and topological band structures in the same compound might generate intrinsic TSC with nontrivial surface states. For example, nontrivial topological band structures have been observed in β-PdBi2 Our experiments prove that TaC is a BCS superconductor with single s-wave gap in bulk. It has simple structure and high resistance to corrosion with high T c of 10.3 K. Meanwhile, TaC shows some unusual superconductivities such as strong EPC constant and linear temperature dependence of H c2 , which is distinct from most conventional superconductors as well as the isostructural NbC single crystal we reported recently In summary, we present the studies of magnetism, resistivity and specific heat on single crystal TaC, which is characterized as a type-II superconductor with centrosymmetric structure. The electronic specific heat in the superconducting state is well described by the single gap s-wave BCS expression. Most of superconducting properties for TaC are similar to NbC single crystals we reported in ref. Hence, we suggest that TaC is a potential candidate of TSCs for further investigating the novel physical properties. a Occup: Occupancy. b Ueq: equivalent isotropic thermal parameter.