Thermoelectric power sensors are widely used in commercial power meters at RF and microwaves, due to their superior robustness, stability, and accuracy if compared with other types of power sensors. Furthermore, their electrical architecture and related performance turned out to be very useful in the realization of the broadband primary power standards as alternative to resistive power sensors, i.e. bolometers. Hereby we present a comparison in term of effective efficiency of a thermoelectric sensor calibrated by applying two different methods of power substitution when used as thermal load in a coaxial microcalorimeter at RF and microwaves. The aim is to test a technology that could enable the realization of a primary RF/MW power standard independently of the assumption of unitary efficiency at the dc (or LF) reference power. Realization of primary power standards at radio frequency and microwave (RF and MW) has always been an important task for National Metrology Institutes (NMIs), and also a real challenge. The method used by most NMIs consists in calibrating a thermal detector against a dc power standard by means of the power substitution method applied in calorimetric measurements However, from our point of view, the most interesting characteristic of the device used in The original purpose of such technical solution is to provide a possibility for sensor power meter self-calibration. De facto, it creates an alternative way for supplying the reference power into microcalorimeters that use thermoelectric power sensors as thermal loads. Currently, such microcalorimeters are fed through the RF/MW input coaxial line only This paper evaluates how much the effective efficiency values obtained by two different power substitution methods are consistent to each other. If the auxiliary heater will turn out to be usable, this will enable a realization of a primary RF/MW power standard that no longer requires the assumption of unitary efficiency at the dc or low frequency (LF) reference power and its experimental verification The paper presents the calibration of a power sensor of the type mentioned in To test the reproducibility of this result, more measurements on different sensors have been planned. Anyway we are confident on the outcome of our comparison since the production technology shows already enough reliability to be used in sensors launched on the market In our experiment we consider a new type of commercial thermoelectric sensor having precision connector type-N (Navy, i.e. PCN connector), which has been provided with an auxiliary heater directly by the manufacturer The quantity we want to measure is the effective efficiency ηe of the sensor mount, which can be defined, in the most generic way, as the ratio of measured power PM to total absorbed power PA = (PM + PX): where PX represents the total power loss in the sensor mount . Definition ( . Evidently Hdc in not equal to HRF because of different distribution of the electromagnetic field in the feeding line and absorber block, but while HRF is unique, Hdc could differ if power substitution is made via the RF-absorber or via the auxiliary heater. If Hdc is reasonably not sensitive to the change of the power substitution paths, then the main absorber and auxiliary heater are both in good thermal contact with the sensor thermometer. If that stands, Eq. ( Unfortunately, (4) is not much useful for the measurand determination, because both HRF and Hdc are not easily related Scheme of the power sensor considered for the alternative power standard realization described in this work. to the physical quantities we can measure using a microcalorimeter. Therefore we must proceed by using the technique previously developed at INRIM for realizing a RF/MW power standard based on thermoelectric sensor in coaxial line where e1 and e2 are the electrical responses of the microcalorimeter to the RF/MW power and to the reference power (dc or 1 kHz in our case) substituted into the system, respectively. The condition Vdc= VRF has also to be maintained as in A critical point of this measurement technique is that it requires the assumption of unitary efficiency of the sensor at dc or LF. This is necessary if the power substitution is made on the RF coaxial line, otherwise it is not possible to obtain an operative equation of effective efficiency auxiliary heater line, where possible losses at dc or LF do not influence the effective efficiency determination Experimental work consists of the calibration of a specific thermoelectric sensor in 7 mm coaxial line at several frequencies in the band 0.01 -18 GHz. For the purpose, the test port of INRIM coaxial microcalorimeter has been fitted with precision connector type-N (Navy, i.e. PCN connector). The power sensor under test has been obtained by modifying a commercial device by removing all its electronic components in order to have direct access to the sensitive element, and inserting it in a custom made case, so to obtain an appropriate microcalorimeter thermal load. Calibrations have been performed according to the INRIM procedure, which requires to operate in a shielded and thermostatic environment at (23 ± 0.3)°C with relative humidity of (45 ± 5)%, in order to obtain the necessary system stability and repeatability. The same procedure suggests to apply a reference power at 1 kHz rather than in dc, to avoid effects of spurious thermoelectric voltages. This operation is allowed because it has been proved that the system losses at 1 kHz are of the same order of the dc losses, if any when supplying the reference power via the input coaxial line Firstly, the power sensor under calibration is supplied by a nominal power of 1 mW at 1 kHz for a time period of 400 min. Then, the reference power is substituted with an appropriate RF/MW power level so to maintain constant the sensor output signal for the next 400 min. Finally the RF/MW power is switched off and substituted again with the reference 1 kHz power. Afterward the RF/MW frequency can be set to a new value and another measurement cycle begins. The commutation time of 400 min between 1 kHz and RF/MW power, is given by the microcalorimeter time constant. It has been experimentally found to allow the system to reach the thermal equilibrium state after each power substitution. The described measurement protocol is always applied independently of the power substitution method and also in the short circuit calibration measurements. In any case, for each power substitution step, the microcalorimeter thermometer, i.e. a thermopile placed at the connector base of the sensor under test, generates a dc signal e of the order of some dozens of μV, depending on the power level supplied to the system and on the system losses. When RF/MW is supplied to the calorimetric load, the system thermometer measures an exponential temperature increase on the same load up to an asymptotic value e1. Conversely, when RF/MW is substituted by 1 mW reference power at 1 kHz, there is a cooling of the thermal load resulting in a decrease of the asymptotic value e2. Asymptote e1 is proportional to the parasitic losses at RF/MW of calorimetric load, whereas the asymptote e2 is a measure of the equilibrium temperature the system reaches in absence of losses. The typical form of this signal is shown in Fig. Table In Table The two effective efficiency values ηe1 and ηe2 are considered compatible if En ≤ 1. Fig. From the measurement results it is obvious that the substitution paths are equivalent. Our measurements say that Hdc in (4) is reasonably not sensitive to the change of the power substitution paths, of course in the limit of the instrumentation sensitivity. This means that the main absorber and the auxiliary heater are both well thermally coupled to the sensor thermometer, i.e. internal thermocouple schematized in Fig. Therefore, the effect of the power substitution results independent of the mode it is performed, that is, directly on the RF/MW absorber or on the dc auxiliary heater. As a consequence (if this result will be confirmed by testing other devices), by using this kind of sensors, the realization of the RF/MW primary power standard no longer depends on the assumption of unitary efficiency at dc or LF. The realization was here shown of a RF/MW broadband primary power standard by applying non conventional measurement procedure. Basically, we used as calorimetric load a new type of thermoelectric sensor that is fitted, directly by the manufacturer, with two electrically independent absorbers, supposed to be also thermally equivalent. This new sensor architecture allowed applying the power substitution method in two different ways. The sensor has been therefore calibrated twice in the frequency range 0.01 -18 GHz. One calibration has been performed according to the method routinely used at INRIM, that is, by supplying the reference power directly on the input coaxial line. In a second step, the calibration has been repeated by feeding the auxiliary heater with the same amount of 1 kHz power. The results of the calibrations are compatible in the limit of the measurement uncertainties, therefore they can be used to obtain a unique value of effective efficiency at each calibration frequency. This experimentally verifies the equivalence of the two procedures and the thermal equivalence of the two absorbers. An even more important result is that, by using the secondary heater to supply the reference power to the sensor, the primary RF/MW power standard can now be realized independently of the assumption of unitary efficiency at dc or LF, which involves complex measurements to be verified. Moreover, because thermoelectric sensors can now be calibrated through an auxiliary heater that is electrically independent of the main absorber, then they can be used to realize hollow waveguide power standards, where the coaxial technology cannot be easily used. Furthermore, having experienced lack of bolometric devices on the market for long time, the microcalorimeter technique finds finally a suitable replacement for its fundamental component. Our results need to be confirmed by measuring several other sensors, because other measurements in literature 