Quantum random number generation is a key ingredient for quantum cryptography and fundamental quantum optics and could advance Monte-Carlo simulations and machine learning. An established generation scheme is based on single photons impinging on a beam splitter. Here, we experimentally demonstrate quantum random number generation solely based on the spontaneous emission process in combination with the symmetric emission profile of a dipole aligned orthogonal to the laboratory frame. The demonstration builds on defect centers in hexagonal boron nitride and benefits from the ability to manipulate and align the emission directionality. We prove the randomness in the correlated photon detection events making use of the NIST randomness test suite and show that the randomness remains for two independently emitting defect centers. The scheme can be extended to random number generation by coherent single photons with potential applications in solid-state based quantum communication at room temperature. The intrinsic randomness in quantum mechanical processes can be used for creating true, unpredictable random numbers via quantum random number generation (QRNG) In this work, we take a different approach exploiting the symmetry of the dipole emission pattern in order to realize QRNG. We make use of the fact that spontaneous emission is identical and random in all directions of the plane perpendicular to the dipole axis. Therefore, when observing the excited dipole from the left and from right in that plane, the spontaneous emission of a single photon happens with equal probability into one of the two observation channels. The randomness is given by the quantum mechanical nature of the spontaneous emission process, as illustrated in fig. It is desirable to utilize a SPE that is embedded in a solid-state matrix in order to realize compact devices among which 2D host materials play a special role In this letter, we demonstrate single photon randomness without the use of a beamsplitter. We exploit the spontaneously emitted single photons from mechanically decoupled defect centers in a multi-layer hBN-flake. The emission is random in direction within the plane orthogonal to the dipole axis. Therefore, we align the dipole axis orthogonal to the optical axis of the setup by means of AFM-based nanomanipulation on the hBN host flake. We use the NIST randomness test suite to benchmark the randomness of the emitted photons and show that the random character persists for two SPE that emit single photons independently from each other. Hence, quantum emitters in hBN-flakes can be optimally fitted into optical setups for future application as QRNG devices. We begin by aligning the defect center in a hBN multilayer flake with the optical setup. In order to align the dipole perpendicular to the optical axis with two detection ports from opposite sites, we use grids with low losses in transmission. A gold grid supports a 20 nm thin perforated carbon foil with 1.2 μm diameter holes Before we turn to QRNG, we proof the capability to align the emission intensity and polarization pattern of the defect center with respect to the optical setup without changing the optical properties. In particular persistence of the mechanical isolation of the defect center against nanomanipulation is important since it enables coherent photon emission. We first demonstrate manipulation of the relative emission directionality of the hBNflake with respect to the laboratory frame. For proofof-principle demonstration, we spin-coat the hBN-flakes onto a sapphire substrate. We precharacterize the spectral properties of the emitter and determine the topology of its host flakes with an AFM. The mechanical isolation of the emitter is evidenced by the energy gap between ZPL and phonon sideband (PSB) Moreover, we rotate the flake by 19°, as illustrated in fig. In order to prepare the experiment, we place a defect center in a hBN-flake onto the transmission grid such that its dipole is as good as possible aligned orthogonal to the optical axis of the setup. A comparison of the PL spectra in reflection and transmission yields the same distinct ZPL at 667 nm with low background fluorescence, both at room temperature (RT) and at 5 K (see fig. The smaller peaks between 710 nm and 750 nm, which are pronounced in transmission, could originate either from optical phonon modes or from other defect centers and are spectrally filtered out in the following. Otherwise, the investigated emitter shows ideal spectral properties with a sharp, intense ZPL at 667 nm and low background signal. However, the high-resolution PL spectrum of the ZPL reveals the double defect nature of the emitters Next, we use an AFM to investigate the flake topology and its location on the grid. Previous studies suggest that mechanically decoupled quantum emitters in hBNflakes predominantly emit along the hBN-layers, since their dipole is distorted out-of-plane Finally, we prove the performance as QRNG device by probing the photonic quantum state. Therefore, we benchmark the randomness of the binary data stream with the NIST test suite Next, we test the second-order cross correlations of the emission in a HBT setup in the reflection and transmission channel, respectively. Both measurements reveal a clear dip at zero time delay (see figs. 4(b) and (c)). We fit the data with the second-order correlation function with the time delay of the photon arrival times τ , lifetime τ 0 and scaling factor a. Both fits yield values at zero time delay of g (2) (0) = 0.46 ± 0.03 and g (2) (0) = 0.52 ± 0.12 and lifetimes of τ 0 = 0.79 ± 0.07ns and τ 0 = 0.8 ± 0.3ns. Note, that the correlation measurement in transmission is noisier due to reduced count rate. Afterwards, we examine cross correlations between reflection and transmission channel with one APD in each channel. The defect center emits only one photon at a time in a random direction. Hence, spontaneously emitted photons enter the reflection or transmission channel randomly distributed with equal probability. So, there can either be one photon in the reflection channel and none in the transmission channel, or vice versa. We denote these two different states as |1 R |0 T and |0 R |1 T . An emitted photon is in a superposition of these states, before it is detected by an APD in one of the two channels. Each detected photon can be interpreted as a single random bit valued 0 or 1 according to whether it is detected in reflection or transmission, analogous to beamsplitter-based QRNG where R and T denote the relative photon number distribution in the reflection and transmission channel. The single-photon count rate distribution is divided by 9% in channel T and 91% in channel R which limits the overall bit rate but not its randomness nor the second-order correlations, in analogy to imbalanced beamsplitters in HBT setups In conclusion, we showcase the creation of single photon randomness with quantum emitters in hBN where the randomness arises from the symmetry of the dipole emission and the random character of the spontaneous emission process based on the principles of quantum mechanics. By exploiting the random single photon emission directionality, we split the emission into a reflection and a transmission channel by preparing the hBN-flake on a grid situated between two high-NA objectives for photon collection. Each channel is designated as 0 or 1 in order to create a binary random number code. Our realization of QRNG with SPEs does not rely on any beamsplitting optics. Therefore, the rates could be increased by a factor of two as compared to architectures relying on beam splitters. Based on the extracted lifetime of about 0.8 ns and assuming that almost all emitted photons are collected with one of the two channels puts raw bit rates beyond gigabit per second into reach. Furthermore, we operate in a regime of high entropy per raw bit, higher than achievable with classical light sources, where the detectors are not saturated nor limited by dark times. We show that photons emitted from two independent SPEs withstand the tests for randomness. The underlying single photon characteristic of each SPE could be used as additional security test against eavesdropping We also show that the SPEs optical properties persist against nanomanipulation of the hBN-host. The nanomanipulation enables further optimization of the absorption and emission polarization with respect to the experimental setup. The combination with pick-and-place techniques 