Second-order nonlinear optics is the base for a large variety of devices aimed at the active manipulation of light. However, physical principles restrict its occurrence to non-centrosymmetric, anisotropic matter. This significantly limits the number of base materials exhibiting nonlinear optics. Here, we show that embedding chromophores in an array of conical channels 13 nm across in monolithic silica results in mesoscopic anisotropic matter and thus in a hybrid material showing second-harmonic generation (SHG). This non-linear optics is compared to the one achieved in corona-poled polymer films containing the identical chromophores. It originates in confinement-induced orientational order of the elongated guest molecules in the nanochannels. This leads to a non-centrosymmetric dipolar order and hence to a non-linear light-matter interaction on the sub-wavelength, single-pore scale. Our study demonstrates that the advent of large-scale, self-organised nanoporosity in monolithic solids along with confinement-controllable orientational order of chromophores at the single-pore scale provides a reliable and accessible tool to design materials with a nonlinear meta-optics. Second-order optical nonlinearity gives rise to three wave mixing processes including the linear electrooptic (Pockels) effect, second-harmonic generation (SHG), sum-or differencefrequency mixing as well as parametric generation and amplification SHG consists in generating of optical waves of a doubled frequency 2ω induced by high intensity incident light of frequency ω. By symmetry principles such a nonlinear optical effect, similarly as other three wave mixing processes, is allowed only in non-centrosymmetric media, e.g. polar and piezoelectric crystals. SHG can also be observed in doped polymer films that have previously been subjected to electrical poling, i.e. the exposure of a polymer film being heated to moderate temperatures to an high external electric field Here, we first explore SHG induced by corona poling in a chromophore-doped polymer film and then we demonstrate that confinement of the identical chromophore in a nanoporous medium can also result in a composite exhibiting SHG -without corona poling. To that end we deposit the chromophore in parallel, tubular nanochannels 13 nm across in silica (pSiO 2 ) membranes, see Fig. The chromophoric dimer Ethane-1,2-diyl (2E,2'E)-bis(2cyano-3-(5-(4-(diphenylamino)phenyl)thiophen-2-yl)acrylate) (hereafter termed D1, see structure in Fig. A strong electron-donating triphenylamine group (D) of the D1-dimer is linked to an electron-withdrawing cyanoacrylic ester group (A) by a thiophene ring as π-spacer. The D-π-A pushpull segments are characterized by an intramolecular charge transfer band observed in the visible spectral region. The red colored chromophore D1 was used as dopant (10 wt%) for a poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) host film deposited on a glass substrate, see Fig. The free standing pSiO 2 -membranes of 300 μm thickness were synthesized by thermal oxidation of electrochemically formed pSi-membranes at T =800 o C for 12 h under normal atmosphere verified by optical absorption. In Fig. The measured SHG signal is normalized to the SHG response of a crystal quartz measured in ooo-geometry, i.e. χ 111 (SiO 2 ) component. In Fig. The pSiO 2 -membrane with chromophore coated pore walls, by contrast, exhibits the SHG response without poling, see in Fig. In the pSiO 2 :D1 nanocomposite, however, the second-order optical nonlinearity likely follows from the geometrical confinement along with the conicity of the channels. From liquidcrystal based nanocomposites it is known that confinement in nanochannels effectively acts like a geometrical field In conclusion we demonstrate that it is possible to embed the chromophore dimer D1 into polymer PMMA films and mesoporous silica (pSiO 2 ) matrices with mean pore diameter of 13 nm. The synthesized PMMA:D1 and pSiO 2 :D1 composites exhibit second-order nonlinear optical properties. The SHG response, absent in the unpoled chromophore doped polymer film, appears after long-term poling in high electric fields performed at temperatures close to the polymer glass transition point T g . More importantly, the nanoporous pSiO 2 membranes with chromophore coated pore walls exhibit an SHG response without poling. We explain this by an orientational ordering of elongated guest chromophore molecules in the tubuluar, slightly conical nanochannels, i.e. as orientational alignment of chromophore molecules enforced by the geometrical confinement fields. From a more general perspective our study exemplifies how by filling of nanoporous media confinement-controlled ordering on the single-pore scale can be employed to tune the subwavelength light-matter interaction and thus the effective metaoptics of the hybrid materials. From a materials science perspective the resulting hybrids have an integrated optical functionality in combination with a mechanical rigidity provided by the nanoporous silica scaffold structure. Thus our study is a fine example, how self-organized nanoporosity in solids in combination with confinement-induced orientational order of organic chromophores results in materials with a non-linear meta-optics. Disclosures. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.