We investigate superconducting phase transition in superconductor(S)/ferromagnet(F) bilayer with Rasba spin-orbit interaction at S/F interface. This spin-orbit coupling produces spontaneous supercurrents flowing inside the atomic-thickness region near the interface, which are compensated by the screening Meissner currents [S. Mironov and A. Buzdin, Phys. Rev. Lett 118, 077001 (2017)]. In the case of thin superconducting film the emergence of the spontaneous surface currents causes the increase of the superconducting critical temperature and we calculate the actual value of the critical temperature shift. We also show that in the case of type-I superconducting film this phase transition can be of the first order. In the external magnetic field the critical temperature depends on the relative orientation of the external magnetic field and the exchange field in the ferromagnet. Also we predict the in-plane anisotropy of the critical current which may open an alternative way for the experimental observation of the spontaneous supercurrents generated by the SOC. The superconducting states carrying spontaneous current in the systems with broken time reversal symmetry were the subject of interest for more than twenty years Recently the spontaneous supercurrents were predicted to appear at the interface between s-wave superconductor (S) and a ferromagnetic (F) insulator Since spontaneous supercurrents flowing at the S/F interface with SOC appear at T = T c , these currents can affect the parameters of the phase transition (the superconducting critical temperature, the phase diagram in the external magnetic field, the critical current, etc). Although the spontaneous supercurrents result in the local enhancement of the superconductivity near the S/F interface, it was shown 12 that for the large thickness of the superconductor they do not affect the superconducting transition temperature and, thus, with the increase in temperature the superconductivity becomes destroyed in the whole bulk of the sample. This situation is in contrast with the well-known phenomena arising in the superconductors containing twinning planes which locally increase the critical temperature and favor the emergence of the localized superconducting states above the bulk critical temperature (see, e.g., Ref. 26 for review). In the present paper we study the effect of the spontaneous supercurrents on the superconducting phase transition in S/F bilayer with finite thickness of the superconducting layer and SOC of the Rashba type at the S/F interface. We show that in the case of thin superconducting film these currents causes the increase of the superconducting critical temperature T c and we calculate the corresponding critical temperature shift. Surprisingly, in type-I superconductors the superconducting phase transition is of the first order even in the absence of external magnetic field. At the same time, in external magnetic field the critical temperature strongly depends on the relative orientation between external magnetic field and the exchange field in the ferromagnet. Note that in the case of positive (negative) SOC parameter T c is significantly higher (lower) for the parallel magnetic configuration in comparison with the antiparallel one. At the same time, in the case of type-II superconducting layer the emergence of the spontaneous supercurrents also in-creases the superconducting critical temperature in the absence of external magnetic field and makes in sensitive to the relative orientation of external magnetic field and the exchange field, if the sample placed into the field, but the phase transition is of the second order. All described phenomena can serve the hallmarks of the spontaneous supercurrents and can be used for the experimental detection of these currents. The paper is organized as follows. In section II we introduce the model and study the phase transition in the S/F bilayer with type-I superconductor. In section III we calculate the dependence of the critical temperature on the external magnetic field. In section IV we consider type-II superconductor. In section V we analyze the anisotropy of the critical current. In section VI we summarize our results. We consider thin superconducting (S) film of the thickness L placed in contact with a ferromagnetic insulator (F), see Fig. Here α = a(T -T c0 ) and β are the standard GL coefficients, T c0 is the critical temperature of bulk superconductor, D = -i ∇ + 2e c A, A is the vector-potential, n is the unit vector perpendicular to the S/F interface and directed from S to F layer, h is the exchange field in the ferromagnet, ψ is the order parameter of the superconductor and ǫ is the spin-orbit constant, which is nonzero only in the atomically thin area of the width l so near the S/F interface. Without loss of generality, let us assume that the exchange field is directed along the z-axis, i.e. h = he z , the x-axis coincides with n and the S/F interface is located at x = L. In such system spontaneous supercurrents flow near the S/F interface Since the spontaneous supercurrents are fully compensated by the Meissner currents, the magnetic field B = (0, 0, B z ) is absent outside the superconductor and has the following form: Here λ = λ 0 /φ, where λ 2 0 = mc 2 β/(8πe 2 |α 0 |) is the zero-temperature London penetration depth for the bulk superconductor. Note that inside the superconducting slab we neglect the second exponent [see the first line in Eq.( ( Here ∆H = 4 √ 2H cm k so l so (ξ 0 /λ 0 ) is the jump of magnetic field at S/F interface due to spontaneous surface supercurrents, where H cm = 4πα 2 0 /β is the thermodynamic critical magnetic field, k so = mhǫ/ and ξ 0 = 2 /4m|α 0 |. The resulting free energy reads as: where V is the volume of the superconducting slab and S is the surface area of S/F boundary. We find the value of the critical temperature T c and the order parameter φ cr at T = T c by minimizing F with respect to φ and using the condition F = 0, which is fulfilled at the critical temperature. We find: One see that the critical temperature, indeed, increases due to the spin-orbit interaction at the S/F interface. Moreover, since the order parameter does not equal to zero at the transition temperature, in the structure under consideration the phase transition is of the first order. Note that the critical temperature Eq.( The obtained result is valid only if the assumption λ ≪ L is fulfilled at T = T c . To check this, we find the London penetration depth at the critical temperature: Since ∆H/H cm ∼ k so l so (ξ 0 /λ 0 ) and (ξ 0 /λ 0 ) ≫ 1 the assumption λ cr ≪ L is valid if k so l so is not very small. Let us estimate ∆T c = T c -T c0 . Since ǫ = v so /E F , where v so is the spin-orbit velocity and E F is the Fermi energy, the jump of the magnetic field at x = L due to the spontaneous supercurrents can be estimated as , where v F is the Fermi velocity. It is reasonable to take h/E F ∼ 0.1, v so /v F ∼ 0.1. If we also assume ξ 0 /λ 0 ∼ 50, then we find ∆H ≈ 3H cm . Taking λ 0 /L ∼ 0.1 we obtain ∆T c /T c0 ≈ 0.1. Since ∆T ≪ T c0 the Ginzburg-Landau approach is applicable. Note that the first-order phase transition in S/F bilayer with Rashba-type spin-orbit interaction and λ 0 ≪ L ≪ ξ can serve as a hallmark of the spontaneous supercurrents flowing at S/F interface The suitable system for the observation of the discussed effects may be based on thin epitaxially grown layers of extreme type-I superconductors. For example, recently it was demonstrated the epitaxial growth of high-quality single-crystalline aluminum films In the external magnetic field H 0 the critical temperature of superconducting phase transition depends on the relative orientation of H 0 and the exchange field h. For simplicity, let us restrict ourselves to the case H 0 = H 0 e z , where H 0 can be both positive and negative. To find actual T c (H 0 ) dependence let us write down the Gibbs free energy of the system: As before, we consider the case L ≪ ξ and assume ψ ≈ const. Since we also assume λ ≪ L, the magnetic field B = Be z = rotA inside the superconducting slab reads: Calculating the resulting Gibbs free energy we obtain: Note that the surface contribution to the free energy caused by spontaneous supercurrents results in the increases (decreases) of the free energy if The critical temperature and the order parameter at the critical point φ cr can be found from the system of equations G = 0 and ∂ φ G = 0, which are fulfilled at T = T c . From the second equation we find the critical temperature as a function of φ cr : At the same time, the order parameter obeys the equation Solving the equations we indeed find that the critical temperature of the superconducting phase transition strongly depends on the relative orientation of the external magnetic field and the exchange field: for positive (negative) SOC parameter ǫ the T c is higher for the parallel (anti-parallel) orientation compared to the antiparallel (parallel) one (see Fig. At the same time, if ∆H > 0 (∆H < 0) for the antiparallel (parallel) magnetic configuration we find: Note that the above expressions are invalid, when H 0 tends to zero. Assuming H 0 ≪ ∆H from Eq.( Note that the dependence of the critical temperature on the in plane magnetic field orientation is another hallmark of spontaneous supercurrents flowing at the S/F interface In this section we analyze the peculiarities of the superconducting phase transition in the S/F bilayer (see Fig. with the boundary conditions (17) In the absence of the external magnetic field the order parameter reads as ψ(x) = Acoshqx, where q 2 = 4mα/ 2 + k 2 y . Calculating the free energy, we find: Assuming qL ≪ 1 and minimizing the free energy with respect to k y , we find the optimal modulation vector k y = 4k so l so /L. Since at the critical point F=0, we obtain the increase of the superconducting critical temperature: Note that the effect is absent in the limit L → ∞, i.e. for thick superconducting slab. When the sample is placed in the external magnetic field it is convenient to choose the origin of the x-axis at the center of S film, so the S/F boundary is located at x = L/2 and the other boundary at x = -L/2. Following the procedure described in Ref. [28] we introduce the dimensionless coordinate X = 2x/L, the modulation vector K y = k y L/2, the parameters H0 = eH 0 L 2 /(2 c), ǫ 0 = -mαL 2 / 2 and rewrite the GL equation in the following form: At the same time, the boundary conditions read where s = 8k so l so . Next it is useful to introduce the new variable t = 2| H0 |(X + K y /h 0 ). The resulting GL equation and the boundary conditions are the following: The solution of Eq.( where α ± = 2| H0 |(±1 + K y / H0 ). The maximal value of T c at fixed magnetic field corresponds to the minimal value of ν, which satisfies Eq. (25). At fixed K y and H0 this equation has infinite but discrete number of solutions for ν, and we find the minimal one. Then we minimize it with respect to K y and find the minimal value ν 0 for fixed H0 . As a result, we obtain the dependence ǫ 0 ( H0 ) (i.e. T c (H 0 )) in the form ǫ 0 = (2ν 0 + 1)| H0 |, see. Fig. As we can see from the inset in Fig. In this section we show that the spin-orbit coupling makes the in-plane critical current of S/F bilayer anisotropic. Although the total spontaneous superconducting current generated by the SOC is zero, it is nonuniformly distributed across the layers. As a result, for the fixed direction of the exchange field the local current density (and, thus, the local damping of the superconducting order parameter) at a certain point of the S film becomes dependent on the angle θ between the external current and the spontaneous current flowing along the S/F interface. Consequently, the maximal current which does not destroy the superconducting state (critical current) also becomes dependent on θ (diode-like effect). To calculate the critical current of the S/F bilayer we again consider the system sketched in Fig. where τ = 1 -T /T c0 , φ ′ ≡ ∂φ/∂x and A ′ ≡ ∂A/∂x. Varying the free energy with respect to φ(x) and A(x) inside the S layer we drive to the standard set of the Ginzburg-Landau equations supplemented by the boundary conditions accounting the surface energy contribution due to the spin-orbit coupling [the last term with δ-function in Eq. ( The accurate solution of Eqs. ( In order to find the analytical solution of the Ginzdurg-Landau equations we make several assumptions simplifying the calculations. First, we restrict ourselves to the most interesting case of the type-II superconductor and assume that the thickness L of the S film is much smaller than the superconducting coherence length so that L ≪ ξ ≪ λ. Second, we consider the limit of small spin-orbit coupling assuming the dimensionless parameter μ = ∆Hλ 0 /(H cm L) to be small (μ ≪ 1). These assumptions allow us to expand the functions A(x) and φ(x) over x keeping the terms up to (L/ξ) 3 in order to account the non-uniform distribution of the superconducting current across the S film: Also in the resulting perturbation theory it is enough to consider the terms proportional to μ and neglect the higher order contributions. Substituting the expansion for A and φ into the equations ( Then the critical current J c of the S/F bilayer can be obtained as the maximum of the dependence J(a 0 ) for a 0 > 0. This maximum corresponds to a 0 = μ and can be written in the form Here the sign + (-) corresponds to the current flowing parallel (anti-parallel) to the y axis. The expression (32) clearly shows the anisotropy of the critical current which differs for the two opposite directions of the current flow. The difference between the critical currents J ± c is proportional to the spontaneous magnetic field ∆H generated at the S/F interface due to the SOC. Note that the critical current is higher if the exchange field in the F layer is parallel to the magnetic field generated by the external current at x = L and lower in the opposite case. The equation (32) can be straightforwardly generalized for the case of arbitrary direction of the external current in the plane of the S/F structure. In this case the ± sign in the brackets should be replaced with cos θ where θ is the angle between the direction of the current and the y axis. The predicted diode effect provides the alternative way for the experimental observation of the spontaneous currents generated by the SOC. To protect the S/F bilayer from the distraction caused by the heating effects one may use the pulse currents To sum up, we develop the theory of superconducting phase transition in superconductor/ferromagnet bilayer with Rasba-type spin-orbit interaction at the S/F interface and L ≪ ξ (see Fig. In the case of type-II superconducting layer the phase transition is the second order one, its critical temperature also increases in the absence of external magnetic field and depends on the relative orientation between external magnetic field and the exchange field, if the former is present. We also show that the critical current of the S/F bilayer reveals anisotropy in the plane of the layers. The resulting diode-like effect may provide an alternative way for the experimental observation of the spontaneous superconducting currents generated by the SOC at the S/F interface.