We evaluate the spin-wave spectrum and dynamic susceptibility in a layered superconductor with helical interlayer magnetic structure. We especially focus on the structure in which the moments rotate 90 • from layer to layer realized in the iron pnictide RbEuFe4As4. While in nonmagnetic superconductors low-frequency magnetic field decays on the distance of the order of the London penetration depth, spin waves mediate its propagation to much larger distances limited by external dissipation mechanisms. The spin-wave spectrum in superconductors is strongly renormalized due to the long-range electromagnetic interactions between the oscillating magnetic moments. This leads to strong enhancement of the frequency of the mode coupled with uniform field and this enhancement exists only within a narrow range of the c-axis wave vectors of the order of the inverse London penetration depth. The key feature of materials like RbEuFe4As4 is that this uniform mode corresponds to the maximum frequency of the spin-wave spectrum with respect to the c-axis wave vector. As a consequence, the high-frequency surface resistance acquires a very distinct asymmetric feature spreading between the bare and renormalized frequencies. We also consider excitation of spin waves with the Josephson effect in a tunneling contact between helical-magnetic and conventional superconductors and study the interplay between the spin-wave features and geometrical cavity resonances in the current-voltage characteristics. Experimental realization, characterization, and understanding of quantum materials have emerged as central topics in modern physics research. Quantum materials have the potential to offer new functionalities enabling novel applications and therefore provide a fundamental basis for future technological advances. Superconductors supporting long-range magnetic order represent a rare class of quantum materials with unique properties caused by the interplay between magnetic and superconducting subsystems Several classes of magnetic singlet superconductors have been discovered and thoroughly characterized. The magnetism in these materials is hosted in the rareearth-element sublattice spatially separated from the conduction-electron sublattice. In spite of high density of rare-earth (RE ) local moments, the superconductivity survives because the exchange interaction between two sublattices is relatively weak. Various nonuniform magnetic structures have been revealed in the coexistence regions. The first two groups of magnetic superconductors discovered half a century ago are ternary molybdenum chalcogenides (Chevrel phases), such as HoMo 6 S 8 , with superconducting transition at T c ≈ 1.2 K Another important class of magnetic superconductors is the rare-earth nickel borocarbides RE Ni 2 B 2 C, see reviews Contrary to singlet Cooper pairing, a rare triplet superconducting state may coexist with uniform ferromagnetism. Such triplet state is realized in uranium-based compounds UGe 2 , URhGe, and UCoGe, which become superconducting at sub-Kelvin temperature range, inside the ferromagnetic state, see reviews Interest in the physics of magnetic singlet superconductors has been recently reinvigorated by the discovery of the magnetically ordered iron pnictides, in particular, europium-based 122 compounds, see review A recent addition to the family of Eu-based iron pnic-tides is the stoichiometric 1144 compounds AEuFe 4 As 4 with A=Rb New materials frequently host new physical phenomena. In this paper we investigate spin waves and related properties for layered superconductors with helical magnetic structure with the modulation perpendicular to the layer direction. Spin waves is the most important dynamic characteristic of magnetic materials We also investigate excitation of spin waves with AC Josephson effect in a tunneling contact between helicalmagnetic and conventional superconductors and study the interplay between spin-wave features and geometrical Fiske resonances in the current-voltage characteristics. This consideration is somewhat related to the excitation of the spin waves by the Josephson effect in the ferromagnetic interlayer in SFS junctions The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the model and write general relations determining the spin-wave spectrum via the dynamic magnetic susceptibility. In Sec. III, we consider the helical magnetic ground state. The bare spin-wave spectrum due to the short-range interactions is derived in Sec. IV. In Sec. V, we investigate the response to nonuniform magnetic field and derive the nonlocal dynamic susceptibility. Electromagnetic renormalization of the spectrum is considered in Sec. VI. In Sec. VII, we consider the dynamic equation for smooth magnetization, derive the magnetic boundary condition, and evaluate the frequency dependence of the surface impedance. In Sec. VIII, we investigate the excitation of spin waves by the Josephson effect. We consider a layered magnetic superconductor described by the energy functional where the term is the kinetic energy of the superconducting subsystem in the London approximation determined by the com-ponents of the penetration depth λ i and A is the vector potential determining the local magnetic induction, B = ∇×A. In the following, we consider the Meissner state and drop the phase of the superconducting order parameter φ. We assume that the magnetic subsystem is described by the classical quasi-two-dimensional easyplane Heisenberg model where S i,n is the spin at the site i and in the layer n with the absolute value equal to S, J is the in-plane exchange constant, K is the easy-plane anisotropy, and J z, are the interlayer exchange constants. The exchange constants likely have a substantial RKKY contribution. The behavior of J z, for > ξ c /d is strongly affected by superconductivity Slowly varying in space oscillating magnetization generates macroscopic magnetic fields which couple with this magnetization. This effect is especially important in superconductors where it leads to significant renormalization of the spin-wave spectrum We can transform this equation into the equation connecting the local magnetic field strength H = B -4πM and magnetization For time-dependent fields, this equation is modified by quasiparticle currents. We neglect this contribution assuming that the time variations are slow. On the other hand, the oscillating magnetic field generates oscillating magnetization due to dynamic magnetic response and the relation between their Fourier components is determined by the dynamic magnetic susceptibility χ (k, ω), Note that the poles of χ (k, ω) give the bare spin-wave spectrum due to local interactions unrenormalized by long-range fields. From Eqs. ( In the following, we consider a simple geometry of the wave vector oriented along the z direction and isotropic in-plane case, λ x = λ y ≡ λ. In this case, Eq. ( with α = x, y. Note that the off-diagonal susceptibility χ xy (k z , ω) is finite in the helical magnetic state. Since χ yx (k z , ω) = -χ xy (k z , ω), we obtain the following equation for the spin-wave spectrum renormalized by longrange electromagnetic interactions The dynamic susceptibility χ αβ (k, ω) can be evaluated by solving the Landau-Lifshitz equation in the linear order with respect to small deviations of the magnetization from the equilibrium configuration. Here γ = gμ B / is the gyromagnetic factor. We neglected the damping terms. We start with consideration of the helical interlayer magnetic ground state determined by the energy in Eq. (3). In the classical description, it is convenient to introduce the unit vectors s i,n = (cos φ i,n cos θ i,n , sin φ i,n cos θ i,n , sin θ i,n ) along the direction of S i,n , S i,n = Ss i,n . Then we can rewrite the energy in Eq. ( with new parameters J = J S 2 , K = KS 2 , and J z, = J z, S 2 . The advantage of the constants K, J, and J z, is that they immediately represent the energy scales of the corresponding interactions. Frustrated interlayer interactions may lead to the helical ground state corresponding to φ (0) i,n = qn and θ (0) i,n = 0 is the discrete Fourier transform of the interlayer interactions. The total energy also has an electromagnetic (dipole) contribution, which is substantially affected by superconductivity. As follows from Eq. ( where M n = dn M m n is the two-dimensional moment densities, d is the separation between the magnetic layers, and z n = nd. Note that the superconducting environment leads to the finite magnetic field outside a uniformly polarized layer, contrary to the normal-state case, in which such field is absent. The corresponding magnetic induction and vector-potential are Substituting these distributions into superconducting and magnetic energy terms in Eq. (1), we derive the bulk electromagnetic energy density Therefore, for the helical order, M x,n = M 0 cos (Qn), M y,n = M 0 sin (Qn), the bulk electromagnetic-energy cost is where M 0 = M 0 /d = n M m 0 is the bulk saturation magnetization. The corresponding energy per spin E em (Q) = F em (Q)/n M has to be compared with the exchange energy in Eq. ( We proceed with evaluation of the ground-state modulation wave vector Q. Equation ( (16) If we keep only three nearest neighbors, this equation becomes The energy has a minimum at q = Q if The last two equations determine the optimal modulation vector in the case of frustrating interlayer exchange interactions. In the following, we will pay special attention to the case of commensurate modulation with Q = π/2 realized in RbEuFe 4 As 4 . In this case, assuming J z, = 0 for > 3, the relation in Eq. ( The condition for the minimum, Eq. ( x,i,n + s 4 y,i,n ). In addition, such anisotropy locks the Q = π/2 state within a finite range of the interlayer exchange constants around the relation J z,1 = 3J z,3 . Such 4-fold anisotropy, however, does not completely eliminate the ground-state degeneracy, because the helical state, φ (0) n = πn/2, still has the same energy as the double-periodic state with φ (0) n = (0, 0, π, π, 0, 0, . . .). The simplest term eliminating the latter degeneracy is the nearest-neighbor biquadratic term J z,b (s i,n s i,n+1 ) 2 with J z,b > 0. Without the 4-fold anisotropy term, this yields the modified energy and the modified ground-state condition Local coordinate system (ς, ξ, η) used for computation of the spin-wave spectrum. For three nearest neighbors this gives For Q = π/2 the condition J z,1 = 3J z,3 remains unchanged, while the condition for minimum becomes 2J z,2 -J z,b < 0. In the following analysis, we will assume the hierarchy of the energy constants J z,b , K 4 J z, < K J. In this case, the degeneracy-breaking terms ∝ J z,b , K 4 select the Q = π/2 state but have only a minor impact on the properties discussed in this paper. In this section, we investigate a bare spectrum of spin waves due to the local exchange interactions neglecting coupling to macroscopic fields. We consider spin waves propagating along the direction of helical modulation (z axis) assuming that spin oscillations are uniform in the layer direction. In the following derivations, we drop the in-plane index i, S i,n → S n . A useful trick allowing for analytical solution is to introduce a local coordinate system ς, ξ, η following local equilibrium spin orientation To fix the global coordinate system, we assume (x, y) = (ζ 0 , ξ 0 ) meaning that Correspondingly, the spin components in the rotated and global coordinates are related as This and inverse transformations can also be presented in the complex form with δ = ±1. The Landau-Lifshitz equation for spin dynamics in the rotated basis can be written as where h n = -∂E m /∂S n is the local reduced magnetic field acting on spins in the layer n, which, according to Eq. ( For small spin oscillations, the local ζ component of each spin can be taken as a constant, S ζm → S. Substituting h jn into Eqs. ( We can see that, in spite of the helical structure, in the rotating coordinates this system is uniform. Fourier transformation S uq = n S un exp (-iqn) yields the 2×2 linear system from which we obtain the spectrum in terms of the reduced wave vector q. Since Q is the ground-state modulation wave vector, J z (q) has maximum at q = Q, as discussed in Sec. III. This property influences the spectrum shape near q = 0 and Q. Spin oscillations in the propagating wave have both in-plane and out-of-plane components. Substituting ω s (q) into Eq. (25b), we derive the relation between the spin components in the mode From Eq. (21b), we obtain the in-plane oscillating spin components in real space We should emphasize that, as q represents the wave vector in the rotating-coordinates basis, the real-space spin components S x,y do not behave as exp(iqn). In particular, the mode with q = 0 corresponding to the uniform helix rotation does not generate spin variations uniform in real space. The mode with q = Q will play a key role in the following consideration. For this mode, the in-plane spin components are a superposition of the uniform and 2Q terms. The presence of the uniform n-independent component in the q = Q mode implies that it can be excited by the oscillating uniform field. The frequency of the mode for q = Q is given by the geometrical average of the easyplane anisotropy and combination of the interlayer exchange constants, From Eq. ( We see that it decreases with increase of the easy-plane anisotropy. In the case Q = π/2 and the three-neighbor model discussed in Sec. III B, using Eq. ( This frequency vanishes at q = 0 and π. The q = 0 mode corresponds to uniform helix rotation. Zero frequency at q = π is a consequence of the degeneracy with respect to the relative rotation of two sublattices, which is the property of the exchange model in Eq. ( (33) We see that the frequency has a maximum at q = π/2 for K > |J z,2 |. Moreover, one can check that in this case ω s (π/2) is the largest frequency in the spectrum. We will focus on this case because it is likely realized in RbEuFe 4 As 4 . Brillouin zone For the modulation vector π/2, the magnetic unit cell contains four layers. Correspondingly, the folded magnetic Brillouin zone is four times smaller than the crystalline Brillouin zone. It is therefore useful to present the spin-wave spectrum in the folded Brillouin zone, which better corresponds to a standard crystallographic description. Introducing the index j numbering magnetic unit cells, we present the layer index as n = 4j + ν with ν = 1, 2, 3, 4. Correspondingly, the spins can be repre-sented as where k is the wave vector within the folded Brillouin zone. Using the presentation in Eq. (21b) for S ξn = S 0 exp (iqn), we write The integer m should be selected to reduce k to the range [-π, π]. This means that the four modes within such folded Brillouin zone correspond to the frequencies where ω s (q) is the spectrum for vector q within the original crystalline Brillouin zone, Eq. ( In addition, the boundary values of the frequencies are connected as At the center of the folded Brillouin zone, k = 0, the first mode corresponds to the uniform spin rotations, A x,ν (0) = -S 0 sin(πν/2), A (0) y,ν (0) = S 0 cos(πν/2). Its frequency vanishes in the absence of the four-fold anisotropy term. The second and third modes at k = 0 correspond to the modes at q = ±π/2 coupled to the uniform field, Eq. ( The fourth mode at k = 0 corresponds to mutual rotation of odd and even sublattices, A x,ν (0) = S 0 sin(πν/2), A y,ν (0) = S 0 cos(πν/2), and its frequency also vanishes without degeneracybreaking terms. A. Arbitrary modulation wave vector In this section, we consider the response to the external oscillating nonuniform magnetic field hn = gμ B Hn . The real-space components ( hxn , hyn , hzn ) correspond to rotating-coordinates components ( hξn , hζn , hηn ) with hζn = hxn cos (Qn) + hyn sin (Qn) , (35a) hξn = -hxn sin (Qn) + hyn cos (Qn) , and hηn = hzn . In the presence of such external field, equations for the linear spin oscillations, Eqs. ( where hαq is the Fourier transform of hαn . The solution of these equations can be presented as S ηq = χ S ηξ (q, ω) hξq + χ S ηη (q, ω) hηq , where we defined the susceptibility components in the rotating-coordinates basis, and ω s (q) is given by Eq. We emphasize that here and below the wave vector q corresponding to real space is distinguished from the 'fractur' wave vector q in the rotated basis which we used above. We use the result for S ξq from Eq. (37a), in which we substitute the field Fourier components hξq = 1 2 δ=±1 iδ hx,q+δQ + hy,q+δQ , following from Eq. (35b). This yields the spin response in real coordinates S yq = χ S yx (q, ω) hx,q + χ S yy (q, ω) hyq with the real-space spin susceptibility components As expected, in addition to the usual diagonal response at the same wave vector, the helical magnetic structure also generates nondiagonal susceptibility and responses at the wave vectors shifted by the modulation wave vector Q. Note that the bulk magnetic susceptibility χ αβ (k z , ω) in Eq. ( We will be mostly interested in the smooth spin response to smooth field with the wave vectors much smaller than Q. In this case, we can drop the shortwave length terms hx (q±mQ) with m = 0, i.e., keep only the first lines in Eqs. (39a) and (39b). In addition, to obtain the long-wave length response, we use the small-q expansion (recall that J z (Q) < 0), 1 In our notations, kz and q in Eq. (40a) are the dimensional and dimensionless c-axis wave vectors, respectively, with q = dkz with a s = 2S 2 KJ z (2Q) and Note that for incommensurate-modulation wave vector Q, the linear coefficient a s is finite meaning that the frequency ω s (q) does not have an extremum at q = Q. The important particular cases of this result include the response to the uniform oscillating field which features the antiferromagnetic resonance at the uniform mode frequency, ω = ω s (Q), Eq. ( which only depends on the interlayer exchange constants. The long-range off-diagonal component χ S xy (q, ω) is given by It vanishes for q → 0 proportionally to q, χ S xy (q, ω) ≈ -2iS 2 Ka s q meaning that the transverse spin response is proportional to the field gradient S x ∝ ∂ hy /∂z. For the commensurate modulation with Q = π/2, the spin response, Eq. (39a), simplifies as xx (q, ω) hx,q + hx,π-q + χ S xy (q, ω) hyq + hy,π-q where the diagonal susceptibility, Eq, (40a), explicitly is given by and we used the relation χ S xx (π-q) = χ S xx (q). In the small-q expansion, Eq. ( For the three-neighbor model, Eq. ( The behavior of the off-diagonal component is very different from the case of incommensurate modulation. It vanishes in the static case and for finite frequency in the small-q limit it behaves as i.e., it vanishes ∝ q 3 for q → 0. This behavior allows us to neglect the off-diagonal component in the further phenomenological considerations. In this section, we consider the renormalization of the spin-wave spectrum in the superconducting state due to the long-range electromagnetic interactions between the local moments using Eq. ( s (Q∓q) following from Eqs. (40a) and (40b), we obtain the equation for the renormalized spin-wave spectrum, ω = Ω s (Q∓q). The solution of this equation is The second term gives the spin-wave frequency enhancement due to the long-range electromagnetic interactions. The maximum enhancement is realized near q = 0 corresponding to the uniform mode, Eqs. ( where μ x0 = 1 + 4πχ xx (0, 0) is the static magnetic permeability. Neglecting a weak q dependence in the nominator of the second term in Eq. ( The key features of the commensurate state with Q = π/2 are that (i)the frequency ω s (q) has maximum at q = Q (for K > |J z,2 |) and (ii)the off-diagonal spin susceptibility vanishes as q 3 for q → 0 and therefore its contribution in Eq. ( with the static susceptibility χ xx (0, 0) = n M (gμ B ) 2 /(8|J z,2 |) and c s is given by Eqs. Solution of Eq. ( In particular, the renormalization of the uniform mode is again given by Eq. ( Figure In this section we consider magnetization response to the alternating magnetic field at the surface and derive the magnetic boundary condition. Here and below, we limit ourselves to the commensurate case Q = π/2, for which the frequency of the z-axis uniform mode is maximal. As follows from the shape of the susceptibility, Eq. ( with χ 0 = χ xx (0, 0), ω 2 0 = ω 2 s (Q), and ζ 2 0 = c s d 2 /ω 2 s (Q). This equation is only valid for smoothly varying magnetization, i. e. for ζ 0 |∇ z M | 1. On the other hand, the local magnetic field H is connected with the magnetization as The magnetic length scale ζ 0 is much smaller than the London penetration depth λ. We find the magnetization response to the external oscillating magnetic field. This corresponds to the boundary condition for H(z, t) at the surface, z = 0, This condition has to be supplemented by the boundary condition for the magnetization, which is usually assumed as We look for the oscillating magnetization and field at the semispace z > 0 in the form In the absence of internal dissipation mechanisms, the parameters κ α (ω) may be either purely real or purely imaginary. It is clear that in the former case κ α (ω) has to be positive. Care should taken to select the correct sign for purely imaginary κ α (ω). Since for the spectrum described by Eq. ( which give the quadratic equation for κ 2 α (ω) Solution of this equation is We select 1 corresponding to the validity range of Eq. ( Consider important special cases of Eq. ( while at renormalized frequency ω = √ μ x0 ω 0 , we have However, in the latter case the value of κ 1 is already beyond the applicability range of Eq. ( is satisfied almost everywhere, except a narrow region where the frequency is very close to ω 0 . Away from this region, we can expand meaning that the parameters κ 1 and κ 2 mostly describe magnetic and superconducting decay, respectively. The approximation is valid until the second term in κ 2 1 is small with respect to the first one giving a somewhat more accurate condition for the expansion ω 2 /ω 2 0 -1 √ μ x0 -1ζ 0 /λ. In addition, the condition ζ 0 |κ 1 | 1 implies that the result for κ 1 is only valid for ω 2 /ω 2 0 -1 1. However, the result for κ 2 2 in Eq. (64b) corresponds to the approximation of local magnetic response, ζ 0 → 0, and it remains valid even when the condition ζ 0 |κ 1 | 1 breaks, e.g., in the limit ω → 0. In the immediate vicinity of the frequency ω 0 , in the range ω 2 /ω 2 0 -1 √ μ x0 -1ζ 0 /λ, the parameters κ 2 α can be evaluated as This region is characterized by a very strong mixing of spin and supercurrent oscillations. The key observation is that, in contrast to nonmagnetic superconductors, where low-frequency magnetic field decays on the distance of the order of the London penetration depth, in our case for frequency smaller than √ μ x0 ω 0 one of the parameters κ α is complex meaning that the oscillating magnetic field penetrates at much larger distance limited by external dissipation mechanisms. We now proceed with evaluation of the vector coefficients M 0α and H 0α from Eqs. ( relation 4πM 0α into the boundary condition for H, we obtain a 2 × 2 linear system for the magnetization coefficients which yields the solution (66) The corresponding field components are . The amplitude of the field inside the superconductor with oscillating coordinate dependence, H osc , corresponding to purely imaginary κ α is given by H 01 for ω < ω 0 and by H 02 for ω 0 < ω < √ μ x0 ω 0 . It determines the long-propagating microwave field mediated by the spin waves. Figure for different frequencies. We see that the pronounced oscillating contribution emerges near ω ∼ ω 0 and dominates in the range ω 0 < ω < √ μ x0 ω 0 ≈ 1.73ω 0 , while the corresponding wave length of oscillations increases as the frequency approaches √ μ x0 ω 0 . Slightly above this frequency, the microwave field monotonically decreases but with very large decay length. The interaction between the magnetic superconductor and outside world can be conveniently formulated in terms the boundary condition connecting the gradient ∇ z H with the field at the surface. From Eq. ( , we can rewrite this boundary condition as with FIG. In the range ω 2 /ω 2 0 -1 √ μ x0 ζ 0 /λ the parameters κ α are given by Eqs. (64a) and (64b). In this case |κ 1 | |κ 2 |, λ -1 and we obtain a simple approximate result Note that this result corresponds to the approximation of local magnetic response and it remains valid even in the regime where In particular, it gives correctly the static-case result η ω=0 = √ μ x0 . On the other hand, at ω = ω 0 , using Eq. ( In the range ω 2 /ω 2 0 -1 2 (μ x0 -1), we derive the following approximate scaling form, The real and imaginary parts of the complex function v(u) are connected by the relation Re The real part reaches the maximum value equal to 1.162 at u ≈ -0.436. The asymptotics of v(u) in the range u This matches the result in Eq. ( Figure slightly below ω 0 , at ω ≈ ω 0 (1 -0.218ζ 0 /λ √ μ x0 -1), while -Im(η ω ) reaches the same maximum slightly above ω 0 , at ω ≈ ω 0 (1 + 0.218ζ 0 /λ √ μ x0 -1). In the range ω 0 < ω < √ μ x0 ω 0 , the real part of η ω is much smaller than -Im(η ω ). Finally, in the region ω > √ μ x0 ω 0 the imaginary part is zero, while the real part monotonically increases asymptotically approaching unity. The parameter η ω is directly connected with the conventional parameter characterizing the microwave response, surface impedance To establish this connection, we have to relate the tangential electric field with the normal gradient of the magnetic field. At small frequencies, we can use the London relation 4π c ∂jx ∂t ≈ cλ -2 E x neglecting a small contribution from the quasiparticle current and the Maxwell equation -∇ z H y = 4π c j x omitting the displacement current. This gives -∇ z H y = c iωλ 2 E x and from Eq. (68a) we obtain The real part of this equation, R s = Re(Z), can be converted to the practical formula for surface resistivity Figure The presence of magnetic order inside superconducting material provides a unique possibility to generate and manipulate magnons using the AC Josephson effect. In this section, we consider the excitation of spin waves in a tunneling contact between a conventional superconductor marked by the index 1 and a superconductor with helical magnetic structure marked by the index 2, as illustrated in Fig. We follow the standard derivation of the dynamic equation for the gauge-invariant phase difference between two superconductors θ = φ 2 -φ 1 -2πt Φ0 A z taking into account the dynamic magnetization response. The starting point of derivation is the z component of the Maxwell equation, in which the total current density across the junction is composed of the superconducting and quasiparticle contributions, j z = j s,z + j n,z , where the superconducting contribution is given by the DC Josephson relation, and the quasiparticle contribution is determined by tunneling conductivity σ, j n,z = σE z . The electric field is related to the phase by the AC Josephson relation To relate ∇ x H y in Eq. ( Here, we neglected the displacement current assuming small frequencies and quasiparticle current inside the superconductors. This leads to the relation between the in-plane phase gradient and magnetic fields where j x,i and H y,i are the current densities and the magnetic fields at the surfaces of two superconductors and B y is the magnetic induction inside the junction. We assume a nonmagnetic interlayer meaning that B y = H y . Also, for the nonmagnetic superconductor in the Meissner state at z < -t, we have ∇ z H y,1 = B y /λ 1 . To obtain the close system, we need the boundary condition connecting ∇ z H y,2 with H y = B y at the surface of the magnetic superconductor at z = 0. Note that H y (z) is continuous, while B y (z) has a jump at z = 0. Due to magnetization dynamics, this boundary condition is frequency dependent. At fixed frequency, such boundary condition has been derived in Sec. VII and is given by Eq. (68a), which in our case becomes ∇ z H y,2 = -η ω B y /λ 2 . The complex parameter η ω is determined by the general result in Eq. (68b). In the approximation of local magnetic response valid for frequencies not too close to the bare uniform-mode frequency ω 0 , it has a much simpler approximate presentation in Eq. Applying ∇ x to both sides, substituting ∇ x H y from Eq. (74), and using the Josephson relations for current and electric field, Eqs. ( where ε ω ≡ ε -4πiσ/ω and [sin θ] ω notates the time Fourier transform of sin [θ(x, t)]. The only difference from the standard phase-dynamics Sine-Gordon equation Therefore, the effective junction interlayer width t = t+ λ 1 + √ μ x0 λ 2 is enlarged by the magnetic response. From the last equation, we can evaluate the static Josephson length In the next subsection we consider the influence of magnetic response on the spectrum and damping of the electromagnetic wave propagating through the Josephson junction. The superconductor-insulator-superconductor sandwich structure with sufficiently large width is a waveguide capable of supporting a traveling electromagnetic wave where is the Josephson plasma frequency. Note that the magnetic response does not modify this parameter. It is convenient to rewrite Eq. (82) in the reduced form 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 0 with the static Josephson length λ J , Eq. ( The parameter η ω has the strongest feature around ω = ω 0 . Therefore, the spectrum of the Josephson plasmon is substantially affected only if ω p < ω 0 . Figure , where c s0 is the low-frequency Swihart velocity In this region the spin waves give a small contribution to the mode damping. The intermediate region ω 0 < ω w,r (k) < √ μ x0 ω 0 is characterized by a sharp enhancement of the damping caused by excitation of the spin waves. Finally, in the high-frequency region ω w,r (k) > √ μ x0 ω 0 the damping caused by spin waves is absent and the spectrum approaches the high-frequency limit ω w,r (k) , where c s1 is the high-frequency mode velocity, In this limit the influence of magnetism is weak. Transport properties of a Josephson junction in the magnetic field directly probe its dynamic response with the wave vector and the Josephson frequency Representing sin θ 0 (x, t) = Re [-i exp (ik B x+iωt)], we obtain from Eq. ( with where c s0 is the low-frequency Swihart velocity, Eq. (86). We look for the solution of Eq. ( (93) Assuming the nonradiative boundary conditions, ∇ x θ = 0 for x = 0, L, we find the coefficients A c and A s , and substitute them into Eq. ( The average Josephson current density is given by Substituting θ(x) from Eq. ( The key difference from the standard result where ω p is the Josephson plasma frequency, Eq. (83). To facilitate numerical calculations, we rewrite Eq. (97) in the reduced form. We define the dimensionless size L = L/λ J and frequency ω = ω/ω p . We also introduce the reduced wave-vector parameters kB = λ J k B and pω = λ J p ω = (ω 2 -iν σ ω) r ω , where ν σ is the dimensionless damping parameter, Eq. ( (99) The product kB L here may be related to the magnetic field as kB L = πB y /B L = 2πΦ y /Φ 0 , where Adding the tunnel quasiparticle current, j n = σE z , we obtain the total current in the reduced form This equation together with Eq. (99) determines the current-voltage characteristic in the reduced form in the second order with respect to the Josephson current. The shape of the current-voltage characteristic mostly depends on the relation between the Josephson plasma frequency ω p , the location of the first Fiske resonance ω 1 = πc s1 /L, and the two typical spin-wave frequencies ω 0 and √ μ x0 ω 0 . As the resistive state is stable until the Josephson frequency exceeds the plasma frequency ω p , Eq. (83), spin waves can be excited only if ω p is at least smaller than √ μ x0 ω 0 . The clearest spin-wave features can be observed if ω p ω 0 . In addition, the behavior is also very sensitive to the junction size L. For junctions narrower than the typical size L c = c s1 π/( √ μ x0 ω 0 ), the whole spin-wave region ω 0 < ω < √ μ x0 ω 0 is located below the Fiske resonances allowing for its clear resolution. For wider junctions the behavior is more complicated, because in this case the Fiske resonances are located both above and below the spin-wave region and some of them may fall inside this region. A very special situation is realized for the particular junction size L res , at which the the first Fiske resonance is very close to ω 0 . To estimate this junction size, we substitute the maximum value of Re (η ω ) ∼ λ/ζ 0 (μ x0 -1) 1/4 to Eq. ( For this size, at the Josephson frequency slightly below ω 0 the excited cavity mode generates the strongest spin wave inside the magnetic superconductor. Figure Correspondingly, two strong peaks are realized at both frequencies. The largest size 3λ J exceeds both L c and L res (top plot). The first Fiske resonance in this case is located below ω 0 and is slightly separated from the peak marking the onset of the spin-wave region. Correspondingly, the spin-wave region is located in between the first and second Fiske resonances. We also observe larger amplitude of the spin-wave feature in the region ω > ω 0 . The reason is that the condition for the first resonance in Eq. ( We demonstrated that the AC Josephson effect in a tunneling contact between conventional and helicalmagnetic superconductor can be utilized for the excitation of spin waves. Such excitation is most efficient when the Josephson frequency is in the range between the two typical spin-wave frequencies ω 0 and √ μ x0 ω 0 . In this range the current-voltage characteristic has a dis- tinct feature similar to one in the frequency dependence of the surface resistance. In addition, the spin-wave feature may strongly perturb the shape of Fiske resonances and the power of the excited spin wave may be enhanced when the Fiske resonance falls into the spin-wave region. In summary, in this paper we consider spin waves and related observable effects in superconductors with helical magnetic order. Most computed specific results correspond to the structure realized in the iron pnictide RbEuFe 4 As 4 , in which the moments rotate 90 • from layer to layer, Fig. We also investigate excitation of spin waves with the AC Josephson effect in a tunneling contact between helical-magnetic and conventional superconductors. For the most efficient excitation of spin waves, the Josephson plasma frequency has to be smaller than the bare uniform-mode frequency ω 0 . In addition, the features in the current-voltage characteristics are very sensitive to the junction size due to the interplay between the spin-wave excitation and Fiske resonances. The simplest behavior is realized in small-size junctions, when the renormalized frequency √ μ x0 ω 0 is below the lowest Fiske resonance. In this case, the whole spin-wave region is separated from the Fiske resonances and has a strongly asymmetric shape resembling the feature in the surface resistivity, see the inset in Fig. The author would like to acknowledge discussions with Ulrich Welp, Wai K. Kwok, Yi Li, and Valentine Novosad on possible experimental observations of the effects discussed in this paper. This work was supported by the US Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division.