Surface plasmons with MHz-GHz energies are predicted by using milliparticles made of metamaterials that behave like metals in the radiofrequency range. In this work, the so-called Radioplasmonics is exploited to design scatterers embedded in different realistic media with tunable absorption or scattering properties. High-quality scattering/absorption based on plasmon excitation is demonstrated through a few simple examples, useful to build antennas with better performance than conventional ones. Systems embedded in absorbing media as saline solutions or biological tissues are also considered to improve biomedical applications and contribute with real-time, in-vivo monitoring tools in body tissues. In this regard, any possible implementation is criticized by calculating the radiofrequency heating with full thermal simulations. As proof of the versatility offered by radioplasmonic systems, plasmon "hybridization" is used to enhance near-fields to unprecedented values or to tune resonances as in optical spectra, minimizing the heating effects. Finally, a monitorable drug-delivery in human tissue is illustrated with a hypothetical example. This study has remarkable consequences on the conception of plasmonics at macroscales. The recentlydeveloped concept of "spoof" plasmons achieved by complicated structures is simplified in Radioplasmonics since bulk materials with elemental geometries are considered. Conceived originally in optics, Plasmonics has been evolving due to the increasing possibilities offered by nano-technology, extending its domain to higher and lower energies. Its main relevance is attributed to its sensitivity and versatility at small scales compared with its simple working principles Simultaneously, the appropriate manipulation of methods, materials, and techniques in meso and nanoscales facilitated the development of Metamaterials (MMs) In particular, the control of the EM field in the radiofrequency (RF) range has become essential for the increasing antenna technologies, information networks, and Internet of Things Moreover, from a theoretical point of view, the complex light-matter interactions that occur in plasmonic nanosystems need to be better understood for future developments in light manipulation. A bigger-scale framework of these interactions would be significant provided that easy and more controllable experiments could be performed with lower energies and costs. As an example, the plasmonic nanoantennas have been always compared with their RF counterparts On the other hand, a lot of research has been done to apply plasmonics in biomedicine In a recent work by the author In particular, Ref. In this paper, the concept of Radioplasmonics is focused on scattering phenomena in RF in addition to absorption to develop new applications. A novel Plasmonic concept is shown in macroscale with particle dimensions less than a few millimeters or centimeters Differently from the previous work in Radioplasmonics To start the discussion about RP excitation, the EM response by several RF-MM particles is shown (Figure Note that several peaks appear in the responses that are easily identifiable with plasmonic excitations. Mie theory is used to identify the multipolar plasmon resonances as it is usually performed for plasmonic examples in the optical range Figure As a complement of the study realized in Figure Figure Note that the efficiencies by metal rods (lines with symbols) have a single peak in the range calculated, being its spectral location the same in both cases. Its frequency corresponds to the resonance occurring at λ 2 = length as in usual rods used in half-wave dipole antennas. Differently, the dipole resonance in the RP rod follows a condition λ eff 2 ~length where λ eff is an effective wavelength that depends on the material and geometric properties of the system Another interesting feature to examine regarding radioplasmonics is the near-field distributions. Figure It is not the scope of this paper to provide details to build RF antennas nor compete against complex antenna designs as the typical patch antennas or PIFA of a cellphone, for instance. However, the phenomena lying in Figure The presence of ions diluted in water remarkably changes its EM properties by allowing water to strongly absorb the RF radiation. In this regard, it is common to assume a strong dependence of the refractive index on the salt type and concentration as well as on the temperature of the solution Although a lower frequency range should be even more suitable for tissue applications, as biological entities are more transparent to lower energies, the signal bandwidths would be narrowest thus preventing antennas' interchange of information with high data rate. Then the range studied here can still be useful to conceive real applications. Below, the EM properties of RP systems in saline solutions are analyzed to evaluate in-vivo and real-time body theragnosis. One of the most important aspects to be considered in this regard is the EM heating of tissues and saline solutions The RF heating of electrolyte solutions was analyzed recently in Ref. ( This expression means that a bell-shape function can be obtained for the absorbed power as a function of σ for a given frequency. This phenomenon corresponds to the heat generation in the solution due to the ions' oscillations and depends macroscopically on the EM properties of the solution. In other words, the model assumes that the viscous friction of the oscillating ions is the cause of the RF heating in the solution. As reported in Noteworthy, this peak-dependence on the frequency plays a key role in the evaluation of the RF heating in realistic water solutions if one intends to use RP phenomena, and it is very different from what can be found in optical photothermal therapy when nanoparticles are used. The contribution due to equation ( The frequencies in Figure In Figure To evaluate the temperature localization in and around the particle, the spatial profiles of the temperature increase are calculated as a function of distance from the particle's center for several values of time, always taken before 6 minutes (Figure Another remarkable point in this particular example is the huge field enhancement in a confined space that is possible to produce with such a hybrid structure. A gigantic field enhancement of ~3.5 × 10 3 is obtained in a space of d = 0.3 mm in this case. Although this value is obtained in DI water, it can still be very useful in radiofrequency applications like underwater RF identification or plasma experiments in water After the examination of the heat generation of solutions in a stationary regime, a system constituting a solid RP sphere immersed in human tissue is investigated, Figure There are other interesting frequency regions where the RP mm-antenna principle could be useful. For instance, enhanced signals are also found for each tissue around 800 MHz that can distinguish the scatterers in different tissues by the intensity and not by frequency (not shown here). As a complement, Figure A dielectric core-RP shell particle embedded in a human small intestine is simulated for several core media. Paracetamol is used as core media in different concentrations that are represented by their corresponding dielectric functions in the RF range Figure It is not the purpose of this work to design precise RF devices for different applications but to show the tremendous possibilities that excitation of RP devices may allow in different host media. Specifically, several drugs can be used if their permittivity functions are known as insulin in diseases associated with diabetes Radioplasmonics consists of an extension of optical plasmonics to the radiofrequency range, based on realistic metamaterials able to mimic metal conduction in MHz to GHz regions. It naturally generalizes and complements the recently-developed techniques based on "spoof" plasmons. Other novel concepts as Terrestrial surface plasmon", and "Soft-Plasmonics" are automatically included in the discussion. This work defined for the first time plasmonics of composite systems on a human-living scale. The perspectives that bring the concept of Radioplasmonics were fully explored. Different from a recent work by the author, in which the radioplasmonic absorption of microparticles was taken to enhance photoacoustic signals, the full electromagnetic properties of radioplasmonic particles were taken here into consideration, namely absorption and scattering produced by bigger particles. Centimeter or millimeter particles of several shapes could be easily synthesizable with the current technologies. The near-fields of these scatterers revealed that huge field enhancements and confinements can be achieved. As a consequence of the present studies, easy and low-cost radiofrequency experiments could be designed to study complex plasmonic phenomena and to trace similarities with smaller-scale (optical) systems. Scatterers in air were proven to be useful for antenna design. Specifically, the new sub-wavelength antennas turned to be more efficient than conventional antennas and pave the way to build miniaturized structures for any modern telecommunication devices. Every future design on radiofrequency networks/ radiofrequency identification/ near-field communication should take into consideration the novel plasmonic phenomena stated here. An extensive study of simple scatterers in water-like and biological media was also performed. Furthermore, by using a few illustrative examples based on Radioplasmonics, ideas were given to improve remarkable biomedical applications as real-time, in-vivo monitoring drug-delivery in real human body tissues. As a complement, the RF heating and scattering in absorbing tissues/ saline solutions were studied in the worst realistic scenario, consisting of using continuous illumination and maximum allowed power. As absorbing media as saline water was used, the results may find applicability in technologies like water desalinization, radiofrequency ablation, underwater communication, and food treatment, among others.