Hydrogen, the smallest and most abundant element in nature, can be efficiently incorporated within a solid and drastically modify its electronic state -it has been known to induce novel magnetoelectric effects in complex perovskites and modulate insulator-to-metal transition in a correlated Mott oxide. Here we demonstrate that hydrogenation resolves an outstanding challenge in chalcogenide classes of three-dimensional (3D) topological insulators and magnets -the control of intrinsic bulk conduction that denies access to quantum surface transport. With electrons donated by a reversible binding of H + ions to Te(Se) chalcogens, carrier densities are easily changed by over 10 20 cm -3 , allowing tuning the Fermi level into the bulk bandgap to enter surface/edge current channels. The hydrogen-tuned topological materials are stable at room temperature and tunable disregarding bulk size, opening a breadth of platforms for harnessing emergent topological states. The ability to control carrier density -a key parameter of the electronic state of condensed matter -is central to achieving access to the topologically protected surface states in three-dimensional (3D) topological materials (TIs) that ideally are insulating in the bulk As a result, bulk conduction can dominate the surface channels, hindering the studies of the Dirac states and their implementation in topological spintronics and fault-tolerant quantum computing Recent realizations of a nontrivial quantum anomalous Hall (QAH) state, featuring dissipationfree chiral edge currents In a newly discovered important class of intrinsic topological magnets (ITM) Here we demonstrate a remarkably efficient and facile way to reversibly tune bulk carrier densities by over 10 20 cm -3 in different classes of layered topological materials by using insertion and extraction of ionic hydrogen to achieve access to topological surface states. The source of H + ions is a dilute aqueous hydrochloric acid (HCl) solution, which leaves the TI crystal structure intact and has an extra benefit of removing native surface oxide while passivating surfaces and preventing reox-idation under exposure to air. We show that H + in TIs, by preferentially forming an H-Te(Se) moiety within van der Waals gaps, donates electrons to the system and moves Fermi level from the bulkvalence (BVB) to bulk-conduction (BCB) bands, crossing the bulk bandgap to display an ambipolar pto n-type conductance conversion at the charge neutrality point. The process is fully reversible, as hydrogen-chalcogen moiety can be disassociated by a low-temperature annealing protocol under which hydrogen is easily removed. It is also multiply-cyclable and reproducible, thereby resolving one of the key limitations of magnetic and nonmagnetic TIs. Generally, crystal growth of tetradymite crystals such as Bi 2 Te 3 and Bi 2 Se 3 results in equilibrium defect configurations comprising vacancies and antisites on different sublattices The ultralight hydrogen diffuses rapidly and easily incorporates into many materials Our key and a most immediately notable result shown in Figure After each annealing step the system is room-temperature stable and can be further finetuned by the conventional electrostatic gating. Figure ) is precisely reversible upon changing the direction of the V g sweep -the absence of hysteresis is a clear indication that hydrogenation does not create surface traps The type conversion on hydrogenation and de-hydrogenation is clearly seen in the magnetic field dependence of Hall resistance R xy (Fig. n b e changing sign in the conversion region. Figure , where ∆G(B) is the low-field quantum correction to 2D magnetoconductance, coefficient α = n Q /2 equals to 1/2 for a single 2D channel, The change in the net carrier density induced by hydrogenation is reflected in the Shubnikov-de Haas (SdH) quantum oscillations of Hall resistance at higher fields (Fig. shows that the Fermi vector k F is much reduced after hydrogenation (Supplementary Table ably effective in other chalcogen-based TI. We have achieved the type conversion across the CNP in Se-containing materials, such as Bi 2 Te 2 Se (Supplementary Fig. The technique is also very powerful in magnetic TI, and particularly in a very promising ITM class. One example is the intrinsic ferromagnetic MnBi 2 Te 4 /Bi 2 Te 3 superlattice ( SLs or ∼ 8 nm) (29) to reduce the contribution from bulk conduction channels and to be able to deplete bulk carriers by electrostatic gating. We demonstrate that through hydrogen-tuning of E F we can turn the bulk AFM ITM into an insulating state sans voltage gating. Figure Finally, we remark that a paucity of bulk-insulating topological materials significantly impedes the search for emergent topological quantum phenomena, with the prospect for real-world applications remaining far off. Hydrogen-tunability of high bulk carrier densities expands the availability of robust and easily accessible platforms for observing and harnessing distinct topological phases with stunning macroscopic manifestations, such as dissipationless edge transport of charge and axion electrodynamics 