For the realization of magnonic devices, spin-wave dispersions need to be identified. Recently, the timeresolved pump-probe imaging method combined with the Fourier transform was demonstrated for obtaining the dispersions in the lower-wavenumber regime. However, the measurement takes a long time when the sampling rate is sufficiently high. Here, we demonstrated the fast acquisition of spin-wave dispersions by using the compressed sensing technique. Further, we quantitatively evaluated the consistency of the results. Our results can be applied to other various pump-probe measurements, such as observations based on the electro-optical effects. Spin waves are collective modes of spin precession in magnetically ordered materials. They are considered promising information carriers in the field of magnonics, because they can propagate over a long distance without Joule heating The propagation characteristics of spin waves are manifested in their dispersion relation. The higher-wavenumber regime is governed by exchange interactions. In contrast, lowerwavenumber spin waves are governed by magnetic dipole interactions and are called magnetostatic waves Experimental techniques for acquiring dispersion relations of spin waves are being actively studied. For example, inelastic neutron scattering Recently, a method called spin-wave tomography (SWaT), which used time-resolved pump-probe measurements and the Fourier transform to visualize the dispersion relations of spin waves in the lower-wavenumber region was demonstrated For observing the dispersion, a sufficiently high sampling rate must be maintained for the time-resolved measurement. This is because of the risk of folding noise due to the nature of the discrete Fourier transform (DFT). As a result, the measurement time can range from 10 hours to several days. To search for novel photo-induced dynamics in innumerable materials, the measurement time must be reduced. In recent years, in experiments such as the terahertz imaging In this letter, we demonstrate the fast acquisition of the spinwave dispersions by time-resolved pump-probe measurements using compressed sensing. Moreover, we quantitatively evaluated the effect of reducing the number of measurements in compressed sensing on the results of observations. Our experimental setup is shown in Fig. The light pulse for this pump-probe measurement was generated by a Ti:sapphire regenerative amplifier with a pulse duration of 70 fs and a repetition rate of 1 kHz. A circularly polarized pump pulse with a central wavelength of 1300 nm was focused along a line parallel to the -axis with a cylindrical lens with a fluence of 80 mJ cm -2 . This pump pulse produced an effective magnetic field in the -direction via the inverse Faraday effect Let = /Δ be the number of samples in the time domain of the time-resolved pump-probe measurement. Owing to the nature of the DFT, the frequency resolution of the spectrum is Δ = 1/ . In addition, according to Nyquist's theorem, the frequency components above 1/(2Δ ) cannot be observed, and they appear as folding noise. Therefore, with regard to reducing the measurement time, decreasing leads to a poor resolution, and increasing Δ increases the risk of the appearance of folding noise. Compressed sensing is a method of reducing by taking Δ randomly, without changing , and estimating the spectrum from such data. Since Δ is not a constant, the DFT does not work well, resulting in spectral leakage. Instead, the spectrum can be estimated by the LASSO method. In the LASSO method, the spectrum estimation is treated as an inverse problem. Let y = ( ( 1 ), ( ( The second term on the right-hand side in Eq. ( where f and g are vectorized data of the dispersion relations. Here, f is the dispersion calculated by LASSO from the = 361 data as the most ideal dispersion available from the present data and g is the dispersion with reduced to be compared. For the DFT method, was reduced by taking Δ as 0.01 ns multiplied by the divisors of 360 without changing . For the LASSO method, random sampling with = 10, 20, • • • , 360 was performed in ten ways each, and the mean and standard deviation of the CSs were calculated. Moreover, the points = 0, 0.01, 3.60 ns were always sampled to maintain the frequency resolution and the Nyquist frequency. Figure Figure The excited modes were the backward volume magnetostatic waves, which are mainly dominated by magnetic dipole interactions, and they have a negative gradient of dispersion Figure It is necessary to discuss in what systems LASSO can be applied. Empirically, samplings 2-5 times the number of sparse coefficients is sufficient to reconstruct the spectrum using the 1 norm In conclusion, we demonstrated the fast acquisition of spinwave dispersion by using compressed sensing. Further, we quantitatively evaluated the effects of random sampling on the results of the LASSO method. This technique significantly reduced the measurement time for acquiring the dispersion relations. Moreover, this method of applying compressed sensing to time-resolved pump-probe measurements is not limited to the magneto-optical imaging of spin waves, to various experiments based on pump-probe measurements, such as observations via the electro-optical effects and the refractive index modulations. 