CeRh2As2, a non-symmorphic heavy fermion material, was recently reported to host a remarkable phase diagram with two superconducting phases. In this material, the two inequivalent Ce sites per unit cell, related by inversion symmetry, introduce a sublattice structure corresponding to an extra internal degree of freedom. Here we propose a classification of the possible superconducting states in CeRh2As2 from the two Ce-sites perspective. Based on the superconducting fitness analysis and the quasiclassical Eilenberger equations, we discuss two limits: Rashba spin-orbit coupling and interlayer hopping dominated normal state. In both limits, we are able find two scenarios that generate phase diagrams in qualitative agreement with experiments: i) intra-sublattice pairing with an evenodd transition under magnetic field, and ii) inter-sublattice pairing with an odd-odd transition under magnetic field. The heavy fermion CeRh 2 As 2 was recently discovered to host remarkable properties in the superconducting state Theory developed in the context of layered superconductors with local inversion symmetry breaking accounts for the qualitative features of the temperature versus magnetic field phase diagram of CeRh 2 As 2 Nevertheless, the phenomenology of CeRh 2 As 2 indicates that other scenarios might be possible. In particular, the small anisotropy of the effective mass, inferred from the slope of the upper critical field around T c , indicates that the system is rather three-dimensional tions Motivated by these facts, here we analyse the possible unconventional superconducting states that can be hosted by CeRh 2 As 2 . We start with focus on the main ingredient, the Ce ions, and propose a microscopic model for the normal state Hamiltonian based on the spin and arXiv:2102.09425v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 18 Feb 2021 sublattice (SL) degrees of freedom (DOF). This model allows us to discuss two limits: i) two-dimensional, dominated by Rashba-SOC, and ii) three-dimensional, dominated by ILH. We then classify all possible types of Cooper pairs that can be formed in this material. We perform the superconducting fitness analysis and discuss the relative stability of different superconducting states in both limits. Finally, we obtain temperature versus magnetic field phase diagrams from the quasiclassical Eilenberger equations, based on which we can propose two scenarios for superconductivity in CeRh 2 As 2 . CeRh 2 As 2 has a CaBa 2 Ge 2 -type structure with the non-symmorphic centrosymmetric space group P4/nmm (No. 129). Given the heavy fermion nature of the electronic structure around the Fermi energy inferred by recent experiments, we start modelling the electronic DOF from the Ce sites perspective. The Ce atoms are located in between Rh-As layers which appear intercalated in two flavors: with Rh atoms tetrahedrally coordinated by As, or vice-versa, as schematically shown in Fig. We start with the most general non-interacting normal state Hamiltonian considering Wannier functions localised at the Ce atoms accounting for a two SL structure: where ) encodes the two SLs (1, 2) and the spin (↑, ↓) DOF. The 4 × 4 matrix Ĥ0 (k) can be parametrized as: where τa and σb are Pauli matrices, {a, b} = {1, 2, 3}, or the two-dimensional identity matrix, {a, b} = {0}, corresponding to the SL and spin DOF, respectively. In presence of inversion (implemented as τ 1 ⊗ σ 0 accompanied by k → -k) and time-reversal symmetry (implemented as iτ 0 ⊗ σ 2 , accompanied by complex conjugation and k → -k), only the (a, b) pairs summarized in Table (1, 0) and (2, 0) stem from inter-SL hopping which in this case is necessarily out-of-plane, with These terms are parametrised by t u and t d , the hopping amplitudes to the nearest neighbors in the layer above and below, which are inevitably distinct due to inversion symmetry breaking. (3, 1) and (3, 2) are concerned with intra-SL staggered Rashba-type SOC, h 31 (k) = -α sin(k y a) and h 32 (k) = α sin(k x a), parametrized by α. Finally, The superconducting order parameter can be written in a similar fashion: (3) In presence of inversion symmetry, we can distinguish between even or odd in k and even or odd parity gap functions. Within the standard weak-coupling formalism, the superconducting fitness analysis allows us to discuss the relative stability of superconducting states based on properties of the normal electronic state , and the normalized gap matrix ∆(k) with ∆(k) F S = 1. The superconducting fitness analysis for CeRh 2 As 2 is summarized in Table For the intra-SL Cooper pairs (a = 0, 3), we find that SOC stabilizes spin singlet states (b = 0), while for inter-SL pairs SOC stabilizes triplet states with d-vector along the z-axis (b = 3). Among the intra-SL pairs, a finite ILH stabilizes [0, 0], and among the inter-SL pairs it supports Within the rough assumption that pairing in all channels has same strength, we can conclude that the trivial order parameter with matrix structure [0, 0], an even parity intra-SL spin singlet (BCS) state, is the absolutely most stable superconducting state since all terms in the normal state Hamiltonian support the instability in this channel. We note here that within the assumption of t u = t d and λ = 0, the In presence of a magnetic field along the z-axis, the proposed PDW state, an odd parity intra-SL spin singlet, here captured by With these facts at hand, we now examine the behaviour under magnetic field of the four order parameters identified above. The hierarchy of energy scales motivates the writing of a quasiclassical theory assuming For simplicity, here we take t u = t d and λ = 0 and study the interplay of the magnetic field B, Rashba SOC α and ILH |t u + t d |. We extend the linearized Eilenberger equations of Ref. Given the extremely large upper critical field observed experimentally, the discussion above suggests that the normal state is SOC dominated. Note, though, that this limit does not allows us to distinguish between the intra-SL and inter-SL scenarios, as illustrated by Fig. In this work, we do not discuss the pairing mechanism. For a realistic discussion, details of the FS in the heavy fermion regime are needed in order to investigate possible spin-fluctuation mechanisms. Also, the clarification of the nature of the hidden order observed at 0.4K and its association with multipolar order brings an interesting possibility for exotic pairing from multipolar interactions In summary, we have analyzed all possible superconducting order parameters for CeRh 2 As 2 within the Cesites perspective. We find temperature versus magnetic field phase diagrams in qualitative agreement with experiments for both SOC and ILH dominated normal states. We have identified two possible scenarios for the two superconducting phases observed in CeRh 2 As 2 : i) even-odd intra-SL, associated with the previously proposed PDW scenario, and ii) new odd-odd inter-SL scenario. Our work stimulates more efforts in the field of complex locally noncentrosymmetric materials with extra internal degrees of freedom. We have preliminary evidence that the joint action of SOC and magnetic field might lead parity mixing in both low and high field phases. We detail this possibility in a future more extended manuscript. Further theoretical work analyzing the interplay of normal state parameters and magnetic field, as well as topological aspects are interesting directions for future work. . Symmetry allowed (a, b) terms in the normal state Hamiltonian, as given in Eq. 2. The table highlights the irrep, the even or odd k dependence, the associated physical process and dominant parameter for each term.