Solar grade silicon (SoG-Si) is a key material for the development of crystalline silicon photovoltaics (PV), which is expected to reach the tera-watt level in the next years and around 50TW in 2050. Upgraded metallurgical grade silicon (UMG-Si) has already demonstrated to be a viable alternative to standard polysilicon in terms of cost and quality. This study presents the life cycle assessment (LCA) of UMG obtained by the FerroSolar process. Moreover, it shows the environmental impacts of PV modules and electricity generation based on this material. For this, an exhaustive review of the life cycle inventory (LCI) of PV value chain, from metallurgical grade silicon (MG-Si) down to electricity generation, has been carried out updating inputs for all processes. The Balance of System (BoS) has also been updated with real state of the art data for a fixed open ground large PV site (100 MW). Two different electricity mixes, with low and high carbon intensities, have been considered. The results reveal that for PV electricity generation using UMG instead of polysilicon leads to an overall reduction of Climate change (CC) emissions of over 20%, along with an improvement of the Energy Payback Time (EPBT) of 25%, achieving significantly low values, 12 gCO2eq / kWhe and 0.52 years, respectively. Moreover, it is shown that UMG silicon feedstock is not the main contributor to the carbon and energy footprint of the produced electricity, leaving the first place to PV module manufacturing. Solar photovoltaics is a crucial technology for achieving a decarbonized electricity in the coming years PV has already demonstrated to be an economically viable source of electricity. Its current and expected Levelized costs of Energy (LCOE) are below either fossil or other renewable energies As PV worldwide installed capacity points to the terawatt-level in the next five years Under the denomination of "solar grade silicon" (SoG-Si), different grades are described, regarding to their concentration of impurities according to the "Specification for Virgin Silicon Feedstock Materials for Photovoltaic Applications" (SEMI PV17-1012) The UMG silicon assessed in this work has been manufactured through the metallurgical route by means of the process developed by Ferrosolar in Spain. In a previous mass production test, performed in commercial solar cells and modules production lines, this feedstock has proven to be appropriate for PV applications For the past decade, new PV manufacturing capacity has been mostly installed in China and other places in Asia, covering the whole value chain, from polysilicon to PV modules. It has been previously pointed out that the environmental impact of these production sites is higher than in other regions, in spite of the contribution of higher scale to the optimization of the technologies The potential of PV as leading decarbonization technology rests upon the zero-emissions production of electricity for its lifetime, but the environmental impact associated to its full life cycle needs to be addressed. Countries as France, and recently South Korea, are regulating the carbon footprint of PV modules eligible for large scale tenders and subsidies Life Cycle Assessment is a comprehensive, standardized and internationally recognized approach for quantifying all emissions, resource consumption and related environmental and health impacts linked to a product. A fair amount of publications have dealt with LCA for PV for the past three decades including various recent reviews The objective of this research work is to assess the environmental impacts of UMG silicon based solar PV systems in comparison with traditional state of the art polysilicon-based ones, by means of a comparative LCA. Climate change (CC) emissions and EPBT have been selected as main indicators and Cumulative Energy Demand (CED) and Acidification (terrestrial and freshwater) (ATF) are also reported. To achieve a fair comparison of UMG and standard polysilicon, a comprehensive full PV value chain analysis has been carried out. Moreover, the analysis has been made for two electricity mixes, with different carbon intensities, as electrical power input has a decisive role in the overall impact of PV value chain The environmental impacts have been estimated using process-based LCA, according to the Methodology Guidelines on Life Cycle Assessment of Photovoltaic Electricity published by the International Energy Agency process for electricity production. The functional unit used in this study is 1 kWh of electricity produced by a ground mounted multicrystalline PV system with a nominal capacity of 100 MW. The selected functional units for each step included within the boundaries of the studied system can be found in the Supplementary Material (S1). This "cradle to use" system includes the following items: -Production of raw material: metallurgical grade silicon from silica sand -Production of the solar grade silicon feedstock: Ferrosolar UMG silicon and polysilicon for solar applications -Production of multicrystalline silicon ingots and wafers -Al-BSF (Back Surface Field) multicrystalline solar cell manufacturing -Multicrystalline PV module manufacturing -Balance of system (BoS), ground mounting and electrical gear for a 100MW plant -Installation, operation and maintenance of the PV system In general terms, transport of the different materials between production steps has been not considered, with exception of PV modules transport to PV site location. Production sites do not have a defined location and may be very close to each other. Moreover, it has been shown before that transportation only accounts for a minor part of the final impact in electricity End-of-life (EoL) has been taken out of this study due to the lack of industrial scale data, as this PV systems have not still reached the minimum volume needed for economical reutilization and recycling processes that will be needed by the end of the next decade An uncertainty analysis was not performed in this study as no coherent sets of values where available for all the stages. Previous results indicate that the main factor for uncertainty is electrical consumption and the most affected stage is the silicon feedstock production Regarding the environmental impacts, all categories present in the EF method were calculated, but the focus was set on Climate Change. Additionally, Acidification terrestrial and freshwater (ATF) results are presented. To complement this result, cumulative energy demand (CED), total and non-renewable, was also assessed, together with the energy payback time (EPBT) for the considered scenarios. This parameter, expressed in years, was calculated as per equation (1) Where: CED: Total cumulative primary energy demand for the considered system Life-cycle energy efficiency of the grid mix into which the considered system is embedded (a value of 0.31 is assumed). All background inventory data is taken from ecoinvent 3.5 database. The selection criteria for processes in the database has been using Europe All calculations have been carried out for both UMG and polysilicon feedstocks considering two different electricity mixes: Spanish (ES) and Chinese (CN) (Supplementary Material S2). Spanish mix (REE, 2019) has been selected because Ferrosolar process is meant to be carried out in the facilities located at Puertollano, Spain No other difference has been made between the scenarios calculated for ES and CN electricity mix, as it is not in the scope of this work to evaluate the impact of the manufacturing locations of the different stages and would introduce additional variability in the results. The metallurgical production of silicon (MG-Si) implies the reduction of quartz with carbon in electric arc furnaces to obtain the silicon. Some wood chips are normally added to the reacting mix too, in order to get permeability in the mass and promote reaction between gaseous intermediates present in the furnace, as SiO(g) and CO(g) Extractive mining of quartz main inputs are petrol based fuels and electricity, both of which depend significatively on the mine characteristics and the processes employed for product beneficiation Metallurgical grade silicon production is a mature process from a technical point of view. Values from ecoinvent have been used for inventory, with some minor changes. The values presented in this database are representative of the Norwegian producer (Elkem). Electricity consumption diverges from some values for Chinese production that can be found in literature Solar grade silicon used by industry as silicon source for crystalline silicon PV devices manufacturing at the present time is produced mainly by a closed-loop Siemens process, in which trichlorosilane Siemens CVD deposition technology is combined with hydrochlorination of silicon tetrachloride for recovery of vent gases. This is the technology used by leading SoG-Si producers in China Ferrosolar's UMG silicon for solar applications has a boron concentration bellow 0.2 ppmw and a phosphorous concentration that can be tailored between 0.1 and 0.3 ppmw. Metals concentration is below 0.5 ppmw (including Fe, Al, transition, alkaline and alkaline earth elements). These specifications are suited for multicrystalline silicon applications. The UMG production process description can be found in previous works Mass allocation has been applied to by-products, as avoidance or economical criterions are difficult to formulate and can be considered a source of arbitrariness. As it has been pointed out, polysilicon, silicon ingot and wafer production, have seen an important improvement in their yield and energy consumption, driven by optimization of processes and equipment. In this study only the multicrystalline silicon process is analysed because UMG Silicon application without blending is limited to this technology, due to its higher level of impurities when compared with high quality polysilicon. High performance multicrystalline casting (HP-mc) Regarding the wafering process, the most important development, diamond wire sawing (DWS) has been included in the LCI. The implementation of DWS has been very disruptive, becoming the only technique used for multicrystalline silicon wafering by 2019 For the LCI formulation of the wafering process main assumptions include a silicon consumption of 0.665 kg per 1m 2 of wafer, for 156.75 x 156.75 mm wafers. The yield of the process, in terms of silicon mass, is over 60%, much higher than the 40% achieved by MWSS technique. Standard Aluminium Back Surface Field (Al-BSF) technology for PV solar cells manufacturing has been considered. Details regarding said process can be found in a previous work The BoS includes all the necessary equipment to install the PV modules in the desired configuration and transform the electricity to its final use. The following processes have been contemplated: site conditioning, mounting structure, electrical installation and inverters, PV panel transportation and installation. Inventory for mounting structure and electrical installation has been calculated from current real data gathered from TINOSA Project, comprised of several plants, with a total installed power of 180MW. This PV site, located in Almería (Spain), is currently under construction by Aurinka PV International The modelled PV plant has a total installed power of 100 MWpk, a fixed structure and a set of PV skids comprised of central inverter, switchgear and transformer. Production values are also calculated for the ubication of the mentioned project. A reduction of 0.5% in the produced electricity due to self-consumption was set for EPBT calculations. Tables reporting the full results obtained for the life cycle assessment can be found in the Supplementary Material (S4) for all process stages studied in this work. 3.1 LCIA Results The results for electricity mixes used in this study are first discussed, in order to support the analysis of the results obtained for the rest of the analysed processes, some of which have large electricity consumptions. Results can be found in the Supplementary Material (S5). The impacts considered for Spanish (ES) and Chinese (CN) electricity mixes present very large differences, about 3 and 10 times higher for the latter for CC and ATF categories respectively. This essentially is the result of the different weight of fossil-based electricity production technologies. Coal (hard coal and lignite) is responsible for more than 90% of CC emissions and ATF, in the case of CN mix, whereas natural gas accounts for around 60% of CC for ES mix, that adds up to the contribution of coal (around 20%) and oil (5%). Nuclear and renewables (60% of the mix) do not add significative CC emissions in this case. On the other hand, the coal contribution to ATF in ES mix goes over 75%, despite its relatively low share in the mix (about 5%), thus giving a low absolute total value when compare to CN mix. CED comparison shows much less differences, being 15% higher for CN, relying mainly on coal instead of natural gas combined cycle and nuclear, as nonrenewable generation technologies. CC emissions calculated for Spanish mix, 0.201 kgCO2eq / kWhe, are very similar to those published by the responsible official entity (European Environment Agency, 2020), and can be considered among low intensity mixes, whereas Chinese mix, with 0.591 kgCO2eq / kWhe, would belong to high carbon intensity mix group. The results for PV electricity production in the assessed scenarios are presented in Figure In the case UMG-ES, the value obtained for Climate Change (CC) category is 12.10 gCO2eq / kWhe and for Acidification (terrestrial and freshwater) (ATF) is 9.25•10 -5 molH+eq/ kWhe, according to the definitions in the EF method. The result for Total Cumulative Energy Demand (CED) is 5.67•10 -2 kWh/ kWhe. Predictably, due to the higher carbon intensity of its energy mix, UMG-CN CC category result is 33% higher than UMG-ES. As explained in the previous section, the only difference considered in the LCI between these scenarios is the electricity mix. ATF category behaves in a similar manner, although in this case UMG-CN is 133% higher than UMG-ES. This is due to the important share of hard coal in Chinese mix, in contrast to the relatively low share in the Spanish mix (see Supplementary Material S5). On the other hand, when the CED is compared the differences are not as significant, achieving UMG-ES scenario a result less than 5% lower than UMG-CN. The same trend is observed when poly-ES and poly-CN scenarios are compared, intensified by the higher energy demand, mostly electricity, of these scenarios when compared to the former. This results in a difference of 43% in CC, 185% in ATF and 6% in CED categories, between poly-ES and poly-CN scenarios. The comparison of UMG-ES/poly-ES and UMG-CN/poly-CN scenarios indicate that in the cases where UMG-Si was used as feedstock, electricity production impacts are noteworthy lower, although the differences where not as remarkable as in the previous comparison for ATP, being more significant in the case of CED. The differences between the pairs UMG-ES/poly-ES and UMG-CN/poly-CN are 24% and 15% for CC and 33% and 41% for ATF respectively. The observed results can be attributed to the higher electricity and heat demand characteristic of polysilicon manufacture, that will be shown in detail in next section. Climate change calculated emissions vary between 12.1 and 21.4 gCO2eq/ kWhe for UMG-ES and poly-CN scenarios. Comparing with previous studies that can be found in literature shows that the results are somewhat lower than those published before. It is important to note that these comparisons are not straight forward, as parameters that characterize each case study may differ, having some of them very important influence on the overall result, as for example the efficiency of the solar cell, and therefore of the PV module, the irradiation of the location selected or size of the installation, which may vary from less than 10 kWpk for domestic installations to hundreds of MWp for utility-scale PV parks. It is also common in literature to find studies in which the type of silicon used is a mixture of both mono and multicrystalline materials. Moreover, different systems boundaries are defined, and various LCA assessment methods are used, leading to different results. In order to put the obtained outcomes into context, a set of case studies from literature have been selected and their conditions and results gathered in the Supplementary Material (S6). The criteria for selection have been that the systems considered resembled the present study as much as possible. We are aware that this evaluation is problematic, for example for climate change emissions, as assessment methods have different definitions for impact categories, but nonetheless it provides useful information for discussion. This was in fact the main reason to evaluate four different scenarios in this work, ensuring that the results would be comparable to each other. Some very complete works In the case of UMG feedstock, literature values are scarce. Elkem Solar, back in 2012 (de Wild-Scholten and Gløckner, 2012), reported values for UMG electricity production GWP of about 29 gCO2eq / kWhe. It is to note that Elkem used for their calculations of the UMG silicon feedstock impact the Norwegian electricity mix, which has an especially low carbon intensity as it relies mainly on hydropower. In a more recent work Regarding polysilicon performance, more information is available in literature for a validation of the results. A recent study In order to gain insight of the reasons behind the obtained overall result for PV electricity production, an analysis of the contribution of the different production stages is carried out. The share of each process for CC, ATF and CED is shown in Figure The absolute contribution of the BoS and Installation to the overall result are the same in all the scenarios, as only one location for the PV site has been considered. It is to be noted that the inputs for the inventory have been obtained from a specific project (TINOSA plant, in Almería (Spain)) and are therefore conditioned by the characteristics of the site: i.e., wind velocity, ground slope profiles... On the other hand, the values used are representative of the state-of-the art regarding BoS of large size ground installations. The calculated need of structural steel is 42 kg per kWpk installed, which is of the same order as 31 kg/kWpk Regarding PV module manufacturing, impacts are also very similar in all the scenarios for both CC and ATF categories (see Table Results for polysilicon are comparable to those found recently in published works. Regarding the absolute total results for ingot, wafer and cell manufacture steps, consumption of electrical power is relevant, leading to big differences of the impact calculated for scenarios with different electricity mixes. As no distinction is considered in the processing of UMG and polysilicon for ingot, wafer and cell production, variations are caused solely by the energy mix used for calculations, resulting in very large differences between ES and CN scenarios, about 85% higher values for the later in the case of CC. The same behaviour is observed in the ATF category results, intensified by the big difference between ES and CN mixes for this category, leading to values over 4.5 times higher for these processes when Chinese mix is employed. The critical role of electricity in the impact of these processes is clearly shown in Figure The trends observed for CC and ATF are not found in CED results for the different scenarios, as this parameter is only slightly affected by the electricity mix. As could be expected, a big discrepancy is found between UMG and poly scenarios, whereas small variations are observed when the Spanish mix is compared to the Chinese one. The use of UMG instead of polysilicon leads to a reduction of 33% in the CED per kWhe. This is of much importance in the calculation of the energy payback time of the different technologies. For UMG scenarios the main contributor to CED is the PV module fabrication step, followed by PV cell production, while for poly scenarios it is the silicon feedstock the largest contributor. The obtained results are difficult to compare to those than can be found in open literature, because even the more recent studies do not include the use of DWS, and still rely on data from MWSS processes, essentially taken from databases or previous literature Regarding the impact of the silicon feedstock Fan et.al. studied four scenarios including both materials, for multi and monocrystalline wafers. Their results show that ratios between multicrystalline UMG and poly are 0.235 for PED (Primary Energy Demand) and 0.267 for CO2 emissions. In the present work the calculated ratios are 0.432 and 0.456, respectively, higher because of the lower impact of the wafering process. Multicrystalline ingot casting, apart from the mentioned contribution of electrical power, has a significant one by argon. This consumption (0.75 kg/ kg ingot) was found out to be significantly lower than some literature values (1.92 kg/kg ingot It has already been revealed that UMG based PV electricity has less carbon footprint and a smaller demand of energy than polysilicon, but in order to explain the differences a detailed comparative analysis of both materials is carried out. The full results of the assessment for UMG-Si and polysilicon can be found in the Supplementary Material (S4), both for ES and CN electricity mixes. CC, ATF and CED results per kg of SoG-Si produced are shown in Figure The trends observed for ATF and CED are very similar to those found for PV electricity. For ATF, we find higher value in CN mix scenarios, being the contribution of this coal intensive generation more important than the process for SoG-Si production itself. That means that UMG-Si obtained applying CN mix would have more impact in terms of ATF than the polysilicon obtained with a mix including less share of coal, 69.8•10 -2 against 29.9 molH+eq/kg. On the contrary, it is the SoG-Si production process the determining factor for CED results, those obtained for polysilicon are about 3 times higher than for UMG. This is related to a higher electrical power consumption (85 kWh/kg for polysilicon and 26.5 kWh/kg for Ferrosolar UMG considered process) and the use of heat as input in polysilicon production (180 MJ/kg). The electrical mix is solely responsible for the differences found between the results obtained for each material. Regarding Climate Change (Figure As this ratio has an important influence in CC, especially for UMG-Si, the breakdown of the contribution of the main inputs in the production of MG-Si has been calculated. The absolute values MG-Si are 7.65 and 13.29 kg CO2eq/kg for ES and CN mixes, respectively and the two main contributions are electrical power (38% and 64% for ES and CN mixes), and process emissions (48% and 26%). Process emissions are inherent to the oxidation of the carbonous material that is used for the reduction of silica. They may vary, depending on the nature of the coal mix used and have been studied before Regarding energy consumption of SoG-Si production processes, it is important to note that polysilicon production has a high demand of heat (as steam) apart from electrical power. A heat input of 180 MJ and a electricity consumption of 85 kW/kg of polysilicon have been considered for this work, similar to those found in literature and ecoinvent database. If these values are further reduced, assuming 65 kWh and 90 MJ / kg of polysilicon, CC results would be 40.9 and 81.3 kgCO2eq / kg of polysilicon for ES and CN mixes respectively, still far from UMG results (17.9 and 37.0 kgCO2eq / kg of UMG). The contribution to CC of the different steps used to model UMG production by the Ferrosolar process can be found in the Supplementary Material (S8). The share of the MG-Si used as starting material is for both (ES and CN) mixes the most important, as shown also in Figure The comparison of the obtained results with published values is not easy as this kind of studies are few and aggregated impacts are provided. Recent work by Yu et.al does not provide any detail result for UMG, although they infer from PV production that this material is advantageous in terms of environmental impact The results of the assessment for Cumulative Energy Demand have already been presented for each stage of the PV value chain in the previous section, however additional detail is shown in Supplementary Material (S9) for further clarification. The part of the background processes (taken from ecoinvent database, not part of the modelled system) in the CED is found to be 8.1% of the total value for UMG scenarios and 6.4% for polysilicon ones. The background energy comes from the material used in the different stages, in particular from the components of the PV module: aluminium frame, solar glass, encapsulant and backsheet, which eventually account for over 10 kg /m 2 of PV module, or which is the same, over 90% of the total mass of each module. EPBT for each scenario is calculated from these values and a mean annual electricity production of 1.82•10 8 kWhe /year for the 100 MW installed power PV site. 0.5% is subtracted in account for maintenance (9.12•10 5 kWhe /year). A total EPBT of 0.52, 0.55, 0.69 and 0.72 years are obtained for UMG ES and CN and poly ES and CN, respectively. The values of the nr-EPBT (non-renewable) and the r-EPBT (renewable) are shown in Figure These results are significantly better than other published values for highly irradiated PV sites, both for UMG, as expected, but for polysilicon also. Similar values can be found in the work of Antonanzas et.al. for fixed CN manufacturing polysilicon PV site with a 2327 kWh/m 2 •year, indicating a value of 0.65 years. A comprehensive comparative life cycle analysis of UMG and polysilicon based PV electricity generation was performed "cradle to use". Both silicon feedstocks have been evaluated employing a low and a high carbon intensity electricity mix. The contribution of stages and components to environmental impacts was calculated by EF method. Cumulative energy demand was included in the analysis. The LCI where revised and updated to the best of the authors' knowledge, matching the production flow used in a previous work, in which the mean efficiency of an industrially manufactured UMG BSF solar cell achieved was over 18% efficiency, very close to that obtained for polysilicon. A large scale, 100MW, ground fixed PV site was considered, employing data a current project being developed in Almería (Spain) by Aurinka PV. This location is among the best in Europe for PV solar, as its annual in-plane irradiation is over 2000 kWh/m 2 . As was expected, the electricity mix plays a very important role in most impact categories, as the processes of which the crystalline silicon PV chain if comprised of demand substantial amounts of electricity, especially the silicon feedstock production. Acidification (ATF) impacts were specially affected by the electricity mix, as the coal intensive Chinese mix was compared to much lower impact Spanish mix. The full PV value chain stages contribution was analysed, showing that when UMG is used as feedstock, its contribution to climate change, acidification and cumulative energy demand was not the highest, as it happened when polysilicon is used as feedstock and is usually reported in literature. PV module followed by cell manufacturing had the highest shares. In general, the calculated impacts are lower than those presented in previous studies, also for polysilicon, due to the update, most frequently reducing the quantity of materials and energy employed, of the inventories of the different stages of PV manufacturing. This is especially important in the wafering process, for which state of the art DWS technology has been used, that reduces the amount of silicon losses when compared to slurry based traditional process. Among the most important results of the study where the verification that the use of Ferrosolar's UMG, instead of conventional polysilicon, can lead to a reduction of over 20% for climate change emissions for ES mix (12 vs. 15 gCO2eq/ kWhe) and over 25% for EPBT of the electricity generated (0.52 vs. 0.68 years) during the expected lifetime of PV system, considered 30 years. Regarding the silicon feedstock itself, the reduction of CC impact obtained was 50% for ES mix (18 vs. 56 gCO2eq/ kWhe), being electricity and metallurgical grade silicon the main contributors. Although the results obtained for UMG are encouraging, more advanced technology should be evaluated to find the real potential of this material. PERC and half cells have not been included in current LCA study and are part of the next steps. A more detailed study of the BoS, especially inverters, would also provide useful results, as it plays an important part of the total impacts, due to the reduction of the PV module fabrication impact. The authors received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. Antonanzas, J., Arbeloa-Ibero, M., Quinn, J. Values taken form ecoinvent 3. Although this work does not account for PERC processing, the CC emissions for UMG modules can be estimated from URL https://www.bp.com/content/dam/bp/business-sites/ en/global/corporate/pdfs mc