The possibility of shifting sound energy from lower to higher frequency bands is investigated. The system configuration considered is a segmented structure having non-linear stiffness characteristics. It is proposed here that such a frequency-shifting mechanism could complement metamaterial concepts for mass-efficient sound barriers. The acoustical behavior of the material system was studied through a representative two-dimensional model consisting of a segmented plate with a contact interface. Multiple harmonic peaks were observed in response to a purely single frequency excitation, and the strength of the response was found to depend on the degree of non-linearity introduced. The lower and closer an excitation frequency was to the characteristic resonance frequencies of the base system, the stronger was the predicted higher harmonic response. The broadband sound transmission loss of these systems has also been calculated and the low frequency sound transmission loss was found to increase as the level of the broadband incident sound field increased. The present findings support the feasibility of designing material systems that transfer energy from lower frequency 1 Metamaterial-based sound barrier solutions The latter approach, i.e., the shift of energy to higher frequencies, can potentially be realized by using material systems having non-linear response characteristics. Lazarov and Jensen The idea of shifting energy to higher frequencies where energy absorption is more efficient was studied by Denis et al. However, the prospect of using material systems with non-linear response characteristics for sound barrier applications was investigated only recently by Rekhy et al. Here, we consider a planar cellular panel with its unit cells as shown in and (e). A planar cellular panel with its unit cell comprising segmented plates with contact interfaces can possess linear, bilinear or nonlinear stiffnesses. Although there are a number of variations in possible contact be-havior, the qualitative nature of their harmonic responses to a pure tone excitation was expected to be similar i.e., the examination of the sound transmission characteristics of segmented plates possessing bilinear or non-linear stiffness behavior due to the presence of contact interfaces. Here, numerical models were employed to study the characteristics of representative two-dimensional models comprising a segmented plate having a contact interface, Fig. Two-dimensional models, Fig. Two models based on the configurations shown in Fig. The contact interaction between the two plate segments was modeled using a solid-to-solid contact described by a linear pressure over-closure relationship, as illustrated in Fig. Two-dimensional finite element (FE) models were built for a static analysis to evaluate the stiffness characteristics of the plate systems. The analysis was performed with FE-code ABAQUS Two-dimensional FE models were created to evaluate the natural frequencies of the models M0, M1, M2 and M3. The natural frequency extraction methods in the FE-code ABAQUS were employed with the details of this procedures described in A two-dimensional FE model was also built to study the acoustical properties of the models, Fig. That procedure allows for simulating the non-linear behavior of contact interactions. The contact interface was modeled following the same rules described above in the context of the static analysis. The model consisted of two acoustic domains (upstream and downstream) and a solid domain consisting of the segmented plate structure separating the two acoustic domains. The lengths of the up-and downstream acoustic domains were taken to be 180 mm each with their width equal to 63.5 mm. Acoustic elements (4-node bilinear) were used to model the acoustic domains. The two acoustic domains were discretized with an element size of 6 mm along the length and 3 mm along the width dimensions. The wavelength at the maximum frequency in the analysis, i.e., 5000 Hz, contains 11 elements, thus, wellexceeding the usual requirement of at least 6 elements per wavelength. The discretization of the structural domain remained the same as described for the static analysis models. A sound source radiating a single frequency (f ex ) sound pressure was simulated at the upstream end of the acoustic domain by prescribing the normal derivative of the acoustic pressure per unit density. In addition, the upstream termination was modeled as non-reflecting by imposing the specific acoustic impedance of air ρ 0 c (ρ 0 is the density of air and c is the speed of sound in air). Similarly, the downstream end of the acoustic domain was also modeled as an anechoic (non-reflecting) termination. Each of the models M0, M1, M2 and M3 was studied for their behavior at three excitation frequencies, which were selected based on their corresponding first characteristic bilinear frequencies. The predicted sound pressures were recorded by using virtual 'microphones' at two axial locations both in the upstream and downstream acoustical domains at time intervals of 1 × 10 -4 sec: i.e., at a sampling rate, f s , of 10 kHz, the Nyquist frequency thus being 5 kHz. The upstream 'microphones' were located at x 1 = -150.0 and -138.0 mm, and the downstream 'microphones' at x 1 = 151.3 and 163.3 mm. The maximum frequency of interest here was nominally 2000 Hz, thus ensuring that the sampling frequency, f s , was at least 5 times higher than the maximum frequency of interest. Note that higher order acoustic modes would begin to propagate at approximately 2700 Hz in a standing wave tube having the cross-sectional dimension considered here. The pressure measurement locations were chosen so that they were at least a distance L p away from the unit cell on either side to avoid near-field effects. The results are presented in terms of sound intensity spectra which were calculated as described in Section 3.3.3 below. Apart from recording the sound pressures at the virtual 'microphone' locations, the displacements u 1 and u 2 were monitored at the far right ends of the segments' contact interfaces. The latter information was used to ascertain the occurrence of contact and to correlate the observations of displacements and sound pressure. An acoustic layer having linear behavior can be characterized by a 2 × 2 constant coefficient transfer matrix which can be determined by using the sound pressure data taken from the four microphones in a standing wave tube ×100, referred to subsequently as powerShiftFrac. The sound pressure level, SPL, acting on the incident face of the plates at the source frequency was also calculated. While the harmonic sound source excitation studies helped to illustrate the qualitative response characteristics, a broadband sound source excitation study was conducted to quantitatively study the STL characteristics of the segmented plates. A lowpass Gaussian white noise time-domain signal (P w ) was generated by applying a low-pass FIR filter with a cutoff frequency of 1000 Hz to a Gaussian white noise signal with a mean value of 0 Pa and a standard deviation of 1 Pa. The signal was generated for a total time length of 10 sec with a sampling frequency of 10000 Hz. Signals with standard deviations of 10, 25, 50 and 100 Pa were then created by scaling the standard deviation to 10, 25, 50 and 100 Pa, respectively. The signal with a standard deviation of 10 Pa was used for the comparative study of models M0-M3 while all the signals were used to study the effect of sound source amplitude on M1. The modeling of the sound source end as non-reflecting helped to improve the signal-to-noise ratio by minimizing reflections at the source end. The predicted sound pressures were recorded by using virtual 'microphones' at two axial locations in both the upstream and downstream acoustic domains at time intervals of 1×10 -4 sec, as previously noted. Sound pressures were also recorded at two additional locations; one closer to the sound source in the up-stream duct, and the second in the down-stream duct nearer to the sample compared to the other two microphones to serve as reference signals, respectively. The upstream reference 'microphone' was located at x 1 = -162.0 mm and the downstream 'microphone' was located at x 1 = 139.3 mm. Those signals were used in the post-processing and analysis of the microphone data as detailed in the next section. The virtual 'microphone' locations were chosen to be sufficiently far away from the sample in the standing wave tube so that near-field effects were avoided. The time-domain non-deterministic signals from the six microphones described above were processed using the procedure laid out for the standard test method to measure normally incident sound transmission of acoustical materials Note that the transfer matrix method described in Here, ρ 0 is the density of air, c is the speed of sound in air, ω = 2πf where f is the frequency in Hz, and σ is the areal mass. The skin and the plate-plate-face-edge contact are an integral part of the segmented plate configuration of interest. Contact and skin deformation are the key factors in the deformation response of the system. Figure First, studying the stiffness behavior when a load was applied to the segment faces in the -ve x 1 direction, it can be seen that M1, d cl = 10 μm clearance, shows a sharp change in slope due to the closing of the contact interface at an axial displacement of u 1 ≈ 125 μm. The displacement u 1 at which the plates come in contact was analytically estimated to be equal to 4tp (when it is assumed that the skin kinks at its center point and that the curvature at the remaining locations is negligible -see Appendix B). The latter value was 125 μm in the present case, the same as the numerically predicted value. The ratio of the high to low stiffnesses in this phase was 127. The estimated displacement u 1 after which M2 with d cl = 100 μm comes in contact was 1250 μm. The contact does not close even for the maximum static load applied, but its behavior becomes nonlinear due to the geometric nonlinearity of the unsupported segment of the skin at its center portion. Here, it can also be seen that the deflection curve for M2 traces that of M1 until the point where the contact occurs for M1 but then continues in the same trajectory since contact did not occur in the M2 case. For M0, the deflection behavior is linear with its slope being equal to that of M1 in the closed configuration. Next, studying the characteristics of loading on the skin in the +ve x 1 direction, it can be seen that both M1 and M2 exhibit geometric nonlinearity, and that there is no sharp change in the slope, since no contact occurs. There is a minor quantitative difference in the part of the curve in the first quadrant for M2 compared to its counterpart in the third quadrant apart from the change in sign of the slope from -ve to +ve. The force magnitude for the same deflection magnitude was slightly above 3 N for loading on the skin in the +ve x 1 direction when compared to the corresponding force magnitude for loading on the segment faces in the -ve x 1 direction, which was slightly below 3 N. In the case of M0, the stiffness remains linear and was the same as seen in the -ve x 1 loading direction. and M2) and with a zero thickness clearance. Here, it can be seen that the curve segments are linear in the -ve and +ve loading directions with a slope change occurring at x 1 = 0 with the curve in the third quadrant having a higher slope. The ratio of the high and low stiffness values in this case was 1.8. The first mode of the equivalent unsegmented plate M0, Fig. The excitation frequencies were chosen to be 80, 320 and 640 Hz for the case of M3 since its first bilinear frequency is 451.5 Hz. Figures No subsequent upper-harmonics were predicted. There were some upperharmonics at approximately the same order of magnitude as I 0+ for f ex = 20 and 80 Hz. The magnitudes of the upper-harmonics decreased steadily as the frequency increased for all the cases of f ex . No sub-harmonics were predicted for any of the three excitation frequencies, Figs. Note that the transverse displacement for the excitation frequencies of 20 and 80 Hz does not show a pure harmonic behavior although it is periodic. Figures The corresponding I 0+ were 100, 120, and 120 dB. In contrast to the models M1 and M2 which experienced geometric non-linearity, M3 showed only a contact non-linearity. Also, M3 had a lower bilinear stiffness ratio of 1.8 as compared to the bilinear stiffness ratio of 127 for M1, owing to the thicker beam used for representing the skin. The upper harmonic response was weaker than that for M1 and M2, as reflected in powerShiftFrac (Table The upper harmonics were caused by the contact closure, as reflected in the transverse displacement plots at f ex = 80, 320 and 640 Hz shown in Fig. All the cases discussed in the previous section were based on the same source excitation strength of 100 Pa. Figures That observation correlated with the differences in the STL predictions seen in Fig. Upper-harmonics occur in the acoustical response of structures having geometric and contact non-linearities. The presence of contact interfaces particularly accentuates the non-linear effect due to the steep change in the stiffness. In fact, it was shown that a bilinear stiffness behavior can be expressed as a polynomial non-linearity of order 4 Potentially, there are multiple factors that determine the amount of power shifted to higher frequencies, with the proximity of the excitation frequency to the first flexural frequency being the second prominent one. The first flexural resonance frequency for M1 and M2 of 55.5 Hz was located in between the 20 and 80 Hz excitation frequencies and was a bit closer to 80 Hz. In the case of M0, the first flexural resonance frequency was 429 Hz with f ex = 320 Hz being the closest to it, and that frequency had the highest powerShiftFrac of 0.19%. Two other factors affecting the shift of power to higher frequencies that stand out from the results are the effect of amplitude and the degree of non-linearity. The higher the amplitude of excitation, the stronger was the shift, as reflected in the powerShiftFrac for all the cases as listed in Table The reason for the occurrence of low order harmonics in the case of M0 which has linear static stiffness behavior was also examined. It was hypothesized that a potential geometric non-linearity arose from the magnitude of the deflections on the order of the skin slenderness. The analyses were repeated by turning off the terms accounting for the geometric non-linearity in the strain-displacement relationship. No significant upper-harmonics appeared in the corresponding response, thus confirming the hypothesis, Fig. It was found that the broadband response characteristics of the segmented plates followed the behavior of an edge-constrained plate A small but a notable averaged improvement of 2 dB in STL was predicted for M1 and M2 beyond the dip frequency compared to their corresponding equivalent limp panel. Analysis with a deterministic signal sweep in the chosen frequency band might give more insight into the characteristics of the segmented plates with a stronger influence of the non-linearity on the STL characteristics. The amplitude of the lowpass filtered white noise had a significant effect on the predictions: i.e., the STL in the very low frequency range increased as the noise level increased. This further supports the idea of transferring the energy from lower to higher frequencies to increase the STL in the low frequency range and has potential applications for blocking high intensity sound sources at low frequencies. The idea of this study was to explore another mechanism for the hardto-mitigate low frequency noise. Once the energy is shifted to higher frequencies, transmission can be mitigated more efficiently either by using a mass efficient barrier or dissipation of energy by an absorptive material. Both of those mechanisms are more effective at mitigating higher frequency noise. For example, energy absorbing visco-elastic material along with ABH wedges could be employed to trap and dissipate some power as demonstrated by Touzé et al. The sound barrier performance of planar cellular metamaterials is poor at their flexural resonance frequencies. The possibility of mitigating those limitations of cellular panels by incorporating additional dissipation mechanisms was studied here. One way to overcome those limitations is to transfer the energy from the frequency band having low STL to higher frequencies where it can be blocked more effectively. A material system having nonlinear stiffness behavior introduced through contacts has the potential to realize the above mechanism. The effects of contact nonlinearity, geometric nonlinearity, and both acting together, were examined and compared with the corresponding linear case through two-dimensional numerical models of a segmented plate with a contact interface subjected to a normally incident sound field. Based on the numerical study, upper-harmonic response peaks were observed for single frequency sound excitations, the strength of which were found to strongly depend on the degree of non-linearity or bilinear stiffness ratio. The response was also found to depend on the relative location of the excitation frequency with respect to the eigenmodes of the structure, with stronger upper-harmonics occurring for excitation frequencies closer to the characteristic eigen-frequencies, thus supporting the idea of transferring energy from the deficit regions to higher frequencies. Broadband response of the materials was also examined and notable improvement in STL was predicted at low frequencies. Experimental validation of the observations made in this work would be the next logical step in taking the idea further. Acknowledgment: The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial sup- Figure 13: Transverse displacement (u 2 ) of M2 for f ex = 20 Hz, 80 Hz and 320 Hz. Figure 15: Transverse displacement (u 2 ) of M3 for f ex = 80 Hz, 320 Hz and 640 Hz.