The non-contact broadband transmission line flip-chip spectroscopy technique is utilized to probe resonances of mmsized square kinetic planar resonators made from strongly disordered molybdenum carbide films, in the GHz frequency range. The temperature dependence of the resonances was analyzed by the complex conductivity of disordered superconductor, as proposed in Ref. 1, which involves the Dynes superconducting density of states. The obtained Dynes broadening parameters relate reasonably to the ones estimated from scanning tunneling spectroscopy measurements. The eigenmodes of the kinetic planar 2D resonator were visualized by EM model in Sonnet software. The proper understanding of the nature of these resonances can help to eliminate them, or utilize them e.g. as filters. Thin disordered superconducting films find a variety of applications in advanced technologies, such as superconducting single-photon detectors, 2 parametric amplifiers, In this letter, we report on resonances present in the transmission spectra of disordered superconducting films of a) Also at Institute of Physics, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Dúbravská cesta, Bratislava, Slovakia.; Electronic mail: pavol.neilinger@fmph.uniba.sk b) Also at Institute of Physics, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Dúbravská cesta, Bratislava, Slovakia. molybdenum carbide (MoC) measured by broadband transmission line spectroscopy in temperature range from T c down to ≈ 500 mK and frequency range from 1 GHz to 16 GHz. The measurements were carried out in flip-chip geometry. The 5 nm thin films with different R s were sputtered on sapphire substrate and placed on top of the transmission line facing the center conductor. The present resonances are explained by referring them to eigenmodes of a kinetic planar 2D resonator. Low resonance frequencies of the resonator are the result of the high kinetic inductance of the strongly disordered MoC films. Moreover, in contrast to the aforementioned works, we utilize these resonances to determine the Dynes broadening parameter Γ of these films, which is usually determined by scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) at temperatures well below T c . The superconducting density of states (SDOS) of disordered superconductors is characterized by the smearing of coherence peaks and the presence of in-gap states. Their STS spectra are generally analyzed in terms of the Dynes SDOS A thorough study of the STS spectra of highly disordered MoC films is presented in Ref. 27. As a result of disorder, the temperature and frequency dependent complex conductivity σ = σ 1iσ 2 deviates from the well known Mattis-Bardeen conductivity, rical factor and suppressed T c . Furthermore, the well-defined shape of the samples increased the quality of the resonances, showing the importance of the edges, typical for resonators. The temperature dependence of the transmission spectrum for sample D is shown in Fig. where C r and L r are geometric parameters defining the resonance mode. Assuming these parameters are constant for the n th resonance mode in the measured narrow temperature range, the temperature dependence can be expressed by the simple equation: where A n , B n are fitting parameters, specific for each resonance mode. The kinetic sheet inductance of a thin superconducting film with thickness much smaller than the London penetration depth is given as The fitted curves for sample D are shown in Fig. To further investigate the nature of the resonances, the measurement was modeled in EM software Sonnet (Fig. Sample R s (Ω) T DC c (K) T spec c (K) Γ spec /∆ 0 Γ ST S /∆