The spin-orbit coupling field, an atomic magnetic field inside a Kramers' system, or discrete symmetries can create a topological torus in the Brillouin Zone and provide protected edge or surface states, which can contain relativistic fermions, namely, Dirac and Weyl Fermions. The topology-protected helical edge or surface states and the bulk electronic energy band define different quantum or topological phases of matters, offering an excellent prospect for some unique device applications. Device applications of the quantum materials rely primarily on understanding the topological properties, their mutual conversion processes under different external stimuli, and the physical system for achieving the phase conversion. There have been tremendous efforts in finding new topological materials with exotic topological phases. However, the application of the topological properties in devices is still limited due to the slow progress in developing the physical structures for controlling the topological phase conversions. Such control systems often require extreme tuning conditions or the fabrication of complex multi-layered topological structures. This review article highlights the details of the topological phases, their conversion processes, along with their potential physical systems, and the prospective application fields. A general overview of the critical factors for topological phases and the materials properties are further discussed to provide the necessary background for the following sections. Symmetry, a magnificent and ubiquitous property of nature, provides a profound organizational principle to describe the stable phases of the matter based on the phenomenological Ginzburg-Landau theory on broken symmetry. Multi-disciplinary teamwork in topological research is a current gap in the scientific community. The review is written with that in mind to provide a comprehensive article with easy-to-understand illustrations that can help to close the gap among different disciplines and elaborate on the prospect of topological phenomena in real-life applications. The review will cover the prospects of the topological matter from the fundamental physics, materials aspect, and device applications. We start the article with a concise but complete discussion on topological physics in a less mathematical tone. We will elaborate on the essential topological terms and then discuss the material systems which have already shown the topological characters. A comprehensive list of the previously discovered topological materials and their properties is presented. This can provide the necessary information for the material science community in one place to focus on both the critical material aspects and their further development to meet the application needs. We will then extend the article for device applications, which is less covered in previous reviews. We will elaborate on the conversion/tuning mechanism to obtain and control the topological phases, the existing challenges, the requirements to observe, amplify, and control the topological properties from the perspective of device applications. This review aims to provide a complete and fundamental picture of the topological materials from fundamental theories to device applications, which will be helpful to a wider scientific community, including condensed matter, materials science, and electrical engineering. The topological/quantum phase of matter is a rapidly growing field where the existing theories like topological band theories are still developing. New theories like non-abelian band topology Quantum or topological phases are defined by the breaking of the global symmetries instead of the local symmetries, which are common in conventional phases of matter like solid, liquid, gas, ferromagnetic order, antiferromagnetic order, etc. In topological insulators, the topology-protected helical and chiral surface conducting states exist along with the bulk insulating counterparts; however, the surface conduction has high mobility due to the absence of backscattering. Topological invariance is an important parameter to define quantum phases of matters which does not change within the phase. This quantity determines the equivalence between two quantum states. A continuous deformation is possible between two topologically invariant quantum states of matter without changing the phase. The topological invariant is a mathematical quantity defined with respect to the dimension of the matter. For any dimensional physical system, topological invariance can be calculated from the Berry connection and Berry curvature, which has a relation with Berry phase hence with the Brillouin zone. The surface of the Brillouin zone represents the topology or the conserved symmetry of the quantum phase of a condensed matter. In two dimensional topological systems (such as Chern insulator), Z or the Chern number is the topological invariance, while Z2 represents the same in the three-dimensional topological systems (such as QSHI and 3D topological insulator). To understand the meaning of topological invariant, one must define the topological spaces, homeomorphism, and the equivalence relation. Furthermore, the mathematical definition of topology and topological invariant will give us more generalized notions of the topological invariant and the topological phase in condensed matter physics. Topology is used to study abstract spaces. It introduces the unchanged mathematical structures under continuous deformation. It is often called rubber sheet geometry and focuses on the unchanged features when the parameters of the system change continuously. Hence, a topological space is a pair (X; τ) where X is a set, and τ is a set of subsets of X satisfying certain axioms. τ is called a topology. For example, consider the following set consisting of 3 points; X = {a, b, c} and determine if the set τ = {∅, X, {a}, {b}} satisfies the requirements for a topology. Definitely, this is not a topology because the union of the two sets {a} and {b} is the set {a, b}, which is not in the set τ. According to this definition, we can find some examples in condensed matter with ordered states, like crystals, liquid crystals, magnets, etc. These phases have a symmetry described by a group S, which is a subgroup of the expected full symmetry G. For example, if a similar Hamiltonian is considered for twoelectron gas and crystals systems, the Hamiltonian of N-interacting particles is expected to be invariant under rotational and full translational symmetry, G, but a crystal system has only a discrete set of space group symmetries. This phenomenon of ordering is known as symmetry breaking. The crystal system is described by parameters that reflect this subgroup structure. The allowed values of the order parameter constitute the topological space of the ordered system, and this space is called the order parameter space. Another famous example where the topological space can be constituted by the order parameter is the quantum Hall effect, and the order parameter can be the filling factor (v), which will be explained further in the next sections. Homeomorphism is the notion of equality in topology where there are an equivalence relation and oneto-one correspondence between the points in two topological spaces. For example, a topologist cannot distinguish between a coffee cup and a doughnut (Figure In Euclidean space, often equivalence is defined as congruent. For example, A1 and A2 sets are congruent if A2 can be obtained by translating and rotating A1. For congruent, we can define the equivalence relation and, therefore, the equivalence classes (for example, the equivalence class of triangles shown in Figure A topological invariant is a property of topological spaces which is preserved under homeomorphisms. Each homeomorphism has an equivalence class. Therefore, in the equivalence class of triangles of Euclidean space, angles are geometrical invariants. Also, the hole of the doughnut and a coffee cup is considered to be a topological invariant. Therefore, instead of obtaining equivalence classes for homeomorphisms, we can get these topological invariants, which indicate whether the two topological spaces are equivalent or not. Before topological invariants are expressed in condensed-matter physics, it is helpful to get a feel for the topological invariants of one-dimensional objects in R 2 . The simplest topological invariant is the number and type of vertices in an object. In this case, a vertex is considered as a point where multiple curves intersect or join together. The number of intersect curves determines the vertex type. In fact, the number of n-vertices (n ≥ 3) in the object is the topological invariants that we have identified. We can say that the number of 3-vertices or 4-vertices is a topological invariant because homeomorphisms preserve connectedness (Figure In 1983, "Berry" showed that a quantum system adiabatically transported around a closed contour C in the space of parameters acquires a non-integrable phase (Berry phase) besides the familiar dynamical phase depending only on the geometry of the contour C. Homeomorphism Homeomorphism The importance of the Berry phase comes from the fact that it unfolds the intimate geometrical structure of the underlying quantum mechanics. It is, therefore, appropriate to begin by introducing the basic concept of parallel transport in a purely geometrical context. Suppose we have a surface that can be a plane, a sphere, or a cone. Consider a tangent vector to this surface (Figure Eq. ( Im(ψ * . ψ ̇) = 0 or i ψ * . ψ ̇= 0 The real part of ψ * . ψ ̇ is always zero because v1.v1 and v2.v2 are time independent. The v1 and v2 vectors are not dependent on the location vector r(t); also, the closed contour C on which they move is determined by the location vector r(t). Therefore, we need vectors that depend on the location vector r(t), i.e., a fixed local orthonormal frame (n(r); t1(r); t2(r)) on the surface; where n is a normal unit vector perpendicular to the surface. We have an infinity of possible choices for t1(r), which corresponds to gauge freedom. Therefore, when we have selected t1(r), then t2(r) is, of course, uniquely determined. As before, define a complex vector as: Now, Θ(t) is the angle by which t1 and t2 must be rotated to coincide with v1 and v2. The relation between (t1; t2) and (v1; v2) can be written by the following phase factor: Now using the parallel transport law (Eq. ( So that A coordinate system (X1; X2) is chosen on the surface, and the vector field A(r) (called a connection) on Σ is defined as: Given this relation, the first form of anholonomy angle θ(C) can be written as: 97 Using the Stokes theorem, another relation is obtained: where B(X) is called the Berry curvature. Similar to the parallel transport in geometry, the phase of a quantum state may not return to its original value after a cyclic evolution in parameter space. In the next section, we introduce and discuss the basic concept of the Berry phase. Consider a quantum mechanical system described by a Hamiltonian H(R). This Hamiltonian is controlled by a set of external parameters such as magnetic, electric fields, SOC, etc., and R = (R1, R2, ... ) is described with some collective vectors in parameter space. For each R, the H(R) has eigenvalues En(R) and eigenstates |n(R)⟩ satisfying the independent-Schrodinger equation, 11) In fact, the eigenstate |n(R(t))⟩ of the H(R(t)) varies along with the slow variation of R(t) in the parameter space. It should also be noted that we assume a gap existing between the eigenstates and all other states; therefore, the adiabatic flow of R(t) introduces weak perturbation to prevent the transition to other states. In more detail, let us perform an adiabatic closed-circuit C ≡ {R(t)|t = 0 → T} in the parameter space. The adiabatic theorem 101 tells us that if the rate of variation of the external parameters is low enough, a system that is initially in the n th stationary state |n⟩ of the Hamiltonian will remain continuously in the state |n⟩. Therefore, we assume an adiabatic variation where there is no transition to any other state. Now the question arises, what will be the phase of the state after completion of the circuit C? Note that the expectation value of any observable quantity B = ⟨ψ|B|ψ⟩ does not depend on the phase of |ψ⟩. This has caused this question to be of no interest. Indeed, this lack of interest is certainly the main reason why the Berry phase has been completely overlooked for more than half a century of quantum mechanics. Barry had a clever look at this question and came up with a remarkable answer that has become widely used today in atomic and molecular physics, nuclear physics, classical optics, photonics, and condensed-matter physics where |Φ n (t)⟩ (in t=0) is an auxiliary wavefunction with a zero dynamical phase. By applying the timedependent Schrödinger equation and projecting it on ⟨Φ n (t)|, we will have: where we used the relation, ⟨Ψ(t)|H(t)|Ψ(t)⟩ = E n (t) which follows from the adiabatic theorem. Comparison between Eqs. ( where C is a closed path in the R-space, δ n is the dynamical phase, and is defined as follows: Finally, the Berry phase is defined as follows, It is noteworthy that this result obtained for the quantum system is similar to the classical system (an illustration is shown in Figure This is similar to the gauge transformation in electromagnetism, i.e., one can choose different gauges for the potentials (A(r)) without changing the field (B(r)). As can be seen in Eq. ( Table Topological phases of matter arise into a system with spin-orbit coupling, which causes a band inversion in the presence of symmetry protection/breaking. Topological invariances are another important determinant of topological phases that define the phase conversions under the adiabatic deformation of the system. Therefore, it is obvious that the key factors or determinants of the topological phases into quantum materials are spin-orbit coupling, band inversion, and symmetry protected/breaking topological invariance. Most of the topological or quantum phases were demonstrated by the quantum version of different Hall measurements. The previous section has covered the brief concepts on symmetry, and the following section is dedicated to discussing the different observed Hall effects in topological/quantum materials. This section is focusing on the discussions on the other key factors of topological phases, namely, spin-orbit coupling, band inversion, and topological invariance. Quantum Hall insulators have been the first quantum phases that require an external magnetic field to demonstrate the quantum phases. Under the external magnetic field, the time-reversal symmetry of the system is broken, and the backscattered-less chiral edge states emerge into the matter due to the cyclotron motion of electrons. The topological states of matter have been realized by replacing the external magnetic field with the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) field, which now can be protected under the timereversal symmetry and provides Kramers degeneracy. Therefore, spin-orbit coupling is the main backbone to develop the topological materials, which create the Kramers degenerate edge states with band inversion and provides the existence of the relativistic fermions. SOC is a quantum magnetic field inside an atom of a Kramers' system having spin-orbit interactions which induced a transverse magnetic force on an orbiting electron in the external electric field created by the charge of the nucleus. Where m0 is the electron mass, c is the speed of light, S and L are spin and orbital angular momentum, respectively, V is the Coulomb potential, σ is Pauli's spin matrices, and p is the momentum vector. In the atomic world, SOC provides band splitting and band inversion in the energy band, also known as LS coupling, as shown in Figure Here, Z is the atomic number, and a is the spin-orbit coupling constant, which is proportional to Z 4 . Another type of energy band splitting exists in a molecule, which is known as an electrostatic effect due to e-e repulsion and is proportional to Z. Therefore, the electrostatic effect is dominant in light atoms, while spin-orbit coupling dominates in the heavier atom systems. Moreover, the spin-orbit coupling provides (2J+1) degeneracy for each J energy levels. SOC is a symmetry-independent interaction that can exist in all crystals. But there is a symmetry dependent SOC, which only exists in crystals without inversion symmetry. These SOCs are known as Dresselhaus interaction and Rashba interaction. Band inversion is one of the key parameters in inversion symmetric topological insulators. Under band inversion, an electron-like band with positive effective mass is inverted to a hole-like band with negative effective mass. For a typical non-topological system, the highest valence band has odd parity, and the lowest conduction band has even parity. In narrow band-gap semiconductors with heavier atoms and strong spin-orbit coupling, odd parity bands are swapped with even parity bands, which eventually gives topological phases into the material. Band inversion is one of the essential means to find the topological phases into materials, though materials need to meet topological invariance condition to have the topological phases. Typically, the number of band inversions between opposite parity bands is odd in topological insulators. In PbSnTe2, the number of band inversion is even and occurs at both Γ and three X points, which makes PbSnTe2 topologically trivial. The topological invariant is a parameter of topological phases preserved under homeomorphism and does not change under adiabatic deformation. Typically, the topological invariant is defined by the integral of some geometric quantities like Gaussian curvature. In solids, the Brillouin zone represents the geometry, and the Berry phase provides curvature to get the topological invariant of the solids based on the Gauss-Bonnet theorem. The quantum mechanical curvature defined by Berry phase provides two other terms Berry connection, a gradient of Berry phase, and Berry curvature, a curl of Berry connection. The later term provides the curvature determining the topological invariant. The topological invariant for IQHI, the first observed quantum phase, was obtained from Berry curvature. The Chern number, n, is the invariant which is given by: 25,120 φ 0 S m (24) Where F is the Berry curvature, k is the momentum space, S is the closed surface in k-space, φ is the magnetic flux, and φ 0 is the flux quantum. The Chern number is also known as Z invariant listed in Table where, A(k) and F(k) are the Berry connection and Berry curvature, respectively, which can be obtained from the Berry phase. Z2 invariant can also be defined by the total count of the number of Kramers' pairs that intersects the Fermi energy. In other words, the number of bands that cut the Fermi energy between two Kramers' points (consider as Ncut) can define the Z2 index with the expression: Z 2 = (N cut )mod( Formally, δ i is defined as Pf(w(Γ i )) = ±1 i = n 1 n 2 (i = n 1 n 2 n 3 for 3D) (27) with the unitary matrix w mn = ⟨u m (-k)|Θ|u n (k)⟩. Here, u n (k) are the eigenvectors of the occupied Bloch function, and Pf(w) is the pfaffian over all 4 (8 in 3D) Kramers' points. occ m (28) Here, occ refers to the parities of pairs of occupied Kramers' doublets coming from the TRS at the TRIM points. Hence, the Z2 invariant then simply follows from Eq. ( Eq. ( Where ni (i = 1,2,3) are parameters of reciprocal lattice vectors. Here, v0 is independent of the choice of reciprocal vectors, while vi's can be defined from the reciprocal lattice. Based on v0, 3D topological insulators (TIs) can be categorized into weak TI (v0 = 0) and strong TI (v0 = 1). Physically, the Chern number refers to the change in the electrical polarization of the quantum Hall insulators under an adiabatic change in magnetic flux, while Z2 invariant refers to the change in the time-reversal polarization or local fermion parity of time-reversal invariant SOC material system under the adiabatic change in magnetic flux. From the beginning of the discovery of the Hall effect, it has been associated with the breaking of timereversal symmetry. In ordinary Hall effects, there are two currents existing in the presence of mutually perpendicular electric and magnetic fields: longitudinal and transverse current. The dissipationless transverse current directly breaks the time-reversal symmetry, while the longitudinal current breaks timereversal symmetry based on the second law of thermodynamics by dissipating heat. Therefore, Hall measurements are considered as a vital fingerprint of the topological or quantum phases, which were A non-magnetic system in the absence of an external magnetic field is one example of a system with time-reversal symmetry. The two-dimensional electron system shown in Figure The quasi-one-dimensional edge state motion of electrons is quantized and protected against backscattering (i. e. , p ↦ -p) since there is no counter-propagating state. In the quantum limit (e.g., strong magnetic field), the Hall conductivity quantizes and forms plateaus with integer units of quantum conductance ( 2e 2 h ൗ ), : 5 The dissipationless edge transport (i.e., without resistance) occurs due to the absence of the scattering events and counter-propagating states. The bulk mobile charge carriers could form a parasitic channel, obscuring quantum transport signatures of the dissipationless edge transport. Finally, the dissipationless edge transport is topologically protected against the continuous deformation of the band structure. The integer quantized n represents the filling factor of the n th landau levels, and the plateaus observed in the Hall resistance is associated with the band structure of the quantized landau edge states and the shifting of the Fermi energy as a function of a magnetic field as shown in Figure The fractional quantum Hall effect was observed just after two years of the observation of the integer quantum Hall effect. In a 2D electron gas system with fewer impurities and disorder, similar Hall resistivity plateaus were observed with a fractional filling factor of less than 2. A smaller disorder caused the disappearing of the higher filling factors. This exotic Hall feature was explained with strong e-e interaction and Landau theory. Considerable Coulomb interaction compare to the Landau energy (E disorder ≪ E e-e ≤ nħω B ) can lift the degeneracy of the Landau level. Under magnetic flux quantum (quantized magnetic flux loop shown in Figure The formation of composite fermions is illustrated in Figure Two-dimensional topological insulators host edge modes in the absence of applied magnetic field without breaking time-reversal symmetry (Figure Flux Quantum, h/e Here, while the counter-propagating state does exist, the scattering between them is not possible, and thus time-reversal symmetry is preserved. Since the reversal of momentum and spin transforms each helical state to the other one, these states are related through the time-reversal operation. Furthermore, the lack of scattering between the two states can be proven: This means that helical edge states are protected against any irregular scattering potential. Furthermore, the trajectory of helical edges may change near physical barriers, but the two states remain time-reversal conjugates. It is known that disorders can reduce the mean free path of the charge carriers. In the limit of the mean-free-path becoming comparable to the lattice constant, charge carriers localize, and an insulating ground state emerges, also referred to as Anderson localization. where the integration is over the whole Brillouin zone. The TKNN relationship establishes a connection between the band structure topology and the Hall conductivity. Two aspects of Eq. (  The Berry curvature (Ω(k) = ∇ k × A ks ) is an odd function of the momentum(Ω(k) = -Ω(-k)), highlighting the disappearance of Hall conductivity with time-reversal symmetry. Hall conductivity, as a result, can only be nonzero for a system with broken time-reversal and nonzero Berry curvature.  The Hall conductivity quantizes and forms plateaus with integer units of quantum conductance ( e 2 h ൗ ). Starting from the TKNN formula and applying a periodic boundary condition, one can connect the edges of the Brillouin zone. The Fermi surface, as a result, maps into the surface of a torus. The Brillouin zone might be divided into two arbitrary manifolds and the Hall conductivity, accordingly, only depends on the boundary of the two manifolds, as follows: where C is the boundary of the two arbitrary manifolds. The phase difference of the Berry connections at the boundary is arbitrary and due to the gauge invariance. The quantization of the Hall conductance is related to the winding number of the phase, n. Finally, n is insensitive to the continuous deformation of the band structure and is determined based on the topology of the filled bands. where M and H are the magnetization and the magnetic field, respectively. Karplus and Luttinger revisited the problem in 1954 129 and observed a direct relationship between anomalous Hall conductivity and the spin-orbit coupling, which was in good agreement with experimental results. The electrons acquire an anomalous velocity perpendicular to the electric field (second term in Eq. ( The problem was revisited recently by Haldane as a "topological Fermi-liquid" property. Haldane took into account the accumulated Berry phase by an adiabatic motion of the quasiparticles only at the Fermi surface. Only intrinsic AHE contains information about the topology of the band structure. Realspace spin texture, similar to the momentum space band structure, could be a source for large Berry curvature. The adiabatic motion of electrons in a smoothly varying magnetic field produces nonzero Berry curvature in the absence of spin-orbit coupling. ) and is nonzero for non-coplanar spin textures. Topological states of quantum materials induced by the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) are defined by the symmetry-defined topological invariant, which is continuous under adiabatic deformations of a gapped system without closing its gap. Without TRS, topological states can be deformed adiabatically into other topologically trivial states without closing the energy gap, emphasizing the characteristics of symmetry-protected topological states. Point-group symmetries are unitary operators that keep the lattice unchanged after acting on the lattice. Point-group symmetry operators generally provide short-range ordered symmetry-protected topological states. where P -1 = P † = P (P is now not only unitary but also Hermitian). Therefore, it can be deduced from the above equation that x and P must be anticommuting, i.e., Also, according to Eq. ( This feature can cause different kinds of non-trivial topological phases to emerge. Inversion symmetry operation on energy band provides: Here, E n,s is the energy levels with non-spin quantum numbers, n, and spin quantum number, s. A special inversion symmetry operator also exists, which holds I 2 = -1 and implies a system with an odd number of fermions. This type of inversion symmetry can exist in 1D/2D electrons with spin-orbit coupling under a particular crystal rotation symmetry along an axis perpendicular to the system. Reference Frame Operation: Inversion Operator: Time reversal symmetry (TRS) is an antiunitary involution fermionic operator 164 and simply indicates the invariance of a physical property with the time arrow (t ↦ -t). An unchanged Hamiltonian (H ̂) under this transformation suggests a time-reversal invariant system. Time reversal transformation leaves position (r) unchanged but reverses the linear momentum (p) and spin (s). A time-reversal invariant system is, for example, an even function of the momentum and independent of spin (e.g., non-relativistic free particles). TR: r ↦ r, p ↦ -p, and s ↦ -s Considering T as a TRS operator, a system with an odd number of fermions satisfying T 2 = -1 represents the system with Kramers degeneracy, which also means that two consecutive TRS operations on the spinor of the spin-1/2 system give a minus-sign without restoring the system into the initial configuration. In a spin-1/2 system, TRS operations can be written as: Where σ are Pauli's spin matrices. TRS operation on crystal provides the following degeneracy condition: In the presence of both TRS and IS operators, an antiunitary operator of T⨂I is obtained, which provides -1 when squared. Under both inversion and time-reversal symmetries operation on a crystal, we have: This condition guarantees the presence of spin degeneracy of the band, and the associated momenta points are known as time-reversal invariant momenta points (TRIMs), shown in Figure 13(d). For a 2D Brillouin zone, TRIMs are (k x , k y ) = (0,0), (0, π), (π, 0), (π, π) (Figure Each energy level is at least doubly degenerate for a time-reversal invariant system with half-integer spin, as stated by Kramers' theorem. In In the band theory of electrons, TR operation relates momentum k to -k, i.e., -k = TkT -1 . Therefore, in a system with time-reversal invariant, the Bloch Hamiltonian H satisfies the following relation: This equation shows that if |n(k)⟩ is any Bloch-state of the H(k), then T|n(k)⟩ is an eigenstate of the H(-k) at -k, with the same energy. In topological states, counterpropagating time-reversal protected helical states are Kramers' pair, and the orthogonality relation between Kramers' pair supports the characteristics of no backscattering between two counterpropagating spin-filtered helical modes. TRSprotected Kramers' degeneracy can be lifted by breaking TRS via an external magnetic field. But TRS is protected against the spin-orbit coupling and crystal field. Note that away from the Kramers' points, the spin-orbit interaction can lift the degeneracy. Also, the specific TRIMs are dependent on the crystal structure. In general, TRIM points are directly related to high symmetry (HS) points in the Brillouin zone. In other words, the HS of the TRIMs is reflected by the electronic structure symmetry. Consider an electronic state with Energy E(k), and Spin ↑. According to Kramers' degeneracy, it is guaranteed that there is a degenerate state with E(-k) ↓. Therefore, if k is a TRIM, -k can also be reached by adding a reciprocal lattice vector to k, implying that there must not only be a degenerate state E(-k) ↓but also one E(-k) ↑, i.e., the state is double-degenerate at a TRIM. Among the other symmetry operators, particle-hole symmetry (PHS) and chiral symmetry also play an important role in forming new classes of topological states. Particle-hole symmetry or chargeconjugation symmetry flips the sign of the charge after the antiunitary transformation action on fermions in a system conserving the particle numbers. Where C is the PHS or charge-conjugation operator, Q is a function of particle number operator, N, and U is the unitary matrix associated with the PHS operator. Like TRS, PHS can provide three characteristics for a system: i) system without PHS, ii) system with PHS, and the square of PHS is +1, and iii) system with PHS, and PHS squares to -1. Any superconductors with PHS always satisfy C 2 = -T 2 . On the other hand, the Chiral symmetry operator is the combination of both TRS and PHS operators. Therefore, chiral symmetry is not an independent symmetry operator, which means a system with either TRS or PHS cannot have chiral symmetry, or a system with any two symmetries always has the third symmetry. S -1 Q ̂S = -Q ̂, S 2 = 1, where S = U S (54) In summary, TRS is an antiunitary symmetry operator that can commute with the system Hamiltonian, PHS is an antiunitary symmetry operator which anti-commutes with the Hamiltonian, and finally, chiral is the unitary symmetry operator that also anti-commutes with Hamiltonian. Both PHS and Chiral symmetry gives new classes of topological states, which are discussed in the following subsection. All the symmetry operators mentioned above can define different classes of topological states, which are characterized by respective topological invariants. Based on the presence of individual or combined global symmetries such as time-reversal, particle-hole, and chiral symmetry, ten classes of topological phases can be categorized for non-interacting fermionic systems and defined with their distinct topological invariance with respect to the dimensionality of the system. The topological classes are also called Altland and Zirnbauer (AZ) symmetry classes. All topological classes can be classified into three subgroups: standard or Wigner-Dyson (WD) symmetry class, a chiral class derived from the standard based on chiral symmetry, and Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) classes for superconducting (SC) states (illustrated in Figure In general, topological insulator (TI) materials have an energy gap in bulk band structure opened by the spin-orbit coupling induced band inversion and a metallic state at the surface/interface where the energy gap closes at the boundary of the topological insulator (TI) and normal insulator (NI)/vacuum, as illustrated in Figure 3D topological insulators or Z2 insulators, the 3D counterpart of 2D topological phases, can be categorized into weak topological insulators (WTIs) and strong topological insulators (STIs) based on the four Z2 invariants. Among these adiabatic invariants, three invariants are related to the lattice translational symmetry and provide WTIs without robustness against disorder, while the fourth invariant gives STIs with robustness against nonmagnetic disorders. Like 2D TIs, 3D TIs (especially in STIs) have gapless 2D metallic topological surface states (TSS), which cannot be removed unless TRS is broken with bulk insulator bandgap under SOC. In TIs, TSSs contain massless Dirac fermions, which are helical, meaning the spin of the electron is perpendicular to its momentum. In 3D TIs, two-dimensional surface states become holographic, which cannot exist in the 2D system with TRS but can exist at the boundary of 3D materials. On surface states, the characteristic Fermi arc encloses an odd number of Dirac points, which provides a quantized π Berry phase to an electron after circulating the surface Fermi arc. This quantized Berry phase remains unchanged under continuous perturbations, 171 and the surface states show antilocalization with the disorder (even with a strong disorder in the absence of electron-electron interactions). In materials having 3D STI phases with v0 = 1, strong SOC acts as an internal magnetic field and causes band inversion at an odd number of high symmetry points in bulk Brillouin zone (BZ), which gives an odd number of surface states. The quantized Berry phase in STIs ensures the presence of spin-polarized surface states showing partner switching between a pair of TRIMs in BZ, which means the spin-down band is connected to and degenerate with different spin-up bands at different TRIMs. The most straightforward approach to understanding the mechanism of WTI and STI is to stack several uncoupled 2D QSH states to form a 3D bulk. Therefore, a 3D TI can be obtained by stacking N copies of identical 2D QSH states along the out-of-plane direction (e.g., z-direction). In k-space, it means that the 2D Brillouin zone will gain periodicity in the kz direction and becomes a cube representing the 3D BZ. In the 3D BZ, the Kramers' points can be sorted by their origins from the 2D BZ before stacking. For instance, both the Γ and the Z points in the 3D BZ results from the Γ point in the 2D BZ (see Figure Unlike WTI, strong TI cannot be adiabatically reduced into a bunch of stacked QSH states. Moreover, a strong TI displays protected surface states at all surfaces, irrespective of the termination choice. To investigate this feature, we examine the strong coupling scenario (Figure Since 1928, it is well-known from the Dirac relativistic equation of electron (H = cp. α + (mc 2 )β, where, c is the speed of light and α, and β are the coefficient matrices) that the energy dispersion relation becomes linear in the ultra-relativistic regime (kinetic energy dominates over mass, cp ≫ mc 2 ). The key feature of DSM, which was obtained from the theoretical calculations as well as observed in the experiment, is two surface Fermi arcs connecting a pair of Dirac points on the surface, as shown in Figure Magnetoresistance (MR) is defined as the proportional change of the electrical resistance by an external magnetic field. The MR can be further classified as transverse MR and longitudinal MR according to the angle between the B and E fields. DSMs exhibit a large MR in the presence of an external magnetic field. This giant MR in DMSs is caused by the break of protected topological edge or surface states and the change in the Fermi surface under the applied magnetic field. The theoretical prediction of massless Weyl fermions was made in 1929 by Hermann Weyl. They were predicted to appear as pairs with opposite chirality. Weyl fermions in quantum matters appear in Weyl nodes, which show a nontrivial topological effect on Berry curvature and act as magnetic monopoles with Berry flux (Figure A magnetic monopole is one of the unique features of Weyl fermions. The topology of the Weyl point in the Fermi surface is related to the Berry curvature, which is considered as an effective magnetic field in the momentum space. Weyl nodes on the Fermi surface act as magnetic monopoles: a source and sink for the Berry curvature. Magnetic charge of the Weyl node can be obtained from the integral over Fermi surface enclosing the Weyl node and are known as chirality. A charge current flow is supposed to exist under parallel electric and magnetic fields between different chiral Weyl modes separated in k-space. Chiral anomaly is caused by the unbalance in chiral charges in this process, and chiral anomaly leads to the non-conservation of electric charge; hence, an axial current flow. Chiral anomaly in WSMs can give better conductivity and introduce negative longitudinal MR, though negative MR can still be observed in a system with ill-defined chiral quasiparticles at the Fermi level. The magnetoresistance (MR) of Weyl semimetals has been intensively studied in recent years. Specific characteristics like the chiral anomaly, Fermi arc, and the ultrahigh mobility of the Weyl fermions all influence the magnetoresistance of Weyl semimetals (WSMs). In WSMs, Weyl electrons generally coexist with normal electrons near the Fermi surface, and the number of electrons near Weyl points can be changed in the presence of electric and magnetic fields. The enhancement of the longitudinal conductivity along a weak magnetic field can be represented as: 203 Here, v is the Fermi velocity near the Weyl node, τ is the internode scattering time, and EF represents the Fermi energy from the Weyl node energy. Equivalently, it will bring a reduction to the longitudinal magnetoresistance. Direct observations of this negative longitudinal MR showed that this phenomenon is sensitive to the misalignment between E and B fields since the perpendicular component of B can easily create a large positive transverse MR. Many effects will change the behavior of the longitudinal MR of a Weyl semimetal. One of the most appealing effects is the chiral anomaly, which will induce a negative longitudinal MR in the Weyl semimetal. Negative MR has a sharp dependency on the angle between electric and magnetic fields and has a relation with the Fermi level. Any small changes in the Fermi energy (mostly induced by doping or defects) or even ideal stoichiometric compensated crystals can change the Fermi surface topology significantly. Negative MR is also found to be independent of the direction of the field with respect to the crystalline axis. As discussed before, the Weyl fermions with Chern number C = 1 at its Weyl points have a linear dispersion relation. If the Fermi surface is close to the Weyl points, these Weyl fermions, with low effective mass and high mobility, will contribute to the conduction. These Weyl fermions are sensitive to the external magnetic field since the B field will effectively reduce the mobility due to the low effective mass. This effect has been observed in all the materials of the TaAs family, which has been proven to be Weyl semimetals. The NbP is reported to have a mobility of μ = 5 × 10 6 cm 2 V -2 s -1 at 1.85K. In the Fermi liquid theory, two effects can change the longitudinal MR, for instance, weak localization (WL) and weak anti-localization (WAL). Here, C1 and C2 are fitting parameters, which are negative for WAL and positive for WL. This equation describes the competence between the quantum interference induced WAL and scattering induced WL. Here, cee and cqi are positive parameters related to the correction from quantum interference and electron-electron interaction and disorder scattering, respectively. The parameter p depends on the decoherence mechanism and dimensionality. Other different models are also proposed to fit the longitudinal MR. Figure The transport properties of typical Weyl semimetals are too complicated to be characterized by a single formula due to different scattering mechanisms and different Fermi pocket structures. Another factor that even makes it harder is the current jetting effect in the high mobility semimetals. increase in B-field for chiral anomaly effects, whereas V1 drops and V2 increases with the increase in B due to the current jetting effect. From the figure, we can see the point-like current injection will bring a problem if the voltage detecting contacts are not at the same points. For instance, in the second subfigure, if the detecting contacts are placed at the edges, there will be no voltage difference, which will falsely give a 0 longitudinal resistance. Here, the magnetic field induced resistance anisotropy, A = ρ xx ρ zz ൗ , plays an important role to create the current jetting, where current flow and B-field are in z direction. TaAs family materials were studied for the current jetting induced longitudinal MR with different setups of contacts, and the negative longitudinal MR was explained even in the absence of well-defined chiral nodes due to the Fermi pockets covering both Weyl nodes. 204 Topological nodal line semimetals (TNLSMs) are the other type of topological semimetals which have a line of band crossing instead of point-like band crossing in DSMs and WSMs (Figure In this section, we summarize the different materials that host different topological phases. Based on the fundamental discussion of the topological phases, materials with strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC) are the most probable candidates for observing topological phases that can be satisfied with materials with heavier elements. Besides SOC, band inversion at Kramers' points is another key ingredient for a topological material, which can be determined by the crystal structures. In Table Without breaking the time-reversal symmetry, the spin-orbital coupling (SOC) in some materials is strong enough to induce a band inversion, which has been a typical reason for the nontrivial topological state in the materials known as Z2 topological insulators. In 2012, materials from this family such as SnTe, Pb0.77Sn0.23Se, and Pb0.6Sn0.4Te were tested by experiments and showed having Dirac cone surface states. As discussed in previous sections, symmetries play essential roles in the classifications of topological phases. Based on the absence or presence of time reversal, particle-hole, or chiral symmetry, insulators and superconductors have been classified under the so-called 10-fold way (Bott periodic table in Sec. 7.5). In addition to these internal symmetries, the topological classification of band structures has also been extended to include crystalline symmetries. Due to the vast array of crystal symmetries encapsulated by the 230 crystalline space groups, a large number of topological crystalline phases have been proposed, such as mirror Chern insulators, 226 quantized electric multipole insulators, 227 nodal chain metals, 228 and hourglass fermions. where N and {n 1 , n 2 , ... , n N } depend on the assumed space group. While XBS has been exhaustively computed for all SGs in reference, 225 the concrete physical interpretation for some of the nontrivial classes was left unclear. By recreating topological indicators into more explicit forms, the physical meanings of these classes are better revealed. 232 A summary of these classes is listed in Table It should be noted that XBS in equation (*) can be factorized into weak factors (w) and strong factor(s): In this equation, every factor in X BS  Z4 index for inversion symmetry: The strong topological invariant ν 0 ∈ Z 2 can be promoted to a new topological invariant κ 1 mod 4 ∈ Z 4 in the presence of inversion symmetry. If n K -(n K + ) (due to the Kramers pairing, n K ± is even) is the number of occupied bands with odd (even) parity at each TRIM K, the Fu-Kane formula (Eq. ( Given the above relation, the new topological invariant κ 1 can be introduced, which is simply the sum of the inversion parities of occupied bands: Using the total number of occupied bands n ≡ n K + + n K 1 , can be redefine κ 1 as, By comparing equations (I) and (III), we find (-1) ν 0 = (-1) κ 1 . Although this result shows that κ 1 = ν 0 mod 2, κ 1 contains more information than ν 0 as it is stable mod 4. This means that any trivial insulator has κ 1 = 4n (n ∈ Z), and adding or subtracting trivial bands does not alter κ 1 mod 4. Besides, weak topological phases may realize κ 1 = 2 mod 4, but the most interesting case is when κ 1 = 2 mod 4 while (ν 1 , ν 1 , ν 3 ) all vanish. The space group that contains only IS in addition to translations is called P1 ̅ . The index κ 1 can be defined for every centrosymmetric space group, i.e., for every supergroup of P1 ̅ (space groups containing P1 ̅ as a subgroup).  Z2 index for four-fold rotoinversion: The key group spaces P4 ̅ and I4 ̅ possess neither inversion nor mirror symmetry. Therefore, the indicator XBS = Z2 cannot be accounted for by the Fu-Kane parity formula or the mirror Chern number. For spinful electrons, the four possible values of S 4 eigenvalues are e i(α π 4 ) (α = 1, 3, 5, 7). Hence to introduce the new invariant, there are four moments in the BZ invariant under S 4 , which we denote by K 4 . These points are (0, 0, 0), (π, π, 0), (0, 0, π), and (π, π, π) for primitive lattice systems. The new invariant is the sum of the S 4 eigenvalues of occupied bands over the moments in K 4 : where n K 4 α is the number of occupied bands with the eigenvalue e i(α π 4 ) at momentum K ∈ K 4 . It is noteworthy that this quantity is always an integer in the presence of TRS, and it is stable modulo 2 against the stacking of trivial bands. Moreover, κ 4 mod 2 agrees with ν 0 .  Z8 index with the combination of κ 1 and κ 4 : The key space groups P4/m and I4/m contain both inversions I, and four-fold rotation (C 4 ), with the inversion center on the rotation axis. So, the product of I and (C 4 ) 2 is a mirror M z about the xy-plane, and one can define the mirror Chern number C M (k z = 0) . The eigenvalues of the four-fold rotation determine C M (k z = 0) mod 4. Here, Ref. 232 shows that the combination of κ 1 and κ 4 is responsible for this enhanced factor. Since these space groups have both inversion and rotoinversion (S 4 = IC 4 ), κ 1 and κ 4 can be defined separately using Eqs. (II) and (IV), respectively. Moreover, the inversion center coincides with the roto-inversion center. So, in this case, we find that the difference, ∆= κ 1 -2 κ 4 (V) is stable modulo 8, not just 4, against the stacking of trivial bands. So, ∆ mod 8 should be understood as a new topological invariant, which can be reconciled with the strong index Z8 (< XBS). The key space group P6/m has a six-fold rotation (C 6 ) 3 in addition to inversion I. The product of I and C 6 (i.e., IC 6 ) is the mirror M z protecting the mirror Chern number C M (k z Although the eigenvalues of the six-fold rotation can only detect mirror Chern numbers mod 6, XBS contains a Z12 index. In this case, the combination of C M (k z =0) mod 6 and κ 1 mod 4 can fully characterize this Z12 index. Besides, when the rotation C 6 is replaced by the screw S 6 3 , i.e., C 6 followed by a half translation in z, the resulting key space group is P6 3 /m. In this case, the product of I and (S 6 3 ) 3 is also a mirror symmetry. The corresponding X BS Inspired by graphene, prediction and experimental realization of 3-dimensional materials with Dirac or Weyl fermions in the bulk states have been appealing topics. In the BZ of a Weyl semimetal, the valance and conduction bands are touching in some regions. These band touching points are nondegenerate due to breaking either the time-reversal symmetry or the inversion symmetry if we neglect the spin degeneracy. These touching points are often referred to as Weyl nodes and are stable under small perturbations. Weyl nodes show up in pairs with opposite Chern numbers at their closed vicinity. By tuning the Hamiltonian parameters, Weyl nodes can be merged into pairs and result in Chern number 0 at the merged points. These points are not stable, as they are not topologically protected, but by introducing an additional group symmetry, those points can become stable, which are then called Dirac points. An alternative way of understanding these materials is to think of them as properly tuned topological insulators with the bulk gap closed. In 2011, a multilayer topological insulator structure was 11, 12, 13, 49, 51, 65, 67, 69 Z 2 Z 4 14, 15, 48, 50, 53, 54, 55, 57, 59, 63, 64, 66, 68, 71, 72, 73, 74, 84, 85, 86, 125, 129, 131, 132, 134, 147, 148, 162, 164, 166, 200, 201, 204, 206, 224 0 Z 4 52, 56, 58, 60, 61, 62, 70, 88, 126, 130, 133, 135, 136, 137, 138 141, 142, 163, 165, 167, 202, 203, 205, 222, 223, 227, 228, 230 proposed to be a realization of the Weyl semimetal. For the material consideration, typical Type I Weyl semimetals are the TaAs family, including TaAs, TaP, NbAs, and NbP. The research for understanding unconventional superconductivity has received new momentum from the study of topological materials. It is predicted that the superconducting state can also be classified based on the topological invariants and properties. Hybrid devices where proximity-induced interface superconductivity in topological insulators could harbor Majorana fermions is another path to engineer topological superconductivity. The seminal work by Fu and Kane revealed a time-reversal symmetric 2D state with a spinless px+ipy superconducting state at the interface of an s-wave superconductor and a topological insulator. If topological materials are going to make transformational technologies, it is critical to be able to control their conversion. Topological phase conversion has twofold importance in quantum matter research (i) at the fundamental physical level, developing quantum/topological phases into a trivial matter with different ground and symmetry states, Symmetry-driven topological phases of matter demonstrate their exotic nontrivial topological characteristics arising from the corresponding topological edge/surface states, which are also subjected to symmetry protection or breaking. This implies that the key factor in the topological phases of matter is the techniques to create or break a certain symmetry of matter. For conventional or trivial phases of matter, the temperature is the most common external force or stimulus to achieve the conversions among phases. To control the local ordering mediated conventional phases, one can use both temperature and pressure as an acting thermodynamical force. But global ordering dependent topological phase conversion is quite different than the conventional phase conversions. As discussed in the earlier sections and illustrated in Figure Modification of the band structure is the key factor in achieving the topological phase transition into a material. Due to the recent advances in calculating complex band structures under the external stimuli, theoretical computations offer effective means to explore the band structure tuning mechanisms and their corresponding limiting ranges. In the context of the topological phase studies, many works in the literature have demonstrated the possibilities of the tuning of the band structure theoretically by varying chemical composition, 186 doping, 182 strain, 430 pressure 431 , or an external electric or magnetic field. Where A(k) is the Berry connection calculated from the wavefunctions at the Fermi level. A nonzero CFS indicates the existence of nontrivial topological phases. In general, all the theoretical predictions of topological phase transitions are associated with the first principal calculation that begins with defining the Hamiltonian with the correct external tuning parameters. However, the determination of the phase diagrams showing the transition between trivial to nontrivial phases can be accomplished with different approaches. Besides demonstrating the phase diagram among the known topological phases, theoretical models can predict new topological phases that can appear during the adiabatic deformation of one phase into another one. In general, theoretical modeling requires rigorous efforts with huge simulation capacity, while the practical realization of the topological phase transition into materials is also challenging in terms of both deformations of one phase into another and reliable, controllable tuning mechanisms. Since the observation of the topological phases into a physical system, several efforts have been made to obtain the phase conversion into a real system experimentally. According to Figure The appearance of the topological phases into a material system is quite different than the conversion of topological phases via various mechanisms. Certain material systems (shown in Table The typical challenges in multi-layers topological device structures are related to the interface quality at heterostructure interface, lattice-matched materials, and the thickness of the layers. Figure To maintain the interface quality of the heterostructures, one may use a passivation layer followed by the van der Waals epitaxy (VDWE). Here, Se-passivation can be performed on the Bi2Se3 layer. As mentioned, using the topological phases into practical applications requires controllable and reliable switching of the topological phase in a device structure. Therefore, topological phase conversion techniques play critical technological roles. The exotic topological characteristics are considered excellent prospects for many existing and next-generation device applications. Despite their attractive features, topological materials are still lagging in device applications due to some critical challenges. Before they can be used for technological applications, one has to consider parameters such as the compatibility of the topological material with the existing devices, their fabrication and batch processing, compatibility of the topological or quantum behavior under external stimuli, working temperature range, cost-efficiency, practical structure and ease of use. Another exotic application of topological materials is for quantum bits (qubits) in Quantum computers. The efforts on building quantum computers introduce several ways to make the quantum version of a classical computer conceptually. Topological states provide unique features of suppressing the noise and decoherence of the qubits, two major roadblocks in the performance of quantum computers. Thermoelectricity is another active area of research in the quest for finding high-performance materials for thermal to electrical or vice versa solid-state energy conversion. In addition to electronic and spin properties, topological materials also demonstrate exotic optical properties, namely, Kerr and Faraday rotation, ultrahigh bulk refractive index, unusual electromagnetic scattering, near-infrared frequency transparency, and ultra-broadband surface plasmon resonances. The emergence of Spintronics in device applications provides unique advantages of near-zero Joule heating and ultrafast operation. Several spin properties of topologically protected robust surface states like strong spin-momentum locking, high charge current to spin current conversion efficiency, long spin diffusion length, strong magnetoresistance, and high spin filtering efficiency make the topological materials suitable for spintronics applications. The superconductor is another exciting research field. The trivial superconducting materials have the Bose-Einstein condensed Cooper pairs. 480 However, the topological phase into superconductors has a distinct nature from the Cooper pairs. Typically, topological superconductors have a fully-open gap between the ground and excited states along with non-zero topological invariants. Besides the abovementioned applications, there are other applications, such as different types of sensors, lab black-hole environment, and on-chip high-performance micro-ultrasonic devices. Recent discoveries of topological materials in which macroscopic properties originate explicitly from quantum many-body effects can open a new landscape for developing transformational technologies not reachable by classical or even nanostructured materials. Topological materials are the prime manifestations of massless relativistic fermions in condensed matter physics, first predicted by P. Dirac and H. Weyl. Since the emergence of the topological materials, there have been growing interests in their technological applications, such for future smart materials, due to their salient features like global symmetry protected metallic surface-states with spin-polarized relativistic fermions with zero-mass and high mobility, defect tolerance, and near dissipationless transport properties. Protecting or breaking the global symmetry of the material can lead to different topological phases such as the topological insulator, Dirac semimetal, Weyl semimetal, and nodal line semimetal. Numerous materials have already been reported experimentally and theoretically to have topological phases. Z2 index-defined topological phases of matter are strongly related to the Berry connection and Berry curvature of the effective Brillouin zone, defined by the time-reversal invariant momenta (TRIM) points based on time-reversal symmetry (TRS) and Kramers' theorem. Besides TRS, discrete crystal symmetry (DCS) can also introduce relativistic fermions in the different crystal systems. The spin-orbit coupling (SOC) provides mixing of s and p orbitals that can lead to band inversion, another important behavior of a topological phase. If topological materials are going to make transformational technologies, it is critical to be able to control their properties. As such, a great deal of studies is focused on finding methods for the topological phase conversion, which not only increases the number of topological physical systems but also opens the pathway for the development of unique devices like near dissipationless transistors, spintronic devices, topological thermoelectric devices, fault tolerance quantum computers, etc. For successful device operation, the external stimuli for the topological phase conversion should be capable of controlling the TRS and SOC of the system reliably and efficiently. Most convenient external stimuli are in the extreme range of the host system, like a very high electric or magnetic field or an excessive strain beyond the limit of the material. Realizing such stimuli in practice may require unconventional or complex device structures to develop a viable topological device that can be controlled without failure. Moreover, the ease of operation, scalability, and compatibility with conventional devices are other essential requirements for topological devices. Besides the appropriate materials and the control mechanisms, it is also critical to develop the fabrication and integration methods for realizing a complete topological device. Bott periodic table of ten topological classes for gapped strong topological phases (insulators and superconductors) based on global symmetries: time-reversal, particle-hole, and chiral. Table entries are arranged with respect to the corresponding space dimensions (dg). Physically observed phases are written in parenthesis. 189 protected