The origin of a ubiquitous bosonic coupling feature in the photoemission spectra of high-Tc cuprates, an energy-momentum dispersion 'kink' observed at ~70 meV binding energy, remains a two-decade-old mystery. Understanding this phenomenon requires an accurate description of the coupling between the electron and some collective modes. We report here ab initio calculations based on GW perturbation theory and show that correlation-enhanced electron-phonon interaction in cuprates gives rise to the strong kinks, which not only explains quantitatively the observations but provides new understanding of experiments. Our results reveal it is the electron density-of-states being the predominant factor in determining the dopingdependence of the kink size, manifesting the multi-band nature of the cuprates, as opposed to the prevalent belief of it being a measure of the mode-coupling strength. Rich exotic phases in copper oxide superconductors (the cuprates) arise from correlated electrons and their interactions with other elementary excitations Knowing the origin of the photoemission kink would provide new insights to interactions in this important class of materials and may lead to better understanding of other phenomena including superconductivity. A major impediment has been a lack of truly ab initio calculations that can quantitatively explain the kink feature. In particular, within the mechanism of electron-phonon (e-ph) coupling induced kink, previous calculations We investigate the e-ph interaction and photoemission kinks in the prototypical single-copperoxygen-layer cuprate La2-xSrxCuO4 (LSCO) in the optimally doped (x = 0.15) and overdoped (x = 0.30) hole concentrations. We do not address the underdoped cuprates in this work because they possess very strong local correlations An excited electron or hole in a crystal interacts with other electrons and elementary excitations including phonons, acquiring a shift in its excitation energy and a finite lifetime. These many-body interaction effects may be formally cast into a complex operator called the self-energy Σ associated with a quasiparticle, and can be measured in ARPES experiments. The GW method Having accurate ab initio e-ph interactions allows us to compute the phonon-induced part of the electron's self-energy Σ , which reshapes the electron dispersion relation and provides notable phononinduced signatures if any (such as kinks in ARPES). For comparison, we calculate the e-ph properties of LSCO using both GWPT-and DFPT-calculated e-ph matrix elements, together with a Wannier interpolation technique We now explore in detail the low-energy (<100 meV) region in the nodal dispersion relation where phonons produce sharp features, although spectroscopic features exist at higher binding energies In Fig. The experimental observation of a substantial doping dependence in the cuprate kink size had also been puzzling. From the underdoped towards overdoped regime, the measured apparent kink size monotonically decreases The observed significant doping dependence in the apparent kink size (as extracted with the commonly used procedure discussed above) is traced back to the tail height of the ReΣ k at binding energies beyond ω . Specifically at E , ReΣ k (E ) differs dramatically at the two doping levels [5.3 meV for x = 0.15 and 12.8 meV for x = 0.30, see Fig. In summary, first-principles GWPT calculations of LSCO have identified that the correlationenhanced e-ph interaction is the main origin of the ubiquitous 70-80 meV dispersion kink in the ARPES of cuprates, and revealed that the multi-band DOS effect plays a requisite role in understanding the doping dependence of the extracted apparent kink size. The quantitative agreement with experiments indicates that GWPT satisfactorily captures the correlation effects in e-ph coupling matrix elements in optimally doped and overdoped cuprates, where the quasiparticle picture is still appropriate Note that soft phonon modes may arise from direct T = 0 K DFPT calculations because we are forcing a tetragonal primitive unit cell whereas in reality structural distortions set in at low temperature The core quantity for building microscopic e-ph theories is the e-ph matrix element g (k, q) that measures the coupling amplitude of a quasiparticle from the initial quasiparticle state |ψ k ⟩ to a final state |ψ k q via a phonon mode labeled by qν. Such a process can be directly and efficiently calculated using first principles in the primitive unit cell by taking advantage of linear-response theory. Within GWPT, the e-ph matrix elements at the GW level are constructed as where V is the ionic potential seen by the electrons, V is the Hartree potential, and Σ (r, r ; ε) is the electron self-energy operator that contains the electron-electron interaction effects. The e-ph matrix element at the DFT level g (k, q) is calculated using DFPT in which ∂ q Σ (r, r ; ε) is simply approximated as the change in the static exchange-correlation potential ∂ q V (r). The resulting matrix elements in fact only describe the interaction of the fictitious independent Kohn-Sham particles with the phonons. A calculation of the linear-response change in Σ due to phonons using GWPT captures physically the many-electron self-energy effects in the interaction of a true quasiparticle with phonons (i.e., the true e-ph matrix element g (k, q)), hence providing more accurate descriptions of the e-ph interactions. The change in the GW self-energy is where δ = 0 , G(r, r ; ε -ε′) is the single-particle Green's function, and W(r, r ; ε′) is the screened Coulomb interaction. In Eq. (S2), we neglected the change in W due to phonons by adopting the constantscreening approximation The e-ph interaction contribution to the electron self-energy Σ can then be constructed at either the GWPT level (using g (k, q)) or at the DFPT level (using g (k, q)) within the Fan-Migdal approximation as The experimental MDC width is in general composed of several contributions, including impurity scattering (presumably relatively constant with respect to energy), electron-electron interaction (power law behavior as a function of binding energy), and e-ph interaction (saturates at energies beyond ω ) In some early experiments We calculate the e-ph coupling constant λ on the Fermi surface To demonstrate the validity of the GWPT method and to highlight correlation-enhancement in the eph coupling in LSCO (and also in Ba1-xKxBiO3 (BKBO) In this validation set, our DFPT results are consistent with other earlier DFPT calculations 