Beyond a critical disorder, two-dimensional (2D) superconductors become insulating. In this Superconductor-Insulator Transition (SIT), the nature of the insulator is still controversial. Here, we present an extensive experimental study on insulating NbxSi1-x close to the SIT, as well as corresponding numerical simulations of the electrical conductivity. At low temperatures, we show that electronic transport is activated and dominated by charging energies. The sample thickness variation results in a large spread of activation temperatures, fine-tuned via disorder. We show numerically and experimentally that the localization length varies exponentially with thickness. At the lowest temperatures, overactivated behavior is observed in the vicinity of the SIT and the increase in the activation energy can be attributed to the superconducting gap. We derive a relation between the increase in activation energy and the temperature below which overactivated behavior is observed. This relation is verified by many different quasi-2D systems. The recent interest in low dimensional systems primarily stems from the many exotic electronic phases they exhibit, due to their extreme sensitivity to any emerging order Despite several decades of investigation of the SIT, the nature of the insulator is still a subject of debate. Some argue that Coulomb interactions and disorder prevail so that the insulator is fermionic Arrhenius, or activated, behavior is found in the electronic transport of many insulators. In this case, the temperature dependence of the resistance is of the form: where T0 is the activation temperature. It is usually associated either with a band gap or with nearest neighbor hopping. In disordered materials, the insulating behavior originates from charge carriers being spatially localized and activated behavior usually takes place at rel-atively high temperatures For non-interacting systems, Mott Here, we investigate, both experimentally and numerically, transport properties of quasi-2D systems on the insulating side of the SIT. We have measured over 80 insulating NbxSi1-x films down to 7 mK to span several orders of magnitude in activation temperatures. We perform Monte Carlo simulations of VRH conductivity on quasi-2D systems, so as to reproduce the experimental situation. We analyze at which conditions activated behavior is present at very low temperatures and investigate the different scenarii leading to overactivated behavior. We compare our experimental results with the outcome of our simulations to extract the main physics of conduction mechanisms in the insulating state of the SIT. Our main conclusion is that, close to the SIT, appearance of Cooper pairing enhances the activation temperature at low temperature. 1 Experimental system. Thin metal alloy films constitute model systems to study the zero-magnetic field superconductorinsulator transition. In these compounds, the SIT can be driven either by a reduction of the sample thickness or by a variation in stoichiometry which directly affects the amount of disorder in the system. In amorphous NbxSi1-x (a-NbSi) which we consider, thermal treatment is yet another parameter that enables us to very finely and progressively tune a single sample disorder We have considered over 80 insulating a-NbSi thin films with compositions (x = 9 % and 13.5 %), thicknesses (d ∈ [20, 250] Å ) and heat treatments (θ ht ∈ [70, 160] • C) that allowed us to investigate localized regimes with activation temperatures spanning over four decades. The as-deposited sample conductivity has been studied from room temperature down to 7 mK (see Materials and Methods). The corresponding temperature dependence of the samples sheet resistance is shown in figure For all films and all heat treatments, the low temperature sheet resistance follows an Arrhenius-type law as given by equation (1). This is particularly visible in figure Let us first study the activated regime and derive the expression for its characteristic temperature. Close to the SIT, one expects thin films to have very large localization lengths ξ loc and therefore very high dielectric constants κ. As a consequence, the electric field lines will tend to stay within the film, resulting in an approximately logarithmic effective interaction for distances r between rmin and rmax. rmin corresponds to a typical grain radius in granular materials and to ξ loc otherwise. rmax usually corresponds to the electrostatic screening length κd. Such long-range Coulomb interactions give rise to an exponential gap in the density-ofstates and to a charging energy: where the dielectric constant is given by where β2 ≈ 3.2, a is the typical interatomic distance and N (EF) is the 2D density of states at the Fermi level. Extending Mott's VRH argument to logarithmic interactions (Eq. ( To study these two scenarii, we model the electrical transport in these disordered films by a 2D random capacitor network schematized in figure The results of the simulations are shown in Fig. Nevertheless, the introduction of disorder screens out the longrange contribution to the activation energy, so that rmax in equations ( Logarithmic interactions in disordered systems imply the existence of charging energies, and so effective electronic granularity, irrespective of the film morphology 3 Exponential dependence of the localization length with thickness. Let us come back to the experimental situation. In figure According to Eqs. ( To explain the exponential dependence of T0 on thickness observed experimentally, ξ loc must increase exponentially with thickness. To investigate this dependence, we have calculated ξ loc for square samples of finite thickness in an Anderson model, through a one-parameter scaling analysis of their conductance. The main results of these simulations are presented in figure For small disorder levels, one can appreciate the strong dependence of ξ loc on both W and d. More quantitatively, our numerical simulations establish that in this regime the localization length is of the form (Fig. with A and η approximately constants, but non-universal. The small shift between data for different thicknesses can be taken into account with a thickness-dependent prefactor. Although the exponential dependence of the localization length with thickness has been observed in many systems, it is often attributed to a thickness-induced change in the amount of the disorder W . We are here able to distinguish the quite distinct effects of both parameters. Equation ( The activation temperature therefore exponentially decreases with thickness as shown by the straight lines in Fig. The thinnest (d = 20 Å ) samples do not exhibit any overactivated regime. However, the rest of the samples do. For d = 45 Å the whole activated regime is actually overactivated. To appreciate the systematicity of the overactivated behavior, we scaled the high temperature activated regime for the 13.5% 35 Å -thick sample (figure We have extracted T 0 , whenever an overactivated was observed, by fitting the low temperature data to equation 1. The transition temperatures Tcross between the two activated regimes were also extracted from the crossing point between the two fits. The corresponding results are plotted in figure Since the overactivated regime is only found close to the SIT, it is reasonable to assume it is related to superconductivity. Let us examine what will happen if, due to the proximity to the SIT, superconductivity sets in locally in some (effective) grains. In this case, Cooper pairs will be phase coherent on a short range, but there will not be any global phase coherence. There are then two different possibilities. The first one is that conduction is still dominated by one-electron processes. Then, when a single electron enters a superconducting grain, it has to pay an extra energy penalty associated with the superconducting gap. The second possibility is that conduction between superconducting grains is ensured by tunneling of Cooper pairs. In this case the energy penalty for a pair entering a superconducting grain is four times the charging energy, since the grain becomes doubly charged. In both cases, the crossover temperature to the overactivated regime must be of the order of the pairing energy. In our experimental case, Tcross is much smaller than the activation energy and since T0 ∼ E0, we conclude that the pairing energy is much smaller than the charging energy, so that conduction by single electrons is more likely to be the main conduction mechanism. We have performed Monte Carlo simulations of the conductivity on our random capacitor model to quantify the increase in activation energy when the grains become superconducting. We consider the model with only charging energies and no long-range interactions, since, as we have seen, both cases produce similar results, and the higher computational efficiency of the former is convenient in this highly demanding calculation. We assumed that grains become superconducting at the critical temperature Tcross. Below this temperature, the new energy penalty to charge a superconducting grain is: where ∆ is the superconducting gap. Assuming a BCS ratio of 2, we have The results of the simulations are shown in figure In figure Extracting characteristic temperatures from our numerical results in the same way as from the experimental data, we have established the relation: and found γ = 1.8. For each experimental point, we derived the value of γ given by Eq. ( We have also reanalyzed the overactivated behavior found in the literature and compared the experimental data to our prediction. This can be seen in figure Let us note that the theoretical prediction depends both on the BCS ratio linking Tc and ∆, which we took to be 2 following STM data for a-NbSi We can explain the dependance of Tcross on disorder (Figure Indeed, close to the SIT, equation ( According to (10), Tcross should be of the form a/d + bT0. As can be seen figure 3.d, there is a good agreement between the experimental Tcross and 1.8/d [ Å] + 0.15 × T0 (green open squares). However, close to the SIT, the temperature range over which T0 is observed vanishes (it is the case for our 45 Å samples). Since T0 and T 0 have similar dependencies, Tcross should then be of the form a/d + b T 0 . This is experimentally the case (green full squares). In this regime, T 0 is almost constant because the charging energy is smaller than the superconducting gap which is constant and equal to (ξSC/d)∆0. We have shown that the activated transport behavior observed in thin films close to the SIT is due to transport dominated by charging energies. In homogeneous systems, the electronic granularity is a consequence of a diverging localization length. We have The continuous blue curve is our simulation without superconductivity effects, while the red curve is with grain superconductivity for the case T cross /T 0 = 0.14. (d) Characteristic temperatures T 0 , T 0 and T cross for all measured samples. The bottom panel shows the value of γ = (T 0 -T 0 )/T cross as given by equation ( established that, for a fixed amount of disorder, ξ loc depends exponentially on the film thickness. The overactivated regime observed close to the SIT is a cross-over to a regime governed both by the charging energy and the superconducting gap. Our results indicate that the latter depends critically on the grains size. The overall conclusion is that, in the insulating regime close to the SIT, localized Cooper pairs exist but electronic transport is still dominated by single electrons. 7 Materials and Methods. Experimental details. The a-NbSi films have been grown at room temperature by e-beam co-deposition of Niobium and Silicon under ultra-high vacuum (the chamber pressure during the deposition was typically of a few 10 -8 mbar). The film composition was fixed by the respective evaporation rates of Nb and Si (both of the order of 1 Å.s -1 ) and monitored in situ by a set of dedicated piezoelectric quartz crystals. The sample thickness was determined by the duration of the deposition. Both parameters have been checked ex situ by Rutherford Backscattering Spectroscopy (RBS). The samples have been deposited onto sapphire substrates coated with a 25-nm-thick SiO underlayer designed to smooth the substrate surface. They were also protected from oxidation by a 25 nm-thick SiO overlayer. a-NbSi films of similar compositions and thicknesses have been measured to be continuous, amorphous and homogeneous at least down to a thickness 2.5 nm The transport characteristics of a-NbSi thin films are mainly determined by their composition x and their thickness d. However, an additional thermal treatment can also microscopically modify the system disorder while keeping x and d constant. a-NbSi becomes more insulating as the heat treatment temperature increases without any change in the sample morphology The samples resistances have been measured in a dilution refrigerator with a base temperature of 7 mK. In the case of the x = 13.5% batch, two regions of each sample, labeled left and right, could be probed independently. We used standard low noise transport measurement techniques to ensure the samples were measured without electrical heating of the electronic bath. In other words, we made sure via appropriate filtering that the sample electron temperature was the same as its phononic temperature. Moreover, we have checked that the applied bias was sufficiently low for the resistance measurement to be in the ohmic regime. Capacitor model To calculate the hopping conductance of quasi-2D high dielectric constant disordered systems, we consider a 2D random capacitor model In order to take into account the leakage of field lines to outside the 2D system due to the finite value of κ, we introduce capacitances to the ground, C0, as shown in the bottom panel of Fig. (11) We construct a vector Q, whose components are the charges of the nodes in the sample, and a vector V , whose components are the node potentials. Both vectors are related by Q = CV where the capacitance matrix C has components equal to The total electrostatic energy of this system can be obtained in a compact form through the inverse of the capacitance matrix 36 The matrix C -1 plays the role of an interaction matrix. In the continuous limit, the average interaction between two charges separated by a distance r is proportional to the modified Bessel function K0(r/Λ), where the screening length is Λ = r0 C/C0 37 . In the limit of small r (r0 r Λ) we have K0(x) ≈ -ln(x/2), and the effective interaction is given by Eq. ( Γi,j = τ -1 0 e -2r i,j /ξ loc e -∆ i,j /kT (14) where τ -1 0 is the phonon frequency, ri,j the hopping distance, ξ loc the localization length and ∆i,j the transition energy, given by our capacitor model. To simulate hopping conductivity in the system of interacting electrons, we employ a kinetic Monte Carlo method where Vi = j C -1 i,j Qj is the potential at i, and the hop is performed ∆i,j is negative or with probability exp(-∆i,j/T ) otherwise. All site potentials Vi are recalculated after every successful transition. The last term in (15) is the charging energy of the nodes involved. The electric current is generated by the potential difference V lead between the leads at the opposite sides of the sample, which is reflected in the site potentials by extending the Q vector to include nodes j in the lead connected to nodes i in the sample and associating a charge -Ci,jV lead with each of them The algorithm starts from an initial random charge configuration and follows the dynamics at a given temperature. Once the system is in a stationary situation, the conductivity of each sample is calculated from the number of electrons crossing to one of the leads. The number of Monte Carlo steps performed in this calculation drastically increases with decreasing T , and it is determined by the condition that the net charge crossing one of the leads is on the order of 1000. The number of samples considered is 100. Finally, we averaged ln σ over the set of samples (an ensemble averaging). The main results of the simulations were shown in Fig. where c † i is the creation operator on site i and ni = c † i ci is the number operator. We consider a transfer energy t = -1, which sets our unit of energy, and a disordered site energy i ∈ [-W/2, W/2]. The double sum runs over nearest neighbors. We have considered square samples of finite thickness with dimensions L×L×d. All calculations are done at an energy equal to 0.1, to avoid possible specific effects associated with the center of the band. We have studied numerically the zero temperature conductance g proportional to the transmission coefficient T between two semiinfinite leads attached to opposite sides of the sample, where the factor of 2 comes from spin. We measure the conductance in units of 2e 2 /h. We calculate the transmission coefficient from the Green function, which is obtained propagating layer by layer with the recursive Green function method where L is the lateral system size and ξ the correlation length, which carries the dependence on W and d. Data for different W and d can be made to overlap by an adequate choice of ξ loc (W, d). We use this idea in both the diffusive and the localized regimes. In the former the conductance depends logarithmically on system size where the factor 2/π has been obtained by diagrammatic perturbation theory The results for ξ loc (W, d) are shown in Fig. To analyze quantitatively the overall behavior of ξ loc , we have performed a new one-parameter scaling analysis This implies that if for a given thickness and amount of disorder ξ loc > 2d, the system will tend to metallic when its thickness increases and to an insulator when ξ loc < 2d. Usually in experimental situations, one does not know with enough precision the relation between d and ξ loc to decide if a sample for a given disorder will become extended or localized when its thickness increases according criteria (20). We can establish a new criteria to predict the 3D character of a system. If the 3D system corresponding to a given disorder value is extended, as its thickness decreases, the ratio ξ loc /d decreases, meaning that the localization length decreases faster than the thickness: if d1 > d2. Conversely, if the 3D system corresponding to a given disorder value is localized: (equations ( for d1 = 40 Å and d2 = 30 Å for instance. The corresponding 3D system is therefore on the metallic side of the Metal-Insulator Transition. All considered x = 13.5 % samples exhibit ξ loc d. The x = 9 % samples are also extended, but closer to the transition: ξ loc,1 /ξ loc,2 = 2.6 for d1/d2 = 2.