We present the vertically illuminated Si compatible mid-infrared photodetectors based on graphene that forms negative-index metamaterial. The coupling into a 2D layer at the angles near normal to the surface is negligible without the help of a metamaterial. We propose a low loss metamaterial, the dielectric structure with the nano/microholes through 2D materials that supports a resonance and enhances quantum efficiency in a wide range of incident angles. Recently, 2D materials attract attention for multiple applications including photodetector in infrared and mid-infrared However, absorption of 2D materials for the vertical illumination in mid-infrared is negligibly small and there is a demand for metamaterials that facilitate the confinement of the illumination is a one-atom layer thickness. The studies In the manuscript, we study the possibility to design the metamaterial that exhibits NRI due to the photocurrent resonance with the device topology. As a result, the metamaterial, which consists of graphene layers and the dielectric, produces the magnetic resonance in a similar way as the fishnet Meanwhile, the applications using light-trapping structures have shown to be effective for enhancing absorption and expanding the operating band into longer wavelengths The holes in the layer of conductive material form the fishnet structure that supports magnetic resonance in a wide range of angles near vertical and provides negative index properties. We can use magnetic resonance to enhance the lateral propagation of the plasmons in 2D material arranged in a structure similar to fishnet. Instead of using a graphene sheet between the negative index material to focus the illumination on graphene as it was proposed in We solve the Maxwell equations for the vertically incident illumination of the structure presented in Fig. The holes that etched through the graphene and the Si to the substrate. The micro-hole structure resonates with the infrared radiation and produces the modes in the direction parallel to the substrate. The metamaterials are formed by the graphene layer and the holes in dielectric support modes that could be confined near the location of the graphene layers. The micro-holes in the structure are chosen to be rectangular holes in a square lattice with a size of 0.7x1.5 microns and a period of 2.5 microns and a depth of 0.75 microns. Graphene is one atom thick honeycomb lattice of sp2 bonded carbon atoms optical conductivity was studied in Here EF is the Fermi energy relative to the Dirac point, e is the electron charge, ν is the frequency, h is the Planck's constant, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, and γ is the intraband scattering rate. The graphene model takes into account interband transitions and the Drude-like intraband conductivity. The conductivity with E-field perpendicular to the xy plane is 0. The Finite Difference Time Domain (FDTD) method with optical conductivity for graphene given by ( (2) 0 is the impedance of air. From the boundary conditions for the electric field E and magnetic field H at the wall of the holes, the constrain on the k should be found. As a result, the radiation is spread with a nonzero lateral k. The coupling into graphene must satisfy the boundary conditions that assume the constraints for non-zero k in the xy-plane. In the case of the holes, the infrared light is dispersed in the xy plane as it was shown in The illustration for the plasmon condiments in the metastructure is presented in Fig. The plasmon is exited in graphene for both cases. We studied several configurations for the positions of the 2D layers. The first design has one 2D layer in the middle of the 1.5 microns Si layer. The second one contains two layers with a distance between them of 0.56 microns. The absorption, reflection, and transmission for two graphene layers separated by 0.56 microns, embedded in 1.5 microns of Si transparent at mid-infrared are shown in Fig. The eigenvalues of the system determine the structure resonance. As one can see from Fig. The compromise between the efficiency and range could be achieved near 8.3 microns. The plasmonic resonance depends on the distance between the graphene layers and the simulations show that the position of the resonance changes with the number of layers and the distance between them (Fig. The research is focused on the photodetectors vertically illuminated in a wide range of angles. The simulations (Fig. Our study had shown that infrared radiation could be effectively confined in 2D materials for photodetectors. The nano/micro-structures with graphene make promising materials for Si comparable photodetectors in midinfrared. The absorption of graphene in mid-infrared could be enhanced by using a light-trapping micro-holes structure and tuned to the desired region by adjusting the distance between the graphene layers. The resulting structure exhibits negativeindex properties and has low losses. In addition to the resonance effect, the micro-holes at the surface reduce the reflection of the surface. Applications such as filters and polarizes also could use the combination of 2D materials and nano/micro-structures. The discussed structures could be used as tunable sensors or modulators changing the concentration of carriers in Si by pumping light and, thus, changing the structure's properties. 