CsV3Sb5 is a newly discovered Z2 topological kagome metal showing the coexistence of a charge density wave (CDW)-like order at T* = 94 K and superconductivity (SC) at Tc = 2.5 K at ambient pressure. Here we study the interplay between CDW and SC in CsV3Sb5 via measurements of resistivity and magnetic susceptibility under hydrostatic pressures. We find that the CDW transition decreases with pressure and experience a subtle modification at Pc1  0.6-0.9 GPa before it vanishes completely at Pc2  2 GPa. Correspondingly, Tc(P) displays an unusual M-shaped double dome character with two maxima around Pc1 and Pc2, respectively, leading to a tripled enhancement of Tc to about 8 K at 2 GPa. The obtained temperature-pressure phase diagram resembles those of many unconventional superconductors, illustrating an intimated competition between CDW-like order and SC. The competition is found to be particularly strong for the intermediate pressure range Pc1  P  Pc2 as evidenced by the broad superconducting transition and reduced superconducting volume fraction. This work not only demonstrates the potential to raise the Tc of the V-based kagome superconductors, but also offers more insights into the rich physics related to the electronic correlations in this novel family of topological kagome metals. The newly discovered Kagome metals AV3Sb5 (A = K, Rb, Cs) have attracted considerable attention due to the observation of many intriguing phenomena, including superconductivity (SC), nontrivial band topology, and charge order At present, the topologically related phenomena and SC have been actively studied in these AV3Sb5 compounds, but the possible rich physics related to the electronic correlation, especially the relationship between the intertwined electronic orders, has been barely revealed. In this regard, it is highly interesting to unveil the correlation between the CDW-like order and SC commonly observed in these AV3Sb5 materials. Here we have chosen to study CsV3Sb5 single crystal with the highest Tc = 2.5 K among this series of compounds by applying the high-pressure approach, which has been widely used in disentangling the competing electronic orders of the strongly correlated metals Through detailed measurements of resistivity, DC and AC magnetic susceptibility on CsV3Sb5 single crystals under hydrostatic pressure, we successfully uncover an Mshaped double superconducting dome associated with the modification of the CDWlike order and its complete suppression under pressure, respectively. Interestingly, the Tc of CsV3Sb5 is triply enhanced to about 8 K at 2 GPa, indicating that the Tc of these V-based kagome superconductors can be raised considerably. By revealing the coexistence and competition of SC with the CDW-like order, the temperature-pressure phase diagram of CsV3Sb5 resembles those of many unconventional superconductors, and thus offer more insights into the rich correlation-related physics pertinent to this novel family of kagome metals. Single crystals of CsV3Sb5 were grown from Cs ingot (purity 99.9%), V powder (purity 99.9%) and Sb grains (purity 99.999%) using the self-flux method, similar to the growth of RbV3Sb5 Figures Figure When the CDW-like order just vanishes at about 2 GPa, the superconducting transition becomes very sharp with a Tc  0.3 K. As seen in Fig. Since Tc(P) exhibits a complex variation with pressure and the Tc is quite wide in the pressure range 0.6-1.9 GPa where the high-temperature CDW order coexists, it is essential to further characterize the superconducting transition via detailed magnetic measurements. To this end, we measured the dc magnetization M(T) of sample #5 up to 1.06 GPa in MPMS and the ac susceptibility ′(T) of sample #3 up to 2.2 GPa with mutual induction method in PCC. Figure The ′(T) results in Fig. , the reduction of Tc from 0.6 to 1.2 GPa followed by a resurgence of Tc up to 1.86 GPa with a relatively broad transition, and a sharp superconducting transition at P  2 GPa. It is noteworthy that the superconducting volume fraction is relatively small, ~30-50%, in the pressure range 0.6 -1.86 GPa when the CDW order coexists, while a nearly 100% bulk SC is finally realized at 2 GPa when the CDW order vanishes completely. These results thus provide direct evidences for the microscopic coexistence and competition between CDW and SC Based on the above comprehensive high-pressure characterizations, we can construct the T-P phase diagram of CsV3Sb5, Fig. Discussions. The major finding of the present work is the observation of an M-shaped double superconducting dome that has an intimated interplay with the hightemperature CDW-like order. As shown in Fig. As mentioned above, the weak upturn of (T) upon cooling through T* in the pressure range Pc1  P  Pc2 is a typical character for the formation of CDW-like state that opens a gap over part of the Fermi surfaces. Although the density wave instability in this class of kagome metals is not unexpected, this pressure-induced CDW order should be distinct from the ambient-pressure one given the different responses in (T). At first, it seems to fulfill a better nesting condition across the in-plane twodimensional Fermi surface, which can be finely tuned by compression To examine such a possibility, we probe the evolution of the electronic states by evaluating the upper critical field 0Hc2 of the superconducting state. Figure However, the critical field required to eliminate the superconducting transition exhibits a strong dependence as a function of pressure. In order to quantify this evolution, here we determined Tc as the middle-point temperature of superconducting transition and plotted μ0Hc2 versus Tc in Fig. In summary, we performed a comprehensive high-pressure study on the electrical transport and magnetic properties of the CsV3Sb5 single crystal, which is a newly discovered Z2 topological kagome metal showing the coexistence of a CDW-like order at T* = 94 K and SC at Tc = 2.5 K at ambient pressure. Our results uncover a hitherto unknown pressure-induced modification of the CDW order around Pc1  0.6-0.9 GPa before it is completely suppressed around Pc2  2 GPa. Accordingly, Tc(P) exhibits an unusual M-shaped double superconducting dome with two maxima occurring right at Pc1 and Pc2, respectively, thus revealing an intimated interplay between the CDW and SC. The competition between these two electronic orders is particularly strong for the intermediate pressure range Pc1  P  Pc2 as evidenced by the strong reduction of superconducting volume fraction and the broad transition width. The Tc of CsV3Sb5 can be triply enhanced to ~ 8 K at a moderate pressure of 2 GPa, implying that the Tc of these V-based kagome superconductors still has a room to go higher. In addition, the double-peak character has also been observed in the 0Hc2(0), and characteristics of quantum criticality around Pc1 and Pc2 has also been indicated. The determined T-P phase diagram with a quantum criticality around Pc2 resemble those of many unconventional superconductors, thus providing more ingredients related to the strong electron correlations into the rich physics of this novel family of topological kagome metals. Several open issues still need to be addressed in the future studies, such as the nature of the CDW-like order in the intermediate pressure range, and the plausible buried quantum critical point around Pc1. 