Superconducting crystals with lack of inversion symmetry can potentially host unconventional pairing. However, till date, no direct conclusive experimental evidence of such unconventional order parameters in non-centrosymmetric superconductors has been reported. In this paper, through direct measurement of the superconducting energy gap by scanning tunnelling spectroscopy, we report the existence of both s-wave (singlet) and p-wave (triplet) pairing symmetries in noncentrosymmetric Ru 7 B 3 . Our temperature and magnetic field dependent studies also indicate that the relative amplitudes of the singlet and triplet components of the order parameter change differently with temperature. In the BCS theory, it is assumed that the attractive interaction that leads to superconductivity is isotropic in momentum space If the crystal structure of a superconductor lacks a centre of inversion symmetry, parity is not a good quantum number. In such a system an antisymetric spin-orbit coupling (ASOC) can exist. ASOC can in-principle remove the spin degeneracy of the Bloch states with same k (crystal momentum), but opposite spins. In presence of ASOC, the orbital angular momentum and spin angular momentum do not remain good quantum numbers any longer. Here, Pauli's exclusion principle cannot restrict the symmetry of the Cooper pairs to be either purely even-parity singlet or odd-parity triplet. Therefore, a complex mixed angular momentum state becomes a possibility in a non-centrosymmetric superconductor the study of such superconductors gained significant attention of the condensed matter physics community Despite a number of theoretical predictions of the possibility of the exotic superconducting phases in non-centrosymmetric superconductors as discussed above, there has been no clear spectroscopic evidence of unconventionality in such superconductors studied till date. In this paper, we report our ultra-low temperature scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy results on a non-centrosymmetric superconductor Ru 7 B 3 . Ru 7 B 3 belongs to the space group P 6 3 mc and the cyclic crystallographic class C 6v Almost three decades later, the absence of the inversion symmetry in its crystal structure was highlighted by Morniroli et al. discussed the possibility of a mixed angular momentum symmetry of the superconducting order parameter in Ru 7 B 3 . In addition, though it was ignored by the authors, a possible signature of unconventional pairing was also present in the specific heat data as presented in The single crystals used for our measurements showed a bulk superconducting transition at 2.6 K (Figure In Figure The first type (S 1 , S 2 and S 3 ) shows coherence peaks around ± 0.30 mV and shallow 'V'-shaped dip in between the peaks. The spectra (S 4 , S 5 and S 6 ) of second type show coherence peaks at ± 0.47 mV and they have a higher curvature and depth (dI/dV ∼ 0 at V =0) below that. We have also analysed these spectra within a single band 's-wave' model The tunnelling current is given by and S 3 give ∆ of the order of 0.31 meV, 0.29 meV and 0.24 meV respectively while spectra S 4 , S 5 and S 6 provide the values 0.48 meV, 0.42 meV and 0.49 meV respectively for the same analysis. It is also noted that, while the first group of spectra (S 1 , S 2 and S 3 ) shows reasonably good fitting with the single gap 's-wave' model (albeit with large Γ), the second group (S 4 , S 5 and S 6 ) exhibits a significant departure from that. The above-mentioned discrepancy between the experimental spectra and the spectra generated theoretically within a single-band 's-wave' model, prompted us to consider other possible symmetries of the order parameter. To perform such an analysis, we modified Dyne's equation by introducing a more general expression Here, θ is the polar angle (w.r.t. (001)) and the integer n can be 0, 1 or 2 for s, p and d wave symmetries respectively. The expression for tunnelling current is also modified to In Figure For demonstrating this effect more clearly, we show the spectra and respective 's-wave' fits at zero field and at 16 kG in Figure In Figure Based on the discussion above, if Ru 7 B 3 has a mixed angular momentum symmetry in its order parameter, then we would expect the unconventional component to be present in group-I spectra too. To understand this aspect in details, we used an 's + p-wave' model to analyse the spectra S 1 . In this model, the effective gap is given by ∆ s+p = ∆ s + ∆ p Cosθ. In Figure It should be noted here that the superconducting gap is the manifestation of a phasecoherent macroscopic condensate. Therefore, the measured ∆ should ideally be unique irrespective of the measurement techniques. Since the system is metallic in nature, any role of special surface states is ruled out. The T c and the H c that we measure for all our spectra match well irrespective of whether they fall under Group I or II. Therefore, it can be concluded that, all the spectra falling under two distinct groups differ with each other based on which component of the order parameter contributes predominantly for a particular crystallite that the measurement is performed on. In summary, we performed scanning tunnelling spectroscopy on single-crystal Ru 7 B 3 and recorded several spectra which can be broadly categorised into two groups, group-I and II. Group-I consists of spectra which are shallow in shape. They show overall good agreement with single gap 's-wave' symmetry except at very low temperatures where they deviate from such pure s-wave model. Smaller superconducting gap and larger broadening parameter are characteristics of these spectra. Group-II spectra are broader in shape and show sharper coherence peaks. They significantly deviate from the predictions of 's-wave' model but a theoretical model with 'p-wave' symmetry shows better agreement. The superconducting gap is larger, and the broadening parameter is very small for such spectra compared to those belonging to the first group. The temperature dependences of the spectra belonging to both the groups indicate the presence of a mixed 's + p-wave' symmetry in the order parameter where the two components have different temperature dependence. 