Superconducting devices, based on the Cooper pairing of electrons, play an important role in existing and emergent technologies, ranging from radiation detectors The Bardeen, Cooper and Schrieffer theory of superconductivity predicts that the number of quasiparticle excitations should be exponentially small at temperatures low compared to the superconducting gap ∆ (divided by Boltzmann's constant k B ). Nevertheless, it is experimentally well established that a residual population persists down to the lowest temperatures In several state-of-the art devices, the observed ultralow quasiparticle densities correspond to only a few excitations within the entire device Here, we show experimentally a mesoscopic superconducting island that is free of quasiparticles for time periods reaching seconds, five orders of magnitude longer than typical operation times of superconducting qubits Due to the real time probing of the single-electron tunneling, three orders of magnitude faster than the Cooper pair breaking, we are able not only to measure the decay dynamics of individual quasiparticles but also to indentify the pair breaking events as well the number of quasiparticles created per event. This goes well beyond previous experiments on time-resolved quasiparticle tunneling in superconducting structures We monitor the charge on an aluminum superconducting island, sketched in Fig. To infer the instantaneous number of quasiparticles N QP from the time traces we make a number of observations (see supplement for details): (i) The single-electron tunneling rates Γ 0→±1 and Γ ±1→0 are constant over a range of the gate offset n g , as expected for quasiparticle excitations The statistical distribution of N pair , shown in Fig. Figure The dynamics of N QP within a burst, based on the simple physical picture, are modelled by a rate equation for P (N QP , t), see Methods. As the initial condition, we have the experimentally determined distribution P (N QP ) ∝ exp(-0.9N pair ) = exp(-0.45N QP ) at the start of the burst, see Fig. times within the burst and over three orders of magnitude of P (N QP , t), for all N QP shown. The best fit is obtained for Γ QP = 8.0 kHz, in agreement with the measurent in Fig. In our experiment, the rate of the bursts Γ burst decreased over time from the start of a cooldown on timescales of weeks following a power law Γ burst ∝ t -0.9 , where t is the time after the sample reached temperatures below 77 K. This was observed reproducibly in two t (days since beginning of cooldown) first cooldown second cooldown data of Figs. 1-3 power law t -0.9 Decay of burst rate over time. The observed rate of Cooper pair breaking events leading to bursts of tunneling Γ burst is shown as a function of time t after the start of the first (filled diamonds) and second (open triangles) cooldown. A power law fit Γ burst ∝ t -0.9 is shown by a solid line. The right y-axis shows the corresponding time-averaged quasiparticle density nQP, proportional to Γ burst (see text) since the distribution of quasiparticles generated per burst as well as the single electron tunneling rate were found to be constant over the entire cooldown period (Supplementary subsequent cooldowns of the same sample, as shown in Fig. The real-time monitoring of the single-electron tunneling (see Fig. In conclusion, we have investigated the dynamics of the number of quasiparticles on a superconducting island via real time monitoring of single electron tunneling. We demonstrate that a mesoscopic superconducting island can remain completely free from quasiparticles for time periods up to seconds. These findings open a new route to identifying periods of quasiparticle free operation of superconducting devices, of key interest for e.g. superconducting quantum computation. Our approach, giving access to the number of Cooper pairs broken in a given event, also provides novel information on the properties of the source of quasiparticles, which is presently an actively investigated and debated topic The sample is fabricated by standard electron-beam lithography and multiple angle deposition on a silicon substrate. The normal metal leads of the superconducting island are capacitively shunted by a 2 nm / 30 nm / 2 nm thick Ti/Au/Ti ground plane, which helps suppress photon-assisted tunneling events The sample is attached to a copper sample holder weighing approximately 0.5 kg with vacuum grease. Aluminum wire bonds connect the sample chip and the resonator chip (see below) to the printed circuit board of the sample stage. The bond wires to one of the bias leads and the gate electrode of the superconducting island had disconnected during the cooldown, but we were able to tune n g by applying a voltage to the surviving bias lead instead. In the measurements shown in the main text, the gate voltage was held constant at n g = 0. The sample holder is closed with a single indium-sealed cap, which is coated by Eccosorb. The sample holder is thermally anchored to the mixing chamber stage of a cryogen-free dilution refrigerator with a base temperature of 20 mK, with the innermost radiation shield attached to the still flange of the refrigerator (temperature between 0.5 K and 1 K). The low-frequency measurement lines to the sample are filtered with approximately 2 m of Thermocoax We operate the charge detector as a radio frequency single-electron transistor The amplified signal is down-converted and digitized at room temperature with a Aeroflex 3035C vector digitizer. We save both quadratures of the signal in 5 s traces with a sampling rate of 4 MHz, and rotate the signal such that the charge response is along one quadrature only. We then low-pass filter the signal digitally with a cutoff frequency of 150 kHz to increase the signal-to-noise. This post-processing filter sets the bandwidth of our charge detector. We then identify the charge states, bursts of tunneling, and single-and two-electron tunneling events from the filtered time traces as described in Supplementary Note 4 and Supplementary Figures The quasiparticle dynamics is governed by a rate equation for the probability distribution P (N QP , t) of having N QP quasiparticles on the island at a time t after the first tunneling event in a burst. From the general model, see Supplementary Notes 5 and 6 and Supplementary Figure where σ = 1, σ = 2 (σ = 2, σ = 1) for N QP = 1, 3, 5, .. (N QP = 0, 2, 4, ..). The factors σ arise from the fact that starting from the state N = 0, where N QP is even, the quasiparticles can tunnel out as both electrons and holes with two possible final states N = ±1. On the other hand, starting from N = ±1, where N QP is odd, strong Coulomb interactions restrict the possible final states to N = 0. With the initial condition given from the observed exponential distribution of number of broken Cooper pairs, see Fig. where the sum runs over N QP = 2, 4, 6, ... for N = 0 and N QP = 1, 3, 5, ... for N = ±1. In the text the time-averaged number of quasiparticles N QP on the island is discussed. From the probability distribution in Eq. ( The average number N QP is then directly given by where a numerical evaluation gives the coefficient c(λ = 0.45) = 2.5, which depends on the initial condition. We note that the 1/Γ QP dependence arises since P (N QP , t), from Eq. ( The supplementary material (Supplementary Notes 1-8 and Supplementary Figures We start the sample fabrication by depositing Ti/Au/Ti ground planes (yellow in Supplementary Fig. The superconducting island and charge detector were fabricated simultaneously in a third electron-beam lithography step using a Ge-based hard mask and four-angle evaporation. We evaporate first 35 nm of aluminum, forming the superconducting island. The tunnel junctions are formed by oxidizing in 2 mbar of O 2 for 90 s, followed by deposition of 35 nm of copper which forms the normal metal leads of the superconducting island. Next, we evaporate a further 20 nm of aluminum, oxidize for 30 s in 1 mbar of O2 and evaporate 60 nm of copper to form the charge detector. We use the laterally proximized junction technique We note that the normal metal layers of the device, as well as the gold ground plane, may serve as phonon traps It is possible that the time-dependent process breaking Cooper pairs would originate from the sample itself, for instance from the relaxation of two-level systems or perhaps strain on the island. The fabrication methods and the feature size of the aluminum island are similar to those commonly used in superconducting qubits, although it is also possible that the ortho-para conversion in the copper leads could contribute to the time-dependent decay. Figure We use a room-temperature setup similar to that used in Ref. The charge detector, shown in Fig. The output of the charge detector is amplified by the Josephson parametric amplifier, which is otherwise similar to the devices presented in Ref. In Fig. The operating point of the detector and JPA in the charge sensitivity measurement shown above is not exactly the same as the one used in the data shown in Figs. 1-3 of the main text, and these results are merely indicative of our general detector performance. We additionally characterize the signal-to-noise of the charge measurement directly from the traces measured in the time domain. In Fig. The 3-dB bandwidth of the resonant circuit is approximately 1 MHz. We measure the bandwidth of the JPA in the phase-sensitive mode similarly as in the supplementary material of Ref. We rotate the measured IQ signal such that the charge response is only along one quadrature and analyse the traces one by one. To identify the signal levels corresponding to each charge state, we filter the signal with a cutoff frequency of 50 kHz, histogram the signal values in this filtered trace and identify peaks in the histogram with a minimum separation of 3 × 10 -4 in the units on the x-axis of Fig. For the data acquired during the second cooldown, shown in Fig. Andreev tunneling rates within the bursts of tunneling from the same dataset as the single-electron rates shown in Fig. After identifying the charge states from the raw data, we identify the tunneling events as single-electron or twoelectron tunneling events. We classify a tunneling event as Andreev tunneling if the signal changes from N = +1 to -1 or vice versa within the detector rise time 3 μs, ascertained from the measured waiting time distribution in the state N = 0 similarly as in Ref. We split the time traces into bursts and intervals between bursts with the condition that tunneling events separated by at least t sep = 250 μs in charge state N = 0 belong to separate bursts. With this choice, to interpret two successive bursts erraneously as one requires that a second Cooper-pair breaking event happens within time t burst + t sep from the start of the burst, where t burst = 170 μs is the mean length of a burst. Given that the Cooper pair breaking events occur according to a Poisson process with rate Γ burst = 1.5 Hz, this probability is 1exp[-Γ burst (t burst + t sep )] = 6 × 10 -4 . On the other hand, the probability of splitting a long burst into two is given by the probability that the system were in state N = 0 and N QP ≥ 2 for time t sep without a tunneling event occurring. The tunneling rate out of the state N = 0 and N QP = 2 is 4Γ QP = 32 kHz, so this probability is exp(-4Γ QP t sep ) = 3 × 10 -4 . Hence the total probability of misinterpreting bursts is on the order of 10 -3 . After identifying the bursts and tunneling events, Figs. In plotting the waiting times between the bursts of tunneling in Fig. We calculate effective tunneling rates within bursts Γ N →N (t) from charge states N to N as a function time t from the first tunneling event of a burst. For single-electron transitions, N = N ± 1, for Andreev rates, N = N ± 2. The rates are calculated as averages over time bins by dividing the number of transitions from N to N within a bin by the total time spent in state N within that bin. The time spent in state N = 0 after a burst has ended is not included in the denominator, so that the rates are calculated only within the bursts. The bin widths are adjusted from 10 μs at short times to 50 μs at t > 250 μs, as there are less long bursts available for calculating statistics. We show only those data points where we have statistics calculated from at least 10 bursts with events in the corresponding bin. The error bars in Fig. The single-electron tunneling rates are shown in Fig. Note that in both panels of Fig. Based on the detector performance above, we can estimate the probability that a burst of tunneling would be undetected due to finite bandwidth of the charge detector After a burst of tunneling is correctly identified by the analysis procedure, it is possible that some of the tunneling events within the burst are missed. This is especially likely in the beginnings of the burst, where many quasiparticles are present and the tunneling rates are faster, meaning that the number of tunneling events tends to be underestimated for bursts where many Cooper pairs were initially broken. In particular, we can estimate that if there are more than 20 quasiparticles initially created, the decay rate by tunneling becomes faster than our detector bandwidth for the beginning of the burst. Since we observe essentially no counts between 10 to 20 quasiparticles nor excessive amount of cases at the tail of the exponential distribution if Fig. In Fig. for N QP = 1, 3, 5.. and zero otherwise. This distribution accounts for the time evolution from the pair breaking to the first tunnel event. We point out that in obtaining Eq. ( From the probability distribution P (N QP , N, t) after the first tunneling event occuring at t = 0, the different quantities shown can be obtained. The formally infinite set of equations in (1) is solved by truncating the quasiparticle number at some maximum N QP = N max QP , such that the result is independent of N max QP . In the main text (including Methods) the basic model, considering only quasiparticle out-tunneling, is discussed. For the quantities analyzed in the Supplementary information, the theoretical burst length distribution, shown in Fig. where the sum runs over N QP = 2, 4, 6, ... for N = 0 and N QP = 1, 3, 5, ... for N = ±1. The probability for the empty state (0, 0) is thus not included in the definition of the effective rates, in agreement with how the rates are obtained from the experimental data. Hence, the rates describe only the tunneling within the bursts. From P (N QP , N, t) we can also obtain the time dependent probabilities for having a charge N = 0, ±1 on the island. We focus on the total probabilities for having an odd (N = ±1) or an even (N = 0) charge, defined as and respectively. As for the effective rates, the probabilty for N QP = 0 is not included, in order to only describe the probabilities within the bursts. A theoretical value for the single-quasiparticle tunneling rate for removing a quasiparticle from the island can be estimated as Γ QP, theory = (2e 2 R T V D(E F )) -1 The data shown in the main text was obtained at n g ≈ 0.05. At this operation point, the expected rate for the thermally activated transition N = 0 → ±1, N QP = 0 → 1 adding a quasiparticle into the island is negligible (below 10 -6 Hz), and in any case, the rate of such events is bounded by the measured burst rate. The thermally activated rate of the transition N = ±1 → 0, N QP = 1 → 2 for a quasiparticle tunneling back from the leads from the energetically unfavorable charge states N = ±1 is on the order of 1 kHz or below. However, this rate is difficult to estimate precisely due to its exponential dependence on E C , ∆ and n g , although the independence of measured quantities on n g over a relatively large range, shown below in Figs. A sensitive probe of this backtunneling process are the time-dependent occupation probabilities P (N, t) of the charge states within bursts of tunneling (in contrast with the probabilities P (N QP , t) discussed in the main text). This can be intuitively be understood as follows: If there is no backtunneling, at long times from the initial pairbreaking event, a burst must either end or be in the charge state ±1. If there is a nonzero backtunneling rate, there would be a non-zero occupation probability for the state N = 0 even at long times. Calculations show that the long-time limiting value is independent of the initial conditions (number of Cooper pairs broken) and given by P (N = 0) = (-3q + (1 + q)(9 + q))/2, where q = Γ B /Γ QP is the backtunneling rate normalized by the single-quasiparticle tunneling rate. In Fig. We estimate the recombination rates based on the expression Γ rec given in Ref. Given these rates, we estimate the probability of a Cooper-pair-breaking event being undetected because the quasiparticles recombined before a tunneling event took place. An upper limit can be obtained by considering an event where only a single Cooper pair was broken, which leads to the shortest bursts. The relevant tunneling rate to compare with is the total tunneling rate out of the state N = 0, N QP = 2, which is 4Γ QP = 32 kHz. With Γ R = 25 Hz, in only 0.3% of the cases the quasiparticles would recombine before tunneling out. Even with the order of magnitude higher value of Σ = 1.8 × 10 9 W K -5 m -3 in Ref. The distribution of single-electron tunneling events per burst was also unchanged as a function of time within cooldown, gate offset and bath temperature up to T bath = 85 mK (Fig. To study the dependence of the single-quasiparticle tunneling rate Γ QP on these control parameters, as a complement to the quantities discussed in the main text we show in Fig. As presented in Fig. In the second cooldown with the same device we also detected events which change the tunneling dynamics at a rate on the order of 1 Hz. Figure We interpret these longer time scale parity switching events to arise from trapping and escaping of an electron in localized state in close proximity of the superconducting island. Such trapped states may be either subgap states in the superconductor or electronic states in impurities in close proximity or inside the superconductor. Interestingly, we observe that the switching to the second regime is triggered for roughly half of the cases by several single-electron events as shown in S13d. Our interpretation here is that initially, a Cooper pair breaking event (with the rate Γ burst ) triggers the burst shown in Fig. For acquiring the 4.6 h of data comprising the dataset used in Figs. 2 and 3 of the main text, we made sure that during the measurements no such switching to the regime (2) nor discrete jumps of n g took place. Even in this dataset, roughly 0.3% of the measured bursts of tunneling were longer than 1.5 ms, which should be exceedingly unlikely according to our model. Such long bursts might be also explained by quasiparticles becoming trapped in a localized state, from which they escape with a slower rate, which would also explain the slight decrease in the rate Γ ±1→0 after t > 500 μs. We emphasize that at t = 500 μs, over 90% of bursts have already ended so this effect is only a minor correction to the dynamics. For the data shown in Fig. QTF Centre of Excellence, Department of Applied Physics, Aalto University, FI-00076 Aalto, Finland Physics Department and NanoLund, Lund University, Box 118, 22100 Lund, Sweden VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd, QTF Centre of Excellence, P.O. Box 1000, FI-02044 VTT, Finland (Dated: July 6, 2022) arXiv:2102.00484v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 5 Jul 2022 Probability of undetected quasiparticles within the quiet periodsIn the quiet periods between the bursts of tunneling, quasiparticles may be present without leading to detected tunneling events, if the tunneling events were missed by our detector due to the finite bandwidth. We estimated above that the 1.4% of bursts of tunneling that are shorter than 3 μs will be missed, and the probability that at any given moment quasiparticles would be present due to such an event is Γ burst × 0.014 × 3 μs = 6 × 10 -8 . Another possibility is that the quasiparticles recombined before tunneling out. Estimating cautiously that this happens after 1% of the Cooper pair breaking events, the probability that quasiparticles were present due to such an event would be Γ burst × 0.01 × 30 μs = 5 × 10 -7 .