We analyse the possibility of the appearance of spontaneous currents in proximated superconducting/normal metal (S/N) heterostructure when Cooper pairs penetrate into the normal metal from the superconductor. In particular, we calculate the free energy of the S/N structure. We show that whereas the free energy of the N film FN in the presence of the proximity effect increases compared to the normal state, the total free energy, which includes the boundary term FB, decreases. The condensate current decreases FN , but increases the total free energy making the current-carrying state of the S/N system energetically unfavorable. Introduction. Penetration of Cooper pairs into the normal metal (N) in superconductor/normal metal (S/N) heterostructures, provided the interface transparency is not too small, is a well-known effect Despite of these continuous research efforts in simple S/N systems and their derivatives, outlined above, the origin of certain effects remains mysterious. For example, an interesting paramagnetic re-entrant effect (sometime called Mota effect) caused by spontaneous currents in S/N bilayer was observed in Refs. In this paper, we consider a simple S/N bilayer heterostructure with a superconducting coupling constant in the N layer equal to zero, i. e., λ N = 0 and ∆ N = 0. We calculate the total free energy F S/N of the system that consists of bulk terms F S and F N as well as the boundary term F B . Below the critical temperature T c , the energy F S (F N ) decreases (increases), respectively. On the contrary to F N , the boundary term F B decreases the total free energy in such a way that the contribution of the terms F N + F B is negative. The contribution F S + F B remains negative as it is in the absence of the PE. The condensate current gives a positive contribution to both terms F N + F B and F S + F B making the current-carrying state unfavorable. Theory. Frequently the analysis of the free energy (F ) is performed using the Ginzburg-Landau free energy expansion, assuming the smallness of the order parameter ∆. This approach is not applicable to the considered heterostructure because the superconducting order parameter ∆ N in the N film is assumed to be zero. On the other hand, a part of electrons in N condense due to the PE and therefore the free energy F N changes also in the superconducting state. Thus, in order to calculate the variation δF , we need to find first the quasiclassic matrix Green's functions ĝ in the S and N regions using the boundary conditions and to express the free energy in terms of the functions ĝ. We consider a simple case of diffusive S/N structure when the function ĝ obeys the Usadel equation where D S;N are the diffusion coefficients in the S(N) films, ω is the Matsubara frequency, P = ∇χ -2πA/Φ 0 is the gauge-invariant condensate momentum and Φ 0 = hc/2e is the magnetic flux quantum. The Usadel equations are complemented by the standard Kurpiyanov-Lukichev boundary conditions for θ S,N where κ B,S(N ) = 2/R B σ S(N ) , R B is the S/N interface resistance per unit area and σ S,N are the conductivities in the S and N films in the normal state. The order parameter ∆, which is non-zero in the S film, is determined by the self-consistency equation Note, Eq.( where ν, P , D are the density of states, momentum, and diffusion coefficient in either S or N film, respectively. We set ∆ N equal to zero since we assume that λ N = 0. The energy F is counted from its value in the normal state, i.e. θ = 0. This expression for F N can be also derived from a more general expression for the free energy of a superconductor in the presence of an exchange field In the following we solve Eqs.(1-2) for the functions θ S,N together with the self-consistency equation ( 1 is fulfilled, where ξ S ∼ = D S /2∆ is a coherence length in S. Yet we do take into account a suppression of the order parameter ∆ by the condensate flow. In the case of small suppression of ∆, we find δ∆ ∼ = -( At low temperatures (T ∆) the gap variation is δ∆ ∼ = -D S P 2 S /2. Note that a strong suppression of ∆ by the condensate flow was studied in Refs. The direct calculation of F S0 gives a well known result F S0 = -ν S ∆ 2 d S /2 and as expected the condensate flow reduces the condensation energy. Next we evaluate the contribution to the free energy of the N film, F N . Linearized Eq.( with a solution where κ q = 2ω + q 2 /ξ N , ξ N = D N /2∆, q = Qξ N and f S = ∆/ζ ω . The solution describes correctly the condensate Green's function in N provided the condition R B > ρ N ξ N is fulfilled. In the limit of a weak PE the energy F N + F B can be written in the form where the last term is the boundary free energy The first term in the figure brackets is the contribution of the bulk N region whereas the last term stems from the boundary contribution to the free energy. The second term is a reduction of the free energy due to the PE. One can see that the first term gives a positive contribution to the F and decreases with increasing the condensate velocity V S ∼ q. However the boundary term (the last one) is twice larger than the first one and therefore the total contribution of the terms due to condensate current, Eq. Conclusions: To conclude, we analyzed the free energy for S/N bilayer in the presence of the condensate current. We have shown that the bulk of the N film gives a positive contribution F N (q) to the free energy which decreases with increasing condensate velocity V ∼ q. However the contribution of boundary term F B to F is twice larger in magnitude than F N (q) and is also negative as the contribution F S of the superconductor S. Therefore the total free energy F increases when condensate moves; this makes the current-carrying state unfavorable.