One of the main tasks during the design of a superconducting electrical machine is the estimation of losses in the superconducting coils. These losses can be decisive in such applications since they influence the cooling power requirements and the overall efficiency of the machine. In this publication, we focus on the dissipation in the stator superconducting coils of a synchronous machine for a wind turbine application. The T-A formulation of Maxwell's equations is used in a 2D finite element model to analyse the behaviour of the magnetic field around the coils and calculate losses. Particular attention is given to the position of the coils inside a slot and several coil configurations are presented. It is shown that certain coil arrangements lead to a significantly lower total loss, a more uniform loss distribution, which ultimately leads to the possibility of increasing the operating temperature. T HE large current capacity of high-temperature supercon- ductors (HTS) has inspired several applications. One of the main research topics is related to superconducting electrical machines for transport and energy conversion Despite their zero resistance, HTS experience losses under time changing current or magnetic field C.R. Vargas-Llanos, M. Noe, T. Arndt and F. Grilli are with the Institute for Technical Physics (ITEP) of the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany (e-mail: francesco.grilli@kit.edu). S. Lengsfeld is with Fraunhofer Institute for Energy Economics and Energy System Technology, 34119 Kassel, Germany superconducting coils in electrical machines Several analytical equations have been developed to estimate losses in tapes and stacks of superconducting tapes The T-A formulation of Maxwell's equations is used here to estimate losses in the superconducting tapes by following the approach described in where J is the current density, μ is the permeability of the material and A is defined as B = ∇ × A (B, magnetic flux density). The current vector potential T ( J = ∇ × T) is only calculated in the superconducting domain as: arXiv:2102.12278v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 24 Feb 2021 The superconducting tapes are modelled with a non-linear resistivity In all the calculations, we considered a critical electric field E c = 1 × 10 -4 V m -1 and a value of n = 25. Finally, the losses in the superconducting tapes Q are calculated by integrating the dot product between electric field E and current density J in the superconducting tape over half a cycle: The models used in this publication are a 2D representation of an electrical machine. Therefore, the end-effects are not considered. Since the electromagnetic behaviour is periodically repeated in space and time, one pole pair is analyzed and only one group of coils is modelled with details The total losses in the machine's stator coils are calculated by multiplying the estimation for one group of coils by the number of coil groups, the number of pole pairs and the active length of the machine. The main design under study is a direct driven synchronous electrical machine with permanent magnets in the rotor and superconducting distributed winding in the stator. This machine has an active length of 2.4 m to achieve a rated torque of 10 MN m. The stator coils are located in rectangular slots in almost all the analyzed arrangements. This rectangular shape of the slot is modified in the final configuration to reduce losses and distribute the coils inside the slot. The cross-section of one pole pair is shown in Fig. The magnetic material is M330-50A, whose main properties are described in The stator coils are wound with a 4 mm REBCO tape with a critical current density of 3 MA cm -2 at 77 K and an average operating temperature of 65 K In this section, several configurations are studied by considering the same rectangular slot design. The coil's position and orientation inside the slot are changed based on the average power density dissipation and electromagnetic behaviour. This analysis is done at full load and over the group of coils located in the first slot from bottom to top depicted in blue in Fig. The first configuration to analyze uses coils with a racetrack form. This shape is considered typical in superconducting electrical machines. Three coil layers are stacked one on top of the other in rectangular slots for one phase in one pole pair. These coils are wound with a 4 mm tape for an initial calculation. Fig. Fig. In this arrangement, we have rotated the cross-section of the coils 90 degrees in comparison with the previous solutions. Therefore, the tapes closer to the rotor are better aligned with the magnetic field. Fig. The behaviour of the normalized current density (J/J c (B)) and average power density dissipation for the same arrangement with a 2 mm tape is shown in Fig. Since we still had an uneven distribution of losses in the last arrangement, we have decided to incline the top and bottom coils. This approach will allow us to reduce the perpendicular component of the magnetic field around the coils, which will further reduce the losses. In Fig. We have noticed in the previous configuration analysis that the orientation of the tape can play a key role in the average power density dissipation. For this reason, we propose a new arrangement of the cross-section of the coils by trying to align more the tapes with the magnetic field. This approach allows us to reduce further the perpendicular component of the magnetic field. Fig. DIFFERENT TEMPERATURES The total losses in the superconducting coils are summarized in table II. We can notice in this table that a continuous reduction of losses is achieved through the different arrangements. This loss reduction can be classified under two main strategies. The first one is a reduction in the tape's width. This approach can bring a reduction in the magnetization losses of single tapes under a uniform perpendicular magnetic field The second strategy is based on the magnetic field orientation. Therefore, the position of the coils was changed to decrease the perpendicular component of the magnetic field. If we consider the typical arrangement as a reference, this approach brings a 80 % reduction in losses for the star configuration with a 4 mm tape, and a 73 % reduction in losses for the star configuration with a 2 mm tape. Moreover, the distribution of the average power density dissipation is better. This represents a better distribution of the thermal stress during normal operation. Fig. V. CONCLUSION Losses have been estimated in the HTS coils of a synchronous machine with permanent magnets in the rotor and superconducting winding in the stator. We have used the T-A formulation of Maxwell's equations to model the generator by employing finite elements. A detailed analysis of the electromagnetic behaviour of the coils at rated conditions has been done, several configurations have been proposed and a continuous reduction in losses has been achieved. The loss reduction has been classified into two main strategies based on the tape's width and alignment. This last approach has provided up to 80 % reduction in losses and a better average power density dissipation in the HTS coils of the synchronous machine under study. The analysis has been complemented with a sensitivity study over different temperatures. From all the analyzed arrangements, the star configuration offers the lowest losses and the best average power density distribution. Moreover, it enables an increase in the operating temperature and a better distribution of the thermal stress due to a better distribution of the losses.