We developed a positron emission tomography (PET) system for multiple-isotope imaging. Our PET system, named multiple-isotope PET (MI-PET), can distinguish between different tracer nuclides using coincidence measurement of prompt γ-rays, which are emitted after positron emission. In MI-PET imaging with a pure positron emitter and prompt-γ emitter, because of the imperfectness of prompt γ-ray detection, an image for a pure positron emitter taken by MI-PET is superposed by a positron-γ emitter. Therefore, in order to make isolated images of the pure positron emitter, we developed image reconstruction methods based on data subtraction specific to MI-PET. We tested two methods, subtraction between reconstructed images and subtraction between sinogram data. In both methods, normalization for position dependence of the prompt γ-ray sensitivity is required in addition to detector sensitivity normalization. For these normalizations, we performed normalization scans using cylindrical phantoms of the positron-γ emitters 44m Sc (prompt γ-ray energy: 1157 keV) and 22 Na (prompt γray energy: 1274 keV). A long period measurement using the activity decay of 44m Sc (T1/2 = 58.6 hours) elucidated that the acquisition ratio between the prompt γ-rays coincided with PET event and pure PET event changes on the basis of object activities. Therefore, we developed a correction method that involves subtraction parameters dependent on the activities, i.e., the counting rate. We determined that correction for sensitivity normalization in variation of activity can be performed using only the triple-coincidence rate as an index, even if using a different nuclide from that used for normalization. From analysis of dual-tracer phantom images using 18 F and 44m Sc or 18 F and 22 Na, data subtraction in the sinogram data with sensitivity correction gives a higher quality of isolated images for the pure positron emitter than those from image subtractions. Furthermore, from dual-isotope ( 18 F-FDG and 44m Sc) mouse imaging, we concluded that our developed method can be used for practical imaging of a living organism. Positron emission tomography (PET) is a powerful tool for radio-tracer imaging in a living biological object. PET was mainly developed for nuclear medicine imaging, such as clinical diagnoses and preclinical studies Consequently, recent PET gives high quality images for various tracers and can be used widely, from basic science to clinical diagnosis. Unfortunately, conventional PET is useful only for single tracer imaging due to the energy constancy of annihilation photons, which are used for PET imaging. In order to improve PET imaging, we have developed a new PET system that can be used for multiple-tracer simultaneous imaging. Our PET system, named multiple-isotope PET (MI-PET), detects not only annihilation photons but also prompt γ-rays, which are emitted successively after positrons, using additional γ-ray detectors. Since a prompt γ-ray has an energy intrinsic to each radio-isotope, MI-PET can identify the tracer radio-isotopes by using prompt γ-ray detection. Previously, we succeeded in proving the basic principle of MI-PET using a prototype system In previous research, several PET systems dedicated to multiple-tracer imaging have been developed by a few groups By contrast, our MI-PET system is special in terms of using additional detectors for prompt γ-ray detection, and therefore we need to develop an image reconstruction method specific for our system. In particular, because of the imperfectness of prompt γ-ray detection in MI-PET imaging with a pure positron emitter and positron-γ emitter an image for a pure positron emitter taken by MI-PET is superposed by a positron-γ emitter. Therefore, in order to make an isolated image of the pure positron emitter, we developed a method to make an isolated image of the pure positron emitter and also a system-specific dead-time correction method. We conducted dual-isotope phantom and mouse imaging, and reconstructed images that used the developed methods were evaluated from both quantitative and practical qualitative viewpoints. MI-PET consists of a ring-type small-animal PET system and additional γ-ray detectors. The PET scanner is fabricated using pixelized gadolinium orthosilicate scintillators. Eight large volume (50×50×30 mm 3 ) bismuth germanium oxide (BGO) detectors are used for the detection of prompt γ-rays, and they are arranged into two rings mounted on each side of the PET ring. The inner diameter of the PET ring is 95 mm, and axial length of the field-of-view (FOV) is 37.5 mm. A schematic illustration and a photography of MI-PET are shown in figure The signal processing system of MI-PET can acquire list-mode data of both coincident annihilation photons and annihilation photons with coincident prompt γ-rays in parallel. The width of the coincidence time windows is set to 20 ns. Events of coincident annihilation photons are used for conventional PET imaging, and events of coincident annihilation photons with the presence or absence of prompt γ-rays are used for tracer identification. For our purposes, coincidence detection of annihilation photons by PET detectors is denoted as double-coincidence, and coincidence detection of annihilation photons with prompt γ-ray coincidence by an additional detector is denoted as triple-coincidence. The list-mode data are classified into two groups based on the presence or absence of prompt γ-rays. Different images of tracers are obtained by using a conventional image reconstruction method. Details of the system and its basic performance have been described by Fukuchi et al. The sensitivity for a prompt γ-ray of 1275 keV ( 22 Na prompt γ-ray) in the center position is about 7%. This sensitivity includes not only full-energy absorption events but also Compton partial energy deposited events of the energy threshold setting in 1000 keV. The energy resolution of an additional BGO detector is about 10%. The energy threshold of a BGO detector is changed according to the nuclide and set at 1000 keV for 22 Na or 800 keV for 44m Sc (1157-keV prompt γ-ray). The simplest MI-PET operation for dual-isotope imaging uses a pure positron-emitter and a positron-γ emitter. In this case, a reconstructed image from an event data set with the presence of prompt γ-ray detection (triple-coincidence) reflects the distribution of the positron-γ emitter. Because of the imperfection of prompt γ-ray detection, the reconstructed image from the absence of prompt γ-ray detection (double-coincidence) contains a distribution of both the pure positron emitter and the positron-γ emitter. Therefore, a method to reconstruct the isolated image of the pure positron emitter is required, and that method and its performance evaluation are described in this paper. For our purposes, tracer nuclides used as pure positron emitters and those used as positron γray emitters are called tracer-A and tracer-B, respectively, and the isolated images for tracer-A and -B are called image-A and image-B, respectively. The images reconstructed from the data sets without and with prompt γ-ray detection are called image-D (double-coincidence) and -T (triple-coincidence), respectively. In both image-D and -T, the positional dependences of scanner sensitivities were normalized by normalization scan data using a cylindrical phantom with a pure positron emitter, 18 F. The position dependences of the prompt γ-ray detection sensitivities were also normalized using a cylindrical phantom with positron-γ emitters 44m Sc and 22 Na. The details of the normalization scans and their results are described in Sections 4.1 and 5.1, respectively. In this section, we describe isolation methods for image-A. All isolation methods are based on subtraction between reconstructed image or sinogram data for image-D and image-T. We also describe a correction method for subtraction parameters depending on the activities of measured objects. A primitive method to obtain an isolated image of tracer-A is given by subtraction between reconstructed image-D and image-T. Each component in voxel i of image-D (Di ) and -T (Ti) is expressed using the prompt γ-ray detection efficiency for each voxel position εpi as D i = A i + B i (3.1) where Ai and Bi are the contents of actual activities in voxel i for tracer-A and -B, respectively. These operations are applied for each voxel, but hereafter voxel index i is omitted. From eq. The whole procedure to reconstruct an isolated image of tracer-A from list mode data is shown in figure 2. The other method to reconstruct an isolated image for tracer-A is subtraction using sinogram projection data. In this method, the subtraction coefficient is also determined by the ratio of triple-to double-coincidence by the normalization scan using tracer-B. In the same manner as the image subtraction method (eq. (3.7)), an isolated sinogram for tracer-A (PA) is obtained by P A = P D - where PD and PT are sinograms from double-and triple-coincidence data, and ε'd and ε't are detection efficiencies for sinograms of double-and triple-coincidence data derived by the normalization scan, respectively. As with image subtraction, voxel index i is omitted, but this operation is applied for each pixel of the sinogram. From isolated sinogram PA, image-A is reconstructed by using a conventional image reconstruction method. This procedure is summarized in figure Due to the system dead-time difference of single-event acquisition between double-and triplecoincidence, the data acquisition ratio of double-and triple-coincidence events changes depending on the tracer activities in our system. To correct this variation in the reconstruction of isolation images of tracer-A, we developed a method to correct the subtraction coefficient depending on the counting rate. In our system, the data acquisition system, which causes the main component of dead-time, works with a non-paralyzable behaviour. In general, the recorded count rate m with a nonparalyzable model is where n and τ are the true detection rate and the system dead-time for single-event recording, respectively , and (3.14) From eqs. (3.12) and (3.13), the true counting rate for triple-coincidence is Accordingly, the ratio of recorded count rates between triple-and double-coincidence f is Using the efficiency ratio between double-and triple-coincidence (ε2/ε3) from the normalization scan of tracer-B, the single-event dead-time of τ2 and τ3 can be determined by fitting eq. (3.17) as a function of triple-coincidence count rate n3. The image subtraction (eq. (3.7)) to reconstruct an isolated image for tracer-A is corrected by the variation of ratio m3/m2 as a function of n3 using A = D - where fN and fI are count rates between triple-and double-coincidences (eq. (3.17)) in normalization and imaging scan, respectively. The same correction is applied for sinogram subtraction (eq. (3.8)) using correction parameter. Using activity decay of positron-γ emitter 44m Sc, which has a half-life of 58.6 hours, recorded counting-rates for double-and triple-coincidence in the normalization scan were determined and are described in Sections 4.1 and 5.1. Furthermore, because eq. (3.17) depends only on the triple-coincidence detection rate, in the case using tracer-B other than 44m Sc, which has different prompt γ-ray energy, counting rate correction can be applied based on a 44m Sc normalization scan. For the spatial normalizations of the PET and the prompt γ-ray sensitivity, long-period measurements were performed using cylindrical phantoms of 18 F, 44m Sc, and 22 Na. Each cylindrical phantom was 180 mm in length and 78 mm in diameter. The volume of the cylindrical phantom inside of the FOV was 20.8% of the total volume. Fluorine-18 and 22 Na were dissolved in water and 44m Sc was dissolved in HCl (0.5 M) to pour into the phantom vessels. The normalization scan of pure positron emitter 18 F was used for sensitivity normalization of the PET detectors. The initial activity of 18 F measurement was 63.1 MBq, and the measuring time was 12 hours. Because the half-life of 18 F is 109.8 min, almost all activity decayed during measurement. The normalization scans of positron-γ emitters 44m Sc and 22 Na were performed for the normalization of the prompt γ-ray sensitivities. 44m Sc was also used for analysis of the counting rate dependence using its proper decay half-life of 58.6 hours. The initial activity of the 44m Sc phantom was 2.45 MBq, and the measuring time was 235 hours, which corresponds to about 4 half-lives. Scandium-44m was produced via the reactions of 45 Sc(d, p2n) 44m Sc (for phantom imaging) and 44 Ca(d, 2n) 44m Sc (for mouse imaging) with a 24-MeV deuterium beam and was purified by chemical processes at the RIKEN AVF cyclotron. Since there were about 48 hours of purification and transportation time from the production site to our facility, a short-lived 44 Sc (T1/2 = 6.84 hours) and by-products were attenuated. The 22 Na cylindrical phantom had 1.1 MBq of activity, and the scanning time was 87 hours. In order to evaluate the quantitative performance of our image reconstruction methods, we conducted two phantom experiments with dual isotopes (experiment 1: 18 F and 44m Sc, experiment 2: 18 F and 22 Na). These phantoms are referred to as the F-Sc phantom (experiment 1) and the F-Na phantom (experiment 2). In the first experiment, 18 F and 44m Sc were used as tracer-A and -B, respectively. Three rods were arranged in an equilateral triangle at a distance of twice the rod diameter. The configuration of the rod phantom is shown in figure To evaluate the performance of our method for a nuclide with a different energy from the prompt γ-ray from 44m Sc, phantom data using 18 F and positron-γ emitter 22 Na were used. This experimental data has been previously reported The phantom configuration was the same as that of the F-Sc phantom (figure To evaluate the practical performance of our methods, mouse scanning with a dual-isotope was performed using 18 F-FDG and a simple-substance of 44m Sc. In this experiment, 1.13-MBq 18 F-FDG and 1.23-MBq 44m Sc were administered to an 8-week-old normal male mouse by a tail vein injection. After 38 min from administration, a 30-min scan with bed motion was performed under anaesthesia. This animal experiment was performed in accordance with the Principles of Laboratory Animal Care (NIH Publication No. 85-23, revised 1985) and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of RIKEN, Kobe Branch. For all experiments, the acquired list-mode data were categorized into two groups by the presence or absence of prompt γ-ray detection. Two kinds of sinogram data were made from each categorized group of data. The image reconstruction from the sinogram data was performed using an inter-update Metz-filtered ordered subset expectation maximization by a program called Software for Tomographic Image Reconstruction The normalization scan data of 18 F was used for sensitivity normalization of the PET detectors. The sinogram projection data was applied for the correction of each imaging projection data group. Using normalization scan data of 44m Sc and 22 Na, the position dependence of the sensitivity for the prompt γ-ray, i.e., the subtraction parameters for making an isolated image of tracer-A, was determined for each nuclide. In addition to sensitivity normalization, 44m Sc normalization data was used for evaluation of the counting rate dependence of the prompt γ-ray sensitivity as a ratio of double-and triplecoincidence. The counting rate of the double-and triple-coincidence as a function of measurement time in 44m Sc is shown in figure The functions obtained by division of triple-and double-coincidence as a function of the triple-coincidence counting rate are shown in figure The triple-coincidence counting rate of the 22 Na normalization scan is constant during measurement because of the 2.6-year half-life, and the counting rate was determined to be 86.7 cps (shown in figure The reconstructed images in xy-projection for the F-Na phantom with the absence (image-D) and presence (image-T) of prompt γ-ray detection are shown in figure To determine the prompt γ-ray efficiency as a subtraction parameter, 22 Na normalization scan data was used. Counting rate correction factor was determined by extrapolation of the curve in figure Similar to the rod phantoms, an isolated image of tracer-A for the mouse scan was reconstructed using a subtraction between sinogram data with absence and presence of the prompt γ-ray detection. The subtraction parameter was determined by using 44m Sc normalization scan data, and counting rate correction was also performed based on the counting rate in each bed position. Reconstructed image-D, image-T, and isolated image-A are shown in figure To make a quantitative comparison, 3D volumes of interest (VOIs) were set on the heart, liver, and bladder for image-D, image-T, and image-A. Result values of these VOIs are shown in table From the analysis of the F-Sc phantom data, to reconstruct an isolated image of tracer-A by data subtraction, data subtraction in sinogram data using 44m Sc normalization data gave better quality image data than did subtraction in reconstructed image data. A reason that sinogram subtraction gives a better quality isolated image-A than image subtraction is probably the less biased distribution of sinograms differed from images that have partial volume effects or other effects. Furthermore, if measured activity is different from normalization scanning, correction for the ratio between double-and triple-coincidence is needed in image subtraction to reconstruct an isolated image of tracer-A. For this correction, only the counting rate of triple-coincidence is an indicator for this activity correction. From the F-Na phantom imaging, for the counting rate correction for 22 Na, which emits prompt γ-rays with different energy and gives different detection efficiency and position dependence of the prompt γ-rays, we found that the normalization data of 22 Na can be scaled only by the triple-coincidence rates. This correction is useful for a long-lived nuclide, such as 22 Na, for which normalization scanning with activity function is difficult. However, this method is also useful for a short-lived nuclide, in which it can be difficult to acquire a sufficient amount of normalization data. From the VOI analysis of the mouse experiment with 18 F-FDG and 44m Sc, the D-T activity of 18 F-FDG (table 2) in the liver was negative. However, activity in the liver of image-A, which has no biological specific accumulation of 18 F-FDG, was nearly zero and was comparable with other non-accumulated sections. From this result, we determined that our newly developed image-A isolation and counting rate correction method are useful for practical dual-isotope imaging using MI-PET. Our method can probably be applied not only to MI-PET imaging using dual-isotope tracer-A and tracer-B, but also to those such as tracer-B and tracer-B', or for three tracers with tracer-A, tracer-B, and tracer-B'. Furthermore, our correction method can be also applied for similar types of systems, namely parallel data acquisition for different types of events, which have different data-times. To make an isolated image of tracer-A, we developed an image reconstruction method based on data subtraction specific for MI-PET. For prompt γ-ray sensitivity normalization that is used as a subtraction parameter, we performed normalization scans using cylindrical phantoms of the positron-γ emitters 44m Sc and 22 Na. From a long-period measurement using the activity decay of 44m Sc, the ratio between the prompt γ-ray and the PET sensitivity changes as a function of the activities. Therefore, we developed a subtraction parameter correction method that depends on the activities. From analyses of dual-tracer phantom imaging, we determined that data subtraction in the sinogram data gives a higher quality of isolated images for the pure positron emitter than those reconstructed images from image subtractions. We determined that sensitivity correction for the normalization factor in variation of activity can be performed using only the triple-coincidence rate as an index even with a different nuclide from that used for normalization. From ROI analyses of dual-tracer phantom imaging, the isolated image of a pure positron emitter reconstructed by our image reconstruction method with sensitivity correction had a quality equal to that of the original images. Furthermore, from dual-isotope mouse imaging, our method was found to provide practical images in imaging for a living organism.