Accurate characterisation of small defects remains a challenge in non-destructive testing (NDT). In this paper, a principle-component parametric-manifold mapping approach is applied to single-frequency eddycurrent defect characterisation problems for surface breaking defects in a planar half-space. A broad 1-8 MHz frequency-range FE-circuit model & calibration approach is developed & validated to simulate eddycurrent scans of surface-breaking notch defects. This model is used to generate parametric defect databases for surface breaking defects in an aluminium planar half-space and defect characterisation of experimental measurements performed. Parametric-manifold mapping was conducted in N-dimensional principle component space, reducing the dimensionality of the characterisation problem. In a study characterising slot depth, the model & characterisation approach is shown to accurately invert the depth with greater accuracy than a simple amplitude inversion method with normalised percentage characterisation errors of ±38% and ±17% respectively measured at 2.0 MHz across 5 slot depths between 0.26 -2.15 mm. The approach is used to characterise the depth of a sloped slot demonstrating good accuracy up to ≈ 2.0mm in depth over a broad range of sub-resonance frequencies, indicating applications in geometric feature inversion. Finally the technique is applied to finite rectangular notch defects of surface extents smaller than the diameter of the inspection coil (sub-aperture) over a range of frequencies. The results highlight the limitations in characterising these defects and indicate how the inherent instabilities in resonance can severely limit characterisation at these frequencies. Non-destructive evaluation (NDE) methods are used to detect, size and characterise defects that pose a threat to the structural integrity of safety, and operation critical industrial components The problem of sizing crack-like defects has been studied extensively in the literature, and various sizing inversion techniques have been proposed for eddy-current inspection analysis in a range of applications The characterisation of surface-breaking defects was performed on 1&2D eddy-current surface scans in Al samples. The methodology developed for ultrasonic phased-array defect characterisation utilises the parametric manifold approach to find the closest matching simulated defect scattering-matrix to any given experimentally measured defect scattering-matrix within a pre-simulated database For each type of inspection (1D line scans of slots & 2D area scans of notch defects), simulated databases of defect scans are produced from a bespoke hybrid FE-circuit model, and converted into a parametric manifold in lower-dimensional principle-component space (pc-space). Experimental inspections of defects are then converted into pc-space and characterised based on their Euclidean distance from the parametric manifold. In this paper, the methodology is divided into a number of sections detailing; the experimental measurement system, the optimisation and calibration of the bespoke hybrid-model, and the characterisation using the calibrated model. This study required the development of a bespoke ECT model for a given sensor coil design. Experimental measurements were recorded to optimise and calibrate the model prior to the development of a defect database. Details of the experimental methods are given below. A 1.5 mm high, air-cored, 3.0 mm outer-diameter (OD), solenoid coil depicted in Figure The probe is attached to a high-resolution Zaber (Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada) X-LSM150A XY scanning stage, used to perform raster scans of specimens. Each scan has a spatial resolution of ∆x = ∆y = 0.2mm. A bespoke MATLAB control program was developed to perform a point-by-point raster scan inspection, at each point a full 100 point complex impedance frequency spectra, Z(f ) exp , between 1-8 MHz is recorded with the TE3001 impedance analyser. A 3-dimensional COMSOL 5.3a model of the inductive coil senor was developed using the AC/DC module and the coil parameters specified in section 2.1.1 to generate a multi-turn coil model. This model was then extended to include a planar test specimen beneath the coil at stand-off h and with tilt θ (see Figure In order to validate and relate the changes in measured coil impedance to the experimentally measured impedance, the FE-simulated coil impedance frequency spectra, Z(f ) F E , is input into a simple equivalence circuit model as shown in Figure Step 1: Coil in free space Probe circuit parameters R p , L p , C p Optimised Result Step 2: Probe in free space Step 3: Probe above sample Here, the capacitance, resistance and inductance of the connecting twisted-pair cable are defined as C p , R p , and L p respectively. The resulting FE-Circuit simulated impedance, Z(f ) sim , produces the simulated impedance spectra of the whole inspection probe. Before this hybrid model is used to predict defect signals, the FE model parameters and unknown circuit variables must first be optimised to accurately represent the probe in free-space (air). Secondly the (immeasurable) inherent inspection stand-off h of the probe must be optimised within the FE model. This is achieved by performing a series of optimisation steps shown in Figure An experimental impedance measurement of the inspection coil in air, Z(f ) exp-c.Air , is made and used to optimise the ill-defined parameter of the number of coil turns, N , in the FE model in free-space. Although the number of turns was counted during the manufacture of the coil, there is an uncertainty of ±1 turn due to manufacturing challenges. To ensure the model is as accurate as possible, the number of turns is checked and optimised to ensure that the overall inductance of the coil matches experimental measurements. A systematic integer increase in N is performed in the FE-model to identify the optimum value for N , which gives the closest match to the experimental inductance, L, as defined by the gradient of the imaginary component of impedance, ∇ {Z}, within the linear regime of the experimental curve (i.e. 1-4 MHz). An additional frequency-dependant resistance component, R c (ω), and inductive tuning component L c , must also be added to the FE modelled coil impedance to match the experimental result. Together, Z(f ) F E-Air , R(ω) c and L c in series equal the simulated coil load impedance, Z(f ) L (see Figure An experimental impedance measurement is made of the coil connected to the measurement instrument via a 500 ± 5mm twisted-pair cable. This is referred to as the probe impedance, Zexp-p.Air , and is differentiated symbolically from coil variables and components by the sub-script letter p. The optimised simulated coil impedance in air, Z(f ) L , is input into the circuit model shown in Figure The optimised values defined in Table The third stage of model optimisation uses experimentally measured impedance profiles of the coil above test materials, to determine the inherent stand-off of the coil from the surface of any given inspection material. This is difficult to measure feature of the experimental set-up of the probe (see section 2.1.1). The thickness of this layer must be evaluated in order to produce a valid model of the sensor set-up, and is evaluated via inversion of an experimental measurement of the sensor above the surface of a material, as shown in Figure To validate the model, experimental impedance spectra measurements were made of the sensor at well-defined stand-offs from the surface of Al and Ti6-4. The FE-model was then used to iterate through stand-off distances to generate Z(f ) F E predictions and least-squares linear interpolation used to estimate the experimental standoff. The model was tested in this way at 3 stand-off distances using physical dielectric spacers; a 1.0 mm glass microscope slide, a 1.5 mm glass slide and Kapton tape (typical inspection stand-off). Each spacer was measured experimentally with a digital micrometer in five locations and the average taken. The measured and model-estimated distances of these stand-offs are shown in Table The model detailed above was used to generate a parametric database of ECT scans of defects with varying dimensions in different materials. ECT scans are simulated by calculating the complex impedance spectra, Zsim (f ), at incremental locations relative to the central defect axis defined by the spatial coordinate vector r. Each ECT defect scan can then be defined by what we will refer to as its impedance matrix or Z-matrix Zsim (r, f ), where f is the frequency axes of size P . For 1D line-scans over infinite length slots r = x, and 2D surface scans over finite length notches r = {x, y}, where x and y are the planar orthogonal coordinate vectors of the scan above the specimen with size N x × N y respectively. As such a 2D defect scan has a Z-matrix, Zsim (x, y, f ), of size N x × N y × N f . Z-matrices can be simulated for a series of parametrically varying defects to produce a database of Z-matrices (simulated scans) for use in the manifold-mapping characterisation approach. However, before characterisation can be performed, the simulated defect Z-matrices need to be calibrated to a defect of known dimensions. This process calibrates out any unmodelled behaviour, such as probe drag, differences between simulated and experimental conductivity or discrepancies between manufactured calibration defect dimensions and those simulated. The calibration process (as demonstrated for a single frequency, f , in Figure Z 0 (f ) and Z max (f ) are the mean impedance spectra of the sensor over undamaged material (background) and the peak impedance spectra of the calibration defect response respectively. The disparity in the phase angle, θ ∆ (f ), between the experimental and simulated vectors is applied as a rotation about the origin to the simulated data (step 3). The disparity in vector magnitudes ∆|Z| is applied as a scaling to the simulated data. The calibration steps applied to all simulated data are detailed below: • Zero -Background subtraction (or zeroing) each Z-matrix in complex-space by subtracting Z 0 (f ) from Z = Z(r, f ) of both simulated and experimental. • Phase rotation -Applying a phase rotation, θ ∆ , in complex space to align the simulated indication with the experimental calibration signal. • Scale magnitude -Finally a scaling factor is applied to force the simulated peak magnitude to match the experimental peak magnitude. Principal-component analysis (PCA) is used to reduce the defect scan database down to a handful of dominant metrics which can be used to identify each defect scan. The largest N pc-components of these can be plotted against one another to produce a manifold ND PC-space. Experimental measurements can be transformed into the same ND PC-space and their proximity to points on the manifold used to characterise defect dimensions (see Velichko et. al. where M is the total number of Z-matrices in the defect class and z p is the vector corresponding to the defect Z-matrix Z p . As shown in Velichko et.al 2017 where R is the N z × N z covariance matrix of Z p , D is the diagonal matrix containing the eigenvalues of R, and the axes of the new coordinate system is now given by the column vectors of V. As such any Z-matrix, z, in the new pc coordinate system is represented by the vector, Following PCA, the dominant features of the ECT response to the defect class is effectively contained within a lower-dimensional space, termed principal-component space (or pc-space), where the first N pc coordinates account for the majority of the variation in the Z-matrices between different defects. We can set N pc to be equal to the number of eigenvalues of the covariance matrix R above a given threshold. For this study the eigenvalue threshold was defined as 0.01 (see Figure The model was used to generate databases of simulated defect inspection measurements. In this investigation, 2 studies were considered: The simple infinitely long slot, and the finite-length notch performed in Al. In both cases, defect characterisation of experimental measurements using the pc-manifold approach was explored. All characterisation is performed on single-frequency scan data. For this section 2.0 MHz was selected as the operation frequency. The optimised hybrid-model was used to generate a parametric database of ECT responses to wire-cut slots of varying depth in Al. One-dimensional line-scans, Z(x, f ), (see Figure Experimentally measured ECT responses to wire-cut slots in Aluminium were characterised in 2D pc-space, shown in Figure From the depth characterisation graph shown in Figure The validity of the model was evaluated over the full measured frequency spectrum of the probe, by characterising the slot slope angle, θ, over all measured frequencies, using the parametric manifold mapping approach in 2D pc-space (PC1-2). Figure The results in Figure The hybrid model (see section 2.2) was used to simulate a database of 2D ECT scans, Z(x, y, f ), of rectangular EDM notches in Al. Rectangular notches are typically characterised by 3 parameters -length, depth & width. In this instance the width was kept constant wile the other defect parameters were varied. Three EDM notches of lengths smaller than the diameter of the inspection coil (sub-aperture), were manufactured in Al and their dimensions measured using X-ray CT imaging shown in Figure The parametric database of L × D defect scans was produced, where L & D represent the defect length and depth parameter ranges respectively. The linearly-distributed ranges and parameter sizes of the simulated database are shown in Table Applying the PCA as detailed in section 2.3.2 to the defect database at a given frequency, defect characterisation of the experimental defect scans. The defects shown in Figure ii) Figure The are 2 clear observations that can be made about this approach to defect characterisation. The first is that sub-aperture defects are indistinguishable using this characterisation approach due to the distribution of experimental measurements in pc-space along with the complexity of the manifold surface in pc-space. As a result, characterisation at sub-resonant frequencies determines the defects as having approximately the same length as the diameter of the coil, between 2.0 -4.0mm, while depth estimation varies much more significantly within the parameter space, between 0.4 -1.3mm. Examination of the full frequency range offers no insights into which frequencies might offer greater characterisation accuracy, but does confirm that frequencies around resonance exhibit significant instabilities that cannot be modelled accurately in the simulation, making characterisation within this range near-impossible. A hybrid finite-element & equivalent circuit model for inductive eddy-current measurements across a range of MHz frequencies has been developed and validated experimentally. The process demonstrates the approach for calibrating unknown parameters in the probe circuit in order to simulate eddy-current accurate scans over a range of common frequencies for surface breaking defect detection. This model was used to explore a parametric manifold mapping defect characterisation approach using databases of simulated notch scans. This approach is successfully applied to eddy-current scan data and slot depth characterisation in Aluminium, demonstrating a superior characterisation accuracy compared to standard amplitude inversion methods, particularly for shallow slot depths. The limits of this approach were highlighted by defining the maximum depth characterisation possible on a sloped slot. Here it was shown that accurate depth characterisation is possible up to 2.0 mm in slot depth. This depth is significantly higher than the standard depth of penetration of the measurement in Aluminium but corresponds approximately to the geometric dimensions of the inspection coil. The model was further tested on notches of finite length, smaller than the outer diameter of the inspection coil, to explore the limits of the characterisation capability. The parametric-manifold mapping method was used to characterise the defect dimensions by reducing the dimensionality of 2D scans down to 16 principle components. The results highlight the inherent difficulties in characterising sub coil-diameter defects demonstrated by the complexity of the parametric manifold of the simulated database in principle-component space, and through the tight distribution of experimental measurements of different defect dimensions. Although the defect characterisation method and the parameter-space sampling was not optimised for this ECT application, the limiting factor remains the poor separation between sub-aperture parameters in lower-dimensional space which is an fundamental feature dependent on the coil dimensions that will be difficult to overcome. All defect dimensions are measured with an error of ±0.03mm from X-ray CT data unless stated otherwise.