Metasurfaces consisting of electrically thin and densely packed planar arrays of subwavelength elements enable an unprecedented control of the impinging electromagnetic fields. Spatially modulated metasurfaces can efficiently tailor the spatial distribution of these fields with great flexibility. Similarly, time modulated metasurfaces can be successfully used to manipulate the frequency content and time variations of the impinging field. In this paper, we present time-modulated reflective metasurfaces that cause a frequency shift to the impinging radiation, thus realizing an artificial Doppler effect in a non-moving electrically thin structure. Starting from the theoretical analysis, we analytically derive the required time modulation of the surface admittance to achieve this effect, and present a realistic timevarying structure, based on a properly designed and dynamically tuned high-impedance surface. It is analytically and numerically demonstrated that the field emerging from the metasurface is up-/down-converted in frequency according to the modulation profile of the metasurface. The proposed metasurface concept, enabling a frequency modulation of the electromagnetic field "on-the-fly", may find application in telecommunication, radar, and sensing scenarios. waves at will The control of the metamaterial/metasurface response in time has been first attempted through tunability. However, tunable metamaterials and metasurfaces have been mostly studied in the quasi-static case, where temporal variations can be treated as a tuning parameter of the structure's static response. Only recently the effects of time modulation beyond the quasi-static regime has been investigated As it happens in any actual moving medium, the electromagnetic wave interacts with such a material differently depending on the illumination direction. Thanks to timereversal symmetry breaking induced by the apparent motion of the medium, this effect has been exploited to conceive several non-reciprocal components and devices, which behave similarly to their conventional counterparts based on magnets. Some relevant examples are magnet-less isolators In this paper, we introduce a simple and effective design approach for time-modulated reflective metasurfaces, able to introduce either a red or blue frequency shift to an incident electromagnetic wave, realizing, thus, an artificial Doppler shift through a non-moving electrically thin reflective surface. Starting from a theoretical analysis, we derive the required time-domain surface admittance of the metasurface and present the design of a realistic time-varying metasurface, consisting of a bi-dimensional array of metal-backed mushroom-like elements, which is dynamically tuned through a set of varactors. It is analytically and numerically demonstrated that the reflected field is frequency shifted by just electrically controlling the phase delay of the reflection coefficient in real time. This manuscript is organized as follows. In Section II, we present the theoretical analysis of the scattering from a reflective metasurface, whose surface admittance s Y is time- modulated. We demonstrate that the desired frequency shift is achieved if the metasurface can be tuned from a perfect electric to a perfect magnetic conductor response along one modulation period. In Section III, we study the response of a properly designed polarization-insensitive tunable metasurface, which, at the design frequency, appears as either a perfect electric or a perfect magnetic conductor, depending on the applied electric voltage at the varactor terminals. In Section IV, the frequency conversion of the time-varying metasurface is verified. First, we design the time-varying driving voltage signal to satisfy the analytical conditions for achieving an up-and down-conversion of the illuminating plane wave, and, then, a full-wave time-domain simulation is performed, demonstrating that the frequency of the reflected electromagnetic wave can be actually red-or blue-shifted with respect to the incident one by controlling the electric driving voltage signal of the varactors. Finally, in Section V, some conclusions are drawn. The aim of this Section is to define the design rules for a general time-modulated fully reflective metasurface, exploiting the analytical expression of the reflection coefficient. In order to gain insight into the scattering of the electromagnetic field from a periodically time-varying reflective metasurface, we limit our analysis to the case of normal incidence. This allows deriving the general timedependent relations between the incident and the reflected fields, and between the reflection coefficient and the surface admittance, which are the fundamental quantities to design the needed temporal profile that imparts a controlled frequency shift to the incident electromagnetic wave. Let us consider a planar metasurface consisting of a dense periodic array of subwavelength elements, whose electromagnetic response varies periodically in time. If the size of the elements is much smaller than the operating wavelength, the array can be modeled through an effective surface admittance s Y . In general, metasurfaces exhibit a frequency dispersive surface admittance, i.e. However, if the metasurface exhibits a slow frequency dispersion around the illumination frequency, and the modulation-induced frequency shift is much smaller than the illumination frequency, we can assume that the metasurface exhibits the same surface properties for both the incident and reflected fields. This allows to simplify the mathematical analysis, neglecting the modulation-induced dispersion effects, and considering the surface admittance as only a function of time, i.e. If the metasurface is fully reflective, no transmitted field is present beyond the metasurface. Therefore, the total electromagnetic field in time domain is a superposition of the normally incident and reflected fields: , Re , Re where 0 1 120 is the free-space admittance. At the metasurface location, i.e. 0 z = , the incident and reflected electric fields in time domain are related as and the corresponding equation in the angular frequency domain can be derived by taking the Fourier transform of both sides: where ( ) i E ω , ( ) r E ω are the complex amplitudes of the incident and reflected propagating plane waves in the frequency domain, respectively, and the symbol " * " denotes convolution. Equation (4) implies that, whatever the illuminating frequency i ω is, the input spectrum will be converted into a spectrum of output frequencies, according to the frequency spectrum of the reflection coefficient. The time varying profile of the reflection coefficient ( ) forced by the periodic modulation of the surface admittance ( ) s Y t can be expanded in a Fourier series as where m ω is the angular modulation frequency. The Fourier transform of (5) takes the form Therefore, inserting ( ( ) ( ) 0, ( ) Equation ( Equations ( 0, , 0, In the lossless case and for very small difference between incident and reflected frequencies, the amplitude of the reflection coefficient approaches unity according to the Manley-Rowe relations -. This result is in line with the frequency shift resulting from the Doppler effect in presence of a moving reflector , where 0 λ is the free-space wavelength of the source, whereas the amplitude of the reflection coefficient is still unitary, as in The required surface admittance ( ) s Y t can be found by combining eqs. ( ( ) As expected, if the system is lossless, the metasurface admittance is imaginary with an inductive or capacitive behavior according to the sign of the tangent function In particular, these two extreme values correspond to the case of a perfect magnetic and a perfect electric conductor, respectively. It is clear that such a metasurface belongs to the general class of meta-mirrors proposed in A meta-mirror consists of an array of electrically small resonant bi-anisotropic particles that can be designed to emulate the response of a perfect reflector with arbitrary reflection phase, including a perfect electric and magnetic conductors. However, the dynamic control of a bi-anisotropic particle is not an easy task, because the electric and magnetic responses should be simultaneously controlled in an independent way to modulate the phase of the reflection coefficient, while the zero-transmission condition holds. An attempt to achieve an electric control of the electric and magnetic polarizabilities independently has been recently proposed in An easier path to achieve a perfect reflecting surface whose response can be both a perfect electric and a perfect magnetic conductor is to use a high-impedance surface (HIS) In this Section, we present the geometry of the timemodulated metasurface and its tuning scheme that allows us to dynamically change its response from a perfect electric to a perfect magnetic conductor, and vice-versa. The tunability is achieved using a set of electrically controlled varactors that change in real-time the frequency response of the metasurface, i.e. its complex reflection coefficient. The proposed metasurface is shown in Fig. , dissipation factor tan 0.025 δ = @ 10 GHz f = , , the bottom and top patches are electrically connected to each other. The biasing lines run at 45° with respect to the unit cell main axes in order to realize a chessboard electric potential level between all the patches in xand y-directions. The different electric potential level of the patches is represented in Fig. . Finally, the unit cell and metallic patches of the unloaded metasurface have been designed to resonate at around 1.75 GHz. The dimensions of the unit cell and patches are reported in the caption of Fig. The metasurface is loaded with a set of varactors controlled by the voltage signal, applied at the terminals V + /V -(Fig. In Fig. The electromagnetic response of the metasurface has been numerically evaluated in CST Microwave Studio in cosimulation with CST Design Studio To verify the modulation-induced frequency shift of the reflected electromagnetic field with respect to the incident one, the temporal profile of the phase of the reflection coefficient exhibited by the metasurface should match the one analytically derived in Section II. Therefore, in this Section, we first retrieve the required temporal profile of the modulating signal in order to compensate the nonlinear phase of the reflection coefficient of the loaded metasurface with respect to the biasing voltage (Fig. In Section II, eq. ( If the relationship between the phase the reflection coefficient of the loaded metaurface and the biasing voltage were linear, a modulating voltage signal that linearly increase with time would be used to directly drive the varactors. However, from Fig. Let us assume to drive the varactors with a very lowfrequency modulation signal with respect to the operative frequency of the metasurface, i.e., 500 kHz m f = . The temporal profile of the modulating signal can be derived by mapping the proper value of the biasing voltage for each instant of time that permits the desired phase of the reflection coefficient at the same time. For the metasurface proposed in Section III, we report in Fig. In the following sub-section, the voltage signals of Fig. The capability of the time-varying metasurface to up-and down convert the frequency of the incident field has been numerically verified though a co-simulation of CST Studio Suite The time-domain reflected field has been evaluated and the corresponding Fourier transforms are reported in Fig. In this paper, we have presented a design approach for timemodulated reflective metasurfaces, able to red-and blue-shift the frequency of the incident electromagnetic wave. We have analytically derived the necessary conditions for achieving the desired frequency shift. Based on the analysis, we have proposed a realistic time-varying metasurface, consisting of a properly designed and dynamically tuned high-impedance surface. Taking into account all the dissipative effects of the materials and the parasitic circuit elements, we have demonstrated that the proposed time-varying metasurface is able to frequency modulated the incident field "on-the-fly". Such a capability may have a relevant impact in many applicative scenarios. For example, in the next-generation mobile telecommunication systems, where the proposed metasurface can be used to guarantee a continuous frequency hopping within ever smaller cells to maximize the channel capacity, or in Doppler sensors and radars, where the motion of a given object can be hidden by restoring in reflection the frequency of the incident electromagnetic field. 