A tuning of Fermi level (EF) near Weyl points is one of the promising approaches to realize large anomalous Nernst effect (ANE). In this work, we introduce an efficient approach to tune EF for the Co2MnAl Weyl semimetal through a layer-by-layer combinatorial deposition of Co2MnAl1-xSix (CMAS) thin film. A single-crystalline composition-spread film with x varied from 0 to 1 was fabricated. The structural characterization reveals the formation of single-phase CMAS alloy throughout the composition range with a gradual improvement of L21 order with x similar to the co-sputtered single layered film, which validates the present fabrication technique. Hard X-ray photoemission spectroscopy for the CMAS compositionspread film directly confirmed the rigid band-like EF shift of approximately 0.40 eV towards the composition gradient direction from x = 0 to 1. The anomalous Ettingshausen effect (AEE), the reciprocal of ANE, has been measured for whole x range using a single strip along the composition gradient using the lock-in thermography technique. The similarity of the x dependence of observed AEE and ANE signals clearly demonstrates that the AEE measurement on the composition spread film is an effective approach to investigate the composition dependence of ANE of Weyl semimetal thin films and realize the highest performance without fabricating several films, which will accelerate the research for ANEbased energy harvesting. A thermoelectric generator (TEG) using the Seebeck effect (SE) is one of the promising energy harvesting technologies which can generate electricity from everyday waste heat. During past many decades, researches on developing TEG using SE has been extensively conducted, but till now various remaining problems have to be solved. Combinatorial deposition is one of the most effective tools which allows to fabricate composition spread films with single atom substitution from 0 to 100% on a single film. In this study, we fabricated a CMAS composition-spread thin film using the combinatorial deposition technique and experimentally demonstrated the systematic tuning of EF and other transport and thermoelectric properties with composition. Through the measurement of the anomalous Ettingshausen effect (AEE), which is the reciprocal effect of ANE, we employed a much faster and easier technique to effectively optimize the composition suitable for the transverse thermoelectric conversion. A 001-oriented epitaxial CMAS composition-spread film with a thickness of 50.4 nm and a composition of 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 was fabricated on a single-crystalline MgO (001) substrate using DC/RF magnetron sputtering with a base pressure of < 6.0 × 10 -6 Pa and a process Ar gas pressure of 0.4 Pa. Before deposition, the MgO substrate was flashed at 790°C and then the film was deposited at 600°C substrate temperature. The CMAS composition-spread film with composition variation over a length of 7.0 mm was prepared from Co2MnAl (CMA) and Co2MnSi (CMS) alloy targets using the following deposition sequence: (1) deposition of a wedge-shaped CMA layer using a linear moving shutter with deposition rate 0.042 nm/sec and shutter speed 0.53 mm/sec, (2) rotation of the substrate by 180o, and (3) deposition of a wedge-shaped CMS layer using the linear moving shutter with deposition rate 0.026 nm/sec and shutter speed 0.33 mm/sec, where the total thickness of the CMAS film after completing (1) to (3) was designed to be 0.56 nm corresponding to the lattice constant of L21-ordered Co2MnSi. The sequence was repeated 90 times to get around 50.4-nm-thick film [see Fig. The crystal structure and atomic ordering were investigated by X-ray diffraction with a Cu K X-ray source. The measurement was performed at different positions on the CMAS film along the composition gradient at an interval of 1.0 mm using a 0.5 mm incident slit. To investigate the variation in electronic structures with composition, hard X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (HAXPES) measurements were performed at BL15XU of SPring-8. Horizontal linearly polarized X-ray was used to excite photoelectron and excited photoelectrons were detected by a hemispherical analyzer (VG Scienta R4000). The pass energy of the analyzer was set to 100 eV, and the total energy resolution was approximately 150 meV. All measurements were performed at room temperature in nearly normal emission geometry. The degree of order for B2 and L21 structures, defined as SB2 and S L2 1 , have been evaluated using the following equations: where I002, I004, and I111 represent the integrated intensities of the 002, 004, and 111 peaks, respectively. The subscript exp. and cal. represent the values obtained from the experimental XRD pattern and simulated XRD pattern for ideal L21 structure, respectively. For the present analysis, we performed the XRD pattern simulation for L21-ordered CMAS alloys using the visualization for electronic and structural analysis (VESTA) (The parameters of the simulation can be seen in section II in the supplementary material), where we used the actual compositions measured for pure CMA and CMS regions and estimated a linear variation of composition from the CMA side to the CMS side, as shown in Fig. and L21 ordering parameters are summarized in Fig. (see Fig. To investigate the thermoelectric property of the CMAS film, SE and ANE were measured. The x dependence of the Seebeck coefficient (SSE) for the film is shown in Fig. . The SSE is found to be -14 μV/K for CMA and reach a maximum value of -22 μV/K at around x = 0.3. With further increasing of x, SSE decreases and remains almost invariant for x > 0.65. Figure However, the maximum SANE of +2.7 μV/K is smaller than that in the previous report (+3.9 μV/K). One can see from the band dispersion on the high symmetry line (Fig. AJoule is proportional to jc 2 ). In fact, the tendency is consistent with the ρxx variation as shown in Fig. The detailed procedure of extracting ΠAEE from the observed AEE data can be seen in the previous reports. We have successfully fabricated a composition-spread single-crystalline Co2MnAl1-xSix Heusler alloy film on a MgO substrate using layer-by-layer wedge shape deposition. The represents the sign of the temperature modulation at the top surface of the sample when the time delay of the temperature modulation due to thermal diffusion is negligible. where Jc is the charge current and M is the magnetization direction in a ferromagnet. The 