This paper presents the characterization measurements and related uncertainty evaluation of a nonmagnetic material using the Vector Network Analyzer (VNA) at microwave frequencies. The permittivity of the material under test is computed from the scattering parameters (S-parameters). The aim of the work is to highlight the different uncertainty contributions affecting the permittivity. The measurements of dielectric properties of materials at radio frequency have gained importance in the RF & microwave research field. The dielectric measurements are useful because they provide important information about the electric and magnetic properties of the materials under test (MUTs). The VNAs are widely used for material measurements and provide the material characterization in terms of scattering parameter (S-parameters) Therefore, the complete uncertainty budget showing different uncertainty contributions is still missing. In this work we present a complete uncertainty evaluation along with uncertainty budgets for permittivity measurements of a non-magnetic material following a differential numerical approach The schematic of the measurement setup is shown in Fig. The VNA measurement model used is described in where, Γ = γ 0 -γ 1 γ 0 +γ 1 , T = e -γ 1 L , γ o and γ 1 are the propagation constants in air and the material sample of length L, respectively. Lf is the length of the waveguide fixture. γ o and γ 1 depend on the width of the waveguide fixture. The air gap corrections are also applied for the air gap that exists between the sample and the waveguide fixture. The air gap corrections are the function of the height of the waveguide fixture and the sample Tab. 1. Dimensional measurements of waveguide fixture and the Teflon sample (in mm). The VNA setup has been previously characterized in terms of noise, linearity, drift, cable stability and connector repeatability and the different S-parameter uncertainty influences have been computed The uncertainty propagation from the S-parameters to the permittivity results has been carried out by using a general purpose library, known as Metas.UncLib Measurements have been performed with a two-port VNA in a temperature and humidity controlled shielded room. The temperature and the relative humidity during the measurements were of (23.0 ± 0.3) °C and (45 ±5)% respectively. The VNA was calibrated using the Thru-Reflect-Line (TRL) calibration technique The measurement results and the uncertainty budgets for the dielectric constant and the dielectric loss tangent for the Teflon are presented here. The expanded uncertainties have been computed with a coverage factor of k=2. The behavior of ε r ′ and tan δ as function of frequency including the uncertainty are shown in Figs. tan δ < 4 • 10 -4 ). The uncertainty budgets for the Teflon sample showing different uncertainty contributions for ε r ′ and tan δ are shown at selected frequencies in Tables In this paper, a fully comprehensive measurement uncertainty analysis for permittivity results has been presented. This analysis allows the optimization of the setup with regards to the measurement uncertainty by analyzing the influence of different uncertainty sources. Results are also metrologically traceable to the SI through dimensional measurements. A Teflon sample has been measured from 8.2 to 12.4 GHz using a WR-90 VNA waveguide setup. The transmission S-parameters has been used, iteratively, to compute the complex-valued permittivity. The linear propagation of uncertainties through the measurement model has been carried out. The permittivity results agree very well to the known properties of the Teflon sample in the X-band. The uncertainty budgets are also presented at different frequencies. The results highlight that the cable stability has the major influence on the dielectric constant of the Teflon sample. Therefore, one should minimize the cable movements during the VNA measurements to get accurate measurements. Dimensional measurements are also critical. For what concerns the loss tangent, the most influential contributions are related to dimensional measurements, connectors repeatability and cable stability. 