In this work, we investigate non-Hermitian elastic waveguides with periodically applied proportional feedback efforts, implemented through piezoelectric sensors and actuators. Using onedimensional spectral models for longitudinal motion, it is shown that dispersion diagrams of this family of structures exhibit non-reciprocal imaginary frequency components, manifesting as wave attenuation or amplification along opposite directions for all Pass bands. The effects of positive and negative proportional feedback, as well as local and non-local actuation are investigated. Overall, switching the sign of the feedback effort inverts the amplification direction, while increasing the degree of non-locality produces splitting of the Pass bands into multiple bands with interchanging non-reciprocal behavior. Furthermore, skin modes localized at the boundaries of finite domains are investigated and successfully predicted by the winding number of the complex dispersion bands. These results contribute to recent efforts in designing metamaterials with novel properties associated with the physics of non-Hermitian systems, which may find fruitful technological applications relying on vibration and noise control, wave localization, filtering and multiplexing. Phononics is a branch of condensed matter physics that has become a trending topic in recent years due to its applications in mechanical engineering, emanating from the design of phononic crystals (PC) and acoustic metamaterials Recently, non-Hermitian (NH) systems have received considerable attention from the physics and engineering communities due to the realization of intriguing wave physics phenomena, such as single mode lasers In this context, the use of feedback interactions has been a common theme in the study of active NH mechanical systems Herein, we consider a periodic NH one-dimensional elastic waveguide undergoing longitudinal motion, whereby PZT rod elements are interchangeably used as sensors and actuators, allowing for several feedback strategies to be implemented. In particular, we consider proportional feedback schemes where the voltage applied to each actuator is proportional to the voltage read by an adjacent sensor or by a sensor a few units away, which are respectively labeled as local and non-local feedback schemes. Aligned with recent findings in discrete lattice systems We consider a one-dimensional piezoelectric rod. Its unit cell, displayed in Fig. where u(x, t) is the axial displacement, φ(x, t) is the electric potential, Y is the Young's modulus, ρ represents mass density, α is the dielectric constant, e is the piezoelectric constant, x is the axial coordinate and t represents time. Additionally, one can derive the constitutive equations related to the mechanical and electrical internal efforts, respectively where N (x, t) is the axial internal effort, Q(x, t) is the electric charge distribution and A represents the cross-section area. These equations completely define the wave propagation behavior in the piezoelectric rod domain, and can be solved using different numerical methods. In this work, we consider the Finite Element Method (FEM) and the Spectral Element Method (SEM), with formulations derived in appendix. To realize a feedback-based unit cell, the direct piezoelectric effect is considered for a sensor with open circuit electric boundary condition, while the inverse effect is used to realize the actuator, by making the voltage applied to the actuator (V a (t)) proportional to the voltage measured at the sensor boundaries (V s (t)). Proportional feedback is represented by the equation: where κ g is defined as the voltage gain, while K g is the gain in terms of the relation between V a and the difference in the sensor end displacements (see equation (A9)). The voltage V s (t) in the sensor can be obtained by integrating (4) ( which depends on the measured displacements at the ends of the piezoelectric sensor. In addition to the gain κ g , whose sign defines if the feedback interaction is negative or positive, we are also interested in the influence of the locality parameter a. As illustrated in Fig. which, by the Bloch-Floquet theorem, becomes the following relation in terms of the n-th cell variables only Open circuit Applied Feedback Applied Feedback A finite structure can then be constructed by assembling a number of these cells. The dynamics of the structure can be predicted by the wave propagation features of the corresponding periodic (infinite) material Dissipation was included by assuming Rayleigh damping, i.e., assuming that the damping matrix is proportional to the stiffness and mass matrices. Using a reference damping ratio (ζ) equal for all frequency ranges considered, it is possible to calculate the approximate constants of proportionality by applying the strategy described by Hall Wave propagation in the NH waveguides is predicted by computing the dispersion relations by two different methods. One is a semi-analytical method based on the transfer matrix (TM) via the spectral element formulation (SEM) Figure Next, we illustrate the NH skin effect that occurs for finite structures, manifesting itself as a localization of most of the bulk modes at one of the boundaries Free vibration modes of the finite structure are computed via FEM by solving the corresponding eigenvalue problem. Some of the eigenfrequencies are displayed as black dots, and we have verified that all of them fall inside one of the dispersion loops. Selected eigenfrequencies on the four first PB are marked with orange (positive feedback) and purple (negative feedback) crosses. The corresponding real part of the eigenmodes are also displayed, normalized by their maximum absolute value. The results are displayed on Fig. We note that, while the dispersion bands are characterized by attenuation and amplification, all the eigenfrequencies of the considered finite structures have a small positive imaginary frequency component due to damping. This illustrates that finite domains of the feedback actuated waveguides may be stable even though infinite domains would not be so, since the waves would amplify indefinitely. Non-reciprocity and the localized modes arising from the NH skin effect are further investigated in terms of harmonic excitation. The frequency response functions (FRFs) of a finite structure are computed through the SEM approach. Fig. We now discuss the wave propagation behavior using non-local feedback interactions (a > 0). Figure The same procedure described before was conducted for the non-local waveguides with a = 1, but now employing a broadband spectrum excitation consisting on a tone-burst type signal with 1 cycle and central frequency of 200 [kHz], aiming at exciting several Pass bands at once. The results of the transient simulations are summarized in Fig. As previously mentioned, the topology of the bands get altered by increasing the degree of non-locality through the parameter a. This is illustrated on Fig. Figure In this work we investigated non-Hermitian elastic waveguides with feedback interactions realized through piezoelectric materials. Numerical results illustrate the non-reciprocity emanating from local and non-local feedback interactions, both in terms of wave propagation and localized modes of finite structures. These results expand previous observations on discrete lattice systems In addition to experimental investigations, future work may explore two-dimensional systems, other types of feedback interactions and the effects of non-linear components. The stability of this type of systems is also something to be explored in more detail, as it may impose limitations when conducting experimental investigations. through grant W911NF-18-1-0036. The authors also thank Professor Massimo Ruzzene for the fruitful and insightful technical discussions. Consider the one-dimensional phononic crystal based on the unit cell displayed on Fig. which can be integrated over the cross-section area by applying ! A dA to both equations and recalling the definitions N (x, t) = ! A σ(x, t) dA as the axial internal effort distribution along x and varying with time, ε(t) = ∂u(x,t) ∂x , and Q(x, t) = ! A D(x, t) dA the electric charge distribution. It is assumed that the electric field and electric displacement are uniform inside the piezoelectric material Insofar as it is desirable to model the structure under known applied forces and electric voltages, one shall write the equations with ε and D as the independent variables, which can be achieved by the following rearrangement of (A1): Then, by applying the integration over the cross-sectional area on the first equation of (A3), Using the second equation of (A3) and the definition of voltage difference V between two boundaries spaced by length (L): which can be rewritten to give the expression of Q -the charge related to the voltage difference V -as follows: Hereafter, the subscript ( ) e in scalars and vectors and the superscript ( ) e in matrices refers to each finite element; the subscript ( ) s refers to the piezoelectric sensor variable, while the subscript ( ) a refers to the piezoelectric actuator variables. For the FEM formulation, consider that the displacement can be approximated by a linear function: Then, the strain is defined as It can be shown and with substitution of (A5), We define the well-known FEM mass matrix M e , and the piezoelectric stiffness matrix K e p as Now, consider an electric open boundary condition for the sensor part of the piezoelectric material, where Q is zero. Then, from (A6), the equation becomes While, for the actuator segment of the piezoelectric rod, the applied voltage is defined as a function of the sensor displacement as in (A9). Finally, substitution in (A7) leads to We also define the actuator stiffness matrix K a and the feedback matrix Γ c . The constitutive equations (A2) of the piezoelectric material can be written, in the frequency domain for each frequency ω, recalling that ε(x, t) = ∂u(x,t) ∂x and E(x, t) = -∂φ(x,t) ∂x , as follows: The additional mechanical variable is the material mass density, ρ, whereas the geometric variable A is the crosssection area. The electric domain has the variables φ(x, t) as the electric potential field distributed along the x-axis. The piezoelectric material is a transducer which couples an elastic domain with a dielectric domain due to the piezoelectric effect. Given that the general form of the differential equations of motion for the piezoelectric material can be expressed -with the double dot denoting second derivative with respect to time -as one can substitute (A1) and the definitions of normal strain and electric field, to obtain (A13). The second of the above equation shows that the electric voltage can be eliminated from the first equation, giving rise to the wave equation, which describes the one-dimensional longitudinal vibration within a piezoelectric uniform rod Recalling (A4) and transforming from time to frequency domain, one obtain (A15). Now, consider an electric open boundary condition for the sensor segment of the cell considered herein, with the right and left end displacements denoted by u s (0, t) and u s (L, t). This assumption implies Q(ω) = 0 and, hence, from (A15), and from (A12), Moreover, from (A16), Imposing a wave solution of the form û(x, ω) = a 1 e ik(ω)x + d 1 e -ik(ω)x , (A19) one can derive dû(x, ω) dx = ik(ω) a 1 e ik(ω)x -d 1 e -ik(ω)x . Here, i denotes the imaginary number and k the wavenumber. Moreover, it can be shown from (A14) that the dispersion relation for the uniform piezoelectric rod is The oscillatory terms mean waves propagating to the right and to the left or, in other words, an incident and a reflected wave. Applying this solution to the sensor domain x ∈ [0, L s ], (A18) can be rewritten as On the other hand, if the electric boundary condition is an applied feedback gain of the form: as is the case for the piezoelectric actuator, which has the right and left end displacements denoted as u a (0, t) and u a (L, t), one can verify from (A15) that and from (A12), Moreover, from (A16), Again, considering the wave solution, this equation can be rewritten as For the derivation of the SEM dynamic stiffness matrix, one must use (A19) to write the boundary degrees of freedom in matrix form. Hereafter, frequency dependency will be omitted for the sake of notation simplicity. Applying the wave solution û(x) to the sensor domain, Additionally, using (A20), one can derive and using (A22) we get (A23). where and the external loads f (0) = -N (0) and f (L) = N (L) have taken the place of the internal reactions. The same procedure must be applied to the actuator. Applying the wave solution û(x) to the actuator domain, Note that the short-circuited piezoelectric material has the frequency dependent dynamic stiffness matrix K sc (ω) = K a p (ω)+K a , which is the passive contribution to the dynamic stiffness relation of interest. Naturally, Γ c is the feedback interaction contribution. If the feedback gain K g = 0, Γ c becomes the null matrix, and the V = 0, which is equivalent to a short-circuit boundary condition. Concatenating the dynamic stiffness matrix from the sensor -equation (A23)-and the actuator segments -equation ( A25) -, one can derive the dynamic stiffness matrix of the unit cell, D(ω): where û is the vector with the degrees of freedom of the unit cell, while f is the vector with the corresponding external forces. Assembling the cells into a finite metastructure, the spectral global equation is finally obtained as concatenating degrees of freedom and forces of the whole structure on the global vectors ûg and fg . Aiming at comparing the mathematical models developed in previous section, i.e. SEM semi-analytical formulation and FEM approximation of a finite structure, we simulate the dispersion relations using both methods. The numerical results are displayed in Fig. In order to explain why the unfolded version of the dispersion diagram is necessary for the analysis of NH systems and avoiding falling into cumbersome explanations, we chose an illustrative argument. Consider the folded dispersion diagram depicted on Fig. As illustrated in Fig. Figure [1] L. Fok, M. Ambati, and X. Zhang, "Acoustic metamaterials," MRS bulletin, vol. 