The recent discovery and realizations of higher-order topological insulators enrich the fundamental studies on topological phases. Here, we report three-dimensional (3D) wave-steering capabilities enabled by topological boundary states at three different orders in a 3D phononic crystal with nontrivial bulk topology originated from the synergy of mirror symmetry of the unit cell and a non-symmorphic glide symmetry of the lattice. The multitude of topological states brings diverse possibility of wave manipulations. Through judicious engineering of the boundary modes, we experimentally demonstrate two functionalities at different dimensions: 2D negative refraction of sound wave enabled by a firstorder topological surface state with negative dispersion, and a 3D acoustic interferometer leveraging on second-order topological hinge states. Our work showcases that topological modes at different orders promise diverse wave steering applications across different dimensions. Since its incipience in the 1980s, the study of topological notion in physics has attracted tremendous attention across diverse disciplines While many topological phases originate from the electronic systems Phononic crystal with higher-order topology. Our PC comprises a cubic array of orthogonally aligned aluminum rods (treated as sound-hard objects) along the x-, y-, z-directions, respectively, in an air background. All rods have a square cross-section with a side length L = 1.8 cm, and their axes are separated by a/2, where a = 4 cm is the lattice constant. The PC belongs to a non-symmorphic space group no. 223 Figure ) % > for these two bands (Fig. In other words, the nontrivial bulk polarization of the first gap exists for both choices of the unit cell. Consequently, under the premise of m ! , the glide symmetry of our PC leads to the robustness of bulk polarization to different selections of unit cell. This characteristic distinguishes our PC from certain higher-order topological insulators, such as the 'breathing' Kagome lattice We consider a lattice truncation, which gives rise to topological boundary modes Observation of higher-order topological states. We consider a PC cube consisting 5×5×5 unit cells (shown in Fig. The acoustic pressure field distributions at 5.14 kHz and 6.69 kHz are plotted in Figs. To verify the simulated results, we fabricated this 5×5×5 PC cube enclosed in aluminum plates, whose picture is shown in Fig. Wave transport leveraging THSs. Higher-order topological states give rise to new possibilities for wave manipulation. For example, THSs naturally offer tailorable wave transport channels that can be tailored to versatile shapes. As a proof-of-principle demonstration of potential practical applications of the higher-order topological states, an interferometer based on the PC cube are fabricated and characterized. As illustrated in Fig. We present a simple design of an acoustic 3D high-order TI that can simultaneously support topological states at three different dimensional hierarchies. The negative dispersion of the TSS makes negative refraction easily attainable. Note that our negative refraction occurs at the PC-air interfaces instead of between two different PC boundaries, making it feasible for wave-steering applications. The presence of higher-order topological states, in particular, the THSs, brings even more intriguing effects. First, THSs along different hinges can relay the transport of sound waves, guiding the propagation to bend around corners towards different directions. As a result, the inputs and output are not on the same plane. Similar effects can only be attained by using a 3D double-zero-index medium previously In summary, our work presents convincing cases that higher-order topological wave crystals can benefit wave-steering applications. As topological notions can be universally applied to other realms of physics, such as photonics and electromagnetism, we believe our work is an important step for a broad area of next-generation technology and devices. Simulations. The band structures, Bloch wavefunctions, and acoustic field distributions were calculated using the acoustic module in COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS. The Wannier centers are obtained by computing the Wilson loop operator defined as: where Experiments. All PC samples and their claddings were machined from aluminum alloy and then were assembled in the lab. The frequency responses were measured by frequency scans. A waveform generator (Keysight 33500B) was used to generate a monochromatic signal to drive a loudspeaker through an audio power amplifier. The signals were detected by a 1/4-inch microphone (PCB Piezotronics Model-378C10) and were then recorded by a digital oscilloscope (Keysight DSO2024A). For the negative refraction experiments, the raster-scans of acoustic fields were performed using a house-built motorized translation stage. For the measurement of THSs and TCS, manual scans were performed by inserting the microphone to all small ports on the claddings (Fig. 