The electrical quantum standards have played a decisive role in modern metrology, particularly since the introduction of the revised International System of Units (SI) in May 2019. By adapting the basic units to exactly defined natural constants, the quantized Hall resistance (QHR) standards are also given precisely. The Von Klitzing constant RK = h/e 2 (h Planck's constant and e elementary charge) can be measured precisely using the quantum Hall effect (QHE) and is thus the primary representation of the ohm. Currently, the QHR standard based on GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructure has succeeded in yielding robust resistance measurements with high accuracy <10 -9 . In recent years, graphene has been vastly investigated due to its potential in QHR metrology. This single-layer hexagonal carbon crystal forms a two-dimensional electron gas system and exhibits the QHE, due to its properties, even at higher temperatures. Thereby, in the future the QHR standards could be realized in more simplified experimental conditions that can be used at higher temperatures and currents as well as smaller magnetic fields than is feasible in conventional GaAs/AlGaAs QHR. The quality of the graphene is of significant importance to the QHR standards application. The epitaxial graphene growth on silicon carbide (SiC) offers decisive advantages among the known fabrication methods. It enables the production of largearea graphene layers that are already electron-doped and do not have to be transferred to another substrate. However, there are fundamental challenges in epitaxial graphene growth. During the high-temperature growth process, the steps on the SiC surface bunch together and form terraces with high steps. This so-called step-bunching gives rise to the graphene thickness inhomogeneity (e.g., the bilayer formation) and extrinsic resistance anisotropy, which both deteriorate the performance of electronic devices made from it. In this thesis, the process conditions of the epitaxial graphene growth through a socalled polymer-assisted sublimation growth method are minutely investigated. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) is used to show that the previously neglected flow-rate of the argon process gas has a significant influence on the morphology of the SiC substrate and atop carbon layers. The results can be well explained using a simple model for the thermodynamic conditions at the layer adjacent to the surface. The resulting control option of step-bunching on the sub-nanometer scales is used to produce the ultra-flat, monolayer graphene layers without the bilayer inclusions that exhibit the vanishing of the resistance anisotropy. The comparison of four-point and scanning tunneling potentiometry measurements shows that the remaining small anisotropy represents the ultimate limit, which is given solely by the remaining resistances at the SiC terrace steps. Thanks to the advanced growth control, also large-area homogenous quasi-freestanding monolayer and bilayer graphene sheets are fabricated. The Raman spectroscopy and scanning tunneling microscopy reveal very low defect densities of the layers. In addition, the excellent quality of the produced freestanding layers is further evidenced by the four-point measurement showing low extrinsic resistance anisotropy in both micro-and millimeter-scales. iii Elektrische Quantennormale spielen eine wichtige Rolle in der modernen Metrologie, besonders seit der Einführung des revidierten Einheitensystems (SI) im Mai 2019. Durch die Zurückführung der Basiseinheiten auf exakt definierte Naturkonstanten sind auch die quantisierten Werte von Widerstandsnormalen (QHR) exakt gegeben. Die Von-Klitzing-Konstante RK = h/e 2 (h Planck-Konstante und e Elementarladung) lässt sich mittels des Quanten-Hall-Effekts (QHE) präzise messen und ist somit die primäre Darstellung des Ohm. Die Quanten-Widerstandsnormale bestehen aktuell aus robusten GaAs/AlGaAs-Heterostrukturen, die eine Genauigkeit <10 -9 für die Widerstands-Messung erlauben. In den letzten Jahren wird verstärkt Graphen auf sein Potenzial für die Widerstandmetrologie untersucht. Der einlagige hexagonale Kohlenstoffkristall bildet ebenfalls ein zweidimensionales Elektrongas aus, das den Quanten-Hall-Effekt zeigtund dies auf Grund seiner Eigenschaften schon bei höheren Temperaturen. Damit könnten in Zukunft Widerstandsnormale für vereinfachte experimentelle Bedingungen realisiert werden, die bei höheren Temperaturen und Strömen oder kleineren Magnetfeldern eingesetzt werden können, als es mit konventionellen GaAs/AlGaAs-QHR möglich ist. Für den Einsatz als Widerstandsnormal ist die Qualität des Graphens von entscheidender Bedeutung. Unter den bekannten Herstellungsmethoden bietet das epitaktische Wachstum von Graphen auf Siliciumcarbid (SiC) entscheidende Vorteile. Es lassen sich damit großflächige Graphenschichten herstellen, die nicht auf ein anderes Substrat übertragen werden müssen. Allerdings gibt es grundlegende Herausforderungen beim epitaktischen Wachstum. So tritt bei hohen Prozesstemperaturen eine Bündelung der Kristallstufen auf der SiC-Substratoberfläche auf (Step-bunching), was zu einer bekannten extrinsischen Widerstandsanisotropie führt und darüber hinaus die Bildung von Bilagen-Graphen begünstigt. Beides verschlechtert die Eigenschaften der daraus hergestellten Widerstandsnormale. In dieser Dissertation werden zunächst die Prozessbedingungen des mittels der sogenannten Polymer-Assisted-Sublimations-Growth-Methode hergestellten epitaktischen Graphens auf SiC genauer untersucht. Mithilfe der Rasterkraft-Mikroskopie (Atomic-Force-Microscopy, AFM) wird gezeigt, dass es einen erheblichen Einfluss der bisher wenig beachteten Flussrate des Prozessgases Argon auf die Morphologie des SiC-Substrates und der oberen Kohlenstoffschichten gibt. Anhand eines einfachen Modells für die thermodynamischen Verhältnisse in einer oberflächennahen Schicht lassen sich die Ergebnisse hervorragend erklären. Die sich daraus ergebende Kontrollmöglichkeit des Step-bunching auf Sub-Nanometer-Skalen wird genutzt, um ultraflache, monolagige Graphenschichten ohne Bilageneinschlüsse herzustellen, die eine verschwindende Widerstandsanisotropie aufweisen. Der Vergleich von Vierpunkt-Messungen und Scanning-Tunneling-Potentiometery-Messungen zeigt, dass die verbleibende geringe Anisotropie das ultimative Limit darstellt, die allein durch die verbleibenden Widerstände an den SiC-Terrassenstufen gegeben ist. Abstract his chapter covers a brief overview, including the short historical remarks, primary goals/challenges, and the structure of this thesis. The graphene discovery may go back to 1859 when Benjamin Brodie discovered a new form of carbon called "graphon" as the material we know as graphene oxide nowadays. In the same year, in several studies, the graphene growth mechanism on SiC using the HRTEM and the buffer layer's atomic structure using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) was revealed. In 2011, graphene was produced on SiC using the CVD method by W. Strupinski et al. For the realization of robust and reliable performance of the graphene-based quantum Hall resistance (QHR) metrology, high-quality graphene samples are demanding. This thesis aims to investigate and understand the epitaxial graphene growth on silicon carbide, in order to improve the quality for a sizeable, reproducible, and pure monolayer graphene synthesis. This study further explores the fabrication of different graphene types and employs various characterization analysis to scrutinize both locally and macro-scales the samples' quality. After this introductory in Chapter 1, a brief overview of the graphene's fundamental properties, the mechanism of epitaxial graphene growth on SiC, the crystal structure of hexagonal SiC polytype, as well as the basics of the quantum Hall effect in graphene will be given in Chapter 2. It also includes an introduction to a so-called buffer layer and intercalation technique for the fabrication of the so-called freestanding graphene layers. Chapter 3 provides a short description of the characterization techniques employed in this thesis. Chapter 4 presents the sample preparation, cleaning, different growth recipes, and microfabrication processes. In Chapter 5, the fabrication results of diverse graphene types including buffer layer, monolayer graphene, bilayer graphene, as well as freestandingmonolayer and bilayer graphene are discussed in detail. The so far neglected argon flow-rate and its impact on growth are described within a quasi-thermal equilibrium model supported by several characterization methods. Also, in a multi-perspective study, the influence of the miscut angle, as well as the SiC polytype are investigated. Chapter 6 covers a systematic study of a so-called extrinsic resistance anisotropy of epitaxial monolayer, QFMLG, and QFBLG samples. An almost negligible resistance anisotropy of about 3% underlines the high-quality of the produced samples. This study importantly shows the minimum resistance anisotropy achievable in epigraphene on SiC. Moreover, not merely the step regions but also the terrace areas are investigated regarding the local resistance characteristics. Chapter 7 reveals a special interaction between graphene and SiC terminations. The presented advanced graphene growth allows creating the self-patterned graphene layers on either identical or non-identical SiC terminations. This provides a novel playground to study the interplay of the SiC terminations and top carbon layers as the central part of the Chapter 7. Furthermore, the SiC stacking terminations are identified and assigned within the framework of a socalled joint-cubic-hexagonal (JCH) step-flow model that describes the stepretraction SiC surfaces. Chapter 8 presents the magneto-transport results in epigraphene with respect to the metrological purpose of the graphene-based quantum Hall resistance standard. The environmental influences, doping, encapsulation/ isolation, and charge tuning using different techniques are discussed and evaluated. Graphene is a material that integrates several excellent electronic, optical, and thermal properties. This is so far unique to graphene because, for instance, one can find materials that are as conducting or transparent as graphene, but one can scarcely find any materials that are simultaneously electrically conducting, optically transparent (with a wide range of the optical spectrum from infrared to ultraviolet) and mechanically flexible. Graphene is an allotrope of carbon, which is the 4 th most abundant element in nature. Moreover, it is low-cost, eco-friendly, sustainable, and importantly its 2-dimensional structure makes it compatible with the traditional semiconductor processing planar structure and can be practically integrated into the existing mainstream technology. where a C-C ≈ 1.42 Å is the carbon-carbon distance, which results in a lattice constant of a = 2.46 Å. At the Dirac points, the graphene's band spectrum is closely similar to the Dirac spectrum for massless fermions. Figure There are two distinct known kinds of integer quantum Hall effect: (i) the conventional quantum Hall effect which occurs in 2D semiconductors (e.g., GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructure, for example) The classical Hall effect is observed when current flows through an electrical conductor in the presence of a perpendicular magnetic field. Due to the Lorentz force, electrons are deviated and propagate to the edge of the sample. This leads to a transversal voltage V xy = V Hall , the so-called Hall-voltage. The Hall voltage depends on externally applied parameters (i.e., magnetic field B, and current I) and equals for one type of charge carrier in the implemented semiconductor (e.g., electrons) as follows: where n is three-dimensional charge carrier density, t is thickness, and e is the electron charge. The Hall measurement allows calculating the charge carrier density of the material under investigation. From the Hall coefficient (AHall) in (2-5) the type of charge carrier can be identified; for the electron (holes), the sign of AHall becomes negative (positive). (2-5) In the case of a two-dimensional electron gas; wherein the motion of the electrons is limited to the XY plane, the product nt can be defined as a two-dimensional sheet carrier density n S . This leads to the Hall resistance RH as written in equation From the classical point of view, while longitudinal resistivity (ρ XX ) is constant, the transverse resistivity (ρ XY ) varies linearly with the external magnetic field B. This does not come true in the case of the quantum Hall effect, which is observed in 2DEG systems in a strong perpendicular magnetic field at low temperatures. Then oscillations (Shubnikov-De Haas (SdH) oscillations) in the longitudinal resistivity (ρ XX ) and so-called Hall plateaus in the transversal resistivity (ρ XY ) are observed. In 1980 Klaus von Klitzing found that the Hall resistivity plateaus show exact quantized values of fractions of h/e 2 . where I is the channel current, VXY is the Hall voltage, h is the Planck's constant, e is the elementary charge, and ν is known as "filling factor," which is an integer (1, 2, 3, ...) (in integer quantum Hall effect-IQHE) that define the different plateaus. The center of each plateau occurs when the magnetic field takes the values given by (2-8). B = hn s νe = n s ν φ 0 (2-8) φ 0 is known as the flux quantum. The Hall resistivity should take the value (2-7) when ν Landau levels (LLs) are filled. This will be explained further in the following. As seen, RXY depends only on the fundamental constants proportional to h/e 2 . with the reduced Planck constant ħ = h/2π, and N an integer (zero included). The localized states do not carry current, while the extended states do. Although the existence of an impurity reduces the number of states which can carry the current, however, in an oversimplified model, it can be assumed that the electrons passing by an impurity will speed up to increase the current to compensate exactly the deficit of current due to the presence of the localized state. In case (ii) by increasing the electron density, the different electronics states are gradually filled up, which is equivalent to shifting the Fermi energy EF through the DOS. When EF moves in a mobility gap (localized states), the occupation of the extended states does not change, and since only these states carry the current, the Hall resistance will not change either, leading to an extension of Hall plateau. When EF reaches the next Landau level, dissipation occurs in the system, and the Hall resistance goes to the next plateau. Hence, the QHE can be regarded as a successive localization-delocalization transitions when the Fermi energy EF moves through the DOS. Peaks in RXX are observed each time the Fermi level crosses the center of an LL, and the plateaus in RXY and vanishing RXX are observed whenever the Fermi level lies in between the LLs. When a LL is full, the Fermi level lies in a gap between occupied levels, the filling factor ν has an integer value, and vanishing of the longitudinal resistivity occurs. (a) Formation of Landau levels (LLs) in the density of states (DOS) in conventional 2DEG as a result of the quantization of cyclotron motion. Left (orange-highlighted) shows a typical continuum of DOS at zero magnetic fields. When the magnetic field is applied, the states should theoretically become quantized (delta-function) in LLs for an ideal system without disorders and impurities (marked as B > 0, no disorder). In practice, systems include disorders (marked as B > 0, disorder). Disorders lead to the broadening of LLs and formation of localized (black/green hatched regions)-and extended states (cyan-colored). The localized states do not carry current, whereas extended states do. The energy spacing between LLs in conventional 2DEG is proportional to the magnetic field (∆ELL ∝ B), leading to an equidistant spacing sequence of the Landau levels. (b) Schematic of the density of states of graphene under QHE conditions. (c) The spectrum of LLs for graphene indicating a unique LLs sequence depending on (∆ELL ∝ √B). Also, there is zero-energy LL that is equally shared by electrons and holes. Regions of localized and extended states are illustrated. There is a large energy spacing between the 1 st and 0 th LL in graphene. The energy spacing in the LL spectrum of graphene is not equidistant in contrast to the conventional 2DEG shown in (a). (d) Schematic comparison between the QHE in conventional 2DEG (blue) and graphene (red). The quantized values in graphene for the filling factors of ν = 2, 6 are shown. The linear energy dispersion of monolayer graphene leads to a modification of the magneto-transport in graphene. Accordingly, the energy gap between neighboring Landau levels is not equidistant, as with conventional semiconductors (e.g., GaAs/AlGaAs). In graphene, the energy dispersion of carriers around K and K ′ is similar to that of ultra-relativistic particles with zero mass m 0 . Thus, the Dirac equation is used to describe carriers' behaviors, which mimic massless Dirac Fermions around the Dirac points. E LL-Gr = ±ħω c √N = ν F √2ħeBN (2-14) N is an integer number (including zero), and νF (~10 6 ms -1 ) is the Fermi velocity. These all drastically affect the characteristic of RXY in the quantum Hall regime resulting in monolayer graphene. For a conventional 2D-systems from (2-11), the number of electrons (per unit area) needed to fill a single LL was shown to be B/φ 0 . In graphene, due to spin degeneracy and double valleys (K and K ′ ) degeneracy each filled LL contributes 4B/φ 0 electrons. However, for the abovementioned reason in (iii) for zero energy LL only contributes 2B/φ 0 . Accordingly, the electron density n S corresponding to N filled LL in graphene is as follows: Thus, by substituting n S value of (2-15) into the equation for the conventional Hall effect in equation (2-6), the RXY is given by: Accordingly, the quantized values for graphene are multiples of h/4e 2 with filling factors of ν = 2, 6, 10, 14, ... (for N ≥ 0). From the experimental perspectives, the unique LL energy spacing of graphene (∆ELL ∝ √B), which is deduced from the expression given in (2-14) is significant. This technically means reaching to ν = 2 (RXY = h/2e 2 ) at a lower magnetic field compared to the conventional 2DEG (ΔE LL ∝ B). The energy spacing between the lowest LL, N=0, and the first excited one, N = ±1, is very high and allows surviving the QHE up to room temperatures. There exist several methods and principles to synthesize graphene which can be generally summarized into two categories: the top-down approach (e.g., mechanical exfoliation [ Hexagonal polytypes of SiC have two possible surface terminations, i.e., Si-or C-face, see Figure The atoms rearrange into their energetically most favorable sites in the given environment, provided sufficient thermal energy and time is allowed. [75] Formation of the (d) QFMLG and (e) QFBLG using hydrogen intercalation technique on the buffer layer and epitaxial graphene, respectively. More info in ref. Precise control of growth conditions as well as careful selection of crystal type, face side, and miscut angle are required for the growing single layer of graphene. The temperature of the substrate plays an important role. The time of annealing is another parameter for controlling the growth rate. Also, annealing in the argon environment and the argon flow-rate significantly influence the graphitization process. Figure [88] This is important in growth kinetics when a high thickness control for fabrication pure graphene layers (e.g., BFL, MLG, or BLG) is desired. Furthermore, The Bernal stacked bilayer graphene that grows on SiC has a semiconducting nature; therefore, depending on the charge carrier density can show either metallic or insulating behavior. Since its discovery over a century ago, intercalation has enabled the creation of different materials for various applications. Although the principle of intercalation is simple, in practice, a scalable freestanding layer is not readily achievable. The main challenge is the low quality of epitaxial buffer-or graphene layers, i.e., their thickness inhomogeneity. Moreover, the intercalation circumstance could induce incomplete decoupling or even etched areas. In this study, the high quality of large-area epitaxial buffer-and monolayer graphene layers are further tested by hydrogen intercalation. A hydrogen (5%) gas dissolved in argon (95%) was used, thereby also the influence of gas purity in the intercalation process is intensively investigated. These all will be discussed in Chapters 4 and 5. The compound named ''Kohlensilicium'' (silicon carbide), with an exact stoichiometry of Si:C = 1:1, was discovered in 1824. Both surfaces of 4H-and 6H-SiC polytypes are promising materials for epitaxial graphene growth. For our purpose, the growth of single-layer graphene, Si-face, gives higher growth thickness control while on the C-face leads to multilayer graphene formation. The cross-sectional structure and associated bilayer stacking sequences of 6H-SiC (0001), is shown in Figure During etching and growth on SiC, the surface undergoes a restructuring process in which the steps move and group together (so-called step-bunching process). The final shape of the SiC crystal surface is often determined by a minimization of the total surface free energy. Since the terraces have inequivalent surface energies (due to the physical relationship with the underlying bilayers), the etching/growth is driven by a "step flow." The step-bunching mechanism, e.g., during graphitization or hydrogen etching of the SiC surfaces, has been vastly studied Both miscut angle (also called tilt-angle, misorientation angle, or off-axis angle) and crystal orientation substantially influence the growth as well as electronic properties of overgrown carbon layers. Surface orientations are given by the miscut angle between the surface plane concerning a crystallographic plane. If truncating of SiC happens perpendicular to the c-axis with no inclination (absolute 0°-off), then it should turn out an entirely flat surface. The misorientation of the surface is the reason that flat terraces are formed interrupted by step edges of a certain height corresponding to the miscut angle. The misorientation angle plays a decisive role in graphene morphological and transport properties. Moreover, the crystal plane is relevant to the growth process. For example, it was both theoretically and experimentally shown that quasi-freestanding graphene could be directly grown on nonpolar (112 ̅ 0) and (11 ̅ 00) planes. As shown in Figure The SiC substrate influences the electronic properties of epitaxial graphene layers in multiple ways. QFMLG on hexagonal SiC obtained by H-intercalation is highly p-doped. This p-doping was attributed to the SP since: (i) QFMLG on 3C-SiC (SP is missing) is not p-type (but slightly n-type due to defects), (ii) the Si-H bonds are electronically inactive (no doping contribution), (iii) the passivated surface is supposed to be in principle defect-free (hence no doping contribution), and (iv) the depletion of the bulk doping of SiC (especially for semi-insulated SiC) is insufficient for the substantial doping (corresponding to areal ns < 5  10 10 cm -2 in the depletion layer of SiC substrate), therefore the strong hole-doping is directly associated with the SP effect. Herein, the spontaneous polarization creates a pseudo-acceptor layer at the surface that is fully equivalent to real acceptors. Furthermore, since the SP along the (0001) direction remains negative for all hexagonal SiC polytypes, only p-doping should be induced at the Si terminated quasi-freestanding graphene (QFG) systems. Moreover, there is a linear relationship between the bandgap and degree of hexagonality in all SiC polytype: it varies from ~2.39 eV in the 3C structure (0% hexagonality) to ~3.30 eV in the 2H form (100% hexagonality). Please note that the SP is independent of strain (not like piezoelectric) and can be observed in other wurtzite crystals (e.g., III-nitrides). The SP makes it possible to directly manipulate the electronic properties (e.g., carrier concentration) in a semiconductor like conventional doping without using impurity dopants. Abstract n the framework of this thesis, several versatile characterization techniques were employed to investigate more in detail the quality of different types of graphene samples considering their morphological, electronic transport, or magneto-transport properties. This chapter is devoted to showing the working principle of the implemented experimental techniques, which support the discussions in the next chapters. I Atomic force microscopy (AFM), as a valuable and versatile surface analysis technique, is often used to display the real space morphology of samples on μmscales. In this thesis, the AFM as a standard technique was regularly used to characterize the samples' surface properties. The main component of AFM is a cantilever with a sharp tip. During measurement, the tip scans over the surface. Following the atomic force interaction between the tip and substrate, the AFM can generate informative images of the substrate. The NANOStation AFM (produced by S.I.S) used in this study provides a pronounced resolution that precisely resolves structures with height equals to ~0.25 nm. The SSS-NCLR or PPP-NCLR are the AFM silicon tips fabricated by Nanosensors TM that were used in this work. Figure Technically, the contact (DC) mode and non-contact mode (AC) (applied in this study) are two modes that are applied for AFM measurement. In DC contact mode, the tip is permanently in contact with the substrate during scanning, which may damage the tip and cantilever as a result of a shear force. In the noncontact (AC) mode, the tip is adjusted appropriately in minimum contact with the substrate while the cantilever oscillates. This mode records information from the substrate's surface in which the tip is not in contact (or in an intermediate contact) with the substrate. Important information about the substrates examined with the AFM (in AC mode) can be extracted from their phase images. The AFM generates the phase image by monitoring the phase lag between the signal, which drives the cantilever to oscillate (in non-contact mode), and the actual cantilever oscillation signal. From the phase contrasts in the AFM phase image, one can understand variation in surface properties (e.g., elasticity, stiffness, friction, and adhesion) and the existence of different materials, which all may cause the phase contrast. The AFM phase imaging is based on the detection of variation in the energy dissipated in a local region of the sample surface. Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) is primarily based on the instrumentation of an AFM. The KPFM is a tapping mode technique and is performed in this work in doublepass mode, in which at first trace the topography of the sample is recorded and then in a certain lift distance from the substrate the contact potential difference (VCPD) is captured. The VCPD directly depends on the work function of the sample and tip, thereby gives straightforward information about the Fermi levels of the sample and tip. Similar to the AFM which can detect atomic forces by amplitude or frequency modulations (AM or FM), KPFM can measure the electrostatic force (Fω) either by AM or FM modes, the latter (FM mode) known to have much higher spatial resolution and accuracy. where z is the direction normal to the sample surface, ΔV is the potential difference between VCPD and the voltage applied to the AFM tip (ΔV = Vtip ± VCPD), and ∂C/∂z is the gradient of the capacitance between the tip and sample surface. In the double pass model, the mechanical excitation of the cantilever is deactivated, and a voltage (VAC sin(ωt) + VDC) is applied, therefore the ΔV = Vtip ± VCPD = (VDC ± VCPD) + VAC sin(ωt). By substituting ΔV in the equation (3-1), the Fes will be as follow, including three parts (where ω = 2πf0.): The AC bias leads to oscillation force (Fω and F2ω) at two harmonics of ω and 2ω when the (VDC ± VCPD) is not zero. AM-KPFM measures Fω directly from the amplitude of the cantilever oscillation at ω that is induced by VCPD and VAC. The feedback loop in AM-KPFM tries to maintain the Fω by using the oscillation amplitude (VAC) until the VAC drops to zero when VDC equals the CPD. With knowing the work function of the tip (φ tip ), the work function of the sample can be determined as φsample ≈ φtip -e∆VCPD. The cantilever measures surface topography on the first (main) scan (trace and retrace) (marked as 1). The cantilever ascends to lift scan height (marked as 2), then follows the stored surface topography at the lift height above the sample while responding to electric influences on the second scan (marked as 3). The frequency of the AC bias is typically selected to be the resonant frequency (f0) of the AFM cantilever for enhanced sensitivity afforded by the cantilever's quality factor (Q). A KPFM made by JPK Instruments AG was used to study the samples in this works. The KPFM was equipped with a conductive coated (Cr/Pt, 5/25 nm) micromachined monolithic silicon tips (Tap300E-G, r=25nm) from ''budget sensors''. Although the KPFM operation is relatively simple, however, the low spatial resolution, distance tip dependency, the apex of tip, geometry of conductive probe As a non-destructive tool, Raman spectroscopy enables valuable information about the crystal's phononic properties. In this work, the Raman spectroscopy as a powerful method was implemented mainly for characterizing the thickness Rayleigh scattering happens when the excited electron-hole pair returns to the ground state, and the frequency of the emitted and incident photons remains the same, but only the propagation direction of the photon may change (elastic scattering). With a much lower probability compared to Rayleigh scattering, the Raman scattering happens when the incoming photon loses part of its energy while interacting with a phonon, therefore, leaving the sample with a lower energy of ћωSc. This is known as the Stokes process. The energy is equal to ћωL -ћωSc = ћΩ (An incoming photon ωL excites an electron-hole pair. The pair decays into a phonon Ω and another electron-hole pair). If the incoming photon finds the sample in an excited vibrational state, after the interaction process, the system comes back to its ground state, and the photon can exit the sample with an increased energy of ћωSc = ћωL + ћΩ. This corresponds to the anti-Stokes process and has been reported to be less probable than the Stokes process. Therefore, the Raman scattering is displayed as the Stokes measurement intensity of the scattered light due to the difference between the incident and scattered photon energy known as the "Raman shift." The unit of the Raman shift is usually written as cm -1 , which can be converted in meV as 1meV = 8.0655447 cm -1 (1 cm -1 ≈ 0.124 meV). Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) is used to scan the substrates by exposing a focused electron beam and generating images, including information about the substrate's topography and composition. As depicted in Figure The ultimate lateral resolution of the image obtained in the SEM corresponds to the electron beam's diameter. Advances in the lens and electron gun design yield very fine probe diameters giving image resolutions between 1nm to 20 nm, and depending on the instrument, can reach a point resolution <1 nm. The SEM measurements on the samples in this study have been mostly performed at PTB Braunschweig by Peter Hinze and Kathrin Stör from Nanostructuring Lab using a "SUPRA 40" field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) from Carl Zeiss SMT that allows acceleration voltages between 0.1 keV and 30 keV and enables magnification up to 1000000x. The invention and discovery of scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) by Binnig and Rohrer in 1981 The STM is based on the quantum mechanical tunneling effect. The basic idea behind STM is illustrated in Figure The scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) is a complementary technique that enables probing the LDOS of the sample. This is accomplished by measuring the current-to-voltage characteristic of the tunneling junction, see Figure As a non-destructive technique, low energy electron diffraction (LEED) is a powerful widely-used method for surface structural analysis. The history of LEED dated back to about 1924, when by derivation from Einstein's well-known matter and energy equation E = mc 2 , and Planck's theory E = hν, de Broglie introduced his equation as follow: for the wavelength (λ) of an electron (e) with mass (m), momentum (p), energy (E), and h the Planck's constant. The de Broglie's postulation was experimentally observed by where α is the spacing between adjacent rows of atoms and λ is given by de Broglie relationship, and n is an integer (see Figure Several diffracted beams of electrons with the same energy as the incident (elastic) beam are produced in the backward direction. where G ⃗ is a reciprocal lattice vector, and as mentioned, the perpendicular component is absent and has only a parallel component. In the so-called spot profile analysis low-energy electron diffraction (SPA-LEED), the detection of diffracted electrons is done by a channeltron detector, unlike the standard LEED with a phosphorous screen. The SPA-LEED has the advantage of a larger accessible reciprocal space in contrast to the conventional LEED. This is due to electrostatic deflection plates that are used to continuously vary the angle of incidence of the electron beam in all directions at the sample position. Subsequently, scanning the incident angle of the electron beam results in a simultaneous variation of the angle under which diffracted electrons from the surface are recorded. This variation of both the incident and the exit angle of the electrons results in a very special scanning mode in reciprocal space, in which the angle between the incident and final scattering vector stays constant while the incident angle is changed. So, the Ewald sphere is rotated around the origin of reciprocal space, resulting in the recorded diffraction pattern not following the Ewald sphere (unlike the conventional LEED) but a sphere with twice as the diameter of the Ewald sphere. The LEED measurements in this work were carried out by J. Aprojanz from the Leibniz University Hannover within the group of Prof. C. Tegenkamp. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is a versatile quantitative spectroscopic technique that enables measuring the elemental composition, empirical formula, chemical state, and electronic state of the elements that exist within a material. XPS spectra are obtained by irradiating a material with a monochromatic photon beam of X-rays, causing the sample to emit electrons (the so-called photoelectrons) while simultaneously measuring the kinetic energy (EK) and the number of electrons that escape from approximately top 10 nm of the material being analyzed. A basic XPS setup consists of an X-ray source, an electron analyzer to measure the kinetic energy of the photoelectrons, a detector to count the number of electrons, data acquisition, and a processing system. The kinetic energy of the photoelectron (Ek) is the difference between the X-ray photon energy hυ (h is the Plank's constant and υ is the X-ray frequency) and the binding energy (Eb) of the core-level electron. Since the X-ray energy is known and the Ek of the photoelectron can be experimentally determined, the Eb of the emitted electron is given by the following equation: where φspec is the work function of the spectrometer. The Ek is measured in the spectrometer concerning the Evac of the spectrometer. The XPS measurement and surface analysis need to be performed in an ultrahigh vacuum environment (< 10 -9 Torr) to increase the mean free path of the photons and electrons, remove adsorbed gases from the sample and prevent adsorption of contaminants on the surface. The XPS measurements presented in this work are mainly carried out on socalled intercalated buffer layer samples. This reveals valuable information about the sample and origin of intercalation, as is discussed in detail in Chapter a) The process involves electron from the core state via a high energy X-ray irradiation and propagate through the crystal and finally emits into the vacuum. Red (blue) circles represent electrons (holes) within different orbitals (1s, 2s). The XPS spectra of the C 1S core levels of so-called quasi-freestanding monolayer graphene on SiC. The low energy electron microscopy (LEEM) is a technique based on the principle of LEED. The schematic of a basic LEEM setup is shown in Figure Moreover, LEEM enables studying an aerial contribution of a certain phase. This can be achieved by aligning an aperture in the diffraction spot, allowing electrons reflection only from the desired phase. Through this so-called darkfield imaging (LEEM-DF) technique, an intensity image of the selected diffraction spot is achieved. The same experimental setup can be used for X-ray photoemission electron microscopy (XPEEM), which directly measures the work function variation on the surface. Also, from the low-energy electron reflectivity (LEEM-IV), also known as LEEM-IV of graphene samples, the information about the layer thickness, as well as interlayer distance, can be extracted. This can be perceived from the LEEM-IV spectra, which exhibit a dip (local minima) whenever the electrons can be absorbed by an unoccupied state of the sample. This happens because the confinement of electrons in thin films can create quantum well (QW) bound states. The QW states at discrete energy levels produce peaks in the photoemission energy spectrum or reflectivity of the low-energy electrons. The energy levels of the QW states change with the film thickness. Therefore, the photoemission intensity shows an oscillatory behavior as a function of the electron energy and film thickness, in which the number of dips in spectra corresponds to the number of graphene layers. For a detailed explanation, see refs. The LEEM measurements in this work were carried out by P. Schädlich from the university of Chemnitz within the group of Prof. T. Seyller as well as by Alexei A. Zakharov at the MAXIV laboratory. For the details, see the text and also ref. Schematic of the 4-tip transport setup featuring a Keithley source-meter (bottom) and a sketch of STM tips on a graphene sample for the rotational N4PP measurement with respect to the SiC step and terraces (top), Adapted from refs. Angle-dependent Nano-Four-Point Probe (N4PP) electronic transport measurement in a square configuration is used in this work to investigate a socalled extrinsic resistance anisotropy of epitaxial SiC/G samples. This method, which enables electronic transport investigations on micrometer scales, also gives valuable information about the sheet resistance (intrinsic resistivity) of the sample. The measurement configuration of the N4PP on the graphene sample is shown in Figure The measured resistances Rθ for a given angle θ are adequately described by: where σ∥ and σ⊥ denote the conductivities measured parallel and perpendicular to the step direction, respectively, assuming an anisotropic 2D sheet with different conductivities in x-and y-direction. From the fitting procedure, finally the resistivity values perpendicular (ρ perp = σ ⊥ -1 ) and parallel (ρ par = σ ‖ -1 ) to the step edges are obtained, and the anisotropy ratio is calculated as A = ρ perp /ρ par . Because the current flow via the semi-insulating SiC substrate and the buffer layer is negligible, the measured resistance is related to the 2D graphene sheet on top. In addition to the above-discussed N4PP method, which enabled measurement on micrometer-scales, Van der Pauw (VdP) Implementing the VdP measurement in a cryostat facilitates measuring charge carrier concentration (ns) and mobility (μ) of the sample as a function of temperature. The resistivity can be derived from a total of eight measurements configuration (see Figure . From the entire measurements, two following values are derived: where: ρ A and ρ B are the resistivities in ohm-cm; ts is the sample thickness in cm; I is the current through the sample in amperes; fA and fB are geometrical factors based on sample symmetry related to the two resistance ratios AA and AB. The relation between A and f (where A= (AA+AB)/2 and f = (fA +fB)/2)), is shown in the following equations (f A = f B = 1 for a perfect square symmetry): The average resistivity value is given by The effect of the sample's thickness is important. The sheet resistance RSh is the resistivity divided by the thickness of the sample, and the sheet carrier density nS is the doping level multiplied by the thickness, therefore, the sheet resistance in a 2D system like the graphene sample can be calculated as follow: The Hall Effect can be studied on the samples, giving information about the conductivity type, carrier density, and mobility in the graphene samples. By applying a magnetic field (B) on the sample with the measurement configuration shown in Figure where VH is the average Hall voltage (RMS value), I is the magnitude of the applied current (RMS value), and ts is the thickness. Following the contact numbering in Figure From the resistivity equation (3-15) and Hall coefficient in equation (3-18), the mobility (μ) can be calculated: Correspondingly, the carrier density (ns) can be derived as follow: Figure Abstract his chapter presents the methods, recipes, and setups used in this work for sample preparation, growth, and device fabrications. In the pocket, the primary samples are surrounded by other dummy SiC samples for avoiding the possible influence of the sidewall of the susceptor at hightemperature annealing. The inductive heater can heat the susceptor to 2000 °C. The susceptor's temperature is continuously measured through a window with a pyrometer placed at one end of the reactor within a distance of approximately 30 cm. An insulation layer of graphite surrounds the hot susceptor and reduces the thermal stress of the quartz glass cylinder, which is actively cooled with ambient air from the outside by a radial fan. The quartz tube is connected from one end to a turbopump and a scroll pump, which can evacuate the reactor down to a pressure of ~4 × 10 -7 mbar at room temperature. Argon, nitrogen, and a mixture of argon/hydrogen (95% Ar and 5% H2) are three separate gases that can be led via different inlets to the chamber. Except for the flow rate of nitrogen gas, which is manually adjusted (usually for venting the system), the flow rate of two other gasses can be controlled automatically through the mass flow controllers. This setup was also used for the hydrogen intercalation process. The setup is automated and can be monitored and controlled by the user via a PC based LabVIEW program. This reactor is based on a non-industrial design presented in ref. The epitaxial growth was performed using four-inch 4H-and 6H-SiC wafers from II-VI GmbH Deutschland. The wafers with a thickness of 500 ±25μm were mostly semi-insulating (vanadium compensating dopants, R > 10 9 Ω-cm), classified as prime grade (micro-pipe density <10 cm -2 ), with epi-ready chemical mechanical polishing (CMP) on the silicon face and optical polishing on the carbon face. The growth was carried out on the silicon face. Wafers with various miscut angles towards different crystal orientations were used for the growth. For graphene growth, the SiC wafers were cut into samples typically with the sizes of 5 × 10 mm 2 and 10 × 10 mm 2 (see Figure After finishing the dicing procedure, the samples could be easily split using tweezers. To identify the samples, they were named by a letter and a number, e.g., A7 and A8 shown in Figure The surface quality of SiC is decisive to achieve large-area homogenous epitaxial graphene. Hydrogen etching or cleaning is a technique for providing flat SiC surfaces. High cleaning efficiency is an advantage of this technique, which is the main reason to be applied as a pre-treatment step for epitaxial film growth. Hydrogen etching was formerly often used to remove scratches and damages arising from the cutting and polishing processes. Development in SiC surface preparation has led to producing wafers with almost no scratches. However, it is still beneficial for surface cleaning, removing contaminations, and obtaining atomically flat surfaces. (b) Low-temperature hydrogen-etching applied on a 6H-SiC (0001) sample resulting in a smooth surface with regular terrace and steps. The bright droplet-like spots are silicon droplets, which are typically seen after the H-etching on the SiC surface. For more details, see ref. For example, the SiC specimens after dicing (described in section 4.2) usually contain considerable contaminations, especially when for the protection a durable adhesive foil or photoresist coating is used. Such contaminations stick to the surface, and it is challenging to be removed by standard cleaning procedures, i.e., acetone cleaning. Here, hydrogen etching plays a significant role in surface cleaning. The hydrogen flow-rate and process temperature are two critical parameters in the etching. Depending on the etching parameters, often well-shaped regular but strongly step-bunched terraces are obtained. Heavily step-bunched surfaces are detrimental to graphene growth. However, it is possible to combine the advantages of the hydrogen-etching if certain parameters in the process are considered. Hydrogen etching processes were intensively studied in previous works and can be found in refs. An advanced, so-called polymer-assisted sublimation growth (PASG) method was used to produce graphene on SiC. This technique could be regarded as a modification of standard conventional SiC sublimation growth combined with an additional carbon source. Accordingly, the growth is not based only upon the graphenization of the SiC through thermal treatment and subsequent Si sublimation but also is supported from a foreign carbon-rich source via polymer adsorbates added to the samples. The PASG effectively suppresses the inherent but unfavorable formation of high SiC surface terrace steps during hightemperature sublimation growth. This happens through a rapid formation of the graphene buffer layer, which stabilizes the SiC surface. The growth has gone through multiple optimizations that will be discussed in this work as also have been addressed in refs. The sample preparation comprises two main successive treatments. First, the SiC specimens require to be cleaned from contaminations and then be polymerized for the PASG. The applied cleaning process has two sub-steps: firstly storing the SiC specimens in an acetone beaker (Si-face up) for at least 48 hours, and secondly immersing the samples in a fresh mixture of isopropanol and acetone (1:3) and introducing to an ultrasonic bath (USB) for 15 minutes (at 40 °C). A USB equipped with the ability of temperature and power adjustments is indeed highly favorable. For the cleaning, ultra-pure isopropanol and acetone were used. It worth mentioning that the cleaning was investigated using different methods and chemicals, e.g., hydrogen fluoride (HF), piranha, RCA (SC1/SC2) method, and other known techniques introduced in different studies. After cleaning, the polymerization process was achieved by an easy-to-use socalled liquid-phase deposition (LPD) technique. The growth optimization was carried out on more than 1200 samples types, which statistically underline the successful reproducibility of graphene syntheses. The presented fabrication method and optimization enables the growth of ultra-smooth bilayer-free graphene sheets with unprecedented reproducibility, a prerequisite for the wafer-scale fabrication of high-quality graphene-based electronic devices. In this section, the general lithography process applied to pattern graphene into an electronic device is described. Here, the primary fabrication technique is based on electron beam lithography (EBL) to define the patterns on epitaxial graphene. Alternatively, photolithography is also possible, but because of its lower resolution is not preferred in this study and thus is not used. The lithography process begins when the graphene sample has passed initial inspection using an optical microscope, AFM, and sometimes Raman spectroscopy. The fabrication produce is technically composed of three successive steps, as illustrated in Figure In the first step, the contacts and markers are structured. To this end, the graphene is covered with an EBL compatible photoresist using spin coating. The bottom layer, closest to the graphene, consists of a poly(methyl-methacrylate) (PMMA) based copolymer, and the top layer consists of ARP 630-670 series (e.g., P672.06). These are both positive resists, which become soluble in specific developers upon exposure to the electron beams. Furthermore, these two resists are sensitive with different ratios to the developers, which facilitates control over the resist profile. Additionally, a 20 nm chromium layer is evaporated on the sample. This thin reflective chromium layer helps to overcome the EBL's focusing problem on the transparent SiC/epitaxial graphene. After EBL illumination, the chromium layer is removed. Then, the exposed areas are developed. Next, the graphene is structured by AC-plasma using an oxygen/argon gas mixture. Since graphene adherence to any deposited metal (e.g., Au) is weak, therefore, in this step, areas where metal bond pads (anchors) are placed will also be etched to allow bonding to the SiC substrate. The first step also includes the etching of the markers (at the corners) to help precise alignment of future layers. After the plasma etching, the PMMA mask is lifted. The structured graphene is then contacted by Ti/Au metal contacts. The thin titanium sticks very well to the etched areas (SiC) and is sealed by the gold layer to avoid oxidation. These two layers act as a coupling agent between the final gold overlap layer and the SiC substrate. Titanium does not show proper contact with graphene, so it is not directly deposited onto the graphene. In the second step, the graphene Hall-bar is structured by EBL illumination on two-layers positive photoresists A-RP 630-670 series and atop SX AR-PC 5000/90.2 (Electra 92) layer. The latter resist is electrically conductive and is required for an efficient EBL illumination. Afterward, the Electra 92 is developed under flowing distilled water, and the exposed areas of the photoresist are developed by the same procedure described in the first step. In the third step, the electronic contact with the graphene is realized. The EBL is applied to the sample covered with the same two photoresists (as described in the first step) to open a window (by a developer) for the metallization of the gold contacts. With a thickness of 50 nm, this gold layer overlaps the previously deposited Ti/Au contacts and the nearby uncovered graphene. For the measurements, the samples are glued to a chip carrier, e.g., TO8, as shown in Figure Notwithstanding several existing methods, precise control over the charge carrier density in SiC/G is still a delicate task to accomplish. For the QHE applications, it is desirable to tune the graphene close to the charge neutrality condition (EF = ED) that enables reaching high electron mobility and quantization at low magnetic fields. This section presents two of those methods to tune the graphene Hall-bars. The first method, the so-called photochemical gating, is based on the chlorinated photosensitive polymer (methyl styrene-co-chloromethyl acrylate), commercially available as ZEP520. The photo-gateable heterostructure is formed by spin-coating the sample with 55 nm PMMA as a neutral spacer layer followed by a deposition of 300 nm ZEP520, as shown in Figure Corona discharge can be created by applying a high voltage to a sharp tip or wire to generate an electrical discharge that ionizes the surrounding gas. If performed in air, the predominant ionic species are H 3 O + and CO 3 -2 which move along the lines of the electric field. When a negative voltage is applied, positive ions drift towards the discharge source, while negative species propagate away from it and are deposited on a target substrate and vice versa. Abstract his chapter focuses on the fabrication of graphene on the silicon-face of hexagonal silicon carbide. Over 1200 samples of different types were synthesized to optimize the growth and its reproducibility. Here the most important results are discussed. This chapter gives a comprehensive overview of the growth of a so-called buffer layer (BFL), monolayer graphene (MLG), bilayer graphene (BLG), and quasi-freestanding monolayer/ bilayer (QFMLG/ QFBLG) layers. The high quality of these layers helps to better understand the growth kinetics and mechanism, a so-called step-bunching, and surface restructuring and recrystallization. The large-scale homogeneity of the samples enables both localand macro-scale studies on different sample types resulting in several salient features in epigraphene that each thematically will be discussed separately in the following chapters (i.e., 5, 6, and 7). In this chapter, the optimization of the growth considering an influential but so-far neglected parameter, the "argon gas flowrate," is addressed. The conditions for the fabrication of epitaxial BFL are studied. Subsequently, the main challenges in BFL growth: the poor or excessive-"coverage" at the SiC step-edge regions, which both dramatically degrade the quality of the BFL sample, are discussed. In addition to high-quality MLG, the growth conditions to achieve coherent and scalable epitaxial BLG are presented. Also, the challenges and efficiency of the intercalation technique concerning the intercalant purity and intercalation conditions are studied. Several characterization techniques such as AFM, Raman spectroscopy, XPS, LEED, VdP, and STM are used to examine the samples. The presented results are partly published in refs. Inert gas (e.g., argon or nitrogen) counter-pressure has been used for many years to improve silicon carbide sublimation growth, which prevents unwanted crystal growth before reaching the optimal growth temperature. The experiments (Exp.1-Exp.7) were performed on the Si-face of the samples (5 × 10 mm 2 ) cut from a semi-insulating 4H-and 6H-SiC wafer with a nominal miscut of about -0.06° towards [1100]. The substrates were prepared by liquid phase deposition of polymer adsorbates on the surface as described for the polymer assisted sublimation growth (PASG) technique described in Chapter 4 and refs. The impact of the Ar mass flow-rate on the graphene growth (Exp.2) was demonstrated on two samples G0 and G20 grown at 1750 °C (Ar atm., 900 mbar, 6 min), under zero, and 20 sccm Ar mass flow, respectively. All other parameters were kept constant. (See section 5. The optimized buffer layer sample BFL1 (Exp.3) was grown under 0 sccm Ar flow (900 mbar) by an annealing procedure with temperature steps at 1400 °C (8 min), 1500 °C (5 sec), 1300 °C (2 min), and 800 °C (1 min). The detailed process diagram can be seen in Figure Next, it is shown that the buffer layer samples can be surprisingly intercalated in a nitrogen environment with 99.999% purity. This is demonstrated in Exp5., which includes stepwise buffer layer intercalation processes in nitrogen (5N) and hydrogen environments separately and subsequent investigations using Raman spectroscopy. For this purpose, the intercalation of the buffer layer samples was performed from ~300 to ~1000 °C with temperature increments of 100 °C. This is discussed in section 5.5.3. Similarly, quasi-freestanding bilayer graphene (QFBLG) was shown (Exp. Finally, the epitaxial bilayer graphene (Exp.7) was grown at several temperature windows of 1750 °C (10 min), 1850 °C (30 min), and 1900 °C (10 sec) at 900 mbar in an argon atmosphere. All the samples in this study are listed in The surface morphology of the buffer layer samples grown under different Ar mass flow rates (S0, S100, and S1000) are plotted in The homogenous buffer layer growth is attributed to the PASG growth, which favors buffer layer nucleation over the entire terrace. For 100 sccm Ar flow, the surface morphology changes. Although the (6√3 × 6√3)R30° LEED pattern indicates the formation of the buffer layer on the terraces, Figure For much higher Ar flows (Figure For zero and small Ar flows, the slow SiC decomposition is self-limiting by the generated carbon for buffer layer growth. For a high Ar flow, when a fast SiC decomposition rate exceeds the nucleation and growth rate of the buffer layer, an etching of the SiC surface is the consequence. Both extreme cases are displayed by the samples S0 and S1000, respectively. For moderate Ar flow both, etching and buffer layer growth can appear simultaneously but spatially separated as seen for S100. The control of the SiC decomposition by the Ar mass flow without changing process temperature or the Ar background pressure opens a new parameter range for improved epitaxial graphene growth. This situation can be better perceived in the thermodynamic diagram of the process shown in Figure The heat transfer mechanism under different gas flows, inferred from the model described in the literature By increasing the Ar flux, the heat is transported mainly due to bulk fluid (advection) in the boundary layer (which in the interface layer is still due to the diffusion), however, the flux reduces the thickness of the interface layer. This leads to an increase of sublimation rate, compared to very low or zero gas flow, presuming a constant Ts. At intensive gas flow, the thermal gradient and thermal current toward the outlet increases. Moreover, the irregular flux in the boundary layer and its lower T leads to condensation and random reflection of some of the specimens back to the substrate surface, which is probably the reason for the formation of the aggregating specimens as well as triangular-like structures on the surface. Moreover, as a consequence of the intensive gas flow, no significant supersaturation on the surface occurs, which is why no buffer layer is observable in its LEED pattern in Figure The formation of two-dimensional nuclei is a susceptible function of the supersaturation, which is negligible below a critical supersaturation and rapidly increases above it. In the following, it is demonstrated that the rate of the Ar mass flow also has a substantial impact on the surface morphology of epitaxial monolayer graphene. Two exemplary graphene samples G0 and G20 are compared, grown at 1750°C under zero and 20 sccm Ar gas flow, respectively. The AFM images for both samples ( The retraction process stops when large-area buffer layer coverage on the terraces stabilizes the SiC surface. Once the SiC surface morphology is stabilized by the buffer layer, this structure is frozen and remains stable even when the temperature is further increased for graphene growth to 1750 °C. Accordingly, the SiC morphology is not significantly altered in the subsequent graphene formation process, which is regarded as the formation of the second buffer layer and the detachment and conversion of the first buffer layer into monolayer graphene. The high quality of such ultra-smooth graphene layers was already shown by Raman measurements and nearly isotropic resistivity. Comparing the samples S100 and S0 illustrate that the presence of argon flow-rate causes a change in surface mass diffusion; therefore, it may be implemented in the growth to overcome buffer layer low coverage. Herein, although almost similar steps and terraces are observed on S0 and S100, the latter shows very small straggly uncovered SiC area with brighter phase-contrast inferred from the AFM phase The buffer layer improvement was started with the growth condition of S0 but with an optimized time and annealing protocol as given in Chapter 4. The AFM topography of this optimized sample BFL1 in Figure Although the buffer layer (BFL1) thoroughly covers the surface (see Figure So far, the result of an optimized buffer layer sample (BFL1) and a low-quality buffer layer sample (BFL2) were presented in section 5.4. Here the goal is to achieve a high-quality QFMLG layer by hydrogen intercalation technique. By comparing the results of hydrogen intercalation on the BFL1 and BFL2 samples, the importance of the BFL quality in the uniformity of the QFMLG is further demonstrated. The structural homogeneity and lateral coverage of the BFL1 and BFL2 samples are studied by Raman measurements. The spectrum of BFL1 shows broad features, between 1200 and 1700 cm -1 (upper spectrum in Figure It should be noticed that here the resolution of the Raman measurement is ~1 μm, which is about the terrace width and thus higher than the uncovered areas seen in the AFM image in Figure Furthermore, the mean values of these quantities and the standard deviations were calculated from these data. The appearance of the 2D peak in the Raman spectra of the QFMLG1 sample (lower spectrum in Figure The QFMLG was produced by hydrogen intercalation of the optimized buffer layer (BFL1), and the STM and LEED scrutiny of the surface are shown in Figure Furthermore, dislocations and domain boundaries are not observed. The 4 × 4 nm 2 STM images taken across the step edges reveal a coherent graphene layer that spans smoothly over the step edge from one terrace to the next. A larger two-dimensional image in Figure Aside from the above-discussed successful intercalation of buffer layers by 5% hydrogen (95% argon), it was striking to observe much the same effect for the BFL samples that were annealed (600-1000 °C) in 5N nitrogen (99.999% purity) environment. After this process, the samples were not semi-insulator anymore but instead turned into semi-metallic freestanding graphene monolayers. Due to the almost inert-like nature of molecular nitrogen with its triple covalent bonds, a direct influence of nitrogen in intercalation is unlikely since its dissociation is a strongly endothermic process. However, it cannot be considered as impossible because the dissociation of nitrogen may occur at lower energies under certain circumstances, e.g., in the vicinity of a metal (e.g., ruthenium, lithium, or iron) Upon further annealing at higher temperatures, the D peak decreases, and the 2D peak increases, revealing a complete transformation of the BFL to QFMLG on both sets of samples. The similarity of the transition on both experiments is fascinating and might indicate the decisive role of temperature than the intercalant. This seems reasonable since the intercalation is known to be obtainable through vast material choices. It is worth to be mentioned that, contrary to the above experiment on buffer layers, the intercalation of epitaxial monolayer for the fabrication of QFBLG in the 5N nitrogen ambient was not successful as in hydrogen/argon (5%, 95%) atmosphere. This gives additional evidence that the intercalant concentration is a crucial parameter and should be high enough for proceeding efficient intercalation. The intercalation can also be carried out on epitaxial monolayer graphene to convert it into two freestanding graphene layers on top of each other. This happens with the same mechanism as before through the separation of the BFL, and thereby a QFBLG is obtained. Here the QFBLG sample was fabricated via hydrogen intercalation of an optimized monolayer graphene sample (like G0, see The upper Raman spectrum in Figure After H-intercalation (lower spectrum in Figure Taking the process one step further, the growth of epitaxial bilayer graphene (epi-BLG) can be obtained through an extended annealing process. This is achieved by a similar epi-MLG growth process, but at higher temperatures and adequate growth time, i.e., 1800 °C to 1900 °C, for 5 to 60 min, respectively. Several groups have already reported bilayer graphene growth using different techniques. Following the high-quality epi-MLG and BFL growth using our PASG and the so far discussed optimization techniques, it is interesting to see this method to fabricate epi-BLG. The epi-BLG synthesis was carried out using multiple time and temperature windows, as briefly shown in Table In summary, this chapter presented AFM, STM, LEED, and Raman measurements, which indicate the strong influence of the argon mass flow-rate on the formation of the buffer layer and the graphene growth. For a given temperature and constant Ar pressure, the Ar mass flow rate controls the SiC decomposition rate, which can be qualitatively understood by thermal equilibrium considerations. This new finding has the potential to improve the graphene quality by avoiding accelerated step bunching at higher temperatures and graphene roughening for lower Ar pressures, respectively. By properly chosen growth parameters, it is possible to prevent structural defects (canyon defects and step defects) and obtain a continuous, large-area buffer layer without graphene inclusions as well as bilayer-free graphene monolayer. Optimization of epitaxial monolayer growth resulted in highly homogenous and sizeable layers without bilayer-inclusions. The further characterizations in the following chapters (i.e., 6, 7, and 8) will highlight the quality of such graphene samples. The QFMLG and QFBLG produced by hydrogen intercalation exhibit excellent homogeneity and very small resistance anisotropy over areas in the millimeter range. This indicates the presence of coherent quasi-freestanding graphene layers over large areas. Moreover, it was shown that surprisingly, the ultra-low concentration of oxygen impurities in 5N-nitrogen is sufficient to intercalate a buffer layer. This was shown in a framework of Raman spectroscopy comparative study of stepwise temperature-dependence intercalation of BFL samples in both hydrogen and 5N-nitrogen environments. The decisive role of intercalant purity was discussed, and it was shown that, e.g., the applied 5% H (95% Ar) gas is practically ineffective in intercalation. This study suggests that implementing pure hydrogen intercalation of, e.g., BFL sample can be obtained at lower temperature and shorter time, which reduce the possible processinduced defects. Also, a uniform synthesis of epitaxial bilayer graphene was presented. These results demonstrate a significant improvement in achieving sizeable epi-BLG. This study supports the promising application potential of epi-graphene on SiC for quantum Hall metrology applications and QFMLG and QFBLG for superior transistor performances and extends the capability of epi-MLG, BFL, or epi-BLG to be implemented as a platform for growing other 2D or sub-dimensional materials or metamaterials. Abstract his chapter aims to study a so-called extrinsic resistance anisotropy in the family of epitaxial graphene on SiC. It has been already known that monolayer epigraphene on SiC (0001) exhibits the chirality of an ideal graphene sheet. Being a sheet of carbon just a single atom thick makes graphene an excellent material with many novel physical properties such as its outstanding carrier mobility. However, it is challenging to save high mobility when the graphene is transferred or grown on a substrate. For example, at room temperature, a μ = 15k cm 2 /Vs was measured for exfoliated graphene on SiO2 substrate Graphene fabrication, through SiC sublimation growth, the so-called epitaxial growth on SiC substrates, has the potential to be used as a basis for future electronics applications. The impact of individual step edges of the substrate on the electrical resistance of the epitaxial graphene layer was investigated by various local scanning tunneling potentiometry (STP) studies, which revealed an additional stepinduced resistance contribution for charge carrier transport in monolayer graphene across the step edges. This study presents the successful realization of ultra-smooth monolayer graphene sheets on 4H-and 6H-SiC polytype substrates by the so-called polymer-assisted sublimation growth (PASG) technique and several optimizations. This study is conducted on several samples, including SiC/G, QFMLG, and QFBLG, each with distinctive features (e.g., morphological, electronic properties) to investigate the resistance anisotropy and its origins. The standard sample preparation (discussed in detail in Chapters 4 and 5) is briefly explained in the following. The growth of epitaxial graphene was performed on the Siterminated face of SiC substrates (5 × 10 mm 2 ) cut from semi-insulating 6H and 4H polytype wafers (nominally -0.06° towards[1100]), in the following referred to as sample S1 and S2, respectively. The epi-ready surface conditioning allows high-quality epitaxial growth without hydrogen pre-etching. For comparison, five other graphene samples, including three typical monolayer epitaxial graphene named (S3-S5) as well as one QFMLG and one QFBLG sample are used in this study, listed in Table The AFM topography images of the graphene monolayers grown on 6H-and 4H-SiC substrates, samples S1 and S2, are shown in Figure A closer inspection of the topography in Figure Interestingly, for the S1 with the sequential terrace-step pattern, the SEM imaging (Figure For the graphene on the 4H-SiC polytype, also very regular terraces and steps are observed, Figure Although the majority (50%) of steps are ~0.5 nm high as before, a smaller percentage (20%) of ~0.25 nm steps and a higher proportion (25%) of ~0.75 nm steps are measured. Here, a small portion (3%) of ~1 nm high steps is observed. Nevertheless, the high percentage (70%) of low steps with heights of ~0.25 and ~0.5 nm is remarkable and exceeds the results for conventional sublimation growth on 4H-SiC. The ultra-smooth graphene layers found on both SiC polytypes are a unique feature of the PASG technique. A second typical property of PASG graphene layers is the suppression of graphene bilayer formation, which can be regarded as a result of the very low SiC step heights ≤ ~0.75 nm in agreement with Raman mappings. For the S2, the surface arrangements are not developed like sequential terraces on S1, since the 4H-SiC unit cell has only two distinct terrace energies per unit cell. The electronic properties of the graphene samples were investigated by angledependent nano four-point probe (N4PP) measurements in an Omicron UHV nanoprobe system. The measured resistances Rθ for a given angle θ are adequately described by equation (3-9), which includes the σ∥ and σ⊥ denoting the conductivities measured parallel and perpendicular to the step direction, respectively, assuming an anisotropic 2D sheet with different conductivities in x-and ydirection. Since the current flow via the semi-insulating SiC substrate and the buffer-layer is negligible, the measured resistance is related to the 2D graphene sheet on top. For the applied rotational square method, it was shown that it is sensitive to both a possible intrinsic anisotropy of the graphene and additional superimposed effects (extrinsic anisotropy), e.g., step edges. Figure Hall measurements show that this is due to increased electron mobility, see refs. 6.5. Resistance anisotropy on nm-scales The assignment of the very small resistance anisotropies of the PASG samples S1 and S2 to step related effects is further investigated by scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and scanning tunneling potentiometry (STP) measurements at room temperature, which gives an insight into the local sheet resistance and the defect resistance induced by substrate steps. Using the macroscopic current density, an almost linear increase in resistances with step heights is found: ρ1 = 4 ± 2 Ωμm, ρ2 = 10 ± 2 Ωμm and ρ3 = 13 ± 2 Ωμm for monolayer graphene crossing a substrate step with heights of 0.25 nm, 0.5 nm or 0.75 nm, respectively, which is in good agreement with literature values. Two implications follow from the linear relation between the step height and the local defect resistance at the step. When using SiC substrates with the same miscut angle, a similar step related resistance anisotropy value is expected because step density and step height can commensurate with each other during the surface restructuring processes. A more significant anisotropy is expected for larger substrate miscut angles, which increase the number of steps, its height, or both. These conclusions are valid if only step related resistances in monolayer graphene are considered. Additional extrinsic effects can cause higher resistances and larger anisotropies. An important source for the resistance anisotropies of our samples S3-S5 is attributed to graphene bilayer domains. Local STP measurements have found that the electronic transition from monolayer to bilayer graphene results in an elevated resistance value, which approximately corresponds to that of monolayer graphene over a ~0.75 nm high SiC step. For the graphene sample S3, a larger anisotropy (AS3 = 1.17) was obtained compared to S1 and S2 (AS1, S2 ~1), although all were grown on low miscut substrates. As discussed above, this discrepancy is not clear if only step related contributions are considered. The additional resistance anisotropy is attributed to the scattered, micrometer-sized, asymmetric bilayer spots, which are located mainly at the terraces edges of the sample S3, see Figure The significantly increased resistance anisotropy of the samples S4 and S5 compared to S1, S2, and S3 is expected because of the 6-times larger SiC miscut angle. Under the assumption of a linear correlation between step-height and step resistance, according to the abovementioned STP anisotropy equation, one can estimate for pure monolayer graphene an anisotropy of ASTP ≈ 1.2. The measured anisotropy values of AS4 = 1.79 and AS5 = 1.66 are much higher and are attributed again to bilayer graphene on the terraces. Both samples show more significant bilayer coverages compared to S3, and by taking into account the much higher step concentration in S4 and the giant step edges in S5, respectively, this should drastically increase perp and the anisotropy. On the other hand, transport along the terraces can vary, e.g., caused by local planar ML-BL transitions. This is reflected by the higher par value of S5 compared to S4, which results in a smaller anisotropy value, AS5 < AS4, although perp of S5 shows the highest value of all samples. This is probably due to the very high terrace steps in S5, which cause extensive graphene bilayer stripes along the upper side of the step edges. The BSE contrast observed in the SEM images of S1 and S2 samples in Figure ). It is worthwhile to mention that from the STP sheet resistance output The microscopic anisotropy test is further investigated using macroscopic VdP measurements in a helium flow cryostat in a magnetic field up to 250 mT. For the measurement, the samples were first to cut into square-shape of 5 mm × 5 mm, and the graphene on top of the sample was isolated from the graphene on the side and the back of the substrate by scribing cut-grooves on each side close to the edge of the sample (~0.1 mm from the edge), as shown in the schematic of the VdP configuration in Figure As expected, both QFMLG and QFBLG samples show the typical high p-type carrier density of about 6.7 × 10 12 and 6.3 × 10 12 cm -2 , respectively. The homogeneity of the samples can also be derived from the VdP sheet resistances Rpar and Rperp measured in two orthogonal directions, parallel and perpendicular to the step edges. As before, higher resistance values were obtained for perpendicular transport. The QFMLG and QFBLG samples show anisotropy values (Rperp / Rpar) values of 1.18 and 1.37 (at room temperature), which are in excellent agreement with the microscopic four-point probe measurements. This result indicates the very good electronic homogeneity over mm scales of our QFMLG and QFBLG samples in excellent agreement with the AFM and Raman data. For QFBLG, a comparable VdP study In summary, a comprehensive resistance anisotropy study in multiscale nm, μm, and mm geometries were performed. Various samples, including epitaxial graphene grown by different sample preparation and growth methods on 4Hand 6H-SiC(0001) substrates with small and large miscut angles as well as QFMLG/QFBLG samples by H-intercalation were grown and investigated. In agreement with STP measurements, the rotational square probe measurements reveal very small resistance anisotropies of ~3% for graphene layers grown by PASG on SiC substrates with a small miscut angle. This anisotropy value is traced back to the step resistances of the monolayer graphene across the SiC steps measured by STP on the nano-scale. The main reason for the vanishing small resistance anisotropy was identified to be the absence of bilayer domains, while the specific step resistances are similar to other graphene. The PASG and fine growth optimization methods allow the uniform fabrication of ultra-smooth graphene with most of the terrace step edges being ~0.5 nm or lower, which prevents the formation of graphene bilayer domains. In particular, on the 6H-SiC substrate, a very high percentage of 90% is achieved with a typical pattern of alternating steps of ~0.25 nm and ~0.5 nm in height, which is related to the SiC layer sequence in this polytype. This study shows that graphene growth using the PASG method and fine-tuning of the growth parameters bears the potential to reduce the terrace step heights down to an ultimate level of a single Si-C bilayer. Since SiC substrate steps cannot be entirely avoided, it is impossible to achieve perfect resistance isotropy for epitaxial graphene. However, for the produced bilayer-free graphene on ultra-low terraces negligible small deviations from isotropy can be obtained. The QFMLG and QFBLG produced by hydrogen intercalation exhibit excellent homogeneity and very small resistance anisotropy over areas in the millimeter range. This indicates the presence of coherent quasi-free-standing graphene layers over large areas and remarks on the significance of the optimizations discussed in Chapter 5. Surprisingly, the SEM inspections showed a BSE contrast in pure monolayer graphene on SiC (non-identical) terraces, which give rise to a plausible electronic property difference on these terraces. This was verified by the STP measurements revealing a resistance variation of graphene on the substrate terraces. The investigation of this effect and possible explanations will be discussed in further detail in Chapter 7. This study supports the promising application potential of epigraphene on SiC for quantum Hall metrology applications as well as QFMLG and QFBLG for superior transistor performances and extends the capability of epigraphene or the buffer layer to be implemented as a platform for growing other 2D materials or metamaterials. This study also highlights the importance of bilayer-free graphene growth for all kinds of epitaxial growth techniques whenever isotropic properties are demanded for perfect device performance. It makes the device orientation independent of step direction and improves the freedom to design device layouts, thereby promoting the potential for future device applications of epitaxial graphene. Finally, the applied optimization enabled us to synthesize graphene on non-identical SiC terraces. Thanks to this, the mesoscopic interaction of bottom SiC terminations and top carbon layers could systematically be investigated. Abstract he excellent quality of the fabricated graphene samples enables us to study at sub-nanometric scales the interaction between substrate and atop carbon layers. Thanks to the advanced growth control, the graphene can be fabricated on non-identical SiC terminations, whereon the "proximity effect" significantly changes, in contrast to general assumptions. Accordingly, the graphene's work function depends on its exact position on the underlying SiC termination. This is attributed to the spontaneous polarization doping of the hexagonal SiC substrate. The effect is elaborated using several characterization analyses. It is experimentally shown for the first time that the hexagonal SiC polarization doping (usually known as a bulk concomitant) is also surface dependent. This agrees with theoretical predictions. Thereby, a sequential doping variation is observed in top C-layers on the pairwise terraces-steps of 6H-SiC. This finding opens a new approach of nano-scale doping-engineering based upon the substrate properties, not merely in hexagonal SiC but also in other dielectric polar crystals. The main results are also published in ref. Epitaxial graphene growth provides wafer-scale graphene fabrication for electronic devices for a wide range of potential applications. The epitaxial buffer and graphene layers in this work were grown on semiinsulating 6H-SiC samples with a nominal miscut of about -0.06° toward [1100] (from II-VI Inc.). Epitaxial growth was carried out in a horizontal inductively heated furnace. A very similar result is deduced from the AFM investigation of the buffer layer samples (Figure The cross-sections in the inset of (a, b, g, h) are taken along the blue line. (c, i) The phase images of the homogeneously stepped (~0.75 nm) samples show no phase contrast except for an increased phase at the step edges. (d, j) Only the phase images of the samples with step pairs (~0.25/~0.5 nm) show a sequential contrast on the terraces. (e, f, k, i) Raman spectrum of each sample. The displayed spectra were integrated over 14000 single spectra from an area of 20 × 20 μm 2 . (e, f) The narrow 2D line widths of around 30 cm -1 indicate that the graphene sample is thoroughly covered with monolayer graphene. (k, l) The broad vibrational DOS distribution indicates the existence of buffer layer graphene. To further study the interaction of individual SiC surfaces and the graphene layers, as it was initially inferred from the AFM investigations, it is required to identify and map the substrate terminations. The creation of the SiC terraces during graphene can be understood in the framework of the SiC step retraction model applied to the 6H-SiC(0001) substrate. Figure As discussed in section 2.4.2, the step-bunching mechanism, e.g., during graphitization or hydrogen etching of the SiC surfaces, has been interpreted in two main step-flow models Before the growth, the terrace structures have single Si-C steps (1L) of ~0.25 nm high and can be regarded as the initial surface of the used low-miscut angle substrates, as sketched in Figure The high retraction velocity of the S1 surface can be attributed to the strongest hexagonality (hh on-bond) of this layer in agreement with refs. terraces before the final state with S2 surfaces only is reached, leading to highly isotropic graphene transport properties as discussed in Chapter 6. (c) Basic terrace step patterns of the 6H-SiC surface developing in the step retraction model. In the initial state, the individual S1, S2, and S3 terraces are separated by single SiC monolayer steps (1L) of ~0.25 nm in height. In the intermediate state, the S1 surface with the fastest retraction velocity has disappeared, and an alternating sequence of S2 and S3 surfaces remain with steps of ~0.25 nm (1L) above S2 and ~0.5 nm (2L) above S3. After advanced step retraction S2 becomes wider than the S3 terrace since the step velocity of S3 is faster than S2, which is depicted here. In the final state, the most stable S2 terraces remain with ~0.75 nm (3ML) in height. In addition to the AFM phase images on the buffer and graphene layers (in Figure In the upper part of this image, a regular contrast pattern of alternating narrower brighter and wider darker stripes is observed. From the similarity to the AFM pattern Figure It is worthwhile to mention that the SiC step edges can be discerned in the LEEM images (See Figure To test the surface structure model, also the dark field (DF) LEEM image was recorded using the moiré diffraction spot marked in Figure Using this interpretation also the irregular regions of the LEEM image can be explained, which is sketched in Figure So far, the step-flow model and LEEM inspections revealed that the graphene lies on SiC domains, which are rotated by 60° crystal rotation. This finding, however, raises a question about the crystal structure of the buffer layer, which is partially bonded to these SiC surfaces. A confirmation of the presented surface terrace model and a visualization of the SiC surface crystal of the graphene sample orientation is provided by an STM investigation performed at 77 K with a tungsten tip STM (For details about the STM measurement, see Chapter 3). Figure So far, AFM phase images reveal that the surface properties of graphene monolayers are different depending on the stacking termination of the underlying SiC terrace, which is in good agreement with the observed reflectivity contrast in the BF-LEEM images. In this section, additional methods are used to quantify the energy difference between the terraces, and the possible origins are discussed. First, ambient KPFM-AM is used to measure the surface potential (∆V) and the work function φ of the graphene layer. As a second method, low-energy electron reflectivity (LEEM-IV) measurements are used to deduce the graphene specific energy from the energy dispersion of the reflected electron beam in BF μ-LEED geometry. For the neighboring terraces S2 and S3, an energy difference of (ES3 -ES2) equals to (60 ±10) meV is estimated from the minimum energy histogram in the inset of Figure The KPFM and XPEEM reveal in good agreement a lower work function for monolayer graphene on S2 compared to S3 terraces, and also, the LEEM-IV result support it. A reliable value for energy difference of ~10 meV was measured by KPFM, knowing that this value might depend on the environmental conditions. Thus far, other experimental results are lacking. The local measurements of the sheet resistivity by high-resolution scanning-tunneling potentiometry (STP) on similar 1L/2L stepped samples (thermally cleaned) have indicated a difference of the average graphene sheet resistance by ~14% at room temperature and ~270% at low temperature (8 K) on both terraces S2 and S3. For terraces connected by a 3L step, a smaller variation of < 3% is measured. The presented measurements convincingly show a correlation of the SiC substrate termination with the electronic properties and the work function of epitaxial monolayer graphene. The graphene's n-type doping level is mainly determined by two effects, namely, an overcompensation of the SiC bulk polarization doping by donor-like buffer layer and interface states. This discussion shows that the assumption of a SiC stacking termination dependent polarization doping can explain the presented experimental results. Other effects, e.g., an influence of terrace dependent stress is less probable by the observation of strong contrast patterns also in more relaxed free-standing mono and bilayer graphene. In conclusion, by using various measurement techniques (AFM, STM, μ-LEED, LEEM, LEEM-IV, KPFM, XPEEM), it is for the first time evidenced a direct dependence of electronic properties of epitaxial graphene on the underlying SiC stacking termination. This was realized by employing advanced epitaxial growth techniques, including the PASG method. A periodic sequence of two different SiC terraces with the distinction in cubic and hexagonal nature of the surfaces were prepared, which develop during the high-temperature graphene synthesis. The terraces in the stacking orders are unambiguously identified as S2 and S3, as scrutinized in AFM and BF-LEEM and supported by additional DF-LEEM and STM measurements. The formation of the observed terraces is successfully interpreted in a so-called JCH step-retraction model in which the step retraction velocity increases with the hexagonality of the SiC surface layer. The KPFM and XPEEM result explicitly indicate an alternating work function of the graphene on periodic SiC surface terraces, which confirms for the first time a theoretical prediction in which the graphene doping depends not only on the bulk polarization but also on a SiC termination dependent polarization doping effect. A value of about 10 meV was estimated for the work function difference of monolayer graphene on S2 and S3 terraces from KPFM measurements. The periodically modulated graphene energies self-ordered by the underlying SiC terraces could act as a template for further graphene functionalization schemes on sub-micron scale structures. Moreover, these findings are applicable to other polar dielectric substrates and other sub-dimensional systems. Note that for graphene on 4H-SiC(0001) substrates with only two different starting surfaces, we found no periodical variation of the surface work function (see Appendix A6), since step retraction results in the formation of equivalent S2 and S2* terrace terminations, confirming the above interpretation. Abstract his chapter is devoted to experimental results of quantum Hall effect measurements in epitaxial graphene to test the quality of the samples. Two techniques, namely electrostatic-gating and chemical-gating, are used to adjust the charge carrier density in the graphene sample close to the charge neutrality point. The stability and efficiency of the employed methods are analyzed, considering their suitability for the metrological applications. Furthermore, the challenges and considerations for device microfabrication, in particular concerning quasi-freestanding layers, are discussed. T Quantum resistance metrology based only upon the fundamental constants, the electron's charge and Planck's constant, utilizes a precise redefinition of the ohm unit in two-dimensional electron systems through the von Klitzing's constant Rk = h/e 2 = 25812.807557 (18) Ω, the resistance quantum. Aqua regia (HNO3 : HCl : H2O) is a material example of this approach, but the toxicity, as well as fine-control tuning, are the main problems. The epitaxial graphene layers were grown on semi-insulating 6H-SiC and 4H-SiC samples with a nominal miscut of about -0.06° toward In the following, the quality of the samples and the restrains in the resistance quantization following two charge-tuning methods are investigated by lowtemperature magneto-transport measurements on the lithographically patterned graphene Hall bars. Figure Moreover, there are two other crucial concerns: (i) the electrostatic sparks during tuning and (ii) the homogeneity of the doping. The case (i) is observed during the tuning in which corona charges leading to discharges at areas like metal bonds and contact pads, which can cause damages to the device. This effect was more harmful when in the circuit configuration for corona tuning, a constant current was fed to the system instead of constant voltage. Even taking into account the considerations mentioned in (i), the case (ii) makes the electrostaticgating by corona-discharge inappropriate for a robust QHR. This is because the doping adjustment is not uniform throughout the sample, inherited from the technique itself. Perhaps when the sample size is small, it would be more efficient, nevertheless for the sample size in this study, inhomogeneous doping is inferred. Such nonuniformities were stronger when the samples were tuned very close to the Dirac point compared to higher doping levels. Therefore, this technique is deemed improper for a reliable QHR metrology. (c) QHE measurement on the same sample shows a successful carrier density reduction down to 2.5 × 10 10 cm -2 with substantially high mobility of μ = ~19k cm 2 V -1 s -1 . This underlines the high quality of the graphene sample, and also the significance of charge carrier density adjustment. In the inset of each QHE measurement, the measured contact pairs are sketched (red for ρXX and blue for ρXY contact). The carrier density n and mobility μ are determined from Hall measurements as n = 1/eA and μ = A/ρ XX , with e the elementary charge, the Hall coefficient A = dR XX /dB. The longitudinal sheet resistance ρ XX = R XX W/L, and R XY the transversal resistance. Next, the doping results from the chemical-gating using ZEP520 polymer are discussed in comparison with the previous electrostatic-gating method. Figure By chemical-gating using ZEP520, the electron density in the graphene can be reduced by UV-illumination and also restored to its original value by subsequent heating of the device above the polymer glass transition temperature of Tg ≈ 170 °C. So far, from this comparative study, the high quality of produced graphene samples is verified. On the other hand, it is concluded that the corona-discharge and electrostatic-gating by ZEP520 both are not suitable for a reliable and robust QHR meteorology. An alternative to this problem was suggested by a recent study using F4TCNQ incorporated in PMMA, resulting in an air-stable, tunable, and reliable doping of SiC/G. However, there are some pieces of evidence that an interaction between the layers may induce such a strong strain-like effect. In summary, magneto-transport in epitaxial graphene layers was conducted using electrostatic-gating by corona-discharge and photochemical-gating by ZEP-520 for charge tuning. The QHE measurements demonstrated high-quality sample types demonstrating high mobility values up to 19000 cm 2 /Vs. Although the employed methods led to successful charge carrier reduction in the graphene samples, both suffered either from air-instability or weak controllability. It was observed that performing the corona-discharge doping method in nitrogen ambient instead of the air atmosphere results in further stability of surface ions by reduction of water and oxygen concentration. In general, monitoring the studies on the functionalization of graphene, it is seen that so far, several approaches have been reported, each with benefits and drawbacks. This indicates that there is still much room for technological improvements. Future works need to be concentrating on further effective techniques to acquire robust and stable charge carrier tuning in SiC/G. Moreover, the lithography process needs to be compatible with the specific graphene type, as was exemplary shown for the QFBLG sample. This suggests that the graphene samples must be first covered, preferably after the fabrication to be protected from the environmental influences as well as lithography processes. This thesis explored the synthesis of epitaxial graphene on silicon carbide for the fabrication of high-quality samples required, particularly in metrological applications. To meet this aim, several optimizations were imposed to gain reproducible and robust processes. Various characterization techniques were employed to scrutinize the structural and electronic properties of the samples. These have led to a better understanding of the complex fabrication processes, influence of multiple contributing parameters, considerations in device fabrications, as well as substrate and graphene layers interplay. The experimental results of this thesis can be categorized into four detailed studies that the highlights are briefly summarized in the following. • The first experimental section included a detailed study on the synthesis of five different sample types, i.e., epitaxial buffer layer, epitaxial monolayer graphene, epitaxial bilayer graphene, and two others known as quasifreestanding monolayer and bilayer (QFMLG/QFBLG), each with certain characteristics features. Accordingly, high-quality ultra-smooth bilayer-free monolayer graphene with unprecedented reproducibility was successfully grown. Moreover, such a homogenous buffer layer helped better understand the complex growth, including surface restructuring and recrystallization mechanisms. It was shown that by properly choosing a set of growth parameters, it is possible to prevent structural defects (canyon defects and step defects) and obtain a continuous, large-area buffer layer without graphene inclusions and a bilayer-free graphene monolayer. To this end, it is important to notice the decisive but less-regarded influence of the argon flow rate in the growth process. It was found that for a given temperature and constant Ar pressure, the Ar mass flow-rate strongly influences the SiC decomposition rate, which can qualitatively be understood by thermal equilibrium considerations. This new finding has the potential to improve the graphene quality by avoiding accelerated step bunching at higher temperatures and graphene roughening for lower Ar pressures, respectively. Furthermore, the optimization to obtain uniform epitaxial bilayer graphene was presented. It is technically challenging to fabricate epitaxial bilayer graphene on SiC (0001) due to a self-limiting effect on the surface. However, by a proper treatment and growth recipe, homogenous epitaxial bilayer graphene was successfully grown. In addition, the QFMLG and QFBLG produced by hydrogen intercalation exhibit excellent homogeneity over areas in the millimeter range. Herein, in addition to the major intercalation parameters (pressure, temperature, time), also the intercalant purity is vital in the efficiency of the intercalation process, as was evidenced by two detailed investigations: using (i) 5% Hydrogen (95% Ar) and (ii) low-concentration oxygen impurities in nitrogen 5N (99.999%). From these, two consistent implications were deduced. Firstly, the intercalation occurred consistently in both cases, and secondly, the process is not as efficient as when pure intercalant agents are applied. This low concentration can be somewhat compensated by prolonging the process; however, it cannot be overextended as otherwise induces other defects due to etching effects that occur in graphene layers. • In the second experimental part, the quality of produced types was analyzed, conducting electronic transport measurements from nanometer to millimeter scale. An important challenge confronting the electronic applications of epitaxial graphene is related to its extrinsic resistance anisotropy. Using an angledependent nano four-point probe (N4PP), it was demonstrated that monolayer epigraphene can be produced on both 4H-and 6H-SiC(0001) polytypes with a resistance anisotropy as low as only 2%. This study systematically compared various samples with different quality (e.g., step height, thickness variation, miscut angle) concluded that the anisotropy value is traced back to the step resistances of the monolayer graphene across the SiC steps as also verified by scanning tunneling potentiometry (STP) transport on the nanoscale. The main reason for the vanishing small resistance anisotropy was identified to be the absence of bilayer domains. Eventually, the small remaining resistance anisotropy was entirely attributed to the resistance and the number of substrate steps that induce local scattering. Thereby, the data represented the ultimate limit for resistance isotropy of epitaxial graphene on SiC for the given miscut of the substrate. Similar results were deduced from the mm-scale Van der Pauw measurements underlining the excellent uniformity of the samples. Also, the QFMLG and QFBLG produced by hydrogen intercalation exhibit excellent homogeneity and very small resistance anisotropy over areas in the millimeter range. This also indicates the presence of coherent quasi-free-standing graphene layers over large areas. Because SiC substrate steps cannot be entirely avoided, it is impossible to achieve perfect resistance isotropy for epitaxial graphene. However, for the produced bilayer-free graphene on ultralow terraces, negligible small deviations from isotropy can be obtained. This shows significant progress in the fabrication of uniform epitaxial graphene layers. In general, this study highlights the importance of bilayer-free graphene growth for all kinds of epitaxial growth techniques whenever isotropic properties are demanded for optimum device performance. It makes the device orientation independent of step direction and improves the freedom for designing device layouts, thereby promoting the potential for future device applications of epitaxial graphene. • Based on the third experimental results, it was shown that the presented advanced growth yields a precise graphene thickness control. Thereby graphene can be fabricated on either identical or non-identical hexagonal SiC terrace terminations. This provides an excellent platform for studying the mesoscopic interaction between the individual SiC terminations and the top carbon layers. Accordingly, a tight correlation between the termination of the SiC stacking and the graphene properties was observed in various characterization techniques. This correlation was attributed to a proximity effect of the SiC terminationdependent polarization doping on the overlying graphene layer. Therefore, it was concluded that the stacking termination of the SiC terraces types in association with their cubic and hexagonality nature has a biasing effect on the surface potential and the doping level of the overlying epitaxial monolayer graphene. The unambiguous identification and assignment of the SiC terraces were described within the framework of an extended SiC step retraction model. • Finally, the fourth experimental study devoted to magneto-transport in the produced graphene types. Two techniques, namely electrostatic-gating and chemical-gating, were employed to tune the graphene samples close to Dirac points to reach the quantization (ν = 2) at reasonably low magnetic fields (< 5T). This goal was accomplished through these techniques; however, each method has certain drawbacks that make them not entirely suitable for a reliable, robust, and durable system as is demanded in quantum resistance metrology. Therefore, other alternatives should be sought. The measurements, however, underline the excellent quality of the samples. To protect the graphene layers from the possible defects during lithography processes and/or other environmental influences, it was suggested to initially encapsulate them with a depositing layer, e.g., Al2O3 by atomic layer deposition as shown in Appendix A7. In short, the presented PASG and fine growth optimization methods bear the potential to reduce the terrace step heights down to an ultimate level of a single Si-C bilayer. For the produced bilayer-free graphene on ultralow terraces, negligible small deviations from the resistance isotropy can be obtained. This study supports the promising application potential of epigraphene on SiC for quantum Hall metrology applications as well as QFMLG and QFBLG for superior transistor performances and extends the capability of epigraphene or the buffer layer to be implemented as a platform for growing other 2D materials or metamaterials. From the growth optimization, it was concluded that an early-growth-stage suppression of step-bunching is the key component to improve the quality of epitaxial graphene. From the initial results, it seems yet that the step-bunching may ultimately be frozen. This meets the objective of optimized epitaxial graphene fabrication and motivates further investigations. Moreover, the quality of epitaxial bilayer graphene synthesis can be even further optimized and improved to gain higher thickness control to yield pure bilayer graphene. Different defects originating from the SiC substrate or growth bear interesting properties. For instance, it was shown that triangular-shaped structures could form on the SiC surface during graphenization, in which even under special conditions can thoroughly be densely-grown beside each other (see Appendix A4). Although the buffer layer's (6√3 × 6√3)R30° structure was already revealed back in 1975 Moreover, by the presented advanced growth, the graphene was formed on nonidentical SiC terminations. On such periodic surface configurations, the top graphene layers exhibit an alternating doping variation in association with the underlying SiC surfaces. The effect is attributed to the polarization effect originating from the pyroelectric nature of hexagonal SiC. This finding opens a new approach for a nano-scale doping-engineering on dielectric polar substrates without the use of impurity dopants. This is expected to be a general effect obtainable in other polar dielectric materials like GaN. Additionally, such alternating terrace types in the hexagonal SiC have possible nonequal basal vacancy/divacancy defect states, which can occur in a quasi-cubic or quasihexagonal position. Among the three main challenges facing in epigraphene-based electronics, i.e., the size restraints, reproducible thickness control, and "as-grown" intense carrier concentration, only the latter is the biggest remaining hurdle which requires appropriate alternatives. When considering the epigraphene-based quantum resistance metrology, a fine-tuning of charge carrier density with longterm stability (ideally constant) with proper graphene-isolation from the environmental influences is essential. These requirements have not yet been fully accomplished by the existing methods and demand proper approaches. Aside from that, based on a theoretical investigation of the magneto-transport in stepped graphene, a new kind of Aharonov-Bohm interferometers is expected. Epitaxial graphene is also a versatile platform for the fabrication of other subdimensional materials. It was shown that the intrinsic SiC micropipes and additional holes induced by the growth process (see Appendix A7 and A10) as "mediation sites" can utilize gallium intercalation. This leads to the fabrication of graphene-metallene heterostacks of Van der Waals combined 2D-layers of bilayer graphene (BLG) and gallium stacking layers on SiC substrate (SiC/Ga/BLG). Initial results obtained from VdP setup and the Hall effect measurements on large-scale samples show robust macroscopic superconductivity at T < 4 K. The features observed in the VdP measurement, however, cannot be explained entirely and needs future works. The results, however, are in good agreement with the recent work published in ref. Finally, it seems that large-area fabrication of 2D/sub-dimensional materials systems is generally still in their infancy. There exist a limited number of manufacturers, and the main clients are still research labs. Industrialization and commercialization of these materials probably will need at least a decade from now. As seen from such a perspective, this would be a "golden period" for startup companies, which can effectively boost the advancement of technologies in 2D materials synthesis and technologies for being adapted in the conventional semiconductor industry as the next-generation alternatives. about 1 hour, which is significantly timesaving compared to a conventional lithography process. Here, the pen-patterning concept was performed manually using a Staedtler Lumocolor pen. It can be much improved, for example, by implementing available drawing robots in the market to obtain sharp edges for the patterns. Moreover, employing this technique, the graphene could be easily locally etched or intercalated. The demonstrated process is an initial prototype that has the potential for improvements and applications. The pen-patterning procedure for the fabrication of graphene Van der Pauw structures has four successive steps. (i) The pattern is sketched on the sample and the contact areas where the graphene is left without ink-covered are etched away using oxygen/argon RIE plasma. (ii) The pattern is then simply washed away by acetone and isopropanol. The optical microscope image demonstrates successful etching. (iii) A new pattern is drawn for the metallization. Narrow graphene lines (depicted with green color) are not covered with ink to provide graphene/gold contacting overlaps. Metallization is performed by 20nm Ti and 50 nm Au deposition. (iv) A fast lift-off process can be easily done by acetone/isopropanol cleaning in the ultrasonic bath. The optical microscope image demonstrates the graphene and contact regions after the cleaning. The patterning was carried out manually, therefore the edge areas are not sharp. However, it can be substantially improved using available drawing machines in the market. A charge carrier drift may occur in unprotected bare epigraphene since the graphene is sensitive to its environment, e.g., the water and oxygen existed in air through surface physisorption alter the doping towards hole-doping. It is observed that the increase of the Ar flow leads to the formation of triangularlike structures. This can be seen in Figure The step flow model for 6H-SiC/G was described in Chapter 7 is shown here in more detail. Figure Considering the stacking order-induced doping variation that was found for 6H-SiC/G, it is interesting to study this effect in the 4H polytype too. As illustrated in The mapping of terraces fits captivatingly with the expectations considered and discussed above, and it shows that the phase contrasts are is only observed on dissimilar terraces terminations. Accordingly, the darker and brighter AFM phase contrasts belong to S1/S1* and S2/S2*, respectively. It is worthwhile to mention that this phenomenon is not an accident but observed and examined on many samples, therefore it can be considered as a general fact, as it was already cleared for the 6H-SiC/G. Also, the LEEM investigations on a 4H-SiC/G sample are in agreement with the step-flow model and AFM studies. The LEEM-BF in Figure This section is devoted to an observation regarding graphene deformation under different conditions. This deformation appears as cracks and protrusion areas, as well as dot-like defects on the graphene samples. In the following, this observation by various characterization techniques is demonstrated. Figure A10. A VdP study on a large-area BLG/Ga/SiC superconducting heterostack Epitaxial graphene growth on silicon carbide (SiC/G) is an excellent method for obtaining sizeable graphene layers, a versatile platform for the fabrication of other sub-dimensional materials too. Accordingly, we fabricated a graphene-metallene 2D heterostacks of Van der Waals combined 2D-layers of bilayer graphene (BLG) and gallium stacking layers on SiC substrate (SiC/Ga/BLG). Considering the characteristic feature of the mixed-phase, it is important to take into account the main three components involved in the transverse Hall voltage: (i) geometrical misalignment of the contacts (ii) Hall voltage component, and (iii) contribution from the guided motion of vortex and antivortex. The VdP method facilitates measuring the carrier density and mobility as a function of temperature in the sample. Not meeting gallenene, two other systems in the family of epitaxial graphene were investigated: one epitaxial SiC/G, which after applying H-intercalation, turned to QFBLG. Figure From the slopes in Figure The aim and main growth parameters of each experiment are briefly described. For detailed information, see text and refs. 1). Figure 1) using the STP measurement are concisely discussed. 3.10 for more detail.