Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT) scanners based on photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) are still largely employed in the clinical environment. A standard camera for full-body SPECT employs ∼ 50-100 PMTs of 4-8 cm diameter and is shielded by a thick layer of lead, becoming a heavy and bulky system that can weight a few hundred kilograms. The volume, weight and cost of a camera can be significantly reduced if the PMTs are replaced by silicon photomultipliers (SiPMs). The main obstacle to use SiPMs in full-body SPECT is the limited size of their sensitive area. A few thousand channels would be needed to fill a camera if using the largest commercially-available SiPMs of 6×6 mm 2 . As a solution, we propose to use Large-Area SiPM Pixels (LASiPs), built by summing individual currents of several SiPMs into a single output. We developed a LASiP prototype that has a sensitive area 8 times larger than a 6×6 mm 2 SiPM. We built a proof-of-concept micro-camera consisting of a 40×40×8 mm 3 NaI(Tl) crystal coupled to 4 LASiPs. We evaluated its performance in a central region of 15 × 15 mm 2 , where we were able to reconstruct images of a 99m Tc capillary with an intrinsic spatial resolution of ∼ 2 mm and an energy resolution of ∼ 11.6% at 140 keV. We used these measurements to validate Geant4 simulations of the system. This can be extended to simulate a larger camera with more and larger pixels, which could be used to optimize the implementation of LASiPs in large SPECT cameras. We provide some guidelines towards this implementation. Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) is a nuclear imaging technique that has been used in clinical environments since at least forty years. It provides high efficiency in diagnosing several diseases, like Alzheimer's Most common clinical SPECT scanners are constituted by one or more gamma camera heads Standard clinical full-body SPECT systems exhibit an energy resolution of ∼ 10% at 140 keV and an intrinsic spatial resolution better than 5 mm 1 . The intrinsic spatial resolution is a property of the scintillation detector (scintillating crystal and photodetectors), that combined with the collimator resolution gives the extrinsic (total) spatial resolution of the system Recently, SPECT scanners based on cadmium-zinc-telluride (CZT) technology have been introduced. With respect to traditional systems, they are characterized by a substantial improvement in both energy and (intrinsic) spatial resolution, while being lighter and more compact. The main limitation for a wider use of this technology in full-body SPECT is the camera price, which increases significantly with size A cost-effective approach to build lighter and more compact gamma cameras would be to replace the PMTs by silicon photomultipliers (SiPMs). Replacing PMTs by SiPMs would be beneficial for several reasons. They provide higher photodetection efficiency (PDE), do not require high-voltage operation and their cost is trending down. Moreover, SiPMs are not sensitive to magnetic fields, which is particularly interesting for combining SPECT and Magnetic Resonance Imaging Probably the main obstacle for using SiPMs in full-body SPECT cameras is their limited pixel size: SiPMs are rarely commercially available in sizes larger than 6 × 6 mm 2 . A few thousand channels would be needed to fill a 50 × 40 cm 2 camera using SiPMs, dramatically increasing the cost and complexity of the system. This is one of the reasons why up to now almost all research in SiPMs for SPECT has been limited to small cameras One way of building large SiPM pixels is summing the analog currents of several SiPMs into a single output. SiPM signals are filtered and summed using custom-designed adder circuits based, for instance, on operational or common-base transistor amplifiers. This way the pixel size can be increased by a factor equal to the number of SiPMs that are being summed, while keeping the capacitance at a reasonable level. In this solution, which has been successfully applied in Very High Energy (VHE) astrophysics For the proof of concept we developed a LASiP prototype in which 8 SiPMs of ∼ 6 × 6 mm The SCT matrices were originally produced to equip the Schwarzschild-Couder medium-size Telescope proposed for the Cherenkov Telescope Array These SiPMs provide a peak PDE of ∼ 60 % at ∼ 350 nm and a dark count rate (DCR) of ∼ 0.13 MHz/mm 2 at 20 • C when operated at ∼ 33 V The eMUSIC MiniBoard (bought from SCIENTIFICA, S.L.U • An output with the sum of up to 8 SiPMs. • Enabling/disabling channels. The output signal of each individual SiPM can be accessed during calibration by disabling the remaining seven. • Applying individual offset values to the bias voltage of each SiPM (useful to equalize the gain). • Configure a filter with pole-zero cancellation to shape the pulse. A scheme of the electronic readout of a LASiP prototype can be found in Figure Using the SCT matrix and the eMUSIC MiniBoard was useful for the proof-of-concept and especially efficient in terms of time and cost. However, this constrained the size and geometry of the pixel we could build. We decided to adopt the geometry shown in Figure To test the feasibility of using LASiPs in SPECT we built a micro-camera consisting of a NaI(Tl) scintillation crystal coupled to an array of four LASiPs. This was the minimum number of LASiPs with which we could achieve our aims: (i) evaluate the energy resolution when charge is shared between pixels and compare it with that of standard SPECT scanners, (ii) prove that we can reconstruct simple images with a reasonable spatial resolution and (iii) have a system that we could use to validate MC simulations that let us study with further detail the impact of LASiPs in the performance of a gamma camera. We considered that these three goals were milestones that should be achieved before even considering to build a large SPECT camera based on LASiPs (which would be significantly more complex and expensive since it would involve much more channels). In this sense, the micro-camera was envisioned as a test bench for evaluating the developed LASiPs: we did not aim to perform a full characterization of its performance, especially in view of its limited number of channels. An overview of the micro-camera and the setup employed is shown in Figure The electronic readout of the micro-camera consists of 4 SCT matrices, 4 eMUSIC MiniBoards (one of each per LASiP) and an interface board (see Figure A NaI(Tl) crystal of 40 × 40 × 8 mm 3 bought from OST Photonics Holder and collimator could be mounted in a positioning platform, specifically designed to allow movements of the camera in the detector plane with sub-millimeter precision. A CAEN DT5720 digitizer was used for the acquisition (250 MS/s). Individual discriminator thresholds were set to each channel, optimized to minimize the triggering by dark count events. For each event, a 2 μs waveform was acquired on each channel. The charge was integrated offline in a 600 ns window. The width and position of the integration window were both optimized aiming to maximize energy resolution. The longer the integration window, the larger the number of collected photons, but also the number of integrated dark counts. The optimal integration time depends on the SiPM bias voltage, since it affects both PDE and DCR. The Pole-Zero shaper may also have an impact the optimal integration time, although we did not study in detail such eventual dependence. The total charge Q collected in an event is defined as the sum of the charges collected by each LASiP. With all the values of Q obtained during a measurement we built a histogram where we could identify the photopeak corresponding to the energy of the gamma rays emitted by the radioactive source employed. Only events with an energy within ±15% of the photopeak position were used for the image reconstruction (see section 2.5). The method used to reconstruct the position of an event begins with a simple centroid method. Spatial linearity and uniformity corrections are later applied to produce the final image 2.5.1. Raw images reconstructed through the centroid method. In the centroid method, the coordinates (x c , y c ) of an event are reconstructed as where q i is the charge measured by the i-th pixel that has its center in (x i , y i ). This method, although fast and simple, has several limitations. Events cannot be reconstructed outside the region delimited by the (x i , y i ) of the four pixels. This is true even in the ideal case in which the crystal surfaces are perfectly polished and all scintillation photons are carrying information of their initial direction. In a more realistic scenario, events contain also a diffuse component. For instance, due to diffuse reflections in the crystal walls, as in our case. As a result, with the centroid method events are reconstructed within an area that is much smaller than the one delimited by the center of the four pixels. To recover spatial linearity we followed a similar method to what was described in We built a grid of measurements in which the relative position between source and detector was known. For each measurement we mapped the mean position reconstructed with the centroid method (x rec c , y rec c ) to ). This map can be interpolated so that each event reconstructed with the centroid method can be corrected to recover spatial linearity. A uniformity correction map was generated by taking a long-exposure flood-field irradiation: a 99m Tc source was placed far (more than 50 cm away) from the micro-camera. The image was reconstructed with the centroid method and corrected by spatial linearity. The inverse of this image was the uniformity correction map, which was applied to every reconstructed image. One of the main limitations to increase the number of SiPMs that are summed to build a pixel is the degradation of the single-phe resolution. The noise of all the SiPMs that build a LASiP are summed, which degrades the timing performance and single-phe resolution of a pixel. The noise (e.g., DCR, optical crosstalk) of a single FBK NUV-HD3 SiPM has been studied in The setup employed for noise measurements is shown in Figure The LED intensity was regulated in each measurement to keep the mean number of detected photons at the level of a few phes to facilitate the identification of the single-phe peak. We obtained the charge spectrum for each of these measurements and fitted them with eq. 2 of P (m | μ) is the Poisson probability of having m cells fired given a mean number of interacting photons μ and G(x, n, σ) is a Gaussian function of expected value n and variance σ 2 . The optical cross-talk probability p XT is modeled by a binomial function p n,m (see eq. 1 of To study the impact of uncorrelated noise we recorded events in the absence of visible-light or radioactive sources (with all eight channels enabled for the sum). Random-triggered events were acquired with the digitizer in the same conditions than during standard measurements with the micro-camera. Charge was integrated in the same 600 ns window employed for the charge extraction. We fitted the charge distribution with a Gaussian function of variance σ 2 U N , which was used as input for the simulations described in section 2.8. We evaluated the energy and spatial resolution of the micro-camera in a small region around the FOV center. We limited our measurements to this region aiming to be as far as possible from the dead corners. The performance closer to the edges would be naturally worse because in the micro-camera all 4 pixels are outer-most pixels, but especially because of the proximity to the pixel dead corners. Then it would not be very representative of what may occur in a large camera equipped with "proper" LASiPs (i.e., without dead corners). The central region was the only place in which we could obtain results that could eventually be used to undesrtand how LASiPs would perform in a larger camera. For the measurements we employed the setup of Figure The energy resolution was measured employing 99m Tc, using two different setups. In the first setup, the capillary was completely filled with the radioactive solution (total activity of ∼ 50 μC) and placed in different positions, near the collimator. In the second setup the collimator was removed and the capillary was filled for a length not exceeding 2 mm. Its active volume was positioned at a distance of ∼ 500 mm from the camera, with its longitudinal axis perpendicular to the camera plane. This way we produced a flood-field irradiation of the detector. Spatial resolution was evaluated with both 241 Am and 99m Tc sources. First, the 241 Am source was imaged at a distance h 15 mm from the camera using Coll 1. We fitted the reconstructed image by a 2D-gaussian and defined the extension R of the image as the FWHM of the function that resulted from the fit. Then the capillary was fully-filled with the 99m Tc solution and was imaged at a distance h 20 mm from the camera using Coll 2. In this case we define R as the FWHM of the projection of the reconstructed image in the axis perpendicular to the capillary orientation. In both cases, with the source fixed, the micro-camera was moved in the detector plane to acquire data from different regions of the FOV. The measured R results from the contribution of the source diameter R src (negligible for the point-like source), the collimator resolution R c and the intrinsic detector resolution R d as: The collimator resolution depends on the hole diameter d, the distance h between source and collimator and the effective collimator thickness a ef f as where a ef f = a-2/μ, with a the collimator thickness and μ the linear attenuation coefficient (μ -1 = 0.37 mm at 140 keV in lead). A few of them are able to go through the collimator and produce scintillation photons inside the crystal. To better understand the system behavior we performed Geant4 simulations The simulated system features a 40 × 40 × 8 mm 3 NaI(Tl) crystal coupled to 36 SiPMs of ∼ 6 × 6 mm 2 (Figure We used the Geant4 RoughTeflon LUT Davis model A 3 mm fused silica glass exit window was placed between SiPMs and crystal. Lead collimators with the same geometrical characteristics of Coll1 and Coll2 could be placed in front of the camera. The 36 SiPMs were distributed in the same way as in the micro-camera. The number of scintillation photons detected by each SiPM were recorded independently. Then they were summed in groups of 8 to mimic a micro-camera LASiP or in groups of 9 to study the performance degradation introduced by the dead corner (see Figure the scintillation light-yield to achieve an energy resolution of ∼ 9% at 140 keV when all 36 SiPMs are enabled and no noise is added. We also did not simulate the LASiP pulse shape or the waveforms acquired with the digitizer. Instead, we injected noise in three steps. In a simulated event in which N scintillation photons hit a single LASiP we: 1. Simulate cross-talk events: we add ∆N artificial counts, that are randomly generated with a Poisson distribution with mean μ(N, p XT ), where p XT is the cross-talk probability. At the end of this step N is replaced by N = N + ∆N 2. Simulate the finite resolution of the detector: we build a Gaussian distribution with expected value N and variance σ t (σ 0 , σ 1 , N ) (see definition in section 2.6). At the end of this step N is replaced by a random number N generated with this Gaussian distribution. 3. Simulate uncorrelated noise: ∆N random counts are generated with a Gaussian distribution of variance σ 2 U N . σ U N is the standard deviation of the charge distribution collected in the absence of signal (see definition in section 2.6). At the end of this step N is replaced by N = N + ∆N . Note that four parameters should be input to simulate the noise: p XT , σ 0 , σ 1 and σ U N . The reference values for these parameters were estimated from the LASiP noise measurements described in section 2.6. Then we could vary them to study the individual impact of the different forms of noise in the micro-camera performance. A charge histogram is finally built with the sum of the noise-corrected charge measured in each pixel. This charge histogram is later used to evaluate the energy resolution and to extract the acceptance window for the image reconstruction, the same way it was done with the micro-camera (section 2.4). Since we wanted to study the specific impact of the LASiP noise in the performance, the rest of the detector components (crystal, reflector, coupling material, exit window) were treated as ideal objects. Simulations do not include background effects that are present in the data like Iodine escape peak or scattering in other materials that are not those belonging to the micro-camera. Figure SiPMs as σ 0 = p 0 + p 1 √ N SiP M , with p 0 = (0.22 ± 0.02) phe and p 1 = (0.11 ± 0.01) phe. The fitting function can be evaluated to estimate σ 0 (N SiP M = 8) 0.53 phe. Figure From the results reported in this section we defined the reference values of the input parameters for simulating the pixel noise (see section 2.8). These values are shown in Table 25 0.53 0.07 6.e-3 Table Figure Figure The measured energy resolution at 140 keV slightly depends on the measuring position. The average value was 11.6%, ranging from a minimum value of 10.9% to a maximum of 12.7%. The variations of the photopeak position measured in different parts of the FOV were below 5%. Figure 13 × 13 mm 2 region around the camera center (i.e., the full FOV excluding 1 mm at the edges). The black histograms include only those events that were reconstructed in a 6×6 mm 2 region around the camera center. The green histograms exhibit wider peaks, which was expected since they are more sensitive to a non-uniform charge collection across the crystal area, especially close to the crystal corners where light is not detected. In fact, as it will be shown in section 3.5, simulations suggest that the LASiP dead corners could degrade significantly the energy resolution and be the main responsible for the second peak at 22000 ADC counts that appears in Figure As it will be shown in section 3.5, the dead corner does not only impact the width of the photopeak, but also the mean collected charge. Images of the 241 Am source were taken with the micro-camera in different test positions. Their positions were reconstructed with an accuracy better than 0.3 mm. Three of those images are shown in Figure Removing the collimator resolution (see 3) we obtained an intrinsic spatial resolution of R d = (2.2 ± 0.2) mm. Figure We consider that the agreement between data and simulations is good enough to use the simulations as a test-probe to study with more detail the impact of the LASiP characteristics in the system performance (see section 3.5). The capillary was imaged in different positions in the two orientations of Figure Table Even if the energy resolution that was obtained with the 8-SiPM simulated LASiPs is slightly better than what was obtained in section 3.3 (expected due to the simplification of the simulations), we considered it to be close enough to the values measured with the micro-camera, at least for the scope of studying how energy resolution changes when we modify the input noise parameters. As anticipated in section 3.3, the LASiP dead corners affect significantly the detector performance, as can be seen in all entries of Table The effect of the dead corner can also be seen in Figure It would seem that optical cross-talk has a minor impact on the energy resolution of the system (entries nr. 2-5 in Table However, an increase in σ U N by a factor 2 (which is not so unlikely, for instance if using noisier SiPMs) already degrades significantly the energy resolution (entry nr. 10). This must be taken into account when designing a large camera with several and larger LASiPs. Concerning spatial resolution, we found that it was 10% worse in the images of the capillary simulated with the n.r.v. than in the case in which no noise was added. This difference would not be very significant in the context of full-body SPECT, where the collimator contribution typically dominates spatial resolution. relatively high dark count rate (400 kHz/mm 2 at 20 • ) could significantly degrade energy resolution of a camera using SiPMs with a ∼30% PDE in the wavelength of interest. In fact, the detector module that was under study (later developed in In a larger camera the situation could be different, as it will be discussed afterwards. We were able to reconstruct the images produced by a 99 Tc capillary and by a 241 Am point-like source. Even if using only four pixels, we could produce simple images that support the idea that LASiPs could be an alternative for building compact SPECT cameras. The intrinsic spatial resolution measured close to the micro-camera center was ∼ 2 mm. The experiment with the capillary source was also simulated with Geant4. We were able to obtain a reasonable agreement between experiments and simulations in terms of spatial resolution and image reconstruction. The micro-camera was useful to prove that LASiPs could be used to reconstruct simple images in the center of a gamma-camera and to validate the MC simulations that we used to understand the contribution of the LASiP noise to the overall performance. This was a necessary step towards the ultimate goal, which is to apply the proposed solution in a large camera (e.g., a camera of a full-body SPECT scanner). Extrapolating the performance evaluated with the micro-camera to a larger camera is not straightforward and it requires a dedicated study that is left for a future work. We would like to highlight that we have developed two key components for such a study: validated MC simulations that can be extended to a larger camera and a characterization of the LASiP noise as a function of the number of summed SiPMs, which let us model the noise in larger pixels. Nevertheless, in the next paragraphs we briefly discuss a few aspects that will be particularly relevant in a large camera in which a few thousand SiPMs may be employed. The 8-SiPM LASiP prototype was a cost-effective solution that was adopted as the first step to study the feasibility of using LASiP in SPECT. We do not intend to install pixels with such geometry in a camera hosting several tens to a few hundred pixels. As a minimum requirement, a more symmetric LASiP with no dead corners should be employed (e.g., building LASiPs of 9 SiPMs). Using LASiPs of ∼ 2 × 2 cm 2 like the prototype we developed, about 500 pixels would be needed to cover a 50 × 40 cm 2 SPECT camera. This is a significant improvement with respect to the thousand of pixels that would be needed if commercial SiPMs were used, although still high if compared to the 50-100 PMTs of a standard clinical camera. The proposed solution of building large SiPM pixels by summing SiPM signals, and in particular the MUSIC chip, were thought for VHE astrophysics. In these applications the photosensors must be sensitive to fluxes close to the single-phe level and provide a time resolution of ∼ 1 ns. As single-phe and time resolution degrade as the number of summed SiPMs increase, the developed pixels typically sum from 7 to 9 SiPMs. Since the timing and photon resolution requirements for SPECT are more relaxed, in principle it would be possible to build larger pixels by summing more SiPMs. Moreover, the idea of making large pixels by tiling SiPMs allows to build different geometries, especially when the number of SiPMs increases. SiPMs could be distributed forming circular or hexagonal pixels, which have the advantage of having radial symmetry. However, the number of SiPMs to be summed and their distribution inside a pixel should be carefully optimized, since pixel size and noise will affect the system performance. A rather simple and low-cost solution to build larger LASiPs could be to connect, in parallel, pairs of SiPMs and send each output into one input channel of the MUSIC. One of the problems of this approach would be that the capacitance will significantly increase, resulting in a large amount of noise at the input of the preamplifier. This might not only impact the performance of the detector, but it would also make the calibration of the LASiPs more difficult. Another option that would probably produce less noise and be easier to calibrate would be to perform a sum in two (or more) stages, i.e., to sum the output of several MUSICs into a single channel. In this way it would still be possible to access individual SiPMs by switching off the rest of the MUSIC channels. The optimal solution would be to have an ASIC with as many input channels as SiPMs are summed inside a pixel. That hypothetical ASIC could even have individual configurable thresholds that would allow to perform the sum only over those SiPMs recording a signal above the single-SiPM noise level. A few ASICs have been developed to read the output of 16-64 SiPMs in time-of-flight Positron Emission Tomography (TOF PET) applications, which do not perform the sum of the signals but output a number of digital/binary signals equal to the number of inputs (see for instance In a large SPECT camera the scintillation photons will be distributed over a larger number of SiPMs than in the micro-camera. To illustrate this situation, we simulated a perfectly collimated beam of 140 keV directed into a NaI(Tl) crystal with similar characteristics to the one described in Section 2.8, but with a size of 500 × 400 × 9.5 mm 3 . The crystal was equipped with 4636 SiPMs of 6 × 6 mm 2 arranged in a honeycomb geometry and the charge of each SiPM was readout individually. The spatial distribution of the mean charge collected by the SiPMs is shown in Figure In the example ∼ 200 (∼ 800) SiPMs are needed to collect ∼ 60% (∼ 80%) of the scintillation photons. Figure With a similar reasoning, the integration time will also have to be optimized to maximize the SNR. The temporal distribution of the detected photons is dominated by the scintillation emission, which follows an exponential decay with a characteristic time τ = 240 ns. Dark counts, on the other hand, increase linearly with time. As in the micro-camera, there will be an optimal integration time that maximizes energy resolution. However, this effect will be more relevant in a large camera employing more SiPMs to collect the charge. It is then clear that in a larger LASiP-based camera not only the pixel size and geometry must be optimized, but also the trigger conditions. The optimal trigger conditions (trigger area and integration time) will differ depending on the crystal thickness and the pixel size, but also on the SiPM PDE and the DCR. Following the arguments exposed in the previous paragraphs, it is hard to estimate how LASiPs would perform in a full-body SPECT camera without a dedicated study. We may expect some degradation of the energy resolution due to a higher number of integrated dark counts. Depending on how large that degradation is, it may justify the use of a cooling system to lower the SiPM temperature and thus reduce the DCR. It is also reasonable to expect that the spatial resolution would degrade if the pixel size increases, although at the same time using more than 4 pixels to reconstruct the events would probably help. Also applying a better resolving algorithm during the image reconstruction should provide an improvement in this sense. The results of this work can be used as input for studying in detail the performance of a large SPECT camera based on LASiP through Monte Carlo simulations. Undoubtedly the main advantage of replacing PMTs by SiPM-based pixels in SPECT is the reduction of the size and weight of the camera. The photodetectors would no longer be the main contributors to the camera volume, which could be reduced by ∼ 50%. With smaller and lighter cameras, the cost and the complexity of the whole SPECT scanner could be reduced. Besides this and the general advantages offered by SiPMs described in section 1, LASiPs can be calibrated without the need of any external light-source using SiPM dark counts. This is relatively easy to do while single SiPMs can be accessed (as the MUSIC allows), although much more challenging when pixel size increases. Large PMTs also show a non-uniform spatial response along the photocathode, which can affect the performance of scintillation detectors We studied for the first time the feasibility of using large SiPM pixels in SPECT, as a novel approach to build compact large-area SPECT cameras. We developed a LASiP prototype of ∼ 2.9 cm 2 area (∼ 2.2 cm 2 active area) and evaluated its impact on the performance of a gamma camera through laboratory measurements and MC simulations. With a proof-of-concept micro-camera using 4 LASiP prototypes we were able to reconstruct simple images in a central region of 15 × 15 mm 2 , with an energy resolution of ∼ 11.6% at 140 keV and an intrinsic spatial resolution of ∼ 2 mm. We performed Geant4 simulations of the micro-camera, that were validated with experimental data. In the future, these simulations can be extended to a larger camera, holding several LASiPs. The way in which we modeled LASiP noise can also be easily extended to larger pixels. The results obtained in this work suggest that using LASiPs in large SPECT cameras could be feasible, providing that the trigger settings and the pixel size and geometry are optimized for the dimensions of the camera and that the impact of dark counts are properly mitigated. The employed LASiPs could be comparable in size and geometry to a SPECT PMT and could represent an affordable solution to use SiPMs in SPECT. In this work we provided two essential results that can be seen as the staring points for such optimization: we proved that with a very simple system we can reconstruct images with an energy resolution comparable to standard SPECT systems and validated MC simulations that can be easily adapted to study how LASiPs would perform in a larger camera. After which the "SCT matrix" name is given. https://www.scientifica.es/products/emusic-miniboard https://www.ost-photonics.com/product-category/scintillation-crystal-2/naitl-scintillator https://siliconesolutions.com/ss-988.html