We study Superconductor/Ferromagnet/Superconductor junctions with CuNi, PtNi, or Ni interlayers. Remarkably, we observe that supercurrents through Ni can be significantly larger than through diluted alloys. The phenomenon is attributed to the dirtiness of disordered alloys leading to a short coherence length despite a small exchange energy. To the contrary, pure Ni is clean resulting in a coherence length as long as in a normal metal. Analysis of temperature dependencies of critical currents reveals a crossover from short (dirty) to long (clean) range proximity effects in Pt1-xNix with increasing Ni concentration. Our results point out that structural properties of a ferromagnet play a crucial role for the proximity effect and indicate that conventional strong-but-clean ferromagnets can be advantageously used in superconducting spintronic devices. A competition between superconductivity and ferromagnetism leads to an unconventional proximity effect, studied both theoretically Interpretation of LRPE remains controversial. First, there is a seeming irreproducibility of experimental results, cf. Refs. Here we study nanoscale SFS Josephson junctions (JJ's) containing either diluted Ni-alloys Cu 1-x Ni x and Pt 1-x Ni x , Cu/Ni bilayer or pure Ni. Counterintuitively, we observe that the supercurrent density, J c , through Ni can be much larger than through diluted alloys with the same thickness. Using in-situ absolute Josephson fluxometry (AJF), we demonstrate that Ni interlayers in our junctions exhibit full saturation magnetization as in bulk Ni, which precludes presence of extended dead magnetic layers. The clue to understanding of our results is obtained from the analysis of evolution of temperature dependencies, J c (T ), in Nb/Pt 1-x Ni x /Nb JJ's with increasing Ni concentration. It shows that in diluted Nialloys, x 0.5, the proximity effect is short range, despite a small E ex , due to an extremely short m.f.p. is such atomically disordered alloys. To the contrary, pure Ni remains clean, facilitating ballistic Cooper pair transport and LRPE similar in scale to that in the normal metal Pt. Our results demonstrate that the proximity effect in ferromagnets depends not only on composition and E ex , but also essentially on the internal structure. This may help to resolve some of the controversies around LRPE. We conclude that strong-but-clean ferromagnets may have advantages compared to weak-but-dirty for device applications. The paper is organized as follows. In sec. II we describe sample fabrication and experimental procedures. In sec. III we discuss main experimental results, including III A. in-situ magnetic characterization of Ni interlayers via AJF and III B. analysis of temperature dependencies of critical currents, which reveals a crossover between clean (ballistic) and dirty (diffusive) transport. In the Appendix we provide additional information about We present data for nano-scale SFS junctions with Finterlayers made of Cu 0.4 Ni 0.6 and Pt 1-x Ni x alloys with x = 0 -1, pure Ni and a Cu/Ni (N/F, N-normal metal) bilayer. SFS multilayers were deposited by dc-magnetron sputtering in a single cycle without breaking vacuum. Cu 1-x Ni x films were deposited by cosputtering from Cu and Ni targets and the concentration was controlled by the corresponding sputtering rates. Pt 1-x Ni x films were deposited from composite targets with different areas of Ni and Pt segments and Ni concentration was estimated using energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. More details about fabrication and magnetic properties of Pt 1-x Ni x films can be found in Refs. Measurements are performed in 3 He and 4 He closedcycle cryostats. Magnetic field, parallel to the junction plane, is supplied by a superconducting solenoid. We will show measurements with field oriented either parallel H (easy axis), or perpendicular H ⊥ (hard axis) to the long side of the JJ. Figs. H ll (Oe) The I c (H) modulation occurs due to flux quantization. This can be used for in-situ AJF analysis where B is magnetic induction, L is the junction length, Λ is the effective magnetic thickness of the JJ and M F is magnetization of the F-layer along the field. The first term in the right-hand-side represents the flux induced by magnetic field, the second -by magnetization of the F-layer (for more details see Appendix E). From Figs. The obtained saturation magnetization 4πM sat 7 kG is consistent with that for bulk nickel The large value of M sat confirms that supercurrents in our Nb/Ni/Nb JJ's flow through a pure Ni with strong ferromagnetic properties. Remarkably, we observe a large J c 2 × 10 5 A/cm 2 , even through 20 nm of Ni, see Fig. To clarify our observations, we start with a short summary of proximity effects in SNS and SFS JJ's (more detailed analysis can be found in Ref. For JJ's with thick d N , or short ξ N , d N ξ N (T c ), the J c (T ) is determined predominantly by the T -dependence of ξ N (T ), leading to a strong superlinear T -dependence. In the opposite case, d N ξ N (T c ), J c (T ) is determined by Ψ S/N (T ), leading to a conventional linear J c (T ) close to T c and a saturation at T → 0. For SFS JJ's the coherence length ξ F is complex The real part, ξ F 1 , represents the decay length, the imag- inary, πξ F 2 , the period of oscillations. In the clean case, where v f is the Fermi velocity in F. In the dirty case, Since here l e |ξ F (c)|, the coherence length in the dirty case is shorter than in the clean case. For strong F with are equaly short. However, in the clean case the two scales are different: From Fig. As mentioned in the Introduction, interpretation of LRPE in strong ferromagnets is still controversial. In several cases it was attributed to appearance of the unconventional odd-frequency spin-triplet order parameter. Recently the dominant (∼ 70%) spin-triplet supercurrent was reported in SF 1 F 2 S Josephson spin-valve structures with similar Ni-interlayers We also studied Nb/Cu(10nm)/Ni(10nm)/Nb JJ's, with Cu/Ni bilayer. Interestingly, they show an order of magnitude smaller J c than Nb/Ni(10nm)/Nb JJ's, see Table To conclude, we have studied SFS junctions with different Ni-based interlayers. We observed that supercurrents through pure Ni may be much larger than through diluted alloys with much smaller E ex . Analysis of J c (T ) dependencies revealed that this counterintuitive result is caused by the dirtiness of disordered Ni-alloys, leading to a short coherence lengths ξ F 1 ∼ 1 nm. To the contrary, the mean-free-path in pure Ni interlayers can easily exceed the film thickness [70] up to several tens of nm, facilitating ballistic Cooper pair transport with the decay length as long as in non-magnetic normal metals. Our observation suggests that SFS junctions with strongbut-clean ferromagnets may have significant advantages, compared to commonly considered weak-but-dirty alloys. Our results may also help to resolve the controversy around LRPE in strong ferromagnets, which is either seen The work was supported by the EU H2020-WIDESPREAD-05-2017-Twinning project "SPIN-TECH", grant agreement Nr. 810144 (sample preparation and measurements) and the Russian Science Foundation grant No. 19-19-00594 (data analysis and manuscript preparation). The manuscript was written during a sabbatical semester of V.M.K. at MIPT, supported by the Faculty of Natural Sciences at SU. with further increase of d N i (in the studied range). The mean-square-root roughness of all films is R q 1 nm, although few spikes up to ∼ ±4 nm can be seen in all cases. Probably because of that, we could not obtain reliable data for junctions with d N i < 5 nm, which were usually shorted and did not exhibit JJ behavior. As can be seen from Fig. Tables I-III represent characteristics of all types of studied junctions. Figure Our conclusions are based on the overall analysis of SFS junctions, as listed in Tables Figures Pt 1-x Ni x alloys may form a disordered fcc state (A1), which is presumably dominant in our sputtered films. However there are also three ordered states Pt 3 Ni (L1 2 ), PtNi (L1 0 ) and Ni 3 Pt (L1 2 ) with centra of stability at x = 0.25, 0.5 and 0.75, respectively Since ferromagnetism in Pt 1-x Ni x alloy appears at x c 0.4, diluted ferromagnets with small T Curie ∼ 10 K, comparable to T c of Nb, correspond to an extremely dirty metallic state. The short electronic m.f.p. leads to a short ξ F , which leads to a rapid suppression of the proximity induced superconducting order parameter with increasing d F Nb/Pt 1-x Ni x /Nb junctions with different x and d F were fabricated and studied, see Table From Fig. From the comparison of ρ xx0 and ρ n , Figs. In derivation of Eq. ( The distance between points in the AJF analysis is determined by the flux quantization field ∆H = Φ 0 /LΛ. It is smaller for the hard axis orientation of the field, corresponding to the longest size of the junction L. Therefore, AJF curves for the hard axis, Figs. For the JJ with d N i = 10 nm, Fig. For the JJ with d N i = 20 nm, Fig. * 