Laser cooling of solids keeps attracting attention owing to abroad range of its applications that extends from cm-sized all-optical cryocoolers for airborne and space-based applications to cooling on nanoparticles for biological and mesoscopic physics. Laser cooling of nanoparticles is a challenging task. We propose to use Mie resonances to enhance anti-Stokes fluorescence laser cooling in rare-earth (RE) doped nanoparticles made of low-phonon glasses or crystals. As an example, we consider an Yb 3+ :YAG nanosphere pumped at the long wavelength tail of the Yb 3+ absorption spectrum at 1030 nm. We show that if the radius of the nanosphere is adjusted to the pump wavelength in such a manner that the pump excites some of its Mie resonant modes, the cooling power density generated in the sample is considerably enhanced and the temperature of the sample is consequently considerably (~ 63%) decreased. This concept can be extended to nanoparticles of different shapes and made from different lowphonon RE doped materials suitable for laser cooling by anti-Stokes fluorescence. In 1929, Peter Pringsheim proposed the idea to cool sodium vapor with light using anti-Stokes fluorescence Since its first experimental demonstration by Epstein, laser cooling of solids via anti-Stokes fluorescence has been realized with different rare-earth (RE) ions, including Yb 3+ , Er 3+ , Tm 3+ and Ho 3+ ions, doped in a wide variety of lowphonon glasses and crystals The technology of laser cooling by anti-Stokes fluorescence has numerous applications. For example, it can be used for development a solid-state all-optical cryocoolers, which are based on cm-sized RE-doped low-phonon crystal or glass samples. Such all-optical cryocoolers are compact, reliable, and free from vibrations and moving parts or fluids devices. They can be used for the cryogenic refrigeration of semiconductor devices in applications with tight weight and size constraints, such as airborne and space-based detector systems. The first all-solid-state optical cryocooler was demonstrated in 2018 Laser cooling by anti-Stokes fluorescence can also be realized in radiation-balanced solid-state bulk lasers where the heat generated by the quantum defect between the pump and laser signals is offset by cooling from anti-Stokes emission The size and shape of the laser cooled sample as well as RE ion concentration in this sample are important parameters in the optimization of the laser cooling process In this paper, we propose an approach to enhance the laser cooling process in RE-doped nanospheres with a diameter of a few hundreds of nanometers. Our approach is based on optimization of the sample size by leveraging the Mie resonance concept and theory The process of laser cooling with anti-Stokes fluorescence of RE-doped samples has been considered in details in a number of works Let us consider a laser cooling cycle in Yb 3+ :YAG. It includes phonon absorption at the wavelength λ P , thermalization in the exited 2 F5∕2 manifold accompanied by phonon absorption, and spontaneous photon emission from the exited 2 F5∕2 manifold to the ground 2 F7∕2 manifold. All photon absorption-emission cycles where the energy of the radiated photon exceeds the energy of the absorbed one (anti-Stokes fluorescence) result in cooling, since this energy difference has to be compensated by phonon absorption. All the photon absorption-emission cycles where the energy of the absorbed photons exceeds the energy of the radiated ones (Stokes fluorescence) causes heat generation in the sample, since the energy difference in these cycles has to be compensated by phonon generation (Fig. Spontaneous emission is characterized by the mean fluorescence frequency where Φ(ν) is the fluorescence flux density, which can be obtained experimentally, and ν F = c λ F ⁄ . Here λ F is the mean fluorescence wavelength and c is the speed of light in vacuum. If one wants to cool a sample, the pump wavelength, λ P , has to exceed the mean fluorescence wavelength, λ F , and all radiated photons with wavelengths smaller then λ F must leave the sample (not to be reabsorbed by Yb 3+ ions). Indeed, these short-wavelength reabsorbed photons serve as the source of heat generation in the sample, which is undesirable for cooling. The efficiency of the cooling cycle can be estimated as the difference between the energies of the anti-Stokes emitted photon and the pump photon normalized by the energy of the pump photon that is ( The electrons excited to the 2 F5∕2 manifold can also decay nonradiatively to the ground 2 F7∕2 manifold generating phonons. The "competition" between the radiative and nonradiative decays of the 2 F5∕ 2 electrons can be quantified by the quantum efficiency where W r = 1 τ r ⁄ and W nr = 1 τ rnr ⁄ are the radiative and nonradiative decay rates, respectively, with τ r and τ nr being the radiative and nonradiative lifetimes of the excited manifold, respectively. We consider only high-quality Yb 3+ :YAG samples with the quantum efficiency as high as η q ≥ 99%. Only such samples are suitable for laser cooling. Indeed, in this case the probability of nonradiative decay with phonon generation from the exited 2 F5∕2 to the ground 2 F7∕2 manifold is very low The strength of the pump absorption process can be quantified by the absorption cross section (Fig. where S is the total surface area of the sample, T r is room temperature, and ε is the sample emissivity. As one can understood from (2), the efficiency of laser cooling cycles is very low (a few %). Enhancement of the laser cooling process is therefore highly desirable. Les consider the laser cooling process in a Yb 3+ :YAG nanosphere pumped with a plane electromagnetic wave propagating vacuum at the pump wavelength λ P (Fig. According to Mie theory, the pump plane wave can be expanded in spherical harmonics as where E 0 is the amplitude of the incident field, M ⃗⃗ o1n and N ⃗ ⃗ e1n are the vector spherical harmonics M ⃗⃗ o1n (1) = cosφ ⋅ π n (cosθ) ⋅ j n (r)êθ -sinφ ⋅ τ n (cosθ)j n (r)êφ, N ⃗ ⃗ e1n where P n 1 in the associated Legendre function of first kind of degree n and the first order. The field inside the sphere reads [c n M ⃗⃗ o1n (1) -id n N ⃗ ⃗ e1n (1) ] where the coefficients c n and d n are functions of the normalized radius of the sphere, x = 2πR λ P ⁄ , with R being the radius of the sphere, and read where h n (1) is the spherical Hankel functions, m = n Yb The c n coefficients describe the magnetic multipole modes and the d n coefficients describe the electric multipole modes. At values of R for which the denominator of c n coefficient or the denominator of d n vanishes, the sphere resonantes and scattering exhibits therefore a peak that dominates the response of the sphere. The radial dependence of the absolutesquare of the electric field averaged over polar angle, θ, and azimuthal angle, φ, of spherical coordinates has the form where m n and n n are functions of the radial distance, r, and are given as where r̃= 2πn Yb r λ P ⁄ . The cooling power generated in the sphere can be estimated as the difference between the pump power absorbed by the Yb 3+ ions in the sphere and the power radiated with anti-Stokes fluorescence at the mean fluorescence wavelength. The field intensity given by ( which corresponds to the cooling power generated in the Mieresonant nanosphere. Let us consider an RE-doped nanosphere with radius of a few hundred nanometers. The energy levels of Yb 3+ ions in a bulk Yb 3+ :YAG sample, shown in Fig. As one can see in relations ( We have proposed to use Mie resonant modes to enhance laser cooling in RE-doped nanospheres made of low-phonon glasses or crystals. This concept have been comprehensively investigated for Yb 3+ :YAG nanospheres with radii in the order of a few hundred nanometers. We have considered Yb 3+ :YAG nanospheres pumped in the long-wavelength tail of the Yb 3+ absorption spectrum at the wavelength λ P = 1030 nm. We have shown a considerable enhancement of the cooling power density due to the Mie resonant modes and a related substantial (~ 60%) decrease in the temperature of the laser cooled samples with the radius ~ 320 nm. This sample supports MQ and ED Mie modes. A smaller decrease in the temperature of the laser cooled nanosphere is obtained if the sample supports only one Mie mode, as in the case of the Yb 3+ :YAG nanospheres with the radii ~ 200 nm, ~ 450 nm, and ~ 650 nm. Nanospheres with the radii hundred nanometers are used widely in biophysics and mesoscopic physics. As we already mentioned for samples of such a size scale, phonon quantization, which can influence the thermalization process, the change in the energy levels of the RE ions doped in the sample, as well as the Purcell effect, are not essential. Quantization becomes important only for spheres with smaller radii, in the order of a few nanometers. For such small sphere, quantization can dramatically enhance the laser cooling process, but the related technology becomes naturally challenging. A lot of theoretical and experimental research is currently devoted to the laser cooling of nanoparticles. In the majority of the related work, only the translational energy of the particles has been suppressed. Removal of the internal energy embedded in the vibrational degrees of freedom of the particles, which has been considered in this work, remains an unsettled problem. Nowadays, laser cooling with anti-Stokes fluorescence is the only possible technique permitting to remove the internal energy of the sample, but the efficiency of this technique is very low (a few %). Our proposed approach based on the Mie resonant modes may therefore be considered as a timely new tool for experimentalists working on the laser cooling of solid nano-samples.