Implantable medical devices (IMD) usually have a high constraint on the size, and thus wireless power transfer is widely used instead of the bulky batteries to provide power for the implants. A wirelessly powered trans-sclera electrical stimulation (TsES) system has been developed to treat retinal degenerative diseases To save the use of an additional antenna, power and data are transmitted via the same inductive coupling link. Frequency-shift keying (FSK) modulation is commonly used in IMDs applications to achieve high data rate IMDs are usually low-power applications and inductive power transfer using a pair of series-parallel (S-P) resonant coupled-coils is usually used. In Polyimide has been proven to be a biocompatible material and an excellent choice for neuroprosthetic application To increase the link efficiency, the primary coil could also be made on a flexible PCB, such that it can be attached onto the skin to minimize the distance between the coils. The secondary coil is bended and attached to the surface of the eyeball. Bending will change both the self-inductances and the coupling coefficient, and the field solver HFSS is used to simulate the coupled-coils under the bending situation. The simulation setup is shown in Fig. From We first consider the LSK modulation under ideal situation. Fig. The equivalent impedance model is shown in Fig. For low-power application, the load resistor R L would be large, for example, R L > 100 Ω or even larger than 1 kΩ, so that the factor L s2 /C s2 R L 2 is much smaller than 1. As discussed in part is negligible compared to the real part Req, and Req is given by According to (9) Req increases monotonously w.r.t. RL. Ideally, backscattering changes Req from R L to R L ||R SW . The equivalent impedance Z eq and Z pri will decrease so I 1 will increase. By detecting the amplitude of I 1 , the transmitter side can decode the uplink signal. In practice, it is difficult to make L s2 , C s2 and RL to satisfy (1). The receiver circuits such as the over-voltage protection (OVP) block and the rectifier will introduce parasitic capacitance Cp2 to the secondary LC tank. The OVP circuit needs large diodes to sink excessive power, and the rectifier diodes have to be large enough to reduce conduction loss, and both together lead to a large Cp2. The secondary coil is designed to have high quality factor Q2 to improve PTE, and L s2 is designed to be 564 nH and C s2 to be 27 pF. From actual measurement, the parasitic capacitance Cp2 can be up to 12 pF The equivalent impedance Zeq(s) is shown in Without the parasitic capacitor, ΔZ pri is a monotonous function of R L , and ΔZ pri is positive under all coupling condition. However, due to Cp2 of the secondary LC tank, Z pri H will be smaller than Z pri L at the weak coupling condition. In the numerical example, the parameter set up were following the structure shown in Fig. ) The theoretical results are shown in Fig. The secondary parasitic capacitance C p will introduce an negative imaginary part into the equivalent impedance Z eq . However, if C s1 is made larger than the designed value, Z 11 will contain a positive imaginary part that could be used to cancel the imaginary part of Z eq , so that ΔZ pri may become negative at weak coupling. To avoid cancelling between Z eq and Z 11 , the primary resonator could be detuned. By making C s1 lower than the designed value, Z 11 was guaranteed have a negative imaginary part, such that the uplink signal flipping issue could be eliminated. In this work, a polyimide-based flexible coupled-coils was developed for the TsES system, and the inductive link has been modeled in HFSS and fabricated by FPC. The PTE was 39% when the coils were separated by 10 mm. LSK scheme with parasitic parameter has been analyzed and a solution was proposed. 