Ni-Ga bilayers are a versatile platform for exploring the competition between strongly antagonistic ferromagnetic and superconducting phases. We characterize the impact of this competition on the transport properties of highly-ballistic Al/Al 2 O 3 (/EuS)/Ni-Ga tunnel junctions from both experimental and theoretical points of view. While the conductance spectra of junctions comprising Ni (3 nm)-Ga (60 nm) bilayers can be well understood within the framework of earlier results, which associate the emerging main conductance maxima with the junction films' superconducting gaps, thinner Ni (1.6 nm)-Ga (30 nm) bilayers entail completely different physics, and give rise to novel large-bias (when compared to Superconducting magnetic junctions form elementary building blocks for superconducting spintronics Particularly appealing materials for superconducting spintronics are Ni-Ga (Ni-Bi) bilayers The two main factors that cause triplet pairing in proximitized s-wave superconductors are inhomogeneously magnetized domains and spin-orbit coupling effects. While triplet currents originating from nonuniform magnetizations have been successfully implemented in various systems In this paper, we experimentally investigate the tunneling conductance (dominated by quasiparticles) of high-quality superconducting magnetic Al/Al 2 O 3 (/EuS)/Ni-Ga junctions that host either thicker Ni (3 nm)-Ga (60 nm) or thinner Ni (1.6 nm)-Ga (30 nm) bilayers. In the latter case, we observe a series of unexpected conductance shoulders forming at rather large bias voltages, when compared to the superconducting gap of the thin Al film as a reference, and predict that these conductance shoulders serve as a possible transport fingerprint of superconducting triplet pairings being induced around the Ni-Ga interface. To give independent experimental evidence of this claim, and gain first insights into the potentially underlying physics, we conduct complementary polarized neutron reflectometry studies on specific Ni-Ga bilayers, which eventually allow us to visualize the magnetization around the peculiar Ni-Ga boundary. Thereby detecting a nonuniformly magnetized area around the Ni-Ga interface, as well as the paramagnetic Meissner response in Ga, provides the key experimental evidence that even weak intrinsic ferromagnetism in Ni can induce a superconducting triplet state We have structured the paper as follows. In Sec. 2, we briefly summarize our stateof-the-art techniques to grow the high-quality superconducting magnetic tunnel junctions, present and discuss the results of our tunneling-conductance measurements carried out on selected samples-paying special attention to the yet puzzling novel large-bias conductance shoulders-, and finally analyze the results of our polarized neutron reflectometry measurements. Section 3 reports on our theoretical efforts to develop a simple, purely phenomenological, description that relates the large-bias conductance shoulders to induced superconducting triplet pairings near the Ni-Ga-bilayer interface. Finally, we briefly conclude our main findings in Sec. 4. Our results might provide an essential contribution to establish Ni-Ga bilayers as promising platforms to engineer spin-polarized triplet supercurrents in future works. By applying a bias voltage V between the electrodes and measuring the corresponding tunneling current (indicated by a dark-green arrow), we probe the tunnelingconductance characteristics of the samples. All investigated Al/Al 2 O 3 (/EuS)/Ni-Ga junctions-schematically illustrated in Fig. In one run, we could prepare several junctions differing only in the thicknesses of individual Al, EuS, Ni, or Ga layers, while keeping all other growth parameters the same. To measure the tunneling conductance, and thus study the ramifications of the superconducting magnetic Ni-Ga bilayers on transport, we attached the junctions to a probe with electrical leads and immersed the system into a pumped liquid-helium bath (either 4 He or 3 He) to reach a temperature of about 1 K or 0.6 K. Both Al and Ni-Ga thin films turned superconducting, with critical temperatures strongly dependent on their thickness. All our samples were based on 4 nm-thick Al films (serving as the left electrode; please note that studying the tunneling conductance requires two distinct superconducting electrodes, which is in stark contrast to STM studies Al ≈ 2.5 K; the superconducting coherence length of such thin Al films was estimated by Meservey and Tedrow Ni-Ga ≈ 4.2 K; typical superconducting coherence lengths of Ni (0.4 nm)-Ga (14 nm) bilayers are of the order of ξ Ni-Ga ≈ 15 nm To demonstrate the most puzzling transport features of Ni-Ga-bilayer junctions that we could detect in our series of experiments, we focus on four different samples (labeled sample A through sample D; see Tab. 1) containing either a thicker Ni (3 nm)-Ga (60 nm) or a thinner Ni (1.6 nm)-Ga (30 nm) bilayer, respectively. All tunneling-conductance data was obtained using standard lock-in technique. Sample A. First, we studied the Al (4 nm)/Al 2 O 3 (∼ 1 nm)/Ni (3 nm)-Ga (60 nm)/ Al 2 O 3 (12 nm) junction with a thicker Ni (3 nm)-Ga (60 nm) bilayer and at a temperature of about 1.1 K. The results of our measurements, which are shown in Fig. developed thereby one of the perhaps most fundamental theoretical descriptions of these S/N/S' junctions' tunneling conductance, assuming two dissimilar superconducting electrodes S and S' connected by a thin nonsuperconducting N link. Their Rowell-Feldman approach predicts the emergence of main conductance peaks whenever the applied bias voltage V satisfies eV ≈ ∓Δ S , eV ≈ ∓(Δ S +Δ S ), or eV ≈ ∓Δ S , where Δ S (Δ S ) denotes the superconducting gap of S (S') and e refers to the positive elementary charge. At the microscopic level, Arnold Interestingly, we can directly adapt the predictions of the Rowell-Feldman model to understand the conductance features that we observed in sample A (see Fig. Samples B and C. The second and third samples that we investigated were composed of the Al (4 nm)/Al 2 O 3 (∼ 1 nm)/Ni (1.6 nm)-Ga (30 nm)/Al 2 O 3 (12 nm) junction with a thinner Ni (1.6 nm)-Ga (30 nm) bilayer and the Al (4 nm)/Al 2 O 3 (∼ 1 nm)/Ga (30 nm)-Ni (1.6 nm)/Al 2 O 3 (12 nm) junction with an effectively "inverted" Ga (30 nm)-Ni (1.6 nm) bilayer, respectively. The corresponding tunneling conductances measured at a temperature of about 1.1 K, which are shown in Fig. As the conductance shoulders only arise in junctions with thinner Ni-Ga bilayers, they are most likely intimately connected with novel physical phenomena that solely arise in thinner Ni-Ga bilayers. In our earlier theoretical work on the transport characteristics of ferromagnet/superconductor/ferromagnet junctions in the presence of interfacial spinorbit interactions Furthermore, the conductance data of samples B and C also reveal clearly visible zero-bias conductance peaks, which we did not detect in sample A with the thicker Ni (3 nm)-Ga (60 nm) bilayer. Deducing the physical mechanism that causes such zero-bias peaks is usually a highly nontrivial task, as they could stem from numerous distinct phenomena-like, for example, zero-energy Andreev reflections In bilayers that contain not fully spin-polarized ferromagnets (i.e., no half metals as the second electrode), the situation might be much more intriguing. Thoroughly investigating electrical transport through Al/EuS bilayers, Diesch et al. Coming back to samples B and C of our study, we must therefore conclude that the appearance of zero-bias conductance peaks alone is neither a unique nor a sufficient signature of superconducting triplet pairings, and might as well originate from different physical effects. However, as the main focus of our work is to understand the peculiar large-bias conductance shoulders, and interpret these as clear fingerprints of triplet pairings, we did not further analyze the zero-bias peaks. As another remarkable experimental feature, our conductance measurements on samples B and C suggest that replacing the Ni (1.6 nm)-Ga (30 nm) by a Ga (30 nm)-Ni (1.6 nm) bilayer-i.e., inverting the order of the Ni and Ga films inside the bilayershas no substantial effect on the large-bias conductance shoulders [see Figs. We take this finding as an experimental hint that the physics being responsible for the formation of large-bias conductance shoulders occurs around the Ni-Ga interface, and is thus quite independent of the order of the Ni and Ga films. Together with our claim that the conductance shoulders signify superconducting triplet pairings, we could therefore argue that the physical mechanism inducing triplet correlations in Ni-Ga bilayers could be similar to the aforementioned ones; i.e., the magnetization around the interface of Ni (1.6 nm)-Ga (30 nm) bilayers is inhomogeneous (on a length scale of a few nanometers), which partially converts spin-singlet into spin-triplet Cooper pairs through flipping some of the electrons' spins. Nonetheless, this interpretation certainly requires more pertinent experimental evidence, which we will provide within our polarized neutron reflectometry measurements that are directly able to probe the profile of the interface magnetizations and thereby support our predictions. Sample D. As the thin Ni films of our junctions are only weakly ferromagnetic (recall that we deduced spin polarizations of about 1 % from Meservey-Tedrow spectroscopy)and the triplet-pairing effects are thus most likely also rather moderate-, a more promising perspective could be to focus on samples that contain a second strongly ferromagnetic component. The fourth studied sample consisted therefore of the Al (4 nm)/Al 2 O 3 (0.4 nm)/EuS (1.2 nm)/Ni (1.6 nm)-Ga (30 nm)/Al 2 O 3 (12 nm) junction, which basically corresponds to sample B except for the additional 1.2 nm-thick barrier composed of the strong ferromagnetic insulator EuS The tunneling conductance of sample D at a temperature of about 1 K is presented in Fig. As the most important feature, we assert that the large-bias conductance shoulders- which we claimed to signify superconducting triplet pairings at the Ni-Ga interface-are robust and even slightly more pronounced than in samples B and C (i.e., the splittings between the shoulders' conductance maxima are slightly larger). This observation could be carefully interpreted as a possible experimental hint that the additional ferromagnetic EuS spacer may indeed amplify the triplet pairings. Moreover, adding EuS gives rise to extremely rich lowbias conductance modulations that we could not detect in samples A through C in which EuS was absent. As we pointed out previously, STM studies of Al/EuS bilayers performed by Diesch et al. Our results obtained from sample D look physically similar, apart from detecting four instead of two low-bias peaks (two at negative and two at positive voltages, respectively). Analogously to the zero-bias peaks of samples B and C, unraveling the physical origin of these low-bias features has not yet been possible with the available data, and goes also beyond the scope of this manuscript. One possible explanation for the doubling of low-bias peaks (when compared to Diesch's work) might be that we are dealing with two different ferromagnetic films-EuS and Ni-instead of just one (EuS) as Diesch and coworkers, and thus need to consider two distinct interfaces at which the magnetization may be inhomogeneous. However, this is a premature statement that we cannot uniquely confirm from our measurements. While discussing the tunneling-conductance data obtained from samples B and C in the preceding section, we argued that the observed large-bias conductance shoulders might serve as an experimentally accessible transport signature of superconducting triplet pairings getting induced by inhomogeneous magnetizations around the interface of thinner Ni (1.6 nm)-Ga (30 nm) bilayers. In the following, we wish to provide independent experimental evidence From the fit to the PNR and XRR, we deduce that the Ni (5.6 nm)-Ga (25 nm) interface is sharp with a roughness of 0.5 nm. The Ga layer's density is not uniform and consists of two roughly 7 nm-and 18 nm-thick sublayers (see also Fig. of this claim through a deeper characterization of the physical properties of this peculiar interface. For a deeper investigation of the Ni-Ga interface, and to directly explore its structure and magnetization depth profile, we combine depth-sensitive polarized neutron reflectometry (PNR) with low-angle x-ray reflectometry (XRR) studies. Being electrically neutral, spin-polarized neutrons penetrate the entire multilayer junctions, probing the magnetic and structural composition of their films through buried interfaces down to the substrate For example, a value of SA = 0 means that there is no magnetic moment in the system. The depth profiles of the nuclear and magnetic scattering length densities (NSLD and MSLD) correspond to the depth profiles of the chemical and in-plane magnetization vector distributions, respectively. The total magnetization M can be calculated from the MSLD data using the relation M (emu/cm 3 ) = MSLD(Å -2 )/(2.853 × 10 -9 ). To verify the depth morphology of the films, we used complementary XRR data. These experiments were carried out on Ni-Ga bilayers with the Ga thickness fixed at about 25 nm (fitting our data, we obtain 21 nm Ga thickness), while the Ni thickness was varied to cover 0.8 nm, 2.4 nm, 4.0 nm, and 5.6 nm; see Fig. To analyze the electromagnetic proximity effect in Ni-Ga-bilayer structures from the PNR data, we distinguish between two scenarios: (1) the conventional diamagnetic Meissner screening and (2) the paramagnetic Meissner response in Ga. The results for both cases are shown in Fig. To better illustrate the impact of the thickness of the Ni film on the interface and magnetization structure, we analyze the PNR data obtained from Ni-Ga bilayers with 4 nm, 2.4 nm, and 0.8 nm Ni films (recall Fig. As we outlined in Sec. 2 when discussing our experimental results, the appearance of largebias shoulders in the tunneling conductance of Ni-Ga bilayers can serve as a signature of superconducting triplet pairings induced at the Ni-Ga interface-microscopically originating from inhomogeneous interface magnetizations, as our PNR analyses clearly demonstrated. In this final section of our paper, we formulate a purely phenomenological toy model to theoretically convince at the qualitative level that superconducting triplet pairings at the Ni-Ga interface give indeed rise to the experimentally detected large-bias conductance shoulders. To describe quasiparticle excitations in Al/Ni-Ga junctions (for simplicity, our toy model neglects the Al 2 O 3 tunneling barriers), we formulate their Bogoliubovde Gennes Hamiltonian The on-site energies (with respect to the Fermi level) at lattice site (i, j) are then given by the discretized Nambu-space Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian [Θ(. . .) denotes the Heaviside step function] ĤBdG (i, j) = 4t τ0 and the nearest-neighbor hoppings ( i, j indicates nearest-neighbor lattice sites) by where , Thereby, the hopping parameter represents t = ħ 2 /(2ma 2 ), where m refers to the effective quasiparticle masses. For our mostly to a qualitative level restricted modeling, it is most convenient to use such units that t = 1 [arb. units]. Apart from the discrete single-particle energies ε(i, j) = 4t τ0 and the ferromagnetic exchange gap Δ XC Ni of Ni (the magnetization vector points along the ẑ-direction), we need to account for the films' distinct superconducting gaps. The Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian involves now not only singlet superconducting gaps (pairing potentials), coupling spin-up and spin-down electrons to form spin-singlet Cooper pairs, but also triplet gaps (pairing potentials) that facilitate spin-triplet Cooper pairs consisting of two equal-spin electrons. While the singlet superconducting gaps are abbreviated by Δ Since the inhomogeneous magnetization at the Ni-Ga interfaces, which ultimately induces the triplet pairings we are interested in, stems from a highly complex inhomogeneous magnetic domain structure that has not yet been fully understood at the microscopic level, we manually introduce the interfacial triplet pairings into our toy model through including nonzero tunable equal-spin superconducting pairing terms around the Ni-Ga interface. While this is sufficient to unravel the physical origin of the observed conductance shoulders, more comprehensive, and at the same time more realistic from a microscopic point of view, modeling is certainly desirable at a later stage, after gaining more experimental insight into the magnetic texture at the interface and possibly assisted by first-principles band-structure calculations To proceed, we implement the tight-binding Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian, given by Eq. (1), in K , and use K 's internal Kernel Polynomial Method (KPM) to extract the junctions' spatially integrated zero-temperature tunneling DOS (normalized to its normalstate counterpart) that we essentially probe through our conductance measurements. Along the transverse direction, we include W = 500 lattice sites. Although changing W does not qualitatively impact the tunneling DOS (for that reason, we could also completely neglect the third spatial orientation, i.e., the x-direction, in our junctions), using rather large numbers is reasonable to minimize numerical errors, which might cause unphysical numerical fluctuations in the DOS data. Enhancing the tripletpairing strength in our model corresponds to produce a more inhomogeneously magnetized interface domain texture in the experiment, which is expected to occur-coinciding with our experimental results-when decreasing the Ni(-Ga bilayer) thickness to get a rougher interface. Despite the particular values of triplet gaps substituted into our calculations may seem exaggeratedly large when compared to their singlet counterparts, we can still use them in our numerical simulations to develop a qualitative understanding of the underlying physics. One of the reasons that such large triplet gaps are required to reproduce the experimental findings could be the fact that we did not take care of formulating the full model using physically realistic units (recall that we set, for instance, a = 1 [arb. units]). Furthermore, and as we mentioned earlier, the triplet-pairing mechanisms in the real samples are a consequence of complex nonuniform interface magnetizations and are therefore at the microscopic level much more complicated to properly describe than in our strongly simplified phenomenological model. The "effectiveness" of induced triplet pairings depends additionally also on the strength of ferromagnetism inside the magnetic junction films. We assumed an extremely small exchange energy gap in Ni of Δ XC Ni = 0.5t-when compared to the singlet superconducting gaps, which are typically orders of magnitude smaller than ferromagnetic exchange couplingsin our simulations to demonstrate that even extremely weak ferromagnetism suffices to observe transport ramifications of superconducting triplet pairings. Considering a typical metal Fermi level μ ≈ 10 3 Δ singlet Ni-Ga , Δ XC Ni = 0.5t corresponds to a Ni spin polarization of just P Ni = (Δ XC Ni /2)/μ ≈ 0.03 %. Although Meservey-Tedrow spectroscopy indicated that the Ni spin polarization in our samples is only about 1 %, this is still notably larger than the tiny value assumed for our simulations, which could provide another reason for the large effective triplet pairings required in our simulations to recover the experimentally evident features. In the absence of triplet pairing at the Ni-Ga interface, we recover two DOS maxima (becoming visible in our transport measurements in terms of conductance maxima) that we associated with the energies of the singlet superconducting gaps of Al and the Ni-Ga bilayer when analyzing the experimental data obtained from sample A (recall the Rowell-Feldman description explained in Sec. 2). Already moderate triplet pairing, however, turns the first DOS maximum at the lower of the two bias voltages into two neighboring maxima, and thereby forms the first shoulder that we probably witnessed in the conductance spectrum of sample B. The second experimentally observed shoulder at slightly larger bias voltage eventually appears when the triplet-pairing strength is further enhanced. The latter shoulder (i.e., the one at larger bias voltage) seems to be less sensitive to interfacial triplet pairings in general since the splitting between its two neighboring conductance maxima is substantially smaller than that within the first-in good agreement with our experimental results (recall the conductance data of samples B and C presented in Fig. In summary, we thoroughly discussed and analyzed our tunneling-conductance measurements on superconducting magnetic Al/Al 2 O 3 (/EuS)/Ni-Ga junctions, focusing, in particular, on thicker Ni (3 nm)-Ga (60 nm) and thinner Ni (1.6 nm)-Ga (30 nm) bilayers, respectively. While the conductance spectrum in the first case could be explained based on the findings of earlier studies, the second scenario turned out to become much more puzzling, as it mainly led to the additional formation of unexpected large-bias conductance shoulders that have not yet been understood. Since the latter remained mostly unaffected when "inverting" the Ni and Ga films, we concluded that all important physics should happen near the Ni-Ga interface. Performing PNR analyses to collect more information about the structure and magnetization of this interface, we detected the paramagnetic Meissner response in Ga to convince that the proximity-coupled bilayer induces superconducting triplet pairings around the Ni-Ga interface. With this in mind, we elaborated on a strongly simplified theoretical toy model, which allowed us to compute the junctions' tunneling DOS that our conductance measurements essentially probe. Comparing our phenomenological DOS simulations with experimental conductance data substantiated that the conductance shoulders do indeed provide a well-accessible transport fingerprint of newly induced superconducting triplet correlations in the vicinity of the Ni-Ga interface. To further characterize the novel triplet pairings within the Ni-Ga bilayer, we suggest to subsequently analyze the Ni-Ga-interface profile through SQUID and Lorentz-microscopy measurements, which can directly probe inhomogeneous spin textures around the interface. Moreover, investigating our samples' transport characteristics in the presence of an external magnetic field might give deeper insight into the triplet-pairing mechanism, as this manipulates the inhomogeneity of the interface magnetizations and shall therefore give a unique magnetization dependence to the conductance shoulders.