In this paper we present a theoretical and experimental study aimed at characterizing the hysteretic properties of viscoelastic materials. In the last decades viscoelastic materials have become a reference for new technological applications, which require lightweight, deformable but ultra-tough structures. The need to have a complete and precise knowledge of their mechanical properties, hence, is of utmost importance. The presented study is focused on the dynamics of a viscoelastic beam, which is both experimentally investigated and theoretically characterized by means of an accurate analytical model. In this way it is possible to fit the experimental curves to determine the complex modulus. Our proposed approach enables the optimal fitting of the viscoelastic modulus of the material by using the appropriate number of relaxation times, on the basis of the frequency range considered. Moreover, by varying the length of the beams, the frequency range of interest can be changed/enlarged. Our results are tested against those obtained with a well established and reliable technique as compared with experimental results from the Dynamic Mechanical Analysis (DMA), thus definitively establishing the feasibility, accuracy and reliability of the presented technique. Recent scientific advancements in field of automotive, electronics, micromechanical systems, pipe technologies, have led to new technologies where the use of lightweight, tough, soft and high deformable materials has become ubiquitous. In this scenario, viscoelastic materials have spread in many different contexts, from seals In this section, we derive the analytical formulation of the viscoelastic beam vibrational response. The main purpose is to get a simple-to-use formula, which can be utilized to characterize the viscoelastic modulus, by fitting the experimental acquisitions. It is known, in particular, that for viscoelastic materials, the stress-strain relation is governed by the following integral where ε(t) is time derivative of the strain, σ(t) is the stress, G (t -τ ) is the so called relaxation function. The viscoelastic complex modulus E (s) is closely related to the relaxation function G (t), and the simple equality E (s) = sG (s) exists in the Laplace domain. In this domain, in particular, it is possible to represent the complex modulus E (s) as the following series which derives from the generalized Maxwell model, consisting of a spring with elastic constant E 0 , that represents the elastic modulus of the material at zero-frequency, and k Maxwell In particular, by assuming that the transversal displacement |u (x, t)| L, it is possible to neglect the contribute of shear stress, which is always very low at the first resonances. The equation of motion can be therefore written as being μ = ρA, ρ the bulk density of the material, A = W B the cross section area, J xz = (1/12)W B 3 the moment of intertia, and f (x, t) the generic force acting on the beam. The solution of Eq.( It can be shown that the eigenfunctions φ n (x) do not change if we consider a viscoelastic material instead of a perfectly elastic one. The eigenfunctions φ n (x), in particular, can be calculated by solving the homogeneous problem with the opportune boundary conditions. In the Laplace domain, by considering the initial conditions equal to zero, Eq.( (φ x (x, s) = ∂φ (x, s) /∂x) having defined with C (s) = 1/E (s) the compliance of the viscoelastic material. In the present study, we determine experimentally the beam response when it is suspended at a fixed frame, in the so called "free-free" boundary condition. From a mathematical point of view, this set-up corresponds to the following mathematical conditions From the solution of Eq.( it is possible to derive the well known equation by simply forcing equal to zero the determinant of the system matrix obtained from Eqs. Let us observe that the solutions β n L = c n of Eq.( being δ nm the Kronecker delta function, as well as from Eq.( Through the above Eqs.( it is possible to rewrite Eq.( where dx is the projected force. The Laplace Transform of Eq.( and therefore the system response, defined in Eq.( in the Laplace domain the projected force is Hence, the analytic response of the beam can be rewritten as The beam response, derived in the above Eq.( being the acceleration A (x, iω) = U (x, iω) (iω) 2 . In this way, Eq.( We acquired a group of 10 time histories, each lasting 1 [s], with sampling frequency f s = 25600 By observing the coherence functions in Figure The best fit of the theoretical model has been performed by minimizing the above defined cost function k , which depends on the number k of relaxation times considered to characterize the viscoelastic modulus E (ω). In this manner, the viscoelastic modulus E (ω) (see definition in the Laplace domain in Eq.( With the aim of assessing the presented technique, we have also experimentally characterized our viscoelastic material through a Dynamic Mechanical Analyzer -MCR 702 MultiDrive -Anton Paar GmbH (Tribolab, Politecnico di Bari, Bari, Italy). However, the DMA approach is different, since the viscoelastic modulus E (ω) is directly measured by considering the stress -strain relation shown in the Eq.( In conclusion, the proposed method for the characterization of the viscoelastic materials, has revealed to be very efficient, easy to use, and reliable with inexpensive instrumentation. Moreover, the analytical model here presented and used to fit the experimental response of the beam, in particular, has proven to be accurate. The comparison between the viscoelastic moduli E (ω) characterized by means of our technique and through DMA, indeed, finally assessed the possibility to retrieve this so important mechanical quantity, by simply investigating the dynamics of a viscoelastic beam. We also found that, the idea to consider more beams with different lengths, is very useful to increase the frequency range of interest, and, in principle, by studying the dynamics of even longer or shorter beams, it is possible to cover wider frequency ranges. However, it should be highlighted that in order to obtain a range comparable with the one usually covered by DMA, a different instrumentation should be utilized. In particular, the impact hammer represents a limit in this direction, and it should be substituted with an electrodynamic shaker, which enables to investigate a wider frequency range maintaining high coherence. At last, also by controlling the surrounding temperature, is possible to enlarge the range of interest, i.e. by a frequency shift of the viscoelastic modulus E (ω) under study. These last two modifications to the actual experimental setup, will be object of further investigations. In this paper we have presented a very simple and accurate experimental approach for determining the complex modulus of viscoelastic materials. By means of the vibrational behaviour of suspended viscoelastic beams with different lengths, we have characterized the complex modulus of LUBRIFLON by fitting the measured response through an accurate analytical model of the beam dynamics, which takes into account multiple relaxation times of the material. In particular, the possibility to properly select the number of relaxation times in a frequency range of interest, turned out to be a key factor to obtain very good results. The instrumentation utilized in our experiments is inexpensive and easy to use, and it consists of an impact hammer and a suspended beam, instrumented by means of an accelerometer connected to a data acquiring module. Comparisons with DMA measurements demonstrate the validity of the proposed technique on a frequency range which could be comparable with the one usually covered by DMA technique. In conclusion, the proposed procedure represents a valid alternative approach to DMA, and can be considered as a significative step forward the improvement of the mechanical characterization of viscoelastic materials.