Previously, it has been shown that rapid cooling of yttrium-iron-garnet (YIG)/platinum (Pt) nano structures, preheated by an electric current sent through the Pt layer, leads to overpopulation of a magnon gas and to subsequent formation of a Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) of magnons. The spin Hall effect (SHE), which creates a spin-polarized current in the Pt layer, can inject or annihilate magnons depending on the electric current and applied field orientations. Here we demonstrate that the injection or annihilation of magnons via the SHE can prevent or promote the formation of a rapid cooling induced magnon BEC. Depending on the current polarity, a change in the BEC threshold of -8% and +6% was detected. These findings demonstrate a new method to control macroscopic quantum states, paving the way for their application in spintronic devices. The Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) The formation of a Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) can be achieved by a decrease in the temperature for realparticle systems In the previous experiments, a Pt or Al layer was used to heat the YIG nano structure Here, we investigate a similar structure but with a smaller YIG film thickness of 34 nm Figure Figures Figure The contribution of the SHE can be switched on by rotating the magnetic field by 90 • , hence pointing along the short axis of the stripe [see insets in Figs. In this geometry the SHE-STT contribution can be damping-or anti-damping like Figures The magnon annihilation process [Fig. In the case of the SHE-STT-induced magnon injection process [Fig. Note that a purely thermal excitation of magnons takes place over the whole spectral range [Fig. The results presented in Fig. Figure Figure In the following, the effect of the changed magnon population at the end of the pulse on the threshold voltage of the BEC formation is investigated. The applied DC pulse voltage defines the temperature increase achieved by the Joule heating, and, therefore, it defines the number of excess magnons redistributed in the process of rapid cooling. Thus, the investigation of the BLS intensity as a function of the applied voltage yields threshold information. For the time evolution of the temperature, see Supplemental materials. Figure In the case of STT-injection, the BLS intensity after termination of the pulse (dark blue curve) is the interplay of the rapid cooling induced magnon redistribution and the (decaying) STT-injected magnons during the pulse. To investigate if these two contributions are a linear superposition or if the SHE-STT effect driven injection influences the redistribution process, we need to subtract the intensity originating from an exponential decay of the STT-injected magnons. This intensity can be derived as I STT (t) = I STT t=τ P exp[-2(t -τ p )/τ m ], where I STT t=τ P is the intensity at the end of the pulse [integrated value shown in Fig. The decreasing intensity at higher voltages [U > 1.65 V in Fig. In conclusion, we found that the SHE-STT effect injects or annihilates magnons and, thus, shifts the threshold values for the rapid cooling-induced magnon BEC up to 8%. Utilizing the SHE-STT effect opens up opportunities for the control (triggering or suppression) of the magnon BEC formation when the applied voltage is close to the threshold value. The comparison between the magnon populations during the application of a DC pulse for the cases with and without a SHE-STT contribution has shown that the injection of magnons primarily takes place into the low energy part of the spectrum, and, thus, strongly promotes the formation of a rapid cooling induced magnon BEC. These findings suggest a new way to control the formation of a magnon BEC by the polarity of the applied current, paving the way for the utilization of macroscopic quantum states in spintronic devices. This research was funded by the European Research Council within the Starting Grant No. 678309 "MangonCircuits" and the Advanced Grant No. 694709 "SuperMagnonics", by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) within the Transregional Collaborative Research Center -TRR 173 -268565370 "Spin+X" (projects B01 and B04) and through the Project 271741898, and by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) within the project I 4696-N. Figures better comparison of the three cases described in the main text, Figs. Temperature at the end of the DC pulse The phenomenon of magnon BEC formation by rapid cooling is driven by a rapid decrease in the phonon temperature. In the following, we address the temperature dynamics of the investigated YIG/Pt structure subjected to short heating current pulses. Therefore, we performed COMSOL-Multiphysics-based simulations, using the Electric Currents module and the Heat Transfer in Solids module included in the simulation software. The material parameters used for the simulations are the same as given in the Supplement of Ref. Figure FIG. BLS spectra for different geometries as a function of the applied voltage We discussed the shift of the threshold of a rapid-cooling-induced magnon BEC formation based on the annihilation/injection of magnons via the SHE-STT effect during the pulse. For a slightly supercritical voltage range, we observe an injection of magnons to the bottom of the magnon spectrum in a rather broad frequency range, promoting the subsequent redistribution of the rapid cooling magnon excess to the bottom (see Fig. Figure For larger voltages applied to inject magnons, we observe the SHE-STT-effect-driven excitation of the magnon bullet mode. The reason for the excitation of the magnon bullet, which arises from nonlinear effects, is the reduced effective magnon relaxation rate of this particular mode. The low effective relaxation rate results from the bullet mode's low frequency and self-localization, preventing propagation losses. As shown in Fig. FIG. 