Thanks to high resolution and polarization analysis, resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) magnetic spectra of La 2 CuO 4 , Sr 2 CuO 2 Cl 2 and CaCuO 2 reveal a rich set of properties of the spin 1 /2 antiferromagnetic square lattice of cuprates. The leading single-magnon peak energy dispersion is in excellent agreement with the corresponding inelastic neutron scattering measurements. However, the RIXS data unveil an asymmetric lineshape possibly due to odd higher order terms. Moreover, a sharp bimagnon feature emerges from the continuum at ( 1 /2,0), coincident in energy with the bimagnon peak detected in optical spectroscopy. These findings show that the inherently complex spin spectra of cuprates, an exquisite manifestation of quantum magnetism, can be effectively explored by exploiting the richness of RIXS cross sections. The spin 1 /2 antiferromagnetic two-dimensional (2D) square lattice is one of the best studied quantum systems and represents a benchmark for quantum magnetism. Notably, it depicts the spin ground state arrangement in the CuO 2 planes, common to all high-temperature superconducting layered cuprates, when no doping charge is present and the antiferromagnetic order impedes charge transport and energetic magnons dominate the spin spectra The magnon dispersion is traditionally measured by inelastic neutron scattering (INS) and reproduced, within the linear spin-wave theory, by an improved Heisenberg model that includes higher-order terms Neutrons interact only with the electrons' spin, not with the charge, and with the atomic nuclei, making the theoretical treatment of the scattering cross-sections rather straightforward These differences in the cross sections stimulated a close comparison of the two techniques, and some doubts were raised on the possibility of deriving the actual spin dynamical structure factor S(q, ω) from RIXS data. Indeed, in the very first RIXS work Braicovich et al. of Sr 2 CuO 2 Cl 2 close to q = ( 1 /2, 0) (X-point) of the twodimensional (2D) Brillouin zone The RIXS spectra have been acquired using the ERIXS spectrometer of the ID32 beamline Fig. The extracted single magnon peak positions are shown in Fig. The richness of the RIXS spectra invites to go beyond the traditional analysis made on INS data and to better exploit the complexity of the RIXS cross sections. In that spirit, we acquired RIXS spectra of SCOC with analysis of the scattered light polarization at three different q values (Fig. Conversely, the σπ polarization at ( 1 /2, 0) does not fit this scenario. Indeed, one might expect σπ and πσ (red lines) to be proportional to each other and, eventually, to S ⊥ (( 1 /2, 0), ω), which is clearly not the case. This implies that the scattering operator in RIXS, in addition to the standard on-site spin-flip process Ŝ± (r) includes nonlocal contributions that can be sensitive to the electric field (i.e., photon polarization) orientation. A possible explanation is a generalization of the three spin operator proposed in Ref. We now turn to the ∆S = 0 excitations, which can be probed in RIXS as well as Raman and infrared (IR) spectroscopy. In all these cases the scattering opera- tor involves two spin operators B δ r ≡ Ŝr • Ŝr+δ , and can access excitations with an even number of magnons. In RIXS the scattering operator is usually derived assuming that the main effect of the intermediate 2p 5 3d 10 state is to transiently eliminate one magnetic site. This local approximation Figure In Fig. Taking full advantage of the additional information contained in the RIXS lineshape (both in parallel and crossed polarization channels) requires computations which include non-local effects in the scattering cross section and resonant effects in the matrix elements and selection rules, which we hope our work will stimulate. In the future, the present findings can be extended to other magnetic systems and doped cuprate compounds. In IR experiments a remarkably different situation was found for spin-1 2D antiferromagnetic square lattice, where four-magnon and higher order processes remain negligibly weak The experimental data were collected at the beam line ID32 of the European Synchrotron (ESRF) in Grenoble (France) using the ERIXS spectrometer designed jointly by the ESRF and the Politecnico di Milano. This work was supported by ERC-P-ReXS Project No. 2016-0790 of the Fondazione CARIPLO, Regione Lombardia and by MIUR Italian Ministry for Research through project PIK Polarix and PRIN Project No. 2017Z8TS5B. J.L. acknowledges financial support from Regione Lazio (L. R. 13/08) under project SIMAP. The computation using the exact diagonalization method in this work has been done using the facilities of the Supercomputer Center, the Institute for Solid State Physics, the University of Tokyo. We thank Riccardo Arpaia, Tom Devereaux, Kurt Kummer, Matteo Minola and Marco Moretti-Sala for fruitful discussions. N.B.B. thanks Diamond Light Source, UK, for hosting him during the writing of this manuscript. Computations were done with support through ISCRA Class C project HP10C72OM1.