The hybridization of magnetism and superconductivity has been an intriguing playground for correlated electron systems, hosting various novel physical phenomena. Usually, localized d-or f-electrons are central to magnetism. In this study, by placing a PTCDA (3,4,9,10-perylene tetracarboxylic dianhydride) molecular monolayer on ultra-thin Pb films, we built a hybrid magnetism/superconductivity (M/SC) system consisting of only sp electronic levels. The magnetic moments reside in the unpaired molecular orbital originating from interfacial charge-transfers. We reported distinctive tunneling spectroscopic features of such a Kondo screened electron impurity lattice on a superconductor in the regime of TK>>suggesting the formation of a two-dimensional bound states band. Moreover, moiré superlattices with tunable twist angle and the quantum confinement in the ultra-thin Pb films provide easy and flexible implementations to tune the interplay between the Kondo physics and the superconductivity, which are rarely present in M/SC hybrid systems. The combination of magnetism and superconductivity, which are normally mutually exclusive, provides an intriguing platform involving rich quantum phenomena, such as the Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) bound states Here, we report a hybrid bilayer system comprised of a monolayer (ML) of the organic molecule (3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic-dianhydride, i.e., PTCDA) and a superconducting Pb thin film. Although none of these two materials contains magnetism, surprisingly, we found that net spin moments formed in the molecular film, resulting in Kondo resonances near the Fermi level. First-principle calculations support the formation of spin-polarized lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) states induced by interlayer charge transfer. By scanning tunneling spectroscopy investigations, we revealed distinctive characteristics of the combination of a Kondo screened -orbital impurity lattice and a superconductor. In particular, our studies suggest the formation of a two-dimensional (2D) Kondo-induced impurity band near the superconducting gap edge. More interestingly, we found twistable moiré superlattices forming in this bilayer system, leading to moiré modulations for the Kondo-superconductivity interplay. In addition, the quantum confinement effect in Pb films provides another tuning knob to the charge transfer induced magnetic moments. These two appealing features combine in a single sample system, manifesting versatile tailoring of the complex interactions at the M/SC interface. Figure Based on the temperature dependence of the resonance Detailed discussions are given in the SM The quantitative strength of the Kondo resonance is strongly modulated by the moiré superlattices forming between the molecular and the Pb lattices. Such moiré structures show long-range ordered super-periodicities and a tunable twist angle both of which are absent in previous observations of the adsorption site dependent Kondo effect When a single localized magnetic moment is coupled to a superconductor, its exchange interaction with the Cooper pairs leads to in-gap states, referred to as YSR bound states, after the seminal works of Yu, Shiba, and Rusinov Figure A few important characteristics are noted: (i) the absence of multiplets typically observed for a high spin magnetic moment; (ii) a nearly symmetric particle/hole spectral weight; (iii) a spectral width broader than the typical bound state or YSR states; and (iv) a moiré modulation of ∆ * [Fig. which is beyond the YSR picture in the dilute limit. The absence of multiplets in spectra acquired using a superconducting tip [Fig. Finally, we show that the quantum confinement effect (QCE) in Pb films can dramatically affect the Kondo/superconductivity interplay. In conclusion, we have established an unusual magnetism/superconductivity hybrid bilayer with pure -electrons that are carrying the magnetic moments. Owing to the relatively delocalized nature of electrons, this hybrid system presents 2D-like behaviors for the interlayer stacking registry, the Kondo screening, and the bound state formation, which qualitatively distinguishes it from d-electron-and f-electron-based moment systems and thus opens new avenues for novel correlated physics. Moreover, the control over the twist angle offers a rare opportunity to explore the physics of the moiré modulated Kondo and superconductivity. In addition to combining moiré physics with quantum confinement effects, we demonstrated a practical tuning approach for the magnetic moment concentration and the SC pairing strength. Rich emergent quantum phenomena are anticipated with the combination of all these intriguing elements, as well as possibilities for fabrications of 2D organic structure 11774268, 11974012 and 61888102), the Ministry of Science and Technology of China Clean Si(111)-7×7 surface was prepared by cycles of flashing at 1480 K using direct-current heating (heavily n-type doping with a resistivity < 0.005 Ω/cm). A commercial Knudsen effusion cell was used to evaporate Pb (0.35ML/min), while a home-built evaporator was used for the PTCDA molecules (purchased from Aldrich Inc.) with a deposition ratio of 0.4 ML/min. Pb films were grown on Si(111) surface directly without preparation of the crystalline wetting layer. It was first deposited at a sample temperature of ~100K The STS measurements at 0.4 K were conducted by using a Unisoku-1300 STM at Wuhan University. The system can be cooled down to 0.4 K by a single shot 3 He cryostat; the magnetic field can be applied perpendicularly to the sample surface. Polycrystalline Pt-Ir and Nb STM tips were used in our experiments. The bias voltage is applied to the sample. dI/dV spectra were measured by using the lock-in technique with the reference signal at 963 Hz. Different modulation amplitudes were used depending on the energy range, as specified in each figure's captions. (1) Calculation methods. The density functional theory calculations were performed under the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) scheme with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional using the Vienna ab-initio simulation package (VASP). Core electrons were described In order to qualitatively examine the modulation effect of moiré superstructure, we carried out calculations for a series of laterally shifted adsorption positions of the PTCDA unit cell. We found that the equilibrium interlayer separation, charge transfer, and magnetic moment can vary along with the changes of registries in the in-plane direction. Magnitudes of charge transfer and moment were obtained for each registry at its equilibrium interlayer distance. As shown in Fig. Though we believe the oscillation of Kondo temperature indeed results from the variations of the local interlayer registry (i.e., adsorption site), just like other moiré induced super-periodicities. In our sample system, the effects of adsorption sites on Kondo shall be more complex than in other cases with the moments residing in d/f electrons. This is due to the fact that in our sample, not only the spin-exchange interaction but also the net magnetic moments are sensitive to the interlayer distance. For instance, in the above two configurations, though the exchange coupling may enhance when the d changes from 3.43 Å to 3.33 Å, the magnetic moment can completely diminish at d = 3.33 Å. The zero-bias peaks observed in the dI/dV spectroscopy can be fitted with the Fano lineshape formula where H is the magnitude,   is the background signal, EK is the energetic position, q is the Fano factor, and  is the half-width at half-maximum. The experimental spectra for all 20 molecules in which agrees reasonably well with the present fitting. Note the measurement at 77K was taken on a molecule with the same index within the moiré periodicity (not on the same sample region). In addition, the reduction of the zero-bias peak height (GV=0) with increasing TS follows the empirical expression for a spin-1/2 system: GV=0 = G0((T/TK * ) 2 +1) -s , where the coefficient s = 0. film is needed to produce the same suppression In Fig. It is worth noting that in the bright row, the peak of 1/q occurs at the locations with medium d (e.g., #7-#10), other than the locations with the lowest d. Combining with the measurements of bound states, we found that in our sample system, the Kondo and bound states asymmetries are not strictly correlated. This is different from the recent observation on FeTpyP-Cl/Pb (1) Deconvolution of the tunneling spectra. Following the procedures as below, we achieved the numerical deconvolution of the dI/dV spectra of PTCDA/Pb taken with a superconducting Nb tip. All experimental data analyzed in this section were taken at the sample temperature reading of 0.4 K. In principle, the tunneling spectra is a convolution of the tip DOS and the sample DOS : where n represents the DOSs, fFD is the Fermi-Dirac function. We first performed the simulation for a spectrum taken with a normal tip on bare Pb film. The DOS function of the normal tip (ntip) can be considered as a constant. The superconducting sample (or tip) has a BCS DOS as n n Re , where  is the order parameter, and γ is the Dynes parameter representing the intrinsic gap broadening With the acquired sample DOS and Teff, we perform a similar fitting for the spectrum taken We emphasize that the advantages of using the Nb tip in our studies are two-fold: i) the instrumental broadening can be qualitatively addressed and thus can be excluded from the reasons causing the large bandwidth of the bound states. ii) The dip features help us to identify the existence of bound states. where ( / ) / ( ) ( / )/( ) Here,   is the energy of bound states, 0 is the order parameter of superconductivity, Z (+) and Z (-) are the intensities of electron-and hole-like excitations. We use ∆0 =1.06 meV from the Matsuura fitting. By substituting the experimental values of ∆ * and into Eq.S3 and Eq.S4, we can solve NF|J| and NFKU. In our analysis, we considered NF|J| as an integrated variant, and the same consideration is applied to NFKU. Note that from the experimental observation of Z (+) < Z (-) , we can determine that KU>0, while the sign of J cannot be determined from the equations directly. Along the bright row-I, NFKU is always a small value (from 0.006 to 0.057). We do not observe obvious oscillation of KU along with the moiré periodicity, likely due to its relatively small amplitude. 7. Delocalization of the magnetic moments: 2D nature of the bound states and Kondo It was known that the 22ML Pb film has a relatively smaller work function compared to the 23ML one 