Dielectric metasurfaces have shown prominent applications in nonlinear optics due to strong field enhancement and low dissipation losses at the nanoscale. Chalcogenide glasses are one of the promising materials for the observation of nonlinear effects due to their high intrinsic nonlinearities. Here, we demonstrate, experimentally and theoretically, that significant second harmonic generation can be obtained within amorphous chalcogenide based metasurfaces by relying on the coupling between lattice and particle resonances. We further show that the high quality factor resonance at the origin of the second harmonic generation can be tuned over a wide wavelength range using a simple and versatile fabrication approach. The measured second harmonic intensity is orders of magnitude higher than that from a deposited chalcogenide film, and more than three orders of magnitude higher than conventional plasmonic and Silicon-based structures. Fabricated via a simple and scalable technique, these all-dielectric architectures are ideal candidates for the design of flat non-linear optical components on flexible substrates. High refractive index dielectric metasurfaces SH signals can also be strongly enhanced by using properly engineered resonances. For example, resonators with broken symmetry Another way to engineer high Q.F. metasurfaces is to use surface lattice resonances. For a bare lattice made from non-resonant particles, near-field enhancement is observed at the Rayleigh-anomaly wavelength. where a 0 is the periodicity or the lattice constant of the arrays, n is the surrounding refractive index, θ is the angle of incidence, and i is an integer denoting the diffraction order. Under normal incidence, this resonance is hence solely dependent on the lattice periodicity and the surrounding refractive index For weak coupling, both resonances are barely modified and the response of the system remains essentially Lorentzian. When coupling reaches the critical regime, this interaction leads to the emergence of a high Q.F. Fano-type resonance Interestingly, the entire response of the system can be controlled by the interactions between particle resonance (determined by its material composition and shape) and the lattice resonance, which is governed by the array periodicity and the surrounding refractive index However, independent control over geometrical parameters commonly relies on time and cost-intensive lithographic techniques and thus fails to optimize the nano-structures for enhanced SH performance. Previous works have proposed simple techniques to controllably tune a single geometrical parameter without relying on lithographic techniques, for example using thermoplastics Here, we address this issue and demonstrate a novel materials and fabrication platform for high conversion efficiency SH dielectric nanostructures from the coupling between particle resonance with lattice resonance, via the template dewetting of chalcogenide glasses-based metasurfaces. Chalcogenides An array of inverted pyramids with different periods and sizes was obtained by interference lithography followed by KOH anisotropic etching on p-doped Si [100] wafer (CEMITEC, Spain). Using a negative PDMS stamp (Sylgard 184, Dow Corning, USA), the Si microstructure was reproduced via nano-imprinting onto a thermoplastic polycarbonate sheet (Goodfellow, UK). The thin chalcogenide film (ChG) was then deposited by thermal evaporation (UNIVEX 250, Oerlikon, Germany). Annealing was achieved on a hot plate (Isotemp Fisher Scientific) (80°C) to induce thermal dewetting. All SEM samples were coated with a 10 nm carbon film. The SEM images were taken with a Zeiss Merlin field emission SEM equipped with a GEMINI II column operating at 3.0 kV with a probe current of 120 pA . All SEM image analysis were done using Image J software, averaging the measures over a large number N of particles for the size distribution (N>100) and a reduced number of periods P for the period extraction (P>5). The linear simulations were performed using commercially available FDTD software Lumerical (version 2018 a). The optical constants were obtained experimentally via spectroscopic ellipsometry (Sopra GES 5E) analysis of thin film of selenium (Figure S.I.3). A linearly polarized plane wave source was used for all the simulations. The substrate index was chosen to be 1.6, which is the average index of polycarbonate The linear transmission spectra were measured using an integrating sphere coupled with a spectrometer (Ocean Optics, UV-Vis USA). For the non-linear optical measurements, a commercial multiphoton scanning microscope (LEICA SP5MULTI-PHOTON) combined with a 20x/1.00 NA water-immersion objective (HCX PL APO) and a Ti:Sapphire femtosecond laser (Chameleon ultra-laser, repetition rate: 80 MHz, operating wavelength λ = 800 nm, pulse duration: 140 fs) combined with an electro-optical modulator (EOM) to adjust the input power was used. The backward scattered SHG from the structures was collected by the same objective followed by a beam splitter, a bandpass filter (of different wavelengths with a bandwidth of 10 nm), and a photomultiplier tube (NDD PMT). The XY scanner (400 Hz scanning speed) of the microscope enabled a 387.5 μm × 387.5 μm field range with 758.32 nm pixel resolution at 800 nm. The quadratic dependence between the SH intensity and the input power was recorded be carefully tuning the input power. The fabrication process is schematized in Figure On the other hand, our process also proposes a way to control Se particle size or radius (or equivalently their spacing distance, labeled G in this work). By successively depositing and dewetting thin layers of Se of controlled thickness, it is possible to control the inter-particle distance down to approximately 10 nm (Figure S.I.2) while increasing the particle size. Controlling evaporated thickness hence provides a lever over the interparticle gap. As apparent in Figure Interestingly, the particle size distribution can be narrowed down by reducing the interparticle gap (equivalent to increasing the particle size), independently of the factors cited above. This point has alrea dy been extensively investigated in reference 39, and we refer the reader to this work for more details on this point. The particles shown in , which strongly decreases as the gap is reduced from 50 nm to 10 nm. This effect contrasts with the appearance of hot-spots at lower gap in plasmonic metasurfaces. We now turn towards the influence of the array periodicity on the optical spectrum, keeping a fixed particle a small period, is mainly attributed to the electric lattice resonance. Figure To demonstrate the potential of our metasurfaces design capabilities, we used the previously demonstrated nano-photonic structures with optimized light-matter interactions for resonantly-enhanced SHG. Simulated linear transmission spectrum (Figure where n photon SH and n photon Fundamental are the photon counts of the generated second harmonic (SH) and the fundamental incident signal respectively. The intensity I is related to the photon count according to the following equation: where I is the energy and λ the corresponding wavelength. We proceed to measure the re-emitted SH intensity I SH over a fixed integration time (10 second), as well as the intensity of the fundamental I Fundamental reflected from a gold mirror surface over a reduced integration time to avoid saturation (1 second). All measurements are done under normal incidence. Normalizing these powers with time and combining relations (ii) and (iii) finally provide the conversion efficiency, which is evaluated here at 10 -6 at resonance and at 10 -8 off-resonance. The normalized SHG power shows a peak at the asymmetric electric resonance (700 nm) due to the electromagnetic field enhancement (Figure In conclusion, with a simple process of nanoimprinting and dewetting, we developed a technique whereby optical properties of all-dielectric metasurfaces can be finely tuned whilst keeping the same original Si master. The tunability of the optical properties is possible by applying different pressures, leading to a controlled change in period. By a process of successive dewetting, increasing particle sizes were obtained, which in turn tuned the inter-particle gap. With this ability to control these two independent parameters, different optical modes with large Q.F. were observed in a simple way without undergoing any hard lithographic steps. In particular, we have shown that by this programmable process, field enhancement could be increased up to a 100 times. Such enhancement of field could giv e rise to SHG with a tailored FWHM using an amorphous structure. We have experimentally and numerically verified that the performance of SH intensity can be significantly improved by proper tuning the different optical m odes in our metasurface. We demonstrated a SH conversion efficiency that is significantly larger compared to plasmonic metasurfaces and Silicon. Our approach could also be generally applied to III-V semiconductor in the UV or VUV regions, where sharp SH signals are required for bio-molecule sensing application. Such general design approach could indeed pave the way for fabrication of nonlinear meta-devices, fast optical switching, frequency conversion, and lightbased communication. Mie theory was used to calculate the single particle scattering cross-section. Scattering cross-section of a single homogeneous sphere is given by: Where k is the wavenumber , a n , b n are the nth order of electric and magnetic Mie coefficients respectively; and n=1 and 2 indicates the dipole and quadruple moments respectively. Figure 