Abstract-Triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG), a class of mechanical to electrical energy transducers, has emerged as a promising solution to self-power Internet of Things (IoT) sensors, wearable electronics, etc. The use of synchronous switched energy extraction circuits (EECs) as an interface between TENG and battery load can deliver multi-fold energy gain over simple minded Full Wave Rectification (FWR). This paper presents a detailed analysis of Parallel and Series Synchronous Switched Harvesting on Inductor (P-SSHI and S-SSHI) EECs to derive the energy delivered to the battery load and compare it with the standard FWR (a 3rd circuit) in a common analytical framework, under both realistic conditions, and also ideal conditions. Further, the optimal value of battery load to maximize output and upper bound beyond which charging is not feasible are derived for all the three considered circuits. These closed-form results derived with general TENG electrical parameters and first-order circuit non-idealities shed light on the physics of the modeling and guide the choice and design of EECs for any given TENG. The derived analytical results are verified against PSpice based simulation results as well as the experimentally measured values. Index Terms-energy harvesting, triboelectric nanogenerator, switched circuits, internet of things O NE of the major challenges faced by today's ever- expanding field of mobile electronics, Internet of Things (IoT), implantables, and wearable electronics is limited onboard battery lifetime. Placing a high capacity battery presents the demerits of increased size, weight, maintenance, and cost. Hence, recent years have seen a tremendous interest in integrating a miniaturized energy harvester to increase the battery life by scavenging the ambient energy Recently, a new class of mechanical to electrical energy transducers termed triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs) based on the conjugation of friction-induced electrification with electrostatic induction as its working principle have been developed There remain engineering and technical challenges, e.g., integrating TENG with electronic devices for practical applications, optimal design of transducer, and energy extraction: A critical issue arises from the fact that TENG's output harnessing energy from environment with fluctuating movement is non-D.C. and random. Hence, it needs to be "rectified" to a stable positive form to be able to charge an on-board battery or capacitor. Also, TENGs are capacitive in nature with high inherent impedance, which might be fixed or nonlinearly varying based on the mode of TENG Full Wave Rectifier (FWR) is one of the simplest EEC in terms of implementation • The closed-form equations for the per-cycle energy output (E cycle ) of both the P-SSHI and S-SSHI circuits at a given battery load are derived for the first time. In addition, the upper limit on battery load, optimal battery load, and corresponding maximum E cycle for both the SSHI circuits are also derived. Effect of TENG parameters (determined by construction and operation of the given TENG) and circuit non-idealities on the E cycle have been captured in our models to guide the design of these EECs. • Incorporation of the following critical non-idealities in the analytical model to study their adverse effect on the output energy (E cycle ) and also to provide a more accurate model for both the SSHI circuits: -Leakage charge through any off switch over a cycle arXiv:2102.04581v1 [physics.app-ph] 9 Feb 2021 and also due to other sources such as ringing transients of oscillators at switch toggle times; -Limited quality factor of the resonator circuits determined by parasitic resistance of inductor and the on-state resistance of switches; -On-state voltage drop of diodes. • Experimental implementation of FWR and both the SSHI circuits using self-propelled electronic switches with a simple control circuit comprising just one active component (a comparator). • Validation of the presented analytical models by way of close match with those experimentally measured and PSpice simulated E cycle at different battery loads. • Comparison of P-SSHI, S-SSHI, and the standard FWR circuit in a common framework to bring forward their respective pros and cons. It is important to note that while these EECs have been explored previously for piezoelectric transducers A variety of EEC architectures have been presented in literature For the different EECs (FWR, P-SSHI, S-SSHI), we derive the per-cycle energy delivered to a battery load rather the instantaneous output power since the vibration frequency can vary, affecting the power but not the per-cycle energy. A battery load is selected for analysis (as opposed to a resistive or capacitive load) since most frequently, there is an onboard battery for IoT, wearables and, other mobile electronic devices, and the harvester's role is to supplement their energy and extend the lifetime. The use of battery load as opposed to resistive load introduces additional complexity of rectification that our EECs also incorporate. The analytical derivations additionally include the computation of the optimal value of the battery load to maximize output and upper bound beyond which the charging becomes infeasible, providing additional insights into the 3 EECs. Our analytical derivations and experimental verification are provided for the most generalized case: "Contact-Separation" mode TENGs, in which the internal capacitance varies with time, so that the ratio of maximum to minimum TENG capacitances β ≥ 1. This general class also includes Lateral Sliding and Single Electrode Contact mode TENGs. In contrast, the Sliding Freestanding and Contact Freestanding mode TENGs, having fixed internal capacitance (β = 1) Both the SSHI circuits operate with an external inductor, connected briefly at the TENG operation extremes to form a LC oscillator along with the TENG capacitor. For accurate modeling, we carefully consider the quality factor of this oscillator emanating from the non-idealities: parasitic series resistance of inductor (R L ) as well as the on-state resistance (R on ) of the switch. Additionally, the leakage charge (Q L ) through the off switches and during the oscillator ringing transients over an operation cycle is also included in our mathematical modeling. Further, the diode's on-state voltage drop (V D ) is the third analytically modeled non-ideality in our setup. Here we summarize a 1st-order lumped circuit model for Contact-Separation mode TENG where 0 is the electrical permittivity of air, and d is the relative dielectric constant of the Teflon dielectric layer. Denoting the thicknesses of the dielectric and air-gap as t d , x(t) respectively, the voltage across the two electrodes of TENG can be calculated using the Poisson's equation, as below: Inserting (1) in (2), the voltage across TENG can be written as: From (3), we can arrive at the lumped element circuit model of the "contact-separation mode TENG" shown in Fig. V oc (t) := σx(t) It is clear from ( For the analysis purposes, we take x(t) to be varying with period T , with minimum value 0 (when the top plate is fully down) and maximum value x max (when the top plate is fully up). Then at each integer multiple of the period (t = nT ), the two plates are in contact (x(t) = 0), whereas at the corresponding half-period later (t = (n + 1 2 )T ), the two plates are maximally separated (x(t) = x max ). Accordingly, there are two extreme states of the TENG operation: The voltage and capacitor values at these extreme states, namely, maximum open circuit voltage (V oc,max ), minimum TENG capacitance (C T,min ), and maximum TENG capacitance (C T,max ) constitute the TENG parameters that influence the energy output of the EECs. A convenient useful term in subsequent analysis is the ratio of the capacitances at the two extremes: β := C T ,max C T ,min . III. ANALYSIS OF ENERGY EXTRACTION CIRCUITS For each of the three circuits, the general approach to derive the per-cycle energy delivered to the battery load (E cycle ) is to track the TENG voltage at States I and II of the circuit operation. Since the capacitances at States I and II (C T,min and C T,max ) are known, the corresponding charge on the TENG capacitor (Q C T ) can then be found using the TENG equation For a FWR, its battery charging process can be understood by following the voltage waveform shown in Fig. This completes the first half cycle. As the second half cycle begins, V oc starts to drop, causing the overall TENG voltage to fall below the threshold V BL + 2V D and the conduction stops. Battery no longer charges, and capacitor retains its charge to the level at State II, until the time when a dual situation arises, namely, the absolute TENG voltage reaches V T (t) ≥ V BL +2V D and gets clamped at that value till State I is reached, thus completing one full cycle (Refer Fig. 1) Per-Cycle Energy Output: The energy delivered to the load battery in each cycle denoted E cycle , is the product of the battery voltage (V BL ) and the total charge flowing through it in that cycle (∆Q cycle ). From the charge conservation, this total charge flowing through the battery equals the change in the TENG capacitor charge in the two half-cycles, By using (4), the voltage and the charge on the TENG capacitor at the two states, denoted can be written as follows: It follows that, Since this same change in charge flows through the load battery in the respective half-cycles, the energy that the battery gains during one cycle is given by twice this change in charge times the battery voltage: 2) Optimal Battery Load: From ( 3) Upper Bound to Battery Voltage: In order for the load battery to charge, certain conditions must hold. In particular, for the charging in the first half cycle to commence, the maximum achievable voltage must exceed the upper threshold voltage needed for charging: Similarly, for the charging in the second half cycle to occur, the minimum achievable voltage must fall below the lower threshold voltage required for charging: Combining the two cases, it follows that for charging in both half-cycles, the following should hold: Once the first half-cycle completes, the capacitor acquires a voltage of V oc,max -(V BL + 2V D ), and in the extreme case (corresponding to the upper bound battery load, where the conduction will occur just at the end of the second half-cycle, i.e., at State I), the conduction ceases until State I, preserving the capacitor charge at: Now since V I C T < V oc,max , (10) simplifies to: The last condition provides an upper bound to the load battery voltage for it to charge in the FWR extraction circuit. As expected of a quadratic function, it is double the optimal battery value. and Q I L respectively in the following derivation. 1) P-SSHI circuit analysis at States I and II: For the sake of analytical convenience, we introduce four sets of notation for the pre and post switching TENG voltage (V T (t)), TENG capacitor charge (Q C T (t)) and its voltage (V C T (t)) at States I and II: Here, T I on and T II on denote the switching periods at States I and II respectively, and equal the corresponding half the LC T resonator cycle time period. Those are designed to be small compared to the vibration cycle period (T ); hence we can approximate the TENG capacitance C T (t) and open circuit voltage V oc (t) to be constant over the switching period. At State II, the P-SSHI circuit can be simplified to that in Fig. This can be solved for TENG capacitor voltage V C T (t) with initial condition as to obtain: where ω II d is the resonance frequency given by, Switch is kept "on" for half the resonant time period (T II on = ). Hence, with Here, Q II f is the series resonator quality factor at State II, and 0 < α II < 1 is its "normalized" form. The TENG voltage at the end of switching period (V II+ T ) can then be obtained from ( Thus, the normalized quality factor, α II captures the reduction in the voltage swing (flip) at State II due to the circuit's series parasitic resistance (R S ). On the other hand, during the switching at State I, the P-SSHI circuit is simplified to as shown in Fig. Note that the resonance frequency 2) Per-Cycle Energy Output: Equations ( Post switching at State II, using ( In the second half-cycle, there are two possibilities, either the TENG voltage reaches the lower threshold voltage, -(2V D + V BL ) for charging of load to occur (Fig. The "transition" load value, V BL,t separating these two cases can be derived from the limiting case of no conduction in the second half cycle and TENG Voltage at State I (V I- T ) just reaching the lower threshold, -(V BL,t + 2V D ), i.e., Under the condition of no current flow through load in the second-half cycle, considering leakage, Case 1: V BL < V Bl,t : Here, TENG conducts in the second half-cycle, and hence, the TENG voltage is clamped to -(V BL + 2V D ) until reaching State I. Hence, Post switching at State I, using Current flows through the load barring the switching periods at States I and II. As before, the per-cycle energy delivered to the load (E cycle ) is the battery load (V BL ) times the charge flowing through it (∆Q cycle ). The absolute difference between the TENG capacitor charge at State I after switching (Q I+ C T ) and the TENG capacitor charge at State II before switching (Q II- C T ) obtained using ( Similarly, using ( Hence, ∆Q cycle := ∆Q I+→II-+ ∆Q II+→I-and for this case, E 1 cycle = V BL ∆Q cycle , implies: Case 2: V BL ≥ V BL,t : Here, no conduction occurs through load in the second half cycle, implying Post switching at State I, using From ( Since in this case, ∆Q cycle = ∆Q I+→II-, we can obtain, 3) Optimal Battery Load: We first show that the optimal condition occurs in the case when, V BL ≥ V BL,t . Using Also from ( Employing the above inequality into the last equation, and noting that V BL > 0 and 0 < α II < 1, it follows that E 2 cycle -E 1 cycle ≥ 0, implying that a larger per-cycle energy is harvested when V BL ≥ V BL,t . The optimal battery voltage (V * BL ) and the maximized per-cycle energy (E * cycle ) can then be found by analyzing this case to yield: As detailed in Sec.V, the values of the non-ideality parameters (V D , α I /α II , and Q I L /Q II L ) change significantly over the operation range as the load battery varies, causing the currents and voltages in the circuits to change. Hence, to estimate the optimal battery load and corresponding optimal energy output, their averaged values over the entire load operating range are used in the above derived equations. 4) Upper bound to Battery Voltage: If the load V BL is higher than V oc,max -2V D - C T ,min , there shall be transient operation cycles before the steady-state charging commences. We introduce the notation V T,k to denote the TENG voltage in the kth cycle. Then starting from rest, i.e., V I T,1 = 0 and no conduction through the load in the first half-cycle, the TENG voltage at State II is simply given by, which is then followed by a voltage inversion due to the switching action, implying, Similarly, when no conduction occurs in the second half-cycle, The voltage is flipped again at the onset of the second vibration cycle, implying, Following the above reasoning, the maximum TENG voltage in the k th cycle (at State II) can be written as a sum of geometric series with common ratio α I α II , i.e., Thus, through the switching at the extremes, the TENG voltage will continue to build up until it reaches V BL + 2V D , post to which charging commences and the energy output equation (E cycle ) derived in (28) yields the per-cycle harvested energy. An upper bound to the battery voltage can be derived from the extreme case where no charging occurs even as k → ∞, and with α I α II < 1, we get, While TENGs generally have high open circuit voltage (V oc,max ), in the earlier discussed circuits, the maximum TENG voltage (V T ) gets clamped to a value limited by the battery load voltage. In contrast, a serial switch can allow the voltage buildup irrespective of the battery load, as in the presented case of the S-SSHI circuit. It consists of a serial (29) As in the case of the P-SSHI circuit, the switch is closed for half the LC T resonator cycle. Accordingly, solving the above differential equation and performing the analysis as in Section III-B1, the TENG capacitor voltage after the switching (V II+ C T ) is given by, On the other hand, at State I, the S-SSHI circuit is simplified to that in Fig. Here, α II and α I are the same as those defined earlier in ( 2) Switching among States: Transient Phase: The previous subsection discussed the S-SSHI circuit when the switch is closed at States I and II and derived the relations among the pre-switching and post-switching TENG voltages at both those states. Next we derive the pre-switching TENG voltages at the two states to complete the characterization of the TENG voltages. Unlike P-SSHI, the S-SSHI circuit has a transient phase and either the TENG voltage settles to a steady-state value higher than or equal to V oc,max , or a value less than V BL + 2V D (refer Fig. With no current flow other than leakage between States I and II with switch S open, Using the above equation and the relation in With only leakage current up to reaching State I of the subsequent ) and from above equation, it follows, Using Above is a recursive relation, which can be solved to obtain the relation between V I+ T,k+1 and V I+ T,1 : Taking the TENG operation to start from rest, i.e., V I+ T,1 = 0, the above equates to a sum of geometric series with (k -1) terms and common ratio, c 1 = α I α II < 1, and the first term as c 2 . It follows that, This provides a closed-form solution for the post-switching TENG voltage at State I of the kth cycle. Also using From above equation it is clear that when c 2 > 0, the TENG voltage builds up over time (increases with respect to k) as in Fig. 3) Per-Cycle Energy Output in Steady-State: In the steadystate, from Using this, along with the relations ( The change in TENG capacitor charge during the two switching periods flows through the load. S-SSHI being a series circuit, the leakage charge flows through the load too. So the charge flowing through the load in one cycle equals, Hence, the per-cycle energy output equals, V BL ∆Q cycle . Using The number of transient cycles required to attain the steadystate depends on the product of the two normalized quality factors c 1 = α I α II (or equivalently their geometric mean). A system with a lower quality factor shall reach the steady-state quicker but with a lower per-cycle energy output for a given load. 4) Optimal Battery Load: E cycle found in ( 5) Upper bound to Battery Voltage: As discussed earlier, condition for S-SSHI circuit to reach a non-zero steady-state (so battery can be charged in steady-state) is: The above condition sets an upper bound to the battery voltage for a sustained S-SSHI charging. In the above sections, we derived the closed-form results for each of the three considered circuits' per-cycle energy output. Here, we compare their optimal output in a common analytical framework. For the sake of simplicity, we relax the analysis conditions by using ideal diodes and switches, i.e., take the values of diode voltage drop (V D ), leakage (Q I L /Q II L ), and switch-on resistance (R on ) as zero. For further convenience, we define: This allows easy tabulation of optimal per-cycle energy output (E * cycle ), optimal battery load (V * BL ), and maximum gain over FWR circuit ( ) as in Table Using Table we study the effect of quality factor on the optimal gains of P-SSHI and S-SSHI circuits over FWR as in Fig. Optimal Load Quality factor: Q I (α I ) Fig. • The optimal gains of P-SSHI and S-SSHI circuit are increasing with inductor quality factor (Fig. TENG with a contact area of 113.8 cm 2 is built as shown in the schematic of Fig. The key electrical parameters to characterize TENG are maximum open circuit voltage (V oc,max ), minimum and maximum TENG capacitance (C T,min and C T,max ). 1) TENG Capacitance: We follow the method described in 2) TENG maximum open circuit voltage: We use the standard FWR circuit to measure V oc,max . In the section III-A3, the upper bound on the load battery voltage is derived for the FWR circuit. Instead of a battery, if a capacitor (of any capacitance) is charged using a FWR circuit, its voltage will saturate at the same value (V sat ), which by V oc,max = (β + 1)(V sat + 2V D ). By charging a capacitor, V sat was measured as 54.4V . At saturation, negligible current flows through the FWR circuit, and hence diode voltage drop (V D ) can be neglected, yielding V oc,max as 188.77V . The measured TENG parameters are summarized in Table Synchronous switched circuits (P-SSHI and S-SSHI) described above are implemented using the MOSFET as switches and operated through dedicated control circuits. The control circuit's function is to detect States I and II during the TENG operation and issue the required gate pulse to the MOSFET switches. The switching control circuit receives input from an "auxiliary" TENG (with contact area 1/8 th to that of the main TENG) that is implemented on the same fixed bottom and moving upper plates as the main TENG to operate in parallel (Fig. 2) P-SSHI Circuit: P-SSHI circuit is implemented as shown in Fig. The experimentally measured, simulated, and analytically obtained per-cycle energy output (E cycle ) at different load battery values (V BL ) for each of the three considered energy extraction circuits (EECs) are co-plotted in Fig. Referring to Fig. The E cycle for the P-SSHI circuit strictly increases with V BL in the considered range of 0 -35V (Fig. For the S-SSHI circuit, the parabolic response gives the peak E cycle at around 26V (Fig. VI. CONCLUSION This work developed a mathematical analysis framework for the synchronous switched energy extraction circuits: P-SSHI and S-SSHI along with the standard FWR circuit for TENG transducers and derived closed-form formulae for their per-cycle energy output, optimum battery load value, and also the upper bound on battery voltage beyond which extraction is not feasible. The modeling included the non-idealities of diode drop, leakage current, and switch and inductor resistances. The strong match of analytical model results with simulation and measured ones shows that the analytical models can be used to assess TENG EEC performance once the TENG parameters have been measured. An ideally switched P-SSHI/S-SSHI circuit at optimal load was found to provide more than 100 fold gain over the FWR circuit at their optimum values, depending on the inductor quality factor. The effect of load battery change on the percycle energy output was examined. All the circuits show a parabolic response, providing an optimal battery load and an upper bound. Such comparison of energy extraction circuits brought forward their pros versus cons over each other. S-SSHI has superior energy output compared to other circuits but operates over a smaller load range. While P-SSHI energy output can exceed that of S-SSHI, it is optimized at a load voltage value several times the TENG maximum open circuit voltage (V oc,max ). Use of a DC/DC converter can make this feasible, but with added complexity and loss, and so P-SSHI shall be more suited for TENG with low V oc,max . Also, for a TENG with low V oc,max or high β, the low upper bound on the battery load in the case of the S-SSHI circuit can be limiting. In summary, the presented work offers design insights/tradeoffs for TENG energy extraction circuits. A possible direction of further research is to implement the discussed circuit architectures by using "passive" control circuits. Development of integrated efficient DC/DC converters to operate the P-SSHI and S-SSHI circuit at their optimal load for any given TENG and the on-board battery is another direction. Further, implementing the EECs identified leakage through MOSFET switches as one of the major loss factors. So other switching technologies with high rated voltage and low leakage, such as SiC (Silicon Carbide), can be explored. APPENDIX A. Dynamic measurement of TENG capacitance An AC voltage source with frequency f ac several magnitudes higher than the TENG operation frequency f was connected to TENG (see Fig. Table f Quality factor: Q I (α I ) f P-SSHI | β=2.5 P-SSHI | β=2.5 P-SSHI | β=1 S-SSHI | β=1 S-SSHI | β=2.5 S-SSHI | β=2.5 S-SSHI/P-SSHI | β=1