These comments aim to correct some apparent weaknesses in the theory of field electron emission given in a recent paper about nanoscale vacuum channel transistors, and to improve the presentation of this theory. In particular, it is argued that a "simplified" formula stated in the paper should not be used, because this formula is known to under-predict emission current densities by a large factor (typically around 300 for an emitting surface with local work function 4.5 eV). Thus, the "simplified" formula may significantly under-predict the practical performance of a nanoscale vacuum channel transistor. a University of Surrey, Advanced Technology Institute & Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Guildford, Surrey, GU2 7XH, UK. E-mail: r.forbes@trinity.cantab.net In a recent paper Ji Xu et al. make the usual (acceptable) simplifying assumption that their emitter can be modelled theoretically as if it were a free-electron metal with a smooth planar surface of large lateral where e is the elementary (positive) charge, m is the electron mass, h is Planck's constant, φ is the relevant local work function, and F is the relevant local surface field. The Nordheim parameter y is a known function of φ and F, and v(y) and t(y) are appropriate particular values of well-defined special mathematical functions (e.g., see Jensen Modern discussions of FE theory normally simplify eq. ( constants. The definitions and values (to 7 significant figures) of these universal constants can be written The constants are known to at least the accuracy stated, but should be suitably rounded in technological contexts. Inserting these constants into eq. ( Note that, in the modern International System of Quantities introduced in the 1970s, A and B are not pure numbers but are physical constants with units. Failure to state the units can lead to dimensional inconsistency and discrepancies. Thus, just below their eq. ( In fact, eqns (4) and (5) in the paper under discussion are dimensionally inconsistent, because the units of A and B have been omitted. In the modern ISQ, the best way of writing these equations is to put the FN constants A and B as defined above into these equations, rather than their numerical values, and give the values of A and B separately, as above. Ji Xu et al. next make two modifications to eq. ( where β is a field enhancement factor. In the paper under discussion, this relationship is confused by the fact that the authors use the same symbol "F" for both of the two different types of field. However, provided that numerical methods have been used to calculate the local field, and that a field emission formula involving local field has been used to calculate local current density, no problem should arise from this confusion over field definitions. The authors then attempt to formulate a relationship between average field F av and the voltage V between the emitter and the counter-electrode. The formula that they require is actually where d is the distance between the emitter and the counter-electrode. However, in the text below their eq. ( where the meaning of b is defined by their eq. ( We now return to discussion of my eq. ( This equation (which is sometimes called the "elementary FE equation") is undoubtedly simpler, but this approximation also introduces numerical error, namely under-prediction of current density by a large factor The view of the present author is that this under-prediction is an undesirable feature of an unnecessary "simplification". Although setting t(y) =1 is an acceptable approximation, it is much better to leave the correction factor v(y) in the FE equation. Conversion to current-voltage-based form then yields the equations where I is the emission current and α is the formal emission area. An ideal experimental FE device/system is one where there are no "complications", such as those associated with series resistance in the current path, or with current dependence in field enhancement factors. For an ideal system the measured current-voltage characteristics can validly be identified with the theoretical emission characteristics. Equation (10) thus describes the form theoretically predicted from Murphy-Good FE theory for the shape of a measured FN plot taken from an ideal experimental system. Because v(y) is an indirect function of V, it can be shown that the slope S of the theoretical FN plot is given by where the slope correction function 7 s(y) is a slowly varying function of y (and hence of V). The function s(y) can be adequately approximated as having the constant value 0.95. For an ideal system, the other parameters in eq. ( The following point also needs to be made. Strictly, the theory given above (which relates the emitter local surface field to a measured voltage) is theory that applies to a diode configuration in which voltage V is unambiguously defined. However, the transistors under discussion have three electrodes. Care is needed in order to apply the above voltage-based theory only in circumstances where the transistor is effectively behaving as a diode. In other circumstances, eq. ( The remarks in this comment use an approach and notation that aims to be close to that used in the paper under discussion. Usually, the present author's preference would be to formulate FE theory in a somewhat different manner, using different notation conventions described elsewhere A general consequence of these remarks is as follows. It is not clear from the paper precisely which equations have been used to carry out the reported simulations of circuit behaviour. If equations ( will probably be quantitatively unreliable.