This paper deals with modelling the effect of wear on the dynamics of the shrouded bladed disk with frictional contacts at the shrouds and the contact interface evolution. Prediction of fretting wear commonly occurring at the contacts of turbomachinery components, and its impact on the dynamics is increasingly researched due to the components subjected to their structural limits for performance and operating at high loading conditions. Over a lifetime, the fretting wear at these contacts could alter the global dynamic response of these bladed disks from the designed operating point and could lead to high vibration amplitudes. This study implements a coupled static/dynamic harmonic balance method (HBM) with wear energy approach and an adaptive wear logic to study the impact on the steady-state nonlinear dynamic response. Firstly, the methodology is applied to a cantilever beam with a contact patch and then to a shrouded bladed disk with shroud contacts using cyclic symmetry boundary conditions. The novelty of the paper is to show the effect of wear on the dynamics with the changing contact pre-load using a coupled approach. A wear acceleration parameter v w,max is defined, and the impact of the choice of this parameter is discussed in detail on the computation time and the accuracy of results. The test cases demonstrate the impact of wear on the dynamic nonlinear response curves and the contact interface evolution for various scenarios. Mechanical assemblies made of two or more components have contact interfaces between them. Many a time relative sliding occurs during operation, sometimes intentional for design and functional purposes and at times unintentional. In turbomachinery components such as bladed disks, the relative sliding at blade roots, shroud contacts and under platform dampers are carefully designed to provide friction damping and to reduce the vibration amplitudes. These components have very high modal density, and resonances are unavoidable within the operating range. The contacts are precisely designed to undergo small relative motion and provide friction damping and reduce the peak vibration amplitudes. Consequently, this high-frequency small-amplitude motion leads to fretting wear during operation. This wear affects the global dynamics over a period of time and causes an undesirable shift in resonant frequency and amplitude. The turbomachinery components are designed to perform at its structural limits to obtain the maximum efficiency. Hence, they experience very high static and dynamic loads due to centrifugal forces, thermal strains and fluctuating gas forces, leading to high cycle fatigue (HCF). HCF is one of the common failure modes of the bladed disks. This leads to degraded performance, sometimes even catastrophic failure. conditions ([3]- Today's need is embedding the accurate wear prediction tool into these non-linear dynamic solvers to study the impact of wear and contact interface evolution. There is little research available on this joint topic. Brake's book To the author's knowledge, the only research that studied the effect of wear on the evolution of dynamics of friction contact experimentally and characterized by a constitutive numerical model was by Fantetti et al. The current research is a numerical work and aims at developing and implementing a method to predict the effect of wear on the dynamics of structures with contact interfaces and also the evolution of contact interface using a proven static/dynamic coupled approach with harmonic balance method (HBM) 1) Modelling the effect of wear on the dynamic forced response and the contact interface evolution with 'changing contact pre-load'. 2) The impact of the choice of user-defined wear acceleration parameter v w,max that is described in the paper. The contact interface introduces nonlinearity to the system of equations. Two ways to solve the non-linear differential equation is using time domain and frequency domain methods. A time-domain method such as Direct Time Integration (DTI) provides the transient as well as steady-state response, but is computationally demanding and is not a feasible solution for practical scenarios and systems with large degrees of freedom (DOF). The state-of-the-art frequency-domain method to compute the non-linear response is the Harmonic Balance Method (HBM). This method assumes a periodic response under periodic excitation. Krack and Gross's book The current study uses a more recent formulation of the HBM, which allows performing a coupled static and dynamic analysis of the system. This coupled method is proven to provide accurate results in comparison to the classical uncoupled approach The governing equation of motion of a generic system with contact interfaces is written as: where M ∈ R N×N is the mass matrix; C ∈ R N×N is the viscous damping matrix; K ∈ R N×N is the stiffness matrices; Q(t) ∈ R N×1 is a nodal displacement vector; Q ̇ is the time derivative of Q; F(t) ∈ R N×1 is the excitation force vector and F c (Q, Q ̇, t) ∈ R N×1 is the nonlinear contact force interaction vector. The components of the displacement vector Q is given by: where q c , q a and q 0 are the displacements of contact node DOFs, accessory node DOFs, and other node DOFs of the system respectively. q a node DOFs include input and output node DOFs. Since the contact DOF q c and the accessory DOF q a are usually much smaller in comparison to the other DOF q o , a reduction of the size of the nonlinear model is typically performed before computing the nonlinear solution. In this paper, the classical Craig-Bampton reduction method where q ∈ R n×1 and n ≪ N. The equation (1) can be rewritten as: where m ∈ R n×n is the mass matrix, c ∈ R n×n is the viscous damping matrix and k ∈ R n×n is the stiffness matrix, q(t) ∈ R n×1 is a nodal displacement vector; f(t) ∈ R n×1 is the excitation force vector; f c (q, q̇, t) ∈ R n×1 is nonlinear contact force interaction vector obtained after performing the Craig-Bampton reduction method. To solve the equation (4) for periodic excitation using HBM ( where R(•) represents the real part of the quantity. By applying Galerkin's procedure with the multi-harmonic approximation, the time domain nonlinear differential equation ( where d (h) = (-(hω) 2 m + ihωc + k) is the h th dynamic stiffness matrix of the system. The equation ( Let us consider a shrouded bladed disk with shroud contact interface, as shown in Figure Figure The displacement vector at n th isolated bladed disk segment is written as: contains the displacements of other interior nodes of the system of the n th segment. Similar to the generic system, to solve the equation (8) for periodic excitation using HBM ( By applying Galerkin's procedure with the multi-harmonic approximation, the time domain nonlinear differential equation ( where D (h) = (-(hω) 2 M + ihωC + K) is the h th dynamic stiffness matrix of the system. The equation ( depending on the Fourier coefficients of the relative displacements and velocities. The number of harmonics H is chosen in a way to approximate the steady state dynamics of the structure with sufficient accuracy. The equation , F ̂c,r ∈ C (N(H+1)×1) . The system of equations still refer to the single fundamental bladed disk sector. The cyclic symmetry boundary conditions will be implemented in the next steps. The turbine bladed disk is assumed to be subjected to a travelling wave type excitation, see ref. Since the bladed disk is subjected to the travelling wave type excitation, it is assumed that the steady-state vibration response also represents a travelling wave. This results in a relationship between the right segment interface nodal DOF, and the left segment interface nodal DOF. Owing to the cyclic symmetry conditions based on the assumption of the turbine bladed disk is made of the similar bladed-disk fundamental sector, one can write the following coupling relationship for the displacements at the segment boundary DOFs: Redefining the reduced displacement vector of unknowns by considering the right-side boundary segment for h th harmonic component and n th sector as: Thereby making the new reduced displacement vector of unknowns as: T ̂CS Where T ̂CS (h) is the cyclic symmetry constraint matrix for h th harmonic component; I is the identity matrix of an appropriate size corresponding to the size of DOFs. Substituting the vector Q ̂(h) in equation ( where is the h th dynamic stiffness matrix of the system. Note that the complex mass matrix M ̂∈ C (j(H+1)×j(H+1)) , viscous damping matrix C ̂∈ C (j(H+1)×j(H+1)) , and the stiffness matrix K ̂∈ C (j(H+1)×j(H+1)) are Hermitian because of the application of the cyclic symmetry constraints and F red (n) ∈ C (j(H+1)×1) where j(H + 1) < N(H + 1) because of the successful elimination of the left boundary segment interface DOFs. The displacement vector of unknowns can further be reduced by applying the cyclic symmetry constraints at the shroud contact DOFs and writing in relative displacement terms. Writing in relative displacements terms reduces the number of shroud contact DOFs by half as one can consider only the number of shroud contact DOFs of one side and reduce the size of the system required for nonlinear analysis. The relative displacement at the right-side shroud contact and the non-linear contact force can be written as: The new displacement vector of unknowns in terms of relative displacements at the shroud contact becomes: This leads to cutting down the shroud contact unknown DOFs by half by considering either right or left contact, hence reducing the size of the non-linear computation. Similarly, a relative displacement cyclic symmetry transformation matrix where M ̂, C ̂, K ̂∈ C (k(H+1)×k(H+1)) and F rel (n) , F ̂c,r rel (n) ∈ C (k(H+1)×1) where k(H + 1) < j(H + 1). Since the number of shroud contact nodes, boundary nodes and accessory nodes DOFs are much smaller than the number of internal DOFs, as described for the generic system, the classical Craig-Bampton reduction method T By rearranging equation ( To use the nonlinear solvers, the residual has to be supplied in the real form. Hence, the complex form residual equation Since the contact is a unilateral constraint, the normal contact force N(t) is defined at each time t as: When v(t) is negative, no normal contact force is allowed, and separation occurs, hence referred to as lift-off state. For the tangential direction, the tangential contact force T(t) is dependent on the contact state as defined by: The contact forces are computed using predictor-corrector logic Where ∆t is the time step, then a corrector step is performed to compute the actual value of T(t) given by: The slider displacement w(t) is computed as: stick state slip state lift -off state To predict the effect of fretting wear on the dynamic forced response of the bladed disk, wear has to be evaluated. There are many wear models where A is the area associated with the node pair, α is the wear coefficient for a particular contact pair, and E is the energy dissipated over one cycle. It is worth mentioning that A depends on the finite element mesh over the contact surface, while α is the experimentally obtained parameter for a specific material couple ([58]- The process of updating the contact surface due to wear after one cycle is called a wear iteration. With materials typical of turbine blades, the wear depth obtained at each vibration cycle is so small that no significant effect on the forced response of the system is observed if a wear iteration is performed at each vibration cycle. Hence, a wear acceleration technique is used, where the wear depth v w associated at each node pair is considered for Z W number of cycles. In this paper, an adaptive strategy is used, and the value of Z W at each wear iteration is computed as: where, v w,max is a user-defined parameter and ∆h ij is the nodal wear depth at the contact patch for one vibration cycle. Choosing v w,max is empirical at this stage, as there are no guidelines from the experiments what value is most suitable in terms of accuracy of results. However, we present a few thumb rules one can use to define the parameter v w,max : ▪ the maximum wear depth allowed for each wear iteration, directly selected by the user For example, let us consider an assembly with a contact interface is functional up to a contact wear depth of 100 μm. In this case, the user can arbitrarily discretize this maximum allowable wear depth into 100 parts and define v w,max as 1 μm. By doing this, the user can visualise the contact evolution and the effect on the non-linear response plots at sufficient intervals before the functional failure of the assembly. ▪ the percentage of the maximum static deflection for the given static loads acting at the contact This method is more quantitative than the previous arbitrary method. v w,max is a parameter of the static loading condition. Irrespective of the geometry, size and loading scenario of the system, v w,max can be defined as a percentage of the maximum static deflection at the contact. For example, v w,max can be chosen as 0.1% to 10% of the maximum static deflection (δ max ). This is more of a special case. Let us consider that the user has a very strict requirement of the accuracy of wear depth needed in each wear iteration. Then v w,max can be defined directly as the value of this wear depth. In this study, we define v w,max as the percentage of the maximum static deflection at the contact patch for the given static loading condition. This percentage is varied between 0.5% to 10% of the maximum static deflection (δ max ). This parameter determines Z W , in turn, is a trade-off between the accuracy of the results and computation time needed. A low value of Z W will allow for a more accurate, but more time-consuming analysis, the opposite will happen if a high value of Z W is selected. Once the term v w is computed using equation ( After the wear iteration, the forced response of the updated system is computed by solving the updated balance equations, taking into account the effect of the wear depth on the static pre-load and the non-linear dynamics of the system simultaneously. It is here worth mentioning that equation ( The results are shown and discussed in the next section. Figure Figure The main test case here is the tuned shrouded bladed disk with shroud contacts with cyclic symmetry boundary conditions. Before jumping on to the test case, the proposed method is first evaluated on a simple cantilever beam with a contact patch on one side and clamped at the other end. The two test cases demonstrate the proposed methodology with changing pre-load and the contact surface evolution during wear. The goal for the test cases is to choose the static load and the excitation in such a way that there is accelerated wear and total loss of contact due to wear with high energy dissipation at each cycle. This will aid validation in terms of the number of wear iterations, wear profile evolution and correlate the wear profile with the analytical free case. Also, the effect of the choice of parameter v w,max is quantified in terms of accuracy and computational demand. In the following test cases, v w,max is defined as a percentage of maximum static deflection under static loading conditions. Hence, a preliminary static analysis is performed to compute the maximum static deflection as if the contact was open without the presence of the second body. A steel cantilever beam with a contact patch and loading conditions as shown in Figure A preliminary linear analysis is performed to obtain free and stick states of the contact, and the responses at these states are assumed as reference. The computed non-linear response can then be compared with these two reference states. An initial gap/interference, if any, can also be defined using the current algorithm by offsetting in the direction normal to the contact. In the present case, the gap is set to 0 as the beam is resting on top of the body 2 before the static forces are applied to the system. Then both static and periodic forces are applied at the indicated excitation nodes. The contact forces, dissipated energy, contact status of each node and the shear/slip distributions are computed by solving equation Figure Start state End state Table A tuned shrouded bladed disk consisting of 40 blades with identical blades is considered, and the fundamental blade sector is as shown in Figure Figure Figure Figure Figure Figure The current research work successfully studied the effect of wear on the dynamics of structures with frictional contacts using a multi-scale approach -the wear energy approach coupled with adaptive wear logic for accelerated wear and a coupled static/dynamic harmonic balance method formulation to capture the dynamics. The methodology is demonstrated on two test casesa cantilever beam with a contact patch and a tuned shrouded bladed disk with shroud contacts with cyclic symmetry properties. The proposed two-fold aim has been achieved: 1) Modelling the effect of wear on the forced dynamic response and the interface evolution with 'changing contact pre-load'. This was achieved by loading the structure with a static pre-load distribution over the contact and automatically updated during the non-linear analysis as the contact loosens up due to wear. This method eliminates the need for separate non-linear static analysis routine. 2) The effect of the choice of adaptive wear acceleration parameter v w,max that is described in the paper. The effect of the choice of user-defined parameter v w,max is studied on the dynamic response of the two test cases. With smaller values of v w,max , the change in frequency and amplitude of response curves, wear evolution, and the contact profile is smoother. But with increased computation time and a higher number of wear iterations. In case of larger values of v w,max , the results are coarse but with faster computation times. The choice of v w,max is a trade-off between the computation time and accuracy of results.