The charge, spin, and composition degrees of freedom in high-entropy alloy endow it with tunable valence and spin states, infinite combinations and excellent mechanical performance. Meanwhile, the stacking, interlayer, and angle degrees of freedom in van der Waals material bring it with exceptional features and technological applications. Integration of these two distinct material categories while keeping their merits would be tempting. Based on this heuristic thinking, we design and explore a new range of materials (i.e., dichalcogenides, halides and phosphorus trisulfides) with multiple metallic constitutions and intrinsic layered structure, which are coined as high-entropy van der Waals materials. Millimeter-scale single crystals with homogeneous element distribution can be efficiently acquired and easily exfoliated or intercalated in this materials category. Multifarious physical properties like superconductivity, magnetic ordering, metal-insulator transition and corrosion resistance have been exploited. Further research based on the concept of high-entropy van der Waals materials will enrich the high-throughput design of new systems with intriguing properties and practical applications. The isolation of graphene by a 'scotch-tape' method ushers in an era of intensive research in van der Waals (vdW) materials The concept of high-entropy alloy (HEA), proposed at nearly the same time as the discovery of graphene, is a kind of alloying strategy that involves the combination of multiple principal elements in relatively high concentrations Polycrystalline HEXs were synthesized using the conventional solid-state method. Powder elements with their nominal composition were weighted, thoroughly grounded, and pressed into pellets. HECl2 series are prepared by using constituent MCl2 raw materials. The samples were sealed into quartz tubes and slowly raised to the desired temperature (see Table X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were acquired using a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer with Cu-Kα radiation (wavelength Kα1 = 1.54056 Å, Kα2 =1.544390 Å) at room temperature. The FullProf software package was used for the Rietveld refinement. The composition mapping of single-crystalline (Ti,V,Cr,Nb,Ta,)Se2, (Mn,Fe,Co,Ni)PS3 and (V,Cr,Mn,Fe,Co)I2 were determined using an electron-probe microanalyzer (EPMA, JEOL, Inc., model JXA-8530F). The compositions of the rest samples were carried out by using an energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometer coupled with a scanning electron microscope. Topographic images were taken by using an atomic force microscope (AFM, Bruker, multimode8-FSCamp12). Transport, magnetic, and thermodynamic properties were measured using a physical property measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design) and a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) vibrating sample magnetometer (SVSM, Quantum Design). The chemical state of the elements was investigated by using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Thermo Fisher 250Xi). Corrosion resistance measurements were carried out in acid (8.1M HNO3, room temperature, 10 minutes), base (0.5M NaOH, room temperature, 10 minutes) and organic solution (1.0 mmol of butylamine mixed in 2 ml tetrahydrofuran, 40 °C, 1 hour). The reactions with organic solution were conducted in stainless steel autoclave fitted with a glass mantel and a magnetic stirrer. The autoclave was evacuated at first, and then charged with 0.5 MPa O2 and 0.5 MPa CO. The concentrations of the dissolved Se were determined by inductively coupled plasma (ICP). Nitrogen adsorption/desorption measurements were performed to estimate the Brunauer-Emmett-Teller surface area of the as-synthesized polycrystals (BELSORP-mini II, BEL). Few-layer HEXs can be easily exfoliated by scotch tape and transferred to SiO2/Si wafer by using the Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) method under optical microscope. Monolayer HES2 had been acquired through Al2O3-assisted exfoliation method The crystal structures of HEX families share a common layered nature (Figure As a prominent feature of vdW materials, HEX single crystals could be easily exfoliated into few layers by conventional scotch tapes (right panels of Figure The multiple degrees of freedom and the infinite combination in HEX materials provide us a unique opportunity to explore multifarious physical properties. Here we give an example of (Co,Au)0.2(Rh,Ir,Pd,Pt)0.8Te2 which shows superconducting transition temperature (Tc onset ) at 4.5 K and a bulk response at 3.6 K (Figure With elements bearing different local moments included, HEX materials are anticipated to have rich magnetic behavior. Take (Mn,Fe,Co,Ni)PS3 for example (Figure Besides magnetism arising from local magnetic moments, the holistic distribution of the plural elements will also induce the HEX family to present emergent transport behavior. As is known, Anderson localization describes a kind of metal-insulator transition (MIT) where an ordered lattice with uncorrelated random potentials would eventually trap the itinerant electrons In this work, we combined the concept of high entropy alloy and vdW materials into a new material category, i.e., HEX, and showcased the physical properties of thus-synthesized dichalcogenides, halides or phosphorus trisulfides. The introducing of multicomponent facilitates the appearance of superconductivity, enriches its magnetic behavior and realizes the Anderson-type MIT. This system also exhibits noticeable enhancement in corrosion resistance which may be a promising route for the design of heterogeneous catalysts. Needless to say, the marriage of HEA and vdW materials brings us more degrees of freedom and expands the territory of both. Some characteristics of the new HEX materials have been delineated in this work. Considering its infinite possibility (multivariate combination and various properties), we think the intricate coupling of their individual properties also deserve the focus of research community, which is beyond the scope of this work but not the promises of this material. The concept of high entropy could also be introduced to other low dimensional material systems such as (quasi-) 1D materials and MXene phase. Here, we offer an extra rough estimate of the influence of dimension reduction to the entropy of the HEX system: Suppose the number of microstates Ω in each spatial dimension is identical, then S1D=kBlnΩ. S2D=kBln(Ω*Ω)=2kBlnΩ and S3D=kBln(Ω*Ω*Ω)=3kBlnΩ for 1D, 2D and 3D systems, respectively. Despite the 33% loss of entropy caused by dimension reduction from 3D to 2D, the loosening limitation of anion choice (for example HESSe in Table The multi-degrees of freedom inherited from high entropy alloy and van der Waals materials are intermingled together into a brand-new material category, namely HEX materials. Single crystals with homogeneous element distribution can be easily obtained, exfoliated and intercalated. With infinite combinations, HEX materials show enhanced corrosion resistance and versatile physical properties, covering superconductivity, metallic, semiconducting and insulating states.