The fracture stress of materials typically depends on the sample size and is traditionally explained in terms of extreme value statistics. A recent work reported results on the carrying capacity of long polyamide and polyester wires and interpret the results in terms of a probabilistic argument known as the St. Petersburg paradox. Here, we show that the same results can be better explained in terms of extreme value statistics. We also discuss the relevance of rate dependent effects. The failure of macroscopic objects is determined both by intrinsic properties, such as its crystalline structure, and by extrinsic factors as the grain boundaries, vacancies, dislocations or microcracks. In particular, the strength of brittle materials is largely influenced by the presence of flaws, as it was first demonstrated by Griffith in his seminal paper 100 years ago The Griffith theory is also relevant to describe fracture size effects or the observation that larger samples are generally weaker. In fact, the larger the sample, the higher is the probability to find microcraks that might become unstable when a threshold stress is reached. According to the Griffith's theory this threshold is inversely proportional to the square root of defect size. Thus the strength of a material corresponds to the stress needed to trigger the first crack instability event, namely the smallest threshold corresponding to the largest flaw. In this sequence of arguments lies the connection between fracture mechanics , materials failure and extreme value statistics (for a review see In a recent letter We also show that in the asymptotic limit, the wire strength follows the Gumbel's distribution, in full agreement with the data reported in Let us consider a wire of length L which we divide in N = L/L 0 independent elements of size L 0 . Following Ref. Defining P (n) as the probability density function (pdf) of micro-cracks of length w ≡ nL 0 , we introduce as the probability that no micro-crack larger than zL 0 will be found in the wire. Next, we look for the statistics of the largest micro-crack in the wire w nmax = n max L 0 which satisfies the only constraint w max = n max L 0 L [ (2) The Fisher-Gnedenko-Tippet theorem ensures that where G belongs to one of three families only: Weibull, Fréchet or Gumbel To derive the fracture strength, the authors of Ref. This relation corresponds to the weakest link hypothesis in elastic mechanics and, by means of 2, introduce the probability that the wire does not fail up to a stress σ For large samples, the convergence theorem 3 yields . This is the Duxbury-Leath-Beale distribution Finally, the average breaking stress of a wire of length L is given by which recovers Eq.( In Ref. To capture and reinterpret the experimental results within the framework of the classical fracture mechanics, we have used the Gumbel form of the generalized EVT, which is purposely designed to account for strain and thermal effects The quantity ρ 0 (ε f ) corresponds to the Gumbel failure strain probability density function obtained by differentiating the expression 9 (ρ 0 (σ) = -dΣ 0 (σ) dσ ) and substituting σ = Eε f and β = Eε 0 , with E Young's modulus. The thermal factor S 0 can be derived from the Kramer's theory for the transition rate as where ω 0 is a characteristic frequency and k B the Boltzmann's constant. The data reported in Under these conditions, the proper way of fitting the experimental fracture data is the Maximum Likelihood (ML) method is the probability that a wire of volume V i fails at stress σ i , under the specific experimental conditions ( εi ; T ). Each volume was calculated as with d = 0.25 10 -3 m for polyester fibers and d = 0.22 10 -3 m for polyamide. Finally, we set the experimental stresses as σ i = 4F i πd 2 and E = 920M P a or E = 2.5GP a, for polyester and polyamide wires respectively. The parameters ML estimates were μ = 0.47Gpa, ε 0 = 0.0176, V 0 = 5.28 10 -13 m 3 , ω 0 = 0.13sec -1 in case of polyester, and μ = 1.06Gpa, ε 0 = 0.011, V 0 = 1.68 10 -13 m 3 , ω 0 = 0.002sec -1 in case of polyamide fibers. In Fig. The second set of experiments are reported in Fig. We have shown how classical fracture mechanics, coupled to extreme value theory, provides an adequate theoretical framework to explain the results of tensile experiments performed on polyamide as well as on polyester wires reported in 