Strain is a powerful experimental tool to explore new electronic states and understand unconventional superconductivity. Here, we investigate the effect of uniaxial strain on the nematic and superconducting phase of single crystal FeSe using magnetotransport measurements. We find that the resistivity response to the strain is strongly temperature dependent and it correlates with the sign change in the Hall coefficient being driven by scattering, coupling with the lattice and multiband phenomena. Band structure calculations suggest that under strain the electron pockets develop a large in-plane anisotropy as compared with the hole pocket. Magnetotransport studies at low temperatures indicate that the mobility of the dominant carriers increases with tensile strain. Close to the critical temperature, all resistivity curves at constant strain cross in a single point, indicating a universal critical exponent linked to a strain-induced phase transition. Our results indicate that the superconducting state is enhanced under compressive strain and suppressed under tensile strain, in agreement with the trends observed in FeSe thin films and overdoped pnictides, whereas the nematic phase seems to be affected in the opposite way by the uniaxial strain. By comparing the enhanced superconductivity under strain of different systems, our results suggest that strain on its own cannot account for the enhanced high Tc superconductivity of FeSe systems. Uniaxial strain can considerably alter unconventional superconductivity 1-3 or nematic and magnetic phases in ironbased superconductors FeSe is a unique iron-based superconductor, which despite its simple structure hosts a nematic electronic phase, in the absence of a long-range magnetic order. This unusual electronic phase is driven by orbitally-dependent effects and correlations that are responsible for unusual momentum dependent band shifts A monolayer of FeSe, on a suitable substrate, can sustain superconductivity in excess of 65 K, driven by a strong interfacial electron-phonon coupling, the charge transfer through the interface, and strain effects In this work, we explore how the electronic behaviour of bulk single crystals FeSe is affected by uniaxial strain, using magneto-transport measurements outside and inside the nematic phase. We find that uniaxial strain induces significant changes in resistivity and its gradient is highly temperature dependent being closely correlated with the Hall coefficient inside the nematic phase. The resistivity curves cross in a single point in the vicinity of the normal to the superconducting transition and we determine a strain-dependent scaling and its critical exponent. Our results under strain in single crystals of FeSe are consistent with those found for epitaxially grown FeSe films on different substrates. These results indicate that the superconducting state is enhanced under compressive strain and suppressed under tensile strain. FeSe single crystal were grown by the chemical vapour transport method A. Resistivity under strain inside the nematic phase Fig. Fig. To further address this, we look at magneto-transport measurements inside the nematic phase (raw data shown in Fig. To further understand the changes of the electronic structure under strain, we have calculated the Fermi surface of FeSe. Fig. Next, we focus on the effect of strain on the nematic transition at T s shown in Fig. B. Resistivity scaling under strain at low temperatures Fig. Scaling relations to describe superconductor-insulator quantum phase transitions The resistivity studies of bulk FeSe under strain have revealed that the compressive strain enhances superconductivity and narrows the width of the superconducting transition, as shown in Fig. The response of the superconductivity of FeSe to strain can be compared with that of Co-doped BaFe 2 As 2 single crystals 2 . For underdoped and near-optimally doped compositions, the superconducting critical temperature has a quadratic dependence on applied strain being rapidly suppressed by both compressive and tensile stress ε B2g . In the overdoped regime, the response of T c to strain is smaller in magnitude and no longer symmetric for tensile and compressive stress, resembling the behaviour found for FeSe, which has a nematic phase but no long-range order, similar to overdoped pnictides (Fig. To summarize, we have investigated the electronic response to external uniaxial strain of bulk single crystals of FeSe. We have identified a direct correlation between the transport response to strain, which is is strongly temperature dependent, and the temperature changes in the Hall coefficient. The normal resistivity increases under tensile strain in the vicinity of the nematic transition but it decreases in the proximity of the superconducting transition. This suggest that there is a strong coupling between different scattering processes which are strongly temperature dependent involving the formation of nematic domains, multi-band effects and the coupling with the lattice. Band structure calculation suggest that under strain the electron bands would develop the largest in-plane anisotropy. Superconductivity of FeSe is enhanced under compressive uniaxial strain, similar to overdoped 122 iron-based superconductors, whereas the the nematic electronic state responds to strain in a opposite way. Furthermore, close to the critical temperature, we identify a universal crossing point for all resistivity curves measured under constant strain. The scaling behaviour of resistivity versus temperature in the vicinity of the superconducting transition indicates the existence of a strain-induced phase transition, that would be consistent with the development of rare superconducting regions inside of a normal metal matrix as a function of temperature and strain. This study establishes that uniaxial strain, on its own, is not sufficient to stabilize a high-T c FeSe-based superconductor. Note after review: After completing this work we become aware of another study of FeSe under strain We are very grateful to Dragana Popovic for helpful communication related to the scaling analysis. We thank S. J. Singh and P. Reiss for technical support, Oliver Humphries for the development of the mobility analysis spectrum and A. Morfoot for useful comments on the manuscript. This work was mainly supported by EPSRC (EP/I004475/1) and the Oxford Centre for Applied Superconductivity. M. Ghini acknowledges the financial support of the University of Bologna, Scuola di Scienze. JCAP acknowledges the support of St Edmund Hall, University of Oxford, through the Cooksey Early Career Teaching and Research Fellowship. The DFT calculations were performed on the University of Oxford Advanced Research Computing Service (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.22558). AIC acknowledges an EPSRC Career Acceleration Fellowship (EP/I004475/1). Hysteresis strain loops were performed at constant temperature to investigate the sample response to uniaxial tensile and compressive stress. The hysteresis loops were performed at least twice for each set temperature. Multiples measurements were conducted on the sample over several weeks to verify reproducibility between different measurements (Fig. FeSe crystals, with typical dimensions of ≈ 1100×500×60 μm 3 , were cut into a rectangular shape along the [110] tetragonal direction, which corresponds applying strain along the B 2g symmetry channel To extract the value of nominal strain from the measured capacitance, we account for its temperature dependence (the thermal contractions of titanium were negligible). Fig. As bulk FeSe is a soft layered material, large amounts of strain tend to break the sample. Bending, cracking and exfoliation were observed in various samples with this suspended configuration for higher values of stress. Fig. For a limited temperature range in which the capacitance of the cell remains constant, resistivity measurements at constant strain were performed as a function of temperature. Precautions were taken to avoid unwanted effects of thermal drift and fluctuation. All transport measurements as a function of temperature reported in this work were collected during warming ramps and with slow warming rates, in order to limit effects of thermal load at low temperatures. Fig. Magneto-transport measurements were conducted as a function of the magnetic field up to 13.5 T inside the nematic phase (between T = 10 K and T = 60 K), under three different amounts of uniaxial strain between ε = -0.21% to +0.09%. Magneto-transport measurement were conducted measuring both the longitudinal resistivity, ρ xx , (with the current along the [110] direction), and the Hall component, ρ xy , as a function of the applied magnetic field applied along the [0 0 1] direction. These values have been symmetrized and antisymmetrized, with respect to the applied magnetic field (as reported in Fig. r u n 0 1 r u n 5 0 r u n 7 5 Fig. Fig. The understand the effect of the strain on the in-plane and out-of-plane anisotropy of the Fermi surface pockets b, we have also computed the penetration depth, λ, along the three lattice vectors, and taking suitable ratios. out-of-plane anisotropy (2λ c /(λ a + λ b )), calculated from the renormalized and shifted Fermi surface pockets for several values of strain. The inner electron pocket is much smaller than the others, so numerical errors affect the results much more strongly, as seen. We find that the hole pocket is essentially isotropic in-plane, whilst the electron pockets have some in-plane anisotropy. However, all three pockets exhibit outof-plane anisotropy, with the hole band exhibiting the largest anisotropy. The anisotropy in the overall penetration depth, calculated by combining the contributions from each pocket, remains fairly constant with strain, both in-plane and out-ofplane. 