We report on a process for the fiber-coupling of electrically driven cavity-enhanced quantum dot light emitting devices. The developed technique allows for the direct and permanent coupling of p-i-n-doped quantum dot micropillar cavities to single-mode optical fibers. The coupling process, fully carried out at room temperature, involves a spatial scanning technique, where the fiber facet is positioned relative to a device with a diameter of 2 μm using the fiber-coupled electroluminescence of the cavity emission as a feedback parameter. Subsequent gluing and UV curing enables a rigid and permanent coupling between micropillar and fiber core. Comparing our experimental results with finite element method simulations indicates a cavity-to-fiber mode-coupling efficiency of ~46%. Furthermore, we demonstrate pulsed current injection at a repetition rate exceeding 200 MHz as well as low-temperature operation down to 77 K of the fibercoupled micropillar device. The technique presented in this work is an important step in the quest for efficient and practical quantum light sources for applications in quantum information. Solid-state based quantum-light sources are elementary building blocks for photonic quantum technologies [1-3]. Specifically, the maturity of single-photon sources (SPSs) based on semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) has advanced substantially in recent years As a result, QD-based quantum light sources have been employed for many proof-of-concept experiments on quantum communication More recently, the direct fiber-coupling of optically pumped photonic nanostructures with embedded QDs, such as photonic wires [19] and micropillars with oxide aperture optically-pumped fiber-integrated microcavities were employed for the generation of coherent acoustic phonons In this work, we developed a technique enabling the direct and permanent coupling of electrically-pumped cavity-based quantum light sources to optical SM fibers. Our process exploits the emission of the cavity modes as direct feedback parameter for the precise relative alignment between cavity and fiber core. As all steps of this process can be carried out at room temperature, a simple setup can be used for its implementation. The fiber-pigtailed device fabricated in this work is illustrated in Fig. based on a cylindrical Fabry-Pérot resonator which is composed of an intrinsic λ-thick GaAs-cavity with a layer of selforganized InAs QDs in its center and a lower n-doped and an upper p-doped distributed Bragg reflector (DBR). The number of the AlAs/GaAs mirror pairs is optimized for high photon extraction efficiencies resulting in moderate Q factors (~1000-3000) for devices of dpillar = 2.0 μm diameter. The micropillar is planarized using benzocyclobutene to support the ring-shaped electrical top contact, which is used for peripheral current injection together with a planar back contact. For details on the device design and fabrication we refer the interested reader to Ref. For the precise coupling of QD-micropillar and SM fiber, we developed a robust four-step process fully performed under ambient conditions (i.e., room temperature, no vacuum) as sketched in Fig. After optimizing the coupling once again, the UV curing process is started in step During the fiber-coupling process described above, the sample is mounted on a custom-made chip carrier with pinconnectors, bond pads for wire bonding, and a copper heatsink assuring thermalization of the micropillar sample for future operation at cryogenic temperatures. A coarse positioning of the micropillar device relative to the fiber is performed with an xy-stage with a resolution of 1 μm, while a 3D piezo-stage is used for fine positioning of the fiber ferrule with a resolution of better than 250 nm. Moreover, the fiber-to-micropillar distance can be coarsely adjusted with a z-stage (resolution: 1 μm). For electrical operation of the QD micropillar chip, we use a source measurement unit or a pulse pattern generator (300 ps minimal pulse-width, 250 MHz maximal repetition rate) for dc or pulsed current injection, respectively. The emission of the fiberpigtailed microcavity is spectrally analyzed using a spectrometer with a spectral resolution of 25 μeV. For the final device, we choose a QD micropillar with a dpillar = 2.0 μm, being the optimal trade-off between spectral QD density and photon extraction efficiency for this type of sample. Figure The integrated intensity decreases with increasing h due to the finite beam-divergence of the micropillar cavity, which will be investigated in detail further below. Pronounced oscillations are observed, which are due to the interference between the facets of micropillar and fiber core. This observation is in excellent quantitative agreement with the calculated mode coupling efficiency (gray line) obtained from finite element methods (FEM) simulations using the software package JCMsuite of wx,dec. = (0.66 -0.66 +1.06 ) μm and wy,dec = (1.32 ± 0.61) μm. Here, the large errors cannot be avoided, due to the strong convolution of the mode-field radii of fiber and micropillar cavity. The deconvoluted mode radii as function of h are displayed in Fig. The averaged value of wdec = (wx,dec + wy,dec)/2 = (0.99 ± 0.84) μm at h = 2 μm lies well within the range expected from the FEM simulations, revealing a beam radius between wh=2μm,sim = 1.45 μm and w0,sim = 0.82 μm at distances of at h = 2 μm and 0 μm, respectively. The beam-divergence of the fundamental mode is directly observed in Fig. w pillar 2 +w fiber 2 ), where u denotes the transverse misalignment accounting for our positioning accuracy Next, we proceed with step (4) of the fiber-coupling process to realize the permanently coupled fiber-pigtailed QD micropillar. As described in Fig. n eff we achieved a 14-times faster curing of our device combined with a negligible reduction in collected signal in the fiber during the coupling process. While the faster curing could be related to higher UV doses possible with our source based on collimated UV-LEDs, the noticeable decrease in signal intensity during curing in Ref. Next, we investigate the electro-optical properties of the permanently fiber-pigtailed micropillar device, shown as inset of Finally, to prove the applicability of our device for applications requiring electronic triggering, we measure the temporal response of the fiber-pigtailed micropillar under pulsed current injection using a silicon-based single photon counting module in combination with time-tagging electronics. The time-trace shown in Fig. Note, however, that a direct judgment on the fiber-coupling efficiency is not possible from these data, due to the use of different bias-voltages and the relative spectral shift of cavity-modes and QD-ensemble. Reaching the temperature of 77 K thereby is an important achievement, allowing for simple and cost-effective cooling via liquid nitrogen or compact Stirling cryocoolers in future studies. While single-photon emission could not be demonstrated in the present fiber-coupled device, our results are very promising toward an all-fiber-coupled single-photon LED, as single QD effects can in principle be exploited in this temperature regime In summary, we developed a technique enabling the direct and permanent coupling of electrically-pumped cavity-based QD light emitting devices to optical SM fibers. The coupling process, fully carried out at room temperature, involves a spatial scanning technique, where the fiber facet is positioned relative to a device with dpillar = 2.0 μm using the fiber-coupled electroluminescence of the cavity emission as feedback parameter, ensuring optimum fiber alignment throughout the whole process. Subsequent gluing and UV curing enables a rigid and permanent coupling between micropillar and fiber core. Comparing our experimental results with FEM simulations indicates fiber coupling efficiencies of ~46% in our present device. Within a detailed characterization of the device after the fiber-coupling process, we demonstrate pulsed current injection as well as low-temperature operation, proving the suitability of our approach for quantum light generation in future experiments. The next step is to demonstrate an efficient directly fiber-coupled single-photon source operated at cryogenic temperatures using the technique presented in this work. Considering that several publications proving single-photon emission 