Chains of magnetic atoms, placed on the surface of s-wave superconductors, have been established as a laboratory for the study of Majorana bound states. In such systems, the breaking of time reversal due to magnetic moments gives rise to the formation of in-gap states, which hybridize to form one-dimensional topological superconductors. However, in unconventional superconductors even non-magnetic impurities induce in-gap states since scattering of Cooper pairs changes their momentum but not their phase. Here, we propose a path for creating topological superconductivity, which is based on an unconventional superconductor with a chain of non-magnetic adatoms on its surface. The topological phase can be reached by tuning the magnitude and direction of a Zeeman field, such that Majorana zero modes at its boundary can be generated, moved and fused. To demonstrate the feasibility of this platform, we develop a general mapping of films with adatom chains to one-dimensional lattice Hamiltonians. This allows us to study unconventional superconductors such as Sr2RuO4 exhibiting multiple bands and an anisotropic order parameter. Combining topology and superconductivity has been heralded as a new paradigm for the realization of exotic new particles -Majorana zero modes (MZMs)whose non-Abelian braiding statistics would enable faulttolerant quantum computations atoms on the surface of an s-wave superconductor In this work, we propose a path to realize onedimensional topological superconductivity by placing non-magnetic atoms on the surface of an unconventional triplet superconductor, see Fig. Our starting point is a single-band Hamiltonian where H BdG describes a bulk triplet superconductor on a two dimensional lattice, and H Z is the Zeeman term in an external field. In momentum space it has the matrix structure where h(p) = ξ(p) • σ 0 + h • σ σ σ, ξ(p) is the energymomentum dispersion, h the Zeeman field, and σ 0 and σ σ σ are the unit matrix and Pauli matrices acting in spin space. In the following, we measure all energies in units of the Fermi energy E F . In the off-diagonal, ∆(p) = i[d(p) • σ]σ y is the pairing term, whose minimum value we denote by ∆ min ; for details see Appendix A. Here, d(p) describes the vector order parameter of the triplet superconductor. Here, we concentrate on the case of a helical p-wave order parameter and in the Supplemental information we discuss the generalizations to a chiral p-wave order parameter and multiband models using Sr 2 RuO 4 as an example. The chain of atoms placed along the x-direction r n = na 0 e x (with integer n) is described by with the matrix Û = V imp τ z σ 0 mediating non-magnetic impurity scattering of strength V imp . Although the scattering of Bogoliubov quasiparticles preserves spin, there are still Shiba in-gap states in this system because the scattering does not change the phase in order to match the p-wave momentum dependence of the order parameter. In the case of a chain, Shiba states localized in the vicinity of the impurity atoms hybridize and give rise to impurity bands within the bulk gap ∆ min of the superconductor. These bands can be accurately described by an effective Hamiltonian which depends on the momentum k x in a supercell Brillouin zone with lattice constant a 0 . We derive the matrices on the r.h.s. by linearizing the bulk Green function with respect to energy, and obtain G I (k x ), which describes the propagation of Bogoliubov quasiparticles between the impurities, by Fourier transforming the bulk Green function at the impurity sites. The matrix G-1 enters as a prefactor and contains the renormalization of the bandwidth (see Appendix B). The mapping onto the effective Hamiltonian Eq. ( diagonal in spin space, and describing twofold degenerate impurity bands inside the bulk superconducting gap. Here, ξ eff (k x ) and ∆ eff (k x ) are the effective dispersion and pairing for the impurity chain, containing furtherneighbor coupling terms between the impurity states. The Hamiltonian H 0 eff (k x ) is time-reversal symmetric, so that the system can support a topological phase with an even number of MZMs at each end of the chain For the Zeeman field pointing in y-direction, the additional term to the effective Hamiltonian is H Z eff,y = h eff,y σ y τ 0 . In this case, the two BdG bands are shifted trivially in energy with respect to each other, leaving their topological character unchanged, i.e. a field in ydirection cannot tune into the topological phase. Finally, for a field in x-direction, the Zeeman term reads H Z eff,x = h eff,x τ z σ x with weak renormalization of the effective Zeeman field from the bulk value h eff,x ∼ h x . The effective Hamiltonian can now be rotated around the y axis in spin space σ x → σ z , such that in the new basis the effective field h eff,x plays again the role of a chemical potential. The difference to the case of a Zeeman field in z-direction is that the weakly renormalized h eff,x can drive a topological phase transition much more efficiently than the strongly reduced h eff,z discussed above. To quantitatively demonstrate the tunability of topological superconductivity, we compute the topological phase diagram (see Figs. The excellent agreement between Q eff and Q (see Supplemental Material) indicates that H eff (k x ) indeed faithfully describes the low-energy physics of the impurity chain. In the nontrivial case Q = -1 we define the topological gap ∆ topo as the minimum of the eigenenergies of H(k x ) in the Brillouin zone, see Appendix D. To detect the non-Abelian properties of the MZMs, it is necessary that the coupling between MZMs is weak. Thus, the distance between neighboring MZMs needs to be much larger than ζ ≈ hv F,eff /∆ topo , where v F,eff is the Fermi velocity for the impurity band. An estimate of v F,eff yields ζ/a 0 ≈ ∆ min /∆ topo . In order to avoid thermal excitations the temperature needs to be smaller than the topological gap, k B T < ∆ topo . In Fig. For the case of magnetic adatoms, the dependence of adatom magnetic order on an external Zeeman field has been suggested as a means to to create, braid, and fuse MZMs Increasing the Zeeman field along a wiggly impurity chain creates two pairs of Majoranas which can formally be described by operators γ i , i = 1, 2, 3, 4, satisfying γ i = γ † i and anticommutation relations {γ i , γ j } = 2δ ij (for the labeling of MZMs see Fig. In summary, we have shown that topological superconductivity can be realized by placing nonmagnetic adatoms on the surface of an unconventional superconductor, and that the topological invariant can be controlled with the magnitude and direction of a Zeeman field. Our considerations are based on a lattice Hamiltonian which can describe materials exhibiting a complex structure of the order parameter and multiple bands. We have identified the field direction which can most efficiently tune the system into the topological phase and we have proposed a scheme to move and fuse MZMs. An experimental realization of this proposal could become a scalable platform for topological quantum information processing based on the non-Abelian statistics of MZMs. financed by EU within SG OP. We acknowledge support from Leipzig University for Open Access Publishing. The code to numerically calculate the spectra and topological invariants discussed in this paper as well as the data that has been used to generate the plots within this paper is available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. B.R. acknowledges support by DFG grant RO 2247/11-1. For the single-band model, we use the normal state dispersion ξ(p) = -2t(cos p x + cos p y )μ on a square lattice, where t is the nearest-neighbor hopping and μ ≈ -1.44t is the chemical potential fixed such that the filling is one quarter and the Fermi energy E F ≈ 2.56t. The superconducting order parameter can be written in real space as For the single-band system with a triplet order parameter, the coefficients read ∆ ij,αβ,σσ = ∆ 0 d i,j • σ σ σiσ y with the Pauli operators σ σ σ = [σ x , σ y , σ z ] and a vector d i,j . In the main text, we consider the physical consequences of the helical p-wave order parameter d = -i∆ t (sin p y e x + sin p x e y ) which in real-space leads to nearest-neighbor pairings ∆ 0 = δ i -1 0 0 1 with δ i = ∓∆ t /2 for the rel-ative lattice vector (0, ±1), and ∆ 0 = δ i i 0 0 i with δ i = ∓∆ t /2 for the relative lattice vector (±1, 0). The multiband model for Sr 2 RuO 4 Derivations of effective Hamiltonians for continuum models have been worked out in detail for example for helical Shiba chains in Ref. 10 and spinless superconductors to obtain a nonlinear eigenproblem Evaluating Eq. (B2) only at the impurity sites r m = a 0 me x , and using that the impurity Hamiltonian [Eq. ( Because of the periodicity with respect to translations by the impurity chain lattice vector a 0 e x it is useful to transform this equation to momentum space (with respect to the supercell) Ψ(k x ) = m Ψ(r m )e -ikxa0m such that the eigenvalue equation can be rewritten as The real space Green function can be obtained via its Fourier representation where the integral is over the bulk Brillouin zone with momentum space area Ω BZ . By linearizing the bulk Green function at E = 0, we obtain where exist for fully gapped systems. Furthermore, we keep the linear correction ∝ E only in the onsite term of the Green function to obtain where We now insert Eqs. (B4), (B5) and (B6) into Eq. (B3) and introduce the Fourier transforms with respect to the supercell as Rearranging the terms and multiplication with inverse matrices brings the eigenvalue equation in the form where the effective Hamiltonian is This Hamiltonian becomes exact at E = 0 where the topological phase transition occurs and therefore can be used to determine the phase diagram exactly. This approach is general and can be applied to all lattice Hamiltonians. In this work we have applied it to the single-band p-wave superconductors and multiband model for Sr 2 RuO 4 Appendix C: Topological invariant A finite magnetic field breaks time-reversal symmetry such that the remaining symmetry of the Hamiltonian, Eq. ( The effective Hamiltonian, Eq. ( of the bulk Hamiltonian. Therefore, the effective Hamiltonian can be used to calculate the topological invariant using Eq. ( For the calculation of the topological gap, i.e. the minimal positive eigenvalue of the supercell Hamiltonian as a function of k x , we calculate the eigenvalues for a grid of a few k x points between 0 and π/a 0 , select the k x with the smallest positive eigenvalue, and then use an iterative procedure to find the smallest positive eigenvalue by a bisection bracketing algorithm to obtain ∆ topo . This procedure is is implemented for both the supercell and the effective Hamiltonian approach to investigate the reliability of the approximation in deriving Eq. ( The normal state dispersion of the single band model on a square lattice is given by where t is the nearest neighbor hopping which we use as energy unit, i.e. t = 1, and μ ≈ -1.44t (E F = 4t + μ ≈ 2.56t) is the chemical potential fixed such that the filling is one quarter yielding a Fermi surface as shown in Fig. In the following we use t = 1. The superconducting order parameter can be written as ∆(p temperatures, a second transition to a mixed state can occur upon lowering of the temperature, but this possibility is neglected here.) For the square lattice, the possible triplet order parameters are We choose ∆ t = 0.2 throughout the discussion of the single band model unless stated otherwise. In the single band model with filling n = 0.25, the magnitude of the order parameter on the Fermi surface |∆(p)| is almost constant, so is the (inverse) Fermi velocity, Fig. The model for Sr 2 RuO 4 is based on a tight binding parametrization proposed earlier For the calculation in real space with system size of (N x , N y ) lattice points in x and y direction, the hopping elements and contributions from the spin-orbit coupling are set up in sparse matrices to be used to calculate the eigenvalues, or the topological invariant, see below. The order parameter for Sr 2 RuO 4 is considered to be of helical-p wave type with the same parametrization of the higher harmonics of the pairing components as in Ref. 1 which we state here again for convenience. The order parameters in orbital space are given by the following ansatz ∆ a x,j g x,j (p)e y + ∆ a y,j g y,j (p)e x (S6) where a = xz, yz, xy is the orbital index, g y,j (p x , p y ) = g x,j (p y , p x ) and ∆ zy y,j = ∆ zx x,j ; ∆ zx y,j = ∆ zy x,j = 0; ∆ xy x,j = ∆ xy y,j ∀ j with the following parameters: (∆ zx x,1 , ∆ zx x,2 , ∆ zx x,3 ) = (0, 0.2, 1.0) and (∆ xy x,1 , ∆ xy x,2 , ∆ xy x,3 ) = (0.18, 0.15, -0.3). The magnitude of the order parameter is chosen to be small relative to the overall bandwidth of the (unrenormalized) electronic structure, ∆ t = 0.1 such that the density of states in the normal state within this energy scale essentially flat, see Fig. By noticing that ∆(-p) = -∆(p), we see that the momentum integral of ∆(p)/(ξ 2 (p) + |∆(p)| 2 ) vanishes, and therefore Since only the square of the order parameter enters, the single impurity Hamiltonian for both chiral and helical p-wave superconductor is 2. Impurity chain in a chiral p-wave superconductor In the case of chiral p-wave superconductor without field we can write the BdG Hamiltonian as and the bulk Green function at zero energy is Therefore, (S22) Thus, we obtain with and (S25) By reordering the Nambu basis from Here τi and σi are Pauli matrices in the new basis which still correspond to particle-hole and spin degrees of freedom. With the help of these matrices we can write Heff (k Although the Hamiltonian is block-diagonal, these blocks are not independent degrees of freedom because the particle-hole symmetry connects these. Let us remind the reader that particle-hole symmetry is in the original basis and it now reads in the new basis as The fact that the particle-hole symmetry is τx σx means that if there is a positive energy solution in the first block there is a negative energy solution in the second block. 2. Zeeman field along x-or y-direction In the case of chiral p-wave superconductor and Zeeman field in x-or y-direction h = (h x , 0, 0) or h = (0, h y , 0) the effective model for the impurity chain is The Zeeman term enters the effective Hamiltonian indirectly via renormalization of the chemical potential μ → μ±h x(y) in the two blocks. This can cause topological phase transitions but typically, the impurity bound state energy, and thus the impurity bands are only weakly dependent on the chemical potential via the change of the (normal state) density of states at the Fermi level (see Fig. 1. Zeeman field along z-direction In the case of helical p-wave superconductor and Zeeman field in z-direction h = (0, 0, h z ) the effective model for the impurity chain is Therefore the topological phase diagram is exactly the same as in the case of chiral p-wave superconductor with Zeeman field in x-or y-direction. In the case of helical p-wave superconductor and Zeeman field in x-direction h = (h x , 0, 0) the effective model for the impurity chain is Here we have made approximations during the derivation of the effective Hamiltonian, so that the expression only serves as a good approximation for calculation of the topological phase diagram. The Zeeman field in this case is very effective in causing topological phase transitions. It acts almost directly to the impurity states. The magnitude of the effective Zeeman field h eff,z is renormalized from the bare value of Zeeman field h eff,z ≈ h x /2. In the case of helical p-wave superconductor and Zeeman field in y-direction h = (0, h y , 0) the effective model for the impurity chain is Here we have also made some approximations. After these approximations it seems that the effect Zeeman field in this case is similar as in the case of chiral p-wave superconductor with Zeeman field along z-direction. Therefore, it just shifts the blocks in different directions in energy and cannot induce a topological transition. However, it causes a transition from gapped phase into a gapless phase. The magnitude of the effective Zeeman field h eff,y is again renormalized from the bare value of Zeeman field h y . Single-band model with helical p-wave order parameter, which is strongly anisotropic so that the gap is suppressed by a factor of 10 along py. (c) Multiband model for Sr2RuO4 with helical p-wave order parameter, which is strongly anisotropic so that there is a gap minima along the 45 degree direction in (px, py)-plane. In the case of helical p-wave superconductivity without the Zeeman field the system satisfies a time-reversal symmetry. Thus, it belongs to class DIII in the Altland Zirnbauer classification scheme allowing for a possibility of a topological phase transition as a function of the impurity strength. In the topologically nontrivial phase, there exists two degenerate Majorana zero modes at each end of the impurity chain. In the case of chiral p-wave superconductivity without Zeeman field the system supports a spin-rotation symmetry that allows to block-diagonalize the Hamiltonian. Thus also in this case the system can support a topologically nontrivial phase with two degenerate Majorana zero modes appearing at each end of the chain. (To be more precise the effective Hamiltonian in both cases also supports a chiral symmetry allowing infinite number of topologically distinct phases to appear, but the Majorana end modes always appear in pairs in the absence of the Zeeman field.) Because the Majorana end modes appear in pairs they are not so useful for topological quantum computing. However, we can check the numerical implementation by calculating the corresponding DIII invariant as described in Ref. In Fig. The dependence of the topological phase diagram on the direction of the Zeeman field [Fig. In Fig. To illustrate the tuneability of the phase boundaries, we consider a Y-junction geometry of two curved chains with different lattice constants (see Fig. In order to find the basis transformation between the states , we We observe that the unitary transformation between the two bases does not change the total parity. Therefore, using the equations (S45) we find that the basis transfomation between states (S41) and (S44) is given by From these expressions it is clear that when the MZMs 2 and 3 are fused corresponding to projective measurement of f † f , the measurement outcomes 0 and 1 have equal probabilities. After the measurement the system has equal probabilities to be in the two different eigenstates of e † e. As discussed in the main text the MZMs can be moved by varying the direction and the magnitude of the magnetic field. Moreover, the parity of the Majoranas can be measured as soon as the MZMs 2 and 3 hybridize and acquire a charge The curved chain geometry leads to slowly varying parameters along the chain so that in addition to the MZM there exists low-energy Andreev bound states at the domain wall between nontrivial and trivial regions. This means that E gap is much smaller than the topological gap ∆ topo which can be achieved in a linear chain. Thus, also the localization length ζ M in the curved chain is much longer than the corresponding length scale ζ of the linear chain discussed in the main text. Therefore, t tunneling and t thermal are much shorter in curved chain geometry than in the linear chain, so that it is challenging to satisfy the requirements /E gap t 0 t tunneling , t thermal . We also point out it is difficult to vary the external magnetic field fast so that it is also difficult to satisfy the requirement t 0 t poisoning . In the next section we discuss how it is possible to overcome these problems by using small magnets where the magnetization directions are controlled fast using spintronic techniques iγ 0 γ 1 and continue if the outcome of the measurement is +1. (iii) Perform a measurement of the parity iγ 0 γ 2 and continue if the outcome of the measurement is +1. (iv) Perform a measurement of the parity iγ 0 γ 3 . The exchange of Majoranas γ 1 and γ 2 is successfully executed if the outcome of the measurement is +1. In Fig. Therefore, one typically needs to repeat the process many times to successfully execute the exchange operation. Finally, we point out that the circuit shown in Fig. 