We studied noise properties of microwave signals transmitted through the cryogenic resonator. The experiments were performed with the 11.342 GHz sapphire loaded cavity resonator cooled to 6.2 K. Based on the measured transmission coefficient of the cryogenic resonator we computed its noise suppression function. This was done via Monte-Carlo simulations some details of which are discussed in this Letter. Next, we measured technical fluctuations of a signal incident on the cryogenic resonator. Having processed these data with the previously computed noise filtering "template" we inferred noise spectra of the transmitted signal. We found that spectral densities of both phase and amplitude fluctuations of the transmitted signal were close to the thermal noise limit of -180 dB/Hz at Fourier frequencies F3 10 kHz. Such thermal noise limited microwaves allow more precise tests of special relativity and could be useful at some stages of quantum signal processing. Currently, microwave signals with the best long-term frequency stability are derived from the optical sources 1 . This is the result of the outstanding progress in laser frequency stabilisation In this work we show that, a classical loop oscillator based on a cryogenic SLC resonator offers better noise performance than the current state-of-the-art at Fourier frequencies above 1 kHz. We also show that noise spectra of the cryogenic oscillators are essentially free from vibration-induced phase/amplitude disturbances inherent to the photonic systems At fosc = fres, Power Spectral Density (PSD) of phase fluctuations at the output of loop amplifier (port 1 in Fig. Eq. 1 was derived assuming the resonator with Lorentzian transmission coefficient. In such a case, spectral density of phase fluctuations of the transmitted signal (at port 2 in Fig. A simple relation between two phase noise spectra given by the first term in Eq. 2 does not hold for the real microwave resonators whose transmission profiles are rarely Lorentzian. This is especially true for the cryogenic SLC resonators where the high-Q modes often exist as doublets within +/-0.5 kHz around the resonance. In such a case, we show that the relationship between spectral densities of the incident and transmitted signals can be found from numerical simulations, as discussed below. A flowchart of an algorithm for calculating phase fluctuations of a signal transmitted through a resonator is shown in Fig. Since the δfinc, is the "user-defined" random process, we can compute both δftrans and resonator Noise Suppression Factor (NSF) defined as a ratio of two spectral densities (4) Having introduced the NSF, we can rewrite Eq. 2 as (5) Fig. The key parameter of simulations is the sampling frequency fsample. If chosen formally (fsample >> fres) it would result in prohibitively long computation times with the number of samples (Nsamples = Tobs fsample) running into tens of billions. Fortunately, the nature of phase fluctuations in the cryogenic loop oscillator, in particular the rapid decrease of noise spectral density with Fourier frequency, eliminates the need for the high sampling rates. This can be understood by examining the phase noise spectra of the cryogenic sapphire oscillator (see Fig. Overall, in our analysis we assumed: Fmax = 30 kHz and fres = 30 MHz. As for the sampling frequency, it was chosen from fsample = 16 fres to minimize the DFT leakage errors Trace 2 in Fig. The NSF is an inherent property of the resonator. The same NSF used for inferring spectral density of phase fluctuations of the transmitted signal can be applied to evaluation of its amplitude noise. Fig. The noise spectra in Figs. 