Epsilon-near-zero and epsilon near-pole materials enable reflective systems supporting a class of symmetry-protected and accidental embedded eigenstates (EE) characterized by a diverging phase-resonance. Here we show that pairs of topologically protected scattering singularities necessarily emerge from EEs when a non-Hermitian parameter is introduced, lifting the degeneracy between oppositely charged singularities. The underlying topological charges are characterized by an integer winding number and appear as phase vortices of the complex reflection coefficient. By creating and annihilating them, we show that these singularities obey charge conservation, and provide versatile control of amplitude, phase and polarization in reflection, with potential applications for polarization control and sensing. Along with the progress in fabrication technologies observed in the last few decades, the concepts of metamaterials Topological systems are usually quantified with an invariantan integer-valued quantity, like the Chern number Although topological aspects of photonic systems have mostly been driven through the condensed matter physics perspective, recently there has been an expansion of topological photonics beyond these boundaries, leveraging the distinct features of photons Photonic EEs supported by periodic systems have indeed been shown to possess topological features in the form of a polarization singularity in the wavevector space. Their robustness has been explicitly attributed to their topological nature Although the topological aspects of EE-related phenomena are well understood in periodic systems, there has been little exploration into the topological features of other photonic systems that support EEs. Specifically, EEs arising in structures with singular values of the permittivity, mainly using epsilon-nearzero (ENZ) materials, have been recently studied In this paper, we extend the concept of topological photonics to planar reflective systems that support EEs and, using the scattering matrix formalism and complex frequency analysis, we unveil their topological nature and the emergence of topologically-protected scattering singularities. The proposed system supports symmetry-protected and accidental EEs, which are shown to be the origin of scattering singularities emerging upon insertion of loss/gain in the constituent materials. We focus on the lossy case and show that perfect-absorption singularities are intrinsically connected to the underlying EEs. Methods of formation, annihilation and control of these topological charges are discussed, providing a versatile tool to manipulate amplitude, phase and polarization of reflected waves. Using these concepts, we demonstrate several applications of these phenomena for polarization control and sensing. We consider a basic planar structure, infinitely extended in two dimensions as shown in the inset of Figure In order to obtain a better picture of the leaky nature of these modes in this basic geometry, we analyze the problem in the complex frequency space ω=ωr+iωi, which enables a detailed and intuitive description of the underlying scattering phenomena Since the structure under consideration is backed by a PEC, it can be described by a one-port network, whose scattering matrix has only one elementthe reflection coefficient, S = [r]. Thus, computing the reflection singularities is sufficient in this scenario, which can be achieved using a transmission line model for the structure (Supplementary Materials), from which the conditions for zero/pole are derived as where t is the layer thickness, k 1z = √k 0 2 ε 1 -k x 2 -k y 2 is the wavenumber along the z-axis in the Drude material, and Z 0 = k 0z ωε 0 ⁄ and Z 1 = k 1z ωε 0 ε 1 ⁄ are the TM wave impedances in air and the Drude material, respectively. The plus sign refers to the reflection-zero condition, while the minus sign is the reflection-pole condition. More details on the derivation are given in the Supplementary Material. along the imaginary frequency axis, creating a ring of real-frequency zeros (poles). The intersection of scattering singularities with the real frequency axis represents a topological objecta charge with non-zero winding number of a physical parameter in given parameter space. The topological signature of these states can be observed in the wavenumber-frequency plane by plotting the vector flow of r, Figure These types of vortices have been studied extensively in the context of singular optics To further enrich the discussion, we move to a more general scenario and analyze the system shown in Figure where ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity, ω p is the plasma frequency, ω 0 is the Lorentz resonance frequency, and γ is the damping or absorption loss. This type of permittivity describes the electric response of different naturally occurring materials, including metals, semiconductors and polar dielectrics like SiC or AlN Moreover, such a response can be induced by resonant metasurfaces, either with metallic or dielectric realizations The spectral points of particular interest are the Lorentz resonance frequency ω0 and zero-crossing ωENZ frequency. In the lossless case (γ = 0), the permittivity attains singular values at these frequencies, |ε|=∞ and ε=0, respectively. We refer to these regions as ENP (epsilon near-pole) and ENZ The dielectric spacer supports a continuum of modes above the lightline, which can couple to freespace radiation, as this structure is electromagnetically open from the top. However, if a mode of the spacer, i.e., a Fabry-Perot mode, overlaps with one of the top layer material resonances, a leaky mode with zero radiation decay (EE) is supported where c is the speed of the light in vacuum, f 0 is the Lorentz resonance frequency, ε d is the dielectric layer permittivity, and θ is the incidence angle. The tangential component of the electric field is required to be zero at both top and bottom boundaries, as sketched in the inset of Figure We first focus on the ENZ case -Figure Although the magnitude of the reflection coefficient is unity for any frequency and angle in the lossless case, the EEs are visible in the reflection coefficient phase. In real-frequency space, they manifest themselves as phase resonances with diverging linewidth, as visible in Figure The utility of phase analysis becomes apparent when losses are introduced, Figure Namely, the dispersion of reflection-zeros shown in Figure ( As shown in the amplitude plot, pairs of reflection-zeros and consequently perfect absorption points emerge from EE, where the charge emerging from the symmetry-protected EE has a mirror copy in the negative θaxis and thus is not visible in the plot. A similar scenario arises for the ENP casean accidental EE appears at a designed angle of 45 deg. More interestingly, however, both TM and TE modes have real-eigenfrequencies at the same point in the dispersion diagram, Figure To verify the conservation of topological charge, we introduce a mechanism to annihilate charges. As evident from the reflection-zero dispersion diagrams in Figure Figure Comparing these results to Figure In the ENP case in Figure This result opens the question of material lossindeed, some of the naturally occurring materials have high absorption loss and consequently some features discussed here are not available, i.e., charges may already be destroyed due to large loss. However, if we constrain the discussion to low-loss or moderately lossy materials, e.g., polar dielectrics like SiC, all of the previously described aspects hold. Furthermore, artificial materials as well as 2D materials, can provide ENZ or ENP response, thus expanding the validity of the presented analysis to a wide range of realistic geometries. For example, a Lorentzian (ENP) response can be induced as an electric dipole resonance in metasurfaces It is worth noting that the accidental EE at the designed angle θ, and its mirror copy at -θ, are part of a ring of EEs in k-space, as they represent intersection points of a chosen incidence plane and the EEcondition in the whole k|| plane. This condition, which can be derived from Eqs. ( This is in contrast to EEs in photonic crystals, where accidental EEs arise at isolated k-points. This property implies that EEs here do not represent singularities in k-space, and thus have different features than EEs in periodic systems. The discussion here adds new insights on previous observations of phase singularities and perfect absorption in metasurfaces So far, our discussion has been constrained to the analysis of phase and amplitude of the reflection coefficient around EEs. However, an important aspect intrinsically connected to these features is polarization. Traditionally, manipulation of the polarization state of light has been based on waveplates As we have shown in the previous discussion, the system of Figure δ r = δ o -δ i To illustrate the opportunities for polarization control, we plot the total reflectance and the contour lines with specific δ r values. In this way, we can find conversion points from LP to CP and vice versa, In order to better visualize this effect, we plot the output polarization ellipses for both CP and 45 deg LP inputs, Figure Due to the vicinity of the different polarization features, the output polarization state is sensitive to small changes in the system, and specifically to the permittivity (loss) of the SiC layer (Supplementary Materials). This could lead to a versatile polarization switching platform based on active control of material permittivity -for example, a moderate change in permittivity of InAs in the Reststrahlen region was recently demonstrated using laser-induced nonlinear processes Phase vortices are characterized by an undefined phase point in their center, around which the phase changes dramatically. This feature, most commonly observable around reflection-zeros, has been used as a basis for interferometric phase sensing schemes The caveat of this sensing method is the following: by approaching the singular point of the vortex, phase changes more dramatically, thus increasing the sensitivity of the system. However, the amplitude of the reflection coefficient drops at the same time. The sensitivity diverges as the singular point is reached, but there is no reflection to be measured at the detector. This inverse relationship between sensitivity and |r| plays an essential role in such devices. There are indeed qualitative differences between different realizations. Engineering structures with lower possible values of |r| lead to higher sensitivity. Furthermore, higher Q-factors of the underlying mode can improve the sensitivity, as these modes produce stronger fields and interactions with the environment. A critical issue to reconcile in such devices is the need for a highly precise angle of incidence to engage abrupt phase jumpse.g., extremely high sensitivity was reported in To address these issues, we exploit the unusual physics around the EE and the related topological charges discussed in this paper. First, we show that using EEs in SiC provides high-Q factors and enables remarkably high sensitivities around the reflection-zeros associated with EEs. Secondly, we introduce the concept of near-annihilation point sensing and show that we can alleviate the requirement for an extremely precise angle of incidence by manipulating charges, thus creating an extended angular range with stable sensitivity. To achieve these goals, we envision a gold-backed air gap (spacer) covered by a SiC layer to be used as a trace gas sensor, operating at long-wave infrared wavelengths, Figure As shown in the previous discussion, the SiC-capped resonator can support an EE around 10.3 μm (ENZ region) and the accompanying reflection-zeros. To demonstrate the phase jump, we plot the reflection coefficient near EE and its phase as it passes near the vortex at 52.3 deg, Figure At a constant frequency and angle, the phase of reflected waves changes dramatically for permittivity changes on the order of 10 -4 , producing very high sensitivity, of the order of 10 5 deg/RIU. However, as mentioned before, the sensitivity is highly dependent on the amplitude of the reflection coefficient, i.e., the proximity of the measurement to the singular point. To better grasp this correlation, we plot the sensitivity calculated at different values of |r|, red curve in Figure However, the displayed increase in sensitivity requires resolving the incidence angle in the order of 0.01 deg. For the DBR structure displayed in Figure To alleviate this stringent requirement, we exploit the phenomenon of merging charges introduced above. Interestingly, we show that by bringing two neighboring charges in close proximity, the reflection coefficient between them displays almost constant magnitude while keeping the strong phase jump, Figure 6(b)-(d). Furthermore, by fine-tuning the SiC thickness, we show that |r| can be steadily controlled and kept constant over an extended angular range, thus eliminating the stringent requirement on incidence angle and providing stable sensitivity. However, this comes at the cost of lower absolute sensitivity, because bringing two charges together requires lowering the overall Q-factor. A trade-off emerges between sensitivity of the system and robustness to incidence angle variations. For example, the structure in Figure The theoretical results discussed in this paper extend the notion of topological scattering effects to planar structures and show that topological quantities can find their use in various scenarios of interest. Although the presented theory builds upon the topological features of EE-related phenomena, it is worth stressing the differences between the homogeneous planar systems analyzed here and EEs emerging due to the periodicity in photonic crystals (PCs). EEs in PCs come as isolated points in k-space, whereas in the homogeneous planar systems studied here, EEs generally emerge in rings in k-space and isolated points in real space. Thus, a topological charge cannot be defined by integrating in k-space like in PCs, but in real space (either in ω-d or ω-θ space). Somewhat analogous to breaking spatial symmetries in PCs, which splits the EE into two half-integer charges Although PCs have more degrees of freedom to control the topological properties of EE scattering, we have shown that planar structures offer a versatile tool for intensity, phase and polarization control based on the topological nature of the reflection coefficient. Moreover, our proposed structures do not require complicated lithography fabrication process, as in the case of periodic structures. The scattering matrix approach used here has also been utilized in a different area of topological photonics -Weyl physics To conclude, we have introduced a topological perspective on scattering singularities in planar systems supporting EEs, connecting several research areas. We have unveiled that singularities of the scattering matrix necessarily emerge from EEs and carry topological charges observable as phase vortices. Charge conservation was demonstrated by proposing a method of charge annihilation, where tuning the underlying radiation losses provides control over the features and motion of charges. It was shown that perfect absorption and phase vortices associated with these charges enable extreme control of the intensity, phase and polarization of the reflected waves. Based on these concepts, we have proposed applications for versatile polarization control and switching, as well as for phase sensing schemes that may be implemented using silicon carbide. As demonstrated in the main text, charge conservation is confirmed through charge annihilation. We show here in more detail how charges behave and what role embedded eigenstates have. As charges emerge in pairs around the angle at which embedded eigenstate occurs, it is evident that these cannot annihilate each other (except for precisely EE with zero losses). Figure Charges associated with symmetry-protected EE and the first accidental one at a small angle (EE1) are of lower Q-factors, thus annihilate first. As thickness is further reduced, charges between EE1 and EE2, and finally, the pair between EE2 and EE3 annihilates. Thus the resonant angle of EE behaves as an impenetrable wall for these charges. The last unpaired charge of EE3 remains in the spectrum and cannot be annihilated unless a 4 th order EE is made available. In terms of scattering/absorption properties, ENZ can offer various opportunities, however it cannot absorb normally incident waves due to the TM plasmonic nature of the underlying modes. On the other hand, ENPbased structures analyzed in Figure Another important aspect of ENP-based structures is that, at ω0, the permittivity changes from one extreme to another, drastically changing the nature of the top layer in the spacer structures considered throughout the main text. Namely, in the lossless case, by approaching the Lorentz resonance from the right ω → ω 0 + , the permittivity of the top layer goes to -∞, providing metallic, and ultimately PEC character to the layer and in this way enabling perfect light trapping of the Fabry-Perot mode existing in the spacer. To assess the polarization properties of the structure, we define the transverse electric field in the plane normal to the incident k-vector, as sketched in figure E i = E V + E H = [ a be jδ i ] e -j(k 0x x+k 0z z) , where the incident electric field consists of vertically and horizontally polarized components with amplitudes a and b with the phase difference δ i . The compact way to describe the polarization is the Jones vector: The reflected field now has E r = [ r TE r TE-TM r TM-TE r TM ] [ a be jδ i ] e -j(k 0x x-k 0z z) , (s7) where the reflection matrix describes the connection between the incident and the reflected field. As there is no cross-coupling mechanism between orthogonal polarizations, the terms rTE-TM and rTM-TE are equal to zero. The output Jones vector can then compactly be written as 