The future of space exploration missions will rely on technologies increasing their endurance and self-sufficiency, including manufacturing objects on-demand. We propose a process for handling and additively manufacturing powders that functions independently of the gravitational environment and with no restriction on feedstock powder flowability. Based on a specific sequence of boundary loads applied to the granular packing, powder is transported to the printing zone, homogenized and put under compression to increase the density of the final part. The powder deposition process is validated by simulations that show the homogeneity and density of deposition to be insensitive to gravity and cohesion forces within a discrete element method (DEM) model. We further provide an experimental proof of concept of the process by successfully 3D printing parts on-ground and on parabolic flight in weightlessness. Powders exhibiting high and low flowability are used as model feedstock material to demonstrate the versatility of the process, opening the way for additive manufacturing of recycled material. As human reach into space expands, need arises for machines that work under extreme conditions -notably, in absence of gravity. Space exploration missions are severely constrained by payload capacity, and relying upon groundsupport would largely increase the risk of failure of such mission A vision for space exploration is in-space manufacturing (ISM): fabrication, assembly and integration of small to large structures directly in space Additive manufacturing (AM), also known as three dimensional (3D) printing, encompasses technologies that have two essential advantages for space applications: first, compared to subtractive technologies, they reduce the quantity of waste material produced Strictly speaking of manufacturing, AM already is a permanent tool in space: extrusion-based 3D printers have been on-board the International Space Station (ISS) since 2014 As on Earth, different manufacturing technologies should be available for space in order to respond to the variety of needs. Among AM technologies available onground, powder bed fusion (PBF) technologies offer the highest resolution The contours of a technological gap appear: to be suitable for space applications, an AM technology would com-bine the assets of PBF with the possibility to use powders regardless of their flow-properties, and be robust against changes in g-level. While powder handling remains an important issue on-ground (1g) In the present work, we propose a method to 3D print powders, regardless of the rheological properties of the feedstock raw material, and independently of the gravitational environment. Our method rests on a mechanism for powder transport and homogenization, as well as solidification of the granular material, in a closed container. In the following, solidification describes the consolidation process by which the granular material is transformed into a solid, coherent object, by any appropriate physical process chosen depending on the powder at hand. Robustness against gravity-variations is achieved by depositing powder solely using driving mechanisms shown to induce similar response regardless of the gravitational environmentnamely, shear After describing the AM method in Sec. 1, discrete el-ement method (DEM) simulation will be used in Sec. 2 to model the powder handling process. An experimental implementation of the AM process will follow in Sec. 3, providing a proof of concept on-ground and in weightlessness through PFCs. Parts manufactured from materials of variable flow-behaviors, under gravity conditions of 1g and μg, will be analyzed in Sec. 4, enabling to assess the performances of the AM process. Section 5 provides concluding remarks and and outlook. AM generally amounts to multiple iterations of two main steps: material deposition, followed by material solidification. In the case of PBF, powder deposition consists in creating a thin and homogeneous layer of granular material, which will then be selectively solidified -the latter being achieved by melting, sintering, or the addition of an extrinsic phase. The present powder-based AM method aims to conduct the material deposition step without relying on the gravitational environment, nor imposing constrains on the raw material flow-properties. The approach proposed here consists of confining the raw material in a closed container inside which the entire process takes place (whereas in conventional PBF, deposition and solidification happen on an open powder bed Handling the confined raw material is achieved by moving the container itself to force the material to flow towards the desired location. The powder displacement can be divided into two types of movement: 1. the vertical, downward powder transport and 2. the horizontal, planar movement to create homogeneous layers under the platform. Once deposited, the powder can be selectively solidified. The solidification also takes place inside the container: an energy input is provided from outside to the material inside the container through the bottom wall of the container, transparent to the type of energy used to solidify the raw material. Motion is imposed on the powder exclusively by movements of the container itself, i.e. only through boundary forces. The container is cylindrical, axially symmetrical about the axis along which the platform rises. The process is schematized in Fig. Since direct compression of the powder might lead to a fully jammed phase, another transport mechanism must be sought. Shear stress applied to a granular packing creates a primary flow independent of the gravitational field Also in an effort to avoid putting the granular packing under purely normal compression, the printing platform moving through the container is not a platform but the base of a cylinder; hence, no powder can remain compressed between the platform and the upper wall of the container as the platform moves upward to give space to the printed part. The rising cylinder on which the printing substrate is installed is labelled inner cylinder. The rise of the inner cylinder at each new iteration increases the volume available for the powder under the printing platform, but also in the container in general. To maintain the total powder volume fraction constant throughout the process, the volume gain is compensated by lowering the part closing the container on its upper section. Labelled closing disc, this annular shape links the outer wall of the container to the inner cylinder; it descends on the feedstock area, to push downward the raw material stocked there. Again to avoid normal compression, the closing disc describes oscillatory rotation around the cylinder axis while descending. It rotates alternatively in each direction at a frequency of 1 Hz, and it is equipped with vanes penetrating the powder bed. The oscillatory Figure motion forces the material to reorganize regularly, destroying and reforming the "fragile skeleton" Vertical transport of granular material in a closed container has been widely studied on-ground, for instance in the case of silo discharge, showing that normal pressure applied on top of a granular packing is reoriented horizontally During granular shear, force chains form oblique to the direction of shear After having been transported down and homogeneously distributed horizontally, the newly deposited powder layer undergoes normal compression by the platform descending onto it. The powder layer is hence compressed between the bottom wall of the container and the previously solidified layer sitting on top of the platform, increasing the packing density up to close packing. The compression ratio, expressed as a function of the layer height, is a printing parameter. Finally, the newly deposited powder layer can be selectively solidified through the bottom wall of the powder container, by the energy source placed outside. Since this wall must be transparent to the type of energy used to solidify the material, it is labelled solidification window. Quality and repeatability have been identified as the Achille's heel of AM The present process is designed to allow for closedloop control by in-situ monitoring. Primarily, the torque needed to rotate the inner cylinder mono-directionally during material transport is recorded. The torque developed during oscillatory rotation of the closing disc as it descends is also recorded, providing a second source of information on the raw powder's rheological behavior. The adaptive control loop allows for the immediate reaction to changes in flowability upon changes in environmental conditions. It must be noted, that here flowability does not refer to an inherent property of the material, but to the flow exhibited by a powder in the given conditions and environment in which it is processed, which includes -but is not limited to -the gravitational environment. Hence, the torque developed during powder transport is compared to a scale established a priori, giving the typical duration needed to deposit a material as a function of its flow response. This adaptive closed control loop allows for the optimization of powder deposition without being limited to situations formerly encountered. In parallel, a quality assurance system is implemented to monitor the appearance of defects during material homogenization. The solidification window is transparent not only to the solidification energy but also to visible light; hence, live imaging captures the progression of the powder layer homogenization from below. This image-analysis procedure facilitates the detection and quantification of heterogeneities in the powder layer, continuing the material deposition procedure as long as the chosen metrics have not dropped under a threshold set to identify an acceptable degree of homogeneity. Proposing a step toward autonomous manufacturing, concurrent use of the two "probe-and-adapt" systems men-tioned above (i.e., torque-based rheometrical feedback and in-situ monitoring) does not only provide traceability of defects, but their automated correction, ensuring constant and reliable manufacturing quality. The full printing procedure, including in-situ monitoring mechanisms, is schematized in Fig. The following simulation study of material deposition is used to validate the printing parameters prior to experiment, for both 1g and μg. Lacking precedent on which to rely on for comparison, and in an effort to narrow the possible sources of variations, the same printing parameters are used on all the situations presented. The simulation study guides the choice of these printing parameters, while minimizing the risk of failure, notably for μg experiments, by testing the qualitative influence of key parameters, such as gravity and increase in powder cohesion. DEM simulation The system modeled encompasses N = 76 000 deformable 3D polystyrene (PS) particles of diameter d = 2 mm, surrounded by an aluminium (Al) container. Due to computational constraints, considering equivalent setup size, the particle size chosen in the simulation is significantly larger than in experiment (d = 80 μm, see Sec. 3). In order to represent strongly cohesive powders, we include a simple model for attractive interactions among particles, and concentrate on a qualitative rather than quantitative comparison. In the model, each point particle i is represented by a sphere, and overlaps with a particle j by a distance of δ ij . The Hertz-Mindlin contact model The first two terms of Eq. 1 are the normal and tangential components of the force governed by the stiffness parameters k n,t and viscoelastic damping parameters γ n,t . They represent the mechanical properties of the material constituting the particles. While their numerical value can be linked to true material properties (elasticity modulus and Poisson ratio), they are bounded by numerical constraints. Notably, optimization of simulation time requires to fix a sufficiently large time step dt; but deeming dt too large would result in overlooking certain collisions, thus invalidating the simulation. It is customary to consequently adapt the value of k n,t to remain at the lower end of the permissible spectrum, hence reducing computational effort while maintaining expected effects on the large scale. In the light of previous studies The boundary conditions are embodied by contact surfaces following the stepwise powder deposition process described in Sec. 1 (Fig. Snapshots from the visualization of the simulation results are presented in Fig. The critical region regarding powder deposition quality is the centre of the powder layer at the bottom of the processing container, which will be selectively solidified. In simulation, this region is a disc of radius 15d (where d is the diameter of one particle), and height 5d after the compression step. Analysis of the particles' distribution within this region is carried out by finding the local packing fraction φ associated to each particle from a Voronoï tessellation The influence of the gravitational environment is studied by adjusting the gravitational constant g = 9.81 m s -1 , by multiplying it by +1, 0 and -1 (labels used in the subsequent text and in Fig. The evolution of φ at the end of each step of the powder deposition process, averaged over the printing region in Fig. ≈ 0.15%. Zooming-in on the state of the bottom layer at the end of the powder deposition, φ after move 8 is shown in Fig. To summarize, the quality of the final powder deposition shows no dependence on the gravitational environment, although the simulations show, for the parameters chosen, that the powder transport does depend on the g-level. This suggests that the process is robust against changes in gravitational environment. The other relevant parameter for the AM process is dependence on the flow-properties of the powder feedstock. The corresponding simulation variable is the cohesion energy κ, which adds to the contact force an attractive term along the axis defined by the aligned particles centers, proportional to κ times the area of contact A ij (see Eq. 1). Numerical values of κ are varied from 10 -4 J m -3 (for a very low cohesion, hence highly flowable powder) to 10 5 J m -3 (for a highly cohesive powder). φ throughout the powder deposition is presented in Fig. For all κ ≤ 10 4 J m -3 , our model shows very similar results: such high flowability powder flows under the printing platform quickly, as it is already put into motion by the concurrent inner cylinder rotation and closing disc descend (move 2). Non-cohesive powders are very sensitive to collisions and tend to move freely within the container. The remaining steps of the process have little effect on the powder repartition, with the exception of move 5, which slightly increases powder density in the printing region by bringing some more material downward, and the compression step (move 8) which significantly increases φ from 0.52 to 0.85. Locally measured φ shown in Fig. To conclude this simulation study, using the same 3D printing parameter set, all the simulation results have shown that whereas increased powder cohesion, as well as reversed gravity or absence thereof, modifies the powder flow behavior at each step of the powder transport taken separately, the general powder deposition functions independently of the raw material's flowability (cf. Fig. Having confirmed by simulation the working principle of the proposed AM process, the latter is implemented in two 3D printers and tested on-ground and in weightlessness. Parabolic flight campaigns (PFCs) supported by German Aerospace Center (DLR) and European Space Agency (ESA) are used to conduct μg experiments: the 34 th DLR PFC in September 2019, used for testing the hardware in μg, and the 72 nd ESA PFC in November 2019 (in the context of the ESA Education FlyYourThesis! GrainPower project), during which five samples were successfully manufactured fully in weightlessness, providing a proof of concept for the AM process. PFCs allow, by flying an airplane describing parabolic trajectories, a period of free fall of about 22 s, which allows to perform experiments in weightlessness. This μg period is surrounded by A 3D printer built to implement the AM process described (and its digital counterpart) are shown in Fig. The type of energy source and the solidification window's material determine the maximum temperature allowed, hence the adequate raw materials. In the demonstration experiment presented here, polymer powders are used; an infrared (IR) lamp serves as energy source (Quattro IR emitter from Heraeus, Germany), and the solidification window is a doubled 5 mm thick fused silica plate (proQuarz, Germany). The general structure is formed by 30 × 30 mm 2 aluminum profiles on which the individual parts are mounted. The printing volume available is a cylinder of diameter 65 mm and height 50 mm. The motion of each part exactly follows the description given in Fig. The 3D printing procedure is as follows: first, the inner cylinder rises vertically to make space for the new layer. At the end of the powder deposition phase, it moves vertically downward to compress the powder underneath. To maintain a constant volume inside the powder containment, the closing disc translates down to counteract the motion of the inner cylinder; simultaneously, it rotates in alternating direction to probe the packing and keep it from jamming. Powder downward transport is carried out by the screw conveyor placed inside the outer tube, rotating to push the powder towards the bottom of the container. The shell of the inner cylinder (excluding the printing substrate) also rotates (independently of its translation motion) to probe the powder flow from within the container, providing a rheological characterization of the feedstock powder. As mentioned previously, in this first study the in-situ probing control loop is not automatized to allow better overview of the effects of our variable parameters (gravity and powder flowability) on the powder deposition. To demonstrate feasibility of AM from raw materials of high to mediocre flowability, two exemplary demonstrator powders are used, which share all physical characteristics except for their surface roughness. This enables us to test solely the effect of a decreased flowability on the powder deposition and sintering process. The model substances are crafted as follows. A monodisperse spherical polystyrene (PS) powder of main diameter 80 μm is used (where size and dispersity are given by the manufacturer). Produced by the company Microbeads under the name Dynoseeds, the powder as-received from the manufacturer is dry-coated with a sub-micron angular PS dust, as shown in Figs. The influence of the surface coating on the flowability of the powder is not a priori evident, as the addition of smaller guest particles on large host particles can either enhance or hinder their flowability. A small quantity of hard guest particles, of diameter much smaller that the host particles In absence of a universal definition, the procedure that we used to characterize flowability of the SS and RS powders is the so-called flow energy measurement available on the Freeman Technology 4 Powder Rheometer (FT4) where m s is the total mass of the sample and g the gravitational acceleration. Qualitatively, an increase in flow energy E * corresponds to a decrease in powder flowability. Fig. It has been shown that particles of smaller diameter tend to exhibit higher cohesion, due to the predominance of van der Waals interactions In Fig. Finally, a comparison is provided in Fig. 3D printing procedure. For the sake of comparison, all samples are obtained using the same printing parameters. The material deposition lasts 20 s. The layer height is 500 μm (corresponding to ∼ 6d) and the compression rate is 50% -i.e. the printing platform rises by 1000 μm before each deposition step, then descends by 500 μm to compress the newly deposited layer. Following the compression stage, which immobilizes the newly deposited layer, sintering takes place. For the μg samples, sintering starts at the next parabola, to allow the entire manufacturing procedure to be carried out in weightlessness. To provide as much information as possible on the powder deposition, no further compression is applied during solidification, and sintering is preferred over melting, as it maintains possible heterogeneities of the deposited powder layer. The sintering parameters were chosen such that at each new layer, a depth of 1000 μm be sintered (i.e. twice the layer height), to ensure full cohesion between the subsequent layers. Printing substrate. All samples were 3D printed on a premanufactured printing substrate. Examples of printing substrates are visible in Fig. Sample preparation. Samples are prepared to faithfully reflect the powder deposition at its most challenging position: in the centre of the printing volume. The energy source for sintering (IR-lamp) provides heat in a rather evenly distributed manner over an entire area, enabling solidification of the entire sample-section within less than 20 s. However, due to design limitations the IR-lamp provides slightly stronger heating on two regions of the printing bed of approx. 10 mm by 30 mm, represented in blue in Fig. XCT specifications & data analysis. In-bulk characterization of the samples is done by X-ray computed tomography (XCT). The machine and scanning parameters used are presented in Tab. The size-homogeneity of the porosities in the samples is assessed by two automatized image analysis proce-dures implemented in the Python PoreSpy library The primary result to report is the successful manufacturing of samples 3D printed from the SS and RS powders, under 1g and μg (see Fig. The average packing fraction of each sample is compared for all samples in Fig. The average packing fractions depend on the base material, but are independent of gravity. This result is reminiscent of the printing-zone densities obtained through simulation (Figs. The pore size distribution is shown in Fig. The RS samples in Fig. The pore size distribution corresponding to the RS powder has a larger width than that corresponding to the SS powder (Fig. Chord length analysis is used to capture anisotropy in the pores' shape and test whether the manufacturing process begets a preferred direction; it is presented in Fig. For the "known good" sample in Fig. Comparison of the 3D printed samples to this baseline confirms that all samples have slightly larger pores than our reference sample. The comparative sample is sintered continuously under weight, applying a constant pressure to allow porosities to close during sintering, while the 3D printed samples are all compressed to a fixed height rather than under a constant pressure: the compression is not maintained constant during sintering. This is necessary for assessing the powder repartition, but a constant compression pressure should be maintained during the solidification step in further manufacturing campaigns to decrease the size of porosities, thereby increasing the prints' quality. The "known bad" sample's chord length presented in Fig. The μg SS sample has the highest isotropy of all 3D printed samples. The μg RS sample also exhibits high isotropy, despite slightly larger porosities. Generally, the raw material's flowability (SS or RS ) does not beget anisotropy in the printed samples. Comparing the 3D printed samples by base-material depending on the g-level during manufacturing, a slight elongation of the pores in the z-direction is remarked for the 1g samples. Precisely, σz /σx is always larger for the 1g sam- (f ) 0g RS x-dir. z-dir. Chord length /μm Probability density function /μm -1 Figure Table In microgravity, the homogenization step (horizontal shaking of the powder at the bottom of the apparatus), results in a wave of powder forming "clusters" or zones of heterogeneous density: bubble-like circular structures progressing towards the center of the printing area. The homogenization step of the process consists of merging those "powder clusters" into a homogeneous powder layer. This can be seen in video 2 of the supplementary material [61]. On-ground, the same wave-like progression is observed, although the circular structures within the powder are not observed. In absence of the preferred acceleration direction due to gravitational acceleration, the "clusters" that form are composed of particles in configurations that also do not have a preferred direction, which results in an isotropic packing. Those clusters then merge into a powder layer; as this still happens in absence of gravity, the particles are not reordered in a denser packing due to their respec-tive weight, but retain the isotropic configuration they had in the clusters. In turn, this results in porosities with isotropic shapes for the microgravity-3D printed samples, while the ground-3D printed samples have reorganized under their own weight into a less isotropic packing. Microscopies of cuts of RS samples that were 3D printed under 1g and μg respectively, are presented in Figs. Under 1g particles tend to crystallize layer-wise in the xy-plane. Such self-ordering has been shown previously The minute elongation of porosities along the z-axis in the ground-manufactured samples is generally compliant with the presence of a preferred direction under gravity, and partial crystallization is observed in the horizontal shaking plane, in particular in the 1g samples (Fig. To be used for in-space applications, AM methods will need to evolve into more versatile technologies with increased reliability All the samples analyzed in-bulk (SS and RS , under 1g and μg) were manufactured using the same printing parameters. The mild differences obtained in material deposition, show that the use of material with different flowability is reflected in the process; yet all powders could be deposited and 3D printed. This suggests that the RS powder could be more densely packed by using better suited printing parameters. In particular, while the deposition process might be ineffective in increasing packing density if that is a material-dependent variable The possibility to compress the material layer after deposition also has a specific drawback: it implies that the material of the solidification window and the printing material are in contact before and most importantly during consolidation. For the polymer powders used as model substances in the work presented here, the quartz glass plate was not reactive at the sintering temperature of polystyrene (∼ 200 °C). However, to 3D print metal or ceramic powders would require significant modifications of the system: if consolidation happens at higher temperature, material exchange between the molten powder and the glass plate could result in the newly solidified layer sticking irreversibly to the solidification window. The production of metal and ceramic parts would hence require not only to adapt the energy source to provide accordingly higher energy, but also a new study of affinity between the base-material and the window's material. The material of the solidification window would have to be chosen accordingly, to minimize material exchange and avoid the powder layer remaining stuck to the window. For example, the stability of a sapphire glass plate should be investigated when exposed repeatedly to molten metal alloys. Ensuring that no heat-induced chemical reaction happens will be the challenge to adapt this AM process to metal and ceramic powders. Besides controlling parts' density by compressing the newly deposited powder layer, defect appearance is mitigated by constant in-situ monitoring during powder deposition. The next step will be to automatize the control loops (torque sensing during powder transport and image analysis during layer homogenization). On the one hand, homogenization time could be optimized through the image analysis procedure proposed, to minimize fabrication time. On the other hand, assessment of print quality and live-correction during manufacturing will allow AM to access a wider range of applications by increasing stability in prints quality, including application for space and ISM. Using those strategies to ensure high printing quality without requirement on the rheology of the feedstock material will facilitate the use of recycled materials for AM. First tests on-ground have shown that powder produced by closed-loop recycling (i.e. by grinding former 3D printed parts) can be directly used as raw material in the process presented here Focusing on the powder handling aspect, the powder deposition process was developed to allow for the use of powders regardless of their physical and rheological properties, meaning that it functions for any base-material (polymers, metals, ceramics. . . ). The powder handling method could hence be adapted for granular transport even beyond 3D printing in reduced gravity environments, regardless of the material's flowability. Notably, on sand-covered planetary surface (e.g. the Moon, Mars or certain asteroids), powder handling technologies will be necessary to process regolith, the main in-situ resource and a powder of notoriously poor flowability As technological progress and space explorations will go hand-in-hand in the coming years, the authors hope that the AM process presented will be part of a movement to spur the development of in-space manufacturing in general, ultimately enabling long-term human presence in space.