While a topologically ordered counterpart of the s-wave superconductor has been proposed in the literature on phenomenological grounds, its microscopic origin remains unknown. In meeting this goal, we employ the recently developed unitary renormalisation group (URG) method on a generalised model of electrons in two spatial dimensions with attractive interactions. We show that the effective Hamiltonian obtained at the stable low-energy fixed point of the RG flow corresponds to a gapped, insulating state of quantum matter we call the Cooper pair insulator (CPI). Detailed analyses show that the CPI ground state manifold displays several signatures of topological order, including a four-fold degeneracy when placed on the torus. Spectral flow based arguments reveal the emergent gauge-theoretic structure of the effective theory: the CPI effective Hamiltonian can be written entirely in terms of non-local Wilson loops. Further, it contains a topological θ-term whose coefficient is quantised in keeping with the requirement of invariance of the ground state under large gauge transformations. This θ-term is known to be equivalent to the Chern-Simons term in two spatial dimensions. Passage from the CPI to the metal by tuning the θ coefficient reveals a plateaux structure of the CPI ground state in terms of the steadily decreasing number of condensed Cooper pairs. Investigations reveal that the long-ranged many-particle entanglement content of the CPI ground state is driven by inter-helicity two-particle scattering processes. The plateau with θ = 0 possesses the largest bipartite entanglement entropy (EE), scaling logarithmically with subsystem size (L) and falling rapidly upon tuning θ towards the metal. The bipartite EE for inter-plateau transitions shows universal signatures in its variations with L and θ. While the EE signatures for plateaux and transitions can be distinguished at low temperatures, such distinctions are smeared out as temperature is raised. We also study the passage from the CPI to the s-wave BCS superconducting ground state under RG, and find that the RG flow promotes fluctuations in the number of condensed Cooper pairs and lowers those in the conjugate global phase of the ground state wavefunction. Consequently, we find that the distinct signatures of long-ranged entanglement in the CPI are replaced by the well-known short-ranged entanglement of the BCS state. Analysing the effects of Josephson effects reveals that while a Cooper pair tunnel coupling between two CPI systems does not lead to phase stiffening, breaking the global U (1) phase rotation symmetry in one of them induces a phase coherence in the other. However, the generation of a Josephson current requires the separate breaking of the U (1) symmetry in the two systems. Finally, we study the renormalisation of the entanglement in k-space for both the CPI and BCS ground states. The topologically ordered CPI state is shown to possess an emergent hierarchy of scales of entanglement, and that this hierarchy collapses in the BCS state. Our work offers clear evidence for the microscopic origins of topological order in this prototypical system, and lays the foundation for similar investigations in other systems of correlated electrons. I. Introduction 1 II. Effective theory of the Cooper Pair Insulator (CPI) 4 III. Topological Features of CPI 6 A. Topological nature of the effective theory 6 B. Topological degeneracy at Φ = 0. 8 C. Spectral flow, plateau ground states and topological quantum numbers 9 IV. Entanglement Features of CPI 10 A. Entanglement Spectrum 10 B. Entanglement Entropy of the plateau ground states and transitions 12 V. Passage to the BCS ground state 14 A. Properties of the ground state 14 B. The effect of a Josephson coupling 17 VI. Entanglement Renormalisation 17 VII. Conclusions and Discussions 20 Superconductivity is undoubtedly one of the best studied example of an emergent collective phenomenon in a system of interacting electrons. While Cooper's theory Next, in Sec.VI, we have carried out an entanglement RG using the technique developed by us in Refs. We begin by deriving an effective Hamiltonian for an insulating state of matter comprised of a fixed number of Cooper pairs (referred to as the Cooper pair insulator, or CPI, in the introduction). For this, we will carry out a renormalisation group (RG) calculation on a system of electrons in two dimensions with a generalised pairing Hamiltonian, H = q H q pair , where where with q denotes the pair-momenta, k the kinetic energy for electrons about a circular Fermi surface, -|W q kk | is the attractive pairing interaction, U (> 0) a repulsive density-density interaction and n k = σ c † k,σ c k,σ . Note that the case of a constant |W q kk | ∀(k, k , q) corresponds to the attractive Hubbard model where τ = (τ z , τ x , τ y ) are the Pauli matrices and φ k = (c k↑ , c † -k↓ ). The pseudospins obey the standard commutation relation for spin-1/2: [S i k , S j k ] = i jkl S j k . Then, we write H q pair as where ̃ k,q = -k + k+q is the kinetic energy for a pair of electrons. In order to ensure the extensivity of the model, |W q kk | = |V q kk |/N (where N corresponds to the total number of pseudospins, and hence 2N the total number of electrons). The special case of H q=0 pair with |W q=0 kk | and U = 0 is called the Richardson pairing model (see Ref. ∆|W q,(j) where the index (j) represents the RG step number, |W q,(j) present in the RG equations given above Therefore, given the denominator ω - ̃ (j) kΛ,q /2 -U/4 in both RG equations, the leading RG relevant q-sector for the lowest quantum fluctuation energyscale (ω = 0) corresponds to the case of q = 0 (i.e., Cooper pairs with zero centre of mass momentum). Thus, we will henceforth study only the case of ̃ pair ≡ H 0 pair . We define mode decompositions of the dispersion such that the RG equations for ̄ (j) l=0 and V (j) l=0,l =0 are observed to dominate under the RG flow over all other modes for a thermodynamically large system : Re ∆ ̄ The zero mode ̄ (j) 0 is related to the center of mass kinetic energy ̄ (j) : ̄ where W (j) = V (j) /N The relation between the two RG equations (eq.( From this invariant, it can now be seen that when the kinetic energy ̄ is RG relevant, the attractive coupling | W | is RG irrelevant and vice versa. We can now write the effective Hamiltonian obtained at the stable fixed point of the RG flow as where ̄ * , V * and N * are the fixed point values of ̄ (j) , V (j) and N (j) respectively reached at the endpoint of the RG flow (and V * /N * = C - ̄ * ). Finally, by defining the composite pseudospin S = k S k , we can rewrite the Hamiltonian H coll (upto additive constants) as While the first term arises from the electronic kinetic energy, the second the potential energy saved by the formation of pairs (i.e., the condensation energy) and the third represents the repulsive charging energy cost of the electrons that form the Cooper pairs. Note that the Hamiltonian eq.( where Φ ≡ ̄ * / V * and we have ignored a constant (∝ ( ̄ * /N * ) 2 ). Further, for N * pseudospins, 0 ≤ S(∈ Z) ≤ N * /2, -S ≤ S z (∈ Z) ≤ S and the number of Cooper pairs is given by N c = S -S z . It is easily seen that both S and S z commute with H coll . Further, H coll arises a global collective angular momentum degree of freedom, S z , and possesses the form of a quantum particle whose dynamics is confined to a circle and coupled to an (effective) dimensionless Aharanov-Bohm (AB) flux Φ. As well will discuss in a later section, this points to a topological property possessed by the ground state manifold of its Hilbert space. We note here, however, that the emergent Hilbert space corresponding to H coll possesses the property of spectral flow. First, observe that minimisation of the energy is achieved under RG flow for the case of Φ = ̄ * / V * → 0+ by a ground state possessing S = N * /2 and S z = 0, corresponding to the largest number of Cooper pairs (N c = N * /2). Spectral flow refers to the existence of ground states, corresponding to other positive integer values of S z , that can be reached under RG for values of the effective AB flux Φ 1 flowing to the same positive integer. As we will now see, this emergent quantisation of the effective AB flux Φ under RG also provides a relation between the RG invariant C and the quantum fluctuation scale ω. As shown in Appendix A, the final fixed point value of ̄ * is given by ̄ * = 2ω -U 2 . Using this together with the relation for the RG invariant is For the case of U = 0, this leads to Finally, we note that the ground state wavefunction of the U (1)-symmetric CPI state with S z = 0 (i.e., at strong coupling) is given by where |vac is the state that contains no Cooper pairs, and N is a normalisation factor. By acting with H coll on |ψ g , we obtain the ground state energy density as In order to gauge the accuracy of the effective Hamiltonian (eq.( We will, in this section, study the topological properties of the many-body system described by the stable fixed point effective Hamiltonian H coll (eq.( We begin by showing that the effective Hamiltonian for the plateau state in the strong coupling limit (i.e., with Finite-size scaling of the ground state energy density Eg/N * under RG for system sizes N = 100, 202, 406, 814, 1600, 3200, 6400, 12800, 25600, 51200 (blue circles from right to left). N * is the number of pseudospins within the emergent subspace at the stable fixed point of the RG. The red dash-dot line shows a linear fit to the finite-size scaling data. The blue dash-dot line shows the thermodynamic limit value for Eg/N obtained from a finite-size scaling exact diagonalisation study of small systems ranging between 5-15 pseudospins. Inset: Zoom of RG finite-size scaling data for N = 3200, 6400, 12800, 25600, 51200. ̄ * = 0) system) is purely topological. This will be done by rewriting x + S 2 y ) in terms of emergent Wilson loop operators defined on a torus created by imposing periodic boundary conditions in the Λ-direction (i.e., the window in k-space that defines the CPI condensate, see Fig. We define the k-space translation (T ŝ, brown curved line in Fig. where the twist operator Ôi ŝ spans all values of Λ in the ŝ direction, and imparts a gradual twist to the pseudospins S i nΛ,ŝ such that the total twist imparted across the ŝ direction is 2π. Further, we can also define a composite twist operator that spans the entire torus shown in Fig. Then, we compute the following (nonlocal) Wilson loop operator W i 1 (i = (x, y)) defined in terms of T ŝ and Õi where the first term on the right hand side imparts the twist to the centre of mass of the torus of pseudospins. The second denotes the trivial phase twist accumulated at a virtual boundary defined on the torus by the curve Thus, we obtain the composite pseudospin (S i , i = (x, y)) in terms of W i 1 as such that the U (1)-symmetric effective Hamiltonian obtained from the RG can be written purely in terms of the emergent W i 1 as This shows us that the U (1) symmetry is encoded in the invariance of the Wilson loops W i 1 large gauge transformations such that we can redefine as earlier the following composite twist ( Õi ) and pseudospin (S i ) and the Wilson loop We can once again write the effective Hamiltonian H coll as where ̄ * 2 = ̄ * -N * V * /2. The fact that the effective Hamiltonian (H coll ) obtained from the RG can be written completely in terms of global collective gauge degrees of freedom (i.e., the Wilson loops W i 1 and W i 2 ) is not surprising. Indeed, following Refs. written in terms of a global phase φ conjugate to S z , such that and with a Berry phase given by γ = 2π ̄ * V * = 2πΦ where Θŝ ⊥ denotes the center of mass angular position along ŝ⊥ . With this, we find where we have set (and 2n + 1 being the number of pseudospin states in the direction ŝ) in the second line in order to obtain the third. Thus, These relations imply the existence of two degenerate states labelled by the center of mass angular position along ŝ⊥ (Θ ŝ⊥ ) with transitions from one to the other taking place via the twist operator We now unveil another two-fold degeneracy of the ground state manifold. By first defining pseudospin degrees of freedom along a given direction of momentum space (ŝ) that are resolved in terms of the eigenvalue of the helicity operator (η = ±1) we define a helicity twist operator O ŝ Then, we define the helicity inversion operator T H where Ĥ ŝ e corresponds to the generator of helicity inversion of the center of mass along ŝ. These helicity twist and translation operators follow the algebra where we have set [ Sŝ,z 0 + Sŝ,z 1 ] = 0 and Sŝ,z 0 = (2n + 1) 1 2 in the second line in order to obtain the third. Thus, Again, these relation imply the existence of two degenerate states labelled by the eigenvalue of the generator of helicity inversion ( Ĥ ŝ e ) of the center of mass along ŝ with transitions from one to the other taking place via the twist operator O ph Importantly, we find that Thus, these four operators together label the four-fold degenerate ground state manifold. As noted above, this matches the result for the phenomenological BF Chern-Simons gauge field theory formulation of Hansson et al. separating the degenerate ground state manifold from the lowest lying excited state of the effective Hamiltonian H coll (eq.( C. Spectral flow, plateau ground states and topological quantum numbers As mentioned in the previous subsection, by tuning the ratio Φ ≡ ̄ * / V * , we can access ground states with different number of Cooper pair bound states (i.e., the eigenvalue of the operator S z ). We will now study the passage between these ground states, and also show the journey towards a metallic (gapless) ground state (i.e., with a vanishing number of Cooper pair bound states). We recall that for Φ = 0, the ground state is given by |ψ g = |S = N * /2, S z = 0 , i.e., a state with N * Cooper pairs. The action of S + on |ψ g is i.e., lowers the Cooper pair number by 1. Energetically, this is equivalent to a value of the parameter Φ in H coll within the range 0.5 < Φ < 1.5. In the same way, m 2 < Φ < m 2 + 1 (m ∈ Z) leads to a ground state |N * /2, m , such that for Φ > (N * -1)/2, we attain a ground state with a vanishing number of Cooper pairs. This amounts to reducing the spectral gap of the CPI phase in a step-like manner, until a gapless spectrum (the "metal") is attained. Thus, tuning the parameter Φ amounts to a process of spectral flow between various ground states. Each gapped ground state (corresponding to different values of S z ) possesses topological features (as discussed in the previous subsection). At zero temperature, in the presence of a pairing-induced gap ∆, these gapped ground states will show plateaux in a variation of S z with Φ = ̄ * / V * (see Fig. where As shown in Fig. where the expectation value is taken with respect to the ground state. For |ψ g = |S, S z = M , it can be shown that Υ = 2(S 2 + S -M 2 ). A plot of Υ versus M in FIG. Fig. We begin our discussion of the entanglement features of the CPI phase with an investigation of the entanglement spectrum for the plateau ground states, whose wavefunction is given by |ψ P = |S, S z for Φ = m , m ∈ Z. We will also present the entanglement spectrum at the plateau transitions where the ground state is degenerate, S z + N * /2 ↑-pseudospins) into subsystems of length L and N * -L (with l and n -l ↑-pseudospins respectively) where λ n l are the Schmidt coefficients. The number l ranges within l min and l max given by From the pure state density matrix ρ P = |ψ P ψ P |, we can then obtain a reduced density matrix ρ P,L (n) for a subsystem of L pseudospins The Schmidt coefficients (λ n l ) are determined by the combinatorial factor that specifies the number of ways one can choose l ↑ spins from n ↑ spins: (52) At the plateau transitions, we start with a pure state density matrix obtained from the linear superposition state |ψ PT , ρ PT = |ψ PT ψ PT |, and proceed identically as above to obtain the reduced density matrix ρ PT,L (n). The entanglement spectrum (ES) is obtained from the Schmidt eigenvalues, ξ n i = -log 2 (λ n i ), for ρ P,L (n) and ρ PT,L (n) with given values of N * and L. For a fixed N * = 488 pseudospins, we plot the ES for various values of the reduced partition size L for the case of the plateau at strong coupling Φ = 0 and the first plateau transition at Φ = 1/2 in Fig. ture of the CPI ground state at Φ = 0, and corroborated by the degeneracy lifting precisely at the transition point (Φ = 1/2). We have checked that a similar degeneracy of the ES is revealed for all other plateau ground states at Φ = m, m ∈ Z, m > 0 for only a bi-partitioning of the system L = N * /2. For instance, in Fig. We now compute the bipartite entanglement entropy in momentum space for various plateau ground states obtained by tuning the parameter φ. As before, we take a system where N * and L are the total number of pseudospins and number of pseudospins within the reduced subsystem, while n and l are the number of ↑-pseudospins within N * and L respectively. The bipartite entanglement entropy (S EE ) can simply from the Schmidt coefficients (λ n l ) via the following formula where d l is the degeneracy factor for the lth state of the entanglement spectrum. We have observed earlier in Fig. We have found the value of the slope to be a simple number (1/2) as Φ is varied through the first 2000 plateaux. However, it is not clear whether this indicates a universality of plateaux ground states observed at strong coupling with those at intermediate coupling. Unlike the observation of logarithmic scaling of S EE with subsystem size in 1+1D quantum critical systems (see Ref. In contrast to Fig. where β is the inverse temperature and Z the partition function. Equipartitioning the system precisely as described earlier in eqs.( The reduced density matrix is easily seen to be diagonal FIG. such that the entanglement entropy at a non-zero temperature is obtained as Precisely the same formalism can also be carried out with the state equal admixture state at the plateau transition (|ψ P T ). In Fig. In order to chart the passage from the number-fixed CPI ground state to the conjugate phase-fixed BCS ground state, we will carry out the RG analysis upon adding a global U (1)-symmetry breaking term (-2B k S x k , B > 0) to the collective Hamiltonian H coll (eq.( The RG equations for ̄ and V are those given earlier in eq.( In the regime ω < (j) 2 + U 4 , both W and B are found to be RG relevant. From the RG eqs.( indicating that while both | W | and B grow to strong coupling under the RG flow, the ratio | W |/B remains invariant. This shows that while the original BCS meanfield Hamiltonian 2 is achieved only in the limit of the RG invariant | W |/B → 0, a U (1)-symmetry broken BCS-like effective Hamiltonian is emergent from the RG flow at strong coupling where H coll is given in eq.( In commonality with the BCS ground state, the ground state wavefunction for H SB is given by a linear superposition of states with different S z (eq.( where the (normalised) coefficients α B (S z ) are functions of the symmetry-breaking field B. We will also show below that several properties of |ψ(B) closely resemble those of |ψ BCS as B is tuned to large values. For instance, we will show that at large B, |ψ(B) leads to vanishing inter-k entanglement. We recall that a vanishing inter-k entanglement entropy is a special property of the BCS ground state, arising from the fact that different k-momenta electron-pair states are decoupled from one another. In order to obtain various properties of the ground state of the effective Hamiltonian H SB , we carry out exact diagonalization computations for system sizes of N * = 50 Cooper pairs. We compute various quantities related to the ground state, e.g., fluctuation in the Cooper pair number and the conjugate global phase, helicity cross correlations, various measures of entanglement etc. In Fig. where D m n 's are Clebsch-Gordon coefficients given by In the ground state, the total spin (S) is maximised, ensuring that the total spin within each helicity sector is also maximised (and taken to be S/2). By tracing over a certain helicity (η + ), we obtain a reduced density matrix ρ η-= T r η+ |ψ g (B) ψ g (B)|. The set of eigenvalues ({λ i }) btained by diagonalising ρ η-then gives the helicity-partitioned entanglement entropy Ξ (i.e., a measure of the entanglement between the opposite helicities) The variation of this entanglement entropy with B is shown via the blue curve in Fig. On the other hand, as Cooper pairs in the s-wave BCS state are spin singlets, there is a non-zero entanglement between the two spins of a Cooper pair 4 . Thus, in order to distinguish the CPI and BCS ground states further, we compute the entanglement entropies S k EE and S S EE by partitioning the ground state |ψ g (B) for an analytically tractable system of two Cooper pairs (( and the spin variable (↑, ↓) respectively for the case of ̄ = 0 (strong coupling limit) in the Hamiltonian H coll (eq.( where the coefficients C α are a function of the field B and the coupling V /N given by where N is the normalisation factor, α = V N and β = B √ 2 . By writing the states |S, S z in the basis of The momentum-partitioned reduced density matrix is then obtained by tracing out the k pseudo-spin from the density matrix (68). The reduced density matrix ρ k is written in the basis The inter-k entanglement is S k EE calculated from the density matrix ρ k . As shown via the red curve in Fig. The spin-partitioned entanglement entropy S k EE is obtained from ρ ↑ . As shown via the blue curve in Fig. EE for the CPI ground state as log 2 2 = 1, as seen in Fig. This is a clear signature of the maximal entanglement of the Cooper pair singlets in the BCS ground state. Another diagnostic of the difference between the ground states at B = 0 and B >> 1 lies in the occupation for the k-momentum electron While at B = 0, n k ≡ n k (α, β), n k → 1/2 as B >> 1. Given that n k follows the Fermi-Dirac distribution for the BCS ground state 4 , the result of n k = 1/2 obtained at B >> 1 indicates that the collective Hamiltonian H SB (eq.( We end with a brief presentation of the effects of a Josephson coupling between the bulk of two CPI systems A and B (i.e., we are ignoring all effects from gapless edge states), each of which is modelled by H SB (eq.( where H AB is the Josephson coupling between the systems A and B, with the phase φ dependent on the externally applied voltage difference between the two systems Having explored the entanglement features of the topologically ordered CPI and symmetry broken BCS ground states at some length in previous sections, we now present an analysis the T = 0 RG evolution of the many-particle entanglement content of these ground states. For this, we follow the strategy for entanglement renormalisation that was developed in Refs. As shown in Fig. The upper panel of Fig. Next, we present the entanglement RG results for a system in the presence of a bare symmetry breaking field (B). In Fig. A body of theoretical work has proposed 