The detection of light helicity is key to several research and industrial applications from drugs production to optical communications. However, the direct measurement of the light helicity is inherently impossible with conventional photodetectors based on III-V or IV-VI semiconductors, being naturally non-chiral. The prior polarization analysis of the light by a series of often moving optical elements is necessary before light is sent to the detector. A method is here presented to effectively give to the conventional dilute nitride GaAs-based semiconductor epilayer a chiral photoconductivity in paramagnetic-defect-engineered samples. The detection scheme relies on the giant spin-dependent recombination of conduction electrons and the accompanying spin polarization of the engineered defects to control the conduction band population via the electrons' spin polarization. As the conduction electron spin polarization is, in turn, intimately linked to the excitation light polarization, the light polarization state can be determined by a simple conductivity measurement. This effectively gives the GaAsN epilayer a chiral photoconductivity capable of discriminating the handedness of an incident excitation light in addition to its intensity. This approach, removing the need of any optical elements in front of a non-chiral detector, could offer easier integration and miniaturisation. This new chiral photodetector could potentially operate in a spectral range from the visible to the infra-red using (In)(Al)GaAsN alloys or ion-implanted nitrogen-free III-V compounds. In nature, the animal kingdom has developed the ability to detect or reflect circular polarized light (CPL) as an added modality for enhanced vision, better navigation or "private communications" Here we implement the simple solution to this challenge recently proposed in It is important to note that spin dependent recombination and nuclear polarization can occur on many defects and in various materials but typically with a weak efficiency or at cryogenic temperatures. In contrast, in GaAsN-based semiconductors they manifest with macroscopic record-high values at room temperature, paving the way to a practical exploitation of the phenomenon. In addition, these paramagnetic defects can be induced to the whole range of GaAs-based alloys from AlGaAsN to InGaAsN Separeted spin states PC increases PC decreases 3. Schematic of the hyperfine and Zeeman splitted levels of the electron-defect system as a function of the total magnetic field (BN + Bext). The vertical dotted line schematically indicates the value of BN when the external magnetic field is zero. If Bext is decreased or increased from 0 the defect capture rate will respectively increase or decrease leading respectively to lower or higher PC. The shaded regions near the origin and for high total magnetic field schematically indicate respectively the regions where the nuclear and electron spin states are fully mixed or substantially independent. sity from the material gap and to offer extended device configurations and applicabilities Figure In conclusion, we have shown that leveraging the giant spin dependent recombination and the hyperpolarization of Ga 2+ interstitial defect in dilute nitrides epilayers al-lows for the realization of a chiral III-V dilute nitride semiconductor useable for the direct electrical measurement of the incident light helicity at room temperature. As the working principle relies on the optical orientation of conduction electrons, the working spectral range could be easily extended for wavelengths up to the material band gap and as long a non zero spin polarization of photoexcited electrons can be achieved. This paradigm, enabled by the presence of Ga paramagnetic defects in dilute nitrides, can in principle be extended to the whole family of (In)(Al)GaAsN alloys with gaps ranging from the visible to the infrared. The possibility of producing interstitial defects by implantation in N-free alloys The sample studied for the proof of principle demonstration consists of a 100 nm thick GaAs 1-x N x epilayer (x = 0.021) grown by molecular beam epitaxy on a (001) semi-insulating GaAs substrate and capped with 10 nm GaAs. The room temperature gap is at 1080 nm. The excitation light was provided by either a 852 nm laser diode or a continuous wave Ti:Sa laser as the tunable wavelength source. The lasers were focused to a ≈ 100 μm diameter spot (FWHM), in between two Ag electrodes deposited onto the sample surface about 1 mm apart (figure 