The mechanism behind the nematicity of FeSe is not known. Through elastoresitivity measurements it has been shown to be an electronic instability. However, so far measurements have extended only to small strains, where the response is linear. Here, we apply large elastic strains to FeSe, and perform two types of measurements. (2) Resistive anisotropy is measured as nematicity is induced through applied strain at fixed temperature above Ts. In both cases, as nematicity strengthens the resistive anisotropy peaks about about 7%, then decreases. Below ≈40 K, the nematic resistive anisotropy changes sign. We discuss possible implications of this behaviour for theories of nematicity. We report in addition: (1) Under experimentally accessible conditions with bulk crystals, stress, rather than strain, is the conjugate field to the nematicity of FeSe. (2) At low temperatures the twin boundary resistance is ∼10% of the sample resistance, and must be properly subtracted to extract intrinsic resistivities. (3) Biaxial inplane compression increases both in-plane resistivity and the superconducting critical temperature Tc, consistent with a strong role of the yz orbital in the electronic correlations. At an electronic-nematic transition, electronic interactions drive a spontaneous reduction in rotational symmetry without introducing translational or time-reversal symmetry breaking. Electronic nematicity affects all the Fermi surfaces of a metal, and therefore its fluctuations can have powerful effects In many iron-based superconductors, nematicity occurs in close proximity to a transition into unidirectional spin density wave order, suggesting that it is a melted form of the magnetic order Measurements of the strain dependence of resistivity, i.e. the elastoresistivity, have shown that its nematicity, like that of other iron-based superconductors, is an electronic instability. The key observation is that the resistive anisotropy (ρ xx -ρ yy )/(ρ xx + ρ yy ) varies with strain at a rate that diverges with cooling An assumption of a linear relationship between ψ and resistive anisotropy has become deeply enough embedded that resistive anisotropy is often employed as a measure of ψ. Here, we explore elastoresistivity at large |ψ|, where the relationship becomes strongly nonlinear. FeSe is considered to be a Hund's metal, meaning that interorbital charge fluctuations are suppressed by Hund's coupling Two types of measurement are presented. (1) Resistive anisotropy is measured as a function of strain-induced nematicity at constant temperature T ∼ T s . (2) Straintuning is employed to control the twinning as samples are cooled, allowing measurement of the intrinsic resistive anisotropy at temperatures below T s . Although the Tdependent nematic resistive anisotropy has been reported previously for a few iron-based compounds This paper is organized as follows. We first present our setup and methods, and then define the key parameters for discussion of elastoresistivity. We then present results for application of anisotropic strain with principal axes rotated by 45 • from the nematic axes, in other words where it constitutes a transverse field to the nematicity For orientation, the electronic structure of FeSe above and far below T s is illustrated schematically in Fig. To apply large strains to FeSe, we affix samples to platforms with a layer of epoxy (Masterbond ® EP29LPSP), and then apply stress to the platform; details of this method are presented in Ref. Here, the platforms are titanium sheets. The central portion is cut into a narrow neck within which stress is concentrated, and samples are attached to this neck. The platforms are then mounted onto a piezoelectric-driven uniaxial stress apparatus. This apparatus incorporates a capacitive sensor of the applied displacement, and therefore of the longitudinal strain within the neck. We report data from three samples. Sample A was cut for application of strain with 110 principal axes, and Samples B and C with 100 principal axes. Samples A and B were prepared as shown in Fig. Electrical contacts, fabricated from sputtered gold with no adhesion layer, were deposited on the samples' upper surfaces. The resistivity ratio ρ c /ρ ab of FeSe appears not to have been measured, however that of FeSe 0.4 Te 0.6 is ≈70 at 15 K The applied strain can be resolved into symmetric and antisymmetric components, and throughout this work it will be important to resolve their separate effects. Here, we define quantities for discussion. For Sample A, stress is applied along the [110] lattice direction; the displacement sensor in the stress cell measures the strain along this axis, ε 110 . The transverse strain ε 1 10 is given by ε 1 10 = -νε 110 , where ν = 0.32 is the Poisson's ratio of the platform. The symmetric component of the strain field is ε A1g ≡ 1 2 (ε 110 + ε 1 10 ), which comes to 0.34ε 110 , while the antisymmetric component is ε B2g ≡ 1 2 (ε 110 -ε 1 10 ) = 0.66ε 110 . These parameters, along with equivalent parameters for Samples B and C, are summarized in Table Sample A length of the platform. When the sample twins, we use a and b to refer to the directions along which the in-plane lattice constant lengthens and shrinks, respectively; in other words, the a and b axes are defined locally, and the [100] and [110] directions globally. For all samples, the applied strain will also generate a c-axis strain in the sample, ε 001 = -2c 13 ε A1g /c 33 . c-axis strain preserves the tetragonal symmetry of the T > T s lattice, and therefore is in the A 1g representation. When we discuss A 1g strain it should be understood that it includes this associated c-axis strain. Because the aim of this work is to explore the nonlinear regime, we do not apply the elastoresistivity matrix formalism introduced in Ref. Although strong transverse strain is predicted to enhance quantum fluctuations and suppress nematicity ε A1g = 0.34ε 110 , so dT s /dε 110 = 750 K corresponds to dT s /dε A1g = 2200 K. In Ref. pressed by compressive hydrostatic stress with an initial slope of 39 K/GPa. Using the elastic moduli of Ref. RESULTS: 100 STRAIN Stress-temperature versus strain-temperature phase diagram. The effect of strain applied along the principal axes of the nematicity is much more dramatic. Before showing results, we discuss the differences between stress-and strain-temperature phase diagrams for a nematic transition. The distinction between stress and strain is equivalent to that between magnetic field H and magnetic induction B. When a ferromagnet is cooled through its Curie temperature under nonzero H the transition broadens into a crossover. Experimentally, controlled H is applied by preparing samples to have a low demagnetization factor: thin bars parallel to the applied field. In the opposite limit, of a thin plate perpendicular to the applied field, it is B that is held fixed, and if B/μ 0 is less than the spontaneous magnetization M of the sample then in general magnetic domains will form such that the sample's average magnetization matches the applied B. Domain formation under nonzero applied B requires reversal of local magnetization, so it is a first-order transition rather than a crossover. For nematic compounds, the difference between stress and strain is illustrated in Fig. In the stresstemperature phase diagram, a first-order transition line corresponding to reversal of the nematicity runs along the zero-stress axis from T = T s to T → 0. In the straintemperature phase diagram, on the other hand, there are two lines of first-order transitions. The structural distortion in FeSe is to high precision a B 1g distortion, meaning that b contracts by nearly the same amount as a lengthens In the stress-temperature phase diagram there will be resolvable crossover lines at T > T s : when the applied stress is small, there will be a small temperature range over which the nematicity-driven strain increases at a rapid but non-divergent rate. In this sense, stress acts as a classic conjugate field. We present some evidence below on whether equivalent crossover lines are discernable in the strain-temperature phase diagram. Measurements of resistivity confirm this qualitative form of strain-temperature phase diagram. To facilitate comparison with measurements of ε s , we now plot data against the antisymmetric strain ε B1g . ρ 100 (ε B1g ) of Sample B for T ∼ T s is shown in Fig. As T is reduced below T s , the onset of twinning changes the form of ρ 100 (ε B1g ): a range of strain appears over which dρ 100 /dε B1g becomes nearly constant. This change is easiest to see in Fig. Even though the transitions into the twinned region must, when ε B1g = 0, be first-order, no hysteresis is resolved, indicating that the energy barrier for twin formation is low. Separately, close inspection of Figs. ρ versus temperature at a few nonzero ε B1g are shown in Fig. Sample B, T < Ts Fig. For T above ≈ 60 K, the structural strain ε s (T ) can be identified by a sharp change in slope dρ 100 /dε B1g , as seen also in Figs. Fig. We now discuss twin boundaries. For |ε B1g | < ε s (T ), ρ 100 from the temperature ramps systematically exceeds that from the strain ramps. Panel (c) shows a closeup of data at 36.9 and 14.6 K: the T -ramp data have a peaked form that the strain-ramp data do not. The magnitude of this peak is very similar at the two temperatures, even though the intrinsic resistivity at 36.9 K is more than double that at 14.6 K, which shows that its origin is extrinsic. It is due to twin boundaries. The elastic mismatch between the sample, which distorts orthorhombically, and the platform, which does not, will be strongest T-ramp data ε-ramp data FIG. at ε B1g = 0, leading to a peak in the equilibrium twin boundary density. This peak is resolvable for temperatures up to ∼70 K, at a temperature-independent strain, which we therefore identify as the neutral strain point ε B1g = 0. Evidence for twinning is also directly visible in the strain-ramp data in Fig. In Sample C both the longitudinal and transverse resistivities, ρ 100 and ρ 010 , were measured. Results from strain ramps are shown in Fig. The antisymmetric resistivity ρ B1g for temperatures near T s is plotted in panel (b). Here it can be seen that although |ρ B1g | initially grows rapidly with strain-induced nematicity, it eventually reaches a maximum; just above T s , this occurs at ε B1g ≈ -0.19 • 10 -2 . The symmetric resistivity ρ A1g is plotted in panel (c). For T T s , ρ A1g is a minimum near ε B1g = 0, and as T is reduced towards T s this minimum becomes sharper. (ρ 100 -ρ 010 ) : There are indications that other iron-based superconductors will have similar behavior. In Ba(Fe 0.975 Co 0.025 ) 2 As 2 (for which the nematicity also aligns with the 100 directions) ρ 100 and ρ 010 both have upward curvature against ε B1g , that grows sharper as T is reduced to T ≈ T s EFFECT OF BIAXIAL STRAIN. Data from Sample C allow effects of the A 1g and B 1g strain components to be separated. The A 1g elastoresistivity dρ A1g /dε A1g can be obtained by noting that within the twinned region B 1g strain does not couple locally to the sample, because the local B 1g strain is fixed at ±ε s (T ), but A 1g strain does couple locally. We take ρ A1g within the twinned region as ρ A1g = (ρ a +ρ b )/2, and now determine dρ A1g /dε A1g at ε B1g = ε A1g = 0. Under the approximation of linear interpolation between ρ a and ρ b and neglecting twin boundary resistance, ρ 100 and ρ 010 in the twinned region are given by where f = (ε s + ε B1g )/2ε s is the volume fraction of the sample with the nematic a axis oriented along the long axis of the platform. Differentiating with respect to ε B1g gives: Under the experimental conditions here, To obtain underlying slopes dρ 100 /dε B1g and dρ 010 /dε B1g , that is, that exclude the effect of twin boundaries, we average the observed slopes on either side of ε B1g = 0, as shown in Fig. The A 1g elastoresistivity is shown in Fig. We show in panel (b), with data from Sample B, that biaxial compression also increases T c -again, when the sample is twinned only the A 1g component of the strain couples locally. Both the increase in T c and ρ A1g are opposite to the generic expectation that compression should increase bandwidths. A similar correlation between resistivity and T c is also seen in strained Sr 2 RuO 4 At large |ε B1g |, the plastic deformation of the platform causes a gradual relaxation of the applied A 1g strain, and so for ε B1g -0.15 × 10 -2 the T c curve bends downward subtly. For ε B1g < -ε s , the sample detwins, and the B 1g component of the applied strain couples locally to the sample. T c turns downward more sharply. Depending on the resistivity level selected as the criterion for T c , it may even decrease. This behavior suggests that increasing the lattice orthorhombicity is detrimental to superconductivity. We now report the central result of this paper, the nematic resistive anisotropy, both the spontaneous anisotropy below T s and that induced by strain at T ∼ T s . We obtain ρ a -ρ b at T < T s by analyzing temperatureramp data at small strains. At ε B1g = 0, f in Eqs. ( The underlying slopes dρ 100 /dε B1g and dρ 010 /dε B1g are obtained, as before, by averaging the observed slopes from ε B1g > 0 and < 0. In Fig. In Ref. /ρA1g)dρB1g/dεB1g, obtained from both long strain ramps and from a small oscillating strain. For Sample B, ρ010 was not measured, so the [100] elastoresistivity (1/ρ100) × dρ100/dε100 is plotted instead. Fits are to a Curie-Weiss form; see the text. (c) Resistivity anisotropy of Sample C against strain at T ≈ Ts. The curve has been shifted vertically to set ρB1g = 0 at εB1g = 0, cancelling a small geometrical error in the measurement. Also shown is an estimate of the strain-induced nematicity ψ, taken as the xz-yz energy splitting at the X point, obtained from evaluation of Ginzburg-Landau parameters. from a classic elastoresistivity measurement, also performed on Sample C, in which the strain was oscillated by a small amplitude (here, a peak-to-peak amplitude of 3.4 × 10 -5 at 0.0167 Hz) and the resulting oscillation amplitude of the resistivity was measured. For the long strain ramps, the nematic resistive anisotropy at T < T s was determined by methods similar to those described above (See Appendix section 8 for details), and the B 1g elastoresistivity is taken as (1/ε s ) × (ρ a -ρ b )/(ρ a + ρ b ). For T > T s and for the small-amplitude strain oscillation data, the B 1g elastoresistivity is (1/ρ A1g ) × dρ B1g /dε B1g ; these two definitions are equivalent at T = T s . Perhaps surprisingly, the small-amplitude elastoresistivity tracks the long-strain-ramp data to well below T s , which shows that even with a very small strain oscillation amplitude twin boundaries shift with the applied strain. The B 1g elastoresistivity of Sample C peaks at 62. Previously reported values, from conventional measurements in which samples are affixed directly to piezoelectric actuators, are 61 , which yields T s,0 = 60.7 K. A similar fit to data from Sample B [where, because ρ 010 was not measured, we analyse the quantity (1/ρ 100 )dρ 100 /dε 100 ] yields T s,0 = 54.8 K. (We note that we do not include a hightemperature offset term in these fits, because doing so returns negative values, implying that in the T → ∞ limit compression would cause resistivity to increase, which is not expected.) In Fig. We take ψ to be the splitting between the xz and yz orbitals at the X point, which grows in an order-parameterlike fashion with cooling below T s and reaches 0.05 eV as T → 0 We first summarize our findings. (1) The resistive anisotropy (ρ a -ρ b )/(ρ a + ρ b ) evolves nonmonotonically as nematicity ψ grows, peaking at ≈7% and then decreasing [Fig. (2) The nematic resistive anisotropy changes sign at T ∼ 40 K, and at low temperature, where the nematicity is fully developed, it is only ≈ -1.5% [Fig. ( ) is a minimum when the sample is tetragonal [Fig. (4) Below ≈60 K biaxial compression increases both ρ a + ρ b [Fig. This data set places previous low-strain measurements We first consider whether the observed elastoresistivity is a property of the mean-field nematic state. The nematic transition point at ε B1g = 0 and T = T s is a critical point of the twinning transition [see Fig. The effects of biaxial strain at low temperature, like the observation that the superconducting gap magnitude correlates with yz orbital weight We focus the rest of our discussion on the nonmonotonic dependence of the resistive anisotropy on both temperature and strain. We first point out that the sign change in ρ a -ρ b occurs within the inelastic component of the resistivity. A possible explanation for a sign change in resistive anisotropy is that the inelastic and elastic components of the resistivity contribute oppositely, but balance at some temperature. At 40 K, however, the resistivity is about four times the residual resistivity (based on reasonable extrapolation of the resistivity to T → 0), so for this explanation to apply the elastic resistive anisotropy would need to be about four times the inelastic resistive anisotropy, or ∼ 28%. The resistive anisotropy would then grow to ∼28% at very low temperatures, in disagreement with observation that it reaches only 1-2%. The observed temperature dependence of the resistive anisotropy does not track thermodynamic measures of nematicity. The orthorhombicity of the unstressed lattice The importance of this observation rests on the relationship between resistive anisotropy and spin fluctuations. Spin fluctuations are found in theoretical work to dominate the resistivity at higher temperatures A further intuitive reason to expect (π, 0) spin fluctuations to play a strong role in transport is that they connect the Γ and X Fermi surface pockets, providing a channel for umklapp scattering and momentum relaxation along the k x direction. In a clean lattice, momentum is ultimately transferred to the lattice through umklapp scattering. In systems with closed Fermi surfaces, small-angle electron-phonon scattering can transfer momentum between the electrons and phonons, but does not relax the momentum of the combined system, and so does not contribute to dc resistivity. This is seen in weakly correlated metals (where the electron-phonon term is readily observable) as a modification of the usual T 5 dependence for electron-phonon resistivity to exponentially activated, with the activation energy corresponding to a phonon that connects Fermi surfaces We propose a specific mechanism for the nonmonotonic dependence of resistive anisotropy, consistent with data so far. (π, 0) spin fluctuations, and the associated resistive anisotropy, strengthen as nematicity initially onsets and the Fermi velocity on the yz sections of Fermi surface is reduced. These fluctuations then weaken as the nematicity grows further and suppresses the yz orbital weight on the hole pocket, cutting off this fluctuation channel. This is a proposal and a point for further investigation; the relative contributions of spin fluctuation strength and nematicity-driven changes in Fermi surface shape to resistive anisotropy need to be determined. However, direct measurement of spin fluctuations under tunable lattice strain, through inelastic neutron scattering, would be a very challenging experiment. It is nevertheless an important route to attempt because it could provide a direct test of a major class of theories of the nematicity of FeSe, in which it is proposed to be driven by the increase in phase space that it allows for spin fluctuations Regardless of how that path of inquiry develops, we anticipate that the strain-tuning capabilities demonstrated here will allow resolution of the separate orbital contributions to the electronic properties of FeSe, and theories of the nematicity of FeSe to be tested. Applied strain contribution. When applying uniaxial strain to a sample the apparent elastoresistance consists of a purely geometric contribution from the change of its dimensions and the strained material exhibits a different resistivity. We take the geometric contribution into account by calculating the strained sample dimensions in the limit of small strains. For strains within the plane we assume that the platform is coupled rigidly enough to the sample that its dimensions follow the applied strain from the platform: The c-axis of the sample is not constrained in the experiment. If we assume almost rigid coupling within the plane, the corresponding response of the sample along the c-axis can become significant. To include this effect we can define a renormalized Poisson's ratio ν * ⊥ for the out-of-plane component: Here β depends on the elastic moduli and the Poisson's ratios as follows: When the epoxy and sample layers are both thin and the epoxy elastic moduli are low, strain transfer to the sample can be characterized to good accuracy by a strain transmission length λ, given by λ = (ctd/G) 1/2 , where c is the relevant elastic modulus of the sample, t the sample thickness, d the epoxy thickness, and G the epoxy shear modulus Samples A and B are both long, ensuring good coupling of longitudinal strain to the platform, and so the key question is of their width in comparison with λ. For samples much narrower than λ, the transverse strain is the longitudinal strain multiplied by the sample's Poisson's ratio, while for samples much wider than λ, it is the longitudinal strain multiplied by the platform's Poisson's ratio. For FeSe this is an important distinction because its Poisson's ratio for T ∼ T s is close to 1, while that of titanium is 0.32. We find that all of the samples have a width larger than ≈ 4λ, ensuring good locking of both longitudinal and transverse strains to the platform. In particular, Sample A is 31 μm thick, yielding λ ≈ 60 μm, while its width is 280 μm. Sample B is 10 μm thick, yielding λ ≈ 40 μm, and 230 μm wide. Complete sample dimensions are shown in Table Ref. Sample B was driven to high compressions, and the platform deformed plastically when the displacement D applied to it exceeded ≈ 7 μm, causing the strain in the neck to exceed the elastic limit of the platform material, ≈ 2 × 10 -3 . Data from Sample B were taken in the following order: (1) Strain ramps were performed at T ≈ T s up to modest strains. (2) Temperature ramps were performed at constant strain, incrementing the strain at 103.7 K, and moving gradually to high compressions. (3) Further strain ramps were performed at high compression. Data from these three sets are plotted against D in Fig. Fig. The sign of the offset between the pre-and post-plasticdeformation data shows that ρ 100 is controlled dominantly by ε B1g , rather than ε A1g . The fact that a horizontal displacement works so well to match the pre-and post-plastic deformation data shows that the effect of ε A1g on ρ 100 is small; if it were strong then it would have to be finely balanced, over a wide temperature range, with that of ε B1g for the net effect to be so neatly a horizontal shift of the ρ(D) curves. Furthermore, the data of Fig. In Fig. In Fig. Temperature-ramp data from Sample C are shown in Fig. In Fig. In Figs. 7(a) and 8(a), elastoresistivities normalized by ρ a + ρ b are shown. For this normalization we subtracted off an estimated twin boundary resistivity, ρ TB (T ); for example, in Fig. Fig. Above, we presented a determination of the nematic resistive anisotropy for T < T s based on Sample C temperature-ramp data, in which the twin distribution can be assumed to be in near equilibrium with the applied strain. Here, we analyze strain-ramp data. As described above, the determination of nematic resistive anisotropy depends on extraction of the slopes dρ 100 /dε B1g and dρ 010 /dε B1g at ε B1g = 0 and under the condition that the twin boundary configuration does not change. In the strain ramps, the density and location of twin boundaries lags the applied strain, and we therefore obtain these slopes by averaging the observed slopes from the increasing-strain and decreasing-strain ramps, as illustrated in the inset of Fig. dρ A1g /dε A1g must be taken from data from Sample C [see Fig. In the Ginzburg-Landau free energy [Eq. is obtained by noting that dF/dε = 0 at ε = ε s , which gives ε s = (λ/c)ψ. Although the Ginzburg-Landau formalism only applies, strictly, very near to T s , we evaluate parameters at considerably lower temperature in order to obtain approximate evaluations of the coefficients. ε s → 0.27 × 10 -2 as T → 0 -α × (T s -T s,0 ) = 0. (A15) Taking T s = 90 K yields α = 0.0057 GPa/eV 2 -K. Finally, we evaluate b from the observation that ψ reaches half its T → 0, or 0.025 eV, value at T ≈ 0.9T s 