We aim to study a one-dimensional p-wave superconductor with quasiperiodic on-site potentials. A modified real-space-Pfaffian method is applied to calculate the topological invariants. We confirm that the Majorana zero mode is protected by the nontrivial topology the topological phase transition is accompanied by the energy gap closing and reopening. In addition, we numerically find that there are mobility edges which originate from the competition between the extended p-wave pairing and the localized quasi-disorder. We qualitatively analyze the influence of superconducting pairing parameters and on-site potential strength on the mobility edge. In general, our work enriches the research on the p-wave superconducting models with quasiperiodic potentials. The Marjorana fermion is a kind of particular particle, whose antiparticle is itself The Majorana fermion is theoretically proven to exist in topological superconductors with p-wave pairings, which appears in Majorna zero mode (MZM) and are located at both ends of the system, and are protected by the topology The rest of this paper are organized as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the Hamiltonian of a p-wave superconducting model with a general potential. In Sec. III, we first introduce the modified real-space-Pfaffian method, and then we discuss the topological properties and the mobility edges of the system. We make a brief summary in Sec. IV. Real quantum systems are more or less affected by disorder. In this paper, we study a one-dimensional p-wave superconductor with quasiperiodic disordered on-site potentials, which is described by the following tight-binding Hamiltonian (1) where ĉn (ĉ † n ) denotes the fermion annihilation (creation) operator, and L is the size of the system with n being the site index. The nearest neighbor tunneling strength t and the nearest superconducting pairing parameter ∆ are real constants. t = 1 is set as the unit of energy. The quasiperiodic on-site potential V n is where V is the potential strength, b ∈ (0, 1) is the modulation parameter, and α = ( √ 5-1)/2 is the incommensurate modulation frequency. When b = 0, the model goes back to the Kitaev model where cosh β = 1/b is the constraint condition. The parameter b controls the number of the summation terms. When b is small, V n can be truncated into the summation with finite terms. As discussed before, the homogeneous potential manifests the topological boundary of p-wave superconductor located at V = 2t, whereas Cai et al. In the particle-hole picture, the Hamiltonian is diagonalized. In order to obtain the full energy spectrum, we shall introduce the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) transformation where j ranges from 1 to L and the components u j,n and v j,n are real numbers. Thus, the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where E j is the eigenenergy which can be determined by the following BdG equations ) Furthermore, we represent the wave function as the following form then, according to the BdG equations, we have the following BdG matrix where for the periodic boundary condition The topological property of the system is directly characterized by a topological invariant. According to Kitaev's work, the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where h lm is real antisymmetric matrix, satisfying and λ is the Majorana operator with {λ , λ m } = 2δ m , which is defined as Accordingly, under PBC, the represented Hamiltonian is ) For an antisymmetric matrix, its Pfaffian is defined as where S 2L denotes a series of permutations on these 2L elements with sgn(τ ) being the sign of permutation. With the Pfaffian of the system, then the topological invariant M can be defined as ( Although we known that we can calculate the Pfaffian to obtain the topological invariant of the p-wave superconducting system, Eq. ( where U is a unitary matrix, and D is an anti-symmetric tridiagonal matrix. Thus, the Pfaffian of h is redefined as Det(U ) is the determinant of the unitary matrix U . In practice, we can use Eqs. ( and Pf(D) are numerically available (see details in the Appendix). We calculate the Pfaffian by the proposed modified real-space-Pfaffian method, and naturally obtain the topological phase diagram of the system, which is presented in Fig. In topological systems, the topological phase transition is accompanied with the gap closing and reopening. Figure The topological non-trivial phase implies the presence of the MZMs. Figure where Φ j,n = (u j,n + v j,n ) and Ψ j,n = (u j,n -v j,n ). Figures It is well know that for an extended wave function, the IPR scales like L -1 and it approaches 1 for a localized wave function. We consider b = 0.7 as an example to verify the above surmise and make an attempt to qualitatively analyze the influence of the superconducting pairing parameter ∆ on the mobility edge. By taking four different ∆, we plot the excitation spectra and IPR as a function of V under PBC, which are shown in Fig. Herin, a quasiperiodic p-wave superconducting model with coexistence of the homogeneous potential and quasiperiodic potential has been investigated. We proposed a modified real-space-Pfaffian method, which is beneficial and accurate to obtain the topological invariant of this system. We have demonstrated that the topological phases are protected by the gap. However, compared to the purely quasiperiodic case, the gap in the topological nontrivial is more wider. We have argued that this phenomenon occurs because the homogeneous potential has more impact on the gap. Besides, we have uncovered that there are mobility edges in the p-wave superconducting model. We have argued that the mobility edge originates from the competition between the extended p-wave pairing and the localized quasi-disorder. Furthermore, we have discussed the influence of the superconducting pairing parameter on the mobility edge. From the analysis, we have arrived at a qualitative fact that superconducting pairings tend to make system extended and stronger pairings move the mobility edge towards to high-energy region. In general, our theoretical work, i.e., the modified real-space Pfaffian method, overcomes the technical problem of using Pfaffian method to solve the topological invariants of a general p-wave superconductor and makes up for the limitation of the original Pfaffian. Moreover, the uncovered mobility edges promote a further understanding on the quasiperiodic p-wave superconductors. We note that a similar potential has been realized by the Raman coupling Gao Xianlong and Shujie Cheng acknowledge the support from NSFC under Grants No.11835011 and No.11774316. Tong Liu acknowledges Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (Grant No. BK20200737) and NUPTSF (Grant No.NY220090 and No.NY220208). As mentioned in the main text, we can perform a Schur decomposition According to the original definition of the Pfaffian (Eq. ( Therefore, to obtain the Pfaffian of a general anti-symmetric matrix h, a standard strategy is that we first calculate to unitary matrix U and the target matrix D by the Schur decomposition, and then obtain the Pfaffian of D by Eq. (A.2), and finally obtain the Pfaffian of h by Eq. ( 1) Test on the Kitaev model and It is easy to get Det(U ) = 1 and Pf(D) = -8.4688. According to Eq. ( and In this case, we have Det(U ) = -1 and Pf(D) = -3.8469. According to Eq. ( In this case, we have Det(U ) = -1 and Pf(D) = 1.6637. Therefore, the topological invariant is M = sgn(Det(U )Pf(D)) = -1. Next, we take V = 3.2t and other parameters into h. After performing the Schur decomposition, we obtain 3) Test on our model (see Eq. ( According to the topological phase diagram in Fig. (1), we know the numerical topological boundary is located at about V c = 1.5t. V = 1.2t and V = 1.7t are two chosen parameters, corresponding to the topological nontrivial phase and topological trivial phase respectively. We first test the case with V = 1.2t. After performing the Schur decomposition, we have Easily, we have Det(U ) = -1 and Pf(D) = 9.1651. Therefore, the topological invariant is M = sgn(Det(U )Pf(D)) = -1. Next, we test the case with V = 1.7t. In the same way, we perform the Schur decomposition, then we get From the above tests, it is readily seen that this modified real-space-Pfaffian method is very convenient and accurate to numerically obtain the topological phase diagram of p-wave superconducting model.