As a representative device exploiting both the solar energy and the radiative cooling of deep-sky, the radiative temperature regulator (RTR) could switch between heating and cooling modes self-adaptively at different temperatures. However, the concept of RTR is challenging to be implemented due to the intense parasitic absorption in phase-changing layers. Here, based on the theoretical framework of energy conservation, we quantitatively reveal the intrinsic relationships between solar heating and radiative cooling, especially addressing the fundamental limiting factors, including the parasitic absorption and the spectral emission selectivity, as well as the dynamic responses of the phase-changing device under various operating conditions. The investigation presents more insight into the underlying physics of RTRs and provides feasible architectures for realizing such a kind of new functional device. While the sun is a heat source with a constant temperature of ~6000 K, the deep-sky can be deemed a tremendous cold reservoir with a ~3 K Although solar heating and radiative cooling are two opposite physical processes, they can be combined into the same devices for utilizing the solar energy and deep-sky simultaneously However, realizing the passive RTR is challenging since it relies on a precise balance of solar heating and radiative cooling, unlike the dynamic radiative coolers based solely on the radiative cooling effect In this work, starting from the theoretical framework of radiative cooling, we focus especially on the core matter of RTRs, i.e., the balance of solar heating and radiative cooling, and explore the fundamental limit of the RTR with ideal selective and non-selective emissions comprehensively. Considering the relative temperature of RTRs with respect to the ambient temperature, the preference of spectral selectivity of emissivity is illustrated, and the underlying physics is explained from the thermal equilibrium perspective. The dynamic performances of the RTR with different parasitic absorption rates are also evaluated under typical weather conditions. We find that solar heating plays a crucial but subtle role in achieving the multifunctional mode of RTRs: on the one hand, if there is no solar absorption in the phasechanging device, the RTRs can switch between two modes (i.e., cooling and no-cooling modes) like Material requirements of RTRs. The concept of radiative RTRs based on phase-changing material is explicitly given in Fig. Working modes of self-adaptive RTRs. Due to the phase transition is a temperature-driven process, the radiative RTRs can work in a self-adaptive way at different ambient temperatures. In cold weather, as shown in Fig. To clarify the underlying physical relationships quantitatively, we begin with the formula of net cooling power modified from the well-developed theory for radiative cooling the absorbed power due to the atmospheric opacity. The angle-dependent atmospheric emissivity (εatm) is related to atmospheric transmittance (T) by In Eq. ( To determine the advantage or the application scope of the selective and non-selective emissivity spectra, the difference of net cooling powers is evaluated with an explanation from the thermal equilibrium perspective, which is crucial for exploring the ultimate capability of RTRs. Without consideration of the phase-changing effect. Although previous works have discussed the spectral preference for general radiative cooling, they are not specifically prepared for the RTRs discussed below. Therefore, we briefly discuss it for completeness and convenience of a direct comparison with the following RTRs. According to Eq. ( The working modes of RTR during a whole day under various circumstances are further investigated. Without loss of generality, the ambient temperature is modeled by using the expression of Tamb = Tmin +ΔTmaxexp[(t-12) 2 /(-Δt)], where Tmin is the minimum temperature of a day, ΔTmax the maximal temperature difference, and Δt the daytime period across 5:00-19:00. Fig. Besides the ideal case of zero-heating process (i.e., αsolar = 0), a moderate parasitic absorption of αsolar = 0.1 is further taken into account. As shown in the middle column of Fig. As for the dynamic temperature of the non-selective case, its tendency is similar, but its magnitude is a little different from that of the selective case. The difference lies in the fact that while the cooling effect dominates, the temperature drop of the non-selective case is smaller than that of the selective case since Tthermo < Tamb; while the heating effect dominates, the temperature increment (which is inversely proportional to the cooling power) of the nonselective case is also smaller than that of the selective cases since Tthermo > Tamb. Therefore, it is expected that the tolerance of the non-selective emission to high parasitic absorption must be better than that of the selective counterparts. That is, if the parasitic absorption can not be well suppressed, the non-selective type might be the preferred emission spectra for RTRs. Finally, the possible configurations of RTRs are discussed for providing a practical solution to realizing such a self-adaptive temperature modulator. Firstly, the radiative RTR needs to possess a sharp contrast of mid-infrared emissivity before and after the phase change process for enabling a wide range of regulation on the thermal emission. To accomplish this, as shown in Fig. To suppress the parasitic absorption, the tandem photonic crystals (PCs) are placed on the top, which works by forming an extended photonic bandgap in the solar spectrum. The tandem PCs consist of four groups, and each group has five pairs of ZnSe and BaF2 layers. We refer to also Besides the situation of normal incidence given in Figs. 6(b) and 6(c), the angle-dependent emissivity spectra of the device in insulator and metal states are given in Figs. In summary, we have comprehensively investigated the physical process of RTRs dictated by both solar heating and radiative cooling, especially focusing on exploring the fundamental limit and practical challenge in realizing this kind of new functional device. From the theoretical formula of power conservation, the quantitative relation between the parasitic absorption rate and the average emissivity is derived, which perfectly represents the two competing aspects of parasitic absorption and thermal radiation. Unexpectedly, the parasitic absorption rate has to be small enough, even in the case with ideal emissivity, to enable the dynamic balance between heating and cooling. With a very low parasitic absorption (e.g., αsolar = 0), radiative cooling always dominates the system response; with a high parasitic absorption (e.g., αsolar = 0.2), solar heating dominates; only with a moderate parasitic absorption (e.g., αsolar = 0.1), the tradeoff between the two competing effects mentioned above can be controlled self-adaptively to prevent overcooling when the ambiance is cold, and thus providing a unique advantage over the general radiative coolers. However, results show that it is challenging to achieve such a moderate parasitic absorption in the VO2 system. Therefore, exemplified photonic structures are designed carefully for shielding the phase-changing layer from solar illumination, which allows the realization of well-performed RTRs in this study. It is also worth noting that although the discussed RTRs can switch between the heating/cooling mode self-adaptively, its modulation magnitudes of the temperature rise and drop to the ambient are mutually restricted due to the mentioned two competing factors underlying the working principle. the spectral emissivity, Tthermo and Tamb the temperatures of the RTR and ambient circumstance, A(λ) the solar absorbance, 1.5 () AM I