We design and investigate an experimental system capable of entering an electron transport blockade regime in which a spin-triplet localized in the path of current is forbidden from entering a spin-singlet superconductor. To stabilize the triplet a double quantum dot is created electrostatically near a superconducting lead in an InAs nanowire. The superconducting lead is a molecular beam epitaxy grown Al shell. The shell is etched away over a wire segment to make room for the double dot and the normal metal gold lead. The quantum dot closest to the normal lead exhibits Coulomb diamonds, the dot closest to the superconducting lead exhibits Andreev bound states and an induced gap. The experimental observations compare favorably to a theoretical model of Andreev blockade, named so because the triplet double dot configuration suppresses Andreev reflections. Observed leakage currents can be accounted for by finite temperature. We observe the predicted quadruple level degeneracy points of high current and a periodic conductance pattern controlled by the occupation of the normal dot. Even-odd transport asymmetry is lifted with increased temperature and magnetic field. This blockade phenomenon can be used to study spin structure of superconductors. It may also find utility in quantum computing devices that utilize Andreev or Majorana states. Superconductor-semiconductor nanostructures are of interest in the context of quantum computing devices. Most prominently, they are a platform investigated as a host of Majorana zero modes that can be used to build topological qubits In quantum dots coupled to superconductors Andreev bound states form. They are hybrids of quantum dot energy levels and many-body Bogoliubov quasiparticles We fabricate a double quantum dot with one superconducting and one non-superconducting dot in an InAs semiconductor nanowire device (Fig. We experimentally realize conditions required for the observation of Andreev blockade following a theoretical proposal Fig. We demonstrate that dot QD S exhibits Andreev bound states, while dot QD N exhibits Coulomb diamonds, a staple of non-superconducting quantum dot transport (Fig. There are also more subtle conditions that the system must meet for Andreev blockade to be observable. The induced superconducting gap should be hard in order to suppress single-particle transport below the gap. Any single-particle transport is an Andreev blockade lifting mechanism, thus the softer the induced gap the weaker are the Andreev blockade signatures. The barrier to the superconducting lead should be low in order to induce Andreev bound states. This is in contrast with Pauli blockade setups which typically require few electron regimes and hence high barriers to facilitate strong confinement. The inter-dot charging energy should be smaller than the induced gap because the Andreev transport regions shrink rapidly with the increasing of the inter-dot charging energy Following Ref. (A) At subgap voltage biases current is confined to triangular regions of the charge stability diagram. The triangles do not appear in closely spaced pairs as in non-superconducting double dots where they form around triple points. Instead, triangles appear at quadruple Andreev degeneracy points, a consequence of the two-electron charge transfer cycle, form a parallelogram grid in V S vs V N space. (B) An alternating pattern of blockade/no-blockade is observed when quadruple points are tuned by V N . V S does not affect whether blockade is present or not. (C) The sign of source-drain bias voltage flips Andreev blockade. A quadruple point that is blockaded in positive bias is not blockaded in negative bias, and vice versa. (D) Andreev blockade is not present when superconductivity is suppressed by magnetic field or temperature. Signatures (A)-(C) should no longer be manifest. Signatures (B) and (C) can be formulated together as follows. Andreev blockade is expected for (odd,odd)→(even,even) charge parity transitions and for (odd,even)→(even,odd) transitions, where the arrows indicate the direction of charge transfer, so that the conditions are valid for both signs of the applied bias. An ideal blockade corresponds to total suppression of current below the gap. Blockade can be suppressed by the presence of sub-gap quasi-particles and thermally excited quasi-particles In principle there should be no fine-tuning required to observe Andreev blockade. All that is needed is one normal dot, one superconducting dot and a hard gap superconductor lead. Thus we are looking for a region of V S vs V N that includes many charge degeneracy points that exhibit blockade signatures. In practice, mesoscopic factors such as additional quantum dots in the nanowire segments covered by the leads can introduce their own current modulations. Thus some gate tuning may still be required to clearly observe Andreev blockade. Signature (A) which is current confined to single, not double, triangles in the charge stability diagram is illustrated by Figs. Signature (B) in experiment presents itself as an alternating pattern of high current/low current when the occupation of QD N is changed. It is illustrated by Figs. Finally, signature (D) which is the disappearance of other signatures when superconductivity is suppressed is presented in Fig. Single elongated degeneracy points are replaced by less elongated points at higher fields where superconductivity of the aluminum shell is suppressed (Figs. We have considered the possibility that signatures (A-D) were only identified due to fine-tuning in a deliberate search for predicted patterns. In this scenario, signatures such as alternating bright/dim degeneracy points and bias asymmetries are not due to Andreev blockade, but rather they arise accidentally due to additional states coexisting with the QD N -QD S system in the same nanowire -for example spurious Andreev and normal quantum dots in the nanowire lead segments. Those other states are fine-tuned to modulate transport in the double dot in just the right way to be consistent with Andreev blockade. We cannot fully exclude the possibility of the presence of extra mesoscopic states beyond the two quantum dots. We see, e.g. Fig. Additional data in supplementary materials and full experimental data on Zenodo [31] also demonstrate that within the same device other regimes do not show patterns of Andreev blockade, when all gates used to define a double dot are set differently. Our argument to not favor the above explanation is that a pattern consistent with Andreev blockade signatures (A-C) are observed over a regime covering 6×6 degeneracy points, in several sufficiently different double dot configurations, and, in a more limited range in other devices. Furthermore, the fact that bias asymmetry and alternating current patterns disappear when superconductivity is suppressed (signature D) convinces us that these phenomena have to do with subgap superconducting transport which is the regime of Andreev reflection. Recently larger hard gaps have been induced in semiconductor nanowires in experiments with tin (gap of 0.6 mV) and lead (gap of 1.2 mV) shells Several improvements can be done in immediate followon work related to materials processing and device fabrication. This would impact not only Andreev blockade experiments but many works aimed at searching for Majorana modes and building superconductor-semiconductor qubits. For instance, the wet etch degrades the quality of nanowires by introducing defects. The supplementary information in Ref. At the most basic level, Andreev blockade offers a means of studying spin-resolved transport in hybrid devices at zero magnetic field. We foresee application of Andreev blockade in experiments that probe spin pairing in superconductors. Much like Pauli blockade was used to investigate spin mixing mechanisms in semiconductors due to hyperfine, spin-orbit or electron-phonon coupling, Andreev blockade can be potentially used to detect triplet pairing or admixtures thereof, spin-flip scattering, spin polarization or textures such as Larkin-Ovchnnikov-Fulde-Ferrel state in the superconductor. A two-arm Andreev blockade device with two double dots in parallel can in principle be used as a spin-sensitive probe for crossed Andreev reflection. Quantum dots with superconducting leads are building blocks of Andreev qubits, Kitaev emulators and of topological qubits Several versions of a triplet blockade in quantum dots closely related to Andreev blockade have been considered theoretically A recent experiment in a similar double dot setup with two rather than one superconducting lead has studied a triplet blockade that develops at large magnetic field, where spin triplet is the unique ground state of the double dot Supplementary Materials: Evidence of Andreev blockade in a double quantum dot coupled to a superconductor THEORETICAL BACKGROUND: ANDREEV BLOCKADE Theory of Andreev blockade and the details of our numerical model are contained in a separate paper Andreev blockade is a consequence of a dynamical formation of a stable sub-gap spin-triplet state. The series double dot setup allows for this to happen: a triplet state with one spin on each dot can have a low chemical potential due to small exchange interaction between spins. Andreev blockade is the suppression of Andreev reflection due to spin parity mismatch between the double quantum dot and the superconductor. Andreev blockade is most apparent when the superconductor induces a hard gap in the nanowire. The hard gap ensures the suppression of single-particle tunneling and enforces Andreev reflection as dominant means of transport. Andreev reflection transfers a charge of 2e into the superconductor, where 'e' is the electron charge. In order to move the two electrons between the normal and the superconducting lead, the double dot transitions through four charge configurations per Andreev cycle. Therefore transport is only allowed at quadruple charge degeneracy points where four charge configurations have similar chemical potentials all within a source-drain bias window that does not exceed the superconducting gap. As a point of comparison, in non-superconducting double dots transport involves moving just one electron between the leads and takes place at triple, rather than quadruple, degeneracy points, which results in the formations of the well-known honeycomb charge stability diagram Andreev blockade is controlled by the occupation of the normal dot QD N , but it is not sensitive to the occupation of the superconducting dot QD S . Quantum dot QD S is strongly coupled to the superconductor, and this coupling hybridizes all states of the same parity. For example, states with 0 and 2 charges are hybridized, and so are states with 1 and 3 charges. Coupling to the superconductor imposes an approximate particle-hole symmetry which mandates that transport at odd-to-even and even-to-odd degeneracy points is the same. This translates into the insensitivity of Andreev blockade to the occupation of QD S . A complimentary way to see why transport is insensitive to the charging state of QD S is as follows. Over the course of a transport cycle two electrons must be added to QD S , driving the dot from an even parity state, to an odd parity state, back to an even parity state. If the normal dot QD N has two charges on it, then they must be of opposite spins and one of them can always escape into QD S . Specifically, if QD S is in the even parity state, either of the spins on QD N can move to QD S thus putting QD S into an odd parity state. If QD S is in an odd parity state, one of the electrons on QD N has the opposite spin and can move to QD S resulting in a transition to an even parity state. On the other hand, if QD N only has one spin, then that spin cannot escape to QD S if QD S is an odd parity state of the same spin. Hence, the charging state of QD N determines if an Andreev blockade is established. Both Pauli blockade and Andreev blockade occur in double quantum dots with two charges in spin triplet state. However, they have different origins. Pauli blockade is due to Pauli principle which prevents two electrons of the same spin from occupying the same orbital. Andreev blockade is due to inability of forming Cooper pairs out of spin-triplet pairs. The characteristic energy scale of Andreev blockade is the induced superconducting gap. The characteristic energy scale of Pauli blockade is the singlet-triplet energy level spacing in the (0,2) charge configuration. Andreev and Pauli blockades appear in different yet overlapping parameter spaces and can be observed in the same device. In soft gap Andreev double quantum dots, Pauli blockade has been previously observed in Ref. Background information on non superconducting single and double quantum dots can be found in Ref. The growth of InAs nanowires with Al shells are performed using molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). First, InAs nanowires are grown from predefined Au catalysts via vapor-liquid-solid mechanism. After the nanowire growth, the growth chamber is cooled down and in situ Al growth is carried out, ensuring the high interface quality of the hybrid. Further discussion about the growth can be found in Ref. Electrostatic 60 nm pitch gates are patterned by 100 kV e-beam lithography (EBL) with PMMA 950 A1 as the resist. The development for gate patterns is performed in 1:3 MIBK/IPA for 1 minute at a low temperature of -15 • C to enhance the resolution Nanowires are transferred onto the gate chip using a micro-manipulator under an optical microscope. Windows for Al-etching are defined by 10 kV EBL. The PMMA resist is dried in a vacuum chamber at room temperature to avoid heating the Al layer Leads are made with EBL, Ar cleaning, followed by e-beam evaporation of 10/130 nm of Ti/Au. Measurements are performed in a dilution refrigerator with a 40 mK base temperature. 