We consider an interferometer based on artificially induced topological superconductivity and chiral 1D Majorana fermions. The (non-topological) superconducting island inducing the superconducting correlations in the topological substrate is assumed to be floating. This allows probing the physics of interfering Majorana modes via microwave response, i.e., the frequency dependent impedance between the island and the earth. Namely, charging and discharging of the island is controlled by the time-delayed interference of chiral Majorana excitations in both normal and Andreev channels. We argue that microwave measurements provide a direct way to observe the physics of 1D chiral Majorana modes. I. Physics of artificial topological superconductors with chiral Majorana edge modes was a subject of intensive research during the last decade Interferometers based on chiral Majorana modes should allow probing the nontrivial physics of these systems We consider a system depicted symbolically in Fig. where G 0 = e 2 /(2π ) is the conductance quantum, k B is Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature of a Fermi liquid in the Ohmic contact, and n is a number of vortices in the superconducting island. In what follows, we set k B = = 1 and restore them in final expressions. To understand the physical meaning of the admittance Y ω it is useful to plot the response I(t) of the current flowing into the island to a voltage pulse V (t) applied to the contact 1 of Fig. , where Y (t) is the Fourier image of Y ω . The responses to a delta-like and a step-like pulses at T = 0 are depicted in Figs. into the outgoing Dirac channel. These are non-local in space and time processes with the amplitudes determined by the phases acquired by chiral Majorana excitations. Due to the spin texture of the Majorana modes a relative Berry phase π is acquired in addition to the relative topological phase nπ due to n vortices in the superconductor. Hence, the Andreev reflection regime is associated with odd n = 2k + 1 and the normal with even n = 2k, k ∈ Z. The response to the delta-functional pulse coincides with Y (t) which is nothing but the interferometer Green function. A response to an arbitrary pulse is given by a convolution with Y (t). We note that the floating phase can be gauged out from the superconductor into Dirac modes. We note a similarity with the description of the transport in terms of wavepackets induced by voltage pulses (sometimes called "levitons" 30 ). Namely, the immediate singular response in Fig. At zero temperature, for the step-like voltage pulse the current finally stabilizes at the value corresponding to conductance G = 2G 0 in the Andreev reflection regime or G = 0 in the normal reflection regime (see Fig. Λ, we obtain G ± → G 0 , which corresponds to a completely suppressed interference between the two Majorana branches. The ac response Y ω depends on both E Th and Λ, whereas, the dc response calculated in Refs. We propose to couple the superconducting island to a microwave waveguide (transmission line), as shown in Fig. Here, Z T L is a transmission line impedance, which in an idealized situation approaches Z 0 ≈ 376.7Ohm, the free space impedance. The experimentally relevant capacitances should be of the same order, C ∼ C 0 . The reflection coefficient is close to λ ω = -1. This means that the measured response is determined by the fine structure constant, α = Z 0 G 0 ≈ 1 137 , i.e., the effect is of the order of 1%. The function λ ω shows decaying oscillations as a function of ω with periods proportional to E Th and Λ (see Figs. Equation ( An observation of the delayed response can be disrupted by quasi-particle poisoning and by fluctuations of vortices parity. On the other hand, the random charge fluctuations, which are usually the main mechanism of the noise, do not pose any problem as they decouple in the linear response regime. Two possible physical realizations of the interferometer are depicted in Fig. For the relevant values of x 1 and x 2 (between the source and the first Y-splitting) the inverse propagator G -1 is obtained by the Fourier transform of Here, n k = 1/(1 + exp vk T ) is the equilibrium distribution function dictated by the Ohmic contact, and o is an infinitesimal positive frequency. This is a matrix in the +/-basis of the Keldysh space (Pauli ma- trices in this space are denoted by σ) T and τ± = 1 2 (τ x ± iτ y ). The Pauli matrices τ act in the Gor'kov-Nambu particle-hole space and τ z = ±1 correspond to electron-like or hole-like state in the Dirac channel. The scattering matrix Ř for the lower (first) Y-splitting describes the conversion of an incident Dirac electron and hole into a pair of Majorana particles χ k and η k : The Hermitian conjugated Ř+ of the upper (second) Ysplitting describes the conversion of Majorana modes into outgoing Dirac fermions: Here, the scattering matrix is found as Šk = Ř+ Fk Ř where Fk = diag{(-1) n+1 e ikl1 , e ikl2 } determines Berry and topological phases, and dynamic phases kl 1,2 of coherently propagating Majorana excitations. With the help of the above introduced scattering matrix we now transform from the basis of incoming Dirac states to the basis of exact scattering states. That is, the field Ψk now annihilates an exact scattering state in the whole setup. The action retains its form, i.e., The scattering matrix allows us to represent the current flowing into the island, I = ev( ψin ψ in -ψout ψ out ), as where the matrix Jp,k = vτ z -v Š+ p τz Šk has a nondiagonal structure in momentum and Gor'kov-Nambu spaces. Regime of fluctuating phase: Gauge transform and derivation of the interaction part Sint in the effective action Next we allow the phase Φ of the order parameter ∆ = |∆|e iΦ to fluctuate. The scattering of Dirac fermions becomes inelastic in this case; the energy-dependent where z 1 is the coordinate of the first Y-splittings and → 0 at the later stage of the derivation. Similarly where z 2 is the coordinate of the second Y-splitting. The discrete symmetry Φ → Φ + 4π is preserved. In the above discussed gauge transform, we encounter the theta-function regularization problem because we go beyond the long wave-length approximation. We resolve it using a discretized tight-binding approach. The derivation is based on four steps (i-iv) schematically illustrated in Fig. In the second step (see Fig. In the third step transform the chiral ψ in and ψ out to a non-chiral mode ψ(x) on a semi-axis (Fig. It has a spectrum ε = t sin ka with k ∈ [-π a , π a ], t is a hopping energy and a is a lattice constant. In the low energy limit, ε t, we obtain right (left) moving fermions near k = 0 (k = ± π a ). These states determine the long wave-length behavior of in-and out-chiral fermions in our setting. Now we consider two sites, n = m and n = m + 1, where the phase drop Φ = 0 occurs (it is shown by the red cross in Fig. (11) (Without loss of generality we set m = -1 in this expression.) The low energy limit of δ Ĥ yields S int after identifying ta → v, ĉk → ψ in at ka 1, and ĉk → ψ out at ka ≈ ±π. After the transition to this long wavelength limit we send to zero. As a result, we obtain an interaction term in the action Integrating over Ψ we obtain the effective action for the phase S (The prefactor 1/2 in front of Tr ln is due the Pfaffian, which appears after the integration over the non-independent Grassmann fields in the Gor'kov-Nambu formalism.) The Keldysh rotation from Φ(t ± ) to the classical and quantum components, Φ cl (t) = 1 2 (Φ(t + ) + Φ(t -)) and Φ q (t) = Φ(t + ) -Φ(t -), is performed. In the quasiclassical approach we expand (14) up to second order in Φ cl and Φ q . This gives a dissipative action of the Caldeira-Leggett type (see the Appendix VII for details of the derivation). This action is represented in Keldysh σ-space where the matrix possesses the causality structure Alternatively to the use of the step-like gauge transform that extends infinitesimally into the incoming and the outgoing Dirac modes and that results in S int , one can embed the superconducting phase into a nonstationary scattering matrix S Φ (t, t ), similarly to Integrating now over the fermionic degrees of freedom in the spirit of Refs. We have analyzed the microwave dynamics of a Majorana interferometer with floating superconducting island in the linear response regime. We show that one can observe the propagation and interference of Majorana excitations in the two branches of the interferometer by measuring the spectrum of microwaves reflected by the system. This is an alternative to proposals dealing with the detection of current and noise in the Ohmic contacts (sources or drains) of the interferometers. The proposed technique could also be used in the time-resolved manner, i.e, by sending microwave pulses and observing the response delayed due to the finite propagation time and the interference of the Majorana excitations. where Above we have used the matrix valued Green's functions Ǧ (the "check" symbol denotes the matrix structure in the Nambu space). These are given by Ǧω,k = τ+ τ-G ω,k -τ-τ+ G T -ω,-k . (A7) Here G ω,k is a matrix in the Keldysh space given by The unitary matrices on the left and right hand sides produce the fermionic Keldysh rotation of the Green's function matrix in the middle. The latter is expressed in terms of the retarded/advanced functions, g One can see that the first order term given by (A3) is zero due to Tr τ [ Ǧω,k Jp,p ] = 0 in the equilibrium case. Let us now calculate the second order term (A4). First, we calculate the trace over Nambu τ -space ("check" symbol is eliminated here): 2 2v 2 (V p,k V k,p + W p,k W k,p ) dω 2π e -i(t-t )ω × × dΩ 2π Tr σ G Ω+ω/2,p (σ z Φ cl (t ) + σ 0 Φ q (t )/2))G Ω-ω/2,k (σ z Φ cl (t) + σ 0 Φ q (t)/2)) . (A11)