The measurement of the angle between the interferometer front mirror and the diffracting planes is a critical aspect of the Si lattice-parameter measurement by combined x-ray and optical interferometry. In addition to being measured off-line by x-ray diffraction, it was checked on-line by transversely moving the analyser crystal and observing the phase shift of the interference fringe. We describe the measurement procedure and give the miscut angle of the 28 Si crystal whose lattice parameter was an essential input-datum for, yesterday, the determination of the Avogadro constant and, today, the kilogram realisation by counting atoms. These data are a kindness to others that might wish to repeat the measurement of the lattice-parameter of this unique crystal. The measurement of the surface orientation was a critical aspect of the 28 Si lattice-parameter measurement by combined x-ray and optical interferometry To achieve a fractional accuracy near to nine significant digits in the measurement of the lattice parameter, we polished the (front and rear) analyser surfaces parallel to the {220} diffracting planes to within a few microradians. To this end, we realised an apparatus whereby the 28 Si monocrystal was ground and optically polished and the residual misalignment was measured The paper is organised as follows. After a concise description of combined x-ray and optical interferometry, in sections 2.1 and 2.2, we model the projection errors and detail how the x-ray interferometer is aligned to compensate them. Next, sections 3.1 and 3.2 describe the measurement procedures of the miscut angle. The results are given in section 4. Our x-ray interferometer is like a Mach-Zehnder interferometer of visible optics The analyser displacement is measured by a laser interferometer having picometre sensitivity and accuracy. The lattice spacing is measured as d 220 = mλ/(2n), where n is the number of x-ray fringes observed in m optical orders of λ/2 period. Since the Si thermal expansion is about 2.5 × 10 -6 1/K, the temperatures of the two interferometer crystals must be equal to within a few millikelvin. Therefore, to ensure temperature uniformity and stability and to eliminate the adverse influence of the refractive index of air, the apparatus is hosted in a (passive) thermovacuum chamber. The analyser is displaced using a guide where an L-shaped carriage slides on a quasi-optical rail. An active platform (see Fig. Since, the x-ray and optical interferometers project the analyser displacement, s, into the unit normals to the diffracting planes and front mirror, h and n, to ensure that both projections are equal, the analyser front mirror was polished as parallel as possible to the diffracting planes. Also, the displacement was electronically servoed to bisect the misalignment angle, and the laser beam was aligned as much as possible orthogonally to the front mirror. A model of the projection errors is as follows. In a plane-wave approximation, as shown in Fig. The measurement equation of the x-ray interferometer is s x = s•h. Therefore, considering separately the projections on the laser beam, n • o, and on the frontmirror normal, s • n, the projection errors compensate if s where the hats indicate normalised vectors and the s 2 = s 2 + s 2 ⊥ decomposition is arbitrary. Otherwise said, s must lie in the plane bisecting the normals to the diffracting planes and front mirror. The fractional measurement-error, ŝ•(n-h), is proportional to the miscut angle, |n -h|, and bisection error, ŝ • (n -h). To achieve a nine-digit accuracy, the miscut angle |n -h| must be as small as possible. At the same time, the normals to the front mirror and laser beam, n and o, and the movement direction, ŝ, must be aligned each other so that ŝ • (n -h) is minimum. Figure 3 Measurement of the miscut angle The raw crystal -a 28 Si block (55 × 60 × 28) mm 3 -was oriented by x-ray diffraction. Two opposite faces -which will be the interferometer front and rear mirrors -were ground and optically polished parallel to the {220} lattice planes. Figure By tilting the crystal to keep aligned the Bragg's reflection of the x rays when it is rotated, the lattice planes are set orthogonal to the rotation axis. Next, the autocollimator measures the wobble of the optically-polished surface. More details are given in We repeated the measurement of the miscut angle on-line directly by the combined x-ray and optical interferometer. This measurement repetition strengthened our confidence in the measured angle and checked the miscut of the surface area actually sensed by the laser beam. As shown in Fig. Figure Since it was not possible to eliminate the drift between the optical and x-ray signals, the analyzer was moved repeatedly forwards and backwards, and the two signals were repeatedly sampled at each end. Next, the drift was identified and subtracted by fitting the phases of the x-ray fringes with polynomials differing only by the sought phase difference. Figure The measurement results are given in Fig. The measured values of the front-to-rear angles are systematically smaller than the values inferred by the diffractometric and interferometric measurements, which are in good agreement. We did not investigate the origin of this discrepancy; besides, it was irrelevant in aligning the x-ray and optical interferometers and correcting the lattice parameter measurement. However, together with the potentially higher resolution achievable, it might be a clue of the superior accuracy of Si-monocrystal polygons having the angles calibrated to the lattice planes The measurement of the 28 Si lattice parameter in terms of optical wavelengths opened the way to determine the Avogadro and Planck constants and to realise the kilogram by counting 28 Si atoms. We reported about two independent measurements of the miscut angle of the front a rear surface of the 28 Si block from which the x-ray interferometer used for this measurement was obtained. A second x-ray interferometer has been recently manufactured from the same block, and an additional lattice parameter measurement is underway The value of this angle is critical to quantify the projection errors of the x-ray and optical interferometers and to align the crystal under measurement in such a way to make these projections identical. Therefore, it lets these x-ray interferometers be future proof, in that who may wish to remeasure the lattice spacing of these unique crystals does not need to redetermine the miscut angle.