In this paper, we have demonstrated the large-size free-standing single-crystal β-Ga2O3 NMs fabricated by the hydrogen implantation and lift-off process directly from MOCVD grown β-Ga2O3 epifilms on native substrates. The optimum implantation conditions were simulated with a Monte-Carlo simulation to obtain the high hydrogen concentration with a narrow ion distribution at the desired depth. Two as grown β-Ga2O3 samples with different orientation ([100] and [001]) were used and successfully create 1.2 m thick β-Ga2O3 NMs without any physical damages. These β-Ga2O3 NMs were then transfer-printed onto rigid and flexible substrates such as SiC substrate and polyimide substrate. Various material characterizations were performed to investigate the crystal quality, surface morphology, optical property, mechanical property, and bandgap before and after the lift-off and revealed that good material quality is maintained. This result offers several benefits in that the thickness, doping, and size of β-Ga2O3 NMs can be fully controlled. Moreover, more advanced β-Ga2O3-based NM structures such as (AlxGa1-x)2O3/Ga2O3 heterostructure NMs can be directly created from their bulk epitaxy substrates thus this result provides a viable route for the realization of high performance β-Ga2O3 NM-based electronics and optoelectronics that can be built on various substrates and platforms. Beta-phase gallium oxide (β-Ga2O3) has attracted much attention as a promising wide bandgap semiconductor candidate due to its large bandgap with a high breakdown field and decent electron mobility. In this paper, we demonstrated a large-size free-standing single-crystal β-Ga2O3 NMs fabricated by hydrogen implantation and lift-off directly from MOCVD grown epitaxy β-Ga2O3 samples. The use of hydrogen ions not only minimizes the crystal damage during ion implantation due to their light and small volume but also enables us to effectively separate the top portion of β-Ga2O3 from the substrate. Different implantation conditions were simulated with a Monte-Carlo simulation using a Silvaco Victory 2D Process simulator to obtain the high hydrogen concentration with a narrow ion distribution at a desired depth. Two β-Ga2O3 source wafers that were grown on different crystal orientations ([100] and [001]) were used and successfully create 1.2 m thick β-Ga2O3 NMs without any physical damages. These β-Ga2O3 NMs were then successfully transferprinted onto rigid and flexible substrates such as SiC substrate and polyimide substrate. Various material characterizations were performed to investigate the crystal quality, surface morphology, optical property, mechanical property, and bandgap before and after the separation and revealed that no noticeable differences were observed. This result offers several benefits in that the thickness and size of β-Ga2O3 NMs can be accurately controlled as opposed to the narrow stripeshaped β-Ga2O3 NMs from the uncontrolled conventional mechanical exfoliation method. Moreover, β-Ga2O3 NM-based functional free-standing semiconductor NMs such as (AlxGa1x)2O3/Ga2O3 heterostructure NMs can be directly created from their original hetero-epitaxy wafers without being restricted by their dimensional factors and easily integrated with any platform. Thus, this result provides a viable route to high performance β-Ga2O3 NM-based electronics and optoelectronics that can be built on various substrates such as flexible plastic or metallic substrates or different semiconductor platforms. Figure The process design for hydrogen implantation is a critical and most important step that determines a thickness of β-Ga2O3 NM after the lift-off process. The implantation modeling was performed using an ion implantation module of the Silvaco Victory 2D Process simulator to accurately predict the hydrogen distribution in the bulk β-Ga2O3 substrate. The hydrogen profile was modeled based on a Monte-Carlo method with 32000 hydrogen ions using an implantation energy ranging from 70 keV to 300 keV with a fixed dose at 2 × 10 16 cm -2 . In each hydrogen implantation profile, we captured the depth where the hydrogen concentration exceeds mid-10 20 cm -3 , because the layer separation will occur at this depth, thus the thickness of β-Ga2O3 NM after the lift-off process can be estimated. Figure , where N is the number of ions per unit volume. Various material characterizations were exhibited to investigate differences before and after the layer lift-off process. In this characterization, β-Ga2O3 NM on the PDMS stamp which corresponds to the step (vi) in Figure To further investigate the impact of the hydrogen implantation and lift-off process on the optical property and bandgap of β-Ga2O3 NM, the optical property characterization was performed. Firstly, the refractive index (n) and extinction coefficient (k) were measured at the wavelength from 200 nm to 400 nm using a customized UV-to-visible spectrometer. As shown in Figure , where h•v is the photon energy,  is the wavelength and C is a constant. In conclusion, we have successfully demonstrated the large-size free-standing singlecrystal β-Ga2O3 NMs fabricated by the hydrogen implantation and lift-off process directly from MOCVD grown β-Ga2O3 substrates. The optimum implantation conditions were simulated with a Monte-Carlo method to obtain the high hydrogen concentration with a narrow ion distribution at the desired depth. Two β-Ga2O3 source wafers with different orientations (i.e., [100]-and [001]oriented -Ga2O3 substrates) were used and successfully create 1.2 m thick β-Ga2O3 NMs without any physical damages. These β-Ga2O3 NMs were then transfer-printed onto rigid and flexible substrates such as SiC substrate and polyimide substrate. Various material characterizations were performed to investigate the crystal quality, surface morphology, optical property, mechanical property, and bandgap before and after the separation and revealed that good material quality was maintained. This result offers several benefits in that the thickness and size of β-Ga2O3 NMs can be fully controlled. Moreover, more advanced β-Ga2O3 NM structures such as (AlxGa1x)2O3/Ga2O3 heterostructure NMs can be directly created from their bulk epitaxy wafers. Several following studies need to be conducted such as the impact of growth conditions such as growth temperature and n-type/p-type doping concentration on the surface roughness, defect density of the bulk source β-Ga2O3 to create the uniform and high-quality β-Ga2O3 NMs. Nevertheless, this result provides a viable route for the realization of high-performance β-Ga2O3 NM-based electronics and optoelectronics that can be built on various substrates and platforms. 