Superconductor-ferromagnet heterostructures hosting vortices and skyrmions are new area of an interplay between superconductivity and magnetism. We study an interaction of a Néel-type skyrmion and a Pearl vortex in thin heterostructures due to stray fields. Surprisingly, we find that it can be energetically favorable for the Pearl vortex to be situated at some nonzero distance from the center of the Néel-type skyrmion. The presence of a vortex-antivortex pair is found to result in increase of the skyrmion radius. Our theory predicts that a spontaneous generation of a vortex-anti-vortex pair is possible under some conditions in the presence of a Néel-type skyrmion. e -qz , z d F , 1+σ 2 + κ F,(σ) 1 e qz + κ F,(σ) 2 e -qz , d F > z 0, κ S,(σ) 1 e Qz + κ S,(σ) 2 e -Qz , 0 > z -d S , κ V,(σ) 1 Topological objects have been remaining at the focus of theoretical and experimental research for more than half a century. The existence of topologically stable configurations in ferromagnets with Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction has been predicted by Bogdanov and Yablonskii Research on an interplay between magnetism and superconductivity in heterostructures has long history In this paper we study the interaction between a Néeltype skyrmion and a superconducting vortex in a chiral ferromagnet-superconductor heterostructure, see Fig. The outline of the paper is as follows. In Sec. II the solution of the Maxwell-London equation is presented, and the results for the supercurrent are given. The interaction energy between a Néel-type skyrmion and a Pearl vortex is computed and analyzed in Sec. III. In Sec. IV the effect of a Pearl vortex on the skyrmion radius is estimated. We end the paper with summary and conclusions in Sec. V. Some technical details of computations are presented in Appendix. We start from calculation of the supercurrent in the chiral ferromagnet-supercondutor heterostructure which is generated by a Néel-type skyrmion (see Fig. ( Here η = ±1 denotes the chirality of the skyrmion, θ(r) stands for the skyrmion angle, M s is the saturation magnetization of the chiral ferromagnet film, and e r and e z are unit vectors along the radial direction and the z-axis (perpendicular to the interface), respectively. The spatial distribution of the vector potential A Sk is governed by the Maxwell-London equation: where Θ(x) denotes the Heaviside step function (with Θ(0) = 1) and λ L stands for the London penetration depth. The Maxwell-London equation should be supplemented by the boundary conditions of continuity of the normal component of Since the right hand side of Eq. ( Here J n (z) stands for the Bessel function of the first kind. Also we introduced Q = q 2 + 1/λ 2 L and the functions Here and afterwards, we use the following notation θ (r) ≡ dθ/dr. Using the continuity of the azimuthal component of the vector potential, A Sk,φ , and the boundary conditions for its derivative, ∂A Sk,φ /∂z, ( The current density in the superconducting film, i.e. at -d S z 0, can be calculated by means of the London equation, j = -A Sk /(4πλ 2 L ). It is more convenient to trace the total supercurrent flowing in the superconducting film, J φ (r) = 0 -d S dzj φ (r, z). Then, we retrieve φ , where We mention that this expression is similar to the expression for the current induced by a domain wall Below we shall focus on the case of a thin chiral ferromagnet, d F R, and a thin superconducting film, d S λ L , R. As we shall demonstrate in the next section, the asymptotic behavior of the supercurrent can be found for an arbitrary smooth skyrmion profile with θ(0) = π and θ(r → ∞) → 0. Commonly used variational examples with such kind behavior are the exponential ansatz θ(r) = θ(r/R) where θ(x) = π exp(-x) and the 360-degree domain wall ansatz θ(x) = 2 arctan(sinh(R/δ)/ sinh(Rx/δ)). Also we shall consider the linear ansatz with θ(r) = π(1 -r/R) for r < R and zero overwise. The behavior of the supercurrent with the distance from the center of the skyrmion is controlled by the functions G (±) (q), see Eq. ( Then in the case of a thin superconducting film, d S λ L , R, and a thin chiral ferromagnet, d F R, Eq. ( Here λ = λ 2 L /d S denotes the Pearl penetration length where we introduced the numerical constants For example, in the case of the exponential ansatz one finds c 2 ≈ 0.51. The asymptotics of the function g (-) (y) can be written as (see Appendix A), Here we introduced the numerical constants, We note that b 2 ≈ 5.94 in the case of the exponential ansatz. Let us first consider the case of the skyrmion size much smaller than the size of the vortex, R λ. Evaluating the integral over q in Eq. ( and We note that for θ(x) = π exp(-x) one finds c -1 ≈ 1.17. The asymptotic expressions ( to the supercurrent with the extremum at the distance of order of the skyrmion radius R. As it is shown in Fig. In the case of large skyrmion and small Pearl length, R λ, the part of the supercurrent, J φ , which is related with the z-component of the skyrmion magnetization, can be found to the lowest order in λ/R as (see Appendix A), We note that J (+) φ coincides with the current (∇×M Sk ) φ integrated over the width of the chiral ferromagnet. If the function θ(x) decays at x → ∞ faster than 1/x 3 , the expression (15) determines J (+) φ at r r λ only. Then at distances r r λ R the asymptotic behavior of the supercurrent is given as (cf. Eq. ( The length scale r λ can be estimated from the condition In the case of the exponential ansatz one finds r λ ∼ R ln(R/λ) R. The asymptotic expressions for component J (-) φ of the supercurrent read (see Appendix A), We mention that in the case of R λ the dependence of the supercurrent on the distance is qualitatively similar Jφ (-) Jφ , η = +1 Exponential ansatz Jφ (-) Jφ , η = +1 DW ansatz, R/δ = 1 Jφ (-) Jφ , η = +1 DW ansatz, R/δ = 5 Jφ (-) Jφ , η = +1 Linear ansatz Jφ (-) Jφ , η = -1 Exponential ansatz Jφ (-) Jφ , η = -1 DW ansatz, R/δ = 1 Jφ (-) Jφ , η = -1 Jφ (-) Jφ , η = -1 Linear ansatz and the total supercurrent Jφ on the distance from the skyrmion center for the cases of positive (upper row) and negative (lower raw) chiralities. The parameters are dS/λL = 0.01, dF /λL = 0.005, and R/λL = 3. The supercurrent is calculated for the exponential, domain wall (DW) and linear ansatz. to the case of a skyrmion of a small radius R λ. We emphasize that there is a change of the sign of the supercurrent at some distance from the center of the Néel-type skyrmion in some cases, see Fig. In the case of the linear ansatz the expression Here the function g (+) (y) is given by Eq. ( L (y) has the following asymptotic behavior, ( We observe that the abrupt change of θ(r) at r = R results in oscillating behavior of g (+) (y) at y 1. With the help of Eqs. ( Here Si(z) stands for the sine integral. We note that in the case of the linear ansatz the J (+) φ component of the supercurrent decays faster at r R than in the case of smooth skyrmion profile. This occurs due to the fact that the contribution to the current from δg (+) (y) cancels the leading contributions from g (+) (y). As in the case of a smooth skyrmion profile, Eq. ( The asymptotic behavior of J (-) φ can be read from Eq. ( The dependence J (+) φ (r) in the case of large skyrmion size, R λ, is more intricate. This component of the supercurrent is given as the sum of the contribution discussed above for the case of the smooth skyrmion profile, cf. Eqs. ( In the case of the long distance, r R the contribution to the supercurrent is given as We note that in the case of the linear ansatz J (+) φ is stronger suppressed at r R than in the case of a smooth skyrmion profile. The asymptotic behavior of J (-) φ is given by the general expression As above we focus on the case of a thin (d S λ L ) superconducting film with a superconducting vortex situated at the distance a from the center of the Néel-type skyrmion (see Fig. Here F Sk denotes the magnetic free energy of the isolated chiral ferromagnet that leads to the appearance of the Néel-type skyrmion (see its explicit form in the next section). F V and F V are the free energies of the isolated superconducting vortex and anti-vortex, respectively. The electromagnetic interaction between the skyrmion and the vortex is described by the following free energy, where B V = ∇ × A V and B Sk = ∇ × A Sk are the magnetic fields generated by the vortex and the skyrmion, respectively. We note that the first two terms in the right hand side of the expression for F Sk-V compensate each other in virtue of Eq. ( The magnetic field of a Pearl vortex in a thin film, d S λ L , can be written in a standard form Here φ 0 = hc/2e is the flux quantum, a is the coordinate vector of the vortex center with respect to the skyrmion center. Since F Sk-V should depend on the distance a between the skyrmion and the vortex only, we can average the magnetic field B V over directions of the vector a. This procedure implies that We emphasize that the magnetic field B V is directed along -e z at the vortex center. The opposite case can be obtained by reversing the sign of the flux quantum φ 0 → -φ 0 in expressions below. The free energy of the Pearl vortex (as well as antivortex) in a thin superconducting film is given by where the superconducting coherence length is assumed to be much shorter than the Pearl length, ξ λ. Using Eqs. ( We note that the first term in the right hand side of Eq. ( We emphasize that in agreement with general expectations This implies that the derivative of the free energy with respect to the vortex position yields the supercurrent (6), J φ (a) = φ -1 0 (∂F Sk-V /∂a), cf. Eqs. ( Below we analyse the general expression In the case of a smooth skyrmion profile, and for d F R, λ, we find from Eq. ( As in the case of the supercurrent, we start from the case of a skyrmion of size R λ. Neglecting unity with respect to 2yλ/R in the denominator of the integrand in the right hand side of Eq. ( where the function f η (z) has the following asymptotic behavior At very long distances, a λ, the free energy of interaction between the skyrmion and the vortex becomes (see Appendix B), We emphasize that at long distances, a R, F Sk-V becomes insensitive to chirality of the Néel skyrmion. The coefficient c -1 is typically positive whereas θ (0) is negative, therefore the interaction free energy may decrease with increase of a for η = +1. Since the ratio F Sk-V /(M s φ 0 d F ) tends to unity at a → ∞ irrespective of the chirality, one can expect the existence of the minimum of F Sk-V at some non-zero value of the distance a. This situation is realized for the exponential ansatz. In the case of 360-degree domain wall ansatz with η = +1 the nontrivial minimum exists for δ/R 0.64 only. Next we consider the opposite case of the skyrmion with the radius much larger than the size of the Pearl vortex, R λ. The interaction free energy can be written as a series in powers of λ/R (see Appendix B), The function h η,0 that determines the magnitude of the interaction free energy has the following asymptotic behavior (see Appendix B), at z 1, and Here the parameter β 0 is given by the following lengthy expression, where G ≈ 0.916 denotes the Catalan's constant and K(x) stands for the complete elliptic integral of the first kind. The function h η,1 (z) that determines the dependence on distance of the subleading contribution to F Sk-V has the following asymptotic behavior (see Appendix B), and Here the parameter β 1 is given as We mention two discrepancies with the case of a skyrmion of a small radius. At first, the short distance behavior of the interaction free energy in the case of R λ is not parabolic generically, see Eq. ( Provided θ (0) > 0, the analytic results ( In Figs. We mention that the sign of interacting free energy is determined by the sign of the magnetic flux of the superconducting vortex. If the direction of the magnetic flux at the center of the vortex is opposite to the direction of magnetization at the center of the skyrmion, i.e. magnetic flux is parallel to the vector e z , the interacting free energy above will reverse its sign. Then instead of the minimum at a = 0 (at a finite value of a) the minimum will occur at a = ∞ (at a = 0). As in the case of supercurrent, the interacting free energy for the linear ansatz for the skyrmion profile needs a separate treatment. The interaction energy can be written in the form similar to Here the functions g (-) and g (+) L are defined in Eqs. ( L (y) is given by a sum of two terms: one identical to the case of the smooth profile θ(r), g (+) , and the other one, δg (+) , arising due to discontinuity of θ (r) at r = R, see Eq. ( We have studied the behavior of F Sk-V in the previous subsection, thus we can focus on examining solely the contribution from δF Sk-V . Similar to the previous sections we begin with the case of a small skyrmion radius, R λ. At short distances, a λ, we present the free energy likewise Eq. ( where δf η behaves as follows (see Appendix B) Collecting both contributions, F Sk-V and δF Sk-V , together, we can determine the behavior of the free energy F Sk-V,L ≡ 1 + (R/2λ)f η,L (a/R). The function f η,L has the following asymptotic behavior at short distances, z 1, whereas at z 1 it becomes Therefore, at R r λ the interacting free energy in the case of the linear ansatz can be written as Here, also, we add the term of the next order in R/λ which depends on the skyrmion chirality (see that cancels out contribution Different asymptotic expressions, Eqs. ( In the opposite case of a large skyrmion radius, R λ, the additional contribution δF Sk-V to the interacting free energy can be expanded in a series in powers of λ/R, much the same as Eq. ( Asymptotic behavior of functions δh η,0 (z), δh η,1 (z) is investigated in Appendix B. Combining them with contributions from h η,0 (z) and h η,1 (z) (see Eqs. ( (52) for z 1, and The above asymptotic expressions suggest that for the positive chirality, η = +1, the vortex have to be settled at a distance of order R from the skyrmion's center, whereas for η = -1 the vortex is situated exactly at the center of the skyrmion, a = 0. We illustrate the dependence of the interacting free energy on the distance a in the case of the linear ansatz in Fig. It should be noted that, in contrast to the case of a smooth ansatz, the transformation φ 0 →-φ 0 interchanges the qualitative behavior in cases of positive and negative chirality. Namely, for η = +1 the free energy will have the minimum at a = 0 whereas for η = -1 the minimum of the free energy will be shifted from a = 0 to some nonzero a. We note that in the case of the linear ansatz the existence of the minimum of the interaction free energy on a finite distance from the skyrmion's center has been noticed in Ref. The magnetic free energy of the chiral ferromagnetic film is given by Here m(r) denotes the unit vector of magnetization direction, A > 0 stands for the exchange constant, D is the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction, and K > 0 denotes the perpendicular anisotropy constant. The magnetic free energy is normalized in such a way that F magn is zero for the ferromagnetic state, m z = 1. We note that we include the energy of the magnetic field B Sk created by the skyrmion into the definition of the anisotropy constant K (see Appendix C). Substituting m = m Sk = M Sk /M s , see Eq. ( Assuming a scaling form of the skyrmion profile, θ(r) = θ(r/R), we obtain where We note that α A,D,K are positive constants in the case of the linear and exponential ansatz and are positive functions of the parameter R/δ in the case of the 360-degree domain wall ansatz. It is worthwhile to mention that the free energy (54) does not account for the dipole-dipole interaction. However, since the dipole-dipole energy scales as the first power of the skyrmion radius R (see e.g. Minimizing F Sk with respect to R, one can find the optimal radius of the skyrmion and the chirality η = sgn D. We note that the existence of a skyrmion in a chiral ferromagnetic film is possible under the following condition, In order to simplify the presentation, we shall start our considerations from the cases of the linear and exponential ansatz. In the presence of vortex anti-vortex pair the skyrmion radius is obtained by minimization of F Sk + F Sk-V with respect to R and a. Let us start from the case of a skyrmion of small radius, R * λ. For the negative chirality the optimal distance between the skyrmion and the vortex is zero. Therefore, as it follows from Eqs. ( Here K = M s φ 0 /(α K K) is the length scale associated with the anisotropy energy. In the case of linear ansatz one needs to make the following substitution, c 1 → c 1 -c 2 in Eq. ( In the case of the positive chirality the optimal distance between the vortex and the skyrmion for the exponential ansatz is proportional to the skyrmion radius, a 0 = ζ 0 R, see Eq. We note that f +1 (ζ 0 ) < 0. In the case of the linear ansatz with η = +1, using Eq. (47), we can find the following result for the skyrmion radius, Although, the above equation predicts ehnancement of the skyrmion radius due to interaction with the vortex, the numerical constant 5b ] ≈ 0.04 such that the enhancement is extremely small. The results (60)-(62) are applicable for λ max{R 0 , K }. In Table In order a vortex-anti-vortex pair can be spontaneously generated in the presence of a skyrmion the total free energy (23) should be negative. This implies the following inequality, Since R * is larger than R 0 this inequality can be fulfilled provided the condition (59) holds. We note that then the radius of the skyrmion should satisfy λ R 0 K . In particular, the vortex-anti-vortex pair cannot be generated spontaneously in the absence of the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction, i.e. at D = 0. Indeed, in the latter case R * K and the left hand side of the inequality (63) is positive. In fact, there is a minimal value of the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction at which the spontaneous generation of a vortex-anti-vortex pair is possible, Now let us assume that the skyrmion radius is large, R λ. Then, Eqs. ( For negative chirality, η = -1, the optimal distance between the skyrmion and the vortex is zero, ζ 0 = 0. We note that h -1,1 (0) = 4[2c -1 -θ (0)] > 0, see Eq. where We note that for R 0 (λ 2 K ) 1/3 and K λ the skyrmion radius is parametrically enhanced, R * ∼ (λ 2 K ) 1/3 R 0 . For R 0 (λ 2 K ) 1/3 , the radius of the skyrmion is only slightly increased, R * ∼ R 0 . In this case Eq. (66) holds under assumption R 0 λ. A spontaneous generation of the vortex-anti-vortex pair requires the negative total free energy Since R * > R 0 the above inequality can be satisfied provided the condition (59) holds. However, it can occur only for sufficiently large bare skyrmion radius, R 0 λ K . In the case K R 0 λ the skyrmion radius becomes R * ∼ (λ 2 K ) 1/3 K . Therefore, the negative term -α K KR 2 * /2 is much smaller than the positive term α K K 2 K and, consequently, spontaneous generation of vortex-anti-vortex pair is not possible. In the case of the 360-degree domain wall ansatz Eqs. (60), (61), and (65) remain valid. However, the value of ζ 0 depends on the ratio R * /δ. The latter is determined from the minimum of the total free energy with respect to δ. The corresponding analysis can be performed numerically. As one can check, the following inequalities hold f η (ζ 0 ) < 0 and h η,1 (ζ 0 ) > 0. These inequalities imply that the skyrmion radius increases always in the presence of a vortex-anti-vortex pair. To summarize, we have studied an interaction of a Néel-type skyrmion and a vortex-anti-vortex pair due to stray fields in a chiral ferromagnet-superconductor heterostructure. We computed the supercurrent in a superconducting film induced by a skyrmion. For thin ferromagnet and superconductor films we found that the supercurrent has the maximum at the distance from the center of a skyrmion that is of the order of the skyrmion radius. It is worthwhile to mention that the supercurrent is sensitive to a profile of the skyrmion and its chirality. For example, in the case of smooth profiles (exponential and domain wall ansatzes), the supercurrent decays monotonously at large distances from the skyrmion center. For the case of a linear profile, there are decaying oscillations of the supercurrent at large distances due to discontinuity in θ (r) at r = R. Therefore, measurements of dependence of the supercurrent on distance can allow one to extract information on the profile of a skyrmion. We mention that the behavior of the supercurrent with a distance from the center of the skyrmion is qualitatively similar to the behavior of the supercurrent induced in a thin superconducting film by a Bloch domain wall in a ferromagnetic film We have also computed the energy of interaction between a Néel-type skyrmion and a Pearl vortex. We found that the interaction with a Pearl vortex is sensitive to the skyrmion chirality. In the case of a skyrmion with negative chirality, typically, it is more energetically TABLE I. The parameters Ms,A,Ku, and D for a number of thin chiral ferromagnet films. The estimates for the bare radius in zero external field (R0), change of skyrmion radius (δR ≡ R * -R0) and an anisotropic scale ( K ) for the exponential ansatz are given. In order to obtain the estimate for change of radius δR we choose λ = 200 nm. PtCoPt It is worthwhile to mention that in the case of a Blochtype skyrmion it is always energetically favorable for a vortex to settle at the center of the skyrmion The fact that it is energetically favourable for a Pearl vortex to take place at a finite distance from the center of a Néel-type skyrmion might have interesting implications for skyrmion lattices We have investigated how a Pearl vortex affects a Néel-type skyrmion due to their mutual interaction. We found that a vortex-anti-vortex pair leads to an increase of the radius of the Néel-type skyrmion. We note that this result can be contrasted with the case of a Bloch-type skyrmion for which a vortex-anti-vortex pair can either increase or decrease the skyrmion radius For R 0 (λ 2 K ) 1/3 K , we predict that a vortexanti-vortex pair existing in a superconducting film can substantially increase the skyrmion radius: it becomes equal to R * ∼ (λ 2 K ) 1/3 R 0 . The typical values of R 0 , K , and R * are listed in Table Finally, we mention that it would be interesting to generalize our results to the case of skyrmions confined to nanodots We start from the case of a small skyrmion and a large vortex, R λ. In the regime of short distances, a R, we can neglect the unity in comparison to the large parameter λ/R in the denominator under the integral sign in the right hand side of Eq. ×J 1 (yx) sin θ(x). (B1) This expression can be easily simplified to the form of Eq. For the intermediate distances, R a λ, one can simplify Eq. ( After some simplifications, the expression for the interaction energy can be brought to the form of Eq. The case of the longest distances, a λ, can be studied in the following way. One can transform the expression in the denominator under the integral sign in the right hand side of Eq. ( For large values of the argument, z 1, it is enough to consider the term in Eqs. (B7) and (B8) which is proportional to the integral over the region x < z. We can also expand the complete elliptic function of the first kind as K x 2 /z 2 = π/2 + πx 2 /(8z 2 ) + 9πx 4 /(128z 4 ) + . . . . Then one can derive Eqs. ( For linear ansatz we represent the free energy as a sum F Sk-V,L ≡ F Sk-V +δF Sk-V , see Eq. For large skyrmion radius, R λ, it is convenient to present δF Sk-V as follows, The first term can be easily simplified using the identity (B2). The second term turns into (λ/R)δh η,1 (a/R) after setting λ/R → 0 in denominator of the integrand. Its asymptotic behavior at small distances, a R, can be extracted by expanding J 0 (ya/R) in powers of a/R, lim β→+0 ∞ 0 dy e -βy y(1 -y 2 a 2 /(4R 2 ))J 1 (y) = 1 + 3a 2 4R 2 . (B11) At large distances, a R, the second term in (B10) is dominated by very small y, thus one can substitute J 1 (y) with (y/2 -y 3 /16 + . . . ) and find lim β→+0 ∞ 0 dy e -βy yJ 0 (ya/R)(y/2 -y 3 /16) = -R 3 /(2a 3 ) -9R 5 /(16a 5 ). (B12)