Spin backflow and spin-memory loss have been well established to considerably lower the interfacial spin transmissivity of metallic magnetic interfaces and thus the energy efficiency of spin-orbit torque technologies. Here we report that spin backflow and spin-memory loss at Pt-based heavy metal/ferromagnet interfaces can be effectively eliminated by inserting an insulating paramagnetic NiO layer of optimum thickness. The latter enables the thermal magnon-mediated essentially unity spin-current transmission at room temperature due to considerably enhanced effective spin-mixing conductance of the interface. As a result, we obtain dampinglike spin-orbit torque efficiency per unit current density of up to 0.8 as detected by the standard technology ferromagnet FeCoB and others, which reaches the expected upper-limit spin Hall ratio of Pt. We establish that Pt/NiO and Pt-Hf/NiO are two energy-efficient, integration-friendly, and high-endurance spin-current generators that provide >100 times greater energy efficiency than sputter-deposited topological insulators BiSb and BiSe. Our finding will benefit spin-orbitronic research and advance spin-torque technologies. Spin-orbit torques (SOTs) As schematically shown in Fig. Recently, it has been established that spin current is transmittable in insulating NiO layers but the optimized ξ DL j in that work was below 0.09. In this Letter, from direct SOT studies based on different techniques and material series, we, for the first time, identify that in a SOT process both SBF and SML at a metallic magnetic interface can be effectively eliminated at room temperature by the insertion of a thin paramagnetic NiO layer of optimum thickness (tNiO~0.9 nm). The latter enables thermal magnon-mediated essentially unity spin-current transmission from the HM to the FM [Fig. The dampinglike SOT efficiencies are determined by angle-dependent "in-plane" harmonic Hall response measurement where the charge current density jc = Eσxx. For our measurements, the applied electric field is E ≈ 66.7 kV/m; the conductivity σxx varies from 2.3×10 6 to 3.2×10 6 Ω -1 m -1 for the Pt layers and from 0.71×10 6 to 0.91×10 6 Ω -1 m -1 for the Pt-Hf layer; Ms ≈ 1100-1400 emu/cm 3 is the effective magnetization of the FeCoB layer that incudes any magnetic dead layer and magnetic proximity effect (Fig. As summarized in Figs. 2(g) and 2(h), in the absence of a NiO insertion layer, ξ DL E ≈ 4.8×10 5 Ω -1 m -1 (ξ DL j ≈ 0.18) for Pt 4/FeCoB 1.4 and ξ DL E ≈ 3.5×10 5 Ω -1 m -1 (ξ DL j ≈ 0.37) for Pt-Hf/FeCoB 1.4, which agree with previous reports It has been established that the dampinglike SOT in Ptbased alloys The rapid increase of ξ DL E in the region of tNiO< 0.9 nm together with the unity Tint at tNiO ≈ 0.9 safely excludes the possibility of angular momentum transfer via electron tunneling through the insulating NiO layer. The latter, if important, would lead to a monotonic rapid decrease of ξ DL E with increasing tNiO Quantitatively, the absence of SBF at the optimal thickness of tNiO ≈ 0.9 nm suggest that magnonic spin-mixing conductance G eff,m ↑↓ of the HM/NiO/FM composite interface is comparable to the Sharvin conductance of Pt (GSh =0.68×10 15 Ω -1 m -2 ) Note that such impressive enhancement of Tint and SOTs we report in the Pt/NiO/FM and Pt-Hf/NiO/FM samples may not be necessarily expected for some other HM/NiO/FM systems. Apparently, Tint of those HM/FM samples with GHM/2 ≤ G eff,e ↑↓ already reaches the limit of 1 and thus cannot be enhanced further by any NiO insertion. A good example is the Bi2Se3/NiO/Ni81Fe19 system From the viewpoint of SOT technology, the fact that inserting a thin paramagnetic NiO of optimum thickness between a HM and a FM can result in effectively spintransparent interfaces for spin transport from the HM to the FM is a very encouraging development. As shown in Fig. In addition to the power efficiency, the Pt/NiO/FM and Pt-Hf/NiO/FM systems are very promising for practical SOT technologies because their low resistivities are also critical for endurance and because of their CMOS integrationfriendly properties. The latter includes thermal and chemical stability These aspects raise serious questions regarding both the endurance and power efficiency of any SOT devices based on these materials, and pose possibly insurmountable challenges for their successful integration with magnetic tunnel junctions and CMOS circuits. In contrast, Pt/NiO and Pt-Hf/NiO are two exceptionally impressive energy-efficient, integration-friendly, and high-endurance spin-current generators that should immediately benefit the development of practical SOT technologies and further stimulate spinorbitronic research. In conclusion, we have presented that SBF and SML at the Pt-based HM/FM interfaces, which considerably degrade the efficiencies of interfacial spin transport and dampinglike SOT, can be effectively eliminated by insertion of an insulating paramagnetic NiO layer of optimum thickness. We find that thermal magnons most likely mediate spin current in the HM/NiO/FM systems and considerably enhance the effective spin-mixing conductance ( G eff,m ↑↓ >> G eff,e ↑↓ ). The absence of SML is attributed to the negligible ISOC at the NiO/FM interface. We establish Pt/NiO (ρxx= 37 μΩ cm, ξ DL j =0.6) and Pt-Hf/NiO (ρxx= 132 μΩ cm, ξ DL j = 0.8) as two energy-efficient, integration-friendly, and highendurance spin-current generators that provide >100 times greater energy efficiency than sputter-deposited BiSb and BiSe. Our finding will immediately benefit spin-orbitronic research and advance SOT technologies. SOT-MRAM devices for the sputter-deposited Pt/NiO, Pt-Hf/NiO, BiSb The samples were deposited at room temperature by sputtering onto Si/SiO2 substrates. The NiO was dcsputter-deposited using a Ni target at 50 W, with 5 mTorr of 15% O2 + 85%Ar atmosphere. The other layers were deposited with an argon pressure of 2 mTorr. The base pressure was ~10 -8 Torr. Each of the FeCoB-based samples was capped by a Hf 0.1/MgO 2 nm/Ta 2 nm trilayer that was fully oxidized upon exposure to atmosphere. The structure was characterized by cross-sectional annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (ADF-STEM) and selected area electron diffraction (SAED). The electron beam size is 2 nm in diameter and smaller than the grain size of Pt. Figure As an independent check of the enhancement of the dampinglike SOT efficiency by insertion of a 0.9 nm NiO, we performed FM thickness-dependent spin-torque ferromagnetic resonance (ST-FMR) measurement on a bilayer sample Pt 4/Co tCo and a trilayer sample Pt 4/NiO 0.9/Co tCo. For the ST-FMR determination, we employ the standard macrospin analysis and assume a negligible spin pumping effect. We first define an effective FMR spin-torque efficiency ξFMR from the ratio of the symmetric (S) and anti-symmetric (A) components of the magnetoresistance response of the ST-FMR resonance. S is proportional to HDL and A is due to the sum of the Oersted field and the fieldlike SOT effective field. The dampinglike and fieldlike SOT efficiencies per applied electric field, ξ DL E and ξ FL E , can then be obtained from the linear dependence of ξFMR -1 on tFM -1 when ξ DL E , ξ FL E , the HM resistivity (ρHM), and Ms are approximately constant over the studied tFM regime Using ρxx = 43 μΩ cm for the 4 nm Pt layer, ξ DL E was estimated from the ST-FMR measurement to be 1.3×10 5 Ω -1 m -1 for Pt 4/Co tCo and 3.4×10 5 Ω -1 m -1 for Pt 4/NiO 0.9/Co tCo, reaffirming the almost threefold enhancement of the dampinglike SOT efficiency with the insertion of the 0.9 nm NiO layer. The ξ DL E values from the ST-FMR measurement are smaller than those from harmonic response measurements, as has been widely observed for many HM/FM systems To determine if there was a significant SOT component arising from the NiO/FeCoB or the FeCoB/MgO interfaces we also produced a multilayer consisting of Ta 1/NiO 0.9/FeCoB 1.4/Hf 0.1/MgO, that is a multilayer without either of the heavy metal components. As shown in Fig. Figure The spin transparency (Tint) of a heavy metal/ferromagnet (HM/FM) interface is considerably less than unity due to spin backflow (SBF) and spin memory loss (SML). Using a simplifying assumption that the drift-diffusion analysis [4,5] is approximately independent of the weak SML, Tint for a SOT process can be estimated as when the thickness (dHM) of the HM is much larger than its spin diffusion length (λs). Here G HM/FM ⇵ is the bare spin-mixing conductance of the interface, GSML is the effective SML conductance, GHM = 1/ρxxλs, ρxx, and λs are the spin conductance, the resistivity, and the spin diffusion length of the HM. Equation ( or where )] -1 are the spin transparencies set by the SBF and by the SML, respectively. When dHM of the HM layer is not much greater than its spin diffusion length (λs), the spin transparency set by the SBF should be further modified as Recently, we have also established that T int SML for a HM/FM interface decreases in a linear manner with increasing interfacial spin-orbit coupling (ISOC) strength In the main text, we calculated the internal spin Hall ratio and spin Hall conductivity using the values of Tint as calculated from the products of T int SBF and T int SML following Equation (3). T int SBF ≤ 0.5 for the Pt-based HMs (Pt-MgO alloy, Pt-Ti multilayers, and Pt-Hf multilayers) as estimated using Equation (4), G HM/FM ↑↓ ≈ 0.59×10 15 Ω -1 m - 2 (Ref. SML is a minimal effect for these in-plane magnetized samples (T int SML ≥ 0.9, see Figure Here we show that the spin transparency of a HM/NiO/FM interface can be reduced to below that of the corresponding HM/FM interface when the first few atomic layers of FM adjacent to the NiO is oxidized and forms a magnetically dead layer. We prepared perpendicularly magnetized sample series of Pt 2/Co 0.6-1.2/NiO 0, 0.9/Pt 4 , Pt 2/Co 0.6-1.2/NiO 0, 0.9/Pt-Hf (Pt-Hf = [Pt 0.6/Hf 0.2]5/Pt 0.6), and Pt 2 /Co 0.6-1.2/NiO 0.9 (numbers are layer thicknesses in nm), each of which is seeded by 1 nm Ta layer and capped by a bilayer of MgO 2/Ta 1.5. In Table ). The Pt 2/Co/NiO 0.9/HM samples show considerably lower effective saturation magnetization (Ms eff ) of the Co layer compared to the Pt 2/Co/HM samples (Ms eff vary from 1510 to 1610 emu/cm 3 due to magnetic proximity effect), indicating that in the stacks with a 0.9 NiO layer the sputtering deposition of the NiO leads to significant oxidation and magnetic dead layer at the top surface of the Co. The level of this oxidation appears to vary from sample to sample depending on the details of deposition, for example, Ms eff is 910 emu/cm 3 for Pt 2/Co 0.8/NiO 0.9/Pt 4, 360 emu/cm 3 for the Pt 2/Co 1.2/NiO 0.9/Pt-Hf 4, and 560 emu/cm 3 for Pt 2/Co 1.2/NiO 0.9. As a consequence, ξ DL,top E is substantially degraded in the Pt 2/Co/NiO 0.9/HM samples. In the case of Pt 2/Co 1.2/NiO 0.9/Pt-Hf, the torque contribution from the top Pt-Hf layer becomes negligibly small. This observation suggests that in samples including a nickel oxide layer the possible oxidation of the adjacent layers should be carefully taken care of. Although the Pt and the Pt-terminated Pt-Hf multilayers that we study in the work are robust against oxidation, the surface of many other spin current generators, e.g. W, Ta, Bi2Se3, BiSb, and Bi2Tb3 will likely be substantially oxidized. We note that due to the relatively low electron affinity of Ni, even if the magnonic layer is formed by sputtering from a NiO target it is quite likely that O ions will be liberated in the sputtering process and oxidize the surface of layers with higher electron affinity. Interestingly, the dampinglike spin-orbit torque (SOT) efficiency per applied electric field, ξ DL E , for Pt 4/NiO 0.9/FeCoB 1.4 drops from 1.7×10 6 Ω -1 m -1 at 300 K to -0.3×10 6 Ω -1 m -1 at 200 K and then remains roughly constant upon further cooling [Fig. The negative sign of ξ DL E for Pt 4/NiO 0.9/FeCoB 1.4 below 250 K is an interesting observation, which is suggestive of additional mechanisms that are likely associated with the antiferromagnetic ordering or paramagnetic-antiferromagnetic transition in the NiO layer. Note that a sign change in the dampinglike SOT is absent in our Pt/FeCoB [Fig. Here, we do want to note several pieces of important differences between the two experiments. First, the spin current generator Pt in our SOT process has a giant robust SHE (or spin Hall conductivity) that does not decrease or can even increase at low temperatures down to zero K. In contrast, in the case of SSE/ISHE work the thermal spin current generation in the ferromagnetic insulator YIG vanishes at zero K and varies strongly at finite temperatures. We notice that the detected spin current for the SSE process is proportional to the transverse thermopower S that is strongly temperature dependent. S seems to be related to both spin current generation and interfacial spin transmission. In Ref. We also mention that Ref. 