We report the study of spontaneous magnetization (i.e., spin-polarization) for time-reversal symmetry (TRS)-breaking superconductors with unitary pairing potentials, in the absence of external magnetic fields or Zeeman fields. Spin-singlet (∆s) and spin-triplet (∆t) pairings can coexist in superconductors whose crystal structure lacks inversion symmetry. The TRS can be spontaneously broken once a relative phase of ±π/2 is developed, forming a TRS-breaking unitary pairing state (∆s ± i∆t). We demonstrate that such unitary pairing could give rise to spontaneous spinpolarization with the help of spin-orbit coupling. Our result provides an alternative explanation to the TRS breaking, beyond the current understanding of such phenomena in the noncentrosymmetric superconductors. The experimental results of Zr3Ir and CaPtAs are also discussed in the view of our theory. Introduction-. In condensed matter physics, superconductivity and magnetism are generally antagonistic to each other There are mainly two direct ways to probe spontaneously TRS-breaking pairing states, including the zerofield muon-spin relaxation (μSR) In this work, we report the discovery of SP in TRSbreaking unitary SCs. The spin-singlet pairing (∆ s ) coexists with the spin-triplet pairing (∆ t ) in both noncentrosymmetric SCs and superconducting thin films. Once a relative phase of ±π/2 is developed (∆ s ± i∆ t ), TRS is spontaneously broken. By combing the symmetry analysis and the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory, we find that the interplay between spin-orbit coupling (SOC) and the ∆ s ± i∆ t unitary pairing potential could give rise to SP in a homogeneous SC. The direction of the induced SP is perpendicular to both the SOC g-vector and the spintriplet d-vector, even though both g and d are real vectors. Our result provides an alternative explanation for the TRS breaking phenomenon. The potential applications of our theory to recently discovered noncentrosymmetric SCs (e.g. Zr 3 Ir and CaPtAs) are also discussed. TRS-breaking unitary pairings-. In the absence of external magnetic fields or Zeeman fields, the non-vanishing magnetism or SP in the superconducting states generally causes the spontaneous breaking of TRS. The SP can be generated by non-unitary pairing states with a complex spin-triplet d-vector, whose direction is parallel to d × d * . Alternatively, in this work, we explore the spontaneous SP induced by TRS-breaking unitary pair-ing states in SCs whose crystal structure lacks inversion symmetry. For this propose, we start with a single-band model Hamiltonian where ξ k = k 2 /2m -μ is the electron band energy measured from the Fermi energy μ, σ denotes the Pauli matrices of electron spin, and α is the strength of SOC. The inversion symmetry is broken due to g(k) = -g(-k). In this work, we mainly focus on the Rashba-type SOC which is given by g = (-k y , k x ), allowed by the C 4v point group. There are two Fermi surfaces with opposite chirality, and the two bands are k,± = ξ k ± α| g|, and the Fermi momentum is k F = √ 2mμ for α → 0. Then we consider the superconducting pairing Hamiltonian with attractive interactions, here s 1,2 are spin indexes. Applying the mean-field decompositions, we define the gap functions as ∆ s1,s2 . Here • • • represents averaging over the thermal equilibrium states. After ignoring fluctuations, the mean-field pairing Hamiltonian becomes, Due to the breaking of inversion symmetry, the evenparity pairing coexists with the odd-parity pairing Here, the angular form factors for spin-singlet pairing could be either s-wave (ψ As for p-wave pairing symmetries, we focus on in-plane d vectors for simplicity, and there are four possibilities, They belong to different 1D irreducible representations of the C 4v point group, shown in Fig. Spontaneous spin-polarization-. Next, we use the GL theory to address the SP induced by the ∆ s ± i∆ t unitary pairing potential in the absence of external magnetic fields or Zeeman fields. The symmetry allowed free energy of a homogeneous SC reads, where Here γ 1 = 0 indicates the pairing breaks TRS since the relative phase difference between singlet and triplet pairings is developed as ±π/2 which will not alter the relative phase difference θ ts between ∆ s and ∆ t (see Sec. A in the Supplementary Materials). It indicates that the unitary pairing states ∆ s ± i∆ t coexist with the induced SP M . The bulk magnetization vanishes in a purely clean system due to two reasons: the translational symmetry and the Meissner effect Below we first use symmetry analysis to classify the γ 2 -vector. The free energy in Eq. ( Both the s+ip-and d+ip-pairing states are fully gapped in 2D SCs, while gap nodes can exist in 3D SCs. Next, we investigate the important role of Rashba SOC for the establishment of the γ 2 -term in Eq. with i = {x, y, z} and β = 1/(k B T ) the inverse of temperature. And the Matsubara Green's function is We find that the direction of M is perpendicular to both d vector and the SOC g vector, namely, where • • • F S denotes the average over the entire Fermi surfaces. Here we take the ∆ s + i∆ t with s-wave pairing and d A2 (k) as an example [see Fig. where ζ(z) is the Riemann zeta function. The crucial role of SOC to the SP is manifest in Eq. ( where the Nambu basis Here H 0 (k) is given by Eq. ( where l is the "edge coordinate" on a N x × N y rectangular lattice and l ∈ {(1, i y ), (i x , N y ), (N x , i y ), (i x , 1)} with total sites N l = 2N x + 2N y -4, Pe is the projection operator into the particle subspace, and |E n is solution of the BdG equation Next, we take the d + ip pairing states in Eq. ( Theoretical applications to noncentrosymmetric SCs.-Now, we discuss the compatibility of the above superconducting pairings with the real materials. Here we consider two different noncentrosymmetric SCs, Zr 3 Ir We first discuss the weak SOC case, i.e., Zr 3 Ir. The mixed pairings in Eq. As for fun 3 (∆ s+ip ∼ ∆ 0 1 + Sin 2 θ), the calculated ρ s is temperature-independent at low-T , an indication of fully-gapped SC, and shows remarkably good agreement with the experimental data. Therefore, the s + ip-pairing with ∆ s ∼ ∆ t might be applied to the noncentrosymmetric Zr 3 Ir SC with weak SOC. While for the strong SOC case (i.e., CaPtAs), the mixed pairings in Eq. ( Conclusion and discussion-. We briefly discuss the effects of the boundary SP on first-order (second-order) 2D topological SCs, which host topological Majorana edge (corner) states (see Sec. D in the Supplementary Materials). A purely helical p-wave SC supports a pair of helical Majorana edge modes protected by TRS In sum, we find that the TRS-breaking unitary pairing states could induce the spontaneous SP with the help of SOC, in the absence of external magnetic fields or Zeeman fields. We propose that both s + ip and d + ip spontaneously break TRS and give rise to SP, which is induced to be perpendicular to both the real spin-triplet d-vector and the SOC g-vector. The averaged boundary SP is also estimated ∼ 0.02 meV for noncentrosymmetric SC, Zr 3 Ir, which should be able to be detected in experiments. Moreover, our theory can quantitatively describe the superfluid density of Zr 3 Ir and CaPtAs noncentrosymmetric SCs. Our result provides an alternative explanation to the TRS breaking, beyond the current understanding of such phenomena in the noncentrosymmetric superconductors. We also notice a recent theoretical work demonstrating that the pairing symmetry might be d + ip for Sr 2 RuO 4 Mirror Table The independent symmetry operators involve the mirror σv, σ d and the four-fold rotation R4z. To apply our theory to realistic noncentrosymmetric SCs, we list the normalized gap functions on the Fermi surfaces. Here we consider both weak SOC and large SOC cases, (I) Weak SOC case. (II) Large SOC case. Here we ignore the inter-band pairing for simplicity. For TRS breaking unitary s + ip pairing states, where For TRS breaking unitary d + ip pairing states, where (1) Gap functions ∆(kx, ky) for s + ip and d + ip with weak SOC Fun 1: Fun 8: ∆ t ∆ s , ∆(k x , k y ) ∼ ∆ 0 sin 2 θ| cos 2φ|. These 9 gap functions are used to fit the superfluid density ρ s in the main text for Zr 3 Ir, see Fig. (2) Gap functions for s + ip and d + ip with large SOC Fun 1: These 12 gap functions are used to fit the superfluid density ρ s in the main text for CaPtAs, see Fig. It is also worthwhile to study effects of the boundary SP on first-order (second-order) topological superconductors, which host topological Majorana edge (corner) states. From the viewpoint of symmetry arguments, we learn that two singlet-triplet mixed gap functions ∆ s+ip and ∆ d+ip in Eq. ( with M s ( l)M sp ( l) > 0, thus the HMEMs are fully gapped on each boundary with the same mass sign as expected. As for the d + ip case, a second-order topological superconductor (HOTSC) is achieved where A(l 1 ) = -(∆ t -α cos 2θ), M s (l 1 ) = -∆ d /2, and M sp (l 1 ) = M z cos 2θ. We also find that M s (l 1 )M sp (l 2 ) > 0 as expected. Note that M sp = 0 for the α = 0 case, which is consistent with the GL theory. Likewise, the mass terms for other edges are, M s (l i ) = ∆ d /2 for even i, -∆ d /2 for odd i. 