Although the principles underlying dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP) -in its many incarnations -were introduced more than half a century ago From among various existing routes, optical spin pumping of paramagnetic defects in wide-bandgap semiconductors has garnered recent attention as a broadly applicable DNP platform, largely due to the potential for room temperature (or near room temperature) operation Often hosting a dilute set of nuclear spins, materials such as diamond or silicon carbide have also emerged as versatile systems to investigate fundamental questions on the spin dynamics governing DNP Here we extend prior work on optical spin pumping of NV-hosting diamond to investigate the impact of a continuous radio-frequency (RF) drive on the generation of relative concentrations of paramagnetic defects present in the sample, the number of nuclei featuring a given hyperfine coupling, and their spin transport efficiency at the applied magnetic field. We work under conditions similar to those reported previously For the present experiments, we use a highpressure/high-temperature (HPHT) [100] diamond crystal engineered to host nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers at a concentration of ~10 ppm; green illumination (532 nm, 1 W) spin-pumps NV centers into the m ' = 0 state of its ground spin triplet (S = 1), which we ultimately exploit to dynamically polarize transition from m ' = 0, m ' ; = + 1 2 to m ' = -1, m ' ; = -1 2 -polarizes adjacent While the physical picture above provides an intuitive starting point, the mechanisms allowing nuclear polarization to spread to bulk nuclei are far from simple. Part of the problem is the large energy mismatch between nuclei featuring different hyperfine couplings, a regime that truncates nuclear flip-flop terms in the Hamiltonian and thus (presumably) quenches spin diffusion. We found in prior work Although the above observations expose the important role strongly-hyperfine-coupled carbons play in transporting nuclear polarization, the exact nature of the RF absorption at play -meaning the type of spin levels we couple via the drive -remains unclear. In the most intuitive picture, RF excitation drives nuclear-spin-only transitions (i.e., transitions where the electron spin projections are conserved), thus causing 'saturation' (i.e., effective equilibration between nuclear spin population differences) and, correspondingly, a reduction of the observed 13 C NMR signal. This process is most clearly exposed at ~560 kHz -associated to the Larmor frequency of bulk nuclei -where weak cw excitation during t "# is sufficient to extinguish the observed nuclear polarization (Fig. To further investigate these observations, we altered the probe in our shuttling experiments -initially designed to yield RF excitation of uniform, nearly-frequency-independent amplitude over a range reaching 150 MHz (purple and red squares, respectively) as a function of the RF power for a drive at 11.5 MHz. Fig. While simple in its exterior, the finding above is profound in its implications. First off, we note that the continuous wave (cw) nature of the RF excitation (in all experiments, t "# = 5 s) strongly suggests that the observed signal inversion cannot derive from coherent spin manipulation: As shown in Appendix A, such a scenario would require a near-perfectly timed process of polarization generation, storage, and transport, an unlikely mechanism given the diffusive nature of the dynamics in all steps. On the contrary, we hypothesize simultaneous RF and NV optical pumping drive hyperfine-coupled nuclei into a steady state of inverted spin temperature, ultimately spreading to bulk carbons and correspondingly reversing the sign of the observed magnetization. To more clearly lay out our theoretical framework, we return to the 13 C-NV-P1 system considered above and focus our attention on the set of (nearly degenerate) states a , b , c , d within the m ' = 0, m ' ; = + 1 2 and m ' = -1, m ' ; = -1 2 manifolds (see Fig. To quantitatively model the system evolution in the simultaneous presence of RF and optical excitation, we transform the From the above considerations, we conclude the steady state nuclear polarization emerges from an intricate interplay between the NV-P1 dipolar coupling (governing the exchange rate between b and c ) and the RF amplitude (connecting d with states c and b ). The calculated time evolution for variable RF amplitude Ω 56 is shown in Fig. To address the question as to how an RF drive induces negative nuclear polarization, we consider the dynamics of a * Mild signal inversion was seen in these simulations as a result of the Bloch-Siegert effect, but the required Rabi fields -in The schematic in the diagram of Fig. Out of the two spin sets we consider, only one of them polarizes positively when no RF is present (Figs. It is interesting to compare the above process with the well-known "solid-effect" 36 : In the simplest case where the electronic and nuclear spin numbers are both equal to 1/2, nuclear polarization emerges as microwave excitation drives "forbidden" transitions between states whose electron and nuclear spin projections are different. Something similar can be said about the spin subspace in the Fig. excess of 200 kHz -are beyond those attained in our present experiment and cannot be invoked to explain our observations. 2b, we find that the While the basic ideas governing dynamic nuclear polarization have long been established, a broad effort is ongoing to shed light on the microscopic mechanisms involving the generation and transport of polarization to bulk nuclei from near-defect sites. NV-hosting diamond provides an attractive platform to investigate these processes not only due to the promise of low-field, room-temperature DNP, but also because its comparatively simple composition makes it a clean platform to expose fundamental phenomena. Capitalizing on these singular properties, this work explored the generation of The ability to access the electronic bath through 'intraband' transitions -i.e., transitions between electronic levels within a Zeeman-defined manifold -could perhaps be exploited to implement microwave-free routes to DNP, even in the absence of optical spin pumping. For example, assuming thermal initialization in the lowest electronic Zeeman manifold, different spin dynamics follow from an NV or a P1 spin flip, each taking place with a different unit time probability. Given a characteristic spin transport time away from the source electron/nuclear set, the above differences should lead to a net injection of nuclear spin magnetization into the bulk. A full analysis of this MW-free DNP process -involving not only the generation but also the transport of spin polarization -is presently under study and will be the subject of future work. the final box. The time-evolution of the system can be evaluated by solving the appropriate set of differential equations or by Monte Carlo trajectory sampling. Using this last approach, we show in Fig. Figure APPENDIX B: Quantum model of spin dynamics under RF excitation B1. The spin Hamiltonian We formalize here the quantum-mechanical few-level system description of the RF-induced signal reversal. We stress that this approach focusses exclusively on the generation, not the transport, of magnetization. We start by considering a three-spin system, including a 13 C nuclear spin I (I = 1/2), a NV center spin S (S = 1) and an electronic P1 spin S | (S | = 1/2). The complete Hamiltonian H ~ in the laboratory-frame is given by: Here, ω O = γ ‚ B, and ω • = γ • B, while D indicates the NV zero-field splitting. Coefficients A TT and A TU denote the (secularized) hyperfine tensor components coupling the with the corresponding angle, and The matrix representation of the Hamiltonian after this rotation is given by where c Q = cos (θ AQ /2) and s Q = sin (θ AQ /2). Notice that the NV-P1 dipolar coupling term leads to relatively small, off-diagonal matrix elements (of order ~IG ). In what follows, the nuclear states in the subspace m ' = -1 are denoted with primes, ↑ | and ↓ | , as a reminder that they are referenced to Z. The effect of optical pumping is introduced here by means of a projective, non-unitary operation. With that purpose, we enlarge the Hilbert space and introduce two ancillary states, 0, -1/2, ↑ and 0, -1/2, ↓ . Then, we implement a Monte Carlo quantum jump approach that stochastically projects The probability of such a projection corresponds to the NV repolarization rate per unit time, and each trajectory is averaged over a sufficiently large number of realizations. Using the above framework, in Fig. This equation represents the quasi-degeneracy condition between states 0,1/2, ↓ and -1, -1/2, ↑ | , and its precise solution ultimately depends on the particular hyperfine coupling. B2. RF irradiation Now we want to consider the effect of a time-dependent term that describes the effect of RF excitation, H vw = -γ ̃BQ I U cos ωt = -Ω vw I U cos ωt (B. 8) where the frequency ω is set to drive strongly-hyperfine shifted nuclear spins (i.e., ω ≫ ω O ). In order to derive an effective, time-independent Hamiltonian we stay at a fixed magnetic field, which corresponds to B , 2 for a particular hyperfine coupling. For (large) hyperfine couplings (≫ ω O ) where the degeneracy condition (Eq. B.8) does not hold, a detuning δ can be associated to the energy difference between states 0,1/2, ↓ and -1, -1/2, ↑ | . For simplicity, we assume δ ≪ ∆ AQ . We stress, however, that the validity of our observations does not rely on this assumption. The above considerations lead to a well-defined hierarchy of states. The energies of the first three states, 0,1/2, ↑ , 0,1/2, ↓ and -1, -1/2, ↑ | , are assumed very close to each other. In fact, these energies differ in ~max ω O , δ . The remaining state, -1, -1/2, ↓ | , is energetically distant by an amount equal to ∆ AQ . Since, in general, ω~∆ AQ , the natural unitary transformation that defines the rotating frame in this system is given by R = exp -iWt , (B. 9 where W = 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ω . (B. 10) Before computing the lowest order in Average Hamiltonian Theory 