Type I superconductivity has recently been reported for the Dirac semimetal PdTe2 (Tc ≈ 1.6 K) with, remarkably, multiple critical fields and a complex phase diagram. Here, measurements of the specific heat utilizing a thermal relaxation technique are presented. Conventional weak-coupling BCS superconductivity is confirmed by examining the temperature dependence of the specific heat in zero field. By probing the latent heat accompanying the superconducting transition, thermodynamic evidence for type I superconductivity is attained. The presence of the intermediate state is observed as a significant broadening of the superconducting transition onto lower temperatures at high fields as well as irreversibility in the specific heat in zero field cooled data at 8.5 mT. Recently, layered transition metal dicalchogenides have sparked great interest by virtue of their exotic electronic properties, especially the possibility of realizing novel quantum states stemming from the topological non-trivial band structure as uncovered by density functional theory The superconducting properties of PdTe 2 have been extensively investigated. Transport and magnetic measurements carried out on single crystals of PdTe 2 revealed the existence of bulk type I superconductivity, an uncommon feature for a binary compound Evidence for the weak-coupling Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) nature of superconductivity in PdTe 2 was obtained through measurements of the specific heat Although the specific heat of PdTe 2 was reported before, the focus was on elucidating the symmetry of the gap structure In this paper heat capacity measurements of PdTe 2 in zero and applied magnetic fields are reported. The data in field show the presence of latent heat associated with a first order transition and thus type I superconductivity. The temperature variation of the critical field, B c (T ), follows the expected quadratic temperature variation up to 9.5 mT. The data at higher applied fields reveal the presence of a second, minority superconducting phase in the PdTe 2 crystal. PdTe 2 crystallizes in the trigonal CdI 2 structure (space group P 3m1) Heat capacity measurements were carried out in an Oxford Instruments Heliox 3 He refrigerator down to 0.3 K by use of the dual slope thermal relaxation calorimetry technique The sample was attached to the sample platform with Apiezon N grease with the c-axis parallel to the applied magnetic field. This configuration results in a demagnetizing factor N = 0.14 The as-measured total specific heat, consisting of the electronic and phononic contributions, is reported in the Supplementary Material file 27 . At low temperatures, the specific heat of a simple metal in the normal state is given by C = γT + βT 3 , where γ is the Sommerfeld coefficient and β is the phononic coefficient. We have determined γ and β by the usual procedure 27 and obtained values of 4.4 mJ/molK 2 and 0.70 mJ/molK 4 , respectively. This γ value compares reasonably well to the 6.0 mJ/molK 2 derived in previous work , where S is the number of atoms per formula unit and R is the gas constant. We obtain Θ D = 202 K, which agrees well with the previously reported value of 207 K 28 and the calculated value of 211 K 14 . After subtracting the phonon contribution the electronic specific heat, C el , results. The overal temperature variation of the electronic specific heat is presented in figure The jump at T c quantified with the BCS relation ∆C/γT c , where ∆C is the jump in the specific heat, equals 1.42, which is close to the textbook value of 1.43, confirming the weak-coupling BCS nature of superconductivity in PdTe 2 . The full range temperature dependence of a weak coupling BCS superconductor as tabulated by Figure In figure where B c (0) = 13.6 mT and T c = 1.64 K. The new data are in good agreement with the previous result with T c = 1.60 K (solid blue line in figure Figure The overall temperature variation of the superconducting contribution to the specific heat is in very good agreement with the tabulated Mühlschlegel values. At the same time the low temperature data T /T c < 0.3 obey the exponential expression for BCS superconductivity with ∆ k B Tc = 1.76 where ∆C and γ are per unit volume. With the values γ = 4.46 mJ/molK 2 , T c = 1.62 K, ∆C/γT c = 1.42 and the molar volume 4.34 • 10 -5 m 3 /mol, we calculate B c (0) = 10.9 mT. This value is smaller than the measured value B c (0) = 13.6 mT. Examining the previous specific heat study The temperature dependence of the electronic specific heat C el in magnetic fields shown in figure The B c (T ) data points traced in figure The temperature dependence of the normal state volume fraction F N in the intermediate state in fixed fields for B c (1 -N ) < B app < B c is given by where t is the reduced temperature T /T c , t c the reduced critical temperature T c (B app )/T c (0) and N = 0.14 is the demagnetization factor The reduced critical temperature t c in eq. 3 can be rewritten using eq. 1: t c = 1 -Bc(T ) Bc(0) . From this, no sudden decrease in F n is possible as well. We therefore exclude the intermediate phase as a possible cause for the elevated T c and reduced specific heat step. A more likely explanation is that superconductivity survives in a small volume fraction (∼ 10 %) of the crystal with a slightly different PdTe 2+x stoichiometry 5 . We remark a similar additional phase line was obtained in a previous study In the heating curves of the first relaxation measurements of the ZFC data detailed in figure The temperature dependence of the specific heat of PdTe 2 in zero field and magnetic fields was measured in order to produce thermodynamic evidence of the type I nature of superconductivity. From the zero field data a weak-coupling BCS superconducting state is inferred conform with the literature. The data in small magnetic fields show the presence of latent heat at the superconducting transition, where the step in the specific heat ∆C exceeds the zero field value. The intermediate state was probed by (i) a significant broadening of the transition onto lower temperatures for B > 6.5 mT, and (ii) the appearance of irreversibility in the specific heat at 8.5 mT in ZFC data. The critical field for bulk superconductivity extracted from the data follows the standard temperature dependence with B c = 13.6 mT and T c = 1.60 K for B ≤ 8.5 mT. In fields B ≥ 10.5 mT the data reveal the presence of a second, minority phase, with a volume fraction of ∼ 10 %, possibly due to offstoichiometric PdTe 2+x regions. 2. Electronic specific heat in a plot of C el /T versus T in zero and in applied magnetic fields. The increase of the step size of the specific heat at the superconducting transition temperature measured in magnetic field is clearly observed. This is due to the first order nature of the transition which involves latent heat. For B ≥ 10.5 mT the specific heat peak collapses.