The exact nature of unconventional superconductivity in Sr2RuO4 remains a mystery. At the phenomenological level, no superconducting order parameter proposed thus far seems able to coherently account for all essential experimental signatures. Among the latter is the prominent polar Kerr effect, which implies a nonzero ac anomalous Hall conductivity. Assuming the Kerr effect is intrinsic, it can be accounted for by a bulk chiral Cooper pairing with nonzero orbital angular momentum, such as p + ip or d + id, which, however, has difficulties in being reconciled with other experimental results. Given the situation, in this paper, we propose alternative possibilities with complex mixtures of distinct helical p-wave order parameters, namely, A1u + iA2u and B1u + iB2u in the group theory nomenclature. These states essentially consist of two copies of chiral p-wave pairings with opposite chirality and different pairing amplitudes, and therefore support intrinsic Hall and Kerr effects. We further show that these states exhibit salient features that may explain several other key observations in this material, including the absence of spontaneous edge current, a substantial Knight shift drop, and possibly signatures in uniaxial strain and ultrasound measurements. The nature of the unconventional superconductivity in Sr 2 RuO 4 is a puzzle that remains unsolved Arguably, one principal property of the superconductivity in Sr 2 RuO 4 is the condensation of at least two superconducting order parameters. This has been inferred from a variety of experiments, including μSR In light of the evidence of time-reversal symmetry breaking from the μSR and the polar Kerr effect measurements In this work, we turn to the helical p-wave pairings (A 1u , A 2u , B 1u and B 2u irreps), which are analogues of the 3 He B-phase The idea is most transparent when presented in a singleorbital model. Take A 1u + iA 2u as an example, in terms of the d-vector, the pairing functions of A 1u and A 2u are given respectively by k x x + k y ŷ and k x ŷk y x. The full gap function then becomes where , implying unequal pairing gap amplitudes for the two spin species: for spin-down (Fig. At this point, it is worth pointing out that multiple microscopic calculations Below we demonstrate intrinsic a.c. anomalous Hall effect and Kerr rotation for the A 1u + iA 2u state, using the same two-orbital model as in Ref. where Here t labels the nearest neighbor hopping integral of the d xz(yz) orbital along the x(y) direction, t that of the d xz(yz) orbital along the y(x) direction, t denotes the hybridization of the two orbitals between next nearest neighboring sites. The corresponding BdG Hamiltonian follows as, where, following Table Using H ↑ BdG we calculate σ ↑ H (ω) from the standard Kubo formula (without vertex corrections). Details of the calculation can be found in the Supplementary Materials We note that Im[σ H (ω)] becomes nonzero at ω 0.4 eV for the chosen band parameters. This frequency is determined by the minimum energy cost to create a pair of Bogoliubov quasiparticles from different bands, which is not dictated by From the calculated σ H one can estimate the Kerr rotation angle using where n = n(ω) is the complex index of refraction and d is the interlayer spacing of Sr 2 RuO 4 along the c-axis. n(ω) can be estimated from the longitudinal optical conductivity which is modeled by a Drude model as in Ref. A chiral p-wave state shall generate finite spontaneous surface current The A 1u + iA 2u state has just the right appeal for explaining this, which is already obvious in the single-orbital case. Here, the two spin species each generates an edge current, and these currents flow in opposite direction due to the opposite chirality. Moreover, the integrated current in fact vanishes in the BCS limit. However, thanks to the distinct decay length scales of the two contributions, the current distribution does not exactly cancel at each spatial point. Going beyond single-orbital model, the integrated current may not vanish due to SOC and other band structure effects. However, the strong suppression persists, as is demonstrated in Fig. It should be stressed that such suppression is inherent, as it is achieved without appealing to surface disorder, anisotropic band and gap structure -factors typically having the potential to further reduce the spontaneous current, as is known for the case of chiral p-wave x ∆ * A1u ∂ y ∆ A2u are needed to account for the small local current distribution. By the same token, similar physics applies to the chiral d x 2 -y 2 + id xy pairing Finally, the suppression in the A 1u + iA 2u phase is also independent of the edge orientation, and the same phenomenology takes place at the domain walls separating regions of timereversed pairings. Recent revised NMR measurements under external in-plane magnetic field reveal a substantial Knight shift drop below T c Owing to the in-plane d-vector orientation, the mixed helical states naturally exhibit a reduced χ spin across T c under the in-plane field. In fact, in the absence of SOC, χ spin at T = 0 equals half of its normal state value. This is demonstrated in Fig. The SOC may facilitate extra spin-flipping processes that could have otherwise been suppressed by Cooper pairing, thereby alleviating the drop of χ spin . This is exemplified by the noticeable increase of χ spin (T = 0) with enhanced SOC (Fig. Note that our calculations were done in the non-interacting limit. Correlations renormalize the normal and superconducting state χ spin in different manners, reducing the ratio χ spin (T = 0)/χ spin (T = T c ) from its non-interacting value Uniaxial strain and ultrasound measurements reveal crucial information about the symmetry of the superconducting order where i = x 2y 2 , xy for the B 1g and B 2g strains, respectively, and α i (β i ) are coupling constants. No other order parameter bilinears are present. This free energy has two implications. On the one hand, the mean-field critical temperatures of the two components shall both follow a quadratic dependence on the strain. This seems to agree with the observed behavior in several uniaxial strain measurements Under the assumption that the observed polar Kerr effect is a genuine response of superconducting Sr 2 RuO 4 in the clean limit, we proposed that the mixed helical p-wave states, A 1u +iA 2u and B 1u +iB 2u , represent faithful alternative candidates to chiral superconducting states. We also discussed how these states may be compatible with several other key measurements. Interestingly, a recent study Due to their non-unitary nature, our proposed states are also expected to exhibit finite spin polarization in the bulk, which scales as (∆/E F ) 2 . The resultant spontaneous bulk magnetization may be probed in SQUID measurements. One such attempt was said to be impeded by the Meissner effect As a final remark, the B 1g +iB 2g state (chiral d x 2 -y 2 +id xy pairing) also carries the essential features needed to explain the various observations discussed in this work. Alternatively, in a spirit similar to that proposed in Ref. Note added. After posting our manuscript on arXiv, we were informed of another work Supplemental Material for "Possibility of mixed helical p-wave pairings in Sr 2 RuO 4 " Wen Huang 1 and Zhiqiang Wang In the absence of SOC, the two spin blocks decouple. We can calculate σ ↑ H and σ ↓ H separately. The model we consider consists of the two quasi-1d orbitals, d xz and d yz , of Sr 2 RuO 4 . Written in the basis {c dxz (k), c dyz (k)} the spin up block of the normal state Hamiltonian reads The corresponding BdG Hamiltonian is with which is effectively a (spinless) chiral p xip y order parameter. For simplicity we have considered only intra-orbital pairing while neglected any inter-orbital one. From H BdG we can define the electric current velocity operator where 1 2×2 is the identity matrix in the Nambu particle-hole space. We calculate σ ↑ H using the standard one-loop Kubo formula where π xy (q, iν m ) is the electric current-current density correlator, given by In this equation Ĝ is the Green's function. ω n = (2n + 1)πT and ν m = 2mπT are Fermionic and Bosonic Matsubara frequencies. The trace Tr is with respect to both the Nambu particle-hole and orbital spaces. e is the charge of an electron. Using Eq. ( arXiv:2102.03375v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 11 Oct 2021 where For brevity we have suppressed the k dependence in these equations. Written out explicitly, The derivation of σ ↓ H is almost identical. The only difference is that in the definition of the BdG Hamiltonian, ∆↑↑ is now replaced by Correspondingly, with Comparing F ↓ k to F ↑ k in Eq. ( From the calculated σ H (ω) we can estimate the Kerr angle for ω = 0.8eV using where n = n(ω) is the complex index of refraction, given by ab (ω) is the permeability tensor in the ab-plane. ∞ = 10 [1] is the background permeability. d = 6.8 Å is the inter-layer spacing along the c-axis. σ(ω) is the optical longitudinal conductivity. Following Ref. where ω pl = 2.9 eV is the the plasma frequency and Γ = 0.4 eV is an elastic scattering rate. At ω = 0.8 eV, σ(ω) = 0.33 + i 0.67, ab = -0.52 + i 5.20, and n = 1.53 + i 1.69. Plugging this n value into Eq. ( For easy comparison, in this section, we reproduce some of the results of σ H and θ K obtained in Ref. In the absence of SOC, the BdG Hamiltonian can be again decomposed into two decoupled blocks. One of them is which is written in the basis {c The other block is for the same basis but with opposite spin, and we denote it by Ĥ↓ BdG (k). Because ∆↓↑ = ∆↑↓ , Ĥ↓ BdG = Ĥ↑ BdG . Since the expression of Ĥ↑ BdG in Eq. ( where F k = -32 (t -t)(t ) 2 ∆ 2 0 (sin 2 k x cos k y + sin 2 k y cos k x ) sin 2 k x sin 2 k y (22a) As a consequence of Ĥ↓ BdG = Ĥ↑ BdG , σ ↓ H = σ ↑ H for the chiral p-wave pairing such that σ H = σ ↓ H + σ ↑ H = 2σ ↑ H . This should be contrasted with the previous A 1u + iA 2u pairing case where σ ↓ H and σ ↑ H carry opposite signs. Fig. Using the A 1u + iA 2u state as an example, we argue that there are no cross-gradient terms in the free energy that are quadratic in the order parameter components. There are in total four possible such terms that involve both order parameter components as FIG. where the coefficients a, b, c and d assume the values of 1 or -1 and we have dropped an overall Ginzburg-Landau coefficient. The general requirement is that the free energy be real and invariant under all D 4h point group symmetry transformations. Bearing in mind the symmetry properties of the two individual components, one can check that no single set of {a, b, c, d} ensures the invariance of the above free energy under all symmetry operations. One thus concludes that these cross-gradient terms must be absent. Same argument applies to the B 1u + iB 2u state. FIG. 2. Real (blue solid line) and imaginary (red dashed line) parts of the zero temperature σH(ω) as a function of 4∆A 1u ∆A 2u /(|∆A 1u | + |∆A 2u |) 2 . ω = 0.8 eV. ∆max = |∆A 1u | +