In a material prone to a nematic instability, anisotropic strain in principle provides a preferred symmetrybreaking direction for the electronic nematic state to follow. This is consistent with experimental observations, where electronic nematicity and structural anisotropy typically appear hand-in-hand. In this work, we discover that electronic nematicity can be locally decoupled from the underlying structural anisotropy in strain-engineered iron-selenide (FeSe) thin films. We use heteroepitaxial molecular beam epitaxy to grow FeSe with a nanoscale network of modulations that give rise to spatially varying strain. We map local anisotropic strain by analyzing scanning tunneling microscopy topographs, and visualize electronic nematic domains from concomitant spectroscopic maps. While the domains form so that the energy of nemato-elastic coupling is minimized, we observe distinct regions where electronic nematic ordering fails to flip direction, even though the underlying structural anisotropy is locally reversed. The findings point towards a nanometer-scale stiffness of the nematic order parameter. Electronic nematic ordering, characterized by breaking the rotational symmetry of the electronic structure, has emerged as a key signature of many unconventional superconductors Microscopic imaging of Fe-based superconductors revealed the tendency of real materials to form electronic nematic domains, even in crystals under zero nominal strain For example, while the domain size in FeSe single crystals is several micrometers FeSe presents an excellent playground to explore the interplay of electronic nematicity and symmetry breaking strain due to its structural simplicity and the absence of magnetic ordering that is present in many other Fe-based superconductors To characterize electronic properties of our thin films, we use low-temperature spectroscopic-imaging scanning tunneling microscopy. Although a single-unit-cell thick FeSe grown on SrTiO 3 (001) can exhibit superconductivity with ~10-15 meV pairing gap (Supplementary Figure To measure local structural distortions, we start with an atomically-resolved STM topograph (Fig. To investigate strain inhomogeneity further, we superimpose the outlines of electronic nematic domain boundaries on top of the antisymmetric strain map U(r) (Fig. Interestingly, we find that the distribution of antisymmetric strain values within each electronic nematic domain is highly inhomogeneous (Fig. , where regions with a 0 > b 0 comprise 21% of the whole area. Thus, our experiments reveal a local decoupling of structural and electronic anisotropy in an electronic nematic system. We emphasize that this result does not rely on the theoretical strain model in Fig. To gain further insight into the electronic nematic domain distribution, we consider a phenomenological model where the electronic nematicity is described by an Ising order parameter field ψ i . In the simplest of terms, our system can be represented as a 2D square network of lattice sites, each characterized by an electronic nematic configuration ψ i oriented along either a or b-axis. Antisymmetric strain U(r i ) acts as an external field that linearly couples to ψ i , leading to an overall interaction energy E 1 = -α ∑ U(r i )ψ i i (α > 0), where index i runs over all lattice sites. If this was the only interaction in our system, to minimize the energy, the direction of U(r) would strictly dictate the orientation of ψ i to be along the same direction. However, this is clearly contradictory to our observations (Fig. It is important to notice that the relative magnitudes of E 1 and E 2 will strongly depend on the size of electronic nematic domains formed. For micron size domains in bulk single crystals, the number of nearest neighbor pairs along a domain boundary (N b ) is much smaller than the total number of sites (N total ). Correspondingly, E 2 (∝ N b ) is negligible compared to E 1 (∝ N total ). However, as the domain size decreases, N b tends to N total , and E 2 can become comparable to E 1 . This can explain why no electronic domains are formed along dashed white lines in Fig. Our experiments highlight an application of heteroepitaxy to create a densely spaced strain grid in thin films of FeSe. We reveal a direct evidence of local decoupling between electronic nematicity and structural anisotropy, which is likely a consequence of rapidly varying anisotropic strain. Given that antisymmetric strain in our films changes sign over only ~ 5 nanometers, but the smallest electronic nematic domains observed are several times larger than that, electronic nematic rigidity length scale is likely larger than ~ 5 nanometers. This in turn suggests that it may be difficult to partition the nematic domains beyond the size already achieved here. Future experiments tracking the domain distribution as a function of temperature, could shed light on any spatial variations of T N in different strained regions and the robustness of domain boundaries with thermal cycling. Complementary to this, Te substitution for Se in strain-patterned FeSe can also allow explorations of domain formation by pushing the electronic nematic transition towards zero temperature In analogy to the magnetic field-driven motion of nematic domain boundaries detected in Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 Lastly, Potassium surface doping could lead to a re-emergence of superconductivity at the surface of our FeSe heterostructures MBE growth. FeSe films were grown on Nb-doped (0.05 wt%) SrTiO 3 (001) (Shinkosha). The substrates were sonicated in acetone and 2-propanol, followed by annealing in O 2 supplied tube furnace at 1000 °C for 3 hours. This step created √13 × √13 R33.7° surface reconstruction, which has been observed in both RHEED images and STM topographs (Supplementary Figure STM measurements. STM data was acquired using a Unisoku USM1300 STM at the base temperature of ~ 