Inspection of ageing, reinforced concrete structures is a world-wide challenge. Existing non-destructive evaluation techniques in civil and structural engineering have limited penetration depth and don't allow to precisely ascertain the configuration of reinforcement within large concrete objects. The big challenge for critical infrastructure (bridges, dams, dry docks, nuclear bioshields etc.) is understanding the internal condition of the concrete and steel, not just the location of the reinforcement. In most new constructions the location should be known and recorded in the asbuilt drawings, where these might not exist due to poor record keeping for older structures. Muon scattering tomography is a non-destructive and non-invasive technique which shows great promise for high-depth 3D concrete imaging. Previously, we have demonstrated that individual bars with a diameter of 33.7 ± 7.3 mm at 50 cm depth can be located using muon scattering tomography. Here we present an improved method that exploits the periodicity of bar structures. With this new method, reinforcement with bars down to 6 mm thickness can be detected and imaged. Old reinforced concrete structures may need to be inspected or replaced. Knowing the location of the steel is the first step towards determining the condition of the reinforcement. The key for assessing and substantiating the structure for life extensions is being able to state the design was built as planned (location and size of reinforcement) to a high quality (no voids from construction) and that the internal condition is satisfying (not degraded -reinforcement corrosion, cracking -beyond a critical value). Current non-destructive evaluation (NDE) scanning technology is based on the detection of reflected or transmitted electromagnetic, thermal or acoustic waves generated by a local source. The most used NDE techniques are magnetic imaging and ground penetrating radar (GPR) Muon tomography is being investigated for many different challenges, relying on both Monte Carlo simulation studies and experiments. A traditional application of muon tomography is the characterization of nuclear waste drums and related security applications, where contents of concrete or bitumen filled waste drums are studied. Key issues here include the potential presence of gas bubbles in the matrix of the waste drum Previously, we published a novel approach exploiting muon scattering tomography (MST) to detect the presence and location of reinforcement bars Here we present a new method that exploits the periodicity of bar structures, and is able to detect much smaller bar sizes within shorter time of data collection. For most reinforced concrete structures, bars with diameters between 8 mm and 40 mm are used Muon scattering tomography is a non-invasive method which shows great potential to generate high-depth 3D concrete images. MST uses cosmic rays as probes. Cosmic rays are high-energy charged particles which come to the Earth's atmosphere from outer space. In the atmosphere, cascades of new particles are produced. The main type of particles that reach sea level are muons. Muons are identical to electrons, but 200 times heavier. Muons can go through large amounts of material as they do not scatter very much due to their high mass. When traversing matter, Coulomb interactions take place between the muons and the nuclei of the material. As a result, muons undergo a series of scattering events and exit the material under an angle. The angular distribution of scattered muons can be described by a Gaussian distribution with a mean of zero and a standard deviation σ θ described by where p is muon's momentum; β is muon's speed divided by the speed of light c; T is the thickness of the material and X 0 its radiation length; A is the atomic weight of the medium in g•mol -1 . σ θ depends on the atomic number Z of the traversed material. Under the assumption that scattering occurs in a single location, and by reconstructing the incoming and outgoing trajectories of the muons, the scattering angle distribution can be reconstructed and thus information about the traversed material can be inferred. In this work, we use Monte Carlo simulations of a MST system. The simulated MST system consists of detectors and a reinforced concrete block. The muons were generated using the CRY library RPCs consist of a gas volume enclosed between two glass panels over which a high voltage is applied. Muons, which are electrically charged, ionize the gas when traversing the detector. Due to the high voltage, a small avalanche is created locally. The measurable signal induced by the avalanche can be used to reconstruct the location where the muon traversed the RPC. The simulated RPCs performance was modeled using the performance of RPCs that were built for a container scanner prototype A number of MST imaging approaches have been developed. All of them use different ways to retrieve information from the incoming and outgoing muon tracks In our method incoming tracks are reconstructed using the three detector planes above and outgoing tracks using the three detector planes below the block. Subsequently, the hits are refitted under the assumption that the incoming and outgoing track meet in a vertex, where the scattering is assumed to have taken place in a single point. In reality this is not strictly true as the muon actually performs a random walk through the concrete block. However, the vertex assumption turns out to be a very useful one in practice. Our method relies on the "clusteredness" of high angle scatters in higher-Z materials: in high-Z materials the scattering angles tend to be larger, and larger scattering angles result in a well defined vertex. In addition, a higher number of large-angle scatters occur in higher-Z materials. This makes the method very sensitive to the detection of materials with a higher-Z inside an object of a lower-Z, or the other way around. An example of incoming, outgoing tracks and a vertex is shown in figure For each pair of remaining vertices in that voxel, the weighted metric, m ij , is calculated: where V i is the position of the vertex of muon i; θ i is the corresponding scattering angle. The median of the weighted metric distribution is calculated for every voxel. The median of that distribution is then used as a discriminator In this section a new detection algorithm will be presented which removes more background. An example of its performance will be shown using a concrete with a single grid made of bars with diameter of 1.5 cm, and a spacing of 15 cm. A background scenario was defined as pure concrete block. This method is an improved version of the algorithm published in For the new method, all the above mentioned steps are done but the background subtraction was improved by generating two more concrete samples (the same size as bar-scenario ones) and performing the same analysis using the two concrete samples and thus generating final projection images for background only sample. Then, the background projections were subtracted, bin-by-bin, from the bar-concrete scenario projections. This method of background subtraction was chosen as the background is not linear and thus resulted in clear differences between bar and concrete. An example of the projection image before and after additional background elimination is shown in figure From a structural engineering perspective, the reinforcement is always fixed in an orthogonal grid pattern. Due to its regular shape, the reinforcement provides a periodic signal. This periodicity can be exploited to lower the detection limit of the minimum diameter of the bars. This is done by calculating the autocorrelation of the 2D signal distributions (like figure In this method, a variation of the standard auto-correlation R s is used. Since there is periodicity in both the x and y direction, the auto-correlation is only evaluated in one direction, i.e. the x direction, as: The calculation was limited to the area within the acceptance of the detector, and the presence of the reinforcement i.e., X∈<20;175>, Y∈<10;29> in figure Here the function is shifted by an additional ∆ k , where k indicates the number of pixels the image has been shifted. The shift occurs in a rolling mode, i.e. when a column is shifted further than x max , it is placed in column 0. This is illustrated in figure The peak locations of the Fourier transform depend on the spacing, while the peak amplitude is related to the bar diameter. Figure In the previous results, a spacing of 15 cm was used. Figure The smallest bars in normal use have a 6 mm diameter. In order to estimate whether the method is capable of finding such a small bar, the Fourier transform of grids with 8, 7 and 6 mm diameter bars were calculated using a 10 cm spacing and a one week worth of data taking. The results are shown in figure Inspection of ageing, reinforced concrete structures is a world-wide challenge and needs novel non-destructive evaluation techniques with large penetration depths to precisely ascertain the configuration of reinforcement and the internal condition of the structure and steelwork, which can possibly contain some impurities like voids. Muon scattering tomography offers a technique that suits those needs. A method was presented to locate reinforcement placed in a large-scale concrete object. The reinforcement was simulated as two layers of 2 m long bars, forming a grid, placed at a fixed distance from each other inside a large concrete block. The technique exploits the periodicity of the bars in a reinforcement grid by considering the Fourier-transformed signal. The presence of a grid leads to peaks in the normalized Fourier frequency spectrum. Peaks locations are determined by the grid spacing and their amplitude by the bar diameters. It is therefore possible to estimate both bar diameter and spacing with this method. Using only one week worth of data taking, bars with a diameter of 7 mm and larger, could easily be detected for a 10 cm spacing. The signal for 6 mm diameter bar exceeds the background and but becomes very clear after two weeks of data taking. Increasing the spacing to 20 cm results in a smaller amount of iron in the scanning area, thus longer data taking is required. It has been shown that this method enables the detection of the smallest bars in practical use within one or two weeks of data taking time and standard spacing. This is a very important result for non-destructive evaluation of civil structures.