The transition-metal kagome lattice materials host frustrated, correlated, and topological quantum states of matter [1][2][3][4][5][6][7][8][9] . Recently, a new family of vanadium-based kagome metals AV3Sb5 (A=K, Rb, and Cs) with topological band structures has been discovered 10,11 . These layered compounds are nonmagnetic and undergo charge density wave transitions before developing superconductivity at low temperatures [11][12][13][14][15][16][17][18][19] . Here we report the observation of unconventional superconductivity and pair density wave (PDW) in CsV3Sb5 using scanning tunneling microscope/spectroscopy (STM/STS) and Josephson STS. We find that CsV3Sb5 exhibits a V-shaped pairing gap Δ~0.5 meV and is a strongcoupling superconductor (2∆/kBTc~5) that coexists with 4a0 unidirectional and 2a0×2a0 charge order. Remarkably, we discover a 3Q PDW accompanied by bidirectional 4a0/3 spatial modulations of the superconducting gap, coherence peak and gap-depth in the tunneling conductance. We term this novel quantum state a roton-PDW associated with an underlying vortex-antivortex lattice that can account for the observed conductance modulations. Probing the electronic states in the vortex halo in an applied magnetic field, in strong-field that suppresses superconductivity, and in zero-field above Tc reveals that the PDW is a primary state responsible for an emergent pseudogap and intertwined electronic order. Our findings show striking analogies and distinctions to the phenomenology of high-Tc cuprate superconductors, and provide groundwork for understanding the microscopic origin of correlated electronic states and superconductivity in vanadium-based kagome metals. High-quality as-grown CsV3Sb5 crystals (Methods and Fig. The Cs and Sb2 layers form hexagon and honeycomb lattices, respectively (Fig. We first study the SC ground state using the STS described in Methods at an electron temperature 300 mK (see calibration of electron temperatures in Fig. Since the suppression of the LDOS near EF can arise from physics other than superconductivity We next probe the spatial distribution of the off-diagonal long-range ordered quantum states using the high-resolution STM/STS at an electron temperature 300 mK well below Tc. Since the Cs atoms are unstable on the Cs terminated surface and strongly affect the tip states, we perform the measurements on the Sb surface directly above the V kagome plane (Fig. A striking feature of the dI/dV maps, absence in the topography (Fig. A hexagonal pattern of the bidirectional PDW with period 4a0/3 (Fig. To investigate the properties of the PDW and its effects on superconductivity, we measure the dI/dV(r,V) spectra along a line cut parallel to the 4a0 stripes indicated in the topography (Fig. The observation of the PDW at Qpdw =Q3q-4a/3 in the superconductor is consistent with the existence of a shallow roton minimum at same wave vector Qroton = Q3q-4a/3 in the dynamical density-density response function of the superfluid (Extended Data Fig. where ∆ Q p α (r)= ∆ α cos(Q p α • r -φ α ) and Q p α , α = 1, 2, 3, are the momenta corresponding to Q3q-4a/3 in the 3Q directions and φ α is a relative phase. Below Tc, it couples to the uniform SC condensate Δ sc . Thus, the intertwined density wave order has the character of delocalized Cooper pair excitations and localized charge excitations. To stress this distinction, we refer to this novel quantum state as a roton-PDW, without implying direct observation of roton excitations, which may be visible in the conductance spectrum at higher energies through mode coupling. In this scenario, the low energy excitations involve both gapless quasiparticles and roton-PDW excitations. Since a roton is a bound vortex-antivortex pair We further investigate the nature of the PDW by applying a magnetic field along the c-axis. The magnetic field dependent dI/dV spectra on the Sb surface away from field-induced vortices show that the SC gap is gradually reduced with increasing field and vanishes at about 2 T (Fig. Finally, we warm up the sample to the normal state above Tc and acquired dI/dV maps (Fig. The dI/dV map and Fourier transform (Fig. Unconventional superconductivity can arise in model calculations from local and extended electron correlations on the kagome lattice Single crystal growth of CsV3Sb5 sample. Single crystals of CsV3Sb5 were grown from Cs liquid (purity 99.98%), V powder (purity 99.9%) and Sb shot (purity 99.999%) via a modified self-flux method 10 . The mixture was put into an alumina crucible and sealed in a quartz ampoule under Argon atmosphere. The mixture was heated to 1000 oC and soaked for 24 h, and subsequently cooled at 2 oC/h. Finally, the single crystal was separated from the flux and the residual flux on the surface was carefully removed by a Scotch tape. Except sealing and heat treatment procedures, all of other preparation procedures were carried out in an argon-filled glove box in order to avoid the introduction of any air and water. The obtained crystals have a typical hexagonal morphology with a size of over 2×2×0.3 cm 3 (Fig. Sample characterization. XRD pattern was collected using a Rigaku SmartLab SE X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.15418 nm) at room temperature. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) were performed using a HITACHI S5000 with an energy dispersive analysis system Bruker XFlash 6|60. Magnetic susceptibility were determined by a SQUID magnetometer (Quantum Design MPMS XL-1). The SC transition of each sample was monitored down to 2 K under an external magnetic field of 1 Oe. Both in-plane electrical resistivity and Hall resistivity data were collected on a Quantum Design Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS). Surface determination. The weak bonds between Cs and Sb2 layers offer a cleave plane and make it possible to have both Cs-terminated and Sb-terminated surfaces. At the interface of the two surfaces, we can clearly identify the atomic structures on both the top and bottom surfaces using high-resolution STM. We find that the lattice in the bottom layer shows a honeycomb configuration, which matches that of Sb2 layer, while the top surface shows a hexagonal lattice with a spacing of 1 nm, which is about √3 larger than the lattice constant of the pristine Cs surface (Extended Data Fig. Scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy. The samples used in the experiments are cleaved at room temperature (300 K) or low temperature (78 K) and immediately transferred to an STM chamber. Experiments were performed in an ultrahigh vacuum (1×10 -10 mbar) ultra-low temperature STM system equipped with 9-2-2 T magnetic field. The electronic temperature in the low-temperature STS is calibrated (Fig. If the sample surface is SC, a superconductor-insulatorsuperconductor (SIS) junction naturally forms under a SC STM tip for SIS tunneling. This is known as a Josephson STM. In this case, the SC tip and sample are coupled by the Josephson coupling E J as the tip approaches sufficiently close to the sample at temperatures below the SC transition temperatures of both the tip and sample. At temperatures k B T > E J , thermally excited Cooper pairs tunnel and give rise to a tunneling current directly proportional to the phase difference between the SC order parameters in the tip and the sample. This Josephson effect -a sharp zero-bias peak accompanied by negative differential conductance dips on both sides, is a phase-sensitive probe for the existence of superconductivity in the sample μeV is the thermal energy at electron temperature 300 mK. Thus, the zero-bias peak in Fig. Procedure to obtain large areas of exposed Sb surface. In our STM measurements, almost all the surface regions in more than ten as-cleaved CsV3Sb5 samples show large-sized Cs surface topography; the large-sized Sb surface topography is rarely observed. However, we find that the Cs atoms on the Cs surface is weakly coupled to the bottom Sb surface at low temperatures. Using STM tip manipulation, we can successfully 'push' the Cs atoms on the Cs surface away and expose the bottom Sb surface (Extended Data Fig. Drift correction and two-fold symmetrized Fourier transform. To eliminate the STM tip-drift effect from the topography and dI/dV map, we apply the well-known Lawler-Fujita algorithm DFT calculations. All calculations were performed within the Density Functional Theory as implemented in the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) The cutoff energy for the plane-wave basis set is 300 eV. The zero damping DFT-D3 van der Waals correction Discussions of PDW as a "mother state". The magnetic field experiments in Fig. The concept of a "mother state" PDW was proposed in theories of the cuprates Spatial modulations of the PDW pseudogap. We have obtained the Fourier transforms of dI/dV(r,-5mV) maps taken at different temperatures and observed that, as the temperature is reduced, the PDW peak intensity at Q3q-4a/3 normalized by the Bragg peak intensity at QBragg in the same direction increases substantially below the SC transition temperature Tc ~2.5 K following the onset of the coupling to the SC condensate. This suggests the possibility of identifying the pseudogap energy scale and detecting the pseudogap modulations in the SC state. To this end, we first acquire a spatially-averaged conductance spectrum over a region at 300mK below Tc. The spectrum exhibits several peaks in the energy range between 1 mV and 6 mV (Extended data Fig. The dI/dV map and Fourier transform (Fig. 