Motivated by recent experimental progress on iron-based ladder compounds, we study the doped two-orbital Hubbard model for the two-leg ladder BaFe2S3. The model is constructed by using ab initio hopping parameters and the ground state properties are investigated using the density matrix renormalization group method. We show that the (π, 0) magnetic ordering at half filling, with ferromagnetic rungs and antiferromagnetic legs, becomes incommensurate upon hole doping. Moreover, depending on the strength of the Hubbard U coupling, other magnetic patterns, such as (0, π), are also stabilized. We found that the binding energy for two holes becomes negative for intermediate Hubbard interaction strength, indicating hole pairing. Due to the crystal-field split among orbitals, the holes primarily reside in one orbital, with the other one remaining halffilled. This resembles orbital selective Mott states. The formation of tight hole pairs continues with increasing hole density, as long as the magnetic order remains antiferromagnetic in one direction. The study of pair-pair correlations indicates the dominance of the intra-orbital spin-singlet channel, as opposed to other pairing channels. Although in a range of hole doping pairing correlations decay slowly, our results can also be interpreted as corresponding to a charge-density-wave made of pairs, a precursor of eventual superconductivity after interladder couplings are included. Such scenario of intertwined orders has been extensively discussed before in the cuprates, and our results suggest a similar physics could exist in ladder iron-based superconductors. Finally, we also show that a robust Hund's coupling is needed for pairing to occur. The study of iron-based high critical temperature superconductors continues attracting considerable attention in the Condensed Matter community More interesting for our present study, pressureinduced superconductivity has been achieved in geometries different from planes, namely in the iron-based ladder material BaFe 2 S 3 Already exotic theoretical predictions for iron ladders have been confirmed experimentally. For example, using inelastic neutron diffraction applied to powder BaFe 2 Se 3 , an exotic block-AFM state (involving blocks of 2×2 iron atoms ferromagnetically aligned, coupled anti-ferromagnetically along the leg direction) was observed after theory predicted such a state Because the work in the related field of computational studies of superconducting Cu-oxides ladders was extremely useful in showing that pairing can emerge from repulsive interactions In the present publication, we study the magnetic and pairing properties of hole-doped two-orbital Hubbard model using the density matrix renormalization group method (DMRG) In particular, we explore the magnetic properties for various values of hole doping and varying interaction strengths over broad ranges. We have observed for the first time that the magnetic order could evolve from the canonical (π, 0) order to a more exotic (0, π) state, with AFM rungs and FM legs. We have also carefully analyzed the real-space charge density. The number of minima in this quantity is always half the number of holes, suggesting hole pairing, as along as the magnetic background remains antiferromagnetic of any kind. The pairs are arranged in what resembles a charge density wave made of pairs. Remarkably, in regimes where there is no AFM order, such as in fully ferromagnetic regions at large hole doping and Hubbard strength, pairing disappears. Moreover, we study pair-pair correlations and find regions where pairing is robust (in our previous study Due to the simultaneous presence of a charge density profile and robust pair-pair singlet correlations, both in a nontrivial magnetic background, we believe our results can be interpreted in a similar manner as recent efforts in the context of cuprates within the umbrella of intertwined order parameters The organization of the manuscript is as follows. Section II contains the two-orbital Hubbard model employed here for two-leg ladders as well as details of the numerical methods used. Section III starts presenting the DMRG results with focus on the various magnetic orders upon hole doping, as well as the presence of bound states for the case of two holes. Section IV deals with the pair correlations at various dopings and the real-space hole distributions, presenting the idea that intertwined orders could be of relevance for isolated ladders, potentially leading to superconductivity in an ensemble of weakly coupled ladders. Finally, in Section V we present our conclusions. The 2×2 hopping matrix along legs is indicated by t x and along rung by t y . We have also considered plaquette diagonal hopping matrices t x+y and t x-y . For details see text. In this section, we describe the multiorbital Hubbard model for the iron-based ladder compound BaFe 2 S 3 used in this work. The multiorbital Hubbard model for a twoleg ladder can be written as the sum of kinetic and interaction energy terms H = H k + H in where t α γ,γ is the hopping matrix along the directions α indicated in Fig. where γ is the orbital index for site i and γ for i + x . t y γ,γ is the 2×2 hopping matrix along the vertical rungdirection: t y γ,γ = -0.024 0.000 0.000 +0.216 The t x+y and t x-y are 2×2 hopping matrices along the plaquette diagonals of the ladder: The crystal fields ∆ γ at P = 12.36 GPa for each orbital are ∆ a = 0.423 eV and ∆ b = -0.314 eV. The kinetic energy bandwidth is W = 2.2533 eV. The electronic interaction portion of the Hamiltonian is: The first term is the standard on-site Hubbard repulsion between ↑ and ↓ electrons in the same orbital. The second term contain the on-site electronic repulsion between electrons at different orbitals and same site. As often employed in previous publications, the standard relation U = U -2J H is here assumed, due to the SU (2) symmetry of the Hamiltonian. Also the widely employed ratio J H /U = 0.25 is here also used because iron superconductors are known to have a relatively large Hund coupling. The third term is the ferromagnetic Hund's interaction between electrons occupying the active two orbitals γ = {d x 2 -y 2 , d xz }. The operator S i,γ is the total spin of orbital γ at site i. The last term is the pair-hopping between different orbitals at site i, where P iγ =c i↓γ c i↑γ . This pair-hopping term arises from Coulomb interaction matrix elements and has no influence on the more extended pairing of holes due to magnetic short-range order discussed in this publication. Moreover, to confirm this perspective, in many examples we turned off the on-site pair hopping term in the Hamiltonian and our results were barely modified. To solve this two-orbital Hubbard model for the ladder compound BaFe 2 S 3 we employed the DMRG method. Here we focused on a cluster of size L = 2 × 12 and with various values for the hole doping. The number of holes N h was obtained by removing N h electrons from the half-filled system with N = 48 electrons (i.e. 24 sites and 2 electrons per site due to the two orbitals). Due to recent improvement in our computational capabilities, we are able to keep up to m = 3800 states for our DMRG calculation. As a result we can perform the DMRG calculation quite accurately, with various hole doping concentrations employed for the L = 2 × 12 cluster. To characterize magnetic and superconducting properties, we have calculated various observables, such as the charge and spin correlations, spin structure factors, and the pair-pair correlations. For the DMRG calculations we employed open-boundary conditions and we used the DMRG++ software For iron-based high-T c compounds, it is widely believed that magnetic-fluctuations play a crucial role to induce superconductivity Figure The decrease in intensity of the peak at (π,0) is due to the scrambling of spin-ordering by the holes, and also by the reduction in the number of electrons. Eventually, for large enough hole doping, S(k x , 0) displays no prominent ordering, while S(k x , π) shows a commensurate peak at (π/2, π), as shown in Fig. 1 and J H /U = 0.25, the local spin moments are fully developed and approach their maximum value S = 1 at each site for the two-orbital model used here (corresponding to magnetic moment 2.0μ B ) To better visualize in real space the spin IC and scrambling of spin-ordering when increasing the number of holes N h , we have calculated the spin-spin correlations when the holes are projected into their most probable locations ia↓ acting as projectors on the ground state, namely finding the portion of the wave function where site i and orbital a are vacant (hole)]. After projecting the holes into their most probable locations, we calculate the local spin-spin correlations towards the strong coupling regime Figure The above described numerical results show that the magnetic order changes with increasing U/W . To un- derstand the connection between magnetic ordering and pairing of holes, in Fig. Figure In this subsection, we investigate the pairing tendencies after the addition of holes to the undoped state. The formation of hole-pairs is a precursor of a pair-densitywave or of superconductivity In order to find the hole-pairing region as a function of interaction parameter U/W , we calculated the binding energy ∆E. The binding energy of a pair of holes is defined as ∆E = E(N -2) + E(N ) -2E(N -1), where E(N ) is the ground state with N electrons To further verify the pairing of holes, we analyze the real-space charge density n α with two holes at U/W = 3.0. As shown in Fig. To understand the pairing tendencies for more than two holes, in Figs. For orbital a and with 4 holes Fig. Superconductivity involves pairing of holes, as in Cooper pairs, followed by the development of coherence among pairs in the system forming a condensate First let us analyze the pair-correlations for various values of hole dopings. We calculate the pair-pair cor- relations at a fixed value of the interaction strength U/W = 3.0, and for cluster size L = 2 × 12. For our model with two-leg ladder geometry and two orbitals (a and b) at each site, we could have a variety of pair operators to use in the pair-pair correlations. Early investigations suggest that properly selecting the pair operator enhances the signal for superconductivity. However, that task is complicated. For simplicity, here we have focused on intraorbital nearest-neighbor sites pairing-operators (certainly, the presence of local on-site Hubbard repulsion U and U renders the possibility of electron on-site pairing negligible, opposite to the negative U Hubbard model) As a consequence, in order to examine the nature of the dominating superconducting correlation, we analyzed the singlet and triplet pair correlation functions where i is the site index, while 1 and 2 are the leg index. The nearest-neighbor triplet pairing operator for orbital a along the vertical rung is The singlet pairing operator for orbital a along the ladder plaquette diagonal is Finally, the intraorbital spin triplet pairing operator along the ladder plaquette diagonal is Using these pairing operators, we have calculate the averaged superconducting pair-pair correlations for orbital a defined as where d = |i -j| is the distance along the leg of the ladder, and N d is the number of equal-distant pairs from site i. In other words, we consider all the distances within our clusters, properly normalized. In Fig. In a quasi-one-dimensional system, the slowest decaying correlation functions at long distance determine the dominant type of ordering. It is expected that once inter chain or ladder couplings are turned on, this slowest decaying channel will become dominant. In order to compare the pair-pair correlations with spin and charge correlations for orbital a, we have calculated the rungspin and rung-charge correlations Figure Interestingly, when we increase the hole doping to N h = 8 and 10 (the latter not shown), we find that the rung-singlet pair correlation P rung Remarkably, as shown in Fig. In Fig. We have also studied the effect of Hund's coupling J H /U on the bindings of holes. In Fig. Let us examine now the binding of holes using an alternative set of hopping parameters. The new set of hopping parameters at pressure P = 12.36 GPa was derived also using first-principles density functional theory band structure calculations [based on the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) code The hoppings t x+y and t x-y are 2×2 hopping matrices along the plaquette diagonals of the ladder: With the new set of hoppings the binding energy takes negative values at larger values of U/W , compared to the older hopping parameters. Both sets of hoppings lead to a similar magnitude of ∆E ≈ -0.04 eV in the binding region, in spite of the different U/W range for the binding. Clearly, pairing of holes is possible for both set of hopping parameters. The binding of holes is further confirmed by calculating the real-space density n a (i) for different number of holes N h = 4, 6, 8, where we find 2 minima for 4 holes, 3 minima for 6 holes, and 4 minima for 8 holes. The pairing of holes along the rung and negative values of binding energy, namely the qualitative similarities with the other set, suggest that the new hoppings will likely also develop a pair density wave or directly a superconductor adding couplings among ladders. In this publication, we have studied the doped twoorbital Hubbard model for two-leg ladders with hopping parameters corresponding to the compound BaFe 2 S 3 . Using DMRG calculations for cluster sizes up to L = 2 × 12, we have investigated magnetic and pairing tendencies for various doping strengths. We find different type of magnetic ordering when increasing the interaction strength U/W and hole concentrations. For moderate values of interaction strength, the system shows incommensurate magnetic ordering, involving short range AFM-correlation along the leg and FM-correlation along the rung direction, as in the compound at ambient pressure that in our case corresponds to the undoped limit. Remarkably, in the presence of holes and with increase in U/W , the AFM-order along the leg direction changes to FM-ordering, whereas FM-order along rungs changes to AFM-order. For even larger values of U/W , FM-order appears along both leg and rung directions. Interestingly, we find a robust evidence of pairing of holes. The binding energy becomes negative (pair formation) for wide ranges of interaction parameter U/W . The real-space density profile of orbital a shows clear indication of pairing of holes along the rungs of the ladder. Moreover, we have presented a comparison of rung-spin, rung-charge, and pair-pair correlations. At lower doping concentration, we find the rung-spin (magnetic) correlation dominates over other correlations. For moderate values of doping of holes we find an exotic pair-density wave state, where the rung-singlet pair correlation and rung-charge correlation coexist. Furthermore, we have shown that the Hund's coupling plays an important role in the pairing of holes. In addition, we have also shown that the qualitative as-pects of the pairing of holes are similar employing two sets of hopping matrices, suggesting that our study is generic and survives in a wide range in parameter space.