Harvesting waste heat with temperatures lower than 100 o C can improve system efficiency and reduce greenhouse gas emission, yet it has been a longstanding and challenging task. Electrochemical methods for harvesting low-grade heat have attracted research interest in recent years due to the relatively high effective temperature coefficient of the electrolytes (> 1 mV/K) compared with the thermopower of traditional thermoelectric devices. Comparing with other electrochemical devices such as temperature-variation based thermally regenerative electrochemical cycle and temperature-difference based thermogalvanic cells, the thermally regenerative flow battery (TRFB) has the advantages of providing a continuous power output, decoupling the heat source and heat sink and recuperating heat, and compatible with stacking for scaling up. However, TRFB suffers from the issue of stable operation due to the challenge of pH matching between catholyte and anolyte solutions with desirable temperature coefficients. In this work, we demonstrate a pH-neutral TRFB based on KI/KI3 and K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6 as the catholyte and anolyte, respectively, with a cell temperature coefficient of 1.9 mV/K and a power density of 9 μW/cm 2 . This work also presents a comprehensive model with coupled analysis of mass transfer and reaction kinetics in a porous electrode that can accurately capture the flow rate dependence of power density and energy conversion efficiency. We estimate that the efficiency of the pH-neutral TRFB can reach 11% of the Carnot efficiency at the maximum power output with a temperature difference of 37 K. Via analysis, we identify that the mass transfer overpotential inside the porous electrode and the resistance of the ion exchange membrane are the two major factors limiting the efficiency and power density, pointing to directions for future improvements. Low-grade heat sources (<100 o C) contain more than half of the global energy rejection, The electrode potential of a general redox reaction O + ne ⇋ R would depend on temperature, if the entropy change is nonzero. This temperature dependence is quantified by the temperature coefficient α, The redox species at each electrode are rebalanced via Soret diffusion (and hence the measured voltage also includes thermodiffusion contributions) through the electrolyte, enabling thermogalvanic cells to operate continuously similar to thermoelectric devices. Yet its efficiency remained very low (~ 0.8% relative to the Carnot efficiency), Continuously operation of TREC can be achieved via the thermally regenerative flow battery (TRFB) configuration In TRFB, one cell serves as a galvanic cell generating current while providing the electromotive force for the other electrolytic cell to regenerate the redox species. Therefore, TRFB does not need any auxiliary power supplies. Another advantage of TRFB is that heat recuperation can be easily achieved with heat exchangers to pre-heat or pre-cool the regenerated electrolytes. For example, Majumdar demonstrated a 15% efficiency relative to the Carnot efficiency can be achieved using TRFB based on V 3+ /V 2+ and Fe(CN)6 3-/Fe(CN)6 4-. We can understand the routes to high α Cell qualitatively using Born's solvation model. According to Born's solvation model, where s denotes the partial molar entropy of the oxidized species O and the reduced species R, and F is the Faraday constant. In many redox reactions like Fe 3+ +e ⇋ Fe 2+ , the change of the ionic radii is not large enough to affect the sign of α. For cation redox pairs, the reduced ion species usually has smaller valence value, z O 2 -z R 2 > 0, giving rise to a positive α. In contrast, anion redox pairs usually have a negative α according to Born's solvation model. Born's solvation model also indicates that higher valence ions with smaller radii tend to have relatively large temperature coefficients. However, another factor that needs to be simultaneously considered is the hydrolysis of these redox ions, which affects the stability of the electrolyte solution. For example, metallic cations like V 3+ /V 2+ and Fe 3+ /Fe 2+ are good candidates for relatively large positive temperature coefficients, For example, the TRFB based on Cu(NH3)4 2+ / Cu(NH3)2 + and Fe(CN)6 3-/Fe(CN)6 4-has a high temperature coefficient |α Cell | = 2.9 mV/K; 17 however, the different sign of charges between the reactive ion pairs makes it difficult to find the optimal ion exchange membrane to prevent the cross-over of redox active ions. All these kinetic processes described would result in an additional potential drop at the electrode/electrolyte interface, known as the overpotential. However, the analysis of TRFB in the literature either neglected the overpotential Here we tackle the challenges aforementioned and demonstrated a pH neutral TRFB using KI/KI3 as the catholyte and K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6 as the anolyte with all-anionic redox active ion pairs. The redox reaction of catholyte between the iodide ion (I -) and triiodide ion (I3 -) is a twoelectron process: while the redox reaction for the anolyte is written as: where E 0 denotes the standard electrode potential with respect to the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE). Such pairing of electrolytes only involve anions as the redox active species while sharing the same K + counterion, allowing convenient cation exchange without shifting the pH value and preventing the proton induced decomposition of K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6. This pH neutral TRFB has a temperature coefficient of 1.9 mV/K and a maximum power density of 9 μW/cm 2 at the high limit of flow rates. To analyze the energy conversion efficiency and factors affecting the performance of TRFB, we develop a comprehensive porous electrode model for TRFBs, which can capture the effect of flow-rate, mass transfer, surface kinetics, and electrode polarization on the power density and efficiency. We estimate that the maximum efficiency can reach ~ 11% relative to the Carnot limit at a flow rate of 1 μL/min, assuming 90% of heat recuperation. We also pinpoint the mass transfer inside the porous electrode, membrane resistance and heat recuperation effectiveness as the key factors for improving efficiency and power factors in the future. Figure where O denotes the oxidized species and R denotes the reduced species, with n electrons transferred per unit reaction, ν O and ν R the stochiometric number. The electrochemical potential of the electrolyte at thermal equilibrium is determined by the concentration of reactants through the Nernst equation: where R is the universal ideal gas constant, the c k = C k /C 0 (k = O, R) denotes the dimensionless concentration of species to the standard concentration C 0 (1 M), and ν R is the formal potential with γ the activity coefficients and E 0 the standard electrode potential. Apparently, the electrochemical potential of the electrode φ 1 would equilibrate with that of the electrolyte φ 2 when the discharging current is zero: φ 1 = φ 2 = E eq . However, when the discharging current is nonzero, the equilibrium condition is broken resulting in a kinetic potential drop across the interface, known as the overpotential (η = φ 1 -φ 2 ). In addition, the equilibrium potential becomes location dependent because the concentration profile inside the bulk is nonuniform at a finite discharging current. Such a nonuniform concentration profile further affects the surface kinetics and mass transfer, resulting in a nonuniform profile of overpotential. We start deriving the TRFB model by considering spatial profile of concentration, which can be obtained by solving the continuity equation: where R V is the rate of reaction that takes the positive sign for the cathodic reaction per unit volume. Eq. ( where Pe k = u s L/D ̃k is the Peclet number of species k and ġk is the normalized rate of generating the species k inside the porous electrode: The concentration profile can be solved analytically with the boundary condition c k (X = 0) = c k 0 and d dX c k (X = 1) = 0: In TREC flow batteries, the superficial velocity of electrolyte is on the order of 0.1~1 mm/s, yielding a large Peclet number 10 3 ~10 4 , therefore the mean concentration profile is approximately linear along the flow direction. At steady-state, the rate of consuming and generating reactants should also be balanced with the flux of reactants from the bulk solution to the electrode surface, therefore: where M O and M R are the mass transfer coefficient, and C O,R s is the mean concentration at the surface of the electrode.A e is the specific electrode area per unit volume, determined by the porosity ε and fiber diameter d f as A e = 4(1 -ε)/d f . where Sh = Md H /D is the Sherwood number of mass transfer, d H is the hydrodynamic diameter for the porous media, calculated as d H = 0.471 ε 1-ε d f , and ζ = d H /A e L 2 is a geometric factor of the porous electrode. The extended Butler-Volmer equation is the key to correlate the current density to the overpotential loss, surface concentration and the local current density (J): where α S is the symmetry factor of the excitation energy barrier, and is the exchange current density with k 0 (T) the rate constant calculated through the Arrhenius law: Eq. ( which is valid when the mass transfer coefficients approach infinity (Sh → ∞). The current density J is evaluated per unit electrode surface area, and can be related to the volumetric reaction rate through charge balance across the electrode/electrolyte interface: The charge balance condition in the electrolyte should also be considered along the normal direction to the membrane (y-axis). For each mole of cathodic reaction happening, the amount of negative charges transferred to the electrolyte is nFR V per unit volume, which needs to be balanced with ionic current: with the divergence of ionic current written as ∇ ⋅ J ion = -σ eff ∇ 2 φ 2 = σ eff ∇ 2 η , using the Ohm's law. For cells with flow-by geometry, the x -derivatives of the Laplacian ∇ 2 can be neglected since the length of the electrodes is orders of magnitude larger than the thickness, therefore the last approximating equality in Eq. ( RT j z j 2 D ̃jC j . Together with Eqs. ( where j 0 = c O 1-ν O α S c R ν R α S = J 0 /J 0 0 is the dimensionless exchange current, with J 0 0 = nFk 0 C 0 . Da k is the Damköhler number characterizing the relative ratio between the reaction rate to the mass diffusion rate, defined as Da k = k 0 A e L 2 /D ̃k . K is the dimensionless conductivity K = σ eff ⋅ (RT/F)/(J 0 0 A e H 2 ), which can be interpreted as the ratio of conduction current driven by the "thermal voltage" RT/F to the exchange current J 0 0 at standard concentration. The dimensionless ODE (Eq. ( Finally, we consider the boundary conditions for solving the overpotential. At y = H, the ionic current across the membrane should equal to the discharging current of the cell, and at y = 0 where the electrode is in contact with either the current collector or wall of flow channel, the ionic current should be zero. The boundary condition for solving the Eq. ( where i cell is the discharging current of TRFB and apparent A is the electrode area. For each location x along the flow direction, we solve the ODE (Eq. 19) using the boundary value problem solver bvp4c of Matlab to obtain the overpotential profile η(x, y). In this work, we assume the electrode is conductive enough and neglected the electric potential variation in the solid phase, hence the overpotential drop inside the electrode is then taken as the mean value across the entire electrode domain. After discussing the mass transfer and the overpotential inside the electrolyte, we now solve the total current that can be extracted from the cell. We first consider the discharging cell operating at T 1 , with the electrode potential of cathode (+) and anode (-) expressed as: For convenience, we denote the solution to the ODE of overpotential (Eq. 17) as η = f(R V ), then the overpotential at the two electrodes for the discharging cell are expressed as where the subscript 1 indicates the discharging cell operating at T 1 , V the volume of the porous electrode, n ± the electron transfer number for the redox reaction of the catholyte (+) and anolyte (-) correspondingly. The anode will adopt a negative sign when computing the volumetric reaction rate since we define cathodic reaction as the positive direction. At a finite discharging current, the voltage for the discharging cell (V 1 ) is therefore V 1 (i cell ) = V oc (T 0 ) + α Cell (T 1 -T 0 ) -(η 1 + -η 1 -) -i cell ⋅ R in (24) where V oc (T 0 ) = E + (T 0 ) -E -(T 0 ) is the open circuit voltage at reference temperature, and R in = R mem + R Ω is the internal resistance as a combination of the membrane resistance R mem and electrical Ohmic resistance R Ω of the electrode and current collector. Note here we did not lump the overpotential into the internal resistance, since the overpotential loss depends on discharging current and cannot be simply understood as a resistive component. From the extended Butler-Volmer equation, the sign of the overpotential is the same as the sign of current and R V , thereby η 1 -< 0, and the total overpotential for the cell is positive (η 1 + -η 1 -) > 0. The voltage of the charging cell operating at T 2 can be computed in the same manner by simply replacing i cell → -i cell , since all the chemical reactions are opposite to the discharging cell. The overpotential for the cathode and the anode can be written as: The voltage of the charging cell at finite current is therefore: Finally, the measured potential for the full TRFB is: where ) is the total overpotential drop. Similarly, (η 2 + -η 2 -) < 0 and hence the total overpotential drop is positive. In addition, the current is also determined by the load R load in the external circuit, hence the current can be determined by the following equation: Eq. ( where the subscript j in the denominator sums over catholyte and anolyte, ε HX the effectiveness of heat recuperation of, ρ and c p the density and specific heat of the electrolytes, and Q the flow rate. The pump work P pump = Δp ⋅ (Q + + Q -), where Δp is pressure drop along the flow direction inside the porous media is estimated using the Ergun equation: 35 where μ is the dynamic viscosity of the electrolytes. In our work, the flow rate across the cell is small and the pump work is negligible compared with the output power of the TRFB. The porous electrode model of TRFB presented here will be used to comprehensively analyze the factors and sources limiting the power density and efficiency in the following sections, including operating factors such as flow rates, heat recuperation effectiveness and temperature differences, as well as the electrolyte and electrode properties such as rate constants and ionic conductivities. In this section, we describe the experimental details of the TRFB testing system. As shown in Figure Figure However, this problem of insulating the tubes would not be as significant when flow rates are scaled up by stacking multiple flow cells. Therefore, we assumed 90% of the heat recuperation effectiveness when estimating the efficiency of the TRFB devices, which is also the typical effectiveness for heat exchangers for liquid-liquid heat transfer. A peristaltic pump was used to inject the electrolytes into the flow cells. The anolyte solution contained 0.375M K3Fe(CN)6 and 0.375M K4Fe(CN)6 and the catholyte solution contained 0.1 M KI3 an 1 M KI. The catholyte solution was prepared by dissolving 0.1 M iodine (I2) into 1.1 M of KI solution. Both the catholyte and anolyte chosed are stable near neutral pH and can be paired without the pH buffer solutions. In addition, the active ions of both solutions are anionic, therefore can be well separated using a cation exchange membrane. We used a potentiostat (BioLogic VSP-300) to characterize the cell temperature coefficient α Cell , open circuit voltage and the discharging performance. The current collectors of the anodes (Fe(CN)6 3-/ Fe(CN)6 3-) of the two cells were connected by a wire, and the current collector of the cathode (I3 -/ I -) of the hot cell was connected with the working electrode terminal of the potentiostat, and the other cathode of the cold cell served as the counter and reference electrode. Before heating, we maintained the system at room temperature for nearly 20 minutes for equilibration of temperature and the relaxation of the initial built in voltage. Then we increased the temperature in a stepwise manner and recorded the open circuit voltage as shown in Figure This section discusses the experimental results of flow rate dependent discharging performance of the TRFB cell, together with the theoretical analysis pointing to the factors limiting the efficiency and power density. In Figures Reynolds numbers and flow rates, thus decreasing the power density. However, the extra amount of heat needed to increase the temperature of the electrolyte also decreased at smaller flow rate, and the efficiency η E increased at a smaller flow rate (Figure By pushing the effective ionic conductivity of the porous electrode σ eff → ∞, the nonlinearity of V -J curve is eliminated. This loss due to the finite ionic conductivity inside the porous electrode is referred as the electrode polarization, as shown in Figure Electrical resistance of the porous electrode and the contact resistance between the current collector and the electrode should not be the major contribution to R in . We characterized the total electrical Ohmic resistance (R Ω ) by measuring the resistance of the cell assembly without the Nafion membrane, showing that electrical Ohmic resistance is ~3 Ω. Since Nafion membrane has relative low ionic conductivity of K + (3.3×10 -4 S/cm), In this case, the power density at high flow rates (340 μL/min) can increase by two-fold from 9 μW/cm 2 to 18 μW/cm 2 . However, the membrane resistance would have a smaller effect at low flow rates due to the limitation of the mass transfer. At the flow rate of 4 μL/min, the corresponding relative efficiency could be improved from 7.8% to 8.3%, while the power density increased by 14% at from 2.2 μW/cm 2 to 2.5 μW/cm Rate constant I3 -/I -(k 0,+ ) 6.7×10 -5 m/s Ref. [ 22 ] In summary, we demonstrate a prototype of an all-anionic thermally regenerative flow battery operated with pH-neutral K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6 and KI3/KI electrolytes for the anolyte and catholyte solutions, respectively. A reasonably high temperature coefficient of the cell α Cell = 1.9 mV/K and a power density of 9 μW/cm 2 at ΔT = 37 o C was measured. Such cell design is free of pH-matching issue affecting the stability of electrolytes and the issue of cross-over of active species since both active ions are anions. Combining the experiments with the porous electrode model, this work quantitatively captures the flow-rate dependent discharging behavior, even the nonlinear discharging characteristics at low flow rate or low Reynolds number. We showed that the efficiency relative to the Carnot limit can achieve 50% at the limit of perfect heat recuperation and 7.5% at 90% heat recuperation. For the first time, this work comprehensively analyzed the coupled effects of surface kinetics, mass transfer and electrode polarization on energy efficiency and power of TRFB for harvesting low-grade heat. At a fixed flow rate and internal resistance, mass transfer overpotential inside the porous electrode is the major factor limiting both the power density and efficiency. Electrode polarization becomes pronounced at low flow rates and large discharging currents, resulting in nonlinearity of the discharging voltage-current curves. Surface reaction kinetics characterized by the rate constant, however, does not significantly affect the performance of the system in the case when the mass transfer is the major limiting factor. We also expect that the power density and efficiency could be significantly improved in the future, with the development of proper cationic membranes with high conductivity or mobility of alkali metal cations to reduce the membrane resistance.