Force spectroscopy using magnetic tweezers (MT) is a powerful method to probe the physical characteristics of single polymers. Typically, molecules are functionalized for specific attachment to a glass surface at one end and a micronscale paramagnetic beads at the other. By applying an external magnetic field, multiple molecules can be stretched and twisted simultaneously without exposure to potentially damaging radiation. The majority of MT utilize moving permanent magnets to produce the forces on the beads (and the molecule under test). However, translating and rotating the permanent magnets may require expensive precision actuators, limits the rate at which force is changed, and may induce vibrations that disturb tether dynamics. Alternatively, the magnetic field can be produced through an electromagnet which allows much faster force modulation and eliminates motor-associated vibration. Here, we describe a low-cost quadrapolar electromagnetic tweezer design capable of manipulating DNA-tethered MyOne paramagnetic beads with forces of up to 20 pN. The solid-state nature of the generated B-field modulated along two axes is convenient for accessing the range of forces and torques relevant for studying the activity of DNA motor enzymes like polymerases and helicases. Our design specifically leverages technology available at an increasing number university maker spaces and student-run machine shops. Thus, our design is not only applicable to a wide range biophysical research questions, but also an accessible tool for undergraduate education. Magnetic tweezers (MT) comprise a class of force spectroscopy tools that are well-suited to the characterization and manipulation of individual biomolecules, polymers, and even live cells B. Permanent, rare-earth magnetic tweezers Typical magnetic tweezers have a pair of permanent, rareearth magnets near the sample. Field strength at the sample plane is modulated by mechanically moving the magnets closer to or further from the sample. Similarly, field orientation is controlled by rotating the magnets. Although this design generates the necessary magnetic forces, it has a few drawbacks. The motors, which physically move the permanent magnets, may induce vibrations. Such disturbances limit the resolution with which tether length and force can be measured. Additionally, the sample is usually illuminated by a beam passing through a narrow gap between the magnets. Thus, the magnets must be carefully aligned with the objective to avoid variations in illumination strength as the magnets rotate or translate. Lastly, the magnetic field may be axially asymmetric, causing a tethered bead to precess as the magnets are turned. To ameliorate these effects, most permanent magnetic tweezers are operated using only integral turns of the magnetic field to twist the tether. The limitations associated with permanent magnets may be overcome by replacing the mechanically-driven magnetic system with an electromagnetic one. Electromagnetic tweezers use a set of solenoids to generate the magnetic field. The field strength and orientation is modulated by changing the current through the solenoids. Such modulation can be more rapid than that achieved by moving permanent magnets to alter that magnetic field strength and orientation. Previous implementations of magnetic tweezers have been reported. A hexagonal pattern of solenoids with Mu-metal cores was described which produced forces on super-paramagnetic beads as high as 20 pN vertically and 5 pN horizontally and rotations at 10 Hz. The large potential well of this system even allowed horizontal positioning of 5 micron-diameter magnetic beads Here, we describe a simplified electromagnetic tweezer design using two pairs of solenoids in an orthogonal arrangement. We demonstrate that this implementation can manipulate MyOne parametric beads with forces of over 10 pN. This instrument leverages manufacturing equipment that is increasingly available in university makerspaces and student machine shops. Thus, our eMT not only provides a system to manipulate a wide range of biopolymers and associated enzymes, but also a robust teaching tool in biophysical education. The essential components for a set of electromagnetic tweezers are an electromagnet that produces a highly nonuniform magnetic field near a sample of interest, controlling electronics to modulate the strength of the field, optical components capable of resolving tethered paramagnetic beads, and software to track bead motion. A block diagram of the system is rendered in Figure As an instrument for undergraduate education in biophysics, we attempted to devise an eMT that met the following criteria. Firstly, the construction of the apparatus utilized components and/or manufacturing tools generally available within physics and engineering departments. For instance, the design of the electromagnet soft-iron cores were constrained by whether the geometries could be machined in their entirety using manual lathes and mills commonly found in student machine shops or maker spaces. Secondly, the electrical control hardware was based on popular open-source physical computing platforms that involve low barriers to entry, such as Arduino. In addition, we ensured that any custom electrical hardware for this project could be manufactured using a number of different techniques based on the resource availability. Lastly, as budgets for undergraduate projects are often limited, we sought to build an instrument with relatively low cost. Overall, we estimate that this instrument can be constructed for under 500 US dollars. An equally important constraint involves the forces needed to interrogate biomolecules and their interactions with pro-teins. The dynamics of a single paramagnetic bead (PMB) with mass m b and velocity u m in a liquid exposed to an magnetic field gradient is given by: where F D is the Stoke's drag and F M is the magnetic force. The drag force F D on a bead with radius r suspended in a mediums with dynamic viscosity η is: The magnetic force on the PMB depends on the negative gradient of the magnetic energy U: In equation 4, B is the magnetic flux density, m(B) is the magnetic moment of the PMB (which generally depends on the magnetic field). For small relatively weak fields, the force on the PMB scales linearly with gradient of the square of the magnetic flux density and the difference in magnetic susceptibility ∆χ = χ bχ a between the bead material and ambient medium (one can often neglect the ambient susceptibility because it tends to be several orders of magnitude smaller than that of the PMB): where V b is the bead's volume and μ 0 is the permeability of free space. For larger fields, conversely, the magnetic moment of the beads reaches a saturation value m sat and the expression for magnetic force reduces to: Micron-sized beads reach terminal velocity very rapidly in the viscous media and the acceleration term on the left-hand side of equation 1 goes to zero. Thus, the motion of a bead is governed by the balance between the magnetophoretic force and viscous drag: Implicit in equation 5 lies the fact that the force on the bead depends on the magnetic field gradient, not the magnitude. Thus, an effective eMT requires an electromagnet capable of producing a highly non-uniform magnetic field. For instance to obtain trapping forces on the order of tens of pico-Newtons on 1 μm Invitrogen MyOne requires magnetic flux density gradients in the range of 100s to 1000s Tm -1 . The torque τ is given by: FIG. Above, the m o is a component of magnetic moment not aligned with the external field. Unlike the force, τ depends on the magnitude of the magnetic flux density. We investigated the performance of various configurations of the four pole pieces using finite element analysis (FEA). Specifically, we simulated our system using Elmer, an opensource solver developed CSC -IT Center for Science (CSC). Meshing for the model was done using gmsh (another opensource tool) which allows for flexible mesh refinements, especially in regions where we expected high field gradients. Simulations where conducted in full 3D and results were visualized in Paraview (Figure Four solenoids arranged vertically on the four corners of a square frame, with coils on opposing corners wired in series (Fig. A. Electrical hardware Unlike conventional, permanent magnet electromagnetic tweezers, eMTs do not require moving parts or mechanical actuators to modulate the magnetic field in the vicinity of a supraparamagnetic bead. The field is adjusted by changing the magnitude and/or direction of current through the pole-piece solenoids. For the configuration simulated above, forces on the order of 10s of pico-Newtons require maximum solenoid currents between 3-6 A (Figure A schematic representation of the eMT driver circuit is shown in Figure We designed the printed circuit board (PCB) using Ki-CAD (files available in Supplementary Material), an opensource electronic design automation suite available for Linux, Mac, and Windows (https://www.kicad.org/). KiCAD supports multilayer-board (PCB) designs, meaning that electrical traces can be routed on both the top and bottom sides of the board as well as internally through the board. For the present work, we designed a four-layer board where the top and bottom layers served to route power and signals. The two internal layers consisted of large copper pours that funneled heat from the H-bridges to the circuit board's enclosure via aluminum standoffs. This printed circuit board was produced through a professional fabrication house offering student discounts (Advanced Circuits). While some investigators may not have access to professional PCB fabrication services, PCBs may be produced "inhouse" through a variety of techniques (albeit most of these procedures only allow 1 or 2-layer designs). We determined that our design could also be implemented using a PCB milling machine (2 layers) and chemical etching (1 layer). Since both of these procedures do away withexclude the internal thermal layers they may limit the amount of current. A custom-built reflow oven and through-hole soldering were used to complete the circuitry, which was enclosed in a clear plastic casing to prevent shorts and facilitate cabling. An intuitive GUI was built to command the microcontroller via USB and control the magnitude and polarity of the current applied to the solenoids. Actual control of the coil current is established through an intermediary driver board which receives a pulse-width modulation (PWM) signal from the microcontroller that it translates into the effective power delivered to a pair of coils. An additional digital flag (5V or 0V) specifies the direction of current flow through the pair. The electromagnet control may be operated independently or integrated into other software systems via Matlab's objectoriented structure. Additionally, a custom graphical user interface (GUI) for control was developed as a MATLAB script. Through this interface, the user sets the magnetic field strength as well as the xy orientation of the field. The MATLAB script in turn passes commands through a device driver to a serial port connected to custom electrical circuitry. The circuitry featured a commercially available microcontroller (Arduino Micro development board hosting an Atmega328 Atmel microprocessor) to regulate current controllers for the orthogonal pairs of the IV. EXPERIMENTAL Most magnetic tweezers are based on optical microscopy with real-time or offline analysis of diffraction patterns to track beads and determine tether lengths. Light and beads of similar scale, generate circular diffraction patterns of the beads in images (Fig. Based on the equipartition theorem, the force on the bead can be calculated as a function of the effective tether length To test the electromagnet, a microchamber with DNAtethered beads was prepared. To assemble a microchamber, a laser-cut, parafilm gasket with a central opening slightly longer than 22 mm was placed between cleaned 24x50 and 22x22 (mm) coverglasses, and the assembly was heated briefly to seal it. The approximately 15 μl chamber created by the cavity in the gasket between the glasses was rinsed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and incubated with 4 μg/mL anti-digoxigenin (Roche, Madison, WI) in PBS for 1 hour. After incubation the chamber was rinsed with PBS. The DNA construct was composed of a 3837 bp central fragment between a 695 bp biotin-and a 749 bp digoxigenin-labeled tail fragment at opposite ends. The central fragment was amplified using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with a plasmid (pDD1N2BbvCI) template and primers containing BsaI or BspQI restriction sites. Biotin-and digoxigenin-labeled fragments were produced in similar PCR reactions with the same plasmid in which 10 percent of the dATP nucleotide was replaced by biotin-or digoxigenin-labeled dUTP. The three fragments were digested with BsaI and/or BspQI (New England Biolabs) and the purified products were ligated with T7 ligase. In parallel, an aliquot of streptavidin-coated, 1 microndiameter magnetic beads (MyOne Streptavidin T1, Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY, USA) was washed 2X with 1 molar NaCl and mixed with the DNA construct in 100 mM NaCl binding buffer. Following a 5 minute incubation, the DNA-bead mixture was added to a pre-assembled flow-chamber and incubated for 10 minutes. Unbound DNA and beads were flushed out with 100 mM NaCl stretching buffer before brief storage at 4 • C or observation on the microscope. For each test, the electromagnet pole pieces were positioned at a specified height above the top coverslip and the power supply was set to 12 V. A field of view was selected that included both tethered beads exhibiting constrained Brownian motion and beads stuck to the glass. After selecting small regions of interest for individual particle tracking, a set of ROI images was recorded under high force, aligned, and averaged for each bead at a series of positions of the objective, which was mounted on a piezoelectric positioner. During the experiments with the objective position held constant, this calibration scan served as a look-up-table to determine z based on changes in the diffraction pattern. To characterize the force and torque regimes of the electromagnet, different tests were performed. A force extension experiment was used to determine the range of forces generated by the electromagnet. At at height of 1.5 mm with a constant orientation of the magnetic field, the magnitude was varied between 0 and 100% in steps of 10%. Beads were tracked for 10 seconds at each step. As expected for a worm-like chain, Fig. Under low tension, rotating a tethered bead twists the attached DNA and increases the torque in the DNA tether. Additional twist causes the molecule to curl and form a loop and finally a plectoneme, which reduces the overall extension of the DNA. For this experiment, the pole pieces were positioned approximately 2.5 mm above the top coverslip, and the current (force) of the electromagnet was held constant at 80%. The magnetic field was first rotated by -20 turns, which introduced (-) plectonemes and reduced the extension of the DNA tether. With particle tracking at a frame rate of 40 Hz, the turns of the field were increased in increments of 0.2 turns every 3 seconds up to +20. At each increment, the z positions of beads were determined in 120 successive images (blue points). The distance between a tethered and a stuck bead were calculated and plotted (Fig. Tension along the double helix modulates the twist-writhe of a DNA molecule and influences energetically favorable conformations. For investigating conformational changes, an instrument capable of abrupt force modulation with high temporal resolution is desirable. In an electromagnet, the magnetic field can be suddenly changed by altering the current with no mechanical motion required. With the pole pieces at a height of 0.35 mm the strength setting was raised from 0% to 80%, held at that value for 15 seconds, and lowered again to 0%. The effective tether length versus time plot is shown in Figure The remnant fields noted in Fig. fectly paramagnetic. Once aligned by an externally applied field, magnetic domains in the material may not randomize completely when the field strength is changed, leaving a remnant field. Such hysteresis might prevent the actual magnetic field from returning to previously set values especially after large changes. Therefore, a step-wise test was conducted starting at an initial value (0%) for a 15 second interval and then raising the current abruptly in steps of 20, 40, 60, 80, or 100%, followed after another 15 second interval by a return to the initial current. As shown in Fig. Comparison with the magnitudes of forces produced by more incremental changes as shown in Fig. An electromagnet that exerts up to 20 pN of force on superparamagnetic beads was realized on the basis of a conceptually simple design. It produces an ample range of physiologically relevant forces on one-micron-diameter, paramagnetic beads, and tenfold changes of the applied force can be achieved in ten ms or less without disturbing particle tracking. These features will facilitate single molecule investigations of polymers in biophysics.