Droplet evaporation has been intensively investigated in past decades owing to its emerging applications in diverse fields of science and technology. Yet the role transport mechanisms has been the subject of a heated debate, especially the presence of Marangoni flow in water droplets. This work aims to draw a clear picture of the switching transport mechanisms inside a drying pinned sessile water droplet in both the presence and absence of thermocapillarity by developing a comprehensive model that accounts for all pertinent physics in both phases as well as interfacial phenomena at the interface. The model reveals a hitherto unexplored mixed radial and buoyant flow by shedding light on the transition from buoyancy induced Rayleigh flow to the radial flow causing coffee ring effect. Predictions of the model excellently match previous experimental results across varying substrate temperatures only in the absence of Marangoni flow. When thermocapillarity is accounted for, strong surface flows shape the liquid velocity field during most of the droplet lifetime and the model starts to overestimate evaporation rates with increasing substrate temperature. Droplet evaporation plays a key role in various mechanisms encountered in nature, daily life and technological applications Previous studies were able to highlight certain energy transport mechanisms taking place inside the droplet as well as the gas phase surrounding it. Inside the droplet, convective energy transport contributes to conduction. Convective transport mechanisms stem from the buoyant and thermocapillary forces but also evaporating droplets Temperature gradient also exists in the normal direction due to evaporative cooling at the interface and higher temperature of the substrate if heated. A natural cause of this normal temperature gradient is convective flow instabilities associated with the density difference across the liquid. This instability mechanism creates convection cells as explained by Rayleigh Akdag et al. the film both observed by Bénard are triggered by the surface tension variation rather than density difference across the liquid. This instability mechanism is now named the Bénard-Marangoni convection and it replaces Rayleigh-Bénard convection in the case of thin films Outside the droplet, mass and energy are transported by the diffusion and convection. Early modeling attempts Resolving the interfacial phenomena at liquid-gas interface is a must, since they dictate the evaporation rate of droplets both directly and indirectly. For instance, estimation of evaporation rate is directly linked to the Stefan flow of air, which opposes the diffusion of air towards the interface, through which air cannot penetrate due to its insolubility in liquid However, other mechanisms, such as the conduction to the gas phase and radiative heat transfer to the surroundings, contribute to the interfacial energy transport especially in cases with large temperature differences. As highlighted, droplet evaporation comprises complex and concurrent transport mechanisms in both phases. Beyond this, a bigger challenge is the switching of the mechanisms upon the variation of the configuration and the geometry of the problem. Consequently, it is almost impossible to build an assumption-free model, even for a single sessile droplet, enabling the capture of all relevant physics regardless of the changes in problem conditions. Therefore, certain simplifying assumptions have to be made during the modeling. A pre-eminent assumption of droplet modeling is the axial symmetry, which renders the problem a 2-D configuration, thereby reducing the computational cost significantly. However, this assumption prevents the capture of 3-D instability patterns such as oscillating/travelling hydrothermal waves. But axially symmetric models can still be considered as a powerful analysis tool, since they were able to produce multicellular flow pattern of Bénard-Marangoni convection in many studies Akdag et al. certain experiment is aimed to be simulated, the inclusion of real physical boundaries such as the environmental chamber is desirable to eliminate the uncertainty associated with the outer boundary selection. On the other hand, in the case of drying droplets, the process is inherently transient. Geometry of the droplet changes with time in three modes in the following order: i) constant contact radius, decreasing contact angle, ii) constant contact angle, decreasing contact radius, iii) decreasing both contact angle and contact radius In the present study, we aim to build a comprehensive model for the investigation of evaporation of drying sessile droplets by extending our recent work Evaporation rate, evaporative cooling thereof, is estimated based on the concentration field of the vapor and flow field of the gas. A distinctive feature of the model is the utilization of temperature dependent thermophysical properties, which enables solving full compressible Navier-Stokes equations. Prior studies The computational model developed is utilized for the simulation of the evaporation of a water droplet resting on a flat, thermally highly conductive substrate subjected to different heating loads. The substrate surface is assumed hydrophilic, which favors evaporation The modular structure of the computational model enables the assessment of individual role of different transport mechanisms. Owing to this benefit, much disputed role of thermocapillarity instigated transport in droplets can be highlighted by simply switching on/off the Marangoni effect in the algorithm. To this effect, the role of Marangoni convection inside the Akdag et al. droplets experimented by Sobac and Brutin Recently presented iterative modeling approach Droplet preserves its spherical cap shape due to the sufficiently small initial size of the droplet such that capillary forces always dominate the gravitational ones. Problem domain is constructed in accordance with the experimental conditions in Since the surface velocity associated with the shrinking of the droplet is much smaller than the convection velocities in both liquid an gas domains, quasi-steady-state approximation is applied in the modeling. Except transient terms, full compressible Navier-Stokes equations and conservation of energy equation are solved in the entire domain. In addition, in the gas domain, species conservation equation is solved for vapor transport. The computational model utilizes temperature dependent properties throughout the domain, which eliminates the need for applying any approximation to model buoyant and thermocapillary effects. Governing equations are summarized as follows: Figure where ρ, c p , k, and D are density, specific heat, thermal conductivity, and binary diffusion coefficient of the fluid, respectively; u, p, and T are velocity, pressure, and temperature of the fluid, respectively; c v is the molar concentration of the vapor in the gas phase; τ is the deviatoric stress tensor defined as μ(∂u i /∂x j + ∂u j /∂x i ); and g is the gravitational acceleration. The values of the temperature dependent properties are taken from the material library of COMSOL Multi-physics software. where u g is the interfacial gas velocity; therefore, estimation of evaporation flux requires not only the solution of the concentration field of vapor in the gas domain, but also the interfacial gas velocity. To this effect, an interrelation between the vapor concentration and gas velocity should be provided at the interface. This link is actually created by the Stefan flow, which is basically the flow of air from the interface. Stefan flow originates in order to oppose the diffusion of air towards the interface, through which air cannot penetrate due to its insolubility in liquid. This phenomenon can be mathematically expressed by equating the diffusive air transport towards the interface and the convective air transport from the interface as follows: where c air is the molar concentration of air. Then Equation (2.3) can be used to estimate the normal component of the gas velocity, i.e. u n = (D/c air )(∂c air /∂n), which enables the calculation of evaporating mass flux (Equation (2.2)) for a given concentration field. Estimation of the tangential velocity, which is the same for both phases where γ is the surface tension, and t is the unit vector in tangential direction. Based on the assumption of the shear force associated the gas being much smaller than that of the liquid, the effect of gas shear on the interface force balance is neglected. This assumption is validated by an a posteriori analysis of the results. Energy exchange at the interface of an evaporating droplet involves several physical mechanisms. The major one, the evaporative heat transfer, is associated with the breaking of physical bonds between liquid molecules. Diffusive heat transfer, conduction, accompanies the evaporation. Yet its direction may be reversed wherever the gas temperature exceeds the liquid surface, which is possible in the case of heated substrates. Another mechanism, thermal radiation, is associated with the emission of electromagnetic waves. It always exists between the interface and surroundings. Then interfacial energy balance can be expressed as follows: where h f g , σ, and are latent heat of vaporization, Stefan-Boltzmann constant, and emissivity of the liquid surface, respectively. The subscripts s and surr designate the droplet surface and surroundings, respectively. Temperature of the surroundings is assumed equal to the temperature of the environmental chamber. Finally, boundary conditions for the liquid and gas domains are summarized in Eqs. (2.6a) to (2.6c) and Eqs. (2.7a) to (2.7d), respectively, as follows: where φ RH is the far field relative humidity and c v,sat is the saturation concentration of vapor at the corresponding temperature. Because of the assumption of thermal equilibrium, surface temperature calculated from the solution of liquid domain is assigned to the gas domain. Distribution of the interfacial gas velocity (u g ) is based on the normal component, which is calculated from the Stefan flow (see Eq. (2.3)), and tangential component, which is estimated from the solution of the velocity field in the liquid domain. Computational model presented in the current work solves the governing equations in both phases, separately. However, boundary conditions are inseparably interconnected at the droplet surface because of the concurrent interfacial phenomena affecting both phases such as the conjugate heat and mass transfer and Stefan flow. Therefore, coupling of the phases should be carefully handled. To this effect, the present model utilizes an iterative computational scheme, Akdag et al. in which liquid and gas domains are successively solved utilizing the Finite Element Method (FEM) based solver of COMSOL Multiphysics software. The iterative scheme is implemented using the interface, Livelink for MATLAB. In FEM formulation, variable discretization is implemented by linear shape functions in both domains and for all variables. Computational domain is meshed by the mesher of COMSOL itself. Mesh generation initiates at the interface, which is divided to arcs of equal length, and continues towards the liquid and gas domains with a certain growth rate. Resolution of the solution, thereby the size of the mesh, is controlled by the size (length) of the arcs at the interface. The same arc length is utilized at all contact angles. Arc length independence test, which can be viewed as a mesh-independence analysis, is performed by utilizing diminishing values for the arc length. In terms of droplet life, simulations yield almost identical results for all cases with the maximum relative error of 0.5%. Another parameter that may influence the global results is the reduction step of contact angle between the drying simulations. Contact angle reduction step is selected as 4 • for all simulations. The effect of this selection is assessed by comparing the results of simulations with the reduction step of 1 • for selected cases. In terms of droplet life, the change of the result is always less than 0.7%. The proposed model is applied to simulate the evaporating water droplet experiments in The physical configuration shown in Fig. Transport mechanisms inside the droplet directly affect the evaporation rates, or the droplet lifetime thereof. When Marangoni flow is present, it is responsible for the majority of mass and energy transport. In its absence, buoyant flow and/or radial flow can be effective for the convective transport. On the other hand, the presence of Marangoni flow in water droplets is contentious in the literature due to water being prone to contaminants. Therefore, the current study carries out the simulations considering both scenarios: i) without the presence of Marangoni flow (w/o MA) and ii) with the presence of Marangoni flow (w/ MA). Droplet life- Akdag et al. time predictions of the model together with the experimental results of A unique feature of the present study is the realistic modeling of the surrounding gas flow by incorporating the actual physical boundaries of the test chamber. Figure Around θ = 44 • , the droplet experiences a transition period, during which tiny vortex structures arise near the contact line or apex or sometimes none at all during iterations, similar to the oscillatory transition convection period reported in Akdag et al. coffee ring (stain) effect for the configuration demonstrated in Fig. Finally, radial flow damps the Rayleigh convection completely at the contact angle of 24 • . After that, radial flow is effective till the dryout. The resultant internal velocity fields are strongly coupled with the energy transport routes as shown in left sided images in Fig. On a heated substrate, a droplet is expected to have a decreasing interfacial temperature from the contact line towards the apex. This temperature variation can be monotonic or thermocapillarity Direct visualization of Marangoni flow in water is known to be challenging because of the sensitivity of water to surface contamination Identification of the Marangoni flow via gas phase may be difficult at higher contact angles because of the upward oriented gas flow. However, at smaller contact angles, gas vortices associated with the Bénard-Marangoni instability can be distinctively captured by a proper air visualization technique or any alternative methods such as the instant measurement of vapor concentration A remarkable feature of the current work is the inclusion of Stefan flow, which has been widely adopted in fuel droplet evaporation studies, but remained restricted in studies focused θ = 4 • ).