Realization of electromagnetic energy confinement beyond the diffraction limit is of paramount importance for novel applications like nano-imaging, information processing, and energy harvest. Current approaches based on surface plasmon polaritons and photonic crystals are either intrinsically lossy or with low coupling efficiency. Herein, we successfully address these challenges by constructing an array of nonradiative anapoles that originate from the destructive far-field interference of electric and toroidal dipole modes. The proposed metachain can achieve ultracompact (1/13 of incident wavelength) and high-efficiency electromagnetic energy transfer without the coupler. We experimentally investigate the proposed metachain at mid-infrared and give the first near-field experimental evidence of anapole-based energy transfer, in which the spatial profile of anapole mode is also unambiguously identified at nanoscale. We further demonstrate the metachain is intrinsically lossless and scalable at infrared wavelengths, realizing a 90 • bending loss down to 0.32 dB at the optical communication wavelength. The present scheme bridges the gap between the energy confinement and transfer of anapoles, and opens a new gate for more compactly integrated photonic and energy devices, which can operate in a broad spectral range. Overcoming the optical diffraction limit and realizing highefficiency electromagnetic (EM) energy transfer at the subwavelength scale has attracted much interest due to the broad applications in energy conversion As an analog of static anapoles introduced by Zeldovich 21 in the context of parity violation in nuclear physics, optical anapoles feature strong near-field energy confinement and suppressed radiative loss due to the destructive far-field interference of simultaneously excited toroidal dipole (TD) and electric dipole (ED) modes To fill this gap, in this work, we theoretically and experimentally demonstrate that anapole-based metachains consisting of subwavelength silicon disks with air gaps can compactly transfer EM energy in the long range with high efficiency. We find that an air gap structure can significantly enhance the energy confinement inside the isolated disks, which further improves the efficiency of the metachain. Meanwhile, we experimentally evaluated the energy transfer efficiency spectrum of the proposed metachain by the scattering-type scanning near-field microscopy (s-SNOM) at mid-infrared frequencies. The near-field signals manifest the anapole frequencies and depict the distributions of excited modes, from which we experimentally confirm the relationship between the anapole excitation and the high-efficiency energy transfer. Moreover, the proposed metachain is scalable Since the energy confinement depends on the anapole states excited in each dielectric particle, the effect of geometrical parameters on the excitation of anapoles should be first addressed. The structures of proposed metachains consisting of periodic silicon particles are illustrated in Fig. By introducing an air slot structure in a thin dielectric disk, one can excite anapole states Here we investigate the effect of the air slot on anapole excitations to realize high-efficiency metachains, when the substrate is vacuum in this part of simulations. Since the classic multipole expansion in spherical coordinates expands an arbitrary radiation pattern as an incoherent summation of orthogonal radiation patterns, it cannot independently investigate the effects of ED and TD modes. Therefore, we employ the Cartesian multipole decomposition method To determine the near-field confinement capability of different disks, we calculate EM energy density respectively by ε 0 ε r |E| 2 dV /V p and μ 0 μ r |H| 2 dV /V p , where ε 0 (μ 0 ) is the permittivity (permeability) in vacuum and ε r (μ r ) is the rela- tive permittivity (permeability) when V p is the volume of particle. Fig. Since the two-particle system cannot entirely represent the behavior of metachains, we further investigate the onedimensional chains of 21 periodically arranged particles, which is regarded sufficiently long for near-field energy transfer (see Fig. Besides the high-efficiency transmission in a straight 1D chain, a low bending loss along the energy propagation is also a quest for subwavelength EM energy transfer in practical applications. The deviation from the straight path induces energy diffraction, leading to radiation losses and crosstalk to adjacent structures To reveal the physical mechanism of energy transfer in periodic metachains and the effect of periodicity a, we calculate the transmission and photonic band structures of metachains with a= 2.15R using the FDTD method. As shown in Fig. To explain that fact, we introduce two energy ratios ER 1 and ER 2 , which stand for the localized energy ratio of the whole SD structure including the air gap, and that of the silicon part of SD, respectively. From insets (b1-b3), we find that the ER 1 decreases when the eigenstate is above the light line due to the energy leaking. Meanwhile, the ER 2 gets enhanced when eigenstate approaches the light line in inset (b2) due to the coupling effects. In insets (c1-c2), we can also find that the ER 1 decreases while the eigenstate is above the light line. However, the ER 2 surprisingly increases when the eigenstate is leaky, which can be explained by the radiative MQ mode excited in SD with G =0.9R. To be specific, eigenmodes below the light line localize more energy in the SD structure (including the air gap), leading to a higher radiative loss in the air gap due to the MQ mode in SD with G = 0.9R, which is also suggested by the y-direction scattering lobes in Fig. Therefore, we theoretically confirm that although the periodicity has a limited effect on the energy transfer by the coupling between light lines and anapole bands, the proposed metachains show a strong dependence on the excitations anapole states in individual particles. On the other hand, we notice that the proposed metachain can directly couple to the vertical incidence without couplers and transfer the energy with high-efficiency, when most of the existing subwavelength waveguides are either excited by in-plane incidence To verify the simulated results, we experimentally investigated the near-field signal of the proposed split disk metachain with a = 2.375R, G = 0.5R. The identical SDs in metachain are designed to have a radius R = 3.85 μm to ensure that the metachain can be excited by the CO 2 Laser (Access Laser L4G). We employed sapphire (Al 2 O 3 ) as the substrate, which has a relatively lower refractive index than silica at midinfrared frequencies. The fabrication method of the metachain is given in Supplementary Material, Fig. Meanwhile, the numerical simulations on near-field signal acquisition are performed for comparison, when the effect of probe tip is considered. The platinum tip is modeled as a truncated cone capped a hemisphere at the bottom In addition, the excited modes in the metachain at differ-ent wavelengths can also be obtained by the s-SNOM system. Recorded raw near-field signals can be assumed as the linear superposition of E x , E y , and E z . Besides, due to the symmetry characteristic of y polarized incident laser and the periodicity, E x , E y , and E z distributions can be accordingly obtained In conclusion, we have demonstrated ultracompact energy transfer in anapole-based metachains, which can confine EM energy to 1/13 of incident wavelength without couplers. The proposed metachain has high efficiency in both 1D and bending conditions for energy transfer, which is also insensitive to fabrication imperfections. We have performed the first nearfield experimental measurement of energy transfer efficiency resulted from the coupling of excited anapoles, which have also been unambiguously identified by s-SNOM in this work. This insightful technique to transfer EM energy may find wide applications in realizing high-performance integrated photonic devices like a photonic network-on-chip The solid cyan lines denote the metachains with a = 2.15R, while the solid red lines denote the metachains with a = 2.375R. 