Recently, intensive studies have revealed fascinating physics, such as charge density wave and superconducting states, in the newly synthesized kagome-lattice materials AV3Sb5 (A=K, Rb, Cs). Despite the rapid progress, fundamental aspects like the magnetic properties and electronic correlations in these materials have not been clearly understood yet. Here, based on the density functional theory plus the single-site dynamical mean-field theory calculations, we investigate the correlated electronic structure and the magnetic properties of the KV3Sb5 family materials in the normal state. We show that these materials are good metals with weak local correlations. The obtained Pauli-like paramagnetism and the absence of local moments are consistent with recent experiment. We reveal that the band crossings around the Fermi level form three groups of nodal lines protected by the spacetime inversion symmetry, each carrying a quantized π Berry phase. Our result suggests that the local correlation strength in these materials appears to be too weak to generate unconventional superconductivity, and non-local electronic correlation might be crucial in this kagome system. The kagome lattice has attracted great interest in condensed matter physics research. As a prototype lattice with strong geometric frustration, the kagome lattice has been extensively studied in quantum magnetism Recently, a novel family of kagome materials AV 3 Sb 5 (A = K, Rb, Cs) were synthesized Despite the rapid progress, there are still many puz-zles on these materials to be addressed. For instance, the recent susceptibility measurement and μSR measurement both indicate the absence of local magnetic moments In this work, we investigate the correlated electronic structure and magnetic properties of KV 3 Sb 5 , using the combination of density functional theory (DFT) and dynamical mean field theory (DMFT) calculations We perform fully charge self-consistent DFT+DMFT calculations using the edmftf package Lattice structure. The crystal structure for KV 3 Sb 5 is shown in Fig. We adopt the experimental lattice parameters in the calculation by the CTQMC approach. Here, β = 1/(k B T ), and τ is the imaginary time. The calculation is done for the normal state in the temperature range from 100 K to 900 K. The obtained χ versus T result is presented in Fig. To further shed light on this result, in Fig. Correlated electronic structure. The DFT band structure and density of states (DOS) are shown in Fig. As a comparison, the correlated electronic spectral function from our DFT+DMFT calculation is shown in Fig. In Fig. We focus on the crossings indicated by the arrows in Fig. The authors thank Gang Xu, Zhi-Guo Chen, M. R. Kim and D. L. Deng for valuable discussions. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 11604273), and the Singapore Ministry of Education AcRF Tier 2 (MOE2019-T2-1-001). The computational work was performed on resources of