Kitaev spin liquid (KSL) system has attracted tremendous attention in past years because of its fundamental significance in condensed matter physics and promising applications in fault-tolerant topological quantum computation. Material realization of such a system remains a major challenge in the field due to the unusual configuration of anisotropic spin interactions, though great effort has been made before. Here we reveal that rare-earth chalcohalides REChX (RE=rare earth, Ch=O, S, Se, Te, X=F, Cl, Br, I) can serve as a family of KSL candidates. Most family members have the typical SmSI-type structure with a high symmetry of R-3m and rare-earth magnetic ions form an undistorted honeycomb lattice. The strong spin-orbit coupling of 4f electrons intrinsically offers anisotropic spin interactions as required by Kitaev model. We have grown the crystals of YbOCl and synthesized the polycrystals of SmSI, ErOF, HoOF and DyOF, and made careful structural characterizations. We carry out magnetic and heat capacity measurements down to 1.8 K and find no obvious magnetic transition in all the samples but DyOF. The van der Waals interlayer coupling highlights the true two-dimensionality of the family which is vital for the exact realization of Abelian/non-Abelian anyons, and the graphene-like feature will be a prominent advantage for developing miniaturized devices. The family is expected to act as an inspiring material platform for the exploration of KSL physics. Quantum spin liquid (QSL) refers to a novel quantum spin disordered state with strong spin entanglement, which hosts many exotic excitations and phenomena On the other hand, the bond-dependent anisotropic exchange coupling is really unusual and challenges general experience in material realization of quantum spin systems. Strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC) is believed to be a feasible mechanism yielding such kind of anisotropic spin interactions The 5d iridates A 2 IrO 3 (A=Li, Na, Cu) are the first Kitaev materials predicted by Jackeli-Khaliulin mechanism Recently, the 4d ruthenium halide α-RuCl 3 was extensively studied as a KSL candidate Along the way of trichlorides, more KSL candidates have been explored very recently. YbCl 3 , having a monoclinic structure and an effective spin J ef f =1/2, was suggested to be proximate to the KSL physics As we can see, the current effort for searching for KSL candidates mainly focuses on 4d/5d systems, as inspired by the original Jackeli-Khaliulin scenario. Actually, most rare-earth 4f ions typically have strong SOC and an effective spin 1/2 guaranteed by Kramers doublet, and hence are natural building blocks for KSL candidates. Theoretical considerations in this aspect have been made In this paper, we point out that rare-earth chalcohalides REChX (RE=rare earth, Ch=O, S, Se, Te, X=F, Cl, Br, I) may be a promising family of KSL materials. The general crystal structure of the family belongs to the SmSI-type or its polytypes which basically show a high symmetry of R-3m. This allows rare-earth magnetic ions to form an undistorted honeycomb lattice. The honeycomb magnetic layers are well separated and there is only a weak van der Waals coupling between the layers. We have grown the crystals of YbOCl and synthesized the polycrystals of SmSI, ErOF, HoOF and DyOF. They are structurally determined by X-ray diffraction measurements and careful Rietveld refinements. We carry out magnetic susceptibility and heat capacity measurements down to 1.8 K, which show no obvious phase transitions in the samples. We further discuss anisotropic spin interactions in the compounds. The crystals of YbOCl have been grown by a standard flux method The SmSI polycrystals are synthesized with a standard solid state reaction method We have determined the crystal structure of YbOCl and SmSI (Fig. The structure of Er/Dy/HoOF is also determined using powder X-ray diffraction and Rietveld refinements (Fig. Before we go to magnetic properties of the compounds, it should be pointed out that the rare-earth ions with an odd number of 4f electrons generally exhibit an effective spin J ef f =1/2 related to Kramers doublets guaranteed by time reversal symmetry, while the ones with an even number of electrons having no Kramers doublets need to be discussed circumstantially. In our case, YbOCl, SmSI and ErOF with J ef f =1/2 should be more relevant to KSL, while Ho 3+ and Dy 3+ with larger moments may involve dipolar interactions and behave more classically. Fig. As mentioned above, the strong SOC in rare-earth magnetic ions intrinsically provides highly anisotropic spin interactions, which have been well investigated in the triangular lattice QSL candidates ′ model In summary, we report the discovery of a rare-earth based family of KSL candidates. Most family members share the SmSI-type structure with the symmetry of R-3m and rareearth magnetic ions form a regular honeycomb lattice. The combination of the honeycomb lattice and strongly spin-orbit coupled moments of 4f electrons, generates bond-dependent anisotropic exchange couplings required by Kitaev model. The family features a weak van der Waals interlayer coupling which is of particular advantage for exact anyonic excitations and potential applications. We have synthesized some representative family members including the crystals of YbOCl and the polycrystals of SmSI, ErOF, HoOF and DyOF. Their structures are carefully determined by Rietveld refinements. Thermodynamic measurements including magnetic susceptibility, magnetization and heat capacity, have been carried out down to 1.8 K, and no obvious phase transitions are found in the samples but DyOF. Thanks to the diversity of the family members, the family is expected to be a promising and manipulable platform for the study of KSL and may host more intriguing spin physics beyond Kitaev physics.