The design and experimental demonstration of a large-area, ultra-high-Q-factor and single-mode operation silicon ring resonator based on a strip silicon photonic waveguide are presented, which is suitable for photon gyroscopic application. The ring resonator consists of multimode straight strip waveguides (MMWGs), single-mode strip waveguide (SMWGs), and 90 ̊Bezier-bends those connected by liner tapers. The SMWGs is used in the coupling region to achieve the mode coupling for fundamental mode and not exciting the higher-order mode, The MMWGs with 1.6μm width is designed to decrease the propagation loss, tapers make smooth straight-to-bend transition that reduce the intermode crosstalk at the interface of straight and bent waveguides, and the 90 ̊Bezier-bend is designed to realize that the fundamental-mode maintained and propagated at the bent with ultralow loss and low intermode interference. Based on these designs, simulation results show that the resonance depth is 0.9979 while the resonator is in an undercoupled state with the coupling length L=2μm and coupling gap d=0.2μm. For the fabricated resonator, the ultrahigh Q factor of 1.54 × 10 6 is experimentally demonstrated, with the free spectrum range (FSR) of 0.036nm and the resonance depth is 0.9810. In recent years, silicon photonics technology has been rapidly developed due to its high performance and compatibility with complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) Compared with traditional MEMS and bulk fiber optic implementations, the ring resonator gyroscope based on silicon photonics has the advantages of compactness, light weight, high integration, easy mass production, and low loss. The basic working principle of the integrated optical gyroscope is optical Sagnac effect. The angular velocity of the gyroscope is determined by detecting the difference in the resonance frequency of the clockwise (CW) and counterclockwise (CCW) beams In order to decrease the propagation loss and improve the Q factor of ring resonator, several approaches have been proposed for high Q resonators in SOI, e.g. race-track resonators In this letter, we present a large-area, ultrahigh Q factor silicon microring resonator based on the straight MMWGs, liner tapers with 100μm length and 90 ̊single mode bent waveguides based on Bezier curve. The MMWGs is designed to decrease the propagation loss, the 90 ̊Bezier-bent waveguide is previously proposed to reduce loss in single mode waveguide bends since Bezier curve is an adiabatic curve with gradual radius change Tapers can make smooth straight-to-bend transition that reduce the inter-mode crosstalk at the interface of straight and bent waveguide. The SMWGs is used in the coupling region to reduce the size of microring resonator. The designed high-Q factor resonator is realized with a simple standard single-etching process provided by a multiproject wafer (MPW) foundry. As a result, for the fabricated ring resonator, the ultrahigh Q factor of 1.54 × 10 6 is experimentally demonstrated, with the FSR of 0.036nm. It is expected that the present silicon photonic resonators will play a very important role in many applications, in particular for realizing the angular velocity gyroscope with high sensitivity. The device is designed based on the SOI platform with the thickness of 220nm for the silicon layer and 2μm for the buried silica layer. The schematic of the proposed ultrahigh-Q silicon microring resonator is shown in Fig. Then part of the light field E3 enters the microring, after transmit a circle, the light wave E4 in the microring interferes with the light wave E1 which in the original bus waveguide. The resonance enhancement effect will be generated and the strong light field will be formed when the wavelength of light meets the basic resonance condition. After such multiple cycles, the light wave between the microring and the bus waveguide reached a balance. The light wave that satisfied the resonant condition confine to the microring, and the light wave what not satisfied the resonant condition will transmission out the bus waveguide Where the complex mode amplitudes E1, E2, E3, E4, are normalized such that their squared magnitude corresponds to the modal power. The coupling coefficient and transmission coefficient are marked as κ and t respectively in the coupling region between the direct waveguide and the microring. Equation ( Based on the mode coupling theory, when the light wave in the microring satisfies the basic resonance equation 2πRneff=mλ, where neff is the effective index of refraction, m is an integer, λ is the wavelength, 2πR is the length of cavity. The transfer function of an optical waveguide resonator can be expressed as Where a=√10 -αL/10 is the loss factor of light transmission in the resonant cavity for one cycle, and α is the transmission loss in an optical waveguide, L is the cavity length of the resonator, the phase θ of light wave in the microring depends on the integer m. Based on the assumption made on the expected waveguide loss, the condition for critical coupling has been imposed on the coupler transmission coefficient t: The expected Q factor is obtained by determining the corresponding value of the power transmission coefficient and the coupling coefficient of the directional coupler. In this design, we assume a critically-coupled resonator of the total length as Ltotal=17.3mm, built entirely of MMWGs with α=0.3dB/cm propagation loss, the result display t=a=0.9319. For the design of the DC, transmission coefficient t should be used to consider the coupling length of the DC, parameters of the directional coupler are designed as follow: the width of the bus waveguide and microring both are 450nm, the height of the silicon of 220nm. We considering the coupling gap from 190nm to 230nm between the waveguides and set coupling length L from 0μm to 5μm which the step size is 0.5μm. Simulated by A 90 ̊bent waveguide based on Bezier curve had been employed to reduce propagation loss in single-mode waveguide Where R is the radius of the curve and B is a unitless number that used to define how fast the radius of the curve changes. B is optimized to get the best crosstalk performance for the 90 ̊bend with the three-dimensional finite difference time domain (3D FDTD) simulations. One work on Bezier curve focused on obtaining two-mode wavguide bends by set the R=20μm, B=0.15 Through simulation, when R=5um, and B=0.2, we get the bend waveguide with singlemode operation, and the minimum loss of the fundamental mode is 0.0085dB after transmitted through the curved waveguide. For comparison, we designed a normally circular 90°bent waveguide with the same radius, but its propagation loss is higher than 0.036dB, the obtained results were shown in Taper is a basic device which is widely used in photonics field to transmit light between the waveguides with different widths which avoids modal conversion by narrowing the waveguide over a relatively long distance In short, the resonance depth is 0.9979 with the coupling length of 2μm and the coupling gap of 200nm by optimized in coupling region, that means the resonator in a undercoupled state, the 90°Bezier-band is designed to reduce the transmission loss of TE0 and suppress the excitation higher-order modes. Furthermore, a linear taper with 100μm length is used to reduce radiation losses and to ensure only single-mode transmission at the output side. And assuming a critically-coupled resonator of same length that L=17.3mm, built entirely of MMWGs with  =0.3 dB/cm propagation loss, the expected Q factor would be 2.4 × 10 6 through simulation The designed ultrahigh-Q resonators was fabricated by the multiproject wafer(MPW) foundry (Institute of Microelectronics, China) with the standard processes of deep UV lithography technologies and inductively coupled plasma dry etching. The Microscope and scanning electron microscopic (SEM) images of the fabricated silicon PIC and the devices are shown in Fig. In Ref. In conclusion, the superior performance of the integrated optical gyroscope largely depends on the large size of the optical cavity and high Q factor, the high Q factor depends on a large enclosed area, low propagation losses and the large length of the resonant cavity. We design and demonstrate a large-area, ultrahigh-Q factor and singlemode operation silicon ring resonator based on a strip silicon photonics waveguide, which consists of MMWGs, 90 ̊Bezier-bends and SMMGs coupler. After fabricated the microring resonator, we obtain ultrahigh-Q factor of 1.54×10 6 and the free spectrum range of 0.036nm. The experimental demonstration shows that the proposed resonator can be successfully employed in high sensitivity ring resonator gyroscopes. And it is well suited for applications requiring high spectral selectivity, such as sensing, microwave photonics filters, lasers, and more.