REBa2Cu3O7-’üż (RE123, RE: rare earth) is one of the high-temperature superconductors with a transition temperature (Tc) exceeding 90 K. Because of its high Tc and large critical current density (Jc) under magnetic fields, RE123 superconductors have been expected to play a key role in superconductivity application. To accelerate application researches on RE123-based devices, further improvements of Jc characteristics have been desired. In this study, we investigated the effects of high-entropy alloying at the RE site on the superconducting properties, through the measurements of local (intra-grain) Jc (Jc local ) by a remanent magnetization method. We found that Jc local shows a trend to be improved when four or five RE elements are solved at the RE site, which results in high configurational entropy of mixing (’üäSmix). Because high-entropy alloying can improve Jc local of RE123 superconductors by modification of the RE site composition and ’üäSmix, and the technique would be applicable together with other techniques, such as introduction of nanoscale disorders, our entropy-engineering strategy introduced here would be useful for development of RE123 superconducting materials available under high magnetic fields. Since the discovery of high-transition temperature (high-Tc) Cu-oxide superconductor HEA is an alloy containing five or more elements with a concentration range between 5 to 35 at% and hence has a high configurational entropy of mixing (╬öSmix), which is defined as ╬öSmix = -R ╬Żi ci ln ci, where ci and R are compositional ratio and the gas constant, respectively Polycrystalline samples of REBa2Cu3O7-’üż (RE: Y, La, Nd, Sm, Eu, Dy, Ho, Yb, Lu) were prepared by solid-state reaction in air, as described in Ref. 26. Powders of Y2O3 (99.9%), La(OH)3 (99.99%), Nd2O3 (99.9%), Sm2O3 (99.9%), Eu2O3 (99.9%), Dy2O3 (99.9%), Ho2O3 (99.9%), Yb2O3 (99.9%), Lu2O3 (99.9%), BaCO3 (98%), and CuO (99.9%) were used for the synthesis. To obtain the best superconducting properties of each sample, two-step or three-step sintering was performed. The raw chemicals with a nominal compositional ratio of RE : Ba : Cu = 1 : 2 : 3 were well mixed and pelletized with a diameter of 1 cm. The first sintering condition was 930┬░C for 20 h, followed by furnace cooling. For the second sintering process, the sample was ground, mixed, pelletized in the same manner as the first one, and heated at 930┬░C for 8 h and 350┬░C for 18 h, followed by furnace cooling. The third sintering was performed for samples which showed lower Tc and shielding volume fraction after the second sintering. The condition of the third sintering was 930┬░C for 8 h, 350┬░C for 18 h, and 175┬░C for 12 h, followed by furnace cooling. Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were collected on MiniFlex-600 (RIGAKU), equipped with a D/tex-Ultra high-resolution detector, with a Cu-K╬▒ radiation by a conventional ’ü▒-2’ü▒ method. Rietveld refinement was performed using RIETAN-FP The obtained compositions are listed in Table The superconducting properties were investigated using a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometer on MPMS-3 (Quantum Design). The temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility (4’ü░’üŻ) was measured after both zero-field cooling (ZFC) and field cooling (FC) with an applied field of ~10 Oe. The temperature dependences of susceptibility for all the samples are shown in Fig. , where A and B are lengths determined by sample shape, and ’üäM is obtained from the width of the M-H curve. Typical results on Jc global are plotted as a function of field in Fig. RE123 powder with grain sizes close to 20 ’üŁm was prepared using micro sieves and used for remanent magnetization measurements. The grain size was estimated using ImageJ 32 . Figure The results motivated us to study Jc local of RE123 samples with different ’üäSmix to clarify the effect of high configurational entropy of mixing to Jc characteristics. Then, seven samples having different ’üäSmix and almost comparable OP were selected for this study (highlighted with a square in Fig. Through EDX analyses, we confirmed that the actual composition of the examined samples is comparable to the nominal value, as summarized in Table To perform remanent magnetization (mR) measurements, powders with similar grain sizes are prepared and observed by SEM. As shown in Fig. Figure Having compared the OP parameter for RE-1, RE-4, and RE-5, we found that OP for those samples is almost the same. Therefore, the oxygen amount would be comparable in those samples. Therefore, the improvement of Jc local by the increase in ’üäSmix observed between RE-1, RE-4, and RE-5 would be originating from local structural modification by the disordered RE site and chemical bonds near the RE site. In BiS2-based RE(O,F)BiS2 superconductors, local structure modification in the conducting BiS2 layers by the increase in ’üäSmix was observed Here, we reported the improvement of Jc local in REBa2Cu3O7-’üż by the increase in ’üäSmix at the RE site. Polycrystalline RE123 samples with different ’üäSmix were synthesized by solid-state reaction. Through characterization of structural (lattice constants and OP), compositional, and superconducting properties (Tc and shielding fraction), seven samples labeled RE-1-RE-7 were chosen, and remanent magnetization measurements were performed on those samples. At higher temperatures (T = 20.0 K), clear difference in Jc local was not observed. At lower temperatures (T = 2.0 and 4.2 K), higher Jc local was observed for RE-4 and RE-5 with a higher ’üäSmix as compared to that for RE-1, RE-2, and RE-3 with zero or low entropy of mixing at the RE site. Although the results of the current work showed the merit of high-entropy alloying at lower temperatures only, there should be optimal conditions on constituent RE element, mixing ratio, and ’üäSmix, which will achieve higher Jc local at higher temperatures as well. If the trial was achieved, the HEA concept can be applied to all RE123 practical materials to additionally improve their critical current properties. 