We argue that the topological charge density wave phase in the quasi-2D Kagome superconductor AV 3 Sb 5 is a chiral flux phase. Considering the symmetry of the Kagome lattice, we show that the chiral flux phase has the lowest energy among those states which exhibit 2 × 2 charge orders observed experimentally. This state breaks the time-reversal symmetry and displays anomalous Hall effect. The explicit pattern of the density of this state in real space is calculated. These results are supported by recent experiments and suggest that these materials are a new platform to investigate the interplay between topology, superconductivity and electron-electron correlations. Owing to its special geometry, materials with a Kagome lattice structure have become very attractive systems to investigate many-body correlation physics. For example, the geometry frustration in Kagome magnetism is one of the promising routes towards the quantum spin liquid Recently, the newly discovered quasi-2 dimensional (2D) superconductors AV 3 Sb 5 (A=K,Rb,Cs) may become a very unique system to study the Kagome physics These experimental results suggest that AV 3 Sb 5 are intriguing Kagome materials. However, these experimental findings still lack theoretical understanding. In this work, we will focus on the CDW order observed in the normal state. We show that a chiral flux phase (CFP), which provides a 2 × 2 topological CDW order, is a natural candidate to explain observed experimental results. The phase is the lowest energy state that satisfies the symmetry constraints of the Kagome lattice. The CFP phase breaks the time reversal symmetry T and gives rise to the quantum anomalous Hall response. As illustrated in Fig. , which is widely believed to be the reason for CDW in AV 3 Sb 5 . Hence, this 2×2 order is also called the 3Q quadruple order. The STM quasiparticle interference (QPI) results also show the 3Q scattering between M points in addition to the Γ point intra-FS scattering The nearest neighbor tight-binding model for Kagome lattice in the basis of c k = (c k,A , c k,B , c k,C ) can be written as where and . μ is the chemical potential and the hopping t is chosen to be 1 as the energy unit. The band structure for Kagome model is shown in Fig. As described above, the 2 × 2 CDW in AV 3 Sb 5 is widely believed to stem from the multiple Q scatterings between the Kagome VH points, which breaks the translation group down to T (2a 1 , 2a 2 ). Actually, these multiple Q FS instability at 3/4 or 1/4 zone filling for hexagonal lattices stems from the seminar discussion in triangular lattice where the spin vector is defined as (s x , s y , s z ) in the three directions. The four spin vectors of this quadrupled SDW order form a tetrahedron AFM at the triangular lattice. Because of the non-zero spin chirality S 1 • (S 2 × S 3 ), this quadruple order breaks the time-reversal symmetry and causes a quantum anomalous Hall effect For AV 3 Sb 5 , the neutron scattering and the muon spin spectroscopy find little evidence for local magnetic moments or long-range magnetic orders Obviously, the first choice is the charge density for each sublattice where the R is the coordinate for the unit cell formed by the sublattices A, B, C. We name this charge order as the vector charge density wave (vCDW). The order parameter for this vector can be written as where the λ is the coupling strength. Then, the charge order Hamiltonian can be written as The charge density for this vCDW order is illustrated in Fig. Besides the charge density n(R), the hopping bonds inside each unit cell can also form a vector More specifically, there are two choices for the hopping bond order parameters, real or imaginary. If the order parameter is real, a charge bond order (CBO) is formed, as illustrated in Fig. Then, the charge order Hamiltonian can be written as The band structure for CBO at λ = 0.3 is shown in Fig. On the other hand, if the order parameter is imaginary, a chiral flux phase is formed, which can be written as As the current must conserve at each lattice site without charge accumulation, we can determine the chiral flux phase, as shown in Fig. Besides the ground state energy comparison, the most unconventional behavior for CDW state in AV 3 Sb 5 is the chiral anisotropy found by STM measurements under magnetic field where the f (x) is the Fermi distribution function and v nm x/y = nk|v x/y |mk is the matrix element of the velocity operator. The Chern number for each occupied CFP band is listed in Fig. The charge density distribution for the CFP state at each site is plotted in Fig. From the symmetry breaking point of view, the normal state of Kagome lattice contains the symmetry D 6h × T in addition to the translation group T (a 1 , a 2 ). The D 6h is generated by the C 6 rotation along the z axis, C ′ 2 along y axis and inversion symmetry I. As summarized in Fig. The CFP resembles the loop-current order and the d-density wave state for the pseudogap phases in cuprates superconductors proposed by C. Varma and S. Chakravarty et al. respectively In summary, we discuss the possible 2 × 2 charge order states in AV 3 Sb 5 , including vCDW, CBO and CFP. We find the CFP state is the lowest energy state, which naturally gives rise to the time-reversal symmetry breaking and anomalous Hall effect. Our findings will provide a new understanding for the topological CDW state of the Kagome material AV 3 Sb 5 . ). This translation group is labeled as T (a 1 , a 2 ). And the point group for the Kagome lattice is D 6h , as summarized in Fig.1c. The 2 × 2 CDW order quadruply enlarges the unit cell, as indicated by the blue dash lattice in Fig.1a. Each unit cell inside the quadruple order is also labeled as 1, 2, 3, 4. The density functional