We have realized different honeycomb lattices for microwave photons in the 4 to 8 GHz band using superconducting spiral resonators. Each lattice comprises a few hundred sites. Two designs have been studied, one leading to two bands touching at the Dirac points and one where a gap opens at the Dirac points. Using a scanning laser technique to image the eigenmodes of this new type of photonic lattices, we are able to reconstruct their band structure. The measured bands are in excellent agreement with ab initio models that combine numerical simulations of the electromagnetic properties of the spiral resonator and analytical calculations. Superconducting photonic lattices for microwave photons hold the promise to simulate the behaviour of strongly interacting bosons in tailored 1D and 2D lattices Independently of controlling the interactions in the lattice, it seems also interesting to develop techniques allowing to probe lattices in the linear regime and to understand their properties In this manuscript, we use a laser scanning imaging technique in order to map the spatial distribution of the resonant modes across the lattice. This technique is similar to the laser scanning microscopy developed to observe the current density in superconductor films The manuscript is organized as follows. In the first part, we present the properties of the spiral resonator that is used as the site of the different lattices. In the second part, we present the measurement of the band structure of the three lattice designs. And the last part details the two models that we have developed to predict the band and mode structures of the lattices. The three different lattices studied in this manuscript are honeycomb lattices where each site consists of a superconducting spiral resonator as shown in figure where κ e (κ m ) is the electric (magnetic) coupling constant. These coupling constants are proportional to the overlap of the electric (magnetic) fields of the two resonators. We define where E i (H i ) is the electric (magnetic) field spatial dependence of the mode associated with the i = 1, 2 resonator. We assume these functions to be real. We explain in Appendix A how we compute these integrals from the charge and current distribution in the spiral that is obtained from the numerical simulation of a single resonator. In particular, one has to take into account charge and current images due to the dielectric interface at the surface of the sample and to the metallic ground plane below the sample. by κ e = D 12 /D 11 and κ m = G 12 /G 11 . Figure We compare the CMT predictions to a full numerical simulation of the two coupled resonators. From the simulation, we obtain the 2 × 2 admittance matrix Y (ω), which corresponds to the admittance matrix for two ports located at the ends of the two spirals (see figure ). The two resonances ω + and ω -are then obtained as the zeros of det Y (ω). The CMT predictions coincide with the ones of the full numerical simulation at large distances (d > 20 μm) but fails at short distances as shown in figure We have built honeycomb lattices consisting of a few hundred spiral resonators that fit on a 20 × 10 mm 2 sample, which is then mounted on the 1 K stage of a dry dilution fridge. We have characterized three designs of honeycomb lattice labeled G,SI and SII, as shown in figure 3. The G design corresponds to the situation where all sites are identical, as in graphene, and are occupied by the spiral shown in figure We probe the transmission through the lattice using four microwave ports that are connected to four coplanar waveguides. Each waveguide is coupled to a single site located on the edge of the lattice (see figure In order to further characterize the lattice, we use a laser scanning technique to map the spatial variation of the modes identified in the transmission spectra. This imaging technique allows us to obtain a partial information on the dispersion relation of the lattice modes. The measurement consists in monitoring the transmission of one (or many) mode while scanning a laser spot across the lattice. The experimental setup is shown in figure Figure an effective mass for the photons in the lattice which is on the order of () for the lower (upper) band. At larger k, the dispersion relation clearly deviates from a quadratic behaviour. For the G sample, we expect a linear dispersion around the Dirac points but we are not able to image a sufficiently large number of modes in this region to clearly reproduce this behaviour. This is due to the finite size of the sample and also to the radial averaging over the direction of the wavevector. For the SI sample, we observe that bands curve again in the opposite direction close to the Dirac points. In comparison to the DOS, the measured dispersion shown in is less affected by the fact that we are not able to probe all the modes. It allows us to precisely compare our data with two ab initio models. Following the analysis of the coupling of two spiral resonators, we extend the CMT and the admittance matrix model to the case of an infinite lattice. The two models have no free parameters and differ in the following way: the CMT model solely relies on the simulation of the charge and current distribution of a single spiral at resonance, while the admittance matrix model simulates the admittance matrix of a cluster of a few coupled sites. As explained in I, the CMT model gives a clear physical picture of the coupling in the lattice in terms of overlap integrals between the different sites but fails when the coupling is too strong. As a consequence, the band structure of the S lattice is well predicted by the CMT but observe a discrepancy for the G lattice, which is more pronounced for the lower band. The Y matrix calculation gives a more exact description of the lattice at any coupling but requires a more intensive numerical computation. We follow the derivation of where E i (r) (H i (r)) is the electric (magnetic) field of the mode associated to the resonator at site i. The two fields verify where ω i is the resonance frequency of the mode of the resonator at site i. In addition to the overlap integrals defined in (3), we consider the integral where the surface S corresponds to all the metallic boundaries in the circuit, which consists of the resonators and the walls of the box enclosing the sample. This integral can be rewritten in terms of the overlap integrals D ij and G ij assuming that where S i is the surface of the resonator at site i. The integral over S i is null because E i (r) is normal to the surface of the resonator. Using that the current density in the resonator at site j is given by J j (r) = n × H j (r), where n is the normal to the sample surface, we obtain Using this approximation and considering the volume integral of ∇ • (E i × H j ), one obtains In matrix form, the last equation writes where Ω is the diagonal matrix with elements Ω ii = ω i . In the same way, the volume integrals of ∇ • (H i ×E) and ∇ • (E i × H) lead to the following two equations Using the approximation In the case of two resonators only, we recover the result given in We now look for periodic solutions over the lattice as and define the Fourier transform of the D and G overlap matrices We suppose that the lattice contains N cells and we look for solutions with periodic boundary conditions such that where k can take N values in the first Brillouin zone. Equations ( where Ω is now the diagonal matrix with the resonance frequencies of the A and B sites. The resulting eigenvalue FIG. problem We obtain the band structure of our lattices by including all couplings up to the third neighbour coupling (see figure e f 1 (k) + κ (3) where the electric coupling constants are given by κ (1) e The magnetic couplings κ m are given by the same expressions in terms of magnetic field overlaps and the link Expression ( which comes from the diagonalisation of the tight-binding Hamiltonian The coupling t i corresponds to the i-th nearest neighbour coupling. The dispersion relation ( As mentioned in the introduction, a strong motivation to build lattices of superconducting resonators is to include non-linear elements in the lattice. For example, in the case considered here, one could design spirals with an empty area in the center where a transmon might be inserted and coupled to the spiral. In this context, it can be interesting to obtain an effective tight-binding Hamiltonian that describes the linear behaviour of the lattice. Using the CMT approach, we obtained the two equations of motion ȧ = Ωb ( And the total energy in the system is given by In order to identify a and b with the two quadratures of the resonator modes, we normalize the basis fields to that the a's and b's commute. This comes from the fact that the basis used to project the Maxwell equations is not orthonormal, which modifies the commutation relations. This problem is well known in the calculation of electronic band structure using the LCAO method. In order to find an orthonormal basis, we adapt the Löwdin procedure used for electrons with D = Ω 1/2 DΩ 1/2 and G = Ω -1/2 GΩ -1/2 . This step is not necessary if Ω is proportional to the identity. The equations of motion become ȧ = b and G ḃ = -Da. We now apply the Löwdin transformation a → G-1/2 a and b → G-1/2 b in order to restore canonical commutation relations. The Hamiltonian becomes The equations of motion are modified to ȧ = b and ḃ = -G-1/2 D G-1/2 a, which now correspond to the Hamilton equations obtained with H assuming canonical commutation relations. We finally apply the reverse canonical transformation a → Ω -1/2 a and b → Ω 1/2 b to explicitly restore the Ω dependence. The final Hamiltonian is We can now introduce the bosonic operators c = (a + ib)/ √ 2 and rewrite H as with 2J = Ω -1/2 G-1/2 D G-1/2 Ω -1/2 -Ω. A rotating wave approximation can then be performed to transform the last term to c T (J/2)c † + hc. In order to model more accurately the G lattice, we extend the admittance matrix method introduced in section I to an infinite lattice of resonators and we also take into account the possibility to have N ≥ 1 microwave ports per resonator. We introduce the voltage amplitude V (r ) that is a complex vector with 2N components corresponding to the voltage at the 2N ports describing the voltage in the lattice cell at position r . At a given frequency ω, the Kirchhoff's circuit laws describing the lattice can be written r Y r (ω)V (r + r) = 0 (32) where the sum over r is over the points of the Bravais lattice. The matrix Y 0 (ω) is the admittance matrix between the ports belonging to the same cell, while Y r (ω) is the admittance matrix between the ports corresponding to two cells separated by r, it has the property Y -r (ω) = Y T r (ω). We look for a periodic solution V (r) = V (k)e ikr and obtain The Y r (ω) matrix is obtained from the numerical simulation of a finite size lattice. The CMT calculations indicate that one should simulate a lattice with enough sites such that the central site is surrounded by all neighbouring sites up to the 3rd nearest neighbour. We therefore choose the geometry shown in figure with 16 sites. In order for the sum over r to converge rapidly when the distance between sites increases, the number of ports N and their location on the spiral must be well chosen. We observe from the simulations that N = 1 is not sufficient, while results obtained for N > 2 and various port locations give the same results. The results of the final simulations shown in are obtained with N = 3 ports located as shown in . Compared to the CMT model, the admittance matrix is numerically more demanding because it requires the simulation of a much larger (here 16) number of sites. The dispersion obtained for the S lattice confirms the prediction of the CMT model, which were already in good agreement with our experimental data. For the G lattice, we observe a deviation compared to the CMT model leading to a much better agreement with the measured dispersion. We can thus conclude that our lattice are well under control and that ab initio electromagnetic simulation accurately describe their properties.