We experimentally and theoretically challenge the concept of coherent perfect absorption (CPA) as a narrow frequency resonant mechanism associated with scattering processes that respect scaleinvariance. Using a microwave platform, consisting of a lossy nonlinear resonator coupled to two interrogating antennas, we show that a coherent incident excitation can trigger a self-induced perfect absorption once its intensity exceeds a critical value. Importantly, a (near) perfect absorption persists for a broad band frequency range around the nonlinear CPA condition. Its origin is traced to a quartic behavior that the absorbance spectrum acquires in the proximity of a CPA associated with a new kind of exceptional point degeneracy related to the zeros of the nonlinear scattering operator. Introduction -Perfect absorption of the energy carried by a classical wave is an interdisciplinary research theme spanning areas as diverse as acoustics and mechanical waves Coherent perfect absorption (CPA) is a multichannel waveform shaping protocol which leads to a complete extinction of a monochromatic radiation when it enters a weakly lossy cavity At the same time, most of the CPA studies and its implementations have been performed under the assump-tion of scale invariance, i.e., the underlying wave systems were linear. The absence of implementation of CPA protocols in wave systems that lack scale-invariance comes as a surprise, specifically since non-linear mechanisms are abundant in nature and they offer additional degrees of freedom for light manipulation. Only recently, some researchers In this paper we introduce an electromagnetic platform, consisting of microwave resonators, where a NL-CPA with broad-band characteristics can be investigated theoretically and implemented experimentally. The absence of scale invariance and the dependence of the scattering process from the absolute magnitude of the incident wave amplitudes result to a self-induced CPA with a variety of photonic applications in areas like signal processing, non-linear interferometry and sensing. In the case of perfect coupling of the resonators with the interrogating antennas, the system supports a new type of NL-CPA modes which demonstrate a square-root frequency degeneracy in the neighborhood of a critical magnitude of the incident wave amplitudes-remnant of an exceptional point degeneracy occurring in linear non-hermitian systems. These steady-state non-linear solutions of the wave operator, with incoming boundary conditions, are responsible for a broad-band (near-) perfect absorption, which challenges the intuitive understanding of linear CPA as resonant (narrow-band) absorbing protocols. Experimental Setup -The experimental setup [see Fig. Theoretical Model -The transport characteristics of a system of coupled resonators is modeled using a timeindependent coupled mode theory (CMT) where ω is the frequency of the incident monochromatic wave, ψ n is the scattering magnetic field amplitude represented in the TE-modes of the individual resonator (Wannier basis) localized at the n-th resonator H n,n+1 = H * n+1,n describes the coupling between the nth and n + 1-th resonators and H n,n = n is the resonant frequency of the n-th resonator. For the specific case of Fig. where The most general solution of Eq. ( where I 1,2 are given by the scattering boundary conditions and represent the amplitudes of a left/right incident waves. Substituting the above expressions in Eq. ( An additional relation between R 1,2 and I 1,2 is derived by substituting Eq. ( which allows us to express Eq. ( A CPA protocol inhibits all outgoing waves, i.e., R 1 = 0 = R 2 . Imposing these constrains in Eq. ( This relation indicates that the field ψ 0 (and therefore the nonlinear losses Ω(|ψ 0 | 2 )) is controlled by the couplings and the incident amplitudes I 1,2 of the incoming waves while it remains unaffected by ω. A re-arrangement of the above relation into an expression for the relative amplitudes leads us to the conclusion that a potential CPA occurs only if the condition where the relative phase is φ = (φ 1 + φ 2 ). When we substitute these expressions in Eq. ( Absorbance -To confirm the efficiency of the NL-CPA protocol, we first analyze the total absorbance A(ω; I 1 , I 2 ): where ω ∈ R are the real frequencies of an incident monochromatic wave with left/right amplitudes I 1 and I 2 , respectively. For one-side incident waveforms (e.g. I 2 = 0) the absorbance gets the expected form A = 1 -|r| 2 -|t| 2 where |r| 2 , |t| 2 are the reflectance and transmittance respectively. In the multichannel case, the evaluation of A(ω; I 1 , I 2 ) requires the knowledge of R 1 , R 2 which, for a given set ω; I 1 , I 2 , can be calculated via Eqs In order to minimize the available parameter space, we strived to achieve symmetric coupling amplitude configurations, i.e., |κ 1 | = |κ 2 | = κ 0 . The latter has been guaranteed via weak power measurements (linear scattering regime), when the reflected signals at each antenna individually was measured to be the same. We have further simplified our interrogation scheme by setting P IQ1 = 1 dB and φ IQ1 = 0 while varying the amplitude and phase P IQ2 , φ IQ2 (via the second IQ-modulator) of the injected signal through the second antenna together with the total absolute power P VNA controlled by the VNA. Finally, we have scanned the residual parameter space and measured for each of the varying parameters the transmissions S 21 and S 31 from which we extracted the total reflected power and absorbance A. From the previous discussion, we expect that when P IQ1 /P IQ2 = |κ 1 /κ 2 | = 1 the system might support a NLCPA at some critical incident power P VNA . Of course, a necessary condition is that the extracted NL-CPA frequency ω NLCPA is real. To this end, we proceed with the analysis of the absorbance measurements for two settings associated with a weak and moderate coupling constants κ 0 . In the former case, we find a set of parameters P VNA = 0 dBm, P IQ1 = 5.0 dB, P IQ2 = 5.7 dB, and φ IQ2 = 92 • for which A ≥ 99.99% at ω NC = 6.782 GHz. The slight difference between left and right incident wave powers is attributed to the fact that |κ 1 /κ 2 | ≈ 1. The same extreme absorption is found for moderate coupling constants, for which A ≈ 95%. The corresponding NLCPA parameters are ω NC = 6.747 GHz, P VNA = 9.8 dBm, P IQ1 = 5.0 dB, φ IQ1 = 0 • , P IQ2 = 5.0 dB, φ IQ2 = 83.5 • . In both cases a shift of the maximal absorbance as a function of the incident power is observed showing that the non-linearity induces also a slight frequency shift. In Fig. Next, we turn to the theoretical analysis of A(ω; I 1 , I 2 ). In our modeling, κ 1 = κ 0 and κ 2 = -iκ 0 with κ 0 = 0.23 GHz for the weak and κ 0 = 0.04 GHz for the moderate couplings, see Fig. Absorption broadening due to EP degeneracies of NL-CPAs -To understand the origin of the broad-band high absorptivity we analyze the parametric evolution of the NLCPA frequencies versus the incident power I. By imposing the CPA conditions R 1 = R 2 = 0 and combining Eqs (4,5) we arrive to the transcendental equation for where 2 and ω(k) = 2ν cos(k). We reiterate that physically acceptable NLCPA's correspond to the case where the ω NLCPA roots of eq. ( The situation is more challenging when we consider perfect coupling, i.e., κ 0 /ν = 1. In this case, Eq. ( To understand better the appearance of a broad-band high absorbance, we simplify further our critical coupling set-up by designing the non-linear diode characteristics in order to enforce the two complex-zero trajectories to fall onto the real plane. This is shown in Fig. We can quantify the broad-band absorption, by analyzing an effective "linear" model which describes the steady-state transport characteristics of our non-linear setting Fig. where In the last equality we assumed EP conditions, i.e., κ 1 = κ 2 = ν. Interestingly, the condition Eq. ( indicating a quartic broadening of the absorption spectrum in the neighborhood of ω EP Conclusions -We demonstrated the viability of a selfinduced coherent perfect absorber by utilizing a simple microwave setup consisting of a dielectric resonator inductively coupled to a non-linear diode. In the weak coupling regime, we have observed sharp (resonant-like) absorption up to 99.99% at the frequency of the NLCPA. As the coupling with the interrogating antennas is approaching the critical coupling regime, the frequency range where extreme absorption (> 95%) occurred, increases dramatically leading to a broad-band (near-)perfect absorption in the neighborhood of the NLCPA. A CMT model describes the experimental findings nicely and shows that this broadening is attributed to the formation of a new type of self-induced exceptional point degeneracies associated with the NLCPA frequencies. It will be interesting to investigate more complex scenarios where the EP of the NLCPA frequencies is of higher order resulting (probably) to an even broader (near-)perfect absorption. Our results pave the way to new applications of CPA in microwave/RF and optical regimes. We have adjusted and measured the couplings κ 1,2 between the two antennas and the nonlinear resonator by performing small incident power measurements P VNA = -30 dBm of the complex transmission coefficients S 21 and S 34 from each antenna. Under these conditions the scattering process is linear. For these measurements, the Tjunction has been removed (see Fig. To guarantee similar couplings for antennas 1 and 2 we have given extra care in identifying similar behaviors for S 21 and S 34 . The couplings are changed by deforming the horizontal part of each antenna, e.g., by curling more (or less) the antenas around the resonator, and by changing the position of the resonator bringing it closer (further away) to the antennas. Figure We calibrated the measured transmission by measuring the scattering matrix elements S (cal) for the system shown in Fig. The transmission used to evaluate the absorbance has then been normalized by T cal . This choice of normalization underestimates the experimental absorbance, thus guaranteeing a conservative estimation of our measurements. The identification of a NLCPA in a multi parameter space is a daunting task. In the main text we have restricted our investigations to a reduced parameter space incorporating the frequency and the total injected power. Here we present a number of "one-dimensional slices" of absorbance versus various "directions" of the multi-dimensional parameter space: frequency ω axis; the total injected power P VNA ; the additional power reduction P IQ2 and the phase φ IQ2 of the injected wave via antenna 2. We also remind that the power reduction for antenna 1 is set to P IQ1 = 5 dB while the phase is set to be φ IQ1 = 0 • . In Fig. 