Engineered micro-and nanomechanical resonators with ultra-low dissipation constitute the ideal systems for applications ranging from high-precision sensing such as magnetic resonance force microscopy, to quantum transduction between disparate quantum systems Topology optimization is a computational morphogenesis procedure widely applied in engineering to determine the best possible structural design and material distributions within a prescribed design domain to maximize a set of performance targets The basic strategy of topology optimization is to define a design domain in which material can be distributed. Material is being added to or removed from this domain, and founded on a physical model for the system, a gradient-based computational method is used to optimize the figure-of-merit. Through iterations, material is gradually redistributed towards the optimal design for which the figure of merit is either maximized or minimized, depending on the problem to be solved. We use topology optimization to optimally design a nanomechanical resonator towards maximizing its Q•f (Qf) product Aiming at maximizing the Qf product of the fundamental mode of a nanomechanical resonator suitable for opto-mechanical experiments, we consider the preconstrained structure illustrated in Fig. Two damping mechanisms associated with intrinsic losses and phonon tunneling losses have been included in the model (Fig. )UHTXHQF\>N+]@ $PSOLWXGH>G%@ removing buckling-prone features and smoothing sharp features to prevent high tensile stresses at the boundaries. We note, interestingly, that the optimised design of D1 is similar to the membrane design suggested and experimentally tested in Ref. The post-processed designs were patterned on highstress (σ 0 ≤ 1.2 GPa) silicon nitride with a thickness of 12-50 nm grown by low pressure chemical vapor deposition on a silicon wafer. We release the resonators by backetching the silicon substrate in a window of 1.4×1.4 mm 2 (see methods). The fabricated structures are shown in Fig. We performed ring-down measurements of the fundamental mode of 967 devices that include all the topologically optimized resonators, D1-D5, as well as the conventional non-optimized trampoline resonator To understand the limitations of their performance, we fit our best attained result to a theory for the intrinsic and phonon tunneling losses. As the intrinsic loss Overview of the measured frequencies and quality factors across all designs and thicknesses together with selected microscope images. Solid lines correspond to theory fitted to the measured frequencies and best attained quality factors. Dotted and dashed lines are associated with the phonon tunneling and intrinsic loss contributions, respectively. For some designs, the theory curves for the phonon tunnelling loss is not visible on the plots. b. Quality factor plotted against frequency for the five best samples for each design. The shaded area marks the parameter regime in which the resonator may undergo quantum coherent oscillations at room temperature. The inset is the nominal trampoline design fabricated in this work and used as a reference ∆W is mainly dominated by the clamping losses near the boundaries, we directly estimate these losses from the expression where h, E, ν are the thickness, Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio of the resonator material where S, m , n s and Q s are the substrate's area, mass per unit area, modal density and intrinsic quality factor (see methods). These two loss contributions (intrinisic and phonon tunnelling losses) are then adjusted to match the best experimental data using the loss factors β and Q s as fitting parameters. We find β = (2.93 ± 0.19) × 10 11 m -1 and Q s = (1.27 ± 0.31) × 10 5 , and the resulting theory curves for all designs are shown in Fig. We highlight the source of intrinsic losses by plotting the bending loss distribution of design D1 in Fig. illustrate the stress distribution from which we observe a large stress component on the circular frame perpendicular to the tether. The wavelength predicted by the stress and frequency is around 2 mm which is larger than the dimensions of the resonator. Therefore, it cannot exist on the circular frame resulting in mode confinement and dilution of losses. Finally, we compared the amount of boundary bending losses (localized along the outer boundary) to the estimated amount of distributed bending losses (far away from the boundary) as shown in Fig. The topology optimization method, that we have here employed to maximize the Qf product of the fundamental mode of a membrane, is applicable to many other similar morphogenesis problems in engineering of highperformance micro-and nanomechanical resonators. It can for example be applied to finding the optimal structure for maximizing the dissipation dilution effect -and thus the Qf product -in phononic crystal resonators We employed a density-based topology optimization approach Prestressed membrane resonators are simulated using finite element methods with the 4-node MITC (Mixed Interpolation of Tensorial Components) quadrilateral shell element Here F 0 is the equivalent force vector resulting from a prestress σ 0 , K 0 represents the linear stiffness matrix and K σ (U 0 ) represents the initial stress stiffness matrix that depends on the displacement U 0 of the prestress problem in Eq. ( The damping matrix, C, covers intrinsic and phonon tunneling losses. The intrinsic losses are considered via a relaxation mechanism described by a complex-valued Young's modulus Ẽ = (1 + iη s ) E. The phonon tunneling losses are modeled using damped springs distributed along the boundary with a total stiffness of kb = (1 + iη b ) k b and k b = 8.315 × 10 7 kN/m 2 . The detailed calculation formulations of quantities in Eqs ( In the density-based topology optimization approach, an element-wise design variable, x e ∈ [0, 1], is introduced to indicate the material occupation in element e. To avoid checkerboard pattern and mesh dependence Here, xe is the filtered design variable, y k are the center coordinates of element k. v k and x k are the corresponding volume and design variable of element k, respectively. N e is the neighborhood of element e within a certain filter radius specified by N e = {k| x k -y e ≤ r}, and w e (y k ) = r -y k -y e . xe is the projected design variable of element, e. When β 1 is large, xe ≈ 1 if xe > η representing Si 3 N 4 , and xe ≈ 0 if xe < η indicating void. The projection suppresses gray element density regions induced by the density filter when β 1 is sufficiently large and ensures black-white designs when the optimization converges. Moreover, it mimics the manufacturing process and the manufacturing errors can be taken into accounts in the optimization by choosing different thresholds, η, as discussed later. The Young's modulus of element e is directly related to the projected design variable using the Rational Approximation of Material Properties (RAMP) ρ e =x e (ρ -ρ 0 ) + ρ 0 . Spurious modes caused by inappropriate stiffness-tomass ratios in low-density regions are suppressed by setting E 0 = 10 -6 E and ρ 0 = 10 -7 ρ to represent void in this study. Wrinkling-like instabilities in low-density regions are alleviated using a displacement interpolation with detailed formulations presented in To enhance the design robustness with respect to manufacturing errors and impose a minimal length scale in the nominal design, a three-case robust formulation is employed The three design realizations are generated using η ∈ {0.55, 0.5, 0.45} with a filter radius of r = 15 μm. This corresponds to a minimal feature size of 6.7 μm in both solid and void regions of the nominal design. The prescribed frequency lower bound and volume fraction upper bound are f * = 240 kHz and v * = 0.5. Gradients of the objective and constraint functions are calculated using the adjoint sensitivity analysis and the chain rules reaching a maximum value of 120. The loss parameters used in the five design cases, (D1, D2, D3, D4, D5), are η s =(2.500; 1.790; 1.120; 0.515; 0.000)10 -4 and η b =(0.000; 0.095; 0.190; 0.285; 0.380) calibrated against the reference trampoline design. We deposit stoichiometric silicon nitride onto a 100 mm single-crystal silicon wafer of 500 μm thickness using low-pressure chemical vapour deposition. This is followed by spincoating photoresist onto the wafer and transfer of the different resonator designs using UV-lithography. The photoresist is developed and the silicon nitride is etched in these regions by means of reactive ion etching. Residual photoresist is removed using oxide plasma, and finally, the trampolines are released in potassium hydroxide at 80 • C followed by cleaning in hydrochloric acid and sulfiric acid mixed with ammonium persulfate. Measurements of the frequency and quality factor of the resonators are performed using optical interferometry driven by a laser with a wavelength of 1550 nm. The laser beam is reflected off the vibrating membrane (located inside a vacuum chamber at low pressure < 10 -7 mBar), and the resulting phase shift is detected with highsensitivity using a phase-locked homodyne detector and recorded with a spectrum analyzer. Excitation of the mechanical oscillator is done by modulating the intensity of the laser at the resonance frequency. Once excited, the modulation is switched off and the amplitude decay is subsequently measured. The implemented phonon tunneling loss model used in evaluating the designs post topology optimization, is derived by treating the out-of-plane forces induced by the resonator onto the substrate as a point source on a large but finite silicon substrate. This assumption is valid as long as the characteristic size of the membrane as well as the substrate thickness are much smaller than the wavelength of the radiating wave in the substrate. This is the case for the treated designs when considering their fundamental mode. Furthermore, at these low frequencies, Kirchoff-Love plate theory can be used to model the vibrations induced into the substrate. In the point-source assumption the amplitude of vibrations u s at an excited point (x, y) on the finite substrate is related to the excitation force F by where S is the area of the substrate and m = ρ s h s is the mass per unit area of the substrate with ρ s and h s being the substrate density and thickness, respectively When a large substrate is used (like a 100 mm silicon wafer) the spectral distance to the closest mode will be difficult to estimate, due to the high density of modes. Instead, a stochastic approach is used where ∆ω ≡ XY 2 . Here, X is a uniformly distributed variable between 0 and (IIHFWLYHWHQVLOHSUHVWUHVV>*3D@ , where n s is the modal density of the substrate. E s and ν s are the substrate's Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio. This leads to a distribution of possible stiffness for the spring. Due to the assumption that the wavelength of the excited wave in the substrate is much larger than the resonator dimensions, we can treat the outer boundary of the resonator as a single rigid frame with only 1 degree of freedom normal to the plane of the resonator. This frame is then coupled to a reference via a spring defined by k PTL . This enables easy implementation of the PTL model into finite element models. For simulations the expectation value of k PTL is used (see Eq To model the frequency dependency of the silicon nitride thickness in Fig. 