Texture in dense or porous ceramics can enhance their functional and structural properties. Current methods for texturation employ anisotropic particles as starting powders and processes that drive their orientation into specific directions. Using ultra-low magnetic fields combined with slip casting, it is possible to purposely orient magnetically responsive particles in any direction. When those particles are suspended with nanoparticles, templated grain growth occurs during sintering to yield a textured ceramic. Yet, the final grains are usually micrometric, leading weak mechanical properties. Here, we explore how to tune the grain orientation size using magnetic slip casting and templated grain growth. Our strategy consists in changing the size of the anisotropic powders and ensuring that magnetic alignment and densification occurs. The obtained ceramics featured a large range of grain anisotropy, with submicrometric thickness and anisotropic properties. Textured ceramics with tunable grains dimensions and porosity are promising for filtering, biomedical or composite applications. Textured ceramics have the potential to enhance adsorption and catalysis efficiency in porous filters Grain dimensions in ceramics bodies are largely determined by the sintering process. In conventional sintering, temperature-driven diffusion leads to grain growth For example, nanocrystalline MgAl2O4 spinels were obtained starting with grains below 50 nm via an unusual negative Hall-Petch effect In this study, we explore how MASC-TGG of alumina can be adapted to anisotropic microplatelets of various dimensions to yield textured ceramics with tunable grain size and orientation. Four types of microplatelets with differing lengths and aspect ratios were selected and magnetically functionalized. First, the magnetic response and the alignment characteristics of each microplatelet type are characterized in dilute conditions. Then, based on this knowledge, magnetically assisted slip casting is applied to slurries of microplatelets and nanoparticles to create anisotropic assemblies of particles in predefined orientations. Those assemblies are then consolidated into ceramics via TGG. The samples produced are characterized in terms of grain orientation, referred to as the texture, grain misorientation, size and overall porosity. Finally, comparing nanometric and micrometric mechanical properties, we discuss the potential benefits of building such textured materials for different applications, in particular structural particulate filters, bioceramics and ceramic preforms for reinforced composites. Alumina microplatelets (Al2O3 pl, Kinsei Matec Co., Japan) of various dimensions (Table Typically, the microplatelets were suspended in a large volume of deionized water. After addition of superparamagnetic iron oxide particles (SPIONs, EMG-705, 10 nm diameter, Ferrotec) at a volume fraction with respect to alumina varying with the microplatelet type, the mixture was left stirring until all Fe3O4 nanoparticles adsorbed on the surface of the platelets. The functionalized powders were then filtered, rinsed with water and ethanol, and dried at 55°C under vacuum overnight. After functionalization, all powders have a brownish appearance, denoting successful magnetization. The concentration of SPIONs was calculated to have similar surface coverage of iron oxide of 21% The shear profiles of the PVP solutions were recorded using a rheometer (Bohlin Gemini II, Germany) with a cone-plate set-up. The viscosities used for the calculations were estimated using the values at 0.01 s -1 (see Supplementary Information (SI) Figure To visualize the platelet's response, a drop of suspension was deposited onto a glass slide on an inverted optical microscope (Ephiphot, Nikon) and images were recorded with the camera (Lumenra Infinity 1) and the software Infinity Analyze. The magnetic orientation set-up was positioned 3 cm above the drop and comprised a Neodymium magnet attached to a motor (940D271, RS components, Singapore) powered with 15 V (power supply Maisheng MS-3010D) (see Figure Characterization of the alignment: Image J (NIH, USA) was used to characterize the recorded images. In each image, the pixel coverage of a total of 30 platelets minimum was measured. The orientation angle θ with respect to the vertical was calculated using: , where P' is the pixel count of the area of the microplatelet after alignment, and P is the pixel count of the same platelet before alignment The orientation factor f was calculated using Herman's formula with cos 2 θ ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ the average over all the angles recorded in an image. The time of alignment was measured on recorded videos as the time at which all platelets aligned in the same direction upon application of the rotating magnetic field. Slurry preparation: Functionalized alumina microplatelets were dispersed with alumina nanoparticles of ~120 nm diameter (Al2O3 np, Aerodisp W440, Evonik, Germany) at a microplatelets-nanoparticles ratio of 1:2. Efficient dispersion was ensured using acidic pH ~3-5 and mechanical mixing. Magnetically assisted slip casting: The slurries were casted into molds made of 1 cm plastic tubes attached to a flat porous gypsum substrate (Ceramix, Germany), prepared according to the manufacturer's recommendations. The molds were placed on a magnetic alignment set-up for either horizontal or vertical orientation. The horizontal alignment set-up consisted of a sample attached on a standing-up rotating motor (RS component) placed at ~ 2 cm from the center of a strong Neodymium magnet. The magnetic field at the place of the sample was higher than 0.5 mT and the rotating speed of the motor ~1 Hz (see Figure Green body characterization: After the casting, the samples were dried at 30°C overnight (Binder VD 53, Fischer Scientific Pte Ltd, Singapore) before unmolding. Microscopic characterization of the green body was done by fracturing the pieces, mounting them onto a metallic stub and coating them with ~10 nm of platinum. Images were taken with a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM, JEOL 76000F, Japan). Sintering: The green bodies were sintered in air for 2 h at 1600 °C (Nabertherm, Switzerland). The heating rate was set at 2.5 °C/min with an intermediate plateau of 5 h at 500 °C. Characterization of the sintered ceramics: Cross-sections of the sintered ceramics were polished with SiC paper, coated with gold and observed by SEM (JSM-7600F, JEOL, Japan). The densities were determined using Archimedes' principle after overnight impregnation in ethanol, using the following formula: with ρ the density of the ceramic, ρ e the density of ethanol, W A the dried weight, W IA the weight of the impregnated sample measured in air and W IW the weight of the impregnated measured in ethanol. The closed porosity CP was calculated using: with ρ T the theoretical density of alumina. The anisotropic shrinkage was measured on horizontally and vertically aligned disc samples by measuring the height and diameter before and after sintering. The measurements were averaged over 3 to 5 samples. The grain sizes after sintering were measured on the SEM images using the software Image J (NIH, USA) and averaged over 20 to 50 grains per image. Sample preparation: Sintered specimens were hot mounted in resin, mirror polished (AP-D and OPS colloidal solutions, Struers, Denmark), and ultrasonicated to remove debris. Nanoscale properties: Twenty indents spaced apart with 50 μm were done on each sample using a Berkovitch tip mounted on a nanoindenter (G200, KLA Tencor, US). The tests were run under load-controlled conditions, with a loading rate of 1 mN/s, a maximum load of 200 mN and a thermal drift of 0.1 nm/s. The peak hold time was set to 10 s and the Poisson's ratio assumed to be 0.22. The data were analyzed using Oliver-Pharr. The reliability was checked using Weibull analysis (m>3). Microscale properties: Ten indents were made at a loading force of 500 g and dwell time of 10 s using a Vicker's indenter (Future-Tech microhardness tester FM-300E). The indented areas were observed under optical microscopy. Image J was used to measure the indented area and calculate the hardness. Post-mortem fractography: Indented and fractured samples were observed under SEM after 10 nm platinum coating. Using ultra low magnetic fields to orient anisotropic particles requires magnetically responsive particles. It is known that the magnetic response, in particular the ultra-high magnetic response (UHMR), is not only influenced by the field applied, but also by the dimensions of the particles to orient The microparticles considered are alumina microplatelets with diameters varying between ~2 to 10 μm (Table Alumina microplatelets can be functionalized by physically adsorbing charged superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) on their surface In the phase-ejection mode, this viscous drag is suppressed hence is more energetically favorable Suspended in a low-viscosity background fluid (~8 mPa.s) at a dilute concentration of ~0.02 vol%, largely inferior to the concentration of self-assembly into nematic order (Onsager concentration ν I-N in Table The magnetic response of the platelets displayed similar behavior in background liquids of increasing viscosities (Figure We have thus verified that the magnetically functionalized microplatelets used in this study could be directed vertically using an ultra-low external rotating magnetic field. Since vertical alignment is the least favorable orientation, it can be anticipated that any other orientation could be achieved as well To verify the suitability of using microplatelets of various dimensions for MASC-TGG, the magnetized alumina platelets prepared as described were dispersed in a suspension of alumina nanoparticles to form a bimodal slurry. Since the viscosity of suspensions of particles increases as the particle size decreases and as their anisotropy increases We estimate that the time required to align the platelets under a field of 0.45 mT and in a fluid of 100 mPa.s is of 15 minutes maximum for the largest set of particles. This alignment time is inferior to the time the magnetic field was applied in the experimental set-up, of 3 hour minimum. Indeed, we conducted the magnetic orientation during the entire time of the slip casting. Besides, a much shorter time has been reported earlier, suggesting that the fluid directly surrounding the microplatelets, i.e. water, is the fluid to consider During slip-casting, the fluid from the suspension is slowly removed through the porous mold by capillary forces. Those capillary forces, and the resulting hydrodynamic flow, have been reported to disturb the alignment of particles After magnetic slip-casting and drying, the green bodies were sintered in air at 1600°C for 2 hours. Due to the magnetic alignment, the shrinkage was anisotropic with a higher shrinkage perpendicular to the microplatelet's long axis (Figure After sintering, the final diameter Lf of the grains varied linearly with the initial diameter Li. This followed the theoretical expectations from the theory of TGG Finally, the density of the MASC-TGG ceramics was also dependent on the grain size. The larger the final grain size, the lower the density (Figure The mechanical properties of the porous textured ceramics achieved were characterised at the nanometric and micrometric scales for vertical and horizontal orientations of their grains (Figure First, nanoindentation provided information regarding the hardness and the elastic modulus at the nanoscale (Figure 15 GPa, as compared to the horizontal orientation, ca. 10 GPa (Figure Finally, there is also interest in fabricating textured ceramics to implement extrinsic toughening mechanisms in ceramics and their composites In this study, we have applied magnetically assisted slip casting and templated grain growth to alumina microplatelets of various dimensions to prepare ceramics with independently controlled grain orientations and grain sizes. It was found that for the microplatelets chosen, magnetic orientation could be achieved and that the grain sizes in the sintered bodies were lower than those achieved in other work, and with higher aspect ratios. The mechanical properties exhibited interesting crack deflection and anisotropy but were predominantly controlled by the open porosity that remained in the textured ceramics. To circumvent the porosity problem that is difficult to decouple from the microplatelets' dimensions, the ceramics could be infiltrated by a secondary phase, thanks to the minimal closed porosity. Also, the ratio of microplatelets to nanoparticles could be optimized for each microplatelet type. Although the final grain sizes are still in the micrometric range, the thickness remained submicrometric, which is a key feature for enhanced mechanical properties when a load is applied along the thickness. Finally, although a limitation in the MASC-TGG process is that nanopowders would require ultra-high magnetic field strengths to overcome thermal agitation, the microstructures presented here are unique, scalable, and largely tunable for the processing of composites and ceramics.