The pairing mechanism in A3C60 is investigated by studying the properties of a three-orbital Hubbard model with antiferromagnetic Hund coupling in the normal and superconducting phase. Local orbital fluctuations are shown to be substantially enhanced in the superconducting state, with a fluctuation energy scale that matches the low-energy peak in the spectral weight of the order parameter. Our results demonstrate that local orbital fluctuations provide the pairing glue in strongly correlated fulleride superconductors and support the spin/orbital freezing theory of unconventional superconductivity. They are also consistent with the experimentally observed universal relation between the gap energy and local susceptibility in a broad range of unconventional superconductors. The phenomenon of unconventional superconductivity in strongly correlated electron systems (SCES) remains mysterious and debated even decades after the discovery in different classes of materials, including heavy Fermion systems As target system, we consider the three-orbital Hubbard model with antiferromagnetic Hund coupling, which captures the physics of the fulleride superconductors A 3 C 60 and orbital-diagonal hopping on a Bethe lattice with bare bandwidth 2D. Here U is the intra-orbital repulsion, J the effective Hund coupling, α, γ = 1, 2, 3 denotes the orbitals and σ the spin. This set-up allows efficient DMFT simulations based on the segment representation and similarly for Σ. G nor ασ (τ ) = -T c ασ (τ )c † ασ and F α (τ ) = -T c α↑ (τ )c α↓ denote the normal and anomalous Green's functions for orbital α. The Hund coupling will be set to J = -U/4, which is larger than in the realistic compounds A relevant insight from recent DMFT studies ] (with O i some appropriately defined orbital moment), reach a maximum in the normal phase (see dashed line in Fig. and hence (indirectly) to SC. Here, we will provide direct evidence which links orbital fluctuations with 3 in the present three-orbital model to SC. We start by comparing ∆χ orb loc to other SC related quantities which can be evaluated directly on the Matsubara axis (see Fig. Having revealed further evidence for the link between orbital fluctuations and SC in this fulleride-inspired model, we will now investigate real-frequency spectra. An important question concerns the characteristic energy scale of the local orbital fluctuations . In our particle-hole symmetric system, G aux α (τ ) = G nor (τ ) + F (τ ) Panel 4(a) demonstrates that the SC gap exhibits a dome shape as a function of U , with a peak near the orbital-freezing crossover line, and that the almost perfect match between fermionic and bosonic spectral features starts around the maximum of that dome. In this crossover region, with increasing U , the orbital moments in the normal phase start to freeze and the orbital fluctuation energy scale in the normal phase (blue dashed line with empty triangles) drops below the energy scale of the order parameter (green line). Since the timescale of orbital fluctuations, which is given by the inverse of the peak energy in Imχ orb loc , cannot be longer than that of the relevant single particle fluctuations (roughly the inverse gap in the SC state), the peak in Imχ orb loc (ω) cannot shift below the peak in A nor/ano (ω) and the two fluctuation energy scales get locked in. This feedback of the SC state on the orbital fluctuations results in the melting of the orbital-frozen state, the release of the large entropy of the frozen metal state It is interesting to note in this context that an almost perfect match between the excitation energies in the single-particle and two-particle spectra is also found in Bose fluids The lock-in phenomenon is also clearly seen in panel (d), which plots the peak positions as a function of T on the strong-coupling side of the SC dome. In the normal phase, the orbital fluctuation energy scale monotonously decreases with decreasing T (blue dashed line with empty triangles), while the transition into the SC state leads to a synchronization with the (higher) single-particle excitation energy scale. In the orbital-freezing crossover regime (panel (c)), which features the largest gap, the results are qualitatively similar, but here the orbital fluctuation energy scale in the normal phase is already close to the synchronized orbital fluctuation and pairing energy scale in the symmetry-broken phase. On the weak-U side of the dome, however, the lock-in phenomenon is absent (panel (b)), since the orbital moments in the normal phase are not frozen, and the orbital fluctuation energy scale is higher than the SC one, although it is reduced in the SC phase compared to the normal state. Here, we roughly find a factor of two between the peak position in 1 π Imχ orb loc and A nor/ano , as expected in the weak-correlation limit, where . Some previous studies of unconventional SCs have focused on the anomalous self-energy Σ ano instead of the anomalous Green's function F Finally, we would like to test the hidden Fermion scenario in our fulleride-SC-inspired model. According to Refs. Our findings are instead qualitatively similar to those for the square lattice repulsive Hubbard model reported in Ref. In this subsection, we present the SC gaps obtained by different methods. The SC gap given by the peak energy of A nor (ω) which is essentially the Green's function of a BCS-type Hamiltonian in Nambu space Hence, ZReΣ ano (i0 + ) represents the BCS gap or half the total single-particle gap of the normal Green's function G 11 (ω). Interpreting (A.2) as the mean-field Hamiltonian of a Hubbard model with bandwidth 2ZD and interaction ZU , this quantity is related to the interaction by ZReΣ ano (i0 + ) = ZU ∆, with ∆ the local order parameter. ReΣ ano (i0 + )/∆ hence represents the effective interaction. Alternatively, we can determine the SC gap from the gap function. In the Matsubara frequency domain, the gap function is defined as = iImΣ nor (iω n ) in the presence of particle-hole symmetry. In a FL regime, Σ nor (iω n ) ≈ (1 -Z -1 )iω n and the low-frequency approximation to the anomalous self-energy reads Σ ano (iω n ) = ReΣ ano (i0 + ). In this case the gap function is simply a real constant in the metallic state. The transition into the SC state induces particle fluctuations, and hence orbital fluctuations, which results in a more pronounced decay of the correlation function, and hence a larger ∆χ orb loc . This change in the long-time behavior of χ orb loc (τ ) is the direct evidence for the "unfreezing" of orbital correlations. π Imχ orb loc (ω) as one increases the interaction U for |J/U | ≈ 0.13 at T = 0.005. At U = 1.9, the peak positions in A ano (ω) and 1 π Imχ orb loc (ω) are still well separated, since this parameter set is now on the weakpairing side of the dome. While the peak positions in A ano (ω) change only slightly as U increases, the peak energies for 1 π Imχ orb loc (ω) rapidly shift to lower values. At U = 2.5, the peaks in the fermionic and bosonic spectral functions nearly match (lock-in phenomenon). The SC order parameter is related to the anomalous Green's function and spectral function by The "overshooting" of I F (ω) is similar to what has been reported in Ref. 