In this short review we pass through the milestones in the studies of the electronic topological transitions (ETT) and focus on some recent applications of the ideas worked out in their classical theory. These are: two-dimensional electron systems, de Haas-van Alphen effect, classification of ETT in multidimensional systems, superconductivity in systems close to ETT, thermoelectricity in heavy-fermion systems, where the cascades of topological changes of Fermi surface (FS) are generated by magnetic field. The history of studies of ETT is inextricably linked with Kharkov school of condensed matter physics, with such names as I.M. Lifshitz, V.G. Bar'yakhtar and many other. Among them is Moisey Isaakovich Kaganov, who contributed much in studies of the role of geometry and topology of FS in physical properties of the metals. Two of the authors (A.V. and Y.G.) had a honor and pleasure to work with "Musik", as all friends called Kaganov [1]; all of us have been learning the niceties of science from his books. "The Fermi surface is the stage on which the drama of the life of the electron is played out" wrote Kaganov and Lifshitz. We devote this work to their memory. The discovery of a surprising new phase transition in liquid helium by W.H. Keesom and coworkers in Leiden in 1932 who observed a lambda-shaped "jump" discontinuity in the temperature dependence of the specific heat followed by the first classification of the general types of transition between phases of matter, introduced by Paul Ehrenfest in 1933 (see the historical overview As is known, the shape and size of the Fermi surface (FS) may change under the influence of such factors as uniform compression, changes in the concentration of ingredients in the alloy and anisotropic deformation I.M. Lifshitz noticed that changes in topology manifest themselves as certain anomalies in thermodynamic and galvanomagnetic characteristics of the metal. He performed a theoretical study of these anomalies and found that, at zero temperature and in the absence of impurity electron scattering, the topological changes occur when the Fermi energy reaches a certain critical value c . In this case, if the energy of quasi-particles, (p), has an absolute extreme, a void is either formed or disappears, whereas if c is a hyperbolic singular point, then at = c there occurs a disruption of the "neck" that connects two parts of the FS, and an open FS may become closed. Near such transition in 3D metal and at T = 0 the density of electron states can be presented as a sum of a smooth function ν 0 and an additional term δν( ) arXiv:2103.04642v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 8 Mar 2021 FIG. associated with the transition, which is non-zero only on one side of critical point c : on those where either a new void is formed or a neck is disrupted. Here m i are modules of the principal values of an effective mass tensor and Θ is the Heaviside function. One can easily check that such discontinuity in the derivative of the density of states results in the appearance at T = 0 of a non-smooth contribution to the thermodynamic potential: where z =c is the energy parameter driving transition. It characterizes the closeness of the system to the point where the number of components of topological connectivity of the FS changes. This parameter can be biased by hydrostatic pressure, anisotropic deformation, doping by some isovalent impurities, magnetic field etc. Evidently, the second derivatives of the thermodynamic potential, i.e. specific heat capacity, diamagnetic susceptibility, have a vertical kink ∼ |z| 1/2 Θ (±z). The same non-smoothness appears also in conductivity ( In their turn, the third derivatives (for instance, the coefficient of thermal expansion) from one side of the transition point demonstrate singularity ∼ |z| -1/2 . It is from this observation I.M. Lifshitz has named such electron transitions at T = 0 and in the absence of impurity scattering as the 2 1 2 -order phase transitions. At finite temperature however (or when there are impurities that scatter electrons) the singularity at z = 0 becomes smeared out, so, strictly speaking, in this case we cannot call such topological transformation of the FS a phase transition. To distinguish these cases from the true 2 1 2 -order phase transition, we will call the latter as Lifshitz, or an electronic topological transition (ETT). Following the prediction by I.M. Lifshitz of a possibility of changing the FS topology and related effect on the physical properties of metals had drawn the attention of both theoreticians and experimentalists (for detailed review see As an important milestone in this initial period of the studies of Lifshitz transitions should be mentioned the paper by Baryakhtar and Makarov It is necessary to mention also the paper by M.A. Krivoglaz and Tuo Hao, who had extended the Lifshitz transition thermodynamics for the case of metal with impurities The next stage in the studies of the electronic topological transitions started at the beginning of 80-ies and was related to the discovery It is worth to recall that this discovery was preceded by the prediction of the anomaly in thermoelectric coefficient based on the some naive explanation mean free path of the charge carriers, where l 0 (p) is the mean free path of electron scattering at the mainland of the FS with p being the quasiparticle momentum and l 1 (p) is the term related to the singular region. Then they used the Mott's formula for the Seebeck coefficient S = π 2 T /(3e)d(ln σ)/d | = F with σ = σ 0 + δσ(z). Accordingly, |z| -1/2 singularity in thermoelectric coefficient in this approach occurs due to disruption of the neck. Such additive treatment assumes that the electrons in the both pieces of the FS are independent. Yet, a more detailed consideration raises questions: (i) which value of the electron velocity has to be used to calculate δσ(z)? If one chooses the value of the velocity at the just disrupted neck, then its smallness would suppress the gained singularity. (ii) What is the value of the relaxation time, corresponding to the electrons scattered from the new piece of the FS? The answers to these questions were given in the papers where n imp is the impurities concentration and U is the amplitude of the scattering potential, which we assume independent of momentum. More precise analysis shows, that this probability depends on the electron energy ω = -F , but very weakly: the correction to Eq. ( The second possibility for electrons after the scattering from impurity is to travel from the main part of the FS to the small void. Probability of such process is definitely suppressed by the smallness of the density of states in the new void (i.e., available states for newcomer in result of scattering process). However, this smallness for the Seebeck coefficient is over and above compensated by the strong energy dependence of this contribution. The last scenario of impurity scattering for electron from the new void is to return back. This process can be neglected due to smallness of the corresponding density of states which enters quadratically in the corresponding probability. As a result, the total relaxation time can be written as where the function appeared firstly in the paper of Krivoglaz and Tu Hao Equation ( It is essential that consideration of such problem in the model of neck disruption reproduces the same result for Seebeck coefficient with replacement z → -z and ω → -ω, the latter means the replacement of electrons by holes. Therefore the shape of singularity close to ETT depends only on the character of topological changes of the FS but not on its geometrical type, viz. void or neck. The discovery of singularity in Seebeck coefficient in Li 1-x Mg x alloy (see Fig. A. Dissimilarity with the three-dimensional case End of the XX century was marked by the special interest in low dimensional systems, this is why let us briefly review now the 2D case (we will follow Ref. the density of states (DOS) turns out to be proportional to Θ (± (ε -ε c )), while in the case of neck disruption the DOS singularity is proportional to ln (ε -ε c ) One can see that these two expressions are very different from each other. In the case of neck disruption the singularity is nonzero from both sides of the transition and it is even on z. This fact is a direct consequence of the above mentioned symmetry of a system corresponding to simultaneous exchange of holes and electrons branches in the spectrum and a change of z sign (see the discussion below Eq. ( In the case of a void formation the DOS becomes nonzero from one side of the transition only (those corresponding to the new void). First derivatives of the thermodynamic potential have kinks at z = 0, and the second ones break. In accordance with Ehrenfest terminology, both twodimensional void formation and neck disruption must be referred as second order phase transitions. However, it is important to note that this terminology seems to be too general and can give rise to some misunderstanding. In fact, in the current literature, the term "second order phase transition" is strictly associated with the phenomena described by the Landau theory, where it was supposed that the dependence of the thermodynamic potential on the order parameter is different, above and below T c , due to the special choice of the temperature dependence of the coefficient in the quadratic term. So, in spite of the common features between the types of transitions, the 2D void formation and neck disruption have to be differentiated from the second-order phase transitions in the Landau sense. Slight differences between the two aforementioned ETT lead naturally to some differences for the thermodynamic and kinetic properties. The two most remarkable examples are the thermal expansion coefficient and thermoelectric power. The first one does not exhibit any singularities at all at the point of void formation and exhibits a sharp peak in the temperature dependence (with height proportional μ/T ) in the case of neck disruption Special attention in 2D systems requires the case of neck disruption. Here, unlike the 3D case, the system acquires a new type of symmetry: the relaxation time remains unchanged when one replaces the electrons by holes and changes the sign of z: Correspondingly, this fact dramatically affects the shape of singularity in Seebeck coefficient: instead of well pronounced asymmetry with which we are already familiar for both types of transition in 3D case and void formation in 2D case, in the case of 2D neck disruption the dependence S(z) is even, with a minimum and maximum of the same height C. Topogical transitions in a quasi-2DEG: Quantization of entropy The characteristic example of the ETT in two dimensions is the filling by electrons of the empty subband formed due to the size quantization in the quasi-twodimensional electron gas (quasi-2DEG). Each intersection of the levels of electron size quantization by the chemical potential (when μ passes the level E N ), can be considered as the point of the Lifshitz phase transition of the void formation type, where the FS acquires a new component of topological connectivity. In gated structures, a series of Lifshitz transitions can be controlled by the gate voltage. Corresponding anomalies in the thermodynamic and transport characteristics, in particular, thermoelectric coefficient related to the peculiarities of the energy dependence of the electron momentum relaxation time have been studied experimentally and theoretically in Refs. As was shown density of electronic states (DOS) in a non-interacting 2DEG and in absence of scattering has a staircase-like shape with m * being the electron effective mass. The differential entropy, s, can be found using the Maxwell relation The relationship between the electron concentration n, chemical potential μ and temperature T can be found integrating Eq. ( Using Eq. ( In the absence of scattering this result is independent of the shape of the transverse potential that confines 2DEG and of the material parameters including the electron effective mass and dielectric constant. The value of the entropy in the N -th maximum depends only on the number of the maximum, N : The universality of the above quantization rule can be broken both by disorder and by electron-electron interactions. Using a simple model of Lorentzian smearing of the electronic spectrum one can see that it leads to the relative correction of ∼ 1/T τ , where τ is the electron life time. For the case of a single-band 2DEG the role of the electron-electron interaction in the partial entropy was investigated in The variation of differential entropy s versus chemical potential is schematically shown in Fig. At T → 0 (yet T /τ ) the peaks of s are located at μ → E N , N > 1, the maximal values being s max (N ) = ln 2/(N -1/2). At finite T the peaks acquire finite widths of the order of T and shift toward negative values of μ -E N analogously to the shift of the maximum in the Seebeck coefficient (see Fig. Let us discuss the situation when the magnetic field H is applied to the metal and the cross-section of the FS in the direction perpendicular to H is closed (we will follow Ref. It is clear from the last expression that the number of available for electrons states for n-th level is non-smooth and proportional to (ε -E n ) 1/2 Θ (ε -E n ) and the nonsmooth part in the thermodynamic potential turns out to be at zero temperature. We have to note that the chemical potential depends on the magnetic field due to the particle number conservation law; nevertheless this dependence becomes important in the ultra-quantum limit only, which is beyond the scope of our discussion here It can be concluded that the de Haas-van Alphen oscillations arising when the next Landau level passes through the chemical potential value, can be treated as ETT to which the 11⁄2 order has to be attributed. The second derivatives of the thermodynamic potential tend to infinity at T = 0 if z(H) = E n , and at finite temperatures exhibit sharp peaks with magnitude (μ/T ) 1/2 . This singularities are nothing else but inverse magnetic field oscillations of magnetic susceptibility in the De Haas-van Alphen effect. It is noteworthy that the kinetic coefficients behave exactly as ETT in 3D case: conductivity (Shubnikov-de Haas effect), thermopower After this review of the different phenomena showed by the electronic topological transitions, we would like to mention some general features characteristic for such transitions and to classify them formally for arbitrary space dimensionalities n (we will follow Ref. In the neighborhood of any non-degenerate critical point, the spectrum can be described by a quadratic form and the equation of the Fermi hypersurface can be expressed as The shape of this hypersurface is determined by the signature of {m i } = 1, 2, ..., n and by the sign ofc . The topological type of transition (only the sign ofc is changed), is established by the signature of {m i } only. Let us start the discussion from the 0D case. Here the Fermi sea of electrons may be formally treated as a point which can be empty ( < c ) or occupied by two electrons ( > c ). Therefore, only the transition which can be formally treated as the void formation type, can occur in this case (the void does not exist or occupies all 0D space). In the 1D case, the Fermi sea is presented by the interval [-p F , p F ]. These two limiting points play the role of the Fermi "surface". For the surface only two signatures, [+] and [-], are possible and both correspond to void formation (of electron or hole types). So in this case, like in the 0D case, only one type of transition, namely void formation, is possible. The same void formation type transition is typical for the electron system of any dimensionality and corresponds to the signatures {+ + +...+} and {---...-}. But already in the 2D another type of signature: {+-} (or {-+}) for the quadratic form Eq. ( In the 4D space, besides the two transitions of the mentioned above nature, the new transition type corresponding to the symmetrical signature {+ + --} appears. In the general case of a n-dimensional space n + 1 different signatures are possible of which {+ + +...+} and {---...-} describe a new electron and hole void formation, respectively, {+ + +... + -} and {---... -+} correspond to electron/hole neck disruption and the other are associated with more complex topological transformations. In general, the surface containing p pluses and q minuses (p, q > 1) can be imagined as (p+q) dimensional hyperboloid and 1 2 n + 1 (if n is even) or It can be seen that if n is even (n = 2k) one among these transition types (which corresponds to the symmetrical signature of k positive and k negative masses) possesses a remarkable symmetry: the system the system does not vary if all electrons are interchanged with holes and the signc changes also. This symmetry (it was already described for the 2D system) must imply the DOS singularity dependence to be even function of c . All other types of transitions do not exhibit such a symmetry and we cannot expect consequently that the singular part of the DOS will be even function of energy. It is worthwhile to stress that such electron-hole symmetry exists for even dimensional spaces only. For odd dimensions, the two hyperbolic surfaces beyond and above the transition are not topologically equivalent. The critical exponent of the DOS non-smoothness may be easily calculated for the n-dimensional case of void formation. Really, the DOS is proportional to (see where the index [n] denotes the dimensionality of the space. One can see that the last integral presents nothing else than a volume inside the equal energy surface (p) = and is proportional to the number of electron states. The singular part of it is proportional to the volume of the n-dimensional ellipsoid, where p i are the large semi-axis of the ellipsoid in momentum space. Due to the homogeneity of the quadric form in Eq. ( The contribution to the thermodynamic potential reads We can conclude now that n-dimensional formation of a void can be considered as phase transition of n/2 + 1 order at zero temperature, and for high dimensions ETTrelated singularities will be manifested weakly. This conclusion concerns other types of transitions too. It has been shown that abrupt topological modification of the FS can be achieved by tuning of different macroscopic parameters such as temperature, pressure, strain, external magnetic fields and doping. A dramatic reshap-FIG. ing of the FS topology viz. Lifshitz transition often leads to the emergence of the plenty phenomena also in the superconducting phase of a material and as a result to the unusual behavior and the alteration of many properties relevant to superconductivity. On of the first evidence of the Lifshitz transition in a superconductor was revealed in the above mentioned paper of Baryakhtar and Makarov Interpretation of such anomalous behaviour can be done within the BCS theory of superconductivity. The corresponding equation for the temperature dependent energy gap ∆(T ) can be written in the following form: where λ is the constant of electron-phonon interaction, ω D is the Debye frequency, and ν(ξ) is the density of states. In the vicinity of ETT ν(ξ) is given by Eq. ( Later the same theory was applied successfully for interpretation of the behavior of the critical temperature as a function of pressure in In-Cd The similar qualitative dependence of T c as a function of lattice strain was detected in strontium ruthenate Sr 2 RuO 4 that probably exhibits an exotic, odd-parity kind of superconductivity It is worth note that after discovery of the copperbased high-temperature superconductivity there was an attempt to exploit the theory of ETT for the elucidation of the order parameter symmetry in such compounds Despite the fact that this model is rather simple and succeeded to explain most of the apparently contradictory properties of high-temperature superconductors at the moment of its proposition, it has not become widely accepted. In 2008 high-temperature superconductivity was surprisingly discovered in iron-based materials. The presence of iron, for long time believed as an enemy of superconductivity, led to the explosive growth in the study of basic physical properties of this new family and comprehension of origin of the unconventional pairing mechanism in these high temperature superconductors. It was demonstrated by ARPES and other techniques that a common feature of iron-based superconductors is the multiple-band electronic structure. Some of these bands are very shallow with Fermi energies of several meV One of the such an unusual phenomenon was predicted in a regime of BCS-BEC (Bose-Einstein) crossover in a two-band superconductor when the chemical potential μ is tuned in a narrow energy range around the edge E edge of the second band Shifting the chemical potential for the superconductor one can track the evolution of FS topology and the emergence of several Lifshitz transitions (Fig. In the general case of multi-band metal with deep primary bands and a shallow one, when the bottom of the shallow band crosses the Fermi level, ETT causes anomalous density of states with the qualitatively different be- haviors on the two sides of the Lifshitz transition in the superconducting phase where ∆ 0 is the pairing amplitude (gap function) induced in the shallow band by Cooper pair exchange with the deep bands. Eq. ( It is important to note that the term with δ = -1 contributes to Eq. ( while in the limit μ ∆ 0 the density of states recovers the standard symmetric BCS shape Equation ( The specific feature of the extensively studied since 2006 heavy-fermion systems is that the Lifshitz transitions are driven by a magnetic field (see, e.g., Ref. The experimental findings of Ref. The theoretical analysis of Ref. When the thermopower peaks are getting close to each other one should also include the superposition phenomena between the new pockets occurring in the narrow energy range. An indication that the the superposition of the different Lifshitz transitions indeed occurs in the experiments on YbRh 2 Si 2 , is that it is hard to identify the FIG. type of the transition. The asymmetry of the individual peaks which represents the characteristic feature of the Lifshitz transition, is blurred in YbRh 2 Si 2 as compared with YbNi 4 P 2 . To take into account the specificity of a cascade of Lifshitz transitions on quasiparticle scattering the following model was suggested in We assume that all topological changes of the FS are due to the formation of new spherical pockets (see Fig. where p ci is the position of its center in the Brillouin zone, Z i = μci is its energetic size, ci = μ is the critical point of multi-valued function of energy when the i-th voids appears, m i is the corresponding effective mass. In Refs. where Here the function with τ -1 l0 = π -1 n imp |U | 2 m 3/2 (2Z l ) 1/2 as the relaxation time of the electron initially belonging to the l-th void and calculated in the golden rule approximation (compare with Eqs. ( Finally, the expression for the Seebeck coefficient (9) becomes now the sum over involved cascade scattering processes (marked in Fig. As we have shown the field of fermiology, related to study of geometrical and topological properties of FS, founded by I.M. Lifshitz still remains hot topic and time to time emerges in different problems of condensed matter: in new families of superconductors, heavy fermion systems, low dimensional systems, etc. Considerable merit in it belongs to M.I. Kaganov, both due to his original contributions and his review article 