We systematically studied in-plane optical conductivity of FeSe1-xTex thin films fabricated on CaF2 substrates for x = 0, 0.1, 0.2, and 0.4. This system shows a large enhancement of superconducting transition temperature Tc at x ∼ 0.2 and a gentle decrease in Tc with further increasing x. The low-energy optical conductivity spectrum is described by the sum of narrow and broad Drude components, associated with coherent and incoherent charge dynamics, respectively. With increasing Te content, the spectral weight of the narrow Drude component decreases, while the total weight of the two Drude components increases. As a consequence, the fraction of the narrow Drude weight significantly decreases, indicating that Te substitution leads to stronger electronic correlations. Below the nematic transition temperature, the narrow Drude weight decreases with decreasing temperature. This indicates the reduction of the coherent carrier density, resulting from the Fermi-surface modification induced by the development of the orbital order. The reduction of the narrow Drude weight with temperature stopped at x ∼ 0.2, corresponding to the disappearance of the nematic transition. Our result suggests that the increase in the coherent carrier density induced by the suppression of the nematic transition gives rise to the enhancement of Tc. The decrease in Tc with further Te substitution likely arises from too strong electronic correlations, which are not favorable for superconductivity. Iron-based superconductors (FeSCs) are characterized by a rich phase diagram. To deeply understand the underlying physics, it is indispensable to extract key control parameters governing phase diagrams and to elucidate how an electronic state evolves with these parameters. In many FeSCs, superconductivity is induced by suppressing a phase in which four-fold rotational symmetry is broken, which suggests a close relationship between an anisotropic electronic state and superconductivity FeSe exhibits a tetragonal-to-orthorhombic structural phase transition at T s ∼ 90 K without accompanying a magnetic phase transition The nematic transition in FeSe can be tuned by chemical substitution Another important issue in FeSCs is electronic correlation. According to the theoretical calculations, a superconducting phase can emerge in the vicinity of a strongly correlated electron regime centered at a Mott insulating phase with the d 5 configuration In the present study, we performed optical spec-troscopy measurements on FeSe Thin films of FeSe 1-x Te x (x = 0, 0.1, 0.2, and 0.4) were fabricated on CaF 2 substrates by a pulsed laser deposition method Optical reflectivity was measured on the FeSe 1-x Te x films for the energy range of 40-10000 cm -1 using the Fourier-transform infrared spectrometer (Bruker Vertex 80v) at various temperatures ranging from 8 to 300 K. Since the films are oriented along the c axis, in-plane reflectivity spectra were obtained. We extracted optical constants of FeSe 1-x Te x from the reflectivity data by CaF 2 substrate [8,17] (a) means of a thin-film fitting procedure A. Temperature dependence of optical conductivity spectra Figure The optical conductivity spectra of FeSe 1-x Te x are characterized by a small Drude peak and an almost flat tail extending up to ∼ 1000 cm -1 (see also Appendix B). Thus, we can interpret the low-energy spectrum as a Drude component with small spectral weight present on a component with a weak energy dependence. The latter can be expressed by a very broad Drude term. The presence of multiple Drude components is naturally explained by a multiorbital nature of FeSe. We decomposed the spectrum using a Drude-Lorentz model with a narrow and a broad Drude term. In this model, the complex ) dielectric function ǫ(ω) can be written as , where ǫ ∞ is the real part of the dielectric function at high frequency, and ω p,n (ω p,b ) and 1/τ n (1/τ b ) are the plasma frequency and the scattering rate for the narrow (broad) Drude component, respectively. In the last term, ω j , γ j , and Ω j are the frequency, width, and strength of the jth excitation, respectively. The complex conductivity is expressed by σ(ω ). This model has widely been applied for the analysis of the optical spectra of FeSCs and turned out to well explain the temperature and the composition dependence of the spectrum Figure Given that both electrons and holes contribute to the transport properties in FeSe The systematic variation of the Drude weights can be quantitatively confirmed in Figs. (ω 2 p,n + ω 2 p,b ) increases. This is consistent with a recent ARPES study The decrease in ω 2 p,n with x can be understood taking into account the evolution of the band structure. Since ω 2 p,n = 4πn/m * , where n and m * stand for the coherent carrier density and effective mass, respectively, the decrease in ω 2 p,n stems from a decrease in n and/or an enhancement of m * . From ARPES measurements, it has been found in FeSe 1-x Te x that a mass enhancement as well as an incoherent electronic state is induced by Te substitution The present results point toward an enhancement of electronic correlations with Te substitution. Optical spectroscopy allows us to estimate the strength of electronic correlation In Fig. The present system exhibits strong orbital-dependent correlation effects, and the d xy orbital plays a crucial role. As mentioned earlier, iron chalcogenides are characterized by strong electronic correlations and the large orbital differentiation, resulting in a large renormalization factor of the d xy orbital The nematic transition has an impact selectively on the narrow Drude component. In Fig. As in the case for x = 0, a decrease in ω 2 p,n was also observed for x = 0.1 and 0.2 #1, whereas a suppression of ω 2 p,n was absent for x = 0.2 #2 and 0.4. Since the decrease in ω 2 p,n manifests the presence of the nematic phase, the present result evidences that the nematic transition is completely suppressed at x ∼ 0.2, consistent with the transport The reduction of the coherent carrier density induced by the nematic transition should affect superconductivity. In the present system, the carrier density seems to correlate with T c Superconductivity should also be influenced by the change in the correlation strength. Outside the nematic phase, T c decreases with increasing x. Probably, electronic correlations for higher values of x are too strong to support high-T c superconductivity. The value of ω 2 p,n / (ω 2 p,n + ω 2 p,b ) for x = 0.2 with maximal T c is ∼ 0.07, which is close to that for doped BaFe 2 As 2 Finally, we comment on the influence of spin fluctuations. In the temperature-pressure phase diagram of FeSe, T c takes a maximum at the boundary of the magnetic phase We measured in-plane optical spectrum of the FeSe 1-x Te x thin films on CaF 2 substrates for x = 0, 0.1, 0.2, and 0.4. For all the compositions, the lowenergy optical conductivity spectra at high temperatures are almost flat, indicative of the highly incoherent charge dynamics. With decreasing temperature, the Drude response becomes appreciable, the degree of which is weakened with Te substitution. The Drude-Lorentz analysis revealed that ω 2 p,n decreases with increasing x, while ω 2 p,b increases. The reduction of the fraction of ω 2 p,n is attributed to an enhancement of electronic correlations with Te substitution due to the change in the local crystal structure. The d xy orbital is considered to play a crucial role in the evolution of electronic correlations. Upon entering the low-temperature nematic phase, ω 2 p,n decreases. This behavior disappeared at x ∼ 0.2, corresponding to the end point of the nematic transition. The suppression of ω 2 p,n was observed for one of the two samples with x = 0.2 but not for the other, which is consistent with the fact that T c abruptly jumps up when suppress- ing the nematic phase. The present result suggests that the enhancement of T c originates from the increase in the coherent carrier density due to the suppression of the nematic transition. The decrease in T c with Te substitution for x > 0.2 likely arises from too strong electronic correlations, which is harmful to high-T c superconductivity.