A single Majorana Kramers pair hosts only one component of the magnetic multipole. This can be used to determine the bulk Cooper-pair symmetry through surface-sensitive spectroscopic measurements, either by applying a magnetic field or by using a ferromagnet/superconductor junction. This paper proposes that the electric response, which is free from the Meissner effect, can be used an alternative method to measure the bulk Cooper-pair symmetry in time-reversal-invariant superconductors with double Majorana Kramers pairs. The relationships among electric multipoles, strain tensors and superconducting symmetries under a given wallpaper group on the surfaces of topological crystalline superconductors are shown. This study also reveals that only a specific irreducible representation of a uniform strain yields a gap in the double Majorana Kramers pairs for the topological-crystalline-superconductor candidate Sr 3 SnO. This highlights the viability of electric detection regarding Cooper-pair symmetry. Majorana fermions are charge-neutral particles with identical particles and antiparticles. It has previously been revealed that double MKPs protected by crystalline symmetry can respond to an electric perturba-tion. This paper proposes that the electric response, which is unaffected by the Meissner effect and can be prepared more easily than a magnetic field, can determine the bulk Cooper-pair symmetry in TCSCs with double MKPs. The electric multipoles of double MKPs are related to the irreps of the bulk pair potential for a given surface WG. This study demonstrates that double MKPs on the surfaces of three-dimensional TCSC antiperovskites are gapped by an external uniform strain. It is useful to be able to identify bulk Cooper pairs electrically. Moreover, this result suggests that double MKPs on the surfaces of TCSCs can be controlled electrically. This would be well suited to nanofabrication and could potentially lead to the development of a novel Majorana device. Internal, crystalline, and Cooper-pair symmetries. MKPs are zero modes localized on the surfaces of TSCs. Time-reversal and particle-hole symmetries stabilize a single MKP. On the one hand, multiple MKPs appear for a highsymmetry momentum when protected by the WG symmetry of the surface, in addition to time-reversal and particlehole symmetries. These phenomena have been systematically classified. Consider a three-dimensional Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian for a given momentum = ( , , where h( ) and Δ( ) are the Hamiltonian for the normal state and pair potential, respectively. denotes the chemical potential. The BdG Hamiltonian respects the time-reversal [ bulk ( ) -1 = bulk (-), = -K] and particle-hole [ bulk ( ) -1 =bulk ( ), = K] symmetries. Here, , , and K are the th Pauli matrices acting in the spin and Nambu spaces and the complex conjugation, respectively. Chiral symmetry, Γ = , which comprises the combined symmetry of time-reversal and particle-hole symmetries, is also preserved, {Γ, bulk ( )} = 0. Crystalline systems have space-group (SG) symmetry. We focus on the ( ) surface and momentum located on = ( 0 , ), where 0 = ( 0 , 0 ) is the time-reversal-invariant momentum. The surface has a WG symmetry that is compatible with SG symmetry, WG ⊂ SG. The normal part of the Hamiltonian on a high-symmetry point 0 is invariant for a symmetry operation of WG, [ 0 ( ), h( 0 , )] = 0, where 0 ( ) is the representation matrix of the little group. The pair potential is an order parameter and hence belongs (approximately) to an irrep of SG on (near) the phase transition point. For a one-dimensional irrep, the pair potential is either even parity ( = 1) or odd parity ( = -1) for as 0 ( )Δ( 0 , ⊥ ) 0 ( ) T = Δ( 0 , ). The representation matrix 0 ( ) of for the normal part is extended to ̃ 0 ( ) in the Nambu space, as ̃ 0 ( ) = 0 ( ) ⊕ * 0 ( ), which commutes with the BdG Hamiltonian, [ ̃ 0 ( ), bulk ( 0 , )] = 0 for both even and odd parity pairings. The particle-hole and chiral transforms also commute with ̃ ( ), [ , ̃ 0 ( )] = [Γ, ̃ 0 ( )] = 0 for even-parity pairings = 1. This study explicitly considers only one-dimensional irreps, because higher-dimensional irreps are regarded as one-dimensional irreps of the subgroup. As , where | | denotes the order of , 1 denotes the × identity matrix, and the th eigenvalue of ̃ 0 ( ) is given by for rotations and mirror reflections. The glide plane = { | }, where the Seitz notation is adapted to apply to symmetry operations, that is, the mirror followed by the translation , on the Brillouin zone boundary with 0 • 2 = is squared to be ̃ 0 ( ) 2 = --0 •2 = 1 and has the eigenvalues 1 ( ) = 1 and 2 ( ) = -1. Topological invariants for double MKPs. For symmorphic symmetry operations, the time reversal of bulk ( 0 , ) When the pair potential is even-parity for , = 1, bulk ( 0 , ) maintains the chiral symmetry. Therefore, bulk ( 0 , ) is in class AIII and is characterised by the winding number [ ] ∈ Z, which corresponds to the number of Majorana fermions generated from bulk ( 0 , ). For the glide ( ) plane, the decomposed Hamiltonian still preserves time-reversal symmetry, that Table is, bulk ( 0 , ) belongs to class DIII and is characterised by the We define the number of MKPs protected by the chiral symmetry as Electric degrees of freedom of double MKPs. Hereafter, the relationships between the electric response, crystalline symmetry, and Cooper pair symmetry are explained in terms of the effective surface theory for MKPs with time-reversal, LETTERS particle-hole, and WG symmetries. An effective theory for MKPs, zero modes, around the time-reversal-invariant momentum on the surface = ( , ) can be constructed using Majorana field operators ( ), = 1, • • • , 2 . This satisfies the self-conjugate condition † ( ) = ( ) on an appropriate basis. Assuming that 2 -1 ( ) and 2 ( ) form a Kramers pair without loss of generality, time-reversal is represented by surf = (-) ⊕ • • • ⊕ (-). The field operators obey the anticommutation relationship { ( ), ′ ( ′ )} = ′ 2 ( -′ ). The Hamiltonian on the surface effective theory is induced by a uniform external field as follows: where is conjugate to and should be given by an antisymmetric Hermite matrix. For a single MKP, = 1, only one antisymmetric Hermite matrix is proportional to . This means that a single MKP hosts only one magnetic (time-reversal-odd) operator. This is in sharp contrast to conventional (complex) fermions, ( ), which always have three-component magnetic dipoles ′ † ( ) ( ) ′ ′ ( ) for = , , and . On the other hand, double MKPs, for which = 2, have six operators that are represented by six antisymmetric Hermite matrices: 0 , , , 0 , , and . The former four are time-reversal-odd (magnetic), surf -1 surf = -, and the latter two are time-reversal-even (electric), surf -1 surf = . Owing to symmetry constraints, and must belong to the same irrep of WG. This condition enables the determination of the symmetry of the pair potential from their response to an external field, as follows: Table Table 2 [ ] = 1 protected by glide-plane symmetry. The resulting electric operators of double MKPs are decomposed into irreps (Electric). The last column shows the strain tensor belonging to the same irrep of Electric as a representative electric perturbation. The irreps of 4 and , which are compatible with 4 and , respectively, are defined in Table odd parity for the glide plane (Table Consider a model for an antiperovskite with a pair potential of 1 of the h point group. The bulk Hamiltonian for = ( , , ) is given by where 0 and are the identity and the th Pauli matrix for the orbital degrees of freedom, respectively, and and ̃ are 4 × 4 the matrices of spin = 3/2. These are related to ̃ ≡ 5 3 ≠ -7 6 . The explicit representations of and ̃ and the symmetry operations in this system are shown in Supplemental Material. As a result, this system can be classified into the second case in Table which is invariant for the symmetry operation of h as ( ) bulk, ( ) † = bulk, | → ′ ′ ′ ′ . The first and second terms contain the strains of 1 ( and + ) and 1 ( -) irreps of 4 on the (001) surface. The proposed general theory predicts that the latter term induces a gap in the double MKPs on the surface. The energy spectrum of the finite-sized model for Sr 3 SnO is calculated with the (001) surface. In the absence of the strain, double MKPs emerge at the Γ point ( = = 0), as shown in Fig. Discussion. Here, electric multipoles of double MKPs and their coupling to strains on the surface of TCSCs were established. The relations among bulk superconducting symmetries and strain tensors coupled to double MKPs have been systematically shown. This can easily predict the effects of applying strain on the surfaces of TCSCs. The most straightforward ap- plication is a spatially uniform static strain, which can create a gap in the double MKPs hosting the corresponding electric multipoles. Here, this is demonstrated for a model of Sr 3 SnO. These results suggest that spectroscopic measurements taken under strain can detect double MKPs on the surface. In addition, the electric response may be more experimentally accessible because, unlike the magnetic response, it is presumed to be free from the Meissner effect. Therefore, complementary magnetic and electric measurements should be used to determine the symmetry of the bulk pair potential in TCSCs with double MKPs. This study only considered the zero-order coupling between double MKPs and strain, and it was assumed that the coupling constant was finite. This satisfied the symmetry requirement, and such a coupling inevitably exists. Furthermore, its effective model was able to describe various phenomena. However, the scope of the effective model does not permit quantitative evaluation of the microscopic mechanism of the coupling between the strain and MKP, or the coupling constant. This evaluation would require a return to higher-energy models, that is, bulk theory. Such a study will be essential for future progress in MKP research. This is an important issue that should be addressed in future studies. The results presented here also imply a possible coupling between double MKPs and non-uniform dynamic strains, that is, ultrasounds, sound ( ) = -∫ 2 2 =1 Γ ( , ) T Γ ( , ) Γ ( , ) with Γ as the coupling constant, which may induce exotic charge/heat and spin transport carried by MKPs. Strains are expected to drive spin currents because they share the same symmetry (irrep).