The influence of magnetic materials on the spin-dependent properties of light-emitting semiconductor structures is one of the central problems in spintronics and photonics, which if being properly solved may give rise to a number of promising applications in new generation of light-emitting devices In the present paper we provide such kind of data concerning the magnetic interactions in InGaAs/GaAs/δ<Mn> systems and specify some tools for efficient revealing of these interactions. To investigate the above system the pump-probe technique was applied. The pump pulse of circularly polarized laser emission was used to polarize Mn spins via the interaction with spin-polarized photoexcited holes The results obtained have shown that the resident electrons localized in the QW due to the donor doping of GaAs barrier play the dominating role in the observation of optical effects related with Mn-hole interaction. A generation-recombination balance model of the photoluminescence kinetics is derived, the model agrees with experimental data and confirms the role of resident electron concentration in obtaining the polarization dependencies in various samples. The structures for investigation consisted of InGaAs quantum wells with a thin δ<Mn>layer introduced into a GaAs barrier as shown in Fig. On the second stage, we have used a Q-switched YAG: Nd laser ablation system with Mn and GaAs targets for growing the Mn delta-doping layer and the GaAs capping layer (d c =40 nm) respectively, the process temperature in this case was 400 °C. The entire growth process was performed in the same reactor. Further details of the growth can be found in The degree of polarization of the PL emission is defined as: where I σ+/σ-is the intensity of the σ+/emission component. Fig. The values obtained are in a good agreement with earlier results on similar samples with respect to a strong dependence of these parameters on a GaAs spacer layer thickness The characteristic interaction time is very short and therefore cannot be revealed within our experimental techniques. However, Mn spin lifetime is rather long and thus it can influence the polarization dynamics even after the delay of Δt between pump and probe pulses. Fig. where Pol σ+ -σ+ is a polarization degree for σ + -σ + excitation and Pol σ+ -σ-is a polarization degree for σ + -σ -excitation scheme. Since we have selected the σ + polarization of pump in both cases the ΔP value for the 1 st PL pulse is zero with respect to experimental error. The probe laser pulse, on the contrary is of different polarizations, which gives rise to nonzero values of ΔP for the 2 nd PL pulse. We note that there is only a short time period of rather high PL intensity during which ΔP value can be defined without a huge experimental error. As the intensity decreases the experimental error value raises significantly. For that reason, we will not discuss here the time dependence of ΔP and confine ourselves with the values averaged over the time interval of ⁓100 ps (when the high PL intensity is preserved). Even with such limitation the ΔP is a very important parameter defining the behavior of the system. The Insert to Fig. Above 20 K a rapid decrease of ΔP is observed. However detectable ΔP effect was recorded even at 70 K which is above the Curie temperature of δ<Mn> (30-40 K Figure Let us now switch to a discussion of the experimental results. First, we will briefly discuss the qualitative model of dynamic spin polarization in the investigated samples, then we will present the results of theoretical calculations which were performed by solving the balance equations. Consider a system of energy levels in a strained quantum well with enclosed δ<Mn>layer shown in Fig. 1. Prior to the circularly polarized pump pulse arrival (i.e., without any external fields) the polarization of resident electrons is zero i.e. the concentrations of resident electrons with the spins of +1/2 and -1/2 are equal (Fig. 2. As a pump pulse arrives the electron-hole pairs are generated in the QW, as is shown in Fig. The polarized photoexcited electrons with the concentration of N are added to unpolarized resident electrons in the QW. 3. Within the time of less than 100 ps the spin orientation of Mn ions occurs due to interaction with holes (Fig. 4. Within the time of about 100 ps fast hole spin relaxation process provides the redistribution of heavy hole spins into some equilibrium state. We note that in general 3/2-spin and -3/2-spin concentrations are not equal to one another due to a Mn spin polarization influence of heavy holes (Fig. 5. At the next stage, the radiative recombination of spin-polarized photoexcited carriers starts to play role in electron-hole dynamics (Fig. 6. Prior to a probe pulse arrival, the carrier distribution between the energy levels is similar to the one shown at Fig. 7. When the probe pulse polarization is σthe spin polarization of photoexcited carriers is inverse to the one shown at Fig. In the samples with higher concentration of resident electrons, the "minority" recombination intensity is also higher and the polarization degree is smaller. This explains the "inverse" dependence of the spin memory ΔP-effect on the thickness of the spacer layer. With a large thickness of spacer GaAs, the concentration of resident electrons is the highest, which makes the maximum contribution to the intensity of "minority" polarized PL and, accordingly, decreases the overall circular polarization degree. As the thickness of the spacer layer decreases, the concentration of resident electrons decreases, thus decreasing the number of recombination events with a minority spin. The efficiency of the interaction between the spins of holes and manganese in the structures under study plays a secondary role. According to the numerous experimental data The above processes were modeled via the time-dependent spin-resolved equations describing hole and electron generation by laser pulses, the interaction of holes with Mn ions in the delta layer, and the carrier recombination with emission of the circular polarized photons The change in concentrations of spin-polarized electrons, holes and Mn follows the balance equations: . The electrons and holes may be created with the absorption of incident photons, or annihilated with the emission of photons having the polarization depending on the electron and hole spin projections. The first term in equations 1 ( ) refers to the generation of electrohole pairs by the laser pulses referring to σ + and σ -circular polarizations correspondingly. The laser pulses have the delta-shaped profile corresponding to the short duration τ p =0.1 ps and are spaced from one another by the window Δt ranging from 300 to 2000 ps. Besides the generating terms stemming from the laser pulses, the balance equations for electrons and holes include the annihilation terms describing the photoluminescence proportional to the minimum of the concentrations for the two participating components ( ). These terms take into account the selection rules for optical transitions in the quantum well. The third group of terms describes the interaction between the holes and the spins in the Mn layer. These the phenomenological terms depend on the hole and Mn polarization (the difference in hole and Mn spin concentrations), they can be introduced as for holes and for Mn in the second and third pairs of equations ( Here C, D are Mn-hole interaction constants. The function describes the spin channel from which the hole spins can be taken for increasing the corresponding spin population. Consider , change in is only possible when there is In this case and the entire term for Mn-hole interaction is . Similar is present in the balance equation for Mn spins. The concentration dependencies of and a in the system (3) so it is needful to use numerical methods for solving it. Then, from (3) the conservation of the total Mn concentration follows since while the hole and electron concentrations are not conserved due to the laser pulse generation and subsequent photoluminescence. The final group of terms in all equations describes spin relaxation with characteristic rates γ e , γ h , and γ Mn for the electrons, the holes, and Mn spins respectively. The relaxation terms are proportional to the corresponding differences in spin-resolved concentrations , , and Here for brevity, we define , , and so on. The relaxations rates in system (3) are taken from the tables of corresponding material parameters while the constants A, B, C, D are mainly fitting parameters determined from the experimental data on the photoluminescence. The system (3) is accompanied by the initial conditions where we set the total concentration of Mn spins interacting with holes to 1 as a unit for non-dimensional concentrations so , and express the initial nonzero electron concentrations via this unit. The initial hole concentration in our samples is zero. When the spin-resolved concentrations are found as a solution of system (3), one can write down the circular photoluminescence intensities (I 01 is the left polarization and I 02 is the right polarization) . ( After obtaining the intensities one gets also the polarization defined by Parallel case 1: σ + pulse followed after Δt by the same σ + pulse; Antiparallel case 2: σ + pulse followed after window Δt by the oppositely σ -pulse. Following the experimental the polarization (1) for each pulse sequence is labeled as Pol p (parallel) and Pol a (antiparallel) and the corresponding polarization module difference ΔP is defined by One other notice considering the investigated system is the equality of polarizations after 1 st and 2 nd pulse of the same polarity (Fig. We consider the following parameters for the sample #4 where the maximum polarization difference has been achieved. 1. The initial concentrations we choose a unit of concentration. The resident electron concentration is , which has been estimated from the band picture of the system at 10 K. The resident hole concentration is zero ( ), since these conditions should provide the dependence shown at Fig. 2. 2. The relaxation rates in units of 1/ps are γ e =1.493·10 -3 1/ps, γ h =0.027 1/ps, as has been evaluated earlier for the similar systems 3. The remaining parameters A=0.0128 1/ps and B=0.0125 1/ps define the generation and photoluminescence rates. The parameter B is defined via the experimentally measured photoluminescence data and is sample-dependent while the generation rate is assumed to be constant for all samples. The parameters C and D should be for the best fit to the experimental data. Being multiplied by the hole and Mn spin-resolved concentrations and they define in system (3) the polarizations rates for hole and Mn spins due to interaction with each other. For the given experimental conditions maximal achievable hole concentration (in units of Mn spins) reach the value for all samples while . The results of modeling for the recorded intensities (3) are shown in Fig. Another important parameter is the total concentration of Mn spins actively interacting with holes ans serving as a unit of concentration. It is a natural suggestions that this number is sample-dependent since the distance d between the Mn layer and the holes in QW is varied. The greater is d, the smaller fraction N(d) of Mn spins is expected to interact efficiently. If we expect a tunnel-like overlap of Mn and hole wavefunctions, than an exponential fit of the present form may be considered: where d 0 and N(d 0 ) are the reference distance and concentrations which we take for the sample #4 with d=8 nm. The values of both pre-set and fitting parameters for Eq.( We believe that the parameters of the equation discussed above are fundamental characteristics of system behavior and therefore should not change with a change in the delay time. For that reason, we have used all the same modelling parameters as in the 500 ps case. However, the change in the sample structure, in particular the spacer layer thickness might deviate some of the equation (3) parameters discussed in the precious section. For that reason, when performing the same calculation procedure for the rest of the batch one should re-normalize the calculation parameters. The carrier generation rate is considered independent on the spacer layer thickness provided that In content in QW is same for all of the structures. The recombination rate as well as the rate of electron spin relaxation can be derived from experimental dependencies of the PL intensity and polarization decay as has been discussed above. Then we believe that Mn vs hole interaction constants (C and D) as well as hole and Mn spin relaxation rates weakly depend on the spacer layer thickness. The latter can be confirmed by the paper In fact, the parameter that changes most drastically with a decrease of a spacer layer thickness is a residual electron concentration in the quantum well ( ). Indeed, this concentration should decrease upon shifting the QW towards acceptor-type δ<Mn>-layer. In addition, the variation of ) is a corner stone of the qualitative model presented at Fig. We believe that small changes of the equation constant bring insignificant contribution into the ΔP variation as compared with the change of . With respect to above considerations, we have chosen the same fitting parameters for all investigated samples with the only exception for residual electron concentration. As a result, the Mn-hole spin interaction dependence on the distance d is included in our model via the resident electron's concentration scaling function The results of simulations are presented at Fig. Since Mn spins are subject to spin relaxation on the characteristic time τ Mn =1/γ Mn , one can expect a decrease of the "spin memory" effect when the window between the pulses is extended and the Mn spin system loses some of its polarization before the second pulse arrives. Despite some quantitative disagreement one can state that model of the photoluminescence kinetics (3) when correctly applied reflects the trends of the investigated system behavior discussed above. First, with the increase of Δt the ΔP value decreases. The extracted relaxation time for Mn spins is about 5 ns which agrees with other experimental results Such procedure was performed for the experimental data, the results are shown at Fig. Thus, we have investigated the spin-memory effect in the GaAs/InGaAs heterostructures with δ<Mn>-layer in GaAs barrier. The effect consists in spin polarization of Mn atoms due to interaction with photogenerated spin-polarized holes. The investigation of the effect was carried out by analyzing the polarization of the probe photoluminescence pulse in the pump-probe technique. It was shown that the circular polarization degree of probe pulse generated photoluminescence is strongly affected by the interaction of hole spins with spins of Mn atoms polarized by the pump pulse. The latter leads to decrease of circular polarization degree as compared with single pulse excitation (ΔP-effect). The amplitude of ΔP-effect is most strongly affected by the concentration of resident electrons in the quantum well which is believed to be due the specific compliance with selection rules for optical transition with the participation of unpolarized resident electrons. The rest of the sample's parameters including the spatial separation between δ<Mn>-layer and InGaAs quantum well (d s ) have a minor effect on the ΔP value which leads to a paradoxical situation of decreasing ΔP-effect with the decrease of d s . The proposed experimental technique consisting in creating the significant concentration of resident electrons in the QW may serve as a reliable photoluminescence method determining the strength of this effect as well as the Mn spin relaxation time in a particular nanostructure.