Analysis Program for Linear Active Circuits (APLAC) is a general-purpose electronic circuit simulator, which has included a built-in model of the Josephson junction (JJ) since late 80's. It capabilities in simulating eg. noisy Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices (SQUIDs), Rapid Single Flux Quantum (RSFQ) logic circuits, or superconducting Transition Edge Sensors (TESes) are relatively unknown within the superconducting electronics community. Here we give a brief step-to-step tutorial for APLAC users to unleash those capabilities. APLAC is a general-purpose electronic circuit simulator whose humble beginnings A lot of effort went into development of APLAC after Nokia Corporation began using it as their major microwave design tool. The NASSE schematic editor was developed along with the originally text-based APLAC simulation engine. The APLAC version 6.24 (maybe already earlier) included the integrated schematic capture, which feature made the APLAC attractive for Josephson dynamical simulations involving parasitics. Our earlier, hand-written code (eg. The spin-off company APLAC Inc was established to sell and further develop the simulator as stand-alone software, but in 2005 the company was acquired by Applied Wave Research and APLAC got merged into their Microwave Office suite. More recently, APLAC has been acquired along with the AWR by the Cadence Design Systems. This document is intended as a companion to the paper 'Superconductive circuits and the general-purpose electronic simulator APLAC' accepted to IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, and to act as a wrapper to the relevant simulation code files. This tutorial was originally located as a web page. A full dc-SQUID can be constructed from such J-junctions as shown in Fig. With APLAC, the same circuits can be constructed from voltage-controlled current sources (VCCS's) as shown in Fig. The APLAC version of the dc-SQUID is described in the schematic SQ2.N and the SQ2.I netlist, available as ancilliary files. The simulation result is shown in Fig. In APLAC, however, there exists the Josephson junction as a built-in library element. The circuits are much more convenient to construct and simulate faster with the library element. The The result is the same as by using controlled sources, as seen in the Fig. Similarly, the DC-SQUID construction becomes simpler (schematic SQ3.N and netlist SQ3.I as ancillary), see Fig. It is straightforward to build a time domain simulation of a dc-SQUID using the built-in JJ element. In superconducting circuits the Kirchoffs voltage law is modified: not only voltages around any closed loop vanish, but also time integrals of voltages (i.e. fluxes) around any closed loop vanish. (More precisely, they do not vanish but are multiples of the flux quantum Φ 0this is enforced in simulation if there is a J-junction breaking the loop). To make the APLAC calculate the initial condition correctly, the simulation must start at zero initial currents and voltages, and must be driven into the setpoint explicitly. Often, SQUID simulations are performed in dimensionless variables. Here we use SI units for voltages and currents, and realistic values for SQUID parameters. After a simulation run is performed with a given set of SI dimensions, the dimensionless variables The circuit contains magnetic mutual coupling between coils L1 and L3, and between L2 and L4. The Prepare statement chooses the Euler method for numeric integration, which works better with noisy Josephson junctions than the default Trapezoidal method. The bias current is ramped up to the 20.2μA value during the first 0.1 ns of simulation by using the If-Then-Else numerical function within the current source definition. Mutual inductance M = 104 pH from the input coil L3+L4 to the SQUID loop L1+L2 implies response periodicity of 20μA, so that 5μA current ramped up during the first 0.1 ns implies Φ 0 /4 applied flux during the simulation. APLAC components are not completely ideal however, specifically the smallest resistance which can occur anywhere is 10μΩ as default, if not changed in the Prepare statement. This implies eg. that the circulating current injected to the SQUID loop during the first 0.1 ns will decay with time constant of 52 pH/10μΩ = 5μs. Therefore, the longest simulation time should be significantly shorter than the 'supercurrent' decay time. In the above plot, the blue trace is the 22 GHz Josephson oscillating voltage, measured from node N0 and referred to left-hand Y-axis. The green trace is the circulating current in the SQUID loop, referred to the right-hand Y-axis. When generating SQUID characteristics, it is necessary to filter away the Josephson oscillation and only retain the average voltage. We implement a 2-pole low-pass filter with a 0.5 GHz corner frequency to the circuit, utilizing the ideal nature of the components which allows use of To introduce noise to the circuit, we originally inserted voltage sources representing the Johnson noise in series with the shunt resistors. Noting that voltage noise density of 8.1 Ω resistors is 43 pV / Hz First, we will automate the Fourier transform, see Fig. In the next simulation there are two 2 14 -step initialization intervals followed by one 2 17 -step noise gathering stage. The first interval lets the simulator settle to the chosen bias and flux setpoints. In the next interval, SQUID is driven by the sinusoidal flux excitation of 0.1 Φ 0 p-p , at frequency which precisely corresponds to the 8th bin of the Fourier transform, for the sake of determining the SQUID gain dV /dΦ . The plot can be made neater by performing a 7-point sliding average on the spectral data. Using the knowledge that frequency bins are ∆f = (N ∆t) -1 or 3.815 MHz apart, the X-axis can be scaled into the units of hertz and A problem in the previous simulation file is that noise is active also during the dV /dΦ determination stage, which leads to a fluctuating estimate. It is more practical to keep the noise sources inactive during the gain determination and switch them on for the noise-gathering stage. This allows use of a lower than 0.1 Φ 0 p-p test excitation but neglects the possible noise rounding of sharp features in the flux characteristics. In addition to the output voltage, it is possible to obeserve the circulating current in the SQUID loop, and record its fluctuations to determine the backaction noise. It is also possible to step through a number of SQUID setpoints automatically, and simulate noise behaviour at each setpoint. As an example the result of simulating at 100 flux values and at 13 bias current values is shown in Fig. Although our primary interest is the noise behaviour of dc SQUIDs and SQUID arrays, other Josephson junction circuits can be easily simulated, too. As an example from the domain of RSFQ logic, Fig. In all the above circuits the Josephson junctions have been resistively shunted with resistors, with β C ≤1. Although hysteretic JJ circuits can in some cases be simulated without careful modelling of the quasiparticle behaviour, modelling is straighforward by using controlled sources as nonlinear resistances. In Fig. Here the bias current of the JJ is swept from I B = 1.6 μA to 156.6 μA in 4 nanoseconds and back to 1.6 μA in further 4 nanoseconds, motivated by exploring the subgap branch. Finally there is the 2 ns dwell period at I B = 1.6 μA. In the upper row there is the junction voltage plotted as a function of the bias current. The voltage-less superconducting branch is followed by the jump to the finite-voltage state at the JJ critical current of I C = 100 μA. When the bias current is lowered, the JJ voltage traverses the finite-voltage quasiparticle branch, and remains at a finite voltage at the final I B = 1.6 μA. For results see Fig. In the lower row there is shown the junction voltage as a function of simulation time. It shows more clearly the 200 μV average voltage at the I B = 1.6 μA stationary end state, which is slightly above the retrap voltage V rtp for these particular junction model values. Due to this the junction remains in finite-voltage state indefinitely. If we choose a slightly lower end current I B = 1.5 μA for the sweep, the JJ decays to the zero-voltage state within the 2 ns dwell time. There is a magnified plot of the final 2.4 ns of the simulation, where the 100 GHz Josephson oscillation is more clearly visible. Above the retrap voltage V rtp the supercurrent (Josephson) oscillation is so fast that the shunt capacitance keeps the average voltage across the junction a constant, whereby the quantum phase θ determined by the Josephson relation d dt θ = 2π Φ0 U proceeds uniformly. In this case the supercurrent I(t) = I C sin(θ) averages to zero, so that only the quasiparticle current contributes. Below V rtp the instantaneous voltage across the junction varies during the Josephson cycle, and the supercurrent I(t) = I C sin(θ) does not average to zero. Contribution of the supercurrent drives the average voltage of the system further downwards, until the system reaches a zerovoltage state (even at a finite bias current). Superconducting Transition Edge Sensors do not utilize the Josephson effect, but rely on a different non-linear phenomenon: the superconductive phase transition The non-linear Voltage Controlled Voltace Source models the TES resistance in terms of the two control inputs CV(0) and CV(1), representing the TES temperature and current, respectively. Because mixed-input controlled sources are not possible in APLAC, the linear Current Controlled Voltage Source is used to transform the TES current into a voltage that can be used for control purposes. The Voltage Controlled Current Source generates the heat flow driving the thermal capacitance Ct as the product of TES current and TES voltage. Additional heat flow (represented as APLAC current) can be arranged to drive the Ct to simulate absorbed photons. In the circuit of Fig. We have found over the years APLAC to be a very useful tool in the design of practical SQUIDs and in understanding TES dynamics. Its long-standing commercial support and wide range of library components make it easier to simulate hybrids of Josephson-, TES-and more traditional electronic circuits. The APLAC facilities for hierarchical design alleviate modelling complex circuitry. Assuming brickwall frequency response