We study the suppression of superconductivity with ultrashort laser pulse in the presence of transport current. The theoretical model is based on the BCS relations for the superconducting state coupled with kinetic equations for nonequilibrium Bogoliubov quasiparticles and phonons. The results of numerical simulation for picosecond and femtosecond laser pulses of optical and infrared ranges are given. We discuss the effects of main problem parameters, including the current density. There exists the important task of developing fast switching devices for use in highcurrent superconducting applications, e.g. current limiters The nonequilibrium state of excess quasiparticles and phonons in the superconductor can be treated differently, depending on the duration of the excitation. In the case of source with slowly changing or constant intensity, the stationary nonequilibrium distribution function is usually considered, depending on the excitation parameters such as power, spectral width etc. The excitation of superconductor with ultrashort laser pulse discussed in this work, corresponds to the duration intermediate between these extreme cases. Following the typical experimental results In this work, the duration of superconductivity suppression process determining the potentially achievable operating speed, is studied. We use the qualitative theoretical model based on the Bardeen-Cooper-Shrieffer (BCS) theory coupled with kinetic equations for high-energy quasiparticles and phonons, demonstrating the experimentally known characteristic behaviour with fast stage of the excitation development. The results of the numerical simulation for typical problem parameters are presented. The dependence of the superconductivity suppression time on the current density and laser wavelength is discussed. We consider the limited area of superconductor irradiated by the optical pulse of finite duration generating the nonequilibrium Bogoliubov quasiparticles. The recombination of two quasiparticles into a Cooper pair creates the phonon carrying the extra energy, while the backwards process converts the phonon and Cooper pair into two quasiparticles. This energy exchange between subsystems allows the thermalization of the excited nonequilibrium particle densities at relatively short times. After that, the excess quasiparticles and phonons decay with corresponding characteristic times resulting in the relaxation of the superconducting state. To affect the superconducting order parameter, the quasiparticle energy should be lower than Debye energy (|ξ| < ω D ∼ 10 -2 eV). However, the quasiparticles generated by the absorption of the optical quantum of frequency ω have much larger energy ≃ ω/2 ∼ 1eV and thus need some time to reach the effective range with relaxation. We should mention the special case of THz radiation Such formulation allows to avoid the difficulties of applying the theoretical approach based on Green's functions Main relations of the BCS theory: where V 0 is the interaction parameter, n k↑ and n k↓ are the numbers of electrons with wave number k and the respective spin projections, the dash at the sum denotes the restriction for the electron energies |ξ k | < ω D , ω D is the Debye frequency, m is the electron mass, E F is the Fermi energy, and ∆ is the superconducting energy gap (order parameter). The elementary excitations in a superconductor are the Bogoliubov quasiparticles with energies ε k and secondary quantization operators γ † kσ , γkσ related to the initial electron operators â † kσ , âkσ as follows: Writing the Hamiltonian of the system in the quasiparticle basis and adding the electron-electron and electron-phonon interactions: Ĥe-e = U 0 where b † q , bq denote the phonon creation and annihilation operators, n kσ = γ † kσ γkσ , ñq = b † q bq are the occupation numbers of quasiparticles and phonons, correspondingly, and ε k and εq are the dispersion relations of quasiparticles and phonons. We use the matrix elements of electron-electron and electron-phonon interactions U 0 and M 0 independent of momentum, as the specific form of the interaction terms is not critical for the behaviour studied in this work. We also assume the laser radiation uniform, to make the work values coordinate-independent. Using the gauge in which the parameters u k , v k are real-valued, and the fact we convert the last term in The first two lines correspond to the scattering of the quasiparticle creating the phonon, the third line describes the recombination of two quasiparticles creating the phonon, while the fourth gives the obviously unphysical process of three-particle creation without energy conservation. It is useful to introduce the coefficients for the scattering and recombination processes: The system of kinetic equations The lifetimes τ e , τ ph of nonequilibrium quasiparticles and phonons correspond to leaving the excited area. The optical generation and recombination rates G, R describing the creation or annihilation of two quasiparticles with momenta k, -k are proportional to the radiation intensity at the corresponding frequency ω and depend on the particle occupations: where I(ω) is the intensity and α is the prefactor. The collision integrals for various interaction terms have the form for quasiparticles, and phonons, correspondingly, and the factor F (∆ε) was introduced to account the broadening of energy levels. In the simulation, the following parameter values were used: Debye temperature where k max = π/a is the boundary of the 1st Brillouin zone. Initial value of the energy gap ∆(t=0)=10 -3 eV∼k B T c . The values belong to the range typical to superconductors: e.g. Nb ( Worthy to note that the specific numbers are not essential for the phenomena under study as far as the main relation ∆ ≪ ω D ≪ E F is satisfied. The value of matrix element V 0 is calculated following the BCS equation ( The time of electron-electron scattering, however, not only is determined by the material parameters but also depends nonlinearly on the carrier density. As a result, it can be as large as picoseconds The intensity of optical radiation I is measured in units giving the coefficient α = 1 in equations ( In our study, we consider the temperature low enough for the equilibrium densities of quasiparticles and phonons to be zero. With the nonequilibrium quasiparticles present, the value of order parameter ∆ decreases following the equation In figures 1 and 2, we show the simulation results demonstrating the system behaviour under the action of laser pulse. In the case of shorter femtosecond pulse (figure The energy of optical quantum ω affects the time of switching and the maximal number of quasiparticles only marginally. On the other hand, higher values of the radiation quantum energy delay the start of the order parameter decreasing (figure ). It can be explained by the time required for the quasiparticles to reach low enough energies. The effect of the higher intensity consists in the quicker suppression of superconductivity. In figure Summarizing, the superconductivity suppression in the discussed conditions is related to several causes. During the action of laser pulse, the order parameter is depleted due to energy absorption. After that, the relaxation of the excess high-energy quasiparticles increases occupations n k↑ , n k↓ at energies lower that Debye energy which enter the BCS equation ( At large enough energy of the pulse, the superconductivity can be switched off completely, even during the time of laser pulse (figure The process of superconductivity suppression after the action of ultrashort laser pulse can be affected by the transport current in two different ways. First, the initial value of order parameter before the impact is lowered, decreasing the energy needed to suppress the superconducting state which can potentially provide the faster switching. On the other hand, with the lower density of Cooper pairs affecting the efficiency of the laser radiation absorption, the decreased amount of quasiparticles is generated, resulting in slower relaxation and delaying the suppression of the order parameter. The relative contributions of these factors depend on the radiation frequency which determines the energy of the generated quasiparticles. In the presence of trasport current, the Cooper pairs have momentum 2 k s , i.e. consist of electrons with momenta (k s + k) and (k sk). The unitary transformation coefficients and the order parameter obtain the complex factor We can neglect the phase change over the linear size L of the volume under consideration if the current is small enough, so that k s L ≪ 2π, i.e. k s ≪ 2π/L ≪ k F . In this case the relations (2)-( The current in the superconductor is the sum of contributions from all electrons: This expression can be re-written as where n k =< BCS| σ γ † kσ γkσ |BCS > is the number of quasiparticles with momentum k and the summation in During the simulation, the kinetic equations ( In figures 4(a)-4(f) we show the process of superconductivity suppression in the presense of nonzero current density, calculated for two values of radiation quantum energy. With increasing current density, the initial value of the order parameter decreases. This is the main factor accelerating the suppression of superconductivity at low radiation frequency (figures 4(a)-4(c)). At higher radiation frequency (figures 4(d)-4(f)), however, the stage of the preliminary relaxation of high-energy quasiparticles becomes important (like in figure In figure In the framework of the problem of ulfrafast superconductivity switching with ultrashort laser pulse, we study the relaxation of the nonequilibrium state in the presence of transport current. We use the qualitative theoretical model describing the kinetics of nonequilibrium high-energy quasiparticles and phonons accompanied by the relations of BCS theory for the superconducting state. The process of superconductivity suppression is studied in details using numerical simulation. While the high enough pulse energy can allow to switch off the superconductivity completely even during the pulse time, it can cause harmful side effects due to excess heat emission, and slow down the backwards switching. In this work, we study the case of lower energy with the delayed suppression of the superconducting order parameter after the action of laser pulse. The delay is caused by the finite time needed for the electron subsystem to lower the average energy due to relaxation, as the order parameter is affected only by the low-energy quasiparticles. The effect on the superconductivity suppression time caused by the transport current was studied. The results of numerical simulation for various current densities and laser radiation quantum energies demonstrate that the suppression time is detemined by two main factors. The first factor is the lowering of the initial value of order parameter due to the presence of transport current, able to speed up the suppression. The second factor is the delay of the first stage of relaxation, depending on the radiation quantum energy. It is found that the optimal current density needed to achieve the minimal switching time, is substantially different for the cases of optical and infrared radiation ranges.