By their very nature, voltage/current excited Spin Waves (SWs) propagate through waveguides without consuming noticeable power. If SW excitation is performed by the continuous application of voltages/currents to the input, which is usually the case, the overall energy consumption is determined by the transducer power and the circuit critical path delay, which leads to high energy consumption because of SWs slowness. However, if transducers are operated in pulses the energy becomes circuit delay independent and it is mainly determined by the transducer power and delay, thus pulse operation should be targeted. In this paper, we utilize a 3-input Majority gate (MAJ) to investigate the Continuous Mode Operation (CMO), and Pulse Mode Operation (PMO). Moreover, we validate CMO and PMO 3-input Majority gate by means of micromagnetic simulations. Furthermore, we evaluate and compare the CMO and PMO Majority gate implementations in term of energy. The results indicate that PMO diminishes MAJ gate energy consumption by a factor of 18. In addition, we describe how PMO can open the road towards the utilization of the Wave Pipelining (WP) concept in SW circuits. We validate the WP concept by means of micromagnetic simulations and we evaluate its implications in term of throughput. Our evaluation indicates that for a circuit formed by four cascaded MAJ gates WP increases the throughput by 3.6x. For the last 20 years, the information technology revolution has led to exploding market needs for efficient data processing As such, in view of its great potential, numerous SW based logic gates and circuits have been recently reported This paper proposes, validates, and evaluates a SW 3-input Majority gate under both Continuous and Pulse Mode Operation. In addition, it utilizes Pulse Mode Operation (PMO) to introduce, validate, and evaluate Wave Pipelining into SW circuits. Its main contributions can be summarized as follows:  SW Majority (MAJ) gate design and verification: a 3-input triangle shaped SW MAJ is designed to investigate its behavior under PMO and Continuous Mode Operation (CMO).  MAJ functionality validation and performance evaluation under CMO and PMO: MuMax3 software is utilized to validate the MAJ gate. In addition, MAJ performance is assessed under CMO and PMO, which indicates that PMO diminishes the gate energy consumption by a factor of 18.  SW Wave Pipelining (WP) logic gate development and verification: WP concept is introduced by making use of a MAJ gate under PMO. Accordingly, a circuit formed by four cascaded MAJ gates are instantiated to examine WP's validity in SW circuits.  WP concept validation and performance evaluation: MuMax3 software is used to validate the correct functionality of the SW WP concept. Furthermore, the due to WP throughput enhancement is evaluated, which indicates a 3.6x improvement for the considered circuit. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly presents SW basic concepts and computing paradigm. Section 3 illustrates the SW Majority gate operation principle under CMO and PMO. Section 4 discusses WP achievement in SW circuits and evaluate its throughput impact. Section 5 explains variability and thermal noise possible effects and Section 6 concludes the paper. Spin wave fundamentals and computing paradigm are explained in the following lines. When the magnetic material magnetization is out of equilibrium, its dynamics caused by the magnetic torque can be described using Equation Where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, μ0 the magnetic constant, M the magnetization, Heff the effective field, α the damping factor, and Ms the magnetic saturation. The effective field consists of different magnetic interactions and it represents in this work the summation of the demagnetizing field, the exchange field, the external field, and the magneto-crystalline field. If the electron spins are deflected from their positions by one of the excitation methods (specified at the end of this Section), LLG equation can be linearized and results in wave-like solutions. These solutions are known as Spin Waves, which can be defined as the collective excitation of the spins in the magnetic material, and it is described by SW amplitude, phase, frequency, wavelength, and wavenumber as any other wave. The relation between frequency and wavenumber, i.e., the so-called dispersion relation, is very important for SW circuit design as it determines the SW excitation frequency, wavenumber, and wavelength The information can be encoded in the amplitude, and phase at multiple frequencies in the SW technology In the following lines, the 3-input Majority gate working under Continuous Mode Operation (CMO) and Pulse Mode Operation (PMO) is explained. Also, the simulation parameters, in simulation results, and performance evaluation are discussed. Figure In order to achieve the desired functionality, the Majority gate parameters and dimensions must be carefully determined. SW wavelength λ must be larger than the waveguide width in order to simplify the interference pattern. In addition, to correctly capture the output values the input SWs must be excited at the same time and with the same amplitude, frequency, and wavelength. Further, the structure dimensions d1, d2, d3 are essential for the gate behavior. For instance, if the SWs should constructively interfere when they are in-phase, and destructively when they are out-of-phase, d1, d2, d3 must be nλ (where n = 0, 1, 2, 3, ...). In contrast, if the desired case is to interfere destructively when they are in-phase, and constructively when they are out-of-phase, d1, d2, d3 must be (n+1/2)λ (where n = 0, 1, 2, 3, ...). In order to detect the output correctly, d4 must be also accurately chosen as its value determines if the gate computes the Majority function or its complement. For example, if the gate output itself is desired, d4 must be nλ and if inverted Majority is the desired output, d4 must be (n+1/2)λ. As seen from the point of view of SW excitation SW gates and circuits can operate in two main modes: Continuous Mode Operation (CMO) and Pulse Mode Operation (PMO).  CMO: SWs are excited by using continuous signals such that the excitation signal remains active until the output result detection completion because: i) SW with fixed frequency and wavelength are excited in the same time with the same amplitude, and ii) The SW resulted from input SWs interferences can be easily detected as it has the same frequency and wavelength as the inputs. However, as the excitation signal is active from the beginning to the end of the calculation, CMO SW devices energy consumption is large, especially because they are slow as further discussed in Subsection 3.4.  PMO: In contrast to CMO, this operation is more energy effective as a result of the fact that the excitation signal is active only for a short period of time. However, PMO is more complex to work with because: i) SW excitation by means of a pulse signal produces multiple SWs with different wavelengths and frequencies as the pulse covers a large band in the frequency domain. Therefore, all the covered frequencies are excited in the waveguide, which results in the creation of multiple wavenumbers (k = 2 × π/λ) and wavelengths SWs. However, the number of frequencies can be limited by using sinusoidal or Gaussian excitation signals. ii) If the inputs are not located at the same distance from the output, the input SWs must be excited at different time moments and with different amplitudes. Otherwise, the gate malfunctions as the closest input SW reaches the output before the furthest SW, which also has a lower energy when reaching the output as a result of the damping effect in the waveguide. This requires a complex clocking scheme, which can be simplified by attempting to equalize all the input to output propagation paths by means of proper layout and/or delay buffers. The generation of the MAJ gate output O value (see Figure We use MuMax3 Figure To get inside on the practical implications of operation mode on the MAJ gate we its energy consumptions under both CMO and PMO. To this end the following assumptions are in place Note that the SW propagation delay is extracted directly from MuMax3 simulations, and it is 1 Thus, by adding the input and output transducers delays to the SW propagation delay the SW MAJ gate total delay sums up to 1.84 ns. Under these assumptions, as the source is active for 100 ps, and there are four transducers, PMO 3-input SW MAJ induces a 13.7 aJ energy consumption. CMO 3-input SW MAJ results in an energy consumption of 252.5 aJ as the source is active for 1.84 ns and there are four transducers. Hence, PMO diminishes the energy consumption by a factor of 18x. This can be easily explained by the fact that when SWs excitation is performed by the continuous application of voltages/currents the overall energy consumption is determined by the transducer power and the gate critical path length (delay). However, if transducers are operated in pulses the energy becomes gate delay independent as it is mainly determined by the transducer power and delay, thus pulse operation should be targeted. Note that regardless of the operation mode SWs are excited and detected at different time moments, which makes clocking unavoidable. However, its complexity analysis requires further SW technology developments and constitutes future work. While PMO has a substantial impact on energy consumption reduction it is also an enabling factor for the realization of SW circuits operating under the Wave Pipelining paradigm This section introduces the Wave Pipelining (WP) concept in the context of SW technology and discuss it on a simple circuit composed by 3 cascaded MAJ gates. In addition, micro-magnetics simulation results and performance evaluation are also presented. Pipelining is processing multiple sets of inputs before the first set reaches the output Figure The aforementioned in Subsection 3.1 design steps hold true for this case as well. In addition, the directional couplers must be designed, i.e., determine the coupler length Lw and the gap between the directional coupler and the main waveguide DW, such that they normalize the output of the layer one MAJ gates and the layer two can properly operate. This can be performed by making use of the equations in To detect the output O (see Figure As we want to utilize the structure in Figure To validate the correct functionality of the circuit in Figure Theoretically speaking, as the input transducers operate under 0.5 ns pulses the maximum time gap between two consecutive data sets is also 0.5 ns. However, based on MuMax3 simulation, this is not achievable with the utilized waveguide material, parameters, pulse duration, and pulses strength that allow the SWs to persist in the waveguide for more than 5 ns, which means that an already excited SW might affect new coming SWs. Based on experiments we identified 1.5 ns as the optimal time distance between two consecutive sets for this material, parameters, pulse duration, and pulses strength. Thus, we evaluated the circuit in Figure To conclude, the simulation results demonstrate that the WP concept is validated within the SW technology framework and that up to 4 SWs sets can be wave pipelined in the waveguide because SWs persist in the waveguide for longer than 5 ns, and therefore each new set might be affected by previous sets, but since the new excited SW is stronger, their effect is limited. Note that there might be a place for optimization for the number of the WP sets by: i) Exciting SWs sets with different energy level such that the first SWs set has the lowest energy level while the last one has the highest energy level. ii) Decreasing the pulse duration. iii) Increasing the time difference between the excited SWs sets. iv) Using a material with a slightly higher damping effect as waveguide such that SWs can still propagate on long enough distances but in the same time vanish quicker. To get inside on the SW WP potential, we examine the throughput of the circuit in Figure In this paper, the main goal is to introduce and validate SW based Wave Pipelining without considering the thermal noise and variability effects. However, the trapezoidal waveguide cross section and edge roughness effects were presented in We proposed and validated by means of micromagnetic simulations a SW 3-input Majority gate under continuous and pulse mode operation regimes. We also evaluated the gate energy consumption and our results indicated that Pulse Mode Operation (PMO) diminishes the gate energy consumption by a factor of 18, when compared with the Continuous Mode Operation. In addition, we also presented how PMO enables Wave Pipelining (WP) within SW circuits and validated WP on a simple circuit by means of micromagnetic simulations. Furthermore, we demonstrated that WP utilization improves the circuit throughput by 3.6x.