We use the tridiagonal representation approach to solve the radial SchrГ¶dinger equation for an inverse power-law potential of a combined quartic and sextic degrees and for all angular momenta. The amplitude of the quartic singularity is larger than that of the sextic but the signs are negative and positive, respectively. It turns out that the system has a finite number of bound states, which is determined by the larger ratio of the two singularity amplitudes. The solution is written as a finite series of square integrable functions written in terms of the Bessel polynomial. Power-law potential models have significant applications in various areas of physics, including atomic and molecular physics, particle physics, and gravity physics where is the angular momentum quantum number and пҒҢ is a dimensionless real parameter. The other length parameters, a and b, are real such that ba пҖҫ . From this point forward, we set 0 пҒҢпҖҪ . This potential is highly singular with a finite number of bound states. In the published literature, such potentials are treated only formally. Exact solutions of the SchrГ¶dinger equation with this potential for all energies and all angular momenta, which is a highly non-trivial task, has never been reported. In section 2.6 of Ref. with parameters that depend on the energy and пҖЁ пҖ© 2 ba . These polynomials are new and contain all physical information about the system. In sections 2 and 3, we formulate the problem and solve it within the TRA then present the results in sections 4 and 5. In the atomic units 1 m пҖҪпҖҪ , the time-independent radial SchrГ¶dinger equation for the inverse power-law potential (1) with 0 пҒҢпҖҪ reads as follows where E is the energy and () r пҒ№ is the corresponding radial wavefunction. Now, we employ the tools of the TRA in the formulation and solution of this problem (see , where пҒҰ is a set of square integrable functions that produce a tridiagonal matrix representation for the wave operator . In terms of this variable, the wave equation (2) becomes where 2 aE пҒҘ пҖҪ . A proper square-integrable basis that could support a tridiagonal matrix representation for the wave operator has the following elements 12 ( ) ( ) ) Yx пҒӯ is the Bessel polynomial on the positive real line whose relevant properties are given in the Appendix. The normalization constant is conveniently chosen using the orthogonality relation (A3) as (2 2 1) ! ( . The degree of the polynomial is limited by the negative parameter пҒӯ where 0,1,2,.., nN пҖҪ with N being the largest integer less than The TRA dictates that this action takes the following form where with constant factors. Hence, the three-term recursion relation (A2) dictates that the terms inside the square brackets is permitted to be only linear in x. Thus, the term proportional to 1 x пҖӯ must vanish and we should choose the basis parameters пҒӯ as follows This is reassuring since the basis parameter пҒӯ is required to be negative. In fact, it should be less than 1 2 пҖӯ , which is consistent with the physical requirement that ba пҖҫ . Moreover, since N is the largest integer less than пҒӯ пҖӯпҖӯ, then the maximum number of bound states that could be obtained by our TRA solution is which is independent of the angular momentum. However, the actual size of the bound states spectrum does depend on the angular momentum as will be confirmed by our results below. In fact, physically we expect that the number of bound states to decrease with increasing where the disappearing bound states turn into resonances With the basis parameters пҒӯ given by where we have written with parameters that depend on the energy пҒҘ and пҒӯ. n Bz пҒӯ пҒ§ defined in Finally, the kth bound state wavefunction for this power-law potential reads For a given set of physical parameters пҒ» пҒҪ ,, ab and bound state energy k E , the basis parameter пҒӯ is given by ( It remains an open problem in orthogonal polynomials along with other similar problems (for an expose of these problems, one may consult To find the energy spectrum numerically in the absence of the analytic properties of the TRA polynomial ( ; ) n Bz пҒӯ пҒ§ , we might be tempted to use the recursion relation q пҖҪпҖ« and T is the symmetric tridiagonal matrix ( 1)( 2 1) 1 (2 2 1)(2 However, the problem in finding the energy spectrum this way is that the matrix elements of T do depend on the energy itself that we are trying to find. Of course, out of all energies that enter in the construction of T, the discrete energies that belong to the spectrum are only those that produce the eigenvalue q пҖҪпҖ« for a given angular momentum . Therefore, we choose an alternative numerical technique to accomplish this task. It goes as follows: The action of the Hamiltonian operator on the basis elements, where , 0,1,2,.., n m N пҖҪ . These diagonal elements would have been identified as the energy eigenvalues had the basis set (4) been orthogonal; but it is not. The energy spectrum is obtained by solving the generalized eigenvalue equation HE пҒ№пҒ№ пҖҪпҒ— , where пҒ— is the basis overlap matrix whose elements are Using the orthogonality (A3) and the recursion relation (A2) together with the integration measure noted above, we obtain пҒ— as the following where n A and n B are the factors that multiply пҒҘ in n A and n B of Eq. ( In the first method, we select an energy independent complete square integrable basis in which the matrix representation of the Hamiltonian is tridiagonal and symmetric. Then, we diagonalize a finite submatrix of this Hamiltonian for a given set of physical parameters пҒ» пҒҪ ,, ab and obtain the corresponding energy spectrum as the negative eigenvalues of this finite submatrix. We will also demonstrate that the spectrum converges rapidly with an increase in the size of the submatrix. Moreover, we compare these results with those obtained by higher order finite difference schemes for solving the eigenvalue problem For the complete square integrable basis, we choose the "Laguerre basis" whose elements read as follows пҒЎ пҖҪ , the action of the Hamiltonian operator, () where we have used пҖЁ пҖ© Now, we use the recursion relation of the Laguerre polynomials, ( ) (2 1) ( ) for the last term inside the curly brackets in Therefore, the energy spectrum пҒ» пҒҪ 0 K k k E пҖҪ is obtained as the 1 K пҖ« negative eigenvalues of the following generalized eigenvalue equation where is the Hamiltonian matrix whose elements are given by This integral could be evaluate numerically using Gauss quadrature integral approximation associated with the Laguerre polynomials (see, for example, Appendix B in For the second method, which is based on the finite difference scheme where пҒҙ is some real positive parameter of inverse length dimension to be fixed later and Next, we discretize the finite interval пҒӣ пҒқ are the weights which are determined by requiring the formula to have maximum order of consistency (see where A , B and C are diagonal matrices of size M which contain the coefficients in Eq. ( are real square matrices of size M which contain the coefficients ,, . The parameter пҒҙ is chosen as , where 1,..., jM пҖҪ is the eigenvalue index Figure where the two functions 0 () Cn and 2 () Cn are positive that also depend on the physical parameters пҒ» пҒҪ , ab . Moreover, the figure suggests that 2 () of the energy spectrum пҒ» пҒҪ n E as a function of n for several angular momenta. Figure In this work, we obtained a finite exact series solution of the SchrГ¶dinger equation for the bound states of a radial inverse power-law potential with quartic and sextic singularities. The solution series is written in terms of square integrable functions using the Bessel polynomial. The пҖӯ9пҖӯ expansion coefficients are orthogonal polynomials in the energy, angular momentum and potential parameters. We used the tridiagonal representation approach as the method of solution and verified our results numerically via two independent computational methods. We expect that the solution obtained here will have fruitful applications in areas where inverse power-law potential models are relevant such as in molecular physics and high energy physics. The Bessel polynomial on the positive real line is defined in terms of the hypergeometric or confluent hypergeometric functions as follows (see section 9.13 of the book by Koekoek et. al Note that the constraints on пҒӯ and on the maximum polynomial degree make this recursion definite (i.e., the signs of the two recursion coefficients multiplying 1 () n Yx пҒӯ пӮұ are the same). Otherwise, these polynomials could not be defined on the real line but on the unit circle in the complex plane. The orthogonality relation reads as follows The differential equation is The forward and backward shift differential relations read as follows We can write Using this identity and the recursion relation (A2), we can rewrite the backward shift differential relation as follows The polynomial ( ; ) n Bz пҒӯ пҒ§ is defined in where 0 ( ; ) 1 Bz пҒӯ пҒ§ пҖҪ and 1 ( ; ) : 0 Tables Caption: 