A nearly three-fold enhanced stored charge under the field effect in nanoscale electrochemical devices. • This unusual increase in energy storage is attributed to the gradient fermi-level structure and the extended accessible density of states. • This novel application of the field-effect in energy storage devices is applicable to the MnO2, MoS2, and the other redox-based energy storage materials. Nanosized energy storage devices play an essential role in maintenance-free microprocessors and nanoscale energy harvesting/sensing technologies. In this study, we proved the field-effect transistor, which is the core component in microprocessors, can also serve as an amplifier for the nanosized energy storage devices. A three-fold enhanced stored charge is achieved under the field effect, paving the way for the high performance nanosized self-power system. Nanosized energy storage, energy-harvesting, and functional devices are the three key components for integrated self-power systems. Here, we report on nanoscale electrochemical devices with a nearly three-fold enhanced stored charge under the field effect. We demonstrated the field-effect transistor can not only work as a functional component in nanodevices but also serve as an amplifier for the nanosized energy storage blocks. This unusual increase in energy storage is attributed to having a wide range of accessible electronic density of states (EDOS), hence redox reactions are occurring within the nanowire and not being confined to the surface. Initial results with MoS2 suggest that this field effect modulated energy storage mechanism may also apply to many other redox-active materials. Our work demonstrates the novel application of the field-effect in energy storage devices as a universal strategy to improve ion diffusion and the surface-active ion concentration of the active material, which can greatly enhance the charge storage ability of nanoscale devices. The fabrication process of the field-effect energy storage device is also compatible with microtechnology and can be integrated into other microdevices and nanodevices. Nanoscale devices, such as intracellular recording sensors, electron devices, solar cells, thermoelectric conversion devices, and nanogenerators Field effects are widely used for nanoscale electronic devices, such as in transistors for logic circuits and amplifiers To explore the question of whether EDOS influence energy storage, we have designed a nanowirebased, field-effect energy storage device (FE-ESD, Figure The first one was determined to be less than 0.15 nA under 1 V (Figure We have investigated the electrochemical performance of the FE-ESD at different gate-voltages by using a probe station, an electrochemical workstation, and a semiconductor device analyzer. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was used to characterize the energy storage properties of devices. By comparing the CV of a FE-ESD with and without the α-MnO2 (current flow through the α-MnO2 and electrolyte, respectively), we are able to determine how much stored charge is attributable to the α-MnO2 nanowire and the background. As shown in Figure Accompanying the stored charge increase with gate-voltage is the increased voltage offset between oxidation and reduction peaks (Figure where a and b are adjustable values We also use the CV results to quantify the stored charge associated with diffusion-and surfacecontrolled mechanisms. In this case, we use the relation where the current response (i) at a potential (V) can be described as a combination of two mechanisms, surface-controlled charge storage (a1v) and diffusion-controlled one (a2v 1/2 ) V back-gate voltage, the higher H + insertion potential area emerges (c3), resulting in the higher redox potential. In the electrochemical system, an electrochemical reaction should take place while the scanned potential windows by the electrolytes (eΦ) pass through the H + energy level as shown in Figure When there is no gate-voltage, the electrochemical reaction should take place near eΦ = 4.84 eV. This value is reasonably consistent with our experimental result shown in Figure Besides the higher redox potential, there are other two interesting phenomena that emerged by applying the back gate-voltages, the broader redox peaks and the greater stored charge (Figure These two experimental results are explained in Figures nanowire along with the electric field direction. In the middle, there exists a point with no bandbending (Figure In addition to the results for α-MnO2, comparable experiments carried out using molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) nanosheets show that the application of a gate-voltage leads to enhanced energy storage (Figure Our study shows that by modifying the configuration of a nanowire electrochemical cell to include a gate electrode, it is possible to increase the energy storage properties of the device. Analysis of the CV experiment shows that without the gate-voltage, redox reactions are confined to the surface of the α-MnO2 nanowire; and that by increasing the gate-voltage, redox reactions extend beyond the nanowire surface and lead to the energy storage increase. The energy band diagram semiquantitatively shows that the proton insertion energy level bending under gate-voltage contributes to the higher redox potential, greater energy storage, and the broader redox peaks. Finally, initial results for MoS2 suggest that the gate-voltage induced increase in energy storage may be applicable to many other redox-active materials. Synthesis of MnO2 nanowires. The α-MnO2 nanowires were synthesized by a hydrothermal method following a previous report nanowires, which are over 20 μm in length and 20 -40 nm in diameter, are obtained. The large length and small diameter of our synthesize α-MnO2 nanowires make it possible to fabricate single nanowire-based energy storage devices. Device fabrication and characterization. A Cr/Au (5 nm/50 nm) counter electrode was first deposited onto a silicon wafer with a 300 nm thick layer of SiO2 using the electron-beam lithography followed by physical vapor deposition and lift-off. The α-MnO2 nanowire was immobilized by the Cr/Au (5 nm/150 nm) contact and a SU-8 passivation layer deposition. Finally, electrolyte (6 mol/L KOH) was used to cover the working electrode (α-MnO2 nanowire) and counter electrode (Cr/Au pad) of the energy storage device. Cyclic voltammetry of the fieldeffect-modulated energy storage device and the rate behavior at different gate-voltages were measured using a probe station (Lake Shore PPT4), an electrochemical workstation (Autolab PGSTAT 302N), and a semiconductor device analyzer (Agilent B1500A). (51872218, 51832004, 51521001), Foshan Xianhu Laboratory of the Advanced Energy Science and Technology Guangdong Laboratory (XHT2020-003). B.D. acknowledges support for this research from the Office of Naval Research.