Optical properties of refractory intermetallic thin films of Au3Zr were experimentally investigated for the first time, which show distinctive plasmonic properties in the visible and near infrared region. The films were fabricated through DC magnetron sputtering at various deposition temperature ranging from room temperature to 427°C and annealed at different vacuum levels. Both the structural and optical properties are found to be critically dependent on deposition temperature and anneal conditions. Films deposited between 205-320°C are shown to exhibit lower negative permittivity and better thermal stability, which could be linked to specific crystalline orientations. The films are stable when annealed at 10 -8 Torr, but are partially oxidized when annealed at 10 -6 Torr, suggesting oxidization could be a restricting issue for high-temperature applications in ambient environment. Originating from the resonant oscillation of electrons in metallic materials when stimulated by incident electromagnetic radiation, surface plasmons allow for the transmission of energy of the incident light below the diffraction limit, when coupled at the metal-dielectric interface cancer therapy Previous work has looked at various options from metallic silicides, nitrides, conducting oxides, and intermetallic alloys Thin films of Au3Zr, close to 100 nm thick, were co-sputtered at an argon process pressure of 0.8 mTorr using DC magnetrons from elemental gold and zirconium targets of purity better than 99.99% and 99.5% respectively in a cryo-pumped UHV deposition chamber with base pressure below 10 -8 Torr. A set of films were fabricated at different substrate deposition temperature ranging from room temperature (RT) to 427°C. The thin films were deposited onto pre-cleaned Si wafers, with 300 nm oxide layer. There were two exceptions. Films deposited at 320°C and 415°C were fabricated on transparent SiO2 wafers. This was intended to identify any changes on the undersides of these films during annealing processes. No adhesion layers were applied between the substrate and the deposited film. The samples were left in the process chamber to anneal in-situ at 450°C for 1 hour, immediately after deposition, to relieve thermal stress and promote grain growth. Comparative samples, deposited at RT and 439°C were also fabricated, without the in-situ anneal. Structural properties were characterised by XRR and XRD on a Bruker D8 Discover X-ray diffractometer (Cu Ka, l = 1.5418 Å) using Bruker Leptos and EVA software for data analysis. Au3Zr forms an orthorhombic structure, belonging to the Cu3Ti prototype The resistivity of the films was determined by using a Jandel 4-point probe. The optical properties of the structures were determined by the use of a J A Woollam Co. Inc, EC-400 spectroscopic ellipsometer, with an M-2000VI light source, operating with a spectral range from 370 nm to 1690 nm. The reflection spectra were measured using an Olympus BX51 optical microscope with a 5× objective (NA=0.1). The theoretical reflection spectra of the films were calculated from Fresnel's equation of reflectance at normal incidence, which is a close approximation of the experimental condition. To establish the thermal stability the films were annealed for a second time in a vacuum oven that had been purged with argon gas. The temperature was raised to 497°C at a rate of 3°C/min, and dwelled at this peak for 1 hour, at a chamber pressure of 1.5×10 -6 Torr. The thickness of the films was between 90-95 nm. Fig. From Fig. Fig. β is the width of the diffraction peak in radian, Ɛ is the strain, D is the average size of grain, λ is the wavelength of X-ray, θ is the Bragg diffraction angle, and K is the Scherrer constant in the order of unity. Though the XRD spectra are dominated by one primary peak, a weak secondary peak is identifiable in each spectrum. We chose the two most significant peaks from each diffraction spectrum in Fig. However, the 415 and 427 films have significantly larger grain sizes of 24.4 nm and 26.7 nm, respectively. It could be possible that different crystalline orientations lead to the growth of different sizes of grains. For these two films, the dominant orientation is Au3Zr (121), while those deposited at lower temperatures are predominantly Au3Zr (002) orientation. We further measured the resistivity of the films, which are shown in Fig. We characterized the optical properties of the thin films through spectroscopic ellipsometry. The results are displayed in Fig. To further characterize the optical properties of the thin films, we measured the reflectance spectra of the films using a 5× low magnification objective and compare the spectra with theoretically calculated ones based on the Fresnel equations of normal incidence, using the refractive indices measured from the ellipsometry. The results are shown in Fig. However, more pronounced changes were noted on the two small peaks Au3Zr (021) and Au3Zr (002), which became weaker after the in-situ anneal with regard to the dominant Au3Zr (121) peak. to investigate the impacts of in-situ anneal on the optical properties of the films. Two samples deposited at RT (Fig. The small difference in optical properties with in-situ anneal possibly reflects a coalesce of small grains into larger ones. Torr at 497°C for one hour, after the films had been annealed in-situ within the sputtering chamber. The XRD spectra of the films after the second anneal are shown in Fig. Torr. Intermetallic alloys contain a large group of materials with high melting temperatures, which could be promising candidates of novel refractory plasmonic materials, however, till date the optical properties of intermetallics remain largely unexplored. Here we provide the first attempt to experimentally establish the plasmonic properties of Au3Zr intermetallic alloy, which lays a foundation for further investigations on other Au-Zr alloys and refractory intermetallics.