Characterization of the molecular properties of surfaces under ambient or chemically reactive conditions is a fundamental scientific challenge. Moreover, many traditional analytical techniques used for probing surfaces often lack dynamic or molecular selectivity, which limits their applicability for mechanistic and kinetic studies under realistic chemical conditions. Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR) is a widely used technique and would be ideal for probing interfaces due to the molecular information it provides noninvasively. However, it lacks the sensitivity to probe the small number of spins at surfaces. Here, we use nitrogen vacancy (NV) centers in diamond as quantum sensors to optically detect nuclear magnetic resonance signals from chemically modified aluminum oxide surfaces, prepared with atomic layer deposition (ALD). With the surface NV-NMR technique, we are able to monitor in real-time the formation kinetics of a self assembled monolayer (SAM) based on phosphonate anchoring chemistry to the surface. This demonstrates the capability of quantum sensors as a new surface-sensitive tool with sub-monolayer sensitivity for in-situ NMR analysis with the additional advantage of a strongly reduced technical complexity. Characterization of surface processes at the molecular level is important for understanding fundamental processes that are key to industrial catalysis, energy conversion, electronic circuits, targeted drug delivery, and biosensing Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the major tools for chemical and structural analysis in chemistry and material science. Solid-state NMR in particular Here, we demonstrate the use of quantum sensors in diamond as a new surface-sensitive spectroscopy technique that works at ambient conditions and can probe planar interfaces on the microscopic length-scale with far greater sensitivity than conventional NMR in a totally non-invasive manner and at much lower costs and reduced technical complexity. The spectroscopic technique relies on the nitrogen vacancy (NV) point defect, consisting of a nitrogen impurity (N) and an adjacent vacancy (V) in the carbon lattice of diamond. These spin-1 defects allow for optical detection of magnetic resonance (ODMR) and have been established as highly sensitive nanoscale magnetic field sensors Surface NV-NMR. The surface NV-NMR technique is performed on a diamond chip in which 15 N was implanted with a particle fluence of 2x10 12 /cm 2 and with an energy of 2.5 keV (Fig. The quantum sensing scheme for the detection of NMR signals with NV-centers in diamond has been described in detail before The spin state of the NV center can be initialized in the m s = 0 state with laser excitation at a wavelength of 532 nm and optically read out due to spin-dependent photoluminescence (PL), which is weaker for the m s = ± 1 states compared to the m s = 0 state. After optical excitation nearly all the NV spins are in the m s = 0 state. Subsequently, transitions between the m s = 0 and m s = ± 1 can be coherently controlled with microwave pulses. For nuclear spin detection, dynamic decoupling sequences (such as XY8-N ) are used. These sequences are sensitive to frequencies corresponding to 1/(2τ ), where τ is the spacing between the π pulses (Fig. Characterization of the Al 2 O 3 layer. In previous work, NMR signals from samples directly on the diamond surface have been detected for a scratching experiment to corroborate the thickness of the Al 2 O 3 layer on the diamond using atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Fig. Chemical characterization of the functionalized Al 2 O 3 support. Following thickness optimization, we analyzed the chemical composition of the functionalized Al 2 O 3 layer. We selected a C 12 chain phosphonic acid (PA) terminated with a fluorinated phenolic ring (12pentafluorophenoxydodecylphosphonic acid (PFPDPA)) for chemical modification of the Al 2 O 3 surface. Fig. We note that other NMR active nuclei are present in this system, most notably 27 Al and 1 H. However, the strong 13 C signal naturally occurring in the diamond overlaps with the 27 Al resonance, precluding detection in the current experiment. This can be overcome in the future by using an isotopically enriched 12 C diamond. The 1 H signal is ubiquitous which is also observed on a clean diamond and cannot be unambiguously attributed to a characteristic of our system. Therefore, it has been excluded from the present analysis. Characterization of molecular dynamics at the surface. From our measurement of the PFPDPA monolayer a resonance linewidth of ∼ 3 kHz was observed, which is narrower than what has been commonly seen in previous NV-NMR experiments of solid samples Monitoring surface chemistry in real-time. In contrast to other surface sensitive techniques, surface NV-NMR allows for measurements under chemically relevant conditions, for example at the solid-liquid interface. In the present case, this enables the observation of the binding or the phosphonate anchoring group to the Al 2 O 3 support at the solid/liquid interface, which is depicted in Fig. The surface NV-NMR technique has been successfully demonstrated to enable the detection of microscopic NMR signals down to sub-monolayer coverages, including with real-time formation of molecular monolayer assembly on Al 2 O 3 . The use of a diamond-based sensor that is chemically inert and can withstand high temperatures and high pressures is advantageous especially, for chemical applications and catalysis. It will not only bridge the "pressure gap" in surface science but has the resilience to probe chemical reactions even under harsh conditions in-situ In summary, the results from this study introduce a new surface-sensitive technique apt for probing the chemical composition of surfaces and chemical reaction kinetics at interfaces. Using the ability of NV-centers to detect NMR signals selectively from nanoscale layers with wellestablished and versatile ALD techniques, make this a powerful and broadly applicable. As a proof-of-concept, we demonstrate the detection of NMR signals from a phosphonate functionalized Al 2 O 3 surface. In contrast to other surface techniques, sub-monolayer signals can be detected under ambient conditions. This enables us to monitor the chemical formation of the monolayer in real-time in solution at the solid-liquid interface on the microscopic level. We believe that this will facilitate further understanding of a variety of surface phenomena. Not only does this method offer non-invasive benefit of NMR spectroscopy, its functionality under chemically relevant conditions and the low technical complexity make it a practical and sensitive technique for advanced studies in important areas of catalysis, materials science, biological sensing or 2D materials research. Diamond preparation. An electronic grade diamond (1.1% 13 C abundance, Element Six) was implanted with 15 N at an energy of 2.5 keV with an off axis tilt of 7 degrees and with a fluence of 2x10 12 /cm 2 by Innovion. Then, the implanted sample was annealed under vacuum in a home built oven for over 32 hours (see Fig. Atomic layer deposition. ALD was performed using a Veeco Fiji G2 system. Prior to deposition, the diamond surface was cleaned in-situ by 5x (0.15)s cycles of ozone, which was generated via electrical discharge in O 2 . For deposition of Al 2 O 3 thin films, the ozonetreated diamond substrates were sequentially exposed to trimethyl aluminum (98-1955, STREM Chemicals) followed by H 2 O at 200 • C cyclically. Each ALD cycle followed the sequence: TMA pulse/Ar purge/H 2 O pulse/Ar purge. This was repeated for 10 cycles to achieve a final thickness of approximately 1 nm (nominal growth per cycle of 0.1 nm/cycle). To achieve a reproducible surface hydroxyl surface termination suitable for monolayer assembly by phosphonate chemistry, the sample was exposed to a remote oxygen plasma within the ALD system. In particular, the RF (13.64 MHz) inductively coupled plasma (ICP) source of the Fiji G2 system was operated at 300 W for a total of 1 min exposure. For repeated use of diamond substrates, the Al 2 O 3 was removed by soaking overnight in a 5% NaOH solution (see Supplementary Note 7) before the next ALD deposition. Phosphonic acid surface functionalization. For the fully formed monolayer shown in Fig. Surface NV-NMR. The experiment is based on a modified version of the setup described in Bucher et al. In-situ kinetics of monolayer formation. The triacid cleaned diamond was first coated with 1 nm of Al 2 O 3 and activated with oxygen plasma, as described above. Subsequently, the diamond was glued down to a watertight liquid sample holder made from a 30 mm cage plate (CP4S, Thorlabs) with a thin round cover slide (100493-678, VWR) glued to the bottom and the top fitted with a threaded lens tube (SM30L03, Thorlabs). The cage plate was then mounted to the surface NV-NMR experiment (see Supplementary Note 8). 19 F is detected with 24 time traces, which were continuously acquired by sweeping t corr to 40 μs with 201 points. Each data point in Fig. X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed with an Axis Supra (Kratos, UK) spectrometer. The monochromatized Al K α (1486.9 eV) X-ray tube source was operated at an emission current of 15 mA. The data were recorded with a circular acceptance area of Al-source and the analysed area 700 x 300 μm in diameter. Spectra were processed with CasaXPS (Casa Software Ltd, version 2.3.17).