We present exact results that give insight into how interactions lead to transport and superconductivity in a flat band where the electrons have no kinetic energy. We obtain bounds for the optical spectral weight for flat band superconductors, that lead to upper bounds for the superfluid stiffness and the 2D Tc. We focus on on-site attraction |U | on the Lieb lattice with trivial flat bands and on the π-flux model with topological flat bands. For trivial flat bands, the low-energy optical spectral weight D low ≤ n|U |Ω/2 with n = min (n, 2 -n), where n is the flat band density and Ω the Marzari-Vanderbilt spread of the Wannier functions (WFs). We also obtain a lower bound involving the quantum metric. For topological flat bands, with an obstruction to localized WFs respecting all symmetries, we again obtain an upper bound for D low linear in |U |. We discuss the insights obtained from our bounds by comparing them with mean-field and quantum Monte-Carlo results. Understanding superconductivity (SC) in flat band systems is an important problem that has come to prominence with recent experiments on twisted bilayer Much of the recent progress, starting with the earliest proposals of flat band SC In this paper, we derive exact bounds on the optical spectral weight and superfluid or phase stiffness D s of flat band SCs valid in any dimension. Our primary interest is in 2D, where these results yield upper bounds on the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless T c . We have earlier obtained very general results for multi-band Hamiltonians with arbitrary interactions Our main results are bounds on D low that scale linearly with the strength of on-site attraction |U | and depend on the flat band electron density n via min (n, 2 -n). They also depend crucially on the nature of the flat band Wannier functions (WFs). For topologically trivial flat bands, we find an upper bound on D low that involves the Marzari-Vanderbilt (MV) spread Ω For topological flat bands, we consider a Kramers pair of spin ↑ and ↓ flat bands with Chern numbers C ↑/↓ = ±1. Naively one might think that Ω diverges, given the topological obstruction to obtaining exponentially localized WFs. However, following ref. We illustrate the usefulness of our bounds for the attractive Hubbard models on two lattices: (i) the Lieb lattice Hamiltonian: We start with a general Hamiltonians of the form H = H K + H int , where the ki-netic energy H K = ijαβ t αβ (i -j)d † iα d jβ describes hopping between orbitals α in a unit cell labelled by the Bravais lattice site i. To begin with, we absorb spin into the orbital label α. The interaction We analyze systems where the spectrum of H K exhibits a very narrow band of bandwidth w, separated from other dispersive bands by an energy gap E 0 w focusing primarily on the flat band limit w = 0. (The transformation from orbital to band basis is described in appendix A.) The chemical potential lies within the flat band. The external vector potential A couples to our system through a standard Peierls' substitution in the kinetic energy H K , but does not couple to H int in the the multi-band Hamiltonian. We discuss in detail below how A must couple to the interactions after we project down to flat bands. We keep the discussion general to begin with, but then specialize to two specific models, one with topologically trivial flat flat bands and the other with nearly flat topological bands. In both cases, we look at superconductivity arising from the simplest V 1234 , an on-site attractive interaction of strength |U | w which induces singlet s-wave pairing. Optical Spectral Weight: Our goal is to obtain exact results, without making mean field approximations or using numerical methods on finite latices, for the integrated spectral weight D = ( 2 /2πe 2 ) ∞ 0 dω Re σ(ω), an important observable in its own right. In a superconductor, D provides an upper bound For w E 0 |U | we need to use the full multi-band H, in which A couples only to H K via the Peierls' phase factor, with the result Here, and below, the k sum is over the first Brillouin zone, N c is the number of unit cells, and we implicitly sum over all repeated indices: bands m, m , orbitals α, β, and space μ. The U -matrices diagonalize the orbitalspace hopping to band energies: Eq. ( Our primary interest is in the regime w |U | E 0 , where Eq. ( Following ref. Low-energy Projected Hamiltonian: We determine the low-energy Hamiltonian H low in two steps. First, we project to the subspace of (partially filled) flat bands labelled by focusing on the simplest case with a single pair of time-reversal partners in { } that are separated from filled/empty bands by a gap E 0 . Later we will further project down to the low-energy many-body states within this subspace. For the first step we use a standard technique, used for similar problems Here W α (r) are the Wannier functions related to U α (k) via We must next reckon with the localization properties of the WFs, which depend crucially on whether the bands are trivial or topological Topologically Trivial Bands: We first analyze the simpler case of "trivial" bands, where we are guaranteed localized WFs We use gauge invariance to determine how a uniform external vector potential A couples to H low when we have localized WFs; see appendix E. The interaction term V 1234 (i j , α j ) picks up a multiplicative phase factor of exp [-ie(r i4α4 -r i3α3 + r i2α2 -r i1α1 )•A], where r iα = i + τ α with τ α the location of orbital α in the unit cell. We thus see that H low couples to A, even though the (e.g., density-density or spin-spin) interactions in the original multi-band H int did not couple to A. From this point onwards, we focus on the attractive Hubbard interaction in the multi-band Hamiltonian 4 that involves four WFs centered at the same site. All other terms necessarily involve the overlap of WFs centered at different sites. The characteristic length scale for WF decay decreases with increasing E 0 , and we find that all other terms | U | for large E 0 , the regime where the projection is controlled. The dominance of the on-site | U | over all other terms implies that we can further restrict the many-body Hilbert space to states with only doubly occupied sites (↑↓) or empty sites, the attractive interaction analog of the "lower Hubbard band". The low-energy degrees of freedom can be thought of as bosons, on-site pairs bound by the large attractive | U |, with a hard-core repulsion due to Pauli exclusion of constituent fermions. Their kinetic energy in the low-energy subspace is governed by the pair hopping amplitude The ellipses denotes terms that do not couple to the vector potential and thus do not contribute to ∂ 2 H low /∂A 2 μ . Let us reiterate how H low was derived. First, we projected to the flat-bands separated from other bands by E 0 |U | w = 0. Second, we projected to the no single-occupancy subspace, given that pair hopping K ij | U | for localized WFs in the large E 0 regime. Thus H low describes the physics within the "lower Hubbard band" with bandwidth set by the near-neighbor (NN) K ij , and in particular descibes its intraband optical spectral weight. Spectral Weight Bound: The vector potential A couples to H low via K ij → K ij exp [i2e(i -j)•A] as explained above. Using Eq. ( where , where n = min (n, 2 -n), using the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality on a suitably defined inner product for operators; see appendix F. We thus obtain the bound We next relate this to the MV spread The density dependence of bound, with n = min (n, 2 -n), is sensible with the spectral weight vanishing for both an empty and a filled flat band. We note that D low is in general a function of T while our upper bound is T -independent (within the low energy subspace). Lieb lattice: We consider the attractive Hubbard model on the Lieb lattice when the chemical potential μ is within the flat band. The kinetic energy T and f (k) = t (1 + δ) + (1 -δ)e ik . The single-particle dispersion (see Fig. By an appropriate gauge choice in Eq. ( We can view |Φ| 2 = n B0 , the "Bose condensate density" for the projected H low in Eq. ( where N c is the number of unit cells in the system. The second inequality in Eq. ( Next, we compare our exact results with T = 0 MFT, focusing on half-filling (μ = 0). The calculation of the WFs and Ω is described in appendix G. The MFT solution for the three-band model is standard From Fig. 2δt where projection is justified, our upper bound on D low ≥ D s is linear in |U |, as is the MFT result for D s . (Note that MFT ignores quantum fluctuations and will itself overestimate D s .) We can get further understanding of the slopes of these "small |U |" results as follows. The current operator commutes with H low , the paramagnetic current susceptibility vanishes, and thus the diamagnetic term D low = D s at T = 0. The WFs decay rapidly on the scale of the lattice spacing a (see appendix G) and thus P (r) on for r ≈ a enters Eq. ( When |U | E 0 , we cannot project down to the flat band, and we must use the full three-band result Eq. ( Topological Bands and π-Flux Model: We finally turn to a model which harbors nearly-flat topological bands The Chern numbers are an obstruction for exponentially localized WFs which respect all the symmetries. To circumvent this, we follow refs. We now find H low in terms of the localized WFs, which allows us to couple to a vector potential and obtain a finite D low . Unlike the Lieb lattice, we now have non-zero bandwidth w of the nearly flat band which leads to a conventional contribution to D low of the form k ∂ 2 (k)n(k). We focus on the regime w |U | E 0 , where this O(w) term is negligible. In this regime H low takes essentially the same form as Eq. ( 2) where ĩ = i + i , j = j + i and i is summed over. We see that K ij is real and find that it is positive. Following Eq. ( i) were true, Eq. ( We compare in Fig. We see that the low-energy bound Eq. ( Discussion: In conclusion, we have presented exact bounds on the optical spectral spectral weight of flat band superconductors in the strong coupling regime where the interaction is much larger than the bandwidth. We obtained upper bounds on the superfluid stiffness and the 2D transition temperature that involve the geometry of the flat band Wannier functions. They scale linearly with the interaction |U | and depend on the flat band electron density n via min (n, 2 -n). For topologically trivial flat bands the upper bound is proportional to the MV spread of the WFs, while for topological flat bands it is proportional to a generalized second moment of products of WFs. The smaller the gap E 0 isolating the flat bands, the more the spatial spread of WFs, leading to a larger D s and T c for flat band SC. We find, however, that if the gap E 0 becomes smaller than |U |, multi-band effects begin to dominate Note that at each k we are diagonalizing a M × M matrix where M is the number of orbitals per unit cell, which also equals the number of bands. The matrix elements of the unitary transformation may be expressed as a representation that will be useful later. We can rewrite Eq. (A4) in the band basis where Appendix B: Projection to the low-energy subspace We want to focus on the "active bands" ∈ L the low-energy subspace. We assume that the chemical potential lies in the active bands, which are separated from all other -either completely filled or completely empty -bands by an energy scale E 0 . Let w be the effective hopping scale (or bandwidth) scale of the active bands, and V be the scale of the interaction terms. We next find the effective low-energy Hamiltonian projected to L when w E 0 and V E 0 , and arbitrary V /w. Under these conditions, projection simply amounts to restricting the Hamiltonian to bands within L. Such an approach is widely used in quantum Hall problems for projecting interactions to the lowest Landau level, and has also been used for lattice problems of Chern insulators In order to understand how external EM fields couple to this Hamiltonian, we need a real space representation of H low . To achieve that, we use the Fourier transform to introduce the operator c † im . It creates an electron in the Wannier orbital of band m in unit cell i by defining the Wannier function The relation between different bases is summarized in Fig. We are now ready to write the low-energy Hamiltonian in terms of the Wannier orbitals FIG. where the real-space hopping and interaction matrix elements (denoted by 'tilde') are given by the appropriate overlaps of Wannier functions Notice that the hopping matrix elements is in general off-diagonal in the band label. When the low-energy subspace has band degeneracies or some topological character, one has to work with generalized Wannier orbitals. They span the same Hilbert space L but do not have one-to-one correspondence with the original bands { j }. We emphasize that the operators c † i and c i that enter H low of Eq. (B6) obey standard fermion anticommutation relations as they are just the Fourier transforms of the original fermion operators (see Eq. (B3)). We contrast this with other bases in which projected operators may obey non-trivial commutation relations. Let us, for instance, write the low-energy effective Hamiltonian in the orbital basis (rather the band basis chosen above). We then invert Eq. (B4), using the orthonormality of Wannier functions, to obtain This in turn can be projected to the low-energy subspace via Pd iα P = diα . Using Eq. (B1) we find These operators now obey non-trivial commutation relations should be minimized for the optimal choice of gauge. The Wannier functions thus obtained are called maximally localized Wannier functions (MLWF). The spread functional is decomposed into two terms Ω = Ω I + Ω where such that Ω I is gauge-invariant and Ω is a positive quantity that needs to be minimized. We next make connections with the quantum metric g (k), the Berry connection A (k) and the Berry curvature f (k) of band . We use the identity to re-write Since Ω is a sum of positive number, Ω ≥ 0 and the trace of quantum metric sets a lower bound on the spread The quantum metric and Berry curvature are the real and imaginary parts of the quantum geometric tensor B (k) It is useful to write this in the bra-ket notation. Bloch's theorem states that the eigenstates are of the form | k = e ik•r |u k , where |u k are the the cell-periodic Bloch states; note the position operator r here. The orbital states are given by where the function r|αi is strongly localized in the unit cell i, given the multi-band tight-binding Hamiltonian. Thus r|αi = i|αi and we can rewrite We can then rewrite from which we obtain where ∂ μ = ∂/∂k μ . From unitarity of the U α (k) matrix at each k, we see that hence, the states α form a complete set within the space spanned by |u k . Using this, we find Finally, we can write the quantum geometric tensor in a more illuminating form Since B (k) involves the complementary projector (in parenthesis), one of its eigenvalues is zero and its determinant vanishes. In 2D, that leads to the relation det where C is the Chern number. In that sense, Chern number sets a lower bound for the spread. However, that is misleading since the other piece ( Ω) diverges when C = 0 and forces Ω → ∞ The origin of this divergence can be traced back to the smoothness of phase. Chern numbers are an obstruction to a smooth gauge, and that obstruction manifests in Ω. We define a smoothness function as a diagnostic tool to track smoothness of the phase. There is a direct relation between S (k) and Ω as seen in Eq. (C6). S (k) has singularities in the BZ (see Fig. We examine Ω(R c ) as a function of R c to determine convergence. We organize the calculation by exploiting the localization of the flat band WFs, which is controlled by E 0 , the gap to bands outside the low-energy subspace, the same parameter that justified the single-particle projection to flat bands. Exponentially localized WFs decay in space with with a characteristic length √ Ω, and the spread Ω decreases with increasing E 0 . Thus the on-site value of the WF |W (0)| is much larger than its value |W (a)| even one lattice spacing away, with |W (a)|/|W (0)| ∼ exp(-cE 0 /t) (where c is a constant). We present numerical evidence for this exponential decay with E 0 /t in Fig. This behavior of the WFs makes renormalized Hubbard interaction the largest amongst all interaction terms, since all other terms involve WFs centered on least two different sites. All other interaction terms have at least two of the WFs in Eq. (D2) evaluated in different unit cells and thus the resulting interaction is exponentially smaller than | U |. As an example, consider the pair-hopping term with the non-negative pair hopping amplitude Due to the localization of the WFs, K ij for arbitrary i and j is exponentially smaller than the nearest neighbor (NN) pair hopping K N N , corresponding to i and j NN sites. However, even the dominant pair hopping K N N ∼ |U | exp(-2cE 0 /t) is exponentially small compared to the "on-site" Hubbard | U |. In sec. G, we provide quantitative evidence in support of this argument by studying the ratio of U to other NN interactions as a function of gap E 0 for the Lieb lattice; see Fig. In addition to pair hopping, the other interaction terms that preserve the number of pairs are: density-density interaction, H ρρ and spin-flip interaction H ↑↓ : The arguments given above again imply that longer range interactions are exponentially smaller than the NN interactions, which themselves are exponentially small compared to the on-site | U |. Hence, the low energy Hamiltonian is given by where in the last three terms involving two different sites i and j, only the NN terms need to be retained. The bandwidth for excitations in this low-energy subspace is set by The reason why we only show the pair hopping explicitly is that it is the only term that couples to the external vector potential as we show next. Thus it plays the central role in computing optical spectral weight using This is a good point to recap the derivation of our effective low-energy Hamiltonian H low and to understand why it will give us a tight bound on the low energy optical spectral weight. At the first step, described in sec. B, we projected down to the subspace spanned by the flat band states { ↑, ↓}. This is controlled by the large band gap E 0 separating the partially-filled flat bands from empty and filled bands. In this section, we analyzed the various four-fermion terms in the effective Hamiltonian and organized them by exploiting the exponential localization of WFs, which is also controlled by large E 0 . This finally led to our effective low-energy Hamiltonian H low that acts within the lower Hubbard band (with no single occupancy). Thus H low describes the physics on energy/temperature scales with an effective cut off Λ < | U |. We will use H low to compute the intraband optical spectral weight in the lower Hubbard band with a (pair hopping) bandwidth K N N . In the presence of scalar potential φ(r, t) and a vector potential A(r, t), the Hamiltonian is transformed: Our goal is to use gauge invariance to determine how determine how A enters t αβ (i -j; A) and V 1234 (i j , α j ; A). As expected t αβ (i -j; A) will acquire the Peierls' phase factor, but the A-dependence of the interaction term is less well known and worth deriving carefully, even though the final answer is obvious. The interaction term in the original Hamiltonian (Eq. (A1)) will have no A-dependence if we start with density-density or spin-spin interaction. Even in this case the interaction term in the projected low-energy Hamiltonian Eq. (B6) will acquire non-trivial A-dependence, and this is what we are really interested in. The analysis presented here is general and applies to an arbitrary lattice Hamiltonians provided the orbitals {α} are exponentially localized in real space. We are interested in linear response to electromagnetic fields in the q → 0 limit. For the discussion, it suffices to consider the case of a spatially uniform electric field E. Recall that a uniform E has two gauge choices: 1. The "length gauge" φ(r) = 0 and A(r, t) = 0, with E = -∇φ, where 2. The "velocity gauge" φ(r) = 0 and A(r, t) = A(t), with E = -∂ t A, where The Hamiltonian in the two gauges are simply related by U (1) gauge transformation. We can go from the velocity to length gauge by choosing χ(r, t) such that ∂ t χ(r iα , t) = φ(r iα , t) and ∇χ(r iα , t) = A(t). The field operators also change under this gauge transformation which forces the hopping elements to pick up phase factors in order to make Eq. E2 and Eq. (E3) equivalent. For the kinetic energy this is the familiar Peierls phase factor with a uniform A As we will see later, the orbital dependence in the phase factor is crucial in interpreting the "minimal substitution" for Bloch Hamiltonians. The same argument also leads to the A-dependence for the interaction term The result is easy to understand intuitively for an interaction term of the form We note that density-density or spin-spin interactions have r i1α1 = r i2α2 and r i3α3 = r i4α4 , which makes them independent of the vector potential. On the other hand, correlated hops or pair hopping terms pick up an A-dependence. Pair hopping terms, with r i1α1 = r i3α3 , r i2α2 = r i4α4 , have twice the phase as that of a single particle hop. The results of sec. E show that the only term in the low energy Hamiltonian that couples to the vector potential A is the pair hopping term K ij . The density-density and spin-flip interactions do not couple to A and do not impact ∂ 2 H low /∂A 2 μ . This is why we did not even display these terms explicitly in the main text. Using Eq. (E7), we find Next, we use Eq. (D9) to find where μ, ν are spatial indices. The factor of 1/4 in front is cancelled by (2e) 2 coming from charge of the pair. The spectral weight is, in general, a tensor whose trace is important to us. Since we will be focussing on 2D in this paper, we define This idea can easily be extended to dimensions other than 2 by a simple pre-factor. D low should be interpreted as a sum rule for the trace of the dynamical conductivity tensor. Since the integral of a dissipative response is positive by second law of thermodynamics, we can use triangle inequality to derive an upper bound . Now we will plug in K ij that has an implicit sum on i (see Eq. (D5)). After re-labelling the sum i -→ i + i , j -→ j + i , we will get Next, we continue along the same direction and bound the expectation value from above. Notice that for any two operators A and B, the thermal expectation value can be seen as an inner product This allows us to use Cauchy-Schwarz inequality to derive We can go one step further if the operators are themselves quadratic, that is, A = c 2 c 1 and B = c 3 c 4 , where 1, 2, 3, 4 are labels such that 1 = 2 = 3 = 4. where and we have used n2 i = ni to derive the last equality. Applying this result to Eq. (F2), we get where we can use The last equality follows from the combination of translation invariance of density expectation values (n i σ = n σ ) and time-reversal n ↑ = n ↓ = n/2, resulting in where n is the density of electrons in the flat band. The final piece in the puzzle is to identify the term inside the parenthesis, D, as a part of the spread functional in Eq. (C1). that gives the final answer We can further use a particle-hole transformation, c i -→ h † i to derive tighter bounds: The inequality greatly improves our bound for systems with density n > 1, Finally, we briefly remark on how our results can be generalized to the more general attractive Hamiltonian with orbitally-dependent attraction: 0 ≤ f α ≤ 1. The usual attractive Hubbard model that we have focused on in the rest of the paper corresponds to f α ≡ 1 for all orbitals α. Let us look at the case with at least one non-zero f α for an α where the flat-band has non-zero support i.e., |W α (0)| > 0. The renormalized Hubbard interaction is then given by All the arguments of this section then go through, and we use the inequality f α ≤ 1 to derive: Appendix G: Lieb Lattice We will now illustrate the formalism with the Lieb lattice. It is an unbalanced bipartite lattice with the Bloch Hamiltonian As seen in Fig. The bound can be improved further. We introduce the orbital polarized r α = i i|W α (i)| 2 to re-write the spread functional as Ω = r 2 -( α r α ) • ( β r β ) where α, β run over sublattices A,B and C. Next, we use the mirror symmetry about the diagonal direction to argue along with W A (i) = 0 ∀i. We use these to write D as which gives Ω = D + ε where ε = ( r B -r C ) 2 ≥ 0. The inequality D < Ω improves our bound in Eq. (G3) by a factor of 2. It turns out that ε is quite small and D is within 0.01% of Ω. In fact, we can make ε = 0 by appropriately shifting the Wannier centers via a gauge transformation. Therefore, we conclude that D = Ω for Lieb lattice. We end this section by presenting an exact T = 0 lower bound involving the quantum metric for all fillings of the flat band 0 < n < 2. The lower bound uses the generalization of Lieb's theorem We have used here the notation of ref. It is easy to see that, in the |Λ| → ∞ limit, the correlation function on the LHS of Eq. (G6) is simply equal to the n B0 . If we further assume that P (r) ≥ n B0 ∀r, we get Using this in Eq. (F2), together with the fact that D = Ω (see Eq. (G5)), we obtain obtain the lower bound where we have used Eq. (C7) to lower bound the spread functional by the quantum metric. We now consider a time-reversal invariant model where the low-energy bands are almost flat and topological. When these bands are filled, the system describes a Z 2 topological insulator, with an opposite Chern number of ±1 on the two spin bands. We consider the regime where the narrow bands are partially filled. It may seem that the nontrivial topology of the bands may pose an obstruction to exponentially localized Wannier functions. However, we can circumvent the obstruction and find an exact bound on the superfluid stiffness as before. The π-flux model was first introduced as an analog of the Haldane model on a square lattice, whose bands could be made flat using only a few longer-range hoppings The phase φ induces a flux Φ = ±4φ in the red/blue palquettes shown in Fig. These k • 2a i harmonics can be induced from an intra-orbital fifth neighbor hopping We can chose the parameter t 5 to almost cancel the dispersion of one of the bands. t 5 = (1 -√ 2)/4 is the fine-tuned value that optimizes the flatness with bandwidth w = 0.036t 1 and isolates the band with gap E 0 = 3.94t 1 |U | E 0 so that finite w effects can essentially be ignored. Spins carry opposite windings with φ ↑ = -φ ↓ = π/4 so that overall the system is time-reversal symmetric. Since Ŝz is conserved, the Z 2 invariant is ν = 1/2(C ↑ -C ↓ ) for the lower band subspace. The Z 2 -odd topology of the low-energy Hilbert space obstructs exponentially localized Wannier functions that are spin-polarized. The obstruction manifests in a singularity in smoothness function S σ (k) (see Fig. We employ the method outlined in ref The resulting spin-mixed "rotated" states have smooth phase throughout the BZ (see Fig. However, since we are after exact bounds on spectral weight, localization is more important. A localized basis means that we can use the Peierls phase presented in sec. E. Besides, the projected interactions are guaranteed to be short-ranged. We now compute the renormalized Hubbard interaction (H7) For this model, we find U = 0.087|U |. We choose to work with |U | such that w |U | E 0 . Following the same strategy as before, we obtain the low-energy Hamiltonian where all interactions have a rather complicated structure. We focus here only on the pair hopping term that couples to A, as explained before, and impacts the calculation of ∂ 2 H low /∂A 2 μ . The pair hopping amplitude is given by It is worth noting that if W 1,α↑ (i) = W 2,α↓ (i) * and W 1,α↓ (r) = W 2,α↑ (r) = 0 were true, Eqns. (H7),(H9) would collapse to the expressions we encountered for trivial bands. We emphasize that this is precisely the topological obstruction arising from the non-trivial Z 2 topology. Despite the complicated structure, we find K ij to be real, positive and short-ranged. We can therefore continue with Cauchy-Schwarz inequality on the four-fermion expectation value and a triangle inequality, just as we did in Eqns. (F2-F12), to get The bound is shown in Fig. that has the convenient property that under Peierls phase substitution (see Eq. (E6)), it transforms as t II αβ (k) → t II αβ (k -eA). We emphasize that this is not the case for gauge-I. The minimal substitution allows one to write current operators (which are derivatives with A) in terms of derivatives with the crystal momentum k. We have used gauge-II extensively in our earlier work The attractive Hubbard interaction is given by where n is the total density of electrons. Overall, there are M + 1 equations that need to be solved self-consistently. Since D s is a transverse current-current response function, we need to find the current operators. As the interactions are on-site, an external vector potential couples only to the kinetic part We simplify the BdG matrix by invoking time reversal symmetry t ↑ (k) = t T ↓ (-k) = t(k) to write that gives the current operators where the diamagnetic part is and the paramagnetic current-current susceptibility is The pre-factor should be interpreted as -∂f ∂E E=Ea(k) when a = b. For anisotropic systems in 2D, the critical temperature is controlled by the determinant of superfluid stiffness tensor (see appendix H of ref Finally, we turn to the question of Hartree-Fock (HF) corrections in the low-energy sector and whether that leads to additional spectral weight by giving rise to single-particle dispersion in the flat band. Given the spin structure of the Hubbard Hamiltonian, there is no Fock correction. We show below that the Hartree term leads to at most a chemical potential shift for the models considered. This does not impact our results, since we work at a fixed density with a partially filled flat band We start with the full multi-band Hamiltonian of Eq. (A10) and Eq. (A11) with the attractive Hubbard interaction. The Hartree correction is then given by Now c † k +qm↓ c k m↓ = δ q,0 for a filled band m and vanishes for an empty band.