Bound states in superconductors are expected to exhibit a spatially resolved electron-hole asymmetry which is the hallmark of their quantum nature. This asymmetry manifests as oscillations at the Fermi wavelength, which is usually tiny and thus washed out by thermal broadening or by scattering at defects. Here we demonstrate theoretically and confirm experimentally that, when coupled to magnetic impurities, bound states in a vortex core exhibit an emergent axial electron-hole asymmetry on a much longer scale, set by the coherence length. We study vortices in 2H-NbSe2 and in 2H-NbSe1.8S0.2 with magnetic impurities, characterizing these with detailed Hubbard-corrected density functional calculations. We find that the induced electron-hole imbalance depends on the band character of the superconducting material. Our results open interesting prospects for the study of coupled superconducting bound states. Bound states appear in superconductors at localized perturbations in the superconducting order parameter. Both Caroli de Gennes Matricon (CdGM) states at vortex cores The nature of YSR and CdGM states is, however, quite different. YSR states are spin polarized and appear at a single or a few subgap energies and exhibit oscillations at the Fermi wavelength λ F that can be resolved with atomic scale local density of states (LDOS) measurements As we show below, we indeed theoretically predict and experimentally observe electron-hole asymmetric features in the LDOS of vortices in presence of magnetic impurities. As we schematically represent in Fig. The transition metal dichalcogenide 2D layered superconductor 2H-NbSe 2 is the first material where the vortex LDOS has been measured and one of the few where the nature of CdGM states has been extensively studied, both in experiment and theory To produce the YSR states in 2H-NbSe 2 and 2H-NbSe 1.8 S 0.2 we introduce Fe impurities during sample growth (about 150 ppm), as identified after the experiment using inductively coupled plasma atomic analysis. In this diluted regime Fe impurities produce practically no changes in the residual resistivity or T c both for 2H-NbSe 1.8 S 0.2 or 2H-NbSe 2 . The amount of Fe impurities is sufficiently small as to leave the superconducting gap and vortex structure unaffected, but large enough to be easily detected in the area occupied by a single vortex. We use a Scanning Tunneling Microscope (STM) to measure the LDOS as a function of the position at 0.8 K. Samples are cleaved at or below liquid He, to allow for a clean atomically flat surface and the tip is prepared in-situ It is of interest to first analyze the different length scales associated to isolated CdGM and YSR states, particularly in the case of 2H-NbSe 1.8 S 0.2 (Fig. To better understand the magnetism at the Fe impurities we calculated the electronic structure and the spin-density isosurface, i.e. the difference between spinup and spin-down charge densities (Fig. We show vortices in close proximity to YSR impurities in Fig. (with G 0 the averaged tunneling conductance for bias voltages above the gap), we observe that vortex cores are not axially symmetric (Fig. As stated above, we trace the broken axial symmetry to the interplay between vortex and YSR states. We have calculated the perturbation to a rotationally symmetric vortex induced by a magnetic impurity located close to the vortex core. As shown in the Supplemental Information, we start with a two dimensional superconductor described by a Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian. We find discrete energy levels E n and the shape of electron and hole wave functions ψ + n , ψ - n of CdGM vortex bound states (with n the angular momentum number). Magnetic YSR impurities are characterized as usual by the exchange coupling J at the impurity sites , where θ is the polar angle with respect to the vortex center, r p and θ p provide the length and the angle of the line joining the vortex center and the impurity position and the ± sign depends on whether the effective mass is negative or positive, i.e. whether the bands have a hole or an electron like character. The magnitude of the perturbation decays exponentially with the distance from the impurity to the vortex center. As we show in Fig. Let us note that vortices in 2H-NbSe 2 , with their characteristic strong six-fold star shape, present a rather involved shape of the asymmetry (Fig. In all, we conclude from our combined theoretical and experimental work that YSR states produce electron-hole asymmetric vortex cores. The YSR states allow visualizing the discrete nature of CdGM levels and their electronhole asymmetry is translated to large scales. Our theory also suggests that a superconductor with predominantly electron band character should lead to an opposite shift in the LDOS. For example, vortices have been observed in β-Bi 2 Pd Bound states in vortex cores have been considered in the past mostly to address the influence of pair potential disturbances on vortex pinning Unconventional d-wave or s± superconductors often show pair breaking at atomic impurities and vortices at the same time Finally, let us note that one can also envisage experiments using atomic manipulation or deposition to place impurities at certain positions. The position of vortices is easily modified by changing the magnetic field. Groups of geometrically arranged YSR impurities can lead to significant spatially distortions of the LDOS of vortex states. where m * is the absolute value of the effective mass, E F is the Fermi energy and ∆(r) = ∆ 0 tanh(r/ξ V )e -iθ with the size of a vortex core ξ V . Notice that we consider a system with a hole like band character, as 2H-NbSe 2 . where N n is a normalization factor and rn ≡ (r α n and β n are where The BdG equation for the Fermi level lying in an elec-arXiv:2103.04164v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 6 Mar 2021 tron like band in the basis φ = (φ (10) The functions ψ and φ are related by a transformation, where C is the complex conjugate operator. We note that the sign of phase shift η n between ψ + and ψ -along the radial direction shown in Eq. ( It is useful to remember the consequences of these expressions for the shape of the LDOS at and around a vortex core 2 and in many other superconductors. As a result, the LDOS shows a electron-hole symmetric patterns. In presence of anisotropic pairing, as in 2H-NbSe 2 , we can take into account the hexagonal symmetry of the crystalline lattice by using ( The sixfold symmetry breaks the rotational symmetry of the isotropic pairing ∆(r) for V = 0, as observed in the experiment, but again it leads to axially symmetric solutions. Including YSR states. We now consider the effect of magnetic impurities. We locate magnetic impurities at r = r pi . The impurity Hamiltonian contains a magnetic (J i ) and non-magnetic (K i ) part and we write it as where τ z is the Pauli matrix in Nambu space. Here the relation between J i and K i can be determined by YSR state energy observed in the experiment. Note that the direction of the magnetic moment is specified by a unit vector ŝ. The eigenvalues and eigenvectors of ŝ • σ are expressed as ŝ• σ|s = s|s , where s = ±1 are eigenvalues. For simplicity, we assume that J i = J and K i = K. The perturbed energy eigenvalues and eigenstates, (E n,s , ψ n,s ) → ( Ẽn,s , ψn,s ) can be obtained by solving the following equation constructed in the subspace spanned by the relevant nearest-neighbor states, where and the eigenstate has the form ψn,s = j,s c j,s ψ j,s , with the summation index j ∈ {n -1, n, n + 1} for isotropic pairing (c a = 0, 2H-NbSe 1.8 S 0.2 ) and j ∈ {n-6, n-1, n, n+1, n+6} for anisotropic pairing (c a = 0, 2H-NbSe 2 ). If we neglect the rapid oscillations at the scale of k F r, we can write the probability density difference between the electron-like (| ψ+ n,s | 2 ) and the hole-like (| ψn,s | 2 ) states as c * j,s c k,s e i(j-k)θ P jk (r), The difference of the normalized conductance between the positive and negative bias voltages is given by 1 + e β(eV -Ẽn,s) 2 -e β(eV + Ẽn,s) 1 + e β(eV + Ẽn,s) 2 . (21) To obtain the results shown in the main text, we use ξ V =30 nm, k F = 9 nm -1 , E F = 135 meV, ∆ 0 = 1 meV, T = 800 mK for both compounds. For 2H-NbSe 2 , we use c a = 0.05, J = -10 meVnm 2 and K = 10 meVnm 2 , whereas for 2H-NbSe 1.8 S 0.2 we use c a = 0, J = -20 meVnm 2 and K = 20 meVnm 2 . ρ = 0.005 meV -1 nm -1 is used to fit the experimental data. Notice that the position of impurities is very different in both cases (Fig. To better understand the origin of our result, let us discuss a simple example taking just a single magnetic impurity and isotropic superconducting pairing, c a = 0. In the weak perturbation limit, |c n,s | |c n±1,s |, the density of the perturbed state can be written as where the coefficients are (up to a normalization factor close to one) Using Eq. ( In the parameter regime we consider, F n (r) and η n (r) are monotonically decreasing functions with respect to n and η nη n+1 is small and positive of the order of 10 -2 . In the previous Eq. ( where a ≈ 4(1ε 2 n /2). For the case of electron-like bands and within the same simplifying hypothesis one should change η n (r) by -η n (r). It is thus straightforward to conclude that the asymmetry in Eq.( We show the result of the calculation with a single magnetic impurity in Fig. IMPURITIES. In Fig. Notice the small electron-hole asymmetry in absence of YSR impurities (Fig. Calculations. We performed spin-polarized first principles calculations based on DFT with the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) of Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof Relaxed atomic arrangements. To model the experimental system, we constructed slabs of 4×4×2 size formed by four layers (192 atoms each). The relaxed atomic positions are represented in Fig. Magnetic interactions. We inset a vacuum of 18 Å in between sets of cells, to avoid interaction between replica images as a result of periodic boundary conditions. In order to describe the strong correlation of electrons in Mott-Hubbard physics, we adopted a DFT+U approach, where U is the on-site Coulomb repulsion, using the simplified version proposed by Dudarev et al Magnetic moment. In the Fig. To perform the STM measurements we prepared a plate like sample and glued it to our sample holder. We glued a piece of alumina on top of the sample and removed it at 4.2 K by pushing the piece with a beam. To this end, we used the movable sample holder described in Ref. Synthesis. To synthesize samples of the 2H-NbSe 2 and of 2H-NbSe 1.8 S 0.2 we first mixed powders of Nb, Se (99.999% Se from Alfa-Aesar) and S (99.98% S from Sigma-Aldrich) in a stoichiometric ratio, and sealed these in an evacuated quartz ampoule. We heated from room temperature to 900 • C at 1.5 • C/min. Then, the temperature was kept constant for ten days and the furnace was switched off for cooling. We mixed 4 mmol of the previously synthesized material with iodine as transport agent (iodine concentration of 5 mg/cm 3 ). We sealed the mixture in an evacuated quartz ampoule and placed it inside a three-zone furnace with the compound in the leftmost zone. The other two zones were heated up in 3 h from room temperature to 800 • C and kept at this temperature for two days. After that we established a gradient of 800 • C / 750 • / 775 • C in the three-zone furnace. The temperatures were kept constant for 15 days and the furnace then cooled down naturally. Characterization. We obtained large single crystals, with lateral sizes in the order of several millimeters. The crystals were analyzed by powder X-ray diffraction and inductively coupled plasma (ICP) mass spectrometry. The experimental powder patterns were refined with the structure of pure 2H-NbSe 2 (ICSD 51589) in both 2H-NbSe 2 and of 2H-NbSe 1.8 S 0.2 . We obtained a variation in lattice constants with S doping compatible with literature (a = 3.4451(3) Å, c = 12.542(1) Å in 2H-NbSe 2 and a = 3.4327 Superconducting gap and vortex lattice. In Fig. to obtain the images shown in the main text for 2H-NbSe 1.8 S 0.2 . As we show in Fig. . For completeness, we provide the results for all bias voltages in 2H-NbSe 1.8 S 0.2 in Fig. Magnetic susceptibility of the bulk. We have performed susceptibility measurements in the same samples measured by STM using a Quantum Design PPMS system, with the magnetic field applied perpendicular to the plate like sample. Inside the superconducting phase, the signal is dominated by the superconducting diamagnetic response. Above T c we observe a diamagnetic background and a small signal which is ferromagnetic like (Fig. Maps at zero field and in the normal phase. We provide a large size zero bias conductance map at zero field (Fig. k 2