A noiseless, photon counting detector, which resolves the energy of each photon, could radically change astronomy, biophysics and quantum optics. Superconducting detectors promise an intrinsic resolving power at visible wavelengths of R = E/δE ≈ 100 due to their low excitation energy. We study superconducting energy-resolving Microwave Kinetic Inductance Detectors (MKIDs), which hold particular promise for larger cameras. A visible/near-infrared photon absorbed in the superconductor creates a few thousand quasiparticles through several stages of electron-phonon interaction. Here we demonstrate experimentally that the resolving power of MKIDs at visible to near-infrared wavelengths is limited by the loss of hot phonons during this process. We measure the resolving power of our aluminum-based detector as a function of photon energy using four lasers with wavelengths between 1545 -402 nm. For detectors on thick SiN/Si and sapphire substrates the resolving power is limited to 10 -21 for the respective wavelengths, consistent with the loss of hot phonons. When we suspend the sensitive part of the detector on a 110 nm thick SiN membrane, the measured resolving power improves to 19 -52 respectively. The improvement is equivalent to a factor 8 ± 2 stronger phonon trapping on the membrane, which is consistent with a geometrical phonon propagation model for these hot phonons. We discuss a route towards the Fano limit by phonon engineering. A camera in which each pixel can count individual photons with high efficiency and which simultaneously resolves each photon's colour is a dream for many (bio)physicists, astronomers and anybody working in low light applications. In semiconductor based detectors, each visible or near-infrared photon creates only one or a few excitations due to the large bandgap. Therefore energy information about absorbed photons is lost. Dark excitations are indistinguishable from photon excitations, which causes the well-known dark current and read noise that limit the detector sensitivity. In a superconductor, the energy needed to create excitations can be orders of magnitude less than in a semiconductor. A single visible photon can break a few thousand Cooper pairs. A measurement of the number of broken pairs is therefore a direct measure of the photon energy. Microwave kinetic inductance detectors (MKIDs) One of the main characteristics of photon counting MKIDs, the energy resolving power, is poorly understood. The resolving power can be limited by different mechanisms, such as: the signal to noise, quasiparticle diffusion, non-uniformity of the microwave current and phonon losses. Ultimately, the resolving power is limited by the statistical variation in the number of quasiparticles generated per photon. This limit arises because the initial photon energy (a few eV) is downconverted into quasiparticles with a typical energy of 0.1 -0.2 meV through a number of electron-electron and electronphonon interaction steps. When all photon energy is kept inside the detector during this pre-detection stage, the resolving power is described by Fano statistics with E the photon energy, ∆ = 1.76k B T c the gap energy of the superconductor, and T c the critical temperature. η pb expresses that not all energy can be converted to new quasiparticles. Even when all photon energy stays inside the superconductor during downconversion, η pb = η max pb = 0.59, which is equivalent to an average energy of 1.7∆ per generated quasiparticle Energy resolution measurements on MKIDs have been reported for different materials. For TiN (with T c = 0.8 K), R ≈ 10 at 400 nm TES detectors have shown resolving powers of 11 -23 at 780 -350 nm Here we demonstrate that the resolving power of MKIDs at visible to near-infrared wavelengths is indeed limited by hot phonon losses due to the downconversion process after photon absorption. We use a hybrid NbTiN-Al MKID with aluminum as the sensitive material, which is optimised for this resolving power study. We use a geometry for which we have studied the quasiparticle physics in detail and for which the sensitivity is high enough not to be limited by signal to noise We use hybrid NbTiN-Al resonators as single photon detectors. The devices used in this work are hybrid NbTiN-Al resonators For the membrane based device we have found that the number of measured photon hits is strongly dominated by hits in the NbTiN groundplane strip, when that NbTiN strip is also placed on the membrane. Therefore, we have made the end-section of these resonators much wider, to only have the central Al strip on the membrane (Fig. We have chosen these designs to study the resolving power and the effect of phonon losses in a device that we understand well. The downside of this geometry, together with the choice for Al as active material, is that the absorption efficiency of photons (or quantum efficiency) of the devices is low. The efficiency is limited by the Al fill fraction in the aperture and the Al surface impedance at the measured wavelengths. The design excludes two possible limitations to the energy resolution. Quasiparticle diffusion out of the sensitive part of the detector could cause pulse height variations. ∆ NbTiN /∆ Al ≈ 12, which prevents the quasiparticles generated in the Al to diffuse out of the Al volume during the single photon pulse. Secondly microwave current density non-uniformity in the detector could lead to a different pulse height for the same photon energy when absorbed in different locations To limit absorption of radiation in unwanted areas on the chip we place a 500 μm diameter aperture on top of the chips, as indicated with a red circle in Figure The samples are cooled in a pulse-tubed pre-cooled adiabatic demagnetisation refrigerator. Measurements are carried out at a temperature of 120 mK, unless otherwise indicated. The sample stage is carefully shielded from stray light from the 3 K stage of the cooler, using a box-in-box concept with coax cable filters in the outer box Microwave measurements are performed with a standard homodyne detection scheme. The signal from the microwave generator is first attenuated at every temperature stage, sent through the sample and amplified with a low noise HEMT amplifier at 3 K and with a room temperature amplifier. The noise floor we observe in the measurement corresponds to an effective system noise temperature of about 5 K. The output is mixed with the original signal using an IQ mixer. A detailed overview of all components can be found in Ref. 39. In an early experiment of this kind, the optical fiber was not mounted at the lowest temperature stage, but ended at the 3 K stage of the cooler. The detector, illuminated through the same fused silica diffuser and BK7 glass window (both at 120 mK), was therefore also exposed to the 3 K environment. In this configuration we found a strong increase in the noise, compared to a dark measurement with the sample box closed with a copper lid, as shown in Figure For every new measurement condition, we first perform an S 21 frequency sweep to find the resonant frequency and to measure the resonance circle as a reference for the MKID response. At the resonant frequency we first per-form a noise measurement with the lasers off at 1 Msample/s. For the resolving power measurements, we use four room temperature, fiber-coupled diode lasers (Thorlabs) with wavelengths 1545, 986, 673 and 402 nm, with output powers between 1 -10 mW in continuous wave mode and a linewidth corresponding to R > 300. To enable single photon absorption at a rate of ∼100 Hz, around 80 dB of attenuation is used before entering the cryostat. Note that also laser power is lost due to the inefficient absorption as explained above and because the illumination spot after the diffuser is larger than the aperture. We take 40 s of data for devices A and B and 160 s for devices C and D, sampled at 1 Msample/s, which aims at a few thousand single photon events per wavelength. Single photon pulses are processed with a standard optimal filter, applied to the MKID phase response, θ, which gives the highest signal-to-noise for our devices. The optimal filter is applied in the frequency domain, to extract the optimal pulse amplitude A from the measurement where the bandwidth is limited at low frequencies by the duration of the pulses, which we take 3 ms, including 0.5 ms of pre-pulse data, and at high frequencies by the sampling rate. Time traces that have multiple pulses (on top of each other) within this time window are left out of the analysis. The pulse component at θ(f = 0) is left out of the analysis since it does not improve, or even deteriorates the resolving power. The pulse template M (f ) is calculated for each measurement condition as the average of the detected pulses, where we iterate once to only use pulses which have a pulse amplitude within 3σ around the maximum in the histogram. Typical average pulses are shown in Fig. In the analysis we distinguish several aspects of the resolving power, expressed by different symbols. R is the measured resolving power of the detector. A typical histogram for 673 nm illumination of devices C and D is shown in Fig. R SN is the estimate of the signal-to-noise contribution to the resolving power from the noise spectrum and the pulse template with A the average pulse height. R SN is also called R N EP in literature. R 0 is the measured resolving power using the optimal filter (Eq. 2) on pieces of noise. The resulting histogram is centred around E = 0 and R 0 represents the FWHM with respect to the photon energy, R 0 = E/δE E=0 . It is a measure of the potential influence of e.g. baseline fluctuations that are not taken into R SN . Finally we will analyse the contributions to the measured R intrinsic is a measure of the resolving power contributions that are not due to noise. Figure We can estimate the pulse height using the number of quasiparticles generated by the photon N qp = η pb E/∆. For a linear detector, the resulting detector phase response is then given by θ = N qp dθ dNqp . We calculate the responsivity factor using dθ dNqp = -4Q fres,0 dfres(T ) dNqp(T ) , where the resonant frequency f res (T ) is obtained from a measurement of S 21 as a function of bath temperature Capturing the behaviour of the resonator in a single responsivity term dθ/dN qp , measured for a quasiparticle population at elevated bath temperature is a strong assumption. A more detailed pulse model, including the pulse rise and decay, should start from the rate equations for quasiparticle recombination The measured resolving power for the different devices as a function of photon energy is shown in Fig. On the way to a higher R, we have also measured a 150 nm Al film on sapphire, device B. The phonon escape time increases linearly with film thickness, which should enhance a phonon-loss limited R intrinsic significantly. However, as we observe in Fig. We separate the contributions of R SN and R intrinsic to R as described in Section IV, which is shown in Fig. In both devices C and D, R SN is a small contribution to R and so R intrinsic dominates. We have excluded known limits to R intrinsic due to quasiparticle out-diffusion and nonuniform current density by design (Section II). It is also unlikely that baseline fluctuations that are not captured into N (f ) play a dominant role since R 0 is very close to R SN for both devices. It is therefore plausible that R intrinsic for the membrane device is also dominated by hot phonon losses. We therefore interpret the difference between substrate and membrane as entirely due to the enhanced phonon trapping. We first derive the experimental phonon loss factors from the resolving power measurements in Section VII A and analyse the relative phonon trapping between devices on substrate and on membrane in Section VII B. In Section VII C we analyse the absolute value of the phonon loss factor for the substrate devices. We quantify the effective level of phonon loss and phonon trapping on the membrane by comparing the R intrinsic for the devices on substrate (C) and on mem-brane (D), as shown in Figure with J accounting for the hot phonon loss. Per definition the Fano limit is reached when J = 0 (Eq. 1). Note that the minimum energy to generate a quasiparticle, ∆/η max pb , should be used here also for significant phonon losses. The generally used η pb is an expression of average energy lost. R phonon expresses the variance of that process, for which the effect of phonon loss is taken into account by J > 0. Using the known values for F , ∆, and η max pb , and assuming that R intrinsic is indeed dominated by phonon losses, we can fit Eq. 4 to R intrinsic for devices C and D, which results in the curves plotted in Fig. The phonon loss factor J is expected to scale linearly with the phonon trapping factor τ esc /τ pb , with τ esc the average time a phonon spends in the superconductor and τ pb the average time it takes to break a Cooper pair To model the enhanced phonon trapping we consider that the phonon energies which dominate the downconversion process range from the Debye energy to about 10∆ So far we only compared the relative R intrinsic between substrate and membrane. The absolute value of J C , on substrate, can be compared to the detailed model of the different downconversion stages in Refs. 11, 27, and 28. For the high energy part of the downconversion process (from E photon to around E Debye ), we evaluate Eq. 25 from Ref. 28, for photons incident on the top-surface. We first consider that for the highest phonon energies, around the Debye energy, only longitudinal phonons are available for Al The phonon loss factors from both stages can be added together, J = J high + J low = 3.0, which agrees well with the measured J C . When we fit in the same way the measured R intrinsic for Device A on sapphire, we obtain J A = 3.7 ± 0.3. We then use the same equations with the acoustical properties of sapphire to obtain theoretically J = 2.7, which is lower than the measured J A . We realise that not all the input parameters to calculate J high and J low are accurately measured. For example, we have assumed a diffusion constant for thin Al of 20 cm 2 /s, where measured values range from 18-60 cm 2 /s We have also measured quasiparticle fluctuations (generation recombination noise) in the same devices, which we present in detail in Ref. 31. The quasiparticle recombination times on substrate and membrane, fitted from the spectra of these fluctuations, show a factor 66 ± 17 difference in phonon escape time. The effect is illustrated for the high temperature (T ∼ 300 mK) noise spectra of devices C and D in Fig. As shown in Fig. The most important next question that is raised by this work is how to experimentally reach a Fano limited energy resolution. In the case of Al on a thin membrane as in device D, we have J D = 1.9F , whereas J F is needed for the Fano factor to dominate the resolving power. If we set a goal of R = 0.9R F ano , we need J < F/5, and therefore another factor of 10 better phonon trapping. This is unrealistic with the geometrical phonon trapping approach we take now, since either the membrane becomes impractically thin, or the Al strip becomes too wide to conserve R SN (only with a more resistive metal, a wider strip remains an option). We therefore envision the fabrication of a phononic crystal (PnC) to better trap the phonons that flow to the bath. It is important for MKIDs to have a PnC that blocks high frequency phonons, but is transparent for phonons at the microwave readout frequency (∼ 2 -6 GHz) to reduce microwave non-equilibrium effects The analysis above shows that it is realistic to get much closer to the Fano limit. However, reaching R > 0.9R F ano is unrealistic from a phonon-trapping point of view. Additionally the requirement R SN R F ano is also difficult. For our Al MKIDs, apart from the additional phonon trapping, we aim to improve R SN further by reducing the film thickness to lower the volume and improve the kinetic inductance fraction. Additionally we can use a pulse filter combining the amplitude and phase response It is striking that most substrate-based MKIDs with a high enough R SN are all limited to R ≈ 10 -20 We have measured the resolving power of superconducting, energy-resolving, single photon counting MKIDs for wavelengths of 1545 -402 nm. By comparing devices where the superconductor is deposited on substrate with devices on a 110 nm membrane, we show that the resolving power is limited by the loss of hot phonons. These phonons are involved in the downconversion process, in which the absorbed single photon energy is converted into measurable quasiparticle excitations through multiple stages of electron-electron and electron-phonon interaction. For devices on substrate the resolving power is limited to 10-21 for 1545-402 nm respectively. On the membrane this improves to 19 -52, which is consistent with a factor 8 ± 2 stronger phonon trapping compared to the substrate. Even stronger phonon trapping, possibly using phononic crystals, is needed to get closer to a Fano-limited resolving power, together with a further improvement of the signal-to-noise (thinner film, smaller volume). problem we are mainly interested in phonons with relatively high energies and therefore short phonon wavelengths. Phonons with energies ranging from the Debye energy (37 meV in Al) to around 10∆ = 1.9 meV dominate this process In the model, we initialise a phonon at the top surface of the metal film at a random position and with a random angle of propagation and trace the propagation of the phonon. Reflection at any interface is assumed to randomise the angle of reflection due to roughness, in comparison to the short wavelengths. When hitting the metal-substrate interface we calculate the probability of the transmission from the acoustic mismatch model with the equations from Ref. 55. Upon transmission the phonon is refracted according to Snell's law. When the phonon enters the area underneath the film we distinguish between the substrate and membrane. For a film on the substrate, we consider a phonon that enters the substrate to be lost, since the substate is 350 μm thick, compared to the metal strip of 1.7 μm wide. For the membrane, a phonon that hits the bottom of the membrane is reflected back at random angle, and therefore has a probability to re-enter the film, again with a probability from the acoustic matching. When the phonon propagates outside the area underneath the metal, we estimate in this case a 50% probability of returning underneath the film at a random angle, to take into account that any (diffusive) interaction with the membrane interfaces outside of this area can lead to the phonon returning. Diffusive scattering at the membrane interfaces is plausible considering that the membrane is exposed to the reactive ion etch for the NbTiN on the front side. Phonons that do not return we consider lost. The effect of phonon trapping is quantified using the total dwell time of the phonon in the superconducting film, usually called the phonon escape time τ esc . We average the dwell time of 100,000 phonons for each set of parameters. The results are shown in Table Comparing the dwell times on SiN substrate and SiN membrane, we find a factor of 8.1 enhancement due to the thin membrane. This corresponds very well to the trapping factor measured from resolving power 8 ± 2, especially given the simplicity of the model. The phonon trapping enhancement obtained from the measurements of quasiparticle fluctuations at temperatures from 250 -350 mK is 66 ± 17 Appendix B: Low energy events for membrane devices The full histograms of Devices C and D, corresponding to the resolving power measurements in Fig. R, which we take as the FWHM of the primary peak. The low-energy events could be avoided by properly focusing the radiation onto the sensitive part of the MKID with a microlens. As explained in Section II we have chosen a well-studied geometry with sufficient signal-tonoise for energy resolution studies, with the downside of non-selective illumination. For Device D at 402 nm, as shown in the top panel of Fig. Because of the high signal-to-noise, subsequent single photon hits that are too close in time are generally easy to distinguish and filter out before making the histogram. However, in the presence of low-energy hits on device D this is not always effective. We therefore need to remove double hits that involve a primary and a low-energy hit in a post-processing step, for which we reject these double hits based on the residual after applying the optimal filter, θ(f ) -AM (f ), integrated over frequency (see Fig. Here we take Z 1 (0) = 1. g 1 (x) is given by: g 1 (x) = where the ln(...) terms are corrected with respect to Ref. 28. f (x) is given by Here Ω D is the Debye energy, Ω 1 is the characteristic energy at which this stage ends, η is the acoustical transmission coefficient, l pe,D is the mean free path, d the film thickness, 0 = 1.7∆ the average quasiparticle energy and ξ c = cos(θ c ), with θ c the critical angle for phonon transmission at the interface.