In order to identify the mechanism responsible for the formation of charge-density waves (CDW) in cuprate superconductors, it is important to understand which aspects of the CDW's microscopic structure are generic and which are material-dependent. Here, we show that, at the local scale probed by NMR, long-range CDW order in YBa2Cu3Oy is unidirectional with a commensurate period of three unit cells (λ = 3b), implying that the incommensurability found in X-ray scattering is ensured by phase slips (discommensurations). Furthermore, NMR spectra reveal a predominant oxygen character of the CDW with an out-of-phase relationship between certain lattice sites but no specific signature of a secondary CDW with λ = 6b associated with a putative pair-density wave. These results shed light on universal aspects of the cuprate CDW. In particular, its spatial profile appears to generically result from the interplay between an incommensurate tendency at long length scales, possibly related to properties of the Fermi surface, and local commensuration effects, due to electron-electron interactions or lock-in to the lattice. In recent years, charge order, a periodic modulation of the charge density and lattice positions, called chargedensity wave (CDW), has been shown to be a universal property of hole and electron doped cuprates More generally, the knowledge of the spatial profile of the charge modulation, which includes its periodicity but also its intra-unit-cell structure and the possible presence of topological defects or discommensurations, is important for understanding quantum oscillations According to scattering experiments, Y-, Bi-and Hgbased cuprates show short-range, bi-directional (albeit likely unidirectional at short length scales This view has been challenged by recent progress in the analysis of scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) measurements in Bi-based cuprates revealing an extended doping range in which the local wave vector q 0 is 1/4 (in units of 2π a , with a being the crystal lattice parameter), equivalent to a local commensurate period λ = 4a Among cuprates showing incommensurate short-range CDW order and no spin-order, YBa 2 Cu 3 O y (YBCO) is distinguished by 1) larger values of the CDW correlation length in zero-field and 2) the presence of threedimensional (3D) long-range CDW order, observed by quenching superconductivity in high magnetic fields FIG. directional (propagating along the b axis, parallel to the chain direction) with the same incommensurate wave vector q b 0.3 as the short-range CDW in zero field Here, we present supporting evidence from 17 O NMR that the 3D CDW phase of YBCO has a commensurate local period of three unit cells, not four as in Bi-based cuprates, over an extended range of hole doping p and magnetic field values, B z , where ẑ is the unit vector perpendicular to the CuO 2 planes. We discuss how discommensurations (phase slips) reconcile this observation with the scattering results. Taken together with the STM data in Bi-based cuprates, our measurements indicate that the spatial profile of the cuprate CDW generically results from the interplay between an incommensurate tendency at long length scales, and local commensuration effects due to electron-electron interactions, as proposed in ref. Like STM, NMR is a local probe and is sensitive to the local periodicity and other aspects of the modulation. Specifically, the NMR line shape represents the combined histogram of both the local magnetic hyperfine fields, characterised by the Knight shift K, and the local electric field gradients (EFG), encoded in the effective quadrupole frequency ν quad (r) at positions r in the bulk of a sample. Note that ν quad is defined here as half the distance between first low and high frequency satellite lines, hereafter called LF1 and HF1, in any given field orientation. Since both K and ν quad may depend on the local charge density ρ(r), the line shape potentially contains rich information on the CDW First, the periodic lattice distortion associated with the CDW may also affect both K(r) and ν quad (r). Also, a change in the symmetry of the local charge distribution may affect the symmetry of the EFG tensor and thus ν quad . Here, we neglect these effects and instead assume that the CDW-induced changes ∆K(r) and ∆ν quad (r) essentially reflect the amplitude of the charge density modulation at the site of the probed nucleus. This is reasonable given the large contribution of the on-site hole density to the EFG at both Cu and O sites in the CuO 2 planes Second, ∆K(r) and ∆ν quad (r) may, in principle, not be linear functions of ρ(r). We shall examine this possibility below and conclude that it is irrelevant here. Third, depending on the relative magnitude of the two effects and on which line is considered, the changes in K(r) and ν quad (r) may, partially or entirely, compensate, each other. In YBCO, there are five different lines per 17 O site (nuclear spin I = 5/2) and three per 63 Cu (nuclear spin I = 3/2) and our previous work Therefore, we consider that the high-frequency satellite transitions provide a direct image of the charge-density modulation in the CuO 2 planes of YBCO, which will be corroborated by the overall consistency of our 17 O NMR results with both the 63 Cu results and the information from X-ray scattering. Suppose a unidirectional modulation of the charge density ρ at atomic positions x, having an amplitude ∆ρ around an average charge density ρ 0 , a phase φ and propagating with a wave vector q, parallel to the b axis in our case: Fig. Although it lacks the atomic-scale imaging capability of STM, NMR is also able to provide atomically-resolved information by probing different nuclei and/or different crystallographic sites, and it does so in the bulk, not on the surface, over broad ranges of temperatures and fields. This allows, for instance, to single out distinct CDWs in different planes of a layered material We primarily (but not exclusively) focus on data from YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.56 . At this hole doping level (p = 0.109), oxygen dopants form chains (parallel to the b axis) every other site along a. This (so-called ortho-II or O-II) phase is the simplest and longest-range form of oxygen order in the phase diagram. This leads to the narrowest NMR lines and the simplest NMR spectra, with only three inequivalent O sites in the CuO 2 planes, as depicted in Fig. As O(3F) and O(3E) lines overlap in the current experimental conditions (low temperature and B nearly c, see Supplementary Fig. The experimental O(2) NMR line shape for p = 0.109 splits into a more intense peak (O A ) and a less intense peak (O B ) (Fig. O A 3 5 5 3 5 6 3 5 7 I n t e n s i t y ( a r b . u . ) 63 Cu NMR line shapes. a, Experimental second high frequency (HF2) satellite of O(2) sites in YBa2Cu3O6.56 (p = 0.109) in the high field CDW phase (T = 2 K, Bz = 27.1 T). The line shape is described by two peaks OA and OB and is fitted with asymmetric line shapes of equal widths, resulting in an area ratio of 1.95 ± 0.06 for the two peaks. Outside the CDW phase (T ≥ 60 K), there is only a single, symmetric line. b, Experimental 63 Cu high frequency satellite from ref. Such a line shape is in general inconsistent with bidirectional modulations, as shown in Supplementary Note 3 and Supplementary Fig. B m e l t Q u a d r u p o l e s h i f t r a t i o FIG. we thus only discuss unidirectional modulations. X-ray scattering in high fields finds an incommensurate wave vector q = 0.323 ± 0.005 for YBCO with p 0.11. This should give a spectrum with two peaks of equal intensities and an asymmetric shape of the individual peaks, as shown in Fig. On the other hand, a unidirectional commensurate modulation with λ = 3b and φ = 0 • (Fig. The procedure, detailed in Methods, Supplementary Note 5 and Supplementary Figs. where ν quad,A and ν quad,B are the quadrupole frequencies defined by the peak positions and ν quad,0 is the quadrupole frequency outside of the high field phase (at low field and/or high temperature). Fits to the data at B z = 27.1 T (Fig. Interestingly, this result turns out to be robust from 18 to about 27 T (Fig. Finally, the commensurate periodicity is not accidental for this particular hole concentration of p = 0.109. Consistent results from other samples (Fig. The data in the field range over which CDW order coexists with superconductivity lead us to examine the question of a pair-density-wave (PDW). A PDW is a peculiar superconducting state in which Cooper pairs carry a finite momentum and the superconducting order parameter varies periodically in space around a zero mean value That our low temperature NMR spectra at B z of 18 and 21 T are fully consistent with a simple period-3 CDW (Fig. We thus conclude that there is no conclusive evidence of a PDW state in our data. Nonetheless, there is a huge phase space that we have not explored regarding the relative amplitude and the relative phase of the two predicted charge modulations, let alone more sophisticated scenarios with complex real space patterns. To the best of our knowledge, NMR spectra have been computed in the framework of models of charge ordering FIG. In some circumstances, an incommensurate CDW may lower its energy by introducing discommensurations (DCs) which are domain walls wherein the phase φ of the order parameter (Eq. 1) changes rapidly, while the phase in each domain is locked to a constant value We now discuss how such repeated phase slips in the modulation can explain why X-rays find an incommensurate wave vector in high fields while NMR locally sees a commensurate period λ = 3b. Interestingly, the presence of DCs in the high field phase of YBCO has already been discussed in two instances: they have been proposed to have important effects on the transport properties in high fields Following Mesaros et al. where Φ(x) is the phase argument that increases with the slope q 0 . However, if the phase φ is not constant but increases (or decreases) at repeated phase slips, then the phase argument changes to q is the average wave vector including the effect of repeated phase slips. φ(x) contains the residual phase fluctuations which remain after qx is subtracted from the phase argument Φ(x). They will average to zero ( φ(x) = 0), but can lead to additional structure in the Fourier transform. X-ray scattering would find a peak at q while the NMR spectrum, by probing the modulation locally, would be determined by q 0 , provided that phase slips have a small density and do not extend over many lattice sites. From Eq. 4 it follows that over a length L the phase argument increases due to phase slips by where the incommensurability δ is a measure of the density of phase slips: δ = φ(L) L . For the O-II sample studied by NMR in high fields (p = 0.109), we estimate q = q = 0.323±0.005 from zerofield X-ray studies of YBCO samples with similar hole doping The incommensurability δ = q -q 0 = 0.323 -0.333 ≈ -0.01 ± 0.005 implies that after L = 100b the acquired phase due to phase slips is only δ • L = -0.01 2π b • 100b = -2π. For q 0 = 1/3 possible phase slips are ±2π/3 (see Fig. It is also possible, in principle, to reach q ≈ 0.32 by adding many phase slips to a q 0 = 1/4 modulation. For example, starting from a CDW with q 0 = 1/4 and phase φ = 45 • whose spectrum has two peaks of equal amplitude (Supplementary Fig. The amount of discommensurations can be halved if instead +π phase slips are assumed, as shown in Fig. The 63 Cu NMR experiments that discovered the highfield CDW phase of YBCO In this case, the contrasting NMR response below empty and full chains cannot be explained by the modulation propagating along b and another explanation must thus be found. This Cu(2F)/Cu(2E) dichotomy probably signifies that the presence (absence) of oxygen in the nearest chain enhances (reduces) the CDW amplitude. This is conceivable as the high-field CDW order is 3D so that chain-oxygen phonons might play a role. The Cu(2F)/Cu(2E) dichotomy implies a charge differentiation that has the same 2a periodicity as the O-II structure and is thus difficult to detect in X-ray scattering. We notice that a recent X-ray study found that microscopic details of CDW order in YBCO are more complex than previously thought In the next two sections, we discuss how to understand the 63 Cu results quantitatively. Before discussing details of the 63 Cu line shape, it is instructive to compare the magnitude of the charge modulation at Cu and O sites. For this, we compare the values of the relative quadrupole splitting ∆ν quad /ν quad from the spectra shown in Fig. We now discuss the 63 Cu(2F) line shape.O(2) and Cu(2F) sites are separated by half a unit cell in the a direction but since they have the same projection along the direction of propagation of the CDW (b axis), one would expect their NMR line shapes to be identical. Experimentally, however, the shape of the Cu(2F) line (Fig. As shown in Fig. Of particular interest is the value δφ = π because there has been much discussion as to whether a similar antiphase relationship exists between O sites in perpendicular bonds (i.e. O(2) and O(3) here). Such a d-symmetry form factor of the CDW at oxygen sites has been predicted by a number of theories (for example Here, the possibility that Cu and O(2) are in anti-phase has a twofold consequence: either Cu and O(3) are also in anti-phase, in which case O(2) and O(3) must be in-phase and thus there is no d form factor. Or O(2) and O(3) are in anti-phase and thus O(3) is in-phase with Cu. We cannot confidently decide between these two possibilities from our data alone because the overlap of O(3F) and O(3E) lines hampers a quantitative analysis of the O(3) line shapes. As shown in Supplementary Fig. We notice that, in theories of a unidirectional CDW with a d form factor, which O is in-phase or in antiphase with Cu appears to depend on the details of the model Let us first summarize our main result at the qualitative level: the 3D long-range CDW in YBCO is unidirectional (consistent with previous studies We now discuss the consequences of this finding. The presence of discommensurations in an otherwise commensurate modulation is in general the result of a compromise between two opposite, commensurate and incommensurate, tendencies. Here in YBCO, as well as in other cuprates, the Fermi surface has been suspected to dictate the overall global periodicity (q), that is in general found to be incommensurate and decreasing with doping. This includes the possibility that the wave vector is determined by the q-space structure of the electron-phonon coupling (that itself depends on the Fermi surface) The commensurate local periodicity (2π/q 0 ) can in principle result either from a lock-in to the lattice or from an intrinsically-commensurate ordering mechanism. Three scenarios can be considered: • Scenario 1: the modulation simply adjusts itself locally to the lattice (lock-in) with a commensurate period whilst adding phase slips to maintain the dictated global periodicity. The local period is chosen according to the Fermi surface in such a way that the necessary amount of discommensurations is minimised, i.e. q 0 locks to the commensurate fraction m/n the closest to q. For YBCO in the range p 0.08 -0.16, m/n = 1/3 and at a doping p = 0.109, -2π/3 phase slips are separated by an average distance of thirty unit cells. Mesaros et al. argue against such a lattice locking because q 0 = 1/4 is observed in Bi2212 at doping levels ranging from p = 0.06 to 0.17, without any jump to q 0 = 1/3 or 1/5 • Scenario 2: q 0 locks to 1/4 in YBCO, the fundamental wave vector invoked for Bi-based cuprates • Scenario 3 cannot be distinguished from scenario 1 in our experiments as it differs only in the physical origin of the local commensuration: a commensurate ordering mechanism, driven by strong correlations, is at work but, for some reason, it leads to q 0 = 1/3 in YBCO, not 1/4 as in Bi-based cuprates. One might object that this scenario would be at odds with the rare presence of solutions with q 0 = 1/3 in numerical studies of the Hubbard model at doping levels p ∼ 0.1 and in the strong repulsion limit (refs. Summarising this discussion, the simple splitting of NMR lines in YBCO reveals a bimodal charge distribution that is best explained by a three-unit-cell elementary motif containing two inequivalent sites. While we cannot fully exclude that this motif emerges from a fundamental four-unit-cell local period (scenario 2), the scenario that appears to be both the simplest and the most consistent with our NMR results is a commensurate local periodicity of three unit cells with a small amount of discommensurations. Apart from these quantitative aspects, we interpret our results as evidence that there is no fundamental difference between YBCO and Bi-based cuprates: both show a locally-commensurate CDW but an incommensurate global wave vector. The wave primarily modulates the oxygen hole density, with the O sites in orthogonal directions being in anti-phase in case of Bi cuprates and probably for YBCO as well. There is also mounting evidence that the CDW in zero field is bi-directional at long length scales but unidirectional at short length scales (comparable to the CDW period) in both compounds It is interesting to note that the stripe order of Labased cuprates, while often considered as a distinct type of CDW, is in fact not fundamentally different even at a simple phenomenological level. The CDW is unidirectional, though forming orthogonal domains in the absence of low temperature structural distortion We take these considerations as suggestive evidence that superconducting cuprates show, over a substantial doping range, a generic instability towards the formation of a unidirectional and locally commensurate CDW whose global periodicity is nonetheless incommensurate. The high-field phase of YBCO studied here offers a unique realisation of this CDW phase, whose observation is in general complicated by the conspiracy of disorder, magnetic ordering and competition with superconductivity. High quality 17 O-enriched detwinned YBCO single crystal samples were grown from self-flux Frequency swept NMR spectra were acquired by summing Fourier-transformed echoes measured with standard spin-echo sequences on home-built heterodyne spectrometers at LNCMI Grenoble. Fields above 20 T were provided by resistive magnets at LNCMI. 17 O has several advantages with respect to 63 Cu NMR. First, 17 O spectra in the high-field CDW state are better resolved and have larger signal-to-noise ratio For the O-II chain-oxygen superstructure there are two types of O(3) planar sites, namely O(3E) and O(3F) below oxygen-empty and oxygen-filled chains, respectively, but only one O(2) site. To separate O(2) and O(3) planar sites while keeping a large c axis component of the external field, B z , most samples were tilted by 16 • towards the b axis. For YBCO p = 0.109, this angle was 18 • and leads to a quadrupole frequency ν quad,0 = 362.9 kHz (defined as the frequency difference between two consecutive satellite lines) in the absence of long-range CDW order. The ability to extract information on the CDW from NMR spectra depends on three factors, themselves depending on the material and the nucleus considered: i) whether the CDW-induced changes are large enough with respect to the natural line broadening (that depends on chemical homogeneity and quenched disorder), ii) whether the different crystallographic sites can be separated, iii) whether the magnetic hyperfine and quadrupole effects can be disentangled (both types of interaction affect the energy levels of any nuclear spin I > 1/2). In our previous works, we have shown how to extract relevant information from 63 Cu The two contributions ∆K(x) and ∆ν quad (x) combine additively so that each nucleus experiences a change of its resonance frequency with respect to the original resonance without CDW: where n is an integer between -2 and +2 depending on the particular low-or high-frequency satellite in the 17 O-NMR spectrum (the central line is not used as the contributions from different crystallographic sites cannot be separated). HF2, the outer high-frequency satellite (n = +2), is thus most sensitive to the modulation because the resulting total splitting ∆ν tot is largest. LF1 and LF2 are much less affected by the CDW because the minus sign in Eq. 6 leads to a near compensation of the two terms that have comparable magnitude. Yet, we fit all four satellites (LF2, LF1, HF1 and HF2) simultaneously in order to further constrain the analysis and improve its reliability (see also ref. 