A supercurrent transistor is a superconductor-semiconductor hybrid device in which the Josephson supercurrent is switched on and off using a gate voltage. While such devices have been studied using DC transport, radio-frequency measurements allow for more sensitive and faster experiments. Here a supercurrent transistor made from a carbon nanotube is measured simultaneously via DC conductance and radio-frequency reflectometry. The radio-frequency measurement resolves all the main features of the conductance data across a wide range of bias and gate voltage, and many of these features are seen more clearly. These results are promising for measuring other kinds of hybrid superconducting devices, in particular for detecting the reactive component of the impedance, which a DC measurement can never detect. When a Josephson junction is fabricated from a semiconductor, its superconducting properties depend on the semiconductor's density of states. This principle is the basis of the supercurrent transistor Josephson junctions based on nanotubes and nanowires have been previously characterised in direct-current (DC) transport Here, we use simultaneous RF reflectometry and DC measurements to characterise a supercurrent transistor made of a carbon nanotube. We compare these two methods across the full operating regime of the device in bias and gate voltage. The RF data reproduces all the main features of the DC data, including the onset of superconductivity, a critical current that is tuned by a gate voltage and magnetic field, and the presence of Andreev reflections. In addition, the noise is much lower, as expected for a high-frequency measurement. These results show that a supercurrent transistor can be measured at RF without affecting its operation, and make RF techniques promising for rapidly characterising such devices under a range of conditions. Supercurrent transistors are fabricated using a single carbon nanotube contacted by superconducting electrodes as shown in figure Here R S is the series resistance, which incorporates all ohmic resistances in the current path, and is determined by a linear fit to the I -V trace in the supercurrent regime. It has the value R S = 10.72 kΩ (15.71 kΩ) for Device A (Device B), which is is consistent with the known inline resistance in the cryostat wiring. The differential resistance ∂V /∂I is calculated numerically. To allow for RF reflectometry measurements, the device is mounted on a sample board containing an LC tank circuit and an in-built bias tee made from discrete chip components. The loaded tank circuit exhibits a resonance frequency of 261.2 MHz with a quality factor of about 18. Reflectometry measurements are performed by injecting an RF tone via attenuated coaxial lines and a directional coupler, reflected from the tank circuit, and fed into a homodyne demodulation circuit to generate a demodulated voltage V RF , cf. figure To determine typical properties of the nanotube supercurrent transistor, we first characterized one device (Device A) using only DC measurements. In this measurement, the current bias is applied directly to the bond pad of the source contact, bypassing the bias tee and tank circuit. Figure The critical current is strongly modified by changing V G , as seen from figure The fact that I c depends on V G confirms that the device is a supercurrent transistor. For values of I greater than I c , there is a series of broad dips in the differential resistance, consistent with multiple Andreev reflections where n is an integer and ∆ = 85 μeV (Device A; 95 μeV, Device B), which is close to the typical value of the superconducting gap in nanotubes contacted with a thin film of aluminium Reflectometry experiments were performed on a second device (Device B) fabricated by a similar method as Device A but in a separate fabrication run. Device B was bonded to the sample board in the same way as Device A (figure Figure As a further illustration of the sensitivity of RF measurement, figure By comparing simultaneous RF and DC transport measurements of a carbon nanotube supercurrent transistor, this experiment shows that RF reflectometry is sensitive to all the main transport features, most of which appear more distinctly than in DC transport alone. Importantly, the properties of a supercurrent transistor device integrated into an RF measurement circuit are essentially identical to those of a device measured by DC transport alone. Our results show that RF reflectometry is a non-invasive technique for characterising supercurrent transistors and potentially many other nanoscale devices and physical effects. Although not tested here, reflectometry measurements can often be much faster than transport alone, and thus may allow many devices to be tested quickly under a wide range of operating conditions. This would allow, for example, rapid fluctuations of the critical current to be measured in real time 