Recent discovery of superconductive rare earth/actinide superhydrides has ushered in a new era of superconductivity research at high pressures. This distinct type of clathrate metal hydrides was first proposed for alkalineearth-metal hydride CaH 6 that, however, has long eluded experimental synthesis, impeding an understanding of pertinent physics. Here, we report successful synthesis of CaH 6 and its measured superconducting critical temperature T c of 215 K at 172 GPa, which is evidenced by a sharp drop of resistivity to zero and a characteristic decrease of T c under a magnetic field up to 9 T. An estimate based on the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg model gives a giant zero-temperature upper critical magnetic field of 203 T. These remarkable benchmark superconducting properties place CaH 6 among the most outstanding high-T c superhydrides, marking it as the hitherto only clathrate metal hydride outside the family of rare earth/actinide hydrides. This exceptional case raises great prospects of expanding the extraordinary class of high-T c superhydrides to a broader variety of compounds that possess more diverse material features and physics characteristics. Superconductivity is a remarkable quantum phenomenon of broad interest for its great scientific significance and immense application potential Conspicuously, all the currently realized high-T c superhydrides contain rare earth (RE) or actinide (AC) elements as the anchor sites to provide electrons to bind and hold hydrogen atoms into the desired clathrate structure drides but has stayed out of reach despite repeated experimental attempts. In this work, we report successful synthesis of clathrate CaH 6 at pressures of 160-190 GPa and temperature of 2,000 K. X-ray diffraction (XRD) and equation of state (EOS) measurements confirm the theoretically predicted crystal structure. Ensuing electrical transport measurements revealed a superconducting transition temperature of 215 K at 172 GPa. These results not only finally verify and confirm the theoretical prediction made almost a decade ago, but more important, offer insights for exploring the hitherto still largely untapped main-group and transition-metal elements to serve as anchor sites in forming superhydrides that may exhibit more diverse structural and superconducting characteristics. We have prepared 14 cells filled with a mixture of Ca foil and BH 3 NH 3 as starting materials designated as cell_1 to cell_14. The samples were compressed at room temperature to 160-190 GPa and then heated to about 2,000 K with a one-sided pulsed radiation from a YAG laser. XRD measurements were conducted to determine the crystal structures of the products in cell_1-3. Fig. Previous simulations have indicated that CaH 6 possess an estimated T c of 220-235 K at 150 GPa Past studies have attempted to synthesize the predicted high-T c clathrate calcium superhydride CaH 6 but without success In summary, we have successfully synthesized the first predicted and long-sought sodalite-like clathrate calcium superhydride CaH 6 that exhibits a superconducting transition temperature of 215 K at 172 GPa, which represents the highest T c value among non-RE ionic superhydrides. This result confirms the original theoretical prediction and provides impetus for further exploration of high-T c clathrate compounds. The present findings are expected to greatly expand the scope of ongoing studies in search of room-temperature superconductors among more diverse material classes. We synthesized calcium hydride via a reaction of calcium (Alfa Aesar 99.5%) and BH 3 NH 3 (Sigma-Aldrich, 97%) in a diamond anvil cell (DAC). The diamonds used in DACs had culets with diameters of 50-60 μm and were beveled at 8.5 o to diameter of about 250 μm. Composite gasket consisting of a rhenium outer annulus and a cubic boron nitride (c-BN) epoxy mixture insert was employed to contain the sample while isolating the electrical leads in the electrical measurements. Ca foil with the thickness of 2 μm was sandwiched between the BH3NH3. Sample preparation was done in an inert Ar atmosphere with residual O 2 and H 2 O contents of ¡ 0.01 ppm to guarantee that the sample was properly isolated from the surrounding atmosphere. Afterwards, the samples were compressed to required pressures at room temperature. The pressure values in cell 1 and cell 2 was determined by the EOS of contacted Au electrode The resistances were all measured via the four-probe van der Pauw method where four Au electrodes were placed on the BH3NH3 plate with currents of 1-100 μA. The temperature dependence of the electrical resistance was measured upon cooling and warming cycles with a slow temperature ratio (0.2 K•min -1 ). The data were taken upon warming as it yields a more accurate temperature reading. Cu-Be alloy DACs were used for magnetotransport measurements under external magnetic fields up to 9 T. 