We report an all-optical radio-frequency (RF) spectrum analyzer with a bandwidth greater than 5 terahertz (THz), based on a 50-cm long spiral waveguide in a CMOScompatible high-index doped silica platform. By carefully mapping out the dispersion profile of the waveguides for different thicknesses, we identify the optimal design to achieve near zero dispersion in the Cband. To demonstrate the capability of the RF spectrum analyzer, we measure the optical output of a femtosecond fiber laser with an ultrafast optical RF spectrum in the terahertz regime. All optical radio frequency (RF) spectral measurements provide an effective way to analyze ultrafast signals, and have been applied to optical performance monitoring of optical telecommunication systems, ultrafast optical signal characterization and microwave photonics Here, we demonstrate a high-index doped silica based PC-RFSA with improved performance by designing a waveguide structure with low dispersion slope and optimized dispersion for the C-band operation having ZDW at near 1547 nm. We obtained a bandwidth of 5 THz that covers the entire C-band using a 50-cm long waveguide. With the optimized waveguide dispersion, one can obtain broadband operation even with a longer waveguide and results in a higher signal sensitivity. Figure This results in the RF spectrum S RF (ω) of the SUT being mapped onto the sideband of the optical spectrum of the probe light, which can then be measured directly by an optical spectrum analyzer (OSA). Since this is an all-optical operation, in principle it can achieve unlimited bandwidth as it is not limited by the electronic bandwidth from optical-to-electrical conversion. In practice, effects such as group velocity mismatch between the SUT and the CW probe light, limit the bandwidth according to where D is the dispersion of the medium, ∂D/∂λ is the dispersion slope at the wavelength where the SUT is centered, and Δλ is the wavelength spacing between the SUT and the CW probe light To optimize the waveguide for the PC-RFSA for operation in the C-band, we calculate the waveguide dispersion as a function of geometry and wavelength. Figures of 70 for the 1.25 m thick waveguide, indicating the walk-off delay influence on XPM is extremely small and the nonlinear interaction is maintained over large ∆λ. Table In conclusion, we present a PC-RFSA that achieves an RF bandwidth extending well into the terahertz regime, based on a high-index doped silica waveguide. We investigate the dispersion and nonlinear parameter for different waveguide dimensions. By engineering the dispersion, a 3-dB bandwidth of 5 THz is achieved, which is twice as large as that previously reported 