The interlayer coupling, which has a strong influence on the properties of van der Waals heterostructures, strongly depends on the interlayer distance. Although considerable theoretical interest has been demonstrated, experiments exploiting a variable interlayer coupling on nanocircuits are scarce due to the experimental difficulties. Here, we demonstrate a novel method to tune the interlayer coupling using hydrostatic pressure by incorporating van der Waals heterostructure based nanocircuits in piston-cylinder hydrostatic pressure cells with a dedicated sample holder design. This technique opens the way to conduct transport measurements on nanodevices under pressure using up to 12 contacts without constraints on the sample at fabrication level. Using transport measurements, we demonstrate that hexagonal boron nitride capping layer provides a good protection of van der Waals heterostructures from the influence of the pressure medium, and we show experimental evidence of the influence of pressure on the interlayer coupling using weak localization measurements on a TMDC/graphene heterostructure. The discovery of graphene along with other layered crystals led to the emergence of a novel field in material science The interlayer coupling strongly depends on the interlayer distance, which is determined by the vdW interaction that keeps the layers together. However, by applying hydrostatic pressure on these heterostructures (see fig. Hydrostatic pressure cells have been widely used in solid state physics on bulk samples. Changing the pressure can not only tune the wavefuction overlap but can lead to structural changes in the crystal, as e.g. in 2H c -MoS 2 , where layer sliding structural transition and metalinsulator transition take place All the experimental works on transport measurements with pressure manipulation cited above used samples that remained in the macroscopic size range (0.1 mm), even in case of carbon nanotubes, the sample was on a buckypaper of macroscopic size Meanwhile, the dimensions of vdW heterostructure based nanocircuits are microscopic and conventionally a very different measurement method is used to carry out transport measurements, often involving wire bonding on standard ceramic chip carriers or circuit boards. The spatial dimensions of the conventional solutions are considerably larger than the available space in a common hydrostatic pressure cell, which is limited to technological constraints in order to achieve high hydrostatic pressure values without damaging the cell components. Therefore, the standard measurement techniques of nanocircuits do not work in a hydrostatic pressure environment, and special setups are needed. The first pioneering papers about such experiments already showed the potential of this technique, where they managed to tune the superconducting critical temperature of a twisted bilayer graphene structure or change the magnetization alignment of a thin magnetic structure In the next section, after detailing the specific technical requirements of transport measurements on a nanocircuit under pressure, we introduce our dedicated sample holder head and its working mechanism. Then, we present two different examples how pressure can be applied on van der Waals heterostructure based nanocircuits. The first measurement demonstrates that an hBN cover layer provides an ideal isolation between the sensitive 2D electron system and the pressure transfer medium. The second one gives evidence that the interlayer coupling can be changed significantly in graphene/TMDC heterostructures by the pressure generated in our setup. Piston-cylinder pressure cells (see fig. First, measurements of a complicated sample may involve several contacts on the chip surface, occasionally contacting the doped Si substrate on the chip bottom as a global back gate as well. There might also be multiple equally interesting devices on the same chip, often resulting in more than 20 contacts on a single chip. Second, contact pads usually created by electron lithography on these nanocircuits vary in size typically between 20 μm and 200 μm with a spacing between them of the same length scale. Contacting such electronic contact pads by hand using silver paste is hardly feasible. It is possible to design the chip with enlarged contact pads and placed far from each other, (thus limiting the number of available contacts) We developed a dedicated sample holder head to satisfy these requirements. The head consists of the plug, the electric feed-through wires embedded in an epoxy filler, and a printed circuit board (PCB). The sample is fixed on the PCB using conducting or insulating double sided tape and is contacted using wire-bonding to the PCB contact pads. Using the standard wire-bonding technology, one can use nanocircuits without any special modification at lithography level and with several bonding pads of the usual size. A schematic view of the sample holder is depicted in fig. We developed three different versions of the PCB design with 8, 10, and 12 contacts, of which the 8-line version is shown in fig. Therefore, the bonding pads, covered by Ni/Au finish and enlarged as much as possible to maximize reusability, are placed on the opposite sides to the NPTHs. One trace leads through a back plate region in the central part of the PCB Another advantage of the dedicated PCB design is that as long as not exposed to the pressure medium, this sample holder head works just as any regular measurement setup of nanocircuits and can be a substitute of it. In addition, it is possible to mass fabricate the sample holder head prior to experiments and if multiple sets of the plug, plug backup and lower screw are available, parallel investigation of different samples is also feasible, reducing the need of de-connecting or re-connecting samples. The other variants of our PCB design, offering 10 and 12 electric connections, limit the sample size to ca. 2.5 mm×3.0 mm and 1.7 mm×1.7 mm, respectively. Due to its monolayer nature, the electronic quality of a gaphene flake is largely affected by the presence of charged impurities on its surface The studied devices were fabricated on a Si/SiO 2 substrate using the common dry stacking assembly method [64]. The shape of the samples were defined using reactive ion etching and Cr/Au side contacts were fabricated in a separate lithography step Device A consists of a single layer of graphene encapsulated in multilayer top and bottom hBN flakes, see fig. As can be seen from fig. Fig. Whereas the formation of the WAL peak might be related to changes in the intervalley scattering time due to the Berry phase in graphene, we suspect that it is rather related to the increased spin orbit coupling strength in graphene. The detailed analysis goes well beyond the scope of this manuscript and is discussed elsewhere The sample was not designed specifically to the needs of the pressure cell, however, it could be incorporated into our setup. Three devices were formed on a single chip, each with a Hall bar shape with several electrical contacts and local top gates, with 23 contacts in total on the chip surface. A contact pad on the chip surface was 200 × 150 μm 2 with a spacing of 30 μm. This is a size scale that is really challenging to bond using silver paint without accidentally connecting neighbouring contact pads or even contaminating the nanocircuit itself. The bounding box of the patterned area extended to 2 × 2 mm which needs precise dicing of the chip in order to fit on our sample holder. We note that the performed measurements included several thermal cycles with multiple re-bonding of the wires and lasted for several weeks in total without any problem in the sample holder head. In this work we presented a novel method to tune the interlayer coupling in vdW heterostructures post fabrication using hydrostatic pressure. This method enables electronic transport measurements on vdW heterostructures while adding the possibility of tuning the interlayer coupling in them at measurement time. This method allows controlled and reversible fixation of the chip and up to 12 wire-bonding connections to it, which makes hydrostatic pressure studies a lot easier than existing alternatives. We showed experimental evidence of the applicability of hBN crystal flakes as a top layer in order to protect the underlying layers from the pressure medium. Changing interlayer coupling has a measurable effect on the electrical transport of a sensitive heterostructure, as has been demonstrated by weak localization measurements on a graphene/WSe 2 heterostructure. Thus, our study provides a new experimental knob which can be used to tune vdW heterostructure based nanodevices and opens the way towards the highly anticipated pressure studies not only for vdW heterostructures, but also for any other nanocircuit-based physical systems. B.F, A. M. , Z. K-K. and E.T developped the pressure cell setup with the guidance of Sz.Cs and I. K. The samples were fabricated by S.Z., D.I., M.K. with the support of P.M. B. F. and A. M. did the measurements. The manuscript was written by B.F., P.M and Sz.Cs. All authors discussed on the manuscript. K.W. and T.T. grew the hBN crystals. The project was guided by Sz.Cs., P.M and C.S. Although the method presented in this paper works well with any type of piston-cylinder pressure cell, we present in the following, as an example, the general build-up and working principle of one specific cell that we used, made by C&T Factory, Japan (see fig. Working principle. The sample is placed inside a cylindrical high pressure volume (HPV) at the core of the cell, which is filled with a pressure medium, then compressed in a hydraulic press. After clamping the cell at the target pressure, it can be removed from the press and used in any transport measurement setup, e.g. attached to a cryostat dipstick and cooled down to cryogenic temperature. At the end of the measurements, to release the pressure or to set a different one, the cell should be warmed up and placed in the hydraulic press again for a reverse process. The side of the HPV cylinder is supported by the shell of the pressure cell, whereas the top and bottom ends are closed by a piston and a plug element, respectively, both clamped by two screws. Transport experiments can be done on the sample via an electric feed-through of the plug. Our cell has an outer diameter of D = 25 mm and a height H = 62 mm, which is small enough to fit in the bore of many magnets used in cryogenic systems allowing measurements under magnetic field, and also in our VTI measurement setup, thus offering a temperature range of 1.5 K-300 K. Build-up of the cell. The cell wall is composed of two cylindrical shells made of NiCrAl and CuBe, respectively, see mark Pressure medium. The HPV inside the Teflon cup (6 in fig. 