In order to understand the origin of superconductivity, it is crucial to ascertain the nature and origin of the primary carriers available to participate in pairing 1-6 . Tc cuprate superconductors 7-10 have revealed the existence of a Fermi surface akin to normal metals, comprising fermionic carriers that undergo orbital quantization 11 . However, the unexpectedly small size of the observed carrier pocket leaves open a variety of possibilities as to the existence or form of any underlying magnetic order, and its relation to d-wave superconductivity 12-15 . Here we present quantum oscillations in the magnetisation (the de Haas-van Alphen or dHvA effect) observed in superconducting YBa2Cu3O6.51 that reveal more than one carrier pocket. In particular, we find evidence for the existence of a much larger pocket of heavier mass carriers playing a thermodynamically dominant role in this hole-doped superconductor. Fermi surface impose constraints on the wavevector of any underlying order and the location of the carriers in momentum space. These constraints enable us to construct a possible density-wave scenario with spiral or related modulated magnetic order, consistent with experimental observations. YBa2Cu3O6+x belongs to the family of quasi-two dimensional (Q2D) cuprate superconductors that can exhibit surprisingly high critical temperatures compared to other layered superconductors The key finding of the present study is the observation of a new oscillatory component (β) of higher frequency Fβ = 1654 ± 40 T but almost 30 times smaller in amplitude than the dominant component of frequency first observed in ref. Fα in this work -Fig. Were the α and β pockets to constitute the entire Fermi surface, their total carrier density is expected to correspond to the nominal hole doping value pnom ≈ 0.1 (estimated in ref. 20). The effective carrier density on assuming Kramer's degeneracy is estimated by the summation peff = 2(nαAkα+ nβAkβ)/ABZ over pocket k-space areas, where ABZ is the area of the unreconstructed Brillouin zone and n refers to the number of instances each occurs in the reconstructed Brillouin zone (negative for electrons and positive for holes). We find that a scenario where nα = -1 and nβ = 1 (such that peff = 0.082 ± 0.003) yields reasonable consistency with pnom, suggesting that the α-pocket is an electron pocket, and the β-pocket a hole pocket. Given the Q2D electronic structure, the total pocket contribution to the linear temperature coefficient of the specific heat is given by the summation , where γ ′ = 1.46 mJmol -1 K -2 [ref. 8], provided once again that Kramer's degeneracy holds. A single pocket of each type (i.e. |nα| = 1 and |nβ| = 1) would yield γm ≈ 8.2 ± 0.6 mJmol -1 K -2 , comparable in value to γ C ≈ 10 mJmol -1 K -2 measured in heat capacity experiments in the normal state above Tc If we associate Fermi surface reconstruction with the observed pockets, our experimental findings place constraints on the ordering wavevector Q. We start by making the simplifying single-layer assumption that Q averages out the effects of bilayer splitting within the YBa2Cu3O6.51 unit cell by coupling bonding and antibonding states. Reconstruction of the Fermi surface shown in Fig. We therefore consider a scenario with either a differently commensurate order (similar to that considered in ref. 13) or truly incommensurate order, and show that this could lead to a hole pocket compatible in size with the observed β pocket. We consider the particular case of a single wave vector .51 where δ is taken to be 0.1 (see Fig. Pocket sizes consistent with our experimental findings can arise from such a Fermi surface reconstruction (schematic in Fig. The bilayer potential -the effect of which was considered small in the simplified single-layer scenario considered thus far -may, however, play an important role in determining a complete picture of the Fermi surface. A significant bilayer potential could lift the assumed degeneracy of either or both pockets, leading to dual frequencies for the affected pocket, one of which could even be completely depopulated (more likely for the electron pocket given its smaller size). It might then be possible that the observed α and β frequencies each correspond to split frequencies for either or both electron and hole pockets. We conclude with a brief discussion of further issues raised by this study. The first concerns the origin of the potential Fermi surface reconstruction in relation to superconductivity. One possibility is that modulated magnetic ordering competes with superconductivity, nucleating wherever superconductivity is suppressed, as in the vortex core regions. In the case of antiferromagnetic order, this behaviour may have been identified in heavy fermion compounds A third issue concerns the renormalisation of the cyclotron mass for the two Fermi surface pockets identified. A parameterisation of the unreconstructed band structure for YBa2Cu3O6.51, such as that adopted in ref. 13, predicts pockets of similar unrenormalised band masses. The higher mass renomalisation of hole pockets suggested by our observations would, therefore, need to be taken into consideration within any explanation of superconductivity in this system. that the β frequency is not an intrinsic harmonic of the α frequency. Since the exponential damping factor scales with the harmonic index, the large value for ζα also implies that the 3Fα harmonic of the α frequency should be unobservably small in the Lifshitz-Kosevich theory 