We propose a model accounting for plasmons within a two temperature description, to investigate the role of surface plasmon polaritons (SPP) in the energy redistribution between laser excited electrons and the lattice, leading to surface restructuring of the material. This energy transfer can lead to the creation of laser induced surface structures in metals illuminated by an ultrashort laser pulse. The Two Temperature Model + Plasmon (TTM+P) equations are constructed by applying perturbation theory on the energy-, momentum-and density conservation equations of free electrons in metals. We consider three subsystems: the lattice, the thermalized electrons and the SPP, subject to an external laser field irradiation. The interference between the laser and SPP fields leads to spatially modulated energy absorption by the electronic system, and, through electron-phonon collisions, periodically shapes the lattice temperature. A numerical analysis is performed on a 1D model for gold. We show the emergence of a periodic modulation of the lattice temperature, which may contribute to laser induced periodic surface structures (LIPSS). Surface Plasmon Polaritons (SPP) are collective electronic excitations coupled with light. They motivate considerable interest in the scientific community for both their theoretical and technological aspects, as they provide a wide spectrum of applications, ranging from biosensing In order to understand the influence of the electromagnetic fields of SPP on the lattice temperature distribution, we use the phenomenological Two Temperature Model (TTM) The external laser field drives the electronic and lattice systems out of thermal equilibrium, subsequently the subsystems exchange energy via electron-phonon coupling. This is described with the following equations: where T e and T are the electronic and lattice temperatures, Q e and Q are the heat fluxes, G e-ph is the electron-phonon coupling parameter and S e is the source term, which describes laser energy absorbed by the electronic system. The inclusion of SPP fields can be done by modifying the source term S e using Maxwell's equations In this case, the electronic temperature distribution is spatially modulated by the interference of SPP with the laser source. Then, as a result of the electronphonon relaxation, this spatial modulation is transferred to the lattice temperature, hence inducing surface topography modifications via ablation and material transport, creating ripples In this paper, we propose a new approach for deriving the source term in Eq. ( To develop a model describing collective electronic excitation without making arbitrary constraints on the shape of the SPP fields, we start by obtaining the conservation equations governing our electronic system. We then follow a similar approach as in the work of Chen et al. We describe a nonequilibrium system of free electrons irradiated by an external laser field using the moments of the Boltzmann equation for mass, mo-mentum and energy, which reads: with n the electronic particle density, v the mean velocity vector, ξ the internal energy, p the electronic pressure and the energy flux vector Q, F e = e(E+v×B) the Lorentz force resulting from the electromagnetic field E and B, (∂ t ξ) c the collision term, ∂ t = ∂ ∂t and D t = ∂ t + v • ∇. Note that the above equations are coupled via n, v and F e to the microscopic Maxwell's equations: with o and μ 0 are the permittivity and permeability of free space respectively, l = i Z i δ(r -r i ) is the distribution function of the positive ion background, Z i being the effective charge of the ions and r i is the position of the i-th ion, and the electronic current J = env. These two sets of equations are the basis for the derivation of our model. From the system of Eqs. We now expand our variables as follow The linear deviations are only small corrections to the unperturbed system, and satisfy the inequality: which assumes that the number of excited electrons is small compared to the total number of electrons in the system. This perturbative approach gives us approximate solutions to an otherwise, difficult problem to solve. We now insert (4) into equations ( where we have used the condition for the conservation of the generalized vortex ∇ × v j + e m B j = 0 for j ∈ {0, 1}, n 0 is the uniform electron density and v 0 = 0. We also replaced in Eq. (4.c), the first order pressure term by the degeneracy Fermi pressure and is written as p 1 = mn 1 β 2 with β = (3π 2 n0) 1/3 h m the perturbation velocity We note that the condition (5), can be re-written, using Eq. (6.d) as: where φ 1 and s 1 are the electric and velocity potentials respectively, which are related to E 1 and v 1 with: A 1 being the vector potential in the Coulomb gauge. The left hand side of the Eq. ( In order to be able to describe SPP, we impose on the system of Eqs. 1-Continuity of the normal and tangential components of the electromagnetic field across the interface. The normal component of the electronic velocity v 1z vanishes at z = 0. From Eqs. (6e, 6a, 1b), we finally end up with Eqs. ( . The Bhatnagar-Gross-Krook (BGK) model with G e-ph and G e-pl are the electron-phonon and electron-plasmon coupling parameters, respectively. In this section, we perform a numerical analysis of the system of equations The laser's electromagnetic field at z = 0 is described by the real part of: with where ω and k 0 = ω/c are the laser frequency and light wave vector respectively, the parameter σ = 4 ln (2). The laser pulse duration is τ . E abs 0 = 2η cos(θa) η cos(θa)+η0 cos(θi) E inc 0 and B abs 0 = -ñE abs 0 /c are the amplitude of electric and magnetic fields inside the material respectively, η = μ and η 0 = μ0 0 are the material and vacuum impedance respectively, θ a = arcsin(sin(θ i )/ñ) is the angle of transmittance related to the angle of incidence θ i , ñ is the material complex refractive index, E inc 0 is the incident amplitude of the laser electromagnetic field. The fields in Eq. ( In 1D, our system of equations reads as follow: with the operators We start by solving the system of Eqs. A uniform mesh of grid spacing of 4 nm size was employed for a total length of L = 4 μm, along with a time increment of 5 • 10 -18 s, for a duration of 50 ps. As for the boundaries, reflective boundary conditions are used for the wave equations, so that the variables in Eqs. The material parameters that were used are as follows: n 0 = 5 9 • 10 28 m -3 [32], and we write G e-pl = C e /τ ep , with )ω p the SPP lifetime due to electron-plasmon collisions e +ba ) , with a i = k B T i / F (i ∈ {e, l} and F is the Fermi energy) and K and b, are constants depending on the material, here taken as K = 353 Wm -1 K -1 and b = 0, 16 for gold, and k = 1 Wm -1 K -1 Finally, the initial conditions are T e (x, t = 0) = T (x, t = 0) = T in = 293K and 1 (x, t = 0) = C e T in , and for the SPP fields, the initial conditions were derived from the laser electromagnetic field at the interface as: We now present the results of our simulations, performed for gold and a laser pulse of different wavelengths and angles of incidence. The goal of these simulations is to model the influence of the electromagnetic field of SPP on the lattice temperature distribution. In Fig. In order to be able to see the complete picture, one has to incorporate matter reorganization theories into the model to accurately describe the surface topography evolution, since these would include hydrodynamic effects of the melted surface, diffusion and defects accumulation. However, for the purposes of this study, these effects are not taken into account, since they only play an important role after longer periods of time (> 1 ns). Fig. In order to investigate the SPP periodicity predicted by the hydrodynamic model, one can write its dielectric function using the Fourier transform of Eq. (6.f) and the condition ∇ × v 1 + e m B 1 = 0, as: which when β -→ 0, is simply the dielectric function from the local Drude model. We recall that the dispersion relation of the SPP obtained using the interface conditions of the Maxwell's equation can be written as where air and Au are the dielectric constants for air and gold, respectively. From this relation, one can calculate the predicted wavelength of the SPP at an oblique incidence propagating in the positive direction of x, using the relation Figure Fig. A two temperature (plus) plasmon model was derived from conservation equations of the electronic system. The model consists of three equations for energy conservation of the three subsystems (thermalized electrons, SPP and the lattice), coupled with four other equations governing the dynamics of the electromagnetic field created by the SPP. This field has been shown to have a great influence on the total energy redistribution in the system. The model solves the field equations of these collective oscillations without imposing an arbitrary functions to shape the SPP fields. The resulting interference between SPP and the laser source periodically shapes the lattice temperature profile above the ablation threshold. We have also shown, an overall agreement at long wavelengths, between the predictions of the SPP periodicity between the Hydrodynamic dielectric function and the one fitted from experimental data. Finally, we would like to point out some of the limitations of the TTM+P. This model cannot be applied for electronic energies comparable or higher than the Fermi energy. Also, at short laser wavelengths, the hydrodynamic model's predictions become inaccurate since it needs to integrate interband effects. We further mention the absence of Landau damping in the collision term between the SPP and the electrons. As a consequence, the model does not account for processes like electron-hole pair creation and electron photo-emission, thus more accurate terms could prove to be beneficial to improve the TTM+P. This model, at its current stage, takes the plasmonic system as a separate degree of freedom. This enables us to not only derive the SPP electromagnetic fields, but also investigate the interaction between the different subsystems (i.e. electrons, plasmons and lattice). Also, extending the theory to higher orders of perturbations (second and third orders), one is able to study nonlinear effects occurring in the plasmonic system (see for instance The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. We wish to acknowledge the financial support of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft for the project GA465/15-2 as well as for the project RE1141/14-2.