Freeform optical components offer significant compactization of multi-lens systems, as well as advanced manipulation of light that is not possible with traditional systems. However, their fabrication relies on machining processes that are complex, time-consuming, and incompatible with rapid prototyping. This work presents the ability to shape liquid volumes and solidify them into desired freeform components, enabling rapid freeform prototyping with high surface quality. The method is based on controlling the minimum energy state of the interface between a curable optical liquid and an immersion liquid, by dictating a geometrical boundary constraint. The boundary shape is modeled as a cylinder whose arbitrary height is expressed as a Fourier series, allowing for an analytical solution of the resulting freeform surface as a sum of Fourier-Bessel functions. Each of these functions represents a different basic mode, whose superposition creates complex topographies. This solution allows deterministic design of freeform surfaces by controlling three key parametersthe volume of the optical liquid, the density of the immersion liquid, and the shape of the bounding frame. The paper describes a complete workflow for rapid prototyping of such components, and demonstrates the fabrication of a 35 mm diameter freeform component with sub-nanometer surface roughness within minutes. Freeform optics is a broad term that refers to any optical component, reflective or refractive, in which one or more of its optical surfaces performs complex phase manipulation on the incoming wavefront, beyond that achievable using traditional optical components. A single freeform optical component can replace the functionality of multiple traditional lenses (spherical or aspherical) within an optical system, allowing significant reduction in dimensions and assembly complexity. Moreover, freeform surfaces can provide new functionality that is not attainable using standard optics. In this work, we introduce an extension of this scale-invariant fluidic shaping method to nonaxisymmetric boundary conditions, allowing for rapid fabrication of freeform optical components. We study the case of a cylindrical bounding frame whose height varies azimuthally, and based on free-energy minimization, derive an analytical model that relates the shape of this bounding frame to that of the enclosed liquid interface forming the freeform surface. These boundary conditions, which can be represented as a sum of azimuthal waves, together with the injected volume and effective buoyancy, provide an infinite number of degrees of freedom which translate into a family of freeform surfaces. These can be naturally represented by a sum of polar-Bessel functions in a similar manner to the commonly used Zernike polynomials. We use frames defined by a single wavenumber to demonstrate common freeform surfaces such as saddles, tilts (bifocal), and quatrefoils, as well as frames defined by superposition of waves yielding arbitrary desired surfaces. All those components enjoy a surface quality on the order of 1 nm, characteristic of the fluidic shaping method, without the need for any subsequent polishing steps. We consider a configuration similar to that described in Figure , where is the capillary length,  is the interfacial energy between the two liquids, and g is Earth gravity directed in the negative ẑ direction. hr is determined by a balance between gravity, hydrostatic pressure, and surface tension, subjected to the prescribed boundary condition and the total volume V of the injected liquid. At the steady state, the fluidic interface ( , ) hr will take a shape that minimizes the free energy of the system under a fixed volume constraint. The free energy functional,  , is given by and is composed of two contributions: the surface energy associated with the interface between the liquids, and the gravitational potential energy that includes Earth's gravity and the hydrostatic buoyancy force. The last term in ( , ) Fr represents the volume constraint, with  being a Lagrange multiplier. At equilibrium, the first variation of the energy functional vanishes, i.e., 0  , yielding the standard Euler-Lagrange equation which can be written explicitly as where r h and h  are the partial derivatives of ( , ) hr with respect to r and  . We define the following dimensionless variables where 0 h is the characteristic deformation length scale, yielding the dimensionless form of equation ( For most optical elements the characteristic deformation length 0 h is significantly smaller than the component's radius, thus . Therefore, at the leading order in  , and by defining The general solution to this Helmholtz equation is given by In dimensional form, the solution is given by where the constant * 0 () ... . The change in volume not only affects the magnitude of the topography but can also invert the local curvature. presents solutions of equation ( We note that 2 00 ), in which the base term reduces to a constant, meaning that the base term does not contribute to optical power. For any other volume, the baseline solution represents a Bessel surface, which for the particular case of 0 Bo  is a spherical lens. In Figure For the case of 0 Bo  , the solution can be further simplified by using the limit and represented conveniently using the power series This representation is also equivalent to representation by Zernike polynomials of the order || mn n Z  Figure The Bond number represents the deviation from neutral buoyancy, and as shown in Figure Figure We use a 3D printer to print a rigid cylindrical bounding frame with a desired height variation along the azimuthal direction. We seal the bottom of the frame with a flat glass substrate and position it at the bottom of a larger container. We inject a desired volume of optical liquid into the frame and fill the container with immersion liquid until the frame is entirely submerged. At this point, additional optical liquid can be added into the frame while ensuring proper contact between the liquid and the entire inner surface of the frame. Finally, we illuminate the container with UV light for several minutes to solidify the optical liquid. The optical component is then ready and can be removed from the immersion liquid. The bounding frame can be removed from the component and reused or can remain attached to it and serve as a mechanical interface. Figure We presented theory and experiments for a new method for the design and fabrication of freeform components based on shaping of fluidic interfaces. We showed that the minimum free energy state of the interface between an optical liquid and an immersion liquid is dictated by the shape of a bounding frame, the volume of the optical liquid, and the Bond number representing the difference in their densities. We presented a general solution for the case of a cylindrical bounding frame, in which the surface can be represented by a sum of Fourier-Bessel functions, which are known to have similar functionalities for optical application as other commonly-used functions. In this work, we limited our analysis to elements with a single freeform surface, i.e. plano-freeform components. However, the method can be directly expanded to create components with freeform surfaces on both sides. This could be achieved using a frame that is varying azimuthally on both ends and suspended in the container such that the optical liquid injected into the frame has two contact surfaces with the immersion liquid. Moreover, enclosing each end of the frame within a different immersion liquid would result in surfaces that are based on different Bond numbers, allowing to increase the degrees of freedom of the component. We further limited our analysis to the case of small values of   Simple real-time changes may be possible by injecting or aspirating optical liquid, or by adjusting the immersion liquid density. A higher level of control could perhaps be achieved by implementing a deformable bounding frame whose shape can be modified in time.