Electromagnetic environments are becoming increasingly complex and congested, creating a growing challenge for systems that rely on electromagnetic waves for communication, sensing, or imaging, particularly in reverberating environments. The use of programmable metasurfaces provides a potential means of directing waves to optimize wireless channels on-demand, ensuring reliable operation and protecting sensitive electronic components. Here we introduce a technique that combines a deep learning network with a binary programmable metasurface to shape waves in complex reverberant electromagnetic environments, in particular ones where there is no direct line of sight. We applied this technique for wavefront reconstruction and control, and accurately determined metasurface configurations based on measured system scattering responses in a chaotic microwave cavity. The state of the metasurface that realizes desired electromagnetic wave field distribution properties was successfully determined even in cases previously unseen by the deep learning algorithm. Our technique is enabled by the reverberant nature of the cavity, and is effective with a metasurface that covers only ∼1.5% of the total cavity surface area. Highly scattering environments scramble electromagnetic waves, producing interference among the multiple paths between source and receiver. The resulting spatio-temporal fluctuations can seriously degrade imaging, sensing, and communication systems at microwave and optical wavelengths, disrupting operation or even damaging sensitive components. Additional emissions in these environments, whether from unintentional coupling between components or from an intentional electromagnetic attack, can have serious consequences. Future smart radio environments are envisioned to handle such dynamic conditions, adapting on-the-fly to optimize a given wireless channel through a spatial light modulator (SLM) In optics, SLMs have been used to control waves under strong scattering conditions for some time. Applications range from focusing through general disordered media Metasurfaces are not limited to shaping only electromagnetic waves. In seismology, control over surface acoustic waves has been demonstrated using metasurfaces made of elastic metamaterials for Love waves (horizontally polarized) Wavefront shaping techniques with metasurfaces have been well studied; however, control in complex reverberating environments still relies on simple, online brute force optimization methods. While these approaches work, they require a large number of iterations to reach convergence, are rarely guaranteed to achieve a global minimum, and can produce undesirable scattering configurations through the intermediate steps of the optimization process. Wavefront reconstruction, or estimating the wavefront in the basis of metasurface commands, is therefore a critical capability for enabling practical wavefront control applications. In this Article, we use a binary programmable metasurface to shape radio frequency electromagnetic waves inside a chaotic microwave cavity, and present a deep learning network that solves the wavefront reconstruction problem, enabling real-time operation once trained. We show that the deep learning network achieves an accuracy exceeding 99%. This high success rate is achieved with a limited amount of training data, requiring the collection of far fewer sets than the number of possible combinations of metasurface commands. A conceptual view of our technique is given in Fig. We emphasize that our method is enabled by the use of a reverberant environment, which allows the metasurface to interact with multiple ray trajectories, often more than once. A reverberant environment provides two major capabilities that are not present in non-reverberant environments: 1) the ability to control the distribution of wave fields at arbitrarily chosen locations inside the cavity is enhanced. This allows the use of relatively small metasurfaces, e.g., in our configuration, the metasurface covers only ∼1.5% of the total surface area of the cavity; and 2) the requirement on establishing a line-of-sight path between the metasurface and the ports is removed, which allows the location of the metasurface to be arbitrarily chosen, increasing the flexibility and versatility of the approach. We anticipate that realization of this concept will help usher in the new era of smart radio environments, as well as allow on-demand creation of microwave cold spots to protect sensitive electronic components and coherent perfect absorption states for wireless power transfer. Microwave experiments have shown that programmable metasurfaces can provide fine control over the scattering parameters of a cavity, with the most recent work demonstrating perfect absorption Deep learning has been successfully used to design metasurfaces for wavefront shaping applications in both the photonic and microwave domains These examples demonstrate how a programmable metasurface can enhance the processing power of a deep learning network for microwave imaging, but they do not leverage the deep learning network for wavefront reconstruction. This is a key component of intelligent wavefront shaping, which has so far been an underexplored area of research. Qian et al. used a simple dense network to enable cloaking of an object As discussed in Appendix A2, a single propagation path eliminates redundancies from persistent short orbits The reverberating nature of the cavity enables operation with a smaller metasurface than would be possible in a non-reverberating environment. Longer reverberation times (lower cavity losses) mean that the rays will survive longer in the cavity, resulting in more reflections from scattering objects and more ray trajectories that interact with the metasurface, often multiple times. Longer reverberation times then provide the metasurface more flexibility in controlling constructive and destructive interference at the ports, allowing for larger relative changes when toggling metasurface states. We demonstrate this to be the case and show that the performance of the deep learning network degrades as the losses in the cavity increase because the metasurface has a smaller relative impact on the S-parameters. This is another distinction between a reverberant environment and an open one, where environmental losses only impact the signal magnitude through absorption. We further show that our trained network can successfully determine the metasurface configuration from the measured scattering response in the cavity several days after the training data was collected. Measured S 21 responses with the same initial conditions inside a chaotic cavity will change over time, a phenomenon known as scattering fidelity decay Our technique is achieved through the development and combination of four major aspects: 1) adaptive configuration of the metasurface unit cells by binning elements together to dynamically alter the relative size of the elements; 2) representation of the complex system S-parameters in a pseudo-2D "image" to promote extraction of features that are correlated over both local and global frequencies; 3) complex-valued deep learning layers to exploit both phase and amplitude information, accelerating training and improving the accuracy when applied to complex scattering environments; and 4) introduction of the Terrapin Module to parallelize the deep learning network, promoting sparse feature representation and improving training robustness. The complex, ray chaotic cavity used for experimentation is in the same configuration used in our previous work Experiments were carried out over several months with the cavity placed in a heated and air-conditioned basement. While there were many commercial devices in the vicinity that emitted signals within the measurement window, we found the cavity to be well isolated. When not actively in use, such as in between experimental runs, the metasurface was powered off. The metasurface installed on an interior wall was fabricated by the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory. It is designed to operate in the frequency range of 3-4 GHz, and contains 240 binary meta-atoms (LC resonators) arranged in a rectangular grid of 10 × 24 elements. Each element has a characteristic length of ∼ λ/6 and is switched by a GaAs transistor amplifier to 1 of 2 states (0 or 1), changing the phase of the reflection coefficient by ∼ 180 • The goal of our deep learning network is to enable wavefront reconstruction inside a complex cavity. The network will accept a given S 21 spectra from 3-4 GHz and accurately determine the metasurface commands necessary to closely realize that specific scattering response. The relatively small size of the metasurface and its unit cells leads to high correlation between system scattering responses with minor changes in metasurface commands, which means the inverse problem is ill-posed. Deng et al. recently introduced a neural-adjoint approach for solving the ill-posed inverse problem of designing unit cell geometries to match specified absorption spectra The metasurface has 2 240 possible combinations of commands. To reduce the dimensionality, we introduced the concept of binning neighboring unit cells as discussed in Appendix A4. Groupings consisting of 2 × 2, 3 × 3, and 5 × 4 elements were chosen. Binning is an important capability that allows us to adapt the size of an effective element to the underlying scattering system. This is one of the major contributions of our work. The primary limitation of our approach is that we are not guaranteed to be able to generate any arbitrary S 21 response, as a configuration of the metasurface that produces that response does not necessarily exist. The small size of the metasurface relative to the cavity limits its ability to interact with all possible ray trajectories, emphasizing the importance of a binning capability to adapt the effective pixel size to the environment. This limitation is therefore a function of the system configuration, and not the deep learning network. The small relative size of the metasurface does represent a realistic configuration for practical smart radio environments, however. An important step for deep learning is preparation of the measured data. The goal here is to represent the data in a basis set that can be ingested by the neural network architecture. The raw data consists of M sets of complex two-port S-parameter values, each containing 32,001 points measured over a 3-4 GHz window. We are interested in the relationship between metasurface commands and transmission between the ports, so we select S 21 as the primary variable of interest. The measured data contains local and global correlations, both of which must be captured by the deep learning network. We can exploit the local correlations with 1D convolutional neural network (CNN) layers, but would like the individual windows to cover a smaller bandwidth. Our previous work showed diminishing returns for optimization over bandwidths greater than 10 MHz The output values of the deep learning network (equal in number to the number of binned metasurface elements) are floating point numbers rather than binary numbers and can be interpreted as the probability that a given element in the metasurface is active (set to 1). The determined commands are then found by rounding the outputs to either a 1 or a 0. Inspection of the raw (unrounded) outputs allows us to assess how correct the deep learning network was, or how confident the network was in the result. A discussion of the different types of neural network layers used is provided in Appendices A6 and A7. As described in Appendix A8, the training data sets are randomly shuffled and then split into 75% training data and 25% validation data. At each step (epoch), validation of the trained model is performed by testing the model with a new set of data not present in the training set. Complex-valued multiplicative layers have been used to invert propagation through multi-mode fibers The added complexity resulting from placing the metasurface inside a chaotic cavity requires a correspondingly complicated deep learning network to extract the relevant features. Rather than only designing progressively more intricate network topologies, we can also introduce complex-valued layers To demonstrate the impact of utilizing complex-valued network layers, we performed an experiment that compared 3 different architectures: 1) a complex-valued network that processes the complex-valued S-parameters and converts the result to a magnitude at the end of the network (Fig 4b ); 2) a hybrid network that processes the real and imaginary components of the S-parameters independently and then combines them through a rootsum-square operation at the end of the network (Fig 4c ); and 3) a real-valued network that operates on the magnitude of the S-parameters (Fig Ten separate training runs were performed with each architecture on the same set of input data. Panels e) through g) of Figure As described in Appendices A10 and A11, the 5 × 4 binning case performed extremely well using a straightforward sequential CNN architecture. After training, we were able to accurately realize 100% of the target responses over both the training and validation sets. Unfortunately, the purely sequential architecture of the network did not work as well for the 3 × 3 binning configuration (see Appendix A13). The increased complexity implies that we need a more complex network, so we turned to approaches successfully used in modern image classification, specifically inception modules With a deep learning network containing 4 Terrapin Modules in series, we were able to get excellent performance for the 3×3 binning configuration with only 4,000 sets of training data, as discussed in Appendix A13. The 2×2 configuration required 10,000 sets of data for a similar level of performance (see Appendix A14). The smaller effective elements in this configuration produce responses with a larger degree of correlation. Thus, more data is required for the network to learn and distinguish the more subtle relationships between metasurface command con- showing that the magnitude operation occurs at the beginning of the network. (e) through (g) Evolution of the accuracy over the validation data set for the various architectures with a mean accuracy of 99.2% for the complex valued network (e), 97.4% for the hybrid network (f ), and 91.4% for the real-valued network (g) cases that successfully trained. The dashed line shows 95% accuracy, and the insets show closeups of the accuracy evolution from epochs 300-500 in the range of 90% to 100%. This figure demonstrates that the complex-valued network achieves better overall accuracy with more stable training performance than the other architectures. Training is performed in a parallelized fashion over all the training data at once, e.g., for our computational resources, taking ∼ 4 hours to collect a sufficient set of data and train the deep learning network. Testing, however, is performed on single shot measurements and takes less than 1 second to measure the S 21 response and make a determination of the metasurface commands, enabling real-time operation. In contrast, the iterative approach in our earlier work The primary objective of this work is to demonstrate that deep wavefront shaping is a viable technique for wavefront reconstruction inside complex scattering environments, enabling intelligent wavefront shaping in a chaotic cavity. In this section, we shown how our deep learning approach accurately determines metasurface commands from measured cavity scattering parameters. Training results for the 5 × 4 and 3 × 3 binning configurations are provided in Appendices A11 and A13, while training results for the 2 × 2 binning configuration are provided in Appendix A14 and shown in Fig. The trained model did not have perfect accuracy but was able to determine 2,443 out of 2,500 sets in the validation data without error for an accuracy of 97.7%. One set had 2 errors and 56 sets had a single error, as shown in Fig. To further validate the trained deep learning network, we adopted the on-line, closed loop configuration as shown in Fig. The summation is taken over the full measured frequency range (3-4 GHz) and ∆S 21 is defined as The normalization factor here is determined by the average of the L 2 norms of the active commands (all 1s), S 1 21 , and the inactive commands (all 0s), S 0 21 . To understand how ∆S 21 depends on the difference between commands, we first identified the minimum Hamming distance for each of the 10,000 sets in the training data. The Hamming distance is simply the number of elements that are different between 2 sets of commands. It is a useful metric for comparing command sets, but does not include scaling or correlation based on position; in some cases, the impact of toggling an element in the center may be significantly different than the impact of toggling an element on the edge of the metasurface. The smallest Hamming distance between the training data sets ranged from a single element to 19 elements (out of 60). A series of whisker box plots showing ∆S 21 for the various Hamming distances is shown in Fig. Validation of the deep learning network in the configuration shown in Fig. The number of errors and number of cases with more than one error increases with time, showing the "aging" effect of the cavity, which can be quantified through the concept of scattering fidelity. Scattering fidelity is the normalized correlation as a function of time between two cavity responses with the same initial conditions An additional set of experiments showing the performance of the deep learning network with different cavity reverberation times is provided in Appendix A16 and Fig. In this paper, we demonstrated the use of a deep learning network for wavefront reconstruction, enabling intelligent wavefront shaping in complex reverberant environments. Major aspects include complex-valued deep learning layers that exploit both phase and amplitude information, binning of the metasurface elements, a pseudo-2D data format that allows features to be extracted over both narrow and wide bandwidths, and a Terrapin Module that enhances the receptive field, providing width and depth to the network. While our configuration leverages a binary (1-bit) tunable metasurface, it can be adapted for a continuous device, such as a varactor, by replacing the output sigmoid activation function with a rectified linear unit activation function and then discretizing the signal to the desired resolution. One of the primary limitations of traditional deep learning is the amount of data required to train the networks. This is especially concerning in light of the fact that loss of scattering fidelity requires periodically collecting new training data. We have demonstrated the ability to train highly accurate networks with a limited amount of training data, requiring far fewer sets than the number of possible combinations of commands. We have also demonstrated that the accuracy can be maintained for a period of at least several days, and is successful with varying amounts of loss in the cavity. This indicates that successful training on a reduced amount of data is possible, provided it is sufficiently diverse. Diversity in both the metasurface commands and the measured responses is then a key aspect in setting up any potential autonomous system. Several concerns must be addressed to enable practical fielded hardware systems. First, the sensing component must be reduced in cost and size. The availability of software defined radio (SDR) architectures presents an ideal path here, with many inexpensive platforms readily available. Compact devices such as the bladeRF In closing, we have shown that deep learning enabled wavefront reconstruction provides an important step towards realizing intelligent reconfigurable metasurfaces for smart radio environments. Potential applications in the domain of electromagnetics include wireless power transfer, protection of sensitive electronic components, optimization of wireless networks, micromanipulation of objects, and nonlinear time reversal. Our technique is applicable to general wave chaotic scattering systems and is not strictly limited to electromagnetic waves. Adopting this technique to control the system scattering response with metasurfaces that interact with seismic waves Wavefront control has a rich history and has been well studied from the perspective of adaptive optics. Conceived by Horace Babcock in 1953 Adaptive optics systems typically employ reflective deformable mirrors that provide mechanical phase compensation The availability of inexpensive reconfigurable metasurfaces has driven research into a field known as wavefront shaping Conventional adaptive optics systems measure the wavefront directly and use an operator, called the reconstructor, to solve the inverse problem between measurements and control signals. Wavefront reconstruction is at the heart of any wavefront control system. The process is generally indirect, as the reconstructor evaluates the wavefront in the basis of command signals, rather than explicitly in phase. Wavefront reconstruction is a specialized area of system identification Here, C n is the measurement noise covariance matrix, C n = n T n , C φ is the covariance matrix of the environmental disturbance, C φ = φ T φ , W is a weighting/regularization matrix, and B is a system configuration (geometry) matrix that relates control signals to wavefront measurements. Both C n and C φ are defined in sensor space, while W is defined in command space. The inverse problem is often ill-posed due to singularities or the presence of highly correlated responses with different commands For nonlinear systems, we can apply iterative methods to handle the reconstruction process. These are typically Krylov subspace methods such as the conjugate gradient method Wavefront reconstruction is viable for some metasurface applications, but depends on being able to solve the inverse problem. Complex environments include uncertainties in determining the system configuration (B matrix), and multiple reflection paths create intricate interference patterns at the antennas, producing chaotic fluctuations Early metasurface control approaches used brute force trial and error, toggling every element or combination of elements The impact on performance is evaluated through a metric or cost function, J, that is positive and realvalued, and dependent on both the command vector and the environment, E. If the cost function, J a * k+1 , E , is improved, the trial command vector becomes the new command vector, a k+1 = a * k+1 . Otherwise, the trial command vector is rejected and a new trial command vector is generated. The iterative process continues until either a specified number of iterations, T , are performed without improving the metric, or the cost function reaches a pre-determined value, at which point we claim convergence. While simple to implement and not reliant on knowledge of the system configuration, the dithering approach is by no means optimal. Gradient based approaches have proven extremely successful for general stochastic optimization problems In most cases, it is not possible to evaluate the gradient, ∇ a J, directly, so it must be approximated. The general approach is to apply a small perturbation to the current command vector and estimate the gradient from a one-sided or two-sided finite difference. The perturbation is applied to all elements of the command vector simultaneously (in parallel) to increase the convergence rate. A specialty of wavefront control, known as wavefront sensorless, or target-in-the-loop adaptive optics Target-in-the-loop methods are not as easily analyzed through modern multivariable control theory as conventional methods, but they are highly applicable to the problem of controlling metasurfaces in complex scattering environments. In particular, stochastic parallel gradient descent (SPGD) The cost function is arbitrarily defined, allowing SGD methods to be applied based on the specific need. It can be an image quality metric such as Strehl ratio SGD methods work well in principle for controlling a metasurface. However, they begin to fail with coarse quantization, which limits the ability to tune both the size of the applied perturbation and the size of the step taken along the gradient. In the extreme case of a binary (1-bit) metasurface, applying a perturbation boils down to simply toggling or not toggling each element, so that for the n th element, δa n = {0, 1}. This leads to singularities in estimating the gradient (Eq. A4 ), as well as approximation errors with driving the solution along the gradient (Eq. A3), since the resulting command must also be quantized to either 0 or 1. While metasurfaces can be manufactured with more bits of resolution for phase control, this increases complexity, cost, and power consumption considerably, making them less attractive for wide scale use. The capability of binary metasurfaces has been demonstrated many times; these devices can be expected to be utilized whenever power and cost are drivers for implementation. Since gradient based approaches are problematic with coarse quantization, dithering methods have dominated for wavefront control applications with binary tunable metasurfaces. We can modify the dithering technique in Eq. A2 to use shaped or intelligent perturbations. When the algorithm is initialized, we do not know where the optimal commands are located with respect to the solution space. We would like to apply "larger" effective changes that induce highly diverse responses with large scale global changes. As the algorithm proceeds, effec-tively moving along the gradient, we want the changes to become "smaller", and more localized. In this manner, we are able to continue the optimization process without wasting trials on global changes that are less likely to improve the specific metric of interest. Finally, once the algorithm has converged, we would like to be able to make sure we are not stuck in a local minimum. This shaped perturbation approach was demonstrated to successfully enable generating cold spots and realizing CPA states for a binary metasurface with 240 elements While dithering allows us to provide wavefront control in some capacity, a true wavefront reconstruction method is desired. Deep learning may provide a viable approach, as it has already been successfully demonstrated for general ill-posed inverse problems Large enclosed spaces, such as offices or compartments on ships or aircraft can act as "chaotic" reverberating chambers for short-wavelength electromagnetic waves An analytical approach known as the random coupling model (RCM), has been shown to accurately predict fluctuation statistics and allows separation of the universal and deterministic contributions in a simple additive manner The RCM works in the impedance domain to separate the universal contributions; conversion between impedance and scattering is handled through standard bilinear transformations Here, Z r is the radiation or free-space impedance of the ports and ξ is the fluctuating or universal component, which is described by RMT The RCM has been shown to apply to fading statistics in open systems, such as wireless communication paths, as well as closed systems, such as microwave cavities. Operating in a rich scattering environment presents an additional set of challenges in comparison to an open environment. In addition to the fundamental difference in the character of the fluctuations, in the semi-classical case or short wavelength limit, we can look at the behavior of ray trajectories. Specifically, we are interested in the change in ray trajectories in response to a change in the metasurface configuration. In an open system, there is a single ray (or ray bundle) that is observed by the sensor, with at most a single reflection off the metasurface. In a chaotic system, that single ray will reflect off multiple walls and obstacles in the cavity and possibly off the metasurface itself multiple times before reaching the sensor. This creates a cascading effect, so that the wavefront at the sensor is a combination of constructive and destructive interference of the multiple rays. The effect of these multiple interference paths is highly dependent on the configuration of the cavity. For an open system, a wavefront reconstruction approach is only dependent on the geometry between the sensor and the correcting device and is invariant to environmental changes (provided the disturbances remain within the dynamic range of the sensor and corrector). Wavefront reconstruction is therefore very robust for an open system. For a chaotic system however, small environmental changes can cause a wavefront reconstruction technique that was previously successful to no longer be viable, so that being "close" is not good enough. To build environmental models for simulations, we often need to make assumptions or approximations for simplicity or computational tractability. We also need to ensure that these assumptions are valid for the environments that are being modeled. Otherwise, the models may neglect potentially significant effects. We will outline some of the most problematic simplifying assumptions here. The first simplifying assumption often made is that the channels are assumed to be perfectly known by the transmitter (base station), so the only uncertainty in the environment is random thermal noise at the receiver(s). In complex scattering environments, there is always uncertainty, which can be significant. In addition, inside chaotic cavities, measured scattering responses with the same initial conditions will diverge over time, a phenomenon known as scattering fidelity decay The second simplifying assumption often made is that the equivalent channel matrix, is assumed to be invertible, so the inverse problem is well-posed. Complex scattering environments generally contain short orbits, or prompt direct paths, that are persistent across measurements The third simplifying assumption often made is that all the propagation paths are assumed to have a single reflection off the metasurface, so direct line-of-sight and multi-path trajectories are not included. Channel fading is then modeled with Rayleigh amplitude statistics. As stated previously, in real-world systems, strong direct line-of-sight paths induce Rician statistics and the presence of multi-path reflections drives statistics that are governed by random matrix theory (RMT) Testing and verification is often done in anechoic chambers to remove the environment and capture only the impact of the reconfigurable metasurface. Anechoic chambers are very good at covering up emissions problems, which become immediately apparent in reverberation chambers Finally, the metasurface is often assumed to have infinite phase resolution, so quantization effects are not included. Most commercially available metasurfaces have a single bit of control, though custom devices with 2 bits of control are becoming available Caution should be taken when applying any of these simplifying assumptions. Otherwise, they can overestimate the performance or install a false sense of confidence in a particular approach. A final characteristic of complex scattering environments to describe is coherent perfect absorption (CPA). CPA is a special state of the scattering matrix where an eigenvalue is driven to 0 and the electromagnetic energy for the corresponding eigenvector is completely absorbed inside the scattering system Full coherent multi-channel CPA is more complicated than single channel perfect absorption. However, one advantage is the increase in delivered power by a factor of N , where N is the number of channels. This is a significant gain and worth the difficulty of additional phase and amplitude control. path from port 2 to both ports 1 and 3. Also, ports 1 and 3 can be driven either independently or collectively with a relative phase shift provided by a NARDA phase shifter. In the frequency range of interest, 3-4 GHz, the Weyl formula The complexity of the cavity scattering responses combined with the enormous number of possible metasurface command configurations (2 240 ) means the direct development of a deep learning network for the full space of 240 elements is overly ambitious. To simplify the problem, we reduced the number of degrees of freedom of the metasurface by binning together neighboring pixel elements, or grouping them together so that each element in a group is always commanded with the same value. Binning the metasurface elements reduces the total number of elements that must be determined and strengthens the relative change in cavity scattering parameters when driving a single effective element. Binning also promotes generality, as a metasurface with smaller elements can always approximate one with larger elements. This provides the first major novel aspect of our approach and allows us to explore the use of deep learning models in simpler configurations before working our way up to the more difficult cases. We used 4 different metasurface binning configurations, as shown in Fig. A major concern with deep learning is the amount of data required for training, which grows with the complexity of the problem being solved. To work within the constraint of reasonable training time, we wish to limit the number of data sets that must be collected. Therefore, acquiring good training data is of critical importance to ensure we cover the full range of possible responses. As found in earlier work . Metasurface binning configurations. Binning configurations showing the relationship between the various options. The shaded green region identifies a single effective element for the specified configuration and the thin gray lines show the layout of the unbinned elements. With no binning, there are 240 elements, binning into groups of 2 × 2 yields 60 elements, binning into groups of 3 × 3 yields 24 elements, and binning into groups of 5 × 4 yields 12 elements. For the 3×3 binning case, the bottom row of elements consists of a 4 × 3 group so that all the elements are utilized. data took a little under an hour and a half, while collecting 10,000 sets of data took roughly 3.5 hours. Training was performed on a computer running Ubuntu 20.04 equipped with an NVIDIA RTX 3080 GPU, and took roughly 30 minutes for 10,000 training sets. For the initial experiment, we collected 4000 sets of data in each of the specified binning configurations; the 5 × 4 configuration allows 4096 unique metasurface combinations, so we collected 4096 sets (covering all possible combinations) in that case. With the exception of the 5 × 4 binning configuration, the number of sets collected was far smaller than the number of possible configurations of the metasurface. As discussed in Section A14, we found we needed 10,000 sets of data for the 2 × 2 binning case. The concept of depth in deep learning comes from complexity theory as defined for circuits, with depth being the longest path from an input to an output A deep network is divided into layers, with the interior layers often referred to as hidden, as they are unobservable from the input or the output. Networks come in many different shapes and sizes; no single type is optimal for all problems, a consequence of the "No Free Lunch" theorem Identifying the optimal deep learning network topology for a given binning configuration took a significant amount of time to iterate over many potential designs, e.g., for our computing resources, often several weeks, and was performed off-line. Once the deep learning network architecture was determined, we switched to an online, closed loop configuration where the data collection and training processes were separated by a few hours rather than days or weeks. The determined metasurface commands were directly applied to the metasurface and the resulting S 21 responses were measured by the network analyzer, closing the loop. The on-line configuration also serves as a "field-test" for the deep learning network, further validating it against data not seen during training, as well as testing performance against potential small variations in measurement noise and the scattering configuration of the cavity itself. An aspect that is not well understood outside of the signal processing community is how convolutional layers are implemented for inputs containing multiple features. In signal processing, the feature dimensionality is referred to as the number of channels and is sometimes defined as the width or the depth of the data. This arises from color image processing with 3 color channels for red, green, and blue. To perform the convolution over the desired dimension and ensure all the features are captured, the convolution kernel is multidimensional as shown in Fig. single dimension, the local frequency window in our case, but will contain optimized weights for each element. This means that the number of trainable parameters for a 1D convolutional layer scales as kN , not just k. For an input data set X, the output, y, of the convolutional layer with kernel K is given by For our purposes, we will zero pad the input data by appending (k -1)/2 rows of zeros to either end and keeping the central part of the result, so the number of points along the convolution dimension is constant in the output. By designing a convolutional layer consisting of N l filters, there will be N l such outputs or new features for the next layer. For training the networks, the data was split into 75% training data and 25% validation data. The validation data is used to score the performance after each training run and is not used during the training process itself, so that validation is unbiased. The data was randomly shuffled prior to splitting and each network was trained several times to ensure results were in family and that the training process was unbiased as well. To score the performance, we need to define metrics for loss and accuracy. The loss function was selected as mean absolute error to emphasize outliers in the data and we define accuracy as the fraction of sets of commands that were predicted without error. To clarify the difference, the loss function is defined as the average of the sum of the absolute value of the true commands, T j , subtracted from the predicted commands, P j , for set j, computed over N sets of M elements. The loss function is then computed on a per element basis and tells us how close the prediction was on average for each element. The output of the network is floating point rather than binary, so the loss function does not necessarily provide an indication of the total number of incorrect predictions. The accuracy metric is defined as the percentage of sets that were predicted without a single error. It is evaluated on a per set basis and explicitly uses the rounded output (0 or 1) from the network. Because accuracy is computed on a per set basis, it is dependent on the number of elements in a command set and provides a more conservative estimate of performance for the various binning configurations. Accuracy is also more volatile, especially when the loss function is large. The loss function is continuous and more appropriate for training where we need to compute a gradient, while accuracy is a better metric for scoring the overall performance. The networks were trained for 100-200 epochs using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with momentum. The basic SGD algorithm has potential problems with pathological curvature, or narrow ravines, which are common around local optima, and the response tends to oscillate back and forth across the ravine. To address this, we can use momentum The networks were trained in batches, meaning multiple data sets were evaluated at each iteration prior to up-dating the weights. This allows several samples of data to be processed simultaneously so that the effect of changes in the weights are observed over multiple sets of data, improving robustness and desensitizing the response to noise To prevent the networks from simply training on noise, we introduce an additional regularization step on the loss function. By enforcing an L 2 regularization scheme, the regularized loss function L * is computed from the loss function L, and the vector of weights for the current iteration, w i , as L * = L + λ||w i || 2 . The value λ is referred to as a weight decay. The learning rate, γ, is the step size along the gradient, so the weights are incremented at each iteration as Finally, the learning rate is stepped down when the loss function plateaus, which allows the network to continue learning when it stalls due to the rate being too high. With complex values, the mechanics of a network layer are the same as for the real-valued counterpart but they incur four times the computational cost due to having both real and imaginary components as well as the crossterms. Our initial deep learning implementation leveraged Keras Figure The acceleration in training comes with a caveat in that the overall computational time for the purely realvalued deep learning network is still less than that of the complex-valued deep learning network. Complex-valued layers increase the computation requirements for multiplication and convolution by a factor of 4 to handle the real and imaginary terms as well as the cross-terms. In addition, highly optimized and efficient implementations of purely real-valued layers are readily available through the NVIDA CUDA deep neural network library (cuDNN), but are not available for their complex-valued counterparts. to keep the output size fixed, and the stride and dilation are always set to 1. This means the receptive field at any layer, r l , is given by a simple recursive equation dependent on the receptive field at the previous layer, r l-1 , and the kernel length of the current layer, k l As shown in Fig. An inception module is designed to promote sparse feature representation using available dense components The original inception module was developed for image processing and operates in a true 2D space, with full 2D convolutions. It uses 4 parallel paths with CNN layers containing unit length kernels for buffering and conditioning, along with 3 and 5 sample length kernels for feature extraction, and a max pool layer to improve performance Sequential network layer architecture. The input layer consists of Ni feature vectors containing S21 measurements in a local 10 MHz window of F points, for a total size of F × Ni. This is followed by a series of 1D convolutional layers defined by the number of filters and the kernel length. Each convolutional layer includes a 1D convolution, a batch normalization to keep the distribution statistics constant throughout the network, and a rectified linear unit activation function. Interspersed with the convolutions are 1D max pooling layers defined by the pool size, p, that serve to reduce the dimensionality of the local frequency window. The output stage consists of a global average pooling layer to further reduce dimensionality and convert the complex-valued signals to magnitude, followed by a dense or fully-connected layer to ensure the correct number of outputs. The dense layer produces outputs that are linear combinations of the outputs from the global average pooling layer, and is followed by a sigmoid activation function to approximate binary values at the output. (31.25 kHz), while the frequency spacing along rows is the separation between local windows (10 MHz). The difference in sampling means we need to treat the rows and columns accordingly and avoid traditional 2D convolutions that assume uniform sampling. Therefore, we modified the general architecture of the inception module to perform 1D convolutions over the 10 MHz local frequency windows. The 1D convolutional filters then extract local features over the 10 MHz windows, while the relationship between the filters acts as a dense or fully connected layer, extracting global features over the full 1 GHz measurement window. From previous work with the cavity, we found that the mean mode spacing is ∼125 kHz and we demonstrated the ability to generate strong nulls over a 500 kHz bandwidth For the 2 × 2 configuration with 4000 sets of data, we were able to achieve >98% accuracy on the training set, but were limited to ∼50% accuracy on the validation set. The discrepancy between training and validation results is a hallmark of overtraining. In this particular case, the validation results were improving but stalled as the training results approached 100% accuracy. The error landscape became extremely small with a negligible gradient, so there was no direction to take and continue learning. The network therefore learned specific features of the training set rather than general features of the full range of possible responses. This suggests the overtraining is due to having a limited amount of data (only 4000 sets). We captured a larger amount of data (10,000 sets) and were able to achieve >95% accuracy on both the training and validation sets. Perfect accuracy for the validation set may be possible with the collection of an even larger amount of data. Figure An additional set of experiments was performed to determine the impact of cavity reverberation time on the performance of the deep learning network. To increase the losses in the cavity (and decrease the reverberation time), RF absorbent materials were placed inside the cavity. For each loss configuration, an ensemble of measurements was collected using the mechanical mode stirrer and the reverberation time was estimated from the power delay profile (PDP) For on-the-fly learning and adaptation to changing environmental conditions, we propose the future use of reinforcement learning Specification of an arbitrary scattering condition in the current implementation is cumbersome, as the complete S 21 response over the full 3-4 GHz measurement window must be defined. For practical engineering applications, we prefer a simpler method of defining a desired wave scattering condition. Deep reinforcement learning also helps in this case, as it scores the performance of an agent through a scalar, positive, and real-valued metric. The agent uses the deep learning network to learn the relationship between metasurface commands and S 21 responses, but the complicated details are hidden from the user. There are therefore 2 learning components to deep reinforcement learning: an inner deep learning network that learns how to map S 21 responses onto metasurface commands, and an outer agent based loop that learns how to use the inner deep learning network to optimize the desired metric. This metric can be the total power in a specified bandwidth for cold spot generation, the magnitude of the eigenvalues of the full S-matrix at a given frequency for coherent perfect absorption, or the bit error rate for communications systems. Learning from scratch can be slow and may not be fast enough to adapt to changing environmental conditions. In this case, transfer learning, or using information about a similar problem to accelerate training for another one, can be incorporated into the reinforcement learning strategy 