In this work we analyze the power scaling potential of amplifying multicore fibers (MCFs) used in coherently-combined systems. In particular, in this study we exemplarily consider rod-type MCFs with 2x2 up to 10x10 Ytterbium-doped cores arranged in a squared pattern. We will show that, even though increasing the number of active cores will lead to higher output powers, particular attention has to be paid to arising thermal effects, which potentially degrade the performance of these systems. Additionally, we analyze the influence of the core dimensions on the extractable and combinable output power and pulse energy. This includes a detailed study on the thermal effects that influence the propagating transverse modes and, in turn, the amplification efficiency, the combining efficiency, the onset of nonlinear effect, as well as differences in the optical path lengths between the cores. Considering all these effects under rather extreme conditions, the study predicts that average output powers higher than 10 kW from a single 1 m long Ytterbium-doped MCF are feasible and femtosecond pulses with energies higher than 400 mJ can be extracted and efficiently recombined in a filled-aperture scheme. Fiber lasers have demonstrated an impressive power performance scaling potential over the last decades, which has opened up a wide field of new applications in the industrial and scientific sectors. However, the onset of mode instability (TMI) Significant reduction of the footprint, component count and complexity of beam combined systems can be achieved by integrating the individual amplifying channels into a single fiber, a so-called multicore fiber (MCF). Such fibers have already been successfully implemented in optical communications As known, quantum defect heating is one of the most significant heat sources in almost all lasers, so in Yb-doped laser systems. In fiber laser systems in particular, due to the elongated geometry of the fibers, the heat generated in the active cores flows predominantly in the radial direction, which induces a radially inhomogeneous temperature profile as described in the literature A simulation tool has been developed in order to describe an MCF amplifier system accounting for all the previously mentioned effects. The working principle of this tool is schematically depicted in Fig. As mentioned before, the typical non-uniform thermal transverse profile in an MCF, shown in Fig. A more serious impact of the thermal profile, shown in Fig. η comb,spatial can be understood as the ratio of the combined power to the sum of the power emitted by all NxN cores. The combined power is calculated by spatially superimposing the normalized electrical field amplitudes E i,norm emitted by the individual NxN cores with the core centers x i and y i at the fiber end facet (which are part of the solution given by the simulation tool). At this point it is important to note that different output powers P i emitted by each core might occur. This is due to the fact that the different mode sizes along the fiber will, in principle, influence the amplification behavior in each core (due to the different overlap with the doped core area). This will also be considered in the calculation of the combining efficiency. Fig. With λ being the signal light wavelength, n 2 the nonlinear index and I peak,i (z) the peak intensity of the propagating pulse along the core i. Here, the strength of the simulation tool can be seen, since the mode shrinking along the fiber, and with it the change in peak intensity, are taken into account. As shown in Fig. As described in the last section, there are various effects that must be considered when operating an MCF amplifier at high thermal loads. First, prohibitively high temperatures might occur due to the extremely high powers that can be extracted from these waveguides. In Yb-doped fibers, in particular, the optical properties (such as the absorption and emission cross sections, as described in Especially the pump absorption from 900 to 1000 nm and the emission above 1010 nm decreases while the re-absorption in the signal band increases. Moreover, thermally induced damage can start to happen at around 1000 °C -as additionally described in The combining efficiency as a function of the extracted power per coreconsidering MCFs with 30 μm (left) and 80 μm (right) core diameter -is shown in Fig. In this case Gaussian pulses with a stretched duration of 10 ns are assumed (this stretched pulse duration, although large, is something that will be implemented in the next generation of stateof-the-art, high-performance ultrafast fiber laser systems). This information, together with the repetition rate (that will be varied in this study) allows the calculation of a corresponding pulse energy and B-integral. The nonlinear accumulated phase will in most cases distort the temporal profile of the recompressed pulses. Using a spectral shaping device is a well-known technique to reduce the impact of the temporal Kerr nonlinearity, the B-integral Taking this limitation into account (in addition to the others already considered in the CW study) will lead to a maximum combinable and extractable pulse energy for the different MCFs at different repetition rates, as shown in Fig. Simulation results for coherently combined ytterbium-doped multicore fiber amplifier systems have been presented. In order to do this, a tool has been developed that numerically solves and analyzes the amplification behavior in MCFs together with thermal considerations. Using this model allows predicting the expected thermal load and temperature-dependent effects such as mode-shrinking as a function of MCF design parameters. It turns out that the combining efficiency is particularly strongly influenced by the thermally-induced mode shrinking and deformation that differs from core to coredepending on its position. Due to the limitations imposed by thermal effects, the best strategy for scaling the average power appears to be increasing the number of cores and using relatively small core diameters. By doing so, our simulations suggest that it should be possible to extract and combine around 13.5 kW from a just 1 m long 10x10 MCF with 30 μm core dimensions. The use of larger core diameters, on the other hand, will help to maximize the extractable and combinable pulse energy in these systems in ultrashort pulse operation. Assuming a stretched pulse duration of 10 ns and a maximum B-integral of 10 rad, it was possible to show that femtosecond pulses with up to 450 mJ of pulse energy in a 10x10 MCF with 80 μm core dimensions together with an average power of 4.5 kW can be achieved. At this point we want to emphasize that our study does not account for other effects that might reduce the combining efficiency in MCFs, such as multimode operation, tolerances in core sizes/positions or polarization changes. According to already existing coherently combined systems, an additional reduction of power/energy performance of 10-20 % (due to a plethora of spurious effects, such as multimode operation of the cores, imperfections in the optical elements, etc.) has to be taken additionally into account for a realistic estimation. According to our simulations, considering the aforementioned power and energy scaling prospects together with these additional limitations, a combined average power of more than 10 kW in CW operation and more than 400 mJ (4.0 kW) in pulsed operation seem feasible with MCF systems. Future related studies will focus on experimental investigations of the thermal effects that have been revealed and presented in this work. Moreover, strategies have to be worked out to mitigate the impact of thermal effects in MCFs so that the combined average output power and pulse energy can be further increased. This will be an important step towards compact ultrashort pulse Joule-class MCF laser systems in the future. © [2021] Optical Society of America]. Users may use, reuse, and build upon the article, or use the article for text or data mining, so long as such uses are for non-commercial purposes and appropriate attribution is maintained. All other rights are reserved.