We investigated and demonstrated a 1.3 μm-band laser grown by metalorganic vapour phase epitaxy (MOVPE) on a specially engineered metamorphic parabolic graded InxGa1-xAs buffer and epitaxial structure on a GaAs substrate. Bottom and upper cladding layers were built as a combination of AlInGaAs and InGaP alloys in a superlattice sequence. This was implemented to overcome (previously unreported) detrimental surface epitaxial dynamics and instabilities: when single alloys are utilised to achieve thick layers on metamorphic structures, surface instabilities induce defect generation. This has represented a historically limiting factor for metamorphic lasers by MOVPE. We describe a number of alternative strategies to achieve smooth surface morphology to obtain efficient compressively strained In0.4Ga0.6As quantum wells in the active layer. The resulting lasers exhibited low lasing threshold with total slope efficiency of 0.34 W/A for a 500 μm long ridge waveguide device. The emission wavelength is extended as far as 1360 nm. GaAs-based lasers represent (together with "on silicon" approaches For example, the small material bandgap offsets and consequent electron overflow lead to degradation of several device characteristics even at moderate temperature operation. All this translates to poor characteristic temperature (T0) in traditional 1.3 μm InGaAsP lasers, with T0 of about 60 K, Metamorphic growth techniques to develop GaAs-based semiconductor lasers operating at 1.3 and 1.55 μm wavelengths have been broadly previously investigated. All the epitaxial samples discussed here were grown in a MOVPE commercial horizontal reactor at low pressure (80 mbar) with purified N2 as carrier gas. Transmission electron microscope (TEM) characterisation was performed using a Thermo Fisher Talos F200X G2 fitted with the Super-X energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS) operated at 200 kV using high angle annular dark field (HAADF) scanning TEM (STEM) and EDS. The structure of the target laser device developed in this paper starts with a homoepitaxial GaAs 100 nm thick buffer followed by a metamorphic graded n+ InxGa1-xAs layer (~0<x<18%), 1 μm thick. Then, a laser waveguide structure containing n-doped lower cladding, MQW active, p-doped upper cladding and contact layers was grown, all pseudomorphic to the in-plane lattice parameter at the end of the grading. The cladding layers were grown with signature superlattice structures built as a combination of AlInGaAs and InGaP alloys. The lower and upper cladding layers were Si-doped and Zn-doped, with concentration of ~1×10 18 cm -3 and ~8×10 17 cm -3 respectively. The active region of a separate confinement heterostructure (SCH) consisted of three compressively strained nominal In0.40Ga0.60As quantum wells 7 nm thick, sandwiched between nominal In0.13Ga0.87As and Al0.12In0.14Ga0.74As barrier layers, and preceded by 5 nm of GaAs used as control interface layer (CIL). Finally, a 100 nm thick InGaAs top p-contact layer with Zn doping of 1×10 The complete epitaxial structure of the full laser is sketched in Figure The surface organization and roughness behaviour is preserved in the subsequent cladding layers deposited onto the MBL by using an AlInGaAs-InGaP superlattice (SL). AlInGaAs and InGaP represent two suitable alloys for the cladding selection in order to maintain efficient optical field confinement and waveguiding, considering a 1.3 μm emission in a SCH multi-QW configuration for lasing. Indeed, for the quaternary AlInGaAs layer, the Al composition can be significantly varied while keeping lattice matching to the InxGa1-xAs MBL. Moreover, the AlInGaAs material system provides simplicity to a metamorphic laser design, as varying the aluminium content allows both strong QW confinement when used for barriers, and engineering of the SCH to enhance the optical confinement, hence reducing the material gain at threshold, as recently discussed It was also observed that for thicknesses less than 300 nm, both AlInGaAs and the InGaP alloys had RMS values of the same order of magnitude or close enough to those of the MBL. Hence, to avoid the surface instabilities which appeared with increased layer thicknesses when a single alloy was utilised, the strategy was to combine the two alloys in the lower cladding barrier, alternating them while keeping the thickness for each layer around 300 nm for the AlInAs layer and beyond for the InGaP. Figure In Figure The growth temperature was kept constant at 740°C (thermocouple) during the full lower cladding deposition and then was gradually decreased at the end of the Al0.12In0.14Ga0.74As layer in the SCH part, for QWs growth at 580°C. The heavy compressive strain in QWs and the residual strain in the metamorphic buffer layer (in combination with the surface step bunched ordering) promoted 3D feature formation under certain growth temperatures and for certain percentage of indium in the QWs. To avoid and control the 3D nanostructuring, we inserted a thin GaAs layer before the QW region as a controlled interface layer. Five nm of GaAs were sufficient to delay the nanostructure formation process, guaranteeing 2D growth without affecting the active layer optical emission. We systematically investigated the range of growth temperatures and indium content in the active layers which were both 3D-nanostructured and defect-free, while maintaining the emission wavelengths of interest. A range between 540 °C and 650 °C (thermocouple) represents a solid and useful interval where we could grow 2 InGaAs QWs with up to 40% of indium, whereas for three InGaAs QWs with the same 40% of indium the temperature was decreased to 580 °C. HAADF images confirmed the absence of defects and 3D features in the active part (Figure The temperature dependence of the threshold current, Ith, is characterised through the T0 value given by T0 = dT/dln Ith. In CW operation, for the 500 μm long device, a value of 60 K is obtained (inset Figure The CW spectrum at 20 °C of the 300 μm x 4.5 μm laser is shown in Figure We have demonstrated an O-band laser structure on an engineered metamorphic graded InGaAs buffer grown by MOVPE on a GaAs substrate. We discussed that the culprit inhibiting MOVPE metamorphic lasers > 1.3 μm is linked to previously unreported surface instabilities. Strain relaxation defects at the substrate interface are typically blamed for metamorphic device failures. In this case the catastrophic surface roughening appears to be largely independent from the buffer morphology, but tight to further surface dynamics. We presented a two-alloy superlattice cladding layer structure as a novel solution to control the epitaxial surface instabilities. We determined a range of growth temperatures and indium content in the active layer, which provided flat and defects free epitaxy while resulting in the emission of interest. The method combined a relatively low growth temperature with the insertion of a thin GaAs layer deposited before the QWs. The 4.5 μm wide and 500 μm long ridge lasers showed a low electric resistance with a total slope efficiency of 0.35 W/A. Under pulsed operation a T0 of 190 K was measured. Our results represent a solution to long standing problems in the material science community on the MOVPE growth of thick metamorphic structures, and highlights the potential of the GaAs platform as replacement for InPbased laser structures. The achieved control over the material issues opens routes to "elastic" designs targeting specific wavelengths and extending the spectral span of previously available structures, possibly deeper into the infrared region.