Ratchet devices allow turning an ac input signal into a dc output signal. A ratchet device is set by moving particles driven by zero averages forces on asymmetric potentials. Hybrid nanostructures combining artificially fabricated spin ice nanomagnet arrays with superconducting films have been identified as a good choice to develop ratchet nanodevices. In the current device, the asymmetric potentials are provided by charged Néel walls located in the vertices of spin ice magnetic honeycomb array, whereas the role of moving particles is played by superconducting vortices. We have experimentally obtained ratchet effect for different spin ice I configurations and for vortex lattice moving parallel or perpendicular to magnetic easy axes. Remarkably, the ratchet magnitudes are similar in all the experimental runs; i. e. different spin ice I configurations and in both relevant directions of the vortex lattice motion. We have simulated the interplay between vortex motion directions and a single asymmetric potential. It turns out vortices interact with uneven asymmetric potentials, since they move with trajectories crossing charged Néel walls with different orientations. Moreover, we have found out the asymmetric pair potentials which generate the local ratchet effect. In this rocking ratchet the particles (vortices) on the move are interacting each other (vortex lattice); therefore, the ratchet local effect turns into a global macroscopic effect. In summary, this ratchet device benefits from interacting particles moving in robust and topological protected type I spin ice landscapes. Ratchet effect is at the core of notable and unique phenomena, for example biological molecular machines In the present work, the asymmetric potentials are provided by a honeycomb array of connected nanomagnet bars. These arrays develop a set of frustrated nanomagnets, which are governed by spin ice rules, see the reviews This ratchet effect has been studied in two situations: i) at remanence, after an in-plane saturating magnetic field is applied along one of the three anisotropy easy axes, i.e, an axis parallel to one of the directions of the nano-bars. When the saturating field is decreased to zero, a periodic and ordered distribution of positive and negative charges shows at remanence. The sample is in spin ice II configuration. ii) at remanence, when a saturating magnetic field is applied along one of the three anisotropy hard axes (perpendicular to one of the easy axes), then the positive and negative magnetic charges distribution is disordered at remanence. The sample is in spin ice I configuration. In the first situation, spin ice II configuration, the periodic and ordered asymmetric potentials yield a ratchet effect. Remarkably, in the disordered case, spin ice I configuration, a ratchet effect is also observed. This noticeable ratchet effect is supported by the fact that a non-zero remanent magnetization exists in the disordered state (Ice I). This happens since, when the saturating field applied along the hard axis is decreased to zero, this magnetic field seems to imprint a preferential direction in the Ice I configuration. The final result is not a fully disordered set of asymmetric potentials since the system remembers the preferential direction defined by the saturation field In the present paper, we will go a step further, since we experimentally explore different type I configurations and different vortex motion trajectories and we analyze the local distribution of asymmetric potentials. We show that in this hybrid system ratchet effect occurs whichever is the distribution of asymmetric potentials; i. e. any configurations of charges in this type I spin ice yields a ratchet effect. Moreover, we have modeled the local distribution of asymmetric potentials, to figure out which pairs of asymmetric potentials are relevant to promote the ratchet effect and which of the pairs compensate each other, being irrelevant for the ratchet effect. The hybrid nanostructured system comprises a honeycomb array of magnetic Co nanobars (Fig. The experiment protocol is summary as follows: we set the ac current density which yields an ac Lorentz force on the vortices that is given by FL = J x n  , where the current density is J = Jac sin t, n is a unitary vector parallel to the applied magnetic field, and  is the fluxoid. The vortex lattice flows in an asymmetric potentials landscape placed in the vertices of the honeycomb array. From the Josephson expression for the electric field E = B x v, being B the applied magnetic field and v the vortex-lattice velocity, we measure a dc voltage drop Vdc that is given by Vdc = v B d, where d is the distance between contacts and B the applied magnetic field. For an ac driving Lorentz force we find that the output is a nonzero dc voltage Vdc. This means that a net vortex lattice flow arises from the ac driving force. Albeit the time averaged force on the vortices is zero ( <FL > = 0) a nonzero dc voltage drop is measured ( Vdc ≠ 0 ). In summary, it turns out a ratchet effect is observed. Magnetic Force Microscopy (MFM) contrast was used as a proxy for the potential asymmetric landscape of the nanomagnets. Contrast profiles of the asymmetric potentials have been extracted from experimental and simulated MFM data. The experimental distribution of asymmetric Néel walls was obtained by using a NANOTECH Atomic Force Microscope system with magnetic NANOSENSORS We have studied two samples (A and B) with exactly the same honeycomb array (Methods). Sample A is measured as-grown (Tc0 = 8.91 K); i. e. the only applied magnetic fields are the weak fields applied perpendicularly to the sample plane, which are needed to generate the superconducting vortices. Figure In both samples (A, B) ratchet effect has been studied taking into account two vortex motion directions: Superconducting vortices on the move parallel to one of the magnetic easy axes (array nanobars) and parallel to one of the magnetic hard axes (perpendicular to one of the easy axes); more details in Supplemental Information. In sample A, spin ice I has been achieved without imposing a chosen magnetic memory direction. We can study rocking ratchet effect behavior in as-grown sample; i. e. magnitude and temperature dependence and whether or not this behavior deviates from the reported and expected behavior in this type of ratchet. Conversely, in sample B a privilege direction has been set by means of a remanent state selection protocol. Hence, we can study whether or this ratchet effect can discriminate the preferent magnetic direction imprinted in the device. Figure Otherwise, in sample B a remanent state magnetic selection protocol has been applied. Two noticeable directions can be explored for vortex lattice motion. One of them when vortex lattice moves parallel to one of the easy axes (Co nanobars), and the second one when the vortices are on the move perpendicular to the easy axis (see Supplemental Information). Figure We have to take into account the main features of these asymmetric potential wells which comprise two charged Néel walls. In the honeycomb spin-ice nanomagnets, there are -1/2 edge magnetic half vortex with positive magnetic ice charge and -1/2 edge magnetic half vortex with negative magnetic ice charge Next, the combinations of asymmetric potentials are studied. In the ordered magnetic state (Ice II configuration), the positive and negative ice charges are alternating 6(e)-(g). Remarkably, we observe that uneven potentials with the same charge polarity can trigger the ratchet effect, see Figs. This shows that specific combination of potential well profiles is crucial for the emergence of the ratchet effect at large scales. Many asymmetric potential pair candidates are present and they can generate and contribute to this robust ratchet effect; both with opposite spin ice charges and with the same spin ice charges. Furthermore, since superconductivity is a cooperative long-range order effect, we are dealing with a ratchet of interacting particles, which are sculpted in a lattice, the vortex lattice. Therefore, the local ratchet effect becomes a macroscopic ratchet effect. The vortex lattice interplays with the asymmetric potentials and the interacting nature of superconducting vortices are crucial to obtain a macroscopic net flow of particles (vortices) and a rectifier effect from the disordered distribution of asymmetric potentials. There are non-negligible potential asymmetries for superconducting vortex motion for many different magnetic vertex configurations. Our experimental results suggest that collective interactions within the superconducting vortex lattice enhance the effect of the local and uneven asymmetries. A steady ratchet effect is generated in the disordered magnetic potentials in spin ice I configurations with different remanent magnetization. In summary, our results show that a rocking ratchet effect is the result of the asymmetries provided by the frustrated nanomagnets in the honeycomb array, even when a magnetic preferential direction is not identified. Through MFM experiments and simulations, we have proved that, a rich set of local pairs of asymmetric potentials exists, which contribute to the ratchet effect even with the same charge polarities. Therefore, a rectifier device can be achieved of interacting particles (vortices) regardless the distribution of the magnetic asymmetric potentials and the strengths of their potential wells. Finally, this macroscopic ratchet effect does not show any specific dependence with spin ice I configurations neither the vortex lattice motion direction; i. e. parallel or perpendicular to magnetic easy axes (bars in the honeycomb array). Figure 