The on-going COVID-19 pandemic highlights the severe health risks posed by deep submicron sized airborne viruses and particulates in the spread of infectious diseases. There is an urgent need for the development of efficient, durable and reusable filters for this size range. Here we report the realization of efficient particulate filters using nanowire-based low-density metal foams which combine extremely large surface areas with excellent mechanical properties. The metal foams exhibit outstanding filtration efficiencies (>96.6%) in the PM0.3 regime, with potentials for further improvement. Their mechanical stability and light weight, chemical and radiation resistance, ease of cleaning and reuse, and recyclability further make such metal foams promising filters for combating COVID-19 and other types of airborne particulates. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has unleashed global disruptions and profoundly changed our way of life. Central to the rapid spread of this respiratory infection is the transmission by airborne viral particles. Airborne particles and droplets > 2.5 μm typically precipitate rapidly due to gravity, thus have limited reach. However, particles below this size (labeled PM2.5) can suspend in air for hours to days, travel over long distances In this work we report the realization of efficient and durable deep-submicron particulate filters based on low-density metallic nanowire (NW) foams. Such foams are made of randomly distributed Cu nanowires with tunable densities using a scalable electrodeposition and sintering approach. The extremely large surface areas of the foams lead to excellent filtration performance for a broad range of particle sizes, and particularly with efficiencies of > 96.6% for PM0.3 particles, similar to N95 facemasks, within breathable pressure differentials (6-60 Pa). Remarkably, this is achieved without the assistance of electrostatics. These light weight metal foams also exhibit outstanding mechanical properties, allowing strong air flows and large pressure drops, and can be easily cleaned, reused and recycled. Copper foams were fabricated using electrodeposited nanowires following a cross-linking and freeze-drying technique. The strengthened Cu foams are now mechanically sturdy yet still maintain the low density (~ 2-30 % of the bulk metals) and light weight. A 120 mg 15% 2ED-Cu foam disc, 1.4 mm thick and 9 mm in diameter, can be easily supported on top of the bristles of a green foxtail plant (Setaria viridis) without bending them (Figure To quantify the improvement in strength produced by the electrodeposition process, 2% 1ED-Cu, 2% 2ED-Cu and 15% 2ED-Cu foams are evaluated under compression tests (Supporting Information, Figure Pressure differentials across the 2ED-Cu foams, an important parameter to quantify the filter performance, are measured. Small pores will increase the particle filtration efficiency at the expense of breathability, as it will simultaneously increase the pressure drop (PD) across the filter, thus increasing the energy cost to preserve the air flow. At very low face velocities (< 0.1 m/s), where most common filters operate, this dependence can be approximated to the first linear term. Filtration tests reveal that for particles in the 0.8 -1.6 μm, 0.5 -0.8 μm, and 0.1 -0.4 μm size ranges, the mass-based filtration efficiency Em is 99.4%, 96.1%, and 78.3%, respectively for 1.0 mm thick 15% 2ED-Cu foams, which has benefited from the extremely large surface areas of the foams. For a 0.8 mm thick 5% density 2ED-Cu foam, Em increases to 85.5% for 0.1 -0.4 μm sized particles, while the pressure drop coefficient improves to 0.58 ± 0.03 kPa m -1 s. Inertial impaction and interception are the primary mechanisms for filtering the 0.8 -1.6 μm and 0.5 -0.8 μm sized particles, respectively. For the critical 0.1 -0.4 μm sized particles, both diffusion/Brownian motion and interception are effective, at low and high end of the size range, respectively. Improved efficiency in this particle size can be achieved by increasing the foam thickness up to 2.5 mm, reaching a remarkable Em of 97.0% in a 15% 2ED-Cu foam. The linear pressure drop coefficient increases up to (2.76 ± 0.21) kPa m -1 s, still within the breathable regime (see Figure It is useful to compare our Cu foam filters with other common filters. As benchmarks we have used our method and setup to test the filtration efficiency of several common filters, including 3M 8000 series N95 respirator (new and washed), 3M 2200 MPR Filter, and high thread count cloth. As shown in Table ΔP , where α is the penetration ratio of particles (α = 1 -En), v is the air velocity (in m/s) and ΔP is the pressure drop across the filter (in kPa). This metric, similar to those in literature, The comparison of the quality factor for 0.3 μm particles Q0.3 of the tested filtration media is shown in Figure For our 5% 2ED-Cu foam (0.8 mm thick), with an En of 84.2±3.1% and ΔP/v= (0.58 ± 0.03) kPa•m - 1 s, Q0.3=(3.18±0.33) kPa -1 •m•s -1 . This Q0.3 value is comparable to an electrostatically charged N95 respirator, while the breathability, inversely proportional to ΔP/v, is almost twice as good. The excellent filtration efficiency of the foams is due to the extremely high surface areas of the foams, which enhances the filtration by diffusion, interception, and impaction. This is consistent with previous studies that found thinner fibers filter more efficiently. We note that the synthesis of such foam filters is scalable. Using commercially available 1-2" sized nanoporous PC membranes as templates, the materials costs for making nanowires The foam filters may be used in a wide variety of settings, from respirators/ face masks to household air filters. Flat metal foams can be used in conventional air filter applications without the need for bending, or as inserts in respirators that have filter cartridges. For face masks which require conformal fit, the metal foams may be integrated with elastic coating or back-support, where the PM0.3 filtration is accomplished by the metal foams, and the support layer provides the conformal fitting and filtration of larger particulates. We have demonstrated an effective, durable, reusable and recyclable particulate filter for deep submicron airborne nanoparticles using light weight interconnected metallic nanowire foams. The synthesis method employs freeze-drying and sintering, along with two separate electrodeposition processes, to achieve low density (1-30% of bulk density) metal foams with extremely large surface areas and much enhanced mechanical stability. Such foams can be easily cleaned by rinsing in water, sonication or blowing with compressed air for sustained use. Pressure differential measurements confirm the breathability of the synthesized foams. These Cu metal foams exhibit near 100% filtration efficiencies for 0.1-1.6 μm sized particles, including > 96.6% efficiency for 0.1-0.4 μm particles without the use of electrostatics, and with higher breathability and comparable quality factor as N95 respirators. These results demonstrate a new type of efficient particulate filters, especially for the deep-submicron particulates such as the SARS-CoV-2 virus, that could be used in facemasks, PPE, as well as air/fluid filters in general. The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.nanolett.1c00050. Materials and methods, filtration test on 1ED-Cu foams, additional SEM images of foam morphology evolution, mechanical property measurements, results of the smoke test and conventional filter measurements, and determination of particle number-based filtration efficiency (PDF). *Air velocity was between 5-15 cm/s for each foam.