This paper gives a review of studies of superconductors with a porosity above 50%. The pores in such superconducting materials provide refrigerant penetration, efficient heat dissipation and stable operation. Methods for the synthesis of the main groups of porous superconductors are described. The results of studies of the structural, magnetic, and electrical transport properties are presented, and the features of the current flow through porous superconductors of various types are considered. Advances in raising the critical temperature and critical current open up new avenues to the widespread use of superconductors. Progress in the creation of superconducting high-current devices is based on theoretical studies of the pinning of Abrikosov vortices at artificial pinning centers Upon pulsed magnetization and high currents flowing in a superconductor, heating regions and hot spots may appear When creating a PS, scaling, i.e., the ability to create objects of various sizes, is available The thermal and mechanical properties of porous materials were analyzed using various structural models The trajectories of currents in a PS are more ramified and entangled than in dense bulk superconductors, and the current circulation pattern is more complicated The effect of the porosity of samples on their critical current was considered in When describing the magnetic and electric transport properties of PSs, the model of a two-level superconductor is used With increasing temperature or magnetic field, the critical values of both intragranular and intergranular currents decrease, but the corresponding functional dependences of the critical currents of these subsystems are different, since they are associated with different physical processes To determine the average critical current density J c from magnetic measurements, the Bean formula J c (H) = ΔM(H)/kR c is used, where ΔM is the height of the hysteresis loop in A/m and the coefficient k depends on the geometric shape of the sample; for polycrystalline samples, k = 2/3 is taken. The value of ΔM in an external magnetic field H is determined as ΔM(H) = M↓(H) -M↑(H), where M↑(H) and M↓(H) are the magnetization values with increasing and decreasing H, respectively. For the correct determination of J c , a correct choice of R c is necessary. For polycrystalline superconductors, the use of R c as the sample radius often leads to a significant underestimation of J c . A method for determining the current circulation scale was proposed in For samples with a negligible demagnetizing factor R c /t <<1) and polycrystalline superconductors, the following expression to determine the scale of current circulation was proposed in where λ is the magnetic field penetration depth for the superconductor at the measurement temperature and the values of M↑ and ΔM are determined at H = H p . Superconducting materials with macropores can be obtained using various techniques. Previously synthesized PSs can be divided into several groups, differing in methods of preparation and structural features. To date, foams, porous polycrystals, sponges, and fabrics are known. The synthesis of superconducting YBCO foams was carried out in two stages Porous polycrystals have a loose structure and contain a significant number of pores between crystallites, but the crystallites in these materials are the same as in bulk polycrystalline superconductors. (Bi,Pb) 2 Sr 2 Ca 2 Cu 3 O 10 (Bi2223) porous polycrystals were prepared by annealing a mixture of Bi2223 and CaCO 3 powders Porous MgB 2 polycrystals were prepared by annealing a mixture of MgB 2 and Mg powders at a temperature of 900°C in a He atmosphere at a pressure of 1.5-1.7 bar Porous YBCO polycrystals were prepared by annealing a mixture of YBCO particles and sugar Superconducting sponges are formed by interwoven superconducting fibers. Sponges are synthesized based on various biopolymers and can repeat the structure of the biopolymers used. To synthesize superconducting sponges, a sol-gel process is used. YBCO sponges prepared by the annealing of a solidified mixture of polysaccharide dextran and an aqueous solution of yttrium, barium, and copper nitrates were studied Nonwoven fabric is a felt-like material, similar to porous sponges, but formed by entangled superconducting nanofilaments. A nonwoven fabric of Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 (Bi2212) nanowires was prepared by electrospinning (ES) Figure The crystal orientation and phase distribution in the PSs were investigated using electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) For Bi2223 porous polycrystals, the fractal dimension of the boundaries of pores and granules was determined from micrographs by covering with squares It should be noted that the structure of PSs has not been studied in sufficient detail in comparison with other porous materials Does high porosity affect the magnetic and electrical transport properties of superconductors? The features of magnetic flux pinning have been studied in YBCO foams For most of the created highly porous superconductors, magnetization hysteresis loops have been measured at different temperatures. The magnetic hysteresis of porous superconductors (Fig. The observed asymmetry of the magnetization hysteresis loop makes it possible to determine the current circulation scale. Using formula (1) for magnetic hysteresis at T = 4.2 K (Fig. The magnetic field penetration depth λ for Bi2223 is 150 nm The total magnetization of a polycrystalline sample along the external field is the projection of the magnetic moments created by circulating currents in all crystallites. The proportionality between ΔM and the circulating current allows one to determine the critical current density from the magnetic hysteresis using the Bean formula. In this case, to determine the values of ΔM in A/m, one should use the physical density of the crystallites rather than the density of the porous material. For Bi2223 porous polycrystal and Bi2212 fabric, the critical current density, determined from the magnetization hysteresis loops, decreases with increasing magnetic field as J c (H) ~ H -α (Fig. Measurements of the magnetic flux relaxation reveal interesting features of magnetic flux pinning and creep in YBCO foam. In measurements on individual struts, when all effects from pores are absent, the relaxation coefficient of the trapped magnetic flux is about 4% in the temperature range 20-60 K and magnetic fields up to 2 T [111]. This indicates the realization of strong pinning provided by small Y211 particles distributed in the YBCO matrix. Due to strong pinning, the values of Hirr for YBCO struts are higher than in Bi2212 and Bi2223 porous polycrystals and the position of the maximum of the dependences Fp(H) in the temperature range 60-85 K is in the field H ≈ 0.5 H irr (T) The relaxation of the trapped magnetic flux in large lumps of foam has contributions from all types of currents: the currents flowing along the perimeter of the sample and responsible for the main peak; the currents around the pores that are responsible for narrow secondary peaks; and the local currents inside the un.] struts. The total relaxation factor of the magnetic flux is 8% at T = 77 K The current-voltage characteristics of Bi2223 porous polycrystals At H > H cJ , in polycrystalline superconductors, nonzero resistance appears. Since the area of contact points of neighboring granules is one to two orders of magnitude smaller than that in dense polycrystalline HTSCs, the resistance of Bi2223 porous polycrystals is more sensitive to changes in the external magnetic field The temperature dependences of the resistance of polycrystalline superconductors have a characteristic two-step form: a jump in resistance at the critical temperature Т c and an extended decrease in resistance to 0 as T decreases from Т c to Т c0 . A similar picture was observed for YBCO foam [106], YBCO porous polycrystals To compare different PS samples, it is convenient, in our opinion, to use a parameter such as the height of the magnetic hysteresis ΔM in zero magnetic field at a low temperature (10 K) or at a technologically important boiling point of liquid nitrogen (77 K). Such values of ΔM can be estimated for a number of samples from the graphs and data presented in published articles (Table Experimental studies show that high porosity does not lead to significant differences in the behavior of magnetization and resistance in comparison with the temperature and field dependences of the magnetization and resistance of dense polycrystalline superconductors. YBCO foam is currently the most suitable material in terms of characteristics important for practical applications. The foam exhibits the best mechanical properties and the highest Jc values among the materials studied. Polycrystalline PSs, fabrics, and sponges also have potential for development and applications. Polycrystalline PSs can be used as a basis for the creation of textured superconducting materials The mechanical properties of the porous materials presented are inferior to those of dense superconductors. An improvement of both mechanical and currentcarrying properties in PSs can be achieved by creating composites with silver PSs can find their niche among materials for a variety of applications that require both large size, light weight, and high cooling rates. Due to the presence of pore clusters, a liquid or gaseous refrigerant such as liquid nitrogen can be pumped through the PS and provide extremely efficient cooling. This prevents the growth of hot spots arising from the flow of currents close to critical. An efficient heat removal makes PSs attractive for use as short-circuit current limiters Due to their low physical density, PSs are suitable for creating ultra-light devices We hope that this review of works on porous superconductors will give impetus to further research on these promising materials. It is expected that new results will be obtained through the development of methods of synthesis, computer simulation, and machine learning. * At T = 77 K. ** At T = 10 K. *** At T = 20 K.