Here, a physical formalism is proposed for an unconditional microwave quantum teleportation of Gaussian states via two-mode squeezed states in lossy environments. The proposed formalism is controllable to be used in both the fridge and free space in case of entanglement between two parties survives. Some possible experimental parameters are estimated for the teleportation of microwave signals with a frequency of 5GHz based on the proposed physical framework. This would be helpful for superconducting inter-and intra-fridge quantum communication as well as open-air quantum microwave communication, which can be applied to quantum local area networks (QLANs) and distributed quantum computing protocols. Introduction-In recent years, several acheivements have been reported So far, microwave teleportation between two fridges has not been investigated experimentally, neither in terms of discrete variables nor continuous variables (CVs). However, a teleportation scheme in the microwave regime in terms of CVs has been proposed before Quantum T eleportation with CV s-A preliminary CV model for teleportation was proposed by Vaidman Quantum teleportation uses quantum entanglement and classical communication to transfer quantum information between two distant parties, Alice and Bob. The ideal scenario involves Alice and Bob sharing a maximally-entangled state, which in CVs translates to a two-mode squeezed vacuum (TMSV) state with infinite squeezing r. In a realistic scenario, the squeezing r has technological limitations. In such protocol, Alice attempts to send a Gaussian state, with covariance matrix V in and first moments x in = (x in , p in ) (see Appendix) to Bob. The input state can also be described by a harmonic oscillator mode α in = xin+ipin √ . If this process is successful, then Alice and Bob share a Gaussian entangled state with covariance matrix V TMSS and null first moments M easurement by Alice-When Alice receives the mixture of input mode and one mode of the entangled state, she performs a double homodyne detection (see Fig. In the symplectic representation (see Appendix), we consider two symplectic operators in the doublehomodyne detection circuit depicted in Fig. where I 2 is the identity 2×2matrix, and B S (1/2) 4 is the 50:50 beamsplitter operator, i.e. a 4×4 matrix. The input first moment in the double-homodyne detection is x in = (x LOx , p LOx , x in , p in , e r x 1 , e -r p 1 , x LOp , p LOp ) T , and therefore the output's first moments at the photodetectors right before the measurement are x out = S h2 S h1 x in , which gives x out = √ 2((x u ), (p u ), (x u ), (p u ), (x v ), (p v ), (x v ), (p v )) T . Here, we assume that the detectors are ideal, therefore we define the produced current as i = n = â † â = 1/2(x 2 + p2 ) -1/2 = 1/2(x 2 + p 2 ) -1/2. Then, the difference between the currents from each detector after the beam splitters is measured The performance of the teleportation protocol can be measured by the teleportation fidelity F . It can be computed via a symplectic approach where σ = exp (-2r) is the variance of the resource, and n is the number of thermal photons in the two-mode squeezed thermal states (TMSTS) resource as a general form for TMSS. The particular case n = 0 represents the fidelity for the general case when the resource is TMSV (see Appendix). One can compute the average fidelity for the teleportation of an arbitrary squeezed displaced vacuum state by integration over fidelity in the range 0 and 1. M icrowave Quantum T eleportation-Microwave quantum communication, as an exciting line of research with potentially broad applications in science and industry, is an accessible technology due to the recent achievements of circuit quantum electrodynamics (cQED). Since thermal noise in the microwave domain are much larger than in the optical one, losses have to be taken into account, which can significantly affect the quality of the teleportation protocol. In order to suppress thermal fluctuations, macroscopic superconducting circuit operate at low temperatures, i.e. T < 10 -100mK and the real and imaginary parts, respectively. By letting θ x = 0 the current i 1 turns to and P u = 0 where ζ x is the noise term, i.e. √ 1 -ν where x th-i (i=1, 2, 3, 4) are thermal quadratures at temperatures T 1 , T 2 , T 3 , and T 4 respectively. If there are no losses ( = η = κ = ν = 1), then the current is ] sin(θ p ). Again, under similar conditions, but letting and X v = 0, where the noise term If there is no any loss, then the noise term turns to zero, and i 2 = |α LO | √ g J (e y p in -e -r p 1 ). The above results are in agreement with the heterodyne outputs (see the Appendix) by letting g J = 1 and y = 0 for coherent states in the BK protocol. In reality, there are always losses for microwave signals. So, it is desirable to reduce the losses as far as possible to have a successful quantum protocol, otherwise the noisy signal received by Bob makes it harder to reconstruct the input state. In fact, the realization of a microwave single-photon detector is a difficult task due to the low energy of microwave photons, therefore measuring a quadrature of a weak microwave signal is hard. Thus, amplification of the signal is required. Cryogenic high electronic mobility transistor (HEMT) amplifiers are routinely used in quantum microwave experiments because of their large gains in a relatively broad frequency band. Basically, HEMT amplifiers are phase insensitive and add a significant amount of noise photons that may disrupt the protocol (see section E. on Amplification). These signals are digitized with analog-to-digital (ADC) converters and sent to a computer for digital data processing , where R = 50Ω, B is the measurement bandwidth set by a digital filter, and g H is the HEMT gain. The modulated classical signal δ = I 1 + iQ 2 = √ ω i BRg H (X u + iP v ) is communicated classically with Bob, where where ζ x = ζx √ νκgJ , and ζ p = ζp √ νκgJ . The above states I 1 and Q 2 can be sent (or prepared at distant) to Bob via remote state preparation (RSP) , where β is the coupling strength expressed in decibels (dB) and letting Λ = |α LO | 2 ω i BRνκg J g H therefore τ = 1-1 Λ . Since the maximum value of τ = η 2 = 1/2 then it makes a restriction on Λ as 1 < Λ ≤ 2 to have a feasible protocol of teleportation. The coupling strength turns to Finally, after the operation B S (τ ) 4 x τ , the state will be reconstructed in the upper arm after the beam splitter as √ 2α in = e -y x in + ie y p in with noise term ζ = ζ x + iζ p where the components are In a lossless protocol, η = = κ = ν = 1, the noise term disappears and the state can be reconstructed perfectly, but in reality the amount of loss is significant in the microwave regime. The magnitudes of noise terms ζ x and ζ p can be obtained experimentally via calibration of the setup by letting the zero input values, i.e. e -y x in = 0 and e y p in = 0. In the quantum regime, HEMT amplifiers are suited for experiments in the microwave regime. A commercial HEMT usually has g H = 10 4 , and working at 5 GHz frequencies it introduces between n ∼ 10-100 thermal photons Based on the above theoretical proposed protocols and physical formalism, an unconditional microwave quantum teleportation is applicable in real conditions. However, quantum microwave signals are very fragile and there are experimental limitations in free space as well as some fundamental bounds states, V G , as states to be processed, transferred and measured. In the following sections, I 2 = 1 0 0 1 will describe the 2 × 2 identity matrix. One can show that any 2 × 2 symplectic matrix, as a single-mode Gaussian state with mean x and covariance matrix V G , is in its most general form as V G = (2n + 1)R(θ)S(2r)R(θ) T Gaussian states of two bosonic modes (N=2) are characterized by simple analytical formulas, which makes them the simplest states for studying properties like quantum entanglement. The covariance matrix of a two-mode Gaussian (TMG) state in symplectic representation is shown by a block matrix as follows The Braunstein-Kimble protocol describes a CV teleportation procedure with quantum states employing Gaussian resources Then, Alice tries to send a single-mode Gaussian state to Bob via the teleportation mechanism. Alice performs double homodyne detection (see Fig. In the symplectic representation, we consider two operators in the double-homodyne detection circuit depicted in Fig. The input first moment in the double-homodyne detection is x in = (x LOx , p LOx , x in , p in , e r x 1 , e -r p 1 , x LOp , p LOp ) T , and therefore the output's first moments at the photodetectors right before the measurement are x out = S h2 S h1 x in , which gives Here, we assume that the detectors are ideal, therefore we define the produced current as i = n = â † â = 1/2(x 2 + p2 ) -1/2 = 1/2(x 2 + p 2 ) -1/2. Then, the difference between the currents from each detector after the beam splitters is measured In order to obtain the fidelity in free space, we consider that the resource is a TMSV state interacting in free space with a thermal bath characterized by N thermal photons. This mechanism is modeled via a beamsplitter with reflectivity η, i.e. B S (η). In Fig. (B4) The fidelity is obtained via F = 2/ det(Γ), in which Γ = 2V in + ZA Z + B -C Z -Z T C T where A , B , and C are the block matrices of V out = A , C ; C T , B . The diagram of the fidelity in terms of r, for different values of η and N , and for different squeezing level y of input states has been shown in Fig. 