The Majorana zero-energy modes (MZMs) residing at the boundary of topological superconductors have attracted a great deal of interest recently, as they provide a platform to explore fundamental physics such as non-Abelian statistics, as well as fault-tolerant quantum computation. Period doubling of Shapiro steps in a Josephson junction under microwave irradiation has been regarded as strong evidence for the emergence of the MZMs at the junction edges. However, questions remain as to how the Shapiro steps respond to the presence of a 4πperiodic Josephson current. In this study, we investigated the characteristic features of Shapiro steps with respect to the ratio (α) of the 4π-periodic current to the topologically trivial 2πperiodic one, as well as the reduced microwave frequency Ω and McCumber parameter β of the junction. Our analysis reproduced Shapiro steps similar to those observed experimentally for specific parameter sets of α, Ω ≲ 0.1 , and β ≳ 1.0 . Full suppression of the first lobe of the n 1 step guarantees the presence of a 4π-periodic Josephson current. In addition, we discuss the range of Ω and β needed for full suppression of the first lobe of the n 1 step, even for small α 0.1 . To observe "period-doubled Shapiro steps", even with a small α, the junction should have a large I R product and sufficiently large junction capacitance. The Majorana fermion is a particle that acts as its own antiparticle, satisfying γ γ, which was introduced by Ettore Majorana as a solution to the relativistic Dirac equation Owing to the particle-hole symmetry in superconductors, γ E γ E , zero-energy Bogoliubov quasiparticles can be regarded as the Majorana fermionic excitation in topological superconductors. Initially, it was proposed that the Majorana fermionic states appear as lowenergy excitations in fractional quantum Hall phases There are two major experimental schemes to detect the MZMs in a topological superconductor. The first involves observing quantized zero-bias conductance due to the MZMs, G 2e /h, by tunneling spectroscopy. The second requires resolving the fractional Josephson effect in a Josephson weak-link configuration. Experimental studies on quantized zero-bias conductance have claimed the existence of MZMs; however, other effects, such as disorder This also explains why Fraunhofer pattern measurements, in which the dynamical time scale of the junction is much longer than the parity relaxation time of an order of milliseconds In this paper, we report the detailed features of Shapiro steps in the presence of 4π-periodic is the angular frequency of the irradiated microwave, and e is the charge of an electron. Thus, "period-doubled Shapiro steps" provide strong evidence for the presence of the 4π-periodic CPR. In practice, however, the 4π -periodic contribution coexists with, and is usually dominated by, the 2π-periodic one, even in the presence of the MZMs, such that the step height follows ħ of the 2π-periodic case. In this situation, it is expected that the steps at even multiples of ħ (even steps) become more pronounced compared to those at odd multiples of ħ (odd steps), due to the 4π-periodic CPR. Therefore, to obtain information about the 4π-periodic nature, the length of the plateau (step size) must be analyzed in depth. Previous reports claiming the detection of a 4π-periodic Josephson current show the distinct features of Shapiro steps. When the microwave frequency irradiating a junction is sufficiently low, the odd steps are suppressed at the low AC limit. As the AC is increased, however, odd steps emerge and their step sizes become comparable to those of even steps. In addition, the size of the odd steps for low AC is restored as the AC frequency continues to increase Although these features were considered to arise from the presence of a 4π-periodic Josephson current, an in-depth analysis is required. For instance, the abovementioned features have not been reproduced by resistively shunted Josephson junction (RSJ) model analyses, which overlook the hysteretic behavior of a junction. To our knowledge, only two reports have considered the capacitance of a junction when describing the Shapiro steps with 4π-periodic Josephson coupling Here, we report on the step size of Shapiro steps in the presence of 4π-periodic Josephson coupling. We examine the overall features of step size with respect to the broad range of representative junction parameters. The step size was obtained by numerical simulations using the resistively and capacitively shunted junction (RCSJ) model, which includes a capacitance term. The characteristic features of the Shapiro steps observed in previous experiments were reproduced only in the hysteretic junctions with finite capacitance. We also estimated the portion of 4π-periodic current that exhibited good agreement with the experimental conditions. Moreover, we suggest a strategy for distinguishing a small portion of the 4π -periodic Josephson current from the dominating conventional 2π -periodic one, assuming realistic experimental conditions. To investigate the Shapiro steps of a JJ, we use the RCSJ model Josephson dynamics, including the Shapiro step behavior of a JJ under microwave irradiation. In this model, the current-voltage characteristics of the JJ can be obtained by solving the equations of motion of the equivalent circuit with respect to the superconducting phase difference φ across the junction, which is derived from Kirchoff's law in association with the following two Josephson relations: I I sin φ. Here, I is the junction critical current, and I and V are the current and voltage drop across the Josephson element, respectively. However, for the proximity junction considered, the junction is current-biased following the form of Eq. ( Under the three conditions, current flows mainly through the linear elements (the resistor or the capacitor) rather than the nonlinear lumped Josephson element. For the remaining portion of the parametric space, the only way to investigate the Shapiro step characteristics is through the numerical calculation of Eq. ( For Ω 1 , the Shapiro map changes significantly, as adjacent steps start to overlap. Nonetheless, Bessel features still remain with variation in i for Ω as low as ~0.3 [Figs. The step sizes of fully overdamped junctions exhibit triangular variation with the same amplitude, independent of the number of steps n , as shown in Fig. B. Larger portion of the 4π-periodic Josephson current α 0.5 We now introduce the 4π-periodic components of Josephson current by assuming that DC Josephson relation of Eq. ( Here, i i 1 to satisfy the relation I max I . As an example, for α ≡ 0.5 (Fig. We examine how the step size evolves for the 4π-periodic Josephson component present in regions I, II, and IV of Fig. Whereas φ is still approximated as φ ~ v cos Ωτ δ in these regions, even with the 4π -periodic component, 〈i 〉 exhibits a distinct behavior between even and odd numbers of n, due to the sin term of Eq. ( The time average of sin calculated from Eq. ( On the other hand, for v 2mΩ, the step size is determined by the sum of 〈sin 〉 and 〈sin φ〉, whose maximum and minimum values cannot be expressed explicitly. represent the result of a purely 2π-periodic case. The size of the odd steps clearly decreases compared to that of 2π-periodic ones, as expected based on the approximation φ ~ v cos Ωτ δ introduced above. On the other hand, the size of even steps is comparable to that of 2π-periodic ones, but the minima of the lobes do not vanish completely as the two terms are, in general, out-of-phase. We now decrease the α to 0.1 and obtain the i , i for relatively low frequencies (Ω 0.1 and 0.3), as shown in Fig. In the overdamped case of β 0.01, the suppression (enhancement) of odd (even) steps seems to be insensitive to i , where the first lobes of odd steps are not missing. In the underdamped case of β 3.0, however, the suppression (enhancement) of odd (even) steps is clear for the first lobes, where the first steps disappear completely. On the other hand, the size of higher-order lobes is not much different from that of the 2π-periodic ones, with the alternation of even-odd steps being preserved. These features are similar to the experimental observations of Ref. As Ω increases up to 0.3, neither the first nor higher-order lobes exhibit noticeable enhancement or suppression in i , , regardless of the value of β [Figs. as applied in Ref. Figure indicates that full suppression of the first lobe of the n 1 step can be achieved only in the presence of the 4π -periodic components of the CPR. This can be regarded as strong experimental evidence of the presence of 4π -periodic Josephson coupling, even when the exact values of β and Ω cannot be determined. We introduced a strategy to design a junction confirming the presence of a 4π -periodic Josephson component by analyzing Shapiro step measurements. First, it is important to increase the proportion of the 4π-periodic Josephson current with respect to the 2π-periodic one, which arises inevitably from the topologically trivial bulk residual modes of a junction. An increase in I /I of only a few percent produces a large change in the Shapiro-step behavior, as shown in Fig. Second, it is important to lower Ω This limits the range of ω for observing the Shapiro steps. Another way to lower Ω is to increase I R , which corresponds to the voltage of the junction at I I . The I R is typically smaller than the I R product of a proximity junction, due to the conductance enhancement or multiple Andreev reflection within the superconducting gap Δ . As the I R and I R products are generally proportional to Δ in the short junction limit, one can increase Δ to lower Ω. However, when Δ is too large, the coherence length is excessively reduced, which weakens the Josephson coupling strength and thus reduces the I R product for a fixed junction length. In addition, as the value of I R depends strongly on the interfacial transparency of a junction, it is important to have sufficient superconducting interfacial contact. Lastly, α is so small in usual experimental situations that a low Ω is required to observe the period-doubled Shapiro steps. However, a low Ω reduces the step size, as well as the step height, which hinders accurate estimation of the former. In this case, an underdamped junction is better than an overdamped junction for discriminating the 4π-periodic contribution. In the underdamped junction regime, the first lobes of the n 1 step may be missing. Fortunately, the increase of R and I R also increases β ħ , which compliments the strategy of increasing α and lowering Ω. If β is not sufficiently large to observe full suppression of the n 1 step, connecting a shunt capacitor to the junction can be helpful. In summary, we examined how Shapiro steps evolve using different parameter sets of α, β, and Ω. All three parameters affect the features of Shapiro steps significantly. We succeeded in reproducing the Shapiro steps and achieved results similar to those of previous experimental reports claiming the presence of 4π-periodic Josephson coupling, with a relatively small 4πperiodic Josephson current (α ≲ 0.1 in a moderately underdamped junction regime (β ≳ 1.0 . Under this condition, the Ω dependence of the Shapiro steps is also reproduced, in which the first lobe of odd steps survives an increase in Ω. For an underdamped junction, the first lobe of the n 1 step can be suppressed, despite the absence of 4π -periodic Josephson coupling. Therefore, we propose that full suppression of the first lobe of the n 1 step must be confirmed to claim the presence of 4π -periodic Josephson coupling. To that end, we conclude that the low Ω and large β would be advantageous to distinguish the 4π-periodic Josephson current from the trivial 2π-periodic one by observing period-doubled Shapiro steps.