The interplay between unconventional superconductivity and quantum critical ferromagnetism in the U-Ge compounds represents an open problem in strongly correlated electron systems. Sample quality can have a strong influence on both of these ordered states in the compound UCoGe, as is true for most unconventional superconductors. We report results of a new approach at UCoGe crystal growth using a floating-zone method with potential for improvements of sample quality and size as compared with traditional means such as Czochralski growth. Single crystals of the ferromagnetic superconductor UCoGe were produced using an ultra-high vacuum electron-beam floating-zone refining technique. Annealed single crystals show well-defined signatures of bulk ferromagnetism and superconductivity at Tc ∼2.6 K and Ts ∼0.55 K, respectively, in the resistivity and heat capacity. Scanning electron microscopy of samples with different surface treatments shows evidence of an off-stoichiometric uranium rich phase of UCoGe collected in cracks and voids that might be limiting sample quality. The phenomenon of superconductivity, the abrupt disappearance of electrical resistance below a material specific temperature, was discovered over 100 years ago in elemental mercury at 4.16 K The U-Co-Ge ternary system includes a number of compounds such as the room-temperature ferromagnet U 2 Co 17-y Ge y Near-stoichiometric amounts of U (electromigration purified to 99.99 % purity), Co (99.99 %), and Ge (99.9999%) elements were arc-melted into 4 individual buttons of UCoGe on a water cooled copper hearth under ∼20 torr of Ar (99.999 %). The average stoichiometry of the buttons determined by the initial mass of the constituent elements is 33.48 % U, 33.16 % Co, and 33.36 % Ge. All percentages in this work are atomic percent (at. %), not mass percent. Before each arc-melting op-eration, a getter made of uranium was heated into the liquid state in order to absorb oxygen. The buttons were arc-melted into two final ingots in a long narrow trough formed in the hearth. The ingots had diameters of ∼ 6 mm and lengths of ∼ 150 mm and ∼ 65 mm with a combined mass of ∼ 57 g. The ingots were quite brittle and tended to crack and eventually break if mishandled, requiring a few attempts to optimize their casting. During arc-melting it was observed that the ingots would not remain straight, but rather would bend upward away from the hearth suggesting there exists a high temperature structural transition in the solid phase as it cools. Effects of this high-temperature phase have been reported, with prior samples becoming distorted when annealed close to the melting temperature of UCoGe The final ingots were mounted vertically in a UHV electron-beam floating-zone refining apparatus, clamped at their ends between molybdenum fixtures and set screws, with the longer secured ingot above and the shorter ingot below. The specifics of the zone refining apparatus has been previously described in Ref. During zone refining a liquid nitrogen Meissner trap was used to capture volatile impurities. In addition to any undesired volatile impurities, the viewing ports became darkened due to the relatively high vapor pressure of the Co and Ge compared to U. It was later shown via energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS) that the stoichiometry may have changed. The resulting ingot, after being removed from the chamber, is shown in Fig. Once the wafer was determined to be a suitable single crystal grain, it was further oriented and cut into needle shaped samples for further characterization. Two needles, labeled S1 and S2, were oriented and spark cut to 3.10 mm × 0.96 mm × 1.10 mm, and 4.30 mm × 1.10 mm × 1.30 mm, respectively, along the a, b, and c-axes. S1 was taken from the lower part of the ingot while S2 was taken closer to the top, with the approximate location of both needles indicated in Fig. In the following text, we will discuss the samples in three preparation conditions, hereafter denoted X, Y, and Z. The initial sample conditions after zone refinings will be referred to as X or "unannealed". Samples annealed under UHV conditions for 2 weeks at 900 • C while resting on polycrystalline UCoGe wafers, but with no further treatment, will be referred to as Y or simply "annealed". After annealing, it was observed that a liquified phase collected on the polished (ac-plane) surfaces, but not the spark cut (ab-plane) surfaces. This phase will be referred to as the 'low temperature phase' (LTP), due to its relatively low melting point. Powder X-ray diffraction (not shown) did not indicate existence of any phases other than UCoGe in either arc-melted or zone refined material, so the identity of this phase remains unknown, although it is clearly visible optically and in the SEM data. Due to the LTP, the needles were further polished to a final thickness along the b-axis direction of 0.40 mm and 0.19 mm for S1 and S2, respectively. This final sample condition will be referred to as Z or "annealed/polished". In addition, when discussing results pertaining to the outer diameter of the ingot it will be referred to as the "as-grown" surface in contrast to discussing surfaces from the interior that were spark cut and polished. SEM images were collected using a Hitachi S-3400N-II with an attached Oxford INCAx-act SDD EDS to determine relative elemental composition via the AZtec soft- ware package. All elemental percentages have an error of ∼1 at.% as reported by the software, although we comment that since in situ elemental references were not used the actual error may be larger. Electrical resistivity measurements were performed using a standard four-point method down to 425 mK for unannealed (X) S1 and for annealed (Y) S1 and S2. The temperature was measured by a germanium resistance thermometer that was calibrated below 45 K. Heat capacity measurements were performed using a Quantum Design PPMS. After the samples were polished along the b-axis direction to their final thickness as annealed/polished (Z) the resistivity was remeasured without the surface influence from the LTP. This second series of resistivity measurements were made with a Quantum Design PPMS. For the resistivity data that will be presented the excitation current was 0.6 mA for unannealed (X) S1 X, 0.1 mA for annealed (Y) S1, 0.5 mA for annealed (Y) S2, and 0.1 mA for annealed/polished (Z) S1 and S2. Magnetization measurements were done using on a Quantum Design MPMS. SEM images from UCoGe under various treatment conditions are presented in Fig. The average elemental composition for each of the different sample treatments is reported in table I. The arcmelted results are very similar to the percentages calculated from the initial mass of the constituent elements used, suggesting that there is minimal evaporation during arc-melting, and that the internal calibration used by the AZtec software is reasonably accurate for the UCoGe system. After zone refining, the amount of uranium de- tected increased to 35 % consistent with the minor, but noticeable, evaporation of Co and Ge observed during zone refining. After acid etching, the surface uranium rich regions were removed and compositions of U, and Co were selectively reduced such that the surface stoichiometry was close to ideal. Nonetheless, there were some spectra collected that had % Ge as high as ∼43 % consistent with Ge being chemically inert compared to U and Co. In contrast, the after zone refined and arc-melting SEM observations had minimal variance from site to site of a few percent, within error. Most of the measurements are within a reasonable error consistent with onstoichiometric UCoGe, but the unannealed as-grown surface condition X and zone refined annealed condition Y surface are uranium rich. The as-grown surface became rich in uranium due to the segregation of uranium oxide(s) to the outer diameter of the ingot during growth, although it is also possible that the as-grown surface was depleted of Co and Ge since that is where the evaporation occurs. It is harder to confirm the latter as we also observed relatively oxygen free regions that had percentages consistent with UCoGe. However, the annealed surface also had a noticeable increase in U, with no region that could be identified with percentages consistent with ideal stoichiometry, unlike all the other EDS measurements. The highest recorded uranium concentration was ∼ 70 % directly from one of the large particles of LTP that formed. This indicates that this LTP is richer in U compared to UCoGe. In contrast to our observations, there have been previous secondary phases resolved in SEM on UCoGe such as elemental U, U 3 O 8 and U 3 Co 4 Ge 7 The temperature dependence of the resistivity, ρ(T ), taken from the ac-plane surface is shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. As can be seen in Fig. The heat capacity, plotted as C/T vs. T, from the annealed (Y) S1 sample and the annealed/polished (Z) s2 sample are presented in Fig. It is possible that the LTP is present and undetected or unreported in previous work on UCoGe and may ex- plain the difficulty in improving sample quality, as well as the lack of consistency in ρ(T ) from different reports. It may also explain the difficulty in Shubnikov-de Haas (SdH) quantum oscillation measurements However, depending on the growth technique, it is likely that regions of ∼1:1:1 stoichiometry UCoGe make up the major volume of the crystal which hosts bulk superconductivity as shown by the observable rise in C/T in Fig. The UCoGe samples we have prepared are of quite respectable quality with RRR ∼ 20-30, showing signatures of bulk superconductivity and ferromagnetism. However, UCoGe sample quality can not be uniquely identified with RRR as this implicitly assumes that ρ(300K) is sample quality independent, which is not self-evident from the present understanding of this material. The sample with the highest RRR for which ρ(T ) was reported is by Aoki et al. and we suggest that ρ(T → 0K) is a more reliable measure than 1/RRR since the high temperature resistivity appears to vary from sample to sample Another important indication of sample quality is the consistent indication of T s from ρ(T ) and C/T which is not always the case We have used the uncommon but effective method of UHV electron-beam zone refining to grow single crystals of the ferromagnetic superconductor UCoGe. The samples exhibit robust, bulk superconductivity and ferromagnetism, as shown by the ρ, C/T , and M data, placing our samples in good company with the best UCoGe made to date. There is evidence of a slight loss of Co and Ge causing structural integrity issues, as well as negatively impacting the superconductivity and ferromagnetism by forming regions of off-stoichiometric U(CoGe) 1-δ in cracks and voids in the single crystal samples. We have uncovered new metallurgical properties of UCoGe that may allow future improvement of UCoGe single crystal quality. Our ability to zone refine multiple times on a single ingot indicates that we can further improve sample quality if we properly account for the Co and Ge volatility under UHV conditions. We have shown surface treatment to have an influence on the measured resistance of UCoGe, but not superconducting and ferromagnetic temperatures, and consequently for future work we recommend a procedure for careful polishing of the crystals to improve the interpretation of electrical transport data. 