Since the first experimental observation of all-optical switching phenomena, intensive research has been focused on finding suitable magnetic systems that can be integrated as storage elements within spintronic devices and whose magnetization can be controlled through ultra-short single laser pulses. We report here atomistic spin simulations of all-optical switching in multilayered structures alternating n monolayers of Tb and m monolayers of Co. By using a two temperature model, we numerically calculate the thermal variation of the magnetization of each sublattice as well as the magnetization dynamics of [Tb n /Co m ] multilayers upon incidence of a single laser pulse. In particular, the condition to observe thermally-induced magnetization switching is investigated upon varying systematically both the composition of the sample (n,m) and the laser fluence. The samples with one monolayer of Tb as [Tb 1 /Co 2 ] and [Tb 1 /Co 3 ] are showing thermally induced magnetization switching above a fluence threshold. The reversal mechanism is mediated by the residual magnetization of the Tb lattice while the Co is fully demagnetized in agreement with the models developed for ferrimagnetic alloys. The switching is however not fully deterministic but the error rate can be tuned by the damping parameter. Increasing the number of monolayers the switching becomes completely stochastic. The intermixing at the Tb/Co interfaces appears to be a promising way to reduce the stochasticity. These results predict for the first time the possibility of TIMS in [Tb/Co] multilayers and suggest the occurrence of sub-picosecond magnetization reversal using single laser pulses. All-optical switching (AOS) phenomena in magnetic materials have been object of thorough research over the last decade due to its fundamental interest and relevance as a possible new write scheme in spintronic devices Our objective is to model synthetic ferrimagnets composed of alternating ferromagnetic layers of Co and Tb with antiferromagnetic exchange coupling between them. The general structure of the multilayered sample is labeled as [Tb n /Co m ], where the index n and m correspond to the number of monolayers of each element. In order to explore the probability of TIMS in these multilayers, an atomistic spin solver was used coupled with a two-temperature model (2TM) accounting for the laser heating. Our solver has been developed and benchmarked with respect to previous publications addressing the static magnetic properties and the magnetization dynamics of RE-TM-based systems, such as Tb x Co 1-x alloys with S i the classical spin vectors with unit length associated to the magnetic moment direction on site i. The first term represents the Heisenberg exchange energy where the exchange interaction is either between spins of the Tb layer, spins of the Co layer or across the interface between Tb and Co spins. This term therefore contains three interactions J Tb-Tb , J Co-Co and J Tb-Co , restricted in our model to the nearest neighbors. The second term represents the uniaxial anisotropy with the d i,z constant per atom. The dynamics of the spins is governed by the stochastic Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation of motion: where γ i , μ i and λ i are the gyromagnetic ratio, the value of the magnetic moment and the damping constant of the spin i respectively. The effective field at each site i is derived from the Hamiltonian H i (t) = -δ Ĥ δ S i + ζ i and includes a stochastic thermal contribution ζ i , accounting for the coupling to the heat bath with the following white-noise properties: where i, j correspond to the lattice sites and η, θ to the Cartesian components respectively. T e is the electron temperature, which is related with the laser power during the excitation of a femtosecond long single laser pulse according to a standard 2TM expressed by two coupled equations: where T ph (t), C e = γT e and C ph correspond to the temperature of the phonon bath, the heat capacity of electrons and the heat capacity of the phonons respectively. G is an electron-phonon coupling parameter and P(t) is the external power injected by the laser pulses defined as P(t) = (I 0 F)e -(t/τ p ) 2 , where I 0 , F and τ p correspond respectively to the laser energy absorbed by the system, the fluence and the laser pulse duration. Eqs. 4 and 5 also include a Newton's cooling term which drives the system back to room temperature after the incidence of the laser pulse We have considered a multilayered system consisting of 30×30×30 fcc cells with periodic boundary conditions. We assumed that there are no size differences between RE and TM atoms. Only exchange with the 12 nearest neighbors is taken into account. A schematic of the atom distribution is shown in Fig. The first aim of the study was to obtain the equilibrium properties of the multilayer as a function of their composition. Thus, the equilibrium magnetization was calculated as the spatial and time average of the magnetic moments over the volume of the sample. Figure The switching properties of the [Tb n /Co m ] multilayers after the incidence of a single laser pulse were analyzed using the two temperature model (Eq. 4 and 5). The total duration of the laser pulse is set at 50 fs and its fluence is varied up to 120 mJ/cm 2 . The magnetization of each sub-lattice was recorded at each time step and the value at 20 ps after illumination is included in the diagrams presented in Fig. Figs. There is also a remarkable difference between the magnetization dynamics behavior of the sublattices in the [Tb 1 /Co 3 ] and the [Tb 3 /Co 9 ] systems as a function of the laser fluence shown in Figs. Once the fluence switching window was obtained, further magnetization dynamic simulations were carried out in order to check whether thermally-induced magnetization switching can be fully deterministic. Although we have obtained a clear fluence switching window for [Tb 1 /Co 3 ] and for [Tb 1 /Co 2 ], additional simulated events showed that for some values between 35 and 50 mJ/cm 2 , thermally-induced magnetization switching is not fully deterministic. Fig. In order to visualize the evolution of the magnetization during the ferromagnetic transient regime, we plot the magnetic moment of the Tb and Co sublattices in a magnetization phase diagram (Fig. As shown above, a fully reversal of the magnetization is not always observed for repeated attempts at a given fluence. Fig. As expected, the switching probability significantly drops for thicker Tb and Co layers, and similarly to the case of In order to assess the hypothesis that the antiferromagnetic exchange coupling is relevant to the TIMS process, we investigated the influence of the intermixing in the alloy structure and calculated the switching probability in a TbCo alloy system with 66 % of Co. multilayer system. The study performed in the alloy with 66 % of Co in the TbCo alloy can also be compared with the one of 68 % of Co in the TbCo alloy reported in Ref. 11, for which a narrow switching window is expected at a much lower pulsed laser fluence. On the other hand, the enhancement of the probability in the alloy case is also in agreement with other reports highlighting the role of intermixing in synthetic ferrimagnets The results presented in this work indicate that not only thermal fluctuations but also the values of the damping constant and the intermixing are critical and expected to play an important role in the successful optical switching of ultra-thin [Tb n /Co m ]. Further studies will be needed to understand the influence of these parameters in detail. On the other hand, signatures of stochastic switching have been found in preliminary electrical test of magnetic junctions with Tb/Co-based multilayer electrodes (Sec. S5 of the supplementary data file), therefore additional experiments that fully support our simulations need to be performed. In conclusion, we applied an atomistic spin model to [Tb/Co] multilayered structures and calculated the thermal variation of its magnetization and the magnetization dynamics upon incidence of single laser pulses. After introducing the physical influence of the laser pulse into the model, the all-optical switching of [Tb/Co] multilayers was simulated. We found that [Tb 1 /Co 2 ] and [Tb 1 /Co 3 ] present a fluence window between 35 and 50 mJ/cm 2 in which the multilayers can be switched by a single laser pulse, presenting an error rate below 5 %. Stochasticity of the switching process was determined by the calculation of the probability over 20 switching attempts. We also pointed out the role of the damping constant value and the intermixing in the switching occurrence. Lower values of damping constant and intermixed interfaces enhance the switching probability in our system. These results predict for the first time the possibility of TIMS in ultra-thin [Tb/Co] multilayers by using atomistic spin simulations and suggest the occurrence of sub-picosecond magnetization reversal using single laser pulses in a [Tb/Co]-based multilayer structures. The deterministic switching and the estimation of the required fluence are in agreement with recent experimental observations of single-shot all-optical switching in [Tb/Co] 5 -based multilayers 