Novel many-body and topological electronic phases can be created in assemblies of interacting spins coupled to a superconductor, such as one-dimensional topological superconductors with Majorana zero modes (MZMs) at their ends. Understanding and controlling interactions between spins and the emergent band structure of the in-gap Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) states they induce in a superconductor are fundamental for engineering such phases. Here, by precisely positioning magnetic adatoms with a scanning tunneling microscope (STM), we demonstrate both the tunability of exchange interaction between spins and precise control of the hybridization of YSR states they induce on the surface of a bismuth (Bi) thin film that is made superconducting with the proximity effect. In this platform, depending on the separation of spins, the interplay between Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) interaction, spin-orbit coupling, and surface magnetic anisotropy stabilizes different types of spin alignments. Using high-resolution STM spectroscopy at millikelvin temperatures, we probe these spin alignments through monitoring the spin-induced YSR states and their energy splitting. Such measurements also reveal a quantum phase transition between the ground states with different electron number parity for a pair of spins in a superconductor tuned by their separation. Experiments on larger assemblies show that spin-spin interactions can be mediated in a superconductor over long distances. Our results show that controlling hybridization of the YSR states in this platform provides the possibility of engineering the band structure of such states for creating topological phases. Majorana zero modes (MZMs) have been proposed as the building blocks for faulttolerant topological quantum computation. Recent experiments have found both spin and charge signatures of MZMs at the ends of spin chains on superconducting surfaces. However, the properties of such chains have not been reliably controlled experimentally. Here we present a platform in which long-range spin-spin interactions and hybridization of spin-induced in-gap states on the surface of a superconductor can be tuned with unprecedented precision by changing the distance between the spins using atomic manipulation technique. This capability is required for tailoring magnetic textures and engineering in-gap states band structures in spin assemblies and opens up the possibility of exploring new topological superconducting phases with tunable properties. The goal of realizing topological electronic phases using combinations of superconductivity, magnetism, and spin-orbit interaction has motivated efforts in creating spin chains and other magnetic assemblies on the surfaces of superconductors open up a wide range of future experiments. While there have been efforts to successfully create closely-packed iron chains with nearest neighbor exchange interaction on the surface of superconducting rhenium using STM atomic manipulation Here we show that magnetic atoms on the surface of bismuth (Bi) thin films made superconducting by the proximity effect provides such a platform. The relatively large Fermi wavelength of this surface as compared to its atomic lattice spacing, and its strong spin-orbit interaction make it possible to use atomic manipulation with STM to create spin assemblies with different spin alignments. By fine tuning the distance between pairs of interacting spins, we have precisely measured the splitting of their YSR states and observed a quantum phase transition between phases with different electron number parity tuned by their separation. In larger spin assemblies, we find evidence that non-collinear alignment of spins controls the splitting of YSR states, thereby illustrating the potential for YSR band structure engineering with topological properties in this platform. To realize our platform, we grow epitaxial Bi ultra-thin films (6 monolayers) on the surface of superconducting Nb(110) substrate in situ (see Materials and Methods and Fig. More importantly, the λF of Bi surface is almost three times as long as that of Nb (5.4 Å) and more than four times that of the smallest atomic spacing (3.30 Å) on the Bi surface with zig-zag lattice (Fig. We probe the interactions between spins in the superconducting state by constructing precisely positioned pairs of magnetic atoms on the proximitized Bi thin film surface and probe their properties with STM spectroscopy at millikelvin temperatures (with energy resolution of 100 μeV, see Materials and Methods and Fig. Before analyzing the different possible regimes of spin alignments in our platform, we examine one sequence of experiments in which a pair of Gd atoms are brought close together systematically along the diagonal direction on the Bi lattice (black arrow in Fig. Theoretical works To investigate the nature of the spin-spin interactions in our platform, we measure the interaction-induced energy splitting (|Ω2 -Ω1|) of YSR states for all Gd pairs as function of their displacement vector relative to the Bi surface and plot them as blue open circles in Fig. As shown in Fig. For r > 2.82a, the significant deviation from RKKY behavior shown in Fig. The overall behavior of YSR states hybridization as a function of the separation between two spins can be understood, if we consider the interplay between RKKY interaction, the surface magnetic anisotropy, and the spin-orbit coupling in the substrate. For a pair of Gd spins within separation range 2.82a < r << ξ, they may align in FM or AFM arrangement pointing perpendicular to the surface, therefore only weak YSR states near gap edge are observed, due to weak exchange interaction between Gd spin and in-plane spin-polarized Bi electrons. At closer separations r  2.82a, we expect the distance-dependent RKKY interaction overcomes the surface magnetic anisotropy and makes the Gd pair spins lie in-plane to lower the total energy, leading to strong exchange interaction with the Bi surface electrons that drives the YSR states deep inside the gap. Depending on the sign of the RKKY interaction, both in-plane FM alignment and in-plane AFM alignment of the spins can be the ground state of the system. Here we find in-plane FM states with four YSR states are at r < λF (Fig. In the crossover region with separation r ~ λF, four particular pair configurations (r = 2.16a, 2.21a, 2.77a, and 2.82a) show variability in their spin arrangements from location to location on the surface, sometimes displaying splitting of YSR states consistent with FM alignment, or no splitting at all as expected for AFM alignment (Supplementary Section VI, Figs. S13 and S14). More importantly, for distances larger than λF, the interplay between RKKY interaction, spin-orbit coupling, and surface magnetic anisotropy makes the spin alignment of the pairs more complex. A theoretical model that captures the interplay between the surface anisotropy and the RKKY interaction in the presence of strong spin-orbit coupling can be used to qualitatively describe the changing spin alignment in our system. Since we are considering interactions between spins on length scale far below the superconducting coherence length (r << ξ), the influence of superconductivity on spin-spin interactions will not be significant. Furthermore, recent work To demonstrate that changing of spin alignment in larger assemblies opens up the possibility of engineering the band structure of YSR states in our platform, we constructed structures made of three and four Gd atoms. Figure Theories predict helical spin order to be a natural consequence of RKKY interaction for an infinite chain in one dimension (2), and could be stabilized in the presence of large spin-orbit coupling in two dimensions Examining the properties of a 3-atom spin chain when a fourth atom is brought into its close proximity shows that spin-spin interactions can be mediated and controlled in the superconducting state on length scales much larger than the lattice spacing or λF in our system. As shown in Fig. Both sample preparation and in situ scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) measurements were performed in a home-built dilution refrigerator STM (base temperature: 250 mK) equipped with ultra-high vacuum (UHV) preparation chambers (base pressure: 2.0 × 10 -10 Torr) The Nb(110) single crystal was prepared by argon ion sputtering and subsequent flash annealing (10 cycles, 30 seconds each) at 1600 °C to form clean and flat surface. Nominally 5 monolayer (ML) Bi (99.9999%) films were evaporated from standard Knudsen cells onto Nb(110) surface which was held at -150 °C by liquid nitrogen cooling. Fully covered 4 ML Bi films and partially covered 6 ML Bi films (Fig. All STM measurements were performed on 6 ML Bi films at effective electron temperature of 250 mK (calibrated by measurements of the superconducting gap, Fig. The data that support the findings of this study are available within the paper and the Supplementary Information. , where α = πSJνF characterizes the single magnetic atom induced YSR state; J is the exchange coupling between the spin and superconducting electrons; νF is the density of states at Fermi level in the normal state of the superconductor. (D) A schematic showing the magnetic ground state of Gd pairs can be tuned from out-of-plane FM/AFM to in-plane AFM and then to in-plane FM phase as moving two Gd atoms closer. As shown in Figs. Step 1. Compare the dI/dV spectra taken on Gd pairs (red curves) to spectra measured on Bi surface away from Gd atoms (gray curves) in Fig. Step 2. For spectra that show YSR states near the gap edge (Fig. Then subtract the two peaks from the spectra and color code the rest of spectral weights with gray. Examine if the gray coded spectra are particle-hole symmetric. If they are symmetric, there is no more YSR state (Fig. corresponding to the other electron-like states (2) at energy -2. So, the doubly degenerate peaks for r = 0.69a (Fig. To model the interactions between spins as a function of their separation and to determine its influence on their YSR states, we utilize the effect of anisotropy in a 2-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) system with large Rashba type spin-orbit coupling. In particular, we consider an anisotropic exchange interaction that is much larger in the plane of the 2DEG, the xy-plane, than along the axis perpendicular to it, the z-axis, competing with an on-site anisotropy which favors the spins to be along the z-axis. Here we explicitly write down the exchange interaction between the impurity and the quasi-particles in the 2DEG as where a = x, y, z and j = 1, 2 labels the impurities. Here, r j and S j a are the position and spin of impurity j and Ψ(r) annihilates an electron at r. We assume the exchange interaction between electrons and the magnetic impurity is anisotropic and 0 < Jz << Jx = Jy. This is a consequence of both the anisotropy of the impurity atomic orbitals and the surface electron spin polarization (inplane due to strong Rashba type spin-orbit coupling in Bi), giving rise to exchange couplings Ja that are different along different directions. In addition, there is also the on-site anisotropy term where the anisotropy constant A > 0 for a Gd atom with 7/2 spin. This anisotropy is caused by atomic spin-orbit interaction and broken symmetry of the atomic orbitals on the surface. We first consider the case of an isolated magnetic impurity with spin S. There are two extreme conditions for the spin: (1) The spin points out of plane and gives rise to YSR states characterized by αz = πSJzνF, where S is the magnitude of the spin and νF is the density of states on-site anisotropy, there is a competition between the on-site anisotropy and RKKY terms; the former prefers spins to point along the z-axis. Because the RKKY interaction scales as the inverse square of separation r between the impurities, the magnetic ground state will depend on r. Quantitatively, for a sufficiently close separation r where the RKKY interaction overcomes the surface magnetic anisotropy, the spin ground state will be along x-direction. For sufficiently large A and r, the magnetic impurities are oriented along the z-axis and we expect the YSR states to be near the gap edge for large r as Jz is small. With decreasing r, the RKKY interaction strength grows and becomes larger than the on-site anisotropy below a critical separation, favoring the pair of spins to align collinearly along the x-axis. At this critical separation we expect a jump in the energy of YSR states from the gap edge to the middle of gap as Jx >> Jz. Furthermore, as Jx is relatively large, the hybridization between the two nearby YSR states is more pronounced compared to the out-of-plane case. This is consistent with the experimental observation that the YSR state energies shift deep inside the gap at small separations and get split |, which is the energy when the magnetic impurities spins are along the x-axis. The minimum of these two quantities determines the magnetic ground state. Parameterizing S j = (0, sin θ j , cos θ j ) for spins twisting in the yz-plane, we find that either θ1 = -θ2 or θ1 = θ2 -π due to the symmetry, and we have we plot the energy difference between the impurity configurations collinear with respect to each other along the x-axis and aligned parallel to the z-axis as a function of separation between them. For a small anisotropy, for instance in this case when A = A1 = 0.6Δ, the magnetic configuration is dominated by the RKKY interaction. When magnetic impurities are next to each other, the magnetic ground state is in the parallel FM configuration (magenta curve) but switches to the antiparallel AFM configuration (blue curve) as the separation between them is increased. Plotting the YSR states energies in Fig. The anisotropy we have chosen is simply a phenomenological parameter used to match the results of our model calculations with the experimental measurements of the YSR energies. Assuming A = A2, we find that the behavior of the numerically calculated YSR energies as a function of r agree with the experimental measurements (Fig. Here we notice that in the experiment, the in-plane to out-of-plane spin ground state transition happens at a larger kFr value compared to the calculation. This is because the experimental system is between 2D and 3D, while the calculation is based on a 2D model where spatial overlap of the YSR states has been underestimated at distances r < λF. Section XII. Degeneracy of YSR states in the presence of spin-orbit coupling Now that we identify the spin ground state of a pair of Gd atoms with kFr ~ 1 is either inplane FM or in-plane AFM depending on the sign of RKKY interaction, we then investigate whether the degeneracy of YSR states of Gd pairs can reflect the spin orientation. From theory we know that in a system without spin-orbit coupling, a pair of FM aligned spins in a superconductor creates a pair of bonding and anti-bonding YSR states with energy splitting proportional to wavefunction overlap of the YSR states localized around the two spins. But for a pair of AFM aligned spins, the YSR states are degenerate, because their wavefunctions are orthogonal and therefore the overlap is strictly zero. However, this is usually not the case in systems with spin-orbit coupling ). As a consequence, the YSR states induced by AFM aligned spins along the xdirection remain degenerate even with the inclusion of in-plane Rashba type spin-orbit coupling. Therefore, the fact that we have degenerate YSR states localized around a pair of Gd atoms with separation r ~ 2.5a is consistent with our theoretical analysis that the degenerate YSR states reflect in-plane AFM ground state, with the spins aligned perpendicularly to the connection between two atoms. 