This paper explores the behaviour of the ubiquitous twisted pairs at high frequencies and wideband excitation of twisted pairs up to 12GHz. Although there is a large quantity of papers on twisted pairs, the papers in the literature mostly focus on the sub-1GHz spectrum, where the current digital subscriber line technologies operate. Higher carrier frequencies on twisted pairs can enable the data rates required by the future communication networks; hence, the existing copper infrastructure can be utilised on the last mile complementing the fibre networks. Towards this objective, we derive analytical expression for the electromagnetic fields and characteristic equation of twisted pairs. With these derivations we show a fundamental limit on the operating frequency of twisted pairs beyond which twisted pairs start to radiate and behave like an antenna. To validate our theory through measurements, we designed a microstrip balun in order to excite the differential mode on the twisted pairs. Unlike off-the-shelf devices, this balun has a nearly linear transmission curve across 1-12GHz. This linearity allows us to detect the radiation which would not have been possible with an off-the-shelf device. At the end, we demonstrate that the standard twisted pairs used in the UK can be used up to 5GHz carrier frequency without any radiation effect and this upper-bound can be moved to higher frequencies by decreasing the twist lengths. Delivering high-speed broadband access necessitates replacing old copper infrastructure with fibre optic cables. However, full fibre broadband for everyone is still not a feasible solution due to its high deployment cost especially in the metropolitan and historical cities. In addition, rewiring of existing buildings and sparsely populated areas are extremely costly and this situation is an important limitation for the fibre deployment. For these reasons, the existing copper infrastructure based on twisted pair (TP) wires will continue complementing the connection between subscribers and the closest fibre-to-the-premises as also discussed by Maes et al. The advancements in the digital signal processing (DSP) have enabled digital subscriber line (DSL) speeds beyond 100Mbps as described by Ginis and Cioffi TP wires were invented by Alexander Graham Bell EM modelling of twisted and untwisted pairs has been extensively studied in the literature. However, parallel with the existing DSL technologies, the papers on modelling EM waves on TP mostly focus on sub-1GHz frequency spectrum and use relevant approximations that makes them invalid for higher frequencies. In the 1950s, helically wound conductors became popular for travelling-wave tubes to amplify RF signals thanks to their wide bandwidth levels. As a result, there is a large amount of research on modelling helically wound structures, which has a very close geometry with TP. The very first analytical model for a single helical conductor was presented by Sensiper We have developed an FDTD simulation in CST Studio Suite 16 in order to validate the proven benefits of TP cables and also observe the propagation of high frequency EM waves on TPs. For this purpose, a cable with varying twist pitch length is designed. The cable starts as an untwisted pair and twisting starts gradually reaching the lowest twist pitch length of 5mm in the middle section. As noticed in 2D E-field results presented in Figure The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. First, we provide the theoretical explanation for the radiation. The derived radiation frequency is also compared with the numerical FDTD results to justify the developed model at the end of the first section. Then, the design guidelines for the differential mode launcher is provided. The next section after the launcher design includes the comparison of experimental and numerical FDTD results. Lastly, a detailed discussion on our findings and its importance are included in the conclusion. For the derivation of EM fields and the characteristic equation for unshielded TP, we followed the methodology presented in The fields around TP need to satisfy the source-free Maxwell equations where the space between the conductors are filled with a medium with conductivity σ , permittivity ε and permeability μ. ω is the angular frequency. The cylindrical coordinate system is used for modelling TP. Therefore, the Helmholtz equation for the axial component of the electric field (ẑ axis) can be derived as 19 where k = √ ωε μ is the wavenumber of the surrounding medium. According to the Floquet's theorem, the axial component of the periodic structure can be expressed as 19 where (r, φ , z) represent the cylindrical axis system. The axial electric field component can be further simplified by substituting (4) into (3) The lateral wavenumber is γ m = (h 0 + mk p ) 2k 2 , where h 0 is the unknown parameter that will be calculated with the characteristic equation. ( The fields at the exterior region (r > r c ) are vanishing at infinity, so they can be represented as the modified Bessel function of the second kind The current density on the wires in the Floquet form is written as 19 where i 1 and i 2 are the current flowing through filaments as presented in Figure The relationship between the coefficients of the interior and exterior of the fields can be derived by using the following boundary conditions which are valid on the TP filaments at r = r c . In addition, the derivative of the tangential magnetic field is continuous on the boundary. By applying the boundary conditions, the expressions can be simplified as where ( ) shows the derivative of the modified Bessel functions. By applying the boundary conditions and using (10), ( The other components of the fields can be calculated by using the Hertz vectors (Z E , Z H ). The Hertz vectors satisfy the Helmholtz equation and can be represented as At the end, the remaining field components can be found in terms of the Hertz vectors as 21 The tangential component of the electric field is required to be vanishing on the TP filaments (r = r c ); thus, we can write the following By using the field equations for the exterior of the wire at r = r c , the characteristic equation can be derived as where In the differential mode, the currents on TP flow in opposite directions such that i 1 = -i 2 . Therefore, the current density can be nonzero for only odd multiples of m. The even multiples of m are associated with the symmetrical mode, which is also known as the surface wave mode. In order to predict the radiation from the cable, we can check the radial component of the Poynting vector. If there is a power flow in the radial direction, it means the wire is behaving like an antenna such that some of the power will be leaking away from TP. For this purpose, the radial component of the Poynting vector is calculated as where Re(x) returns the real part of x. By substituting ( As noticed (S r ) m will be zero when (γ m ) is real-valued as the term inside the Re(.) function will be purely imaginary. However, if γ m is imaginary, the radial component of the Poynting vector will be nonzero and this causes the TP to radiate. γ m (γ m = (h 0 + mk p ) 2k 2 ) can be imaginary for m = -1 beyond a certain frequency range, which is associated with the radiation effect. The lower indexes (m < -1) can also contribute to the radiation, but the magnitude of (S r ) m reduces with the square of γ m . For this reason, the most significant contributor of the radiation is the m = -1 index. To show this relationship, we solved (24) by using a simplifying assumption as in 21 such that the fundamental component m = 1 of the differential mode is assumed as the only contributing index. In this way, we can numerically solve the characteristic equation for m = 1 and then calculate γ -1 term. This condition can be interpreted with the leaky wave antenna theory Figure Table The measurement setup can be seen in Figure The power loss due to radiation effect depends on the twist length as well. Wire 4(p=10mm) experiences more than 30dB decrease in the transmitted power after 11GHz. The additional loss in S 21 is lower for lower twist rates, but even Wire 1 (p=25mm) has additional 3dB loss over 0.5m. Since the twisted pair behaves like a leaky-wave antenna at these frequencies, the transmission loss in dB (-S 21 dB) linearly scales with the length of the wire. Therefore, we can conclude that any future DSL technology, which will operate at high-carrier frequencies, needs to operate below the calculated radiation frequency. Above this frequency, the transmitted power will be radiated away from the line and cause interference in the communication systems nearby. This paper presents two major contributions towards enabling the exploitation of higher carrier frequencies in the DSL technologies. First, electromagnetic fields and characteristic equations of TPs are derived for a helically wound double infinitesimal current filaments. This approach generated an analytically tractable characteristic equation. The individual components of the electric and magnetic fields are calculated. By using these derivations, we calculated the radial component of the Poynting vector. It is found that m = -1 space harmonics of TP has a nonzero radial power flow away from the transmission line after a certain frequency depending on the wire geometry. This means that TP behaves like an antenna above certain carrier frequency and any communication system that will be designed with these cables needs to operate below this. These results are also validated with numerical simulations and experimental measurements. All of the measurements show excellent consistency with each other. To the best of our knowledge, high frequency modelling of unshielded TPs and radiation effects have not been reported in the literature before. Hence, the findings of this paper will be design guidelines for engineers in designing next generation DSL systems operating at higher carrier frequencies. The second contribution of this paper is the design of a wideband differential mode launcher that can excite TP in the frequency spectrum of 1 -12GHz. Unlike off-the-shelf devices, the proposed design has a nearly linear transmission curve across the frequency spectrum, which makes the detection of any radiation loss possible. The differential mode launcher used in