The controllable magnetic skyrmion motion represents a highly concerned issue in preparing advanced skyrmion-based spintronic devices. Specifically, magnon-driven skyrmion motion can be easily accessible in both metallic and insulating magnets, and thus is highly preferred over electric current control further for the ultra-low energy consumption. In this work, we investigate extensively the dynamics of skyrmion motion driven by magnon in an antiferromagnet using the collective coordinate theory, focusing on the effect of magnon polarization. It is revealed that the skyrmion Hall motion driven by circularly polarized magnon becomes inevitable generally, consistent with earlier report. Furthermore, the elastic scattering theory and numerical results unveil the strong inter-dependence between the linearly polarized magnon and skyrmion motion, suggesting the complicated dependence of the skyrmion motion on the polarization nature of driving magnon. On the reversal, the scattering from the moving skyrmion may lead to decomposition of the linearly polarized magnon into two elliptically polarized magnon bands. Consequently, a net transverse force acting on skyrmion is generated owing to the broken mirror symmetry, which in turn drives a skyrmion Hall motion. The Hall motion can be completely suppressed only in some specific condition where the mirror symmetry is preserved. The present work unveils non-trivial skyrmion-magnon scattering behavior in antiferromagnets, advancing the antiferromagnetic spintronics and benefiting to high-performance devices. During the past decades, the dynamics of skyrmion Effective controls of skyrmions have been demonstrated using various external stimuli including electric current The driving force of skyrmion motion exerted by magnons in ferromagnets can be understood by considering the deflection of polarized magnons by the fictitious magnetic field from the neighboring skyrmion, which on the contrary effectively drives the skyrmion motion through the momenta exchange Unlike the case in ferromagnets where magnons can only be right-circularly polarized, magnons in antiferromagnets can be both right-and left-circularly polarized, adding a polarization degree of freedom including all linear and elliptical polarizations These important works thus unveil interesting magnon-driven skyrmion dynamics, definitely benefiting to future spintronic and magnonic applications. However, the interplay between polarized magnons and AFM skyrmions could be more complex. Theoretically, linearly polarized magnons could be possibly decomposed into magnon bands with elliptical polarizations, which breaks the mirror symmetry and generates a net transverse force on the topological spin texture. In this case, different spin dynamics such as skyrmion Hall motion could be induced by linearly polarized magnons. As a matter of fact, magnon scattering by AFM domain wall has been revealed to be strongly dependent on the linear polarization of injected magnons In this work, we investigate the skyrmion motion driven by injected magnons in antiferromagnets using analytical methods and the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) simulations, and pay particular attention onto the effect of magnon polarization. The skyrmion Hall motion equation driven by circularly polarized magnon is derived based on the collective coordinate theory. Moreover, the strong inter-dependence between the linearly polarized magnon and skyrmion longitudinal motion is theoretically and numerically revealed, allowing a comprehensive understanding of the driving mechanism. More interestingly, we numerically demonstrate that linearly polarized magnons can be generally decomposed into two elliptically polarized magnon bands with opposite handedness. As a result, a net transverse force acting on the skyrmion is induced owing to the broken mirror symmetry, which in turn drives the skyrmion Hall motion. Similar to the earlier work with the thermodynamic free energy: where A0 and A * are the homogeneous and effective exchange constants respectively, K is the easy z-axis anisotropy constant, D is the DMI constant, and ρ0 = ħS/a is the density of the staggered spin angular momentum per unit cell To describe the magnons, it is convenient to use a global frame defined by three mutually orthogonal unit vectors (e1, e2, e3) with e3 = n0/|n0| = e1 × e2 where n0 is the equilibrium configuration. A weakly excited state can be parametrized as n = n0 + δxe1+ δye2, where δx and δy describe the amplitude components of magnon. Then, one obtains the two monochromatic solutions with the complex fields: ψ * = δx + iδy for right-circularly polarized magnon and ψ = δx  iδy for left-circularly polarized magnon Subsequently, the skyrmion dynamics induced by polarized magnons are analytically calculated using the collective coordinate theory and elastic scattering theory. Moreover, the position and velocity of the skyrmion are also estimated based on the LLG simulations of the discrete model, in order to check the validity of theoretical analysis. The LLG simulation details are presented in Appendix A. A scheme of collective coordinates for magnon and skyrmion in a Lagrangian frame will be used to formulate the skyrmion dynamics driven by circularly polarized magnons, noting that such a scheme was once proposed to study the skyrmion-magnon scattering in ferromagnets The Lagrangian density L can be divided into three parts: L0 = (ρ0∂tn0) 2 /2A0 -u0 from the equilibrium texture, Lsw = ρ 2 0 (∂tѱ *  ∂tѱ)/2A0 -A * (∂iѱ *  ∂iѱ)/2 +K(ѱ * ѱ)/2 from the disturbance part where i = 1, 2, and 3 denote the spatial derivatives with respect to the x, y, and z-axes respectively, and Lint = -iρ 2 0 (ѱ * ∂tѱ -ѱ∂tѱ * ) a 0 t /2A0j.atotal + ѱ * ѱu0 -ѱ * ѱ(ρ0∂tn0) 2 /2A0 from the skyrmion-magnon interactions (the detailed derivation is presented in Appendix B). Here, a 0 t = -cosθ • ∂tφ For a stable skyrmion, the Thiele theory can be used to describe its dynamics, and its position is characterized by X = {Xi}. Similarly, one may use a set of collective coordinates x = {xu} to characterize the position of a spin-wave packet where the Einstein summation rules over the repeated indices, M ij = (1-2ρ)ρ0 2 ∫dV(∂in0  ∂jn0)/2A0 is the dissipative tensor describing the effective mass Similarly, the Rayleigh function is rewritten as After applying the Euler-Lagrange rule, we obtain the two coupled equations to describe the dynamics of skyrmion and magnon: where msw is the effective mass of the magnon. In some extent, the motion equation is equivalent to the classical motion of a massive particle, subject to dissipation-induced friction and external forces. Particularly, the third term in the left side of Eq. ( For an injected magnon current, Eq. (5a) is updated to: where Ẍ is the second-order derivative with respect to time, and Q = ∫dV(  a 0 )z/4π is the staggered topological charge. It is noted that the right term is the driving force acting on the skyrmion from the injected magnons, which can be divided into longitudinal and transverse parts. Thus, the Magnus force (the third term in the left side) is reversed for opposite ω Considering a stable skyrmion motion and neglecting ∂iU0, the solution to Eq. 6 gives the skyrmion velocity: where ρ is linearly related to h 2 with magnetic field h used to generate magnons is the driving force. Thus, a linear dependence of the skyrmion speed v on h 2 /α is expected in case of weak field h. In order to check the validity of theory, the dependences of v on various parameters are numerically simulated and analytically fitted. In this section, we analytically investigate the skyrmion longitudinal motion driven by linearly polarized magnons. Here, the remaining massive fluctuation modes are represented by the dimensionless complex field ѱ. The Néel vector is expressed as: First, we study the xand y-linearly polarized magnons driven skyrmion motion. For an elastic scattering, substituting Eq. ( Applying the Euler-Lagrangian equation, we obtain the dynamic equations for the xand y-linearly polarized magnons respectively: (1 cos cos sin ) ] (sin sin cos ) (sin sin cos 1) Thus, different scattering behaviors and skyrmion longitudinal speeds are expected due to the different scattering potentials for the xand y-linear polarizations. It is worth noting that the elastic scattering with an unchanged magnon polarization is simply considered in the derivation of the Lagrangian density, which is not exactly consistent with the fact that the linearly polarized magnon is generally decomposed into circularly or elliptically polarized magnon bands by the skyrmion, due to the topological spin Hall effect. However, the analytical argument on the skyrmion longitudinal motion works qualitatively at least in such inelastic scattering process. For example, different scattered magnon amplitudes for the xand y-linear polarizations are observed in the LLG simulations, as demonstrated in Fig. driven by the xand y-linearly polarized magnons are presented, demonstrating that the skyrmion motion for the y-linear polarization with  = π/2 is much faster than the x-linear polarization with  = π, consistent with the magnon scattering behaviors. Generally, the skyrmion scattering potential depending on the polarization direction reads: Thus, Hs is dependent on the skyrmion helicity η and magnon polarization direction, and equal η + φ will result in equal skyrmion longitudinal speeds vx, which has been confirmed in the LLG simulated dynamics of Bloch skyrmion motion with η = π/2 shown in Fig. As a matter of fact, vx depending on φ could be reasonably assumed to be vx = C1 sin 2 (θ + η + 1) + C2 with the parameters C1 and C2 independent of φ, considering the fact that the momentum transfer between skyrmion and magnons is mainly determined by the scattering Interestingly, a skyrmion transverse motion driven by linearly polarized magnons with a polarization deviated from the x-axis and y-axis is generally observed, as shown in Fig. which gives the LLG simulated evolutions of the skyrmion position Xy for φ = 0.8π and 0.9π. The skyrmion transverse motion is non-negligible and strongly dependent on the polarization direction. In Fig. In conclusion, we have studied the skyrmion dynamics induced by polarized magnons in antiferromagnets using analytical methods and numerical simulations. The skyrmion Hall motion driven by circularly polarized magnons are explained based on the collective coordinate theory. In addition, the skyrmion longitudinal motion strongly depending on the linear polarization of the injected magnons is revealed analytically and numerically. More interestingly, we demonstrate that the linearly polarized magnons generally drive a skyrmion Hall motion which is also dependent on the polarization direction. 