For over five decades the procedure termed maximum-entropy (M-E) has been used to "sharpen" structure in spectra, optical and otherwise. However, this is a contradiction: by modifying data, this approach violates the fundamental M-E principle, which is to extend, in a model-independent way, trends established by low-index Fourier coefficients into the whitenoise region. The Burg derivation, and indirectly the prediction-error equations on which sharpening is based, both lead to the correct solution, although this has been consistently overlooked. For a single Lorentzian line these equations can be solved analytically. The resultant lineshape is an exact autoregressive model-1 (AR(1)) replica of the original, demonstrating how the M-E reconstruction extends low-index Fourier coefficients to the digital limit, and illustrating why this approach works so well for lineshapes resulting from first-order decay processes. By simultaneously retaining low-index coefficients exactly and eliminating Gibbs oscillations, M-E noise filtering is quantitatively superior to that achieved by any linear method, including the high-performance filters recently proposed. Examples are provided. The goal of spectroscopy is information, and enormous effort has gone into improving capabilities either by enhancing structure or reducing noise. Noise reduction, either linear or nonlinear, depends on information residing in correlations between data points whereas noise is uncorrelated. Hence information is contained in low-order Fourier coefficients, whereas high-order coefficients are dominated by noise. Extracting information from spectra by linear methods generally depends on noise reduction, whether to obtain cleaner results for inspection, fit model lineshapes with less uncertainty, or enhance structure by differentiation, either as an intrinsic part of data acquisition or by numerical differentiation afterward. Linear methods reduce noise by attenuating or eliminating high-order coefficients either through reciprocal-(Fourier-) space (RS) filtering or direct-(spectral-) space (DS) convolution. While noise is reduced, the associated cutoffs generate Gibbs oscillations, creating new problems. By now, linear methods are well understood. In particular, recent work has shown that the optimum linear approach for preserving information while reducing noise is done with highperformance filters such as cosine-terminated Nonlinear approaches offer new capabilities, for example retaining low-index coefficients exactly but eliminating Gibbs oscillations by extrapolating trends established by these coefficients into informationally inaccessible regions. For example, one can least-squares fit model functions to spectra in DS or coefficients in RS, in the latter case using the fitted functions to replace coefficients in the white-noise region In principle the maximum-entropy (M-E) method offers a better alternative, because extrapolations are done in a most-probable, model-independent way. However, despite the fact that the correct approach follows directly from Burg's work Our goals in the present work are to investigate the properties of the overlooked solution, understand the mechanism by which it functions, and to use it to reduce or even eliminate noise in spectra. For a single Lorentzian structure we find that the M-E equations can be solved exactly. This solution involves only the two lowest-index coefficients, and yields an exact autoregressive replica (AR(1) in prediction-error terms) of the original. Replication is the result of a combination of two nonlinearities to form a third, the approximate Lorentzian itself. This solution explains not only why the correct M-E procedure reconstructs digital Fourier coefficients to all accessible orders, but also why it applies so well to spectra with structure arising from first-order decay processes. By retaining low-order coefficients exactly and eliminating Gibbs oscillations, the correct M-E solution is quantitatively superior to any form of linear filtering, with minimal additional computational effort. The M-E approach is based on digital Fourier analysis. Because digital methods are intrinsically periodic, data should be pre-processed with either internal To define procedures, let ( ) 0 P   be a continuous function with a Fourier representation () For spectroscopic applications we suppose that the data The points are assumed to be equally spaced in x, where x can be energy, wavelength, frequency, the index j as shown here, or any other variable. The ends x  of the range occur at the nonintegral values , respectively, so all data are interior to the range, an advantage. The restriction to an odd number of points is not essential, but is done to simplify the mathematics. Because the () so in practice we need coefficients n R only for 0 n  . We now return to () P  . The continuous function () P  cannot be constructed from data because the data provide only (2 1) N  coefficients, or ( 1) N  independent values when the reality condition is applied. Because data are typically noisy, this number is optimistic, possibly highly optimistic. Accordingly, let the number of useful coefficients be M , where MN  . Our task is to find a recipe by which the inaccessible coefficients can be estimated and the continuous function () P  created. If we can construct a best-estimate of () P  based on known coefficients, then in principle a Fourier transform of () P  generates the desired projection of the n R into the white-noise range. This is done as follows. Given that the information content of a bitstream is proportional to the natural logarithm of the number of bit locations in the stream, we can retain intrinsic information and prevent new information from entering, for example setting 0 for | ' | nM  . As Burg notes, Eq. ( The original infinite series has therefore become the reciprocal of a finite series. The n  are defined by the requirement that the Fourier coefficients n R of () must equal the known values obtained from the spectrum. Calculation of the n  can be bypassed by defining new coefficients n a according to where * nn aa   , noting that () But the sum in the numerator is the same as the sum on the right in the denominator. Hence these two sums cancel, leaving Because () P  is minimum-phase (has no zeroes in its range of definition), the large term in brackets can be expanded, writing a a e a a e a a e Now since 1 n  , all terms in the above integral vanish upon integration except the first. Consequently, Burg's result differs in the following ways. At Eq. ( , that is, the continuum Fourier transform of the Lorentzian 22 1 () we now show that Eqs. ( The result 0 n  is easily shown to be general. Substituting 0 a and 1 a into Eq. ( Here, () P  depends entirely on the single parameter  . In prediction-error theory, Eq. ( is the lowest-order filter response AR Thus the original Lorentzian line is recovered to within a scaling factor. The nonlinearity introduced by taking the reciprocal compensates the nonlinearity inherent in cos to yield a third nonlinearity, the original Lorentzian. The Fourier transform of Eq. ( While Eqs. Therefore, the Eq. (24b) replica cannot follow the Lorentzian form exactly, but deviates at the edges of the range. Insight into the Gibbs oscillations arising in linear filtering can be obtained from the discrete Fourier transform of Equation ( Given the above, the prediction-error approach can also be understood qualitatively. As noted above, in solving Eq. ( The primary objective of the present work is noise reduction. To illustrate capabilities, we consider two sets of data: XPS results obtained on a sparse distribution of AuPt clusters on an indium tin oxide substrate We consider the XPS data first. After using the external removal of endpoint discontinuities (ERED) While the Burg and prediction -error formulations can both lead to the correct M-E solution, this aspect has been consistently overlooked. In the present work we obtain this solution, discuss its main characteristics, and apply it to different situations to demonstrate its effectiveness in removing noise. The solution for the single Lorentzian is exact, offering insight into the basic M-E mechanism, including how filtering is accomplished and how filtered lineshapes are reconstructed. Returning to our main purpose, the model-independent M-E method of projecting trends established in low-order coefficients into the white-noise region eliminates Gibbs oscillations, the major remaining problem with high-performance linear filters. By retaining the low-index coefficients exactly, the M-E process equals the high-performance filters in this regard. The results are therefore quantitatively superior to those that can be obtained with any linear filter, with residual noise contributions at an absolute minimum. Disclosures. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.