Field emission tips with apex radius of curvature below 100nm are not adequately described by the standard theoretical models based on the Fowler-Nordheim and Murphy-Good formalisms. This is due to the breakdown of the 'constant electric field' assumption within the tunneling region leading to substantial errors in current predictions. A uniformly applicable curvature-corrected field emission theory requires that the tunneling potential be approximately universal irrespective of the emitter shape. Using the line charge model, it is established analytically that smooth generic emitter tips approximately follow this universal trend when the anode is far away. This is verified using COMSOL for various emitter shapes including the locally non-parabolic 'hemisphere on a cylindrical post'. It is also found numerically that the curvature-corrected tunneling potential provides an adequate approximation when the anode is in close proximity as well as in the presence of other emitters. Over the past few decades, there has been increased use of field emitter based cathodes in vacuum nanoelectronics. Such cathodes comprise of sharp tips mainly in the form of nanowires, nanocones and nanotubes, grown on a flat substrate. Owing to their advantages such as fast switching, high brightness, and small energy spread, such cathodes are widely used in microscopy, lithography, microwave amplifiers and X-ray generators The concentration of electric field lines near the tip is quantified using the apex field enhancement factor γ a , defined as the ratio of the local electric field at the emitter apex E a to the macroscopic electric field E 0 far away from the sharp tip. Field enhancement enables electron emission to occur at moderate field strengths of a few MV/m compared to the high field strengths (> 3GV/m) required for planar surfaces. Conventional field emission theory where E l refers to the local electric field on the emitter surface, A FN 1.541434 μA eV V -2 , B FN a) Electronic mail: rajasreer@barc.gov.in 6.830890 eV -3/2 V nm -1 are the conventional FN constants, and φ is the workfunction. In the above equations, J M G refers to the Murphy-Good current density while J F N is the Fowler-Nordheim current density. Note that at the apex, E l = E a = γ a E 0 , while the local field at any other point on the surface depends on the nature of the tip. For locally parabolic tips, the field near the apex can be determined using the generalized cosine law The Murphy-Good predictions are in fairly good agreement with current densities obtained using tunnelingpotentials arrived at analytically (for solvable models such as the hemiellipsoid) or computed numerically (such as using COMSOL), when the apex radius of curvature of the emitter is large There are two ingredients in the standard planar field emission theories that may be a subject of scrutiny for curved emitters. The first is the density of states. As arXiv:2103.01567v2 [physics.app-ph] 8 Apr 2021 the emitter height increases and the tip radius becomes smaller, the nature and availability of electron states can change The question of correction to the potential (V ext ) due to an applied external electric field near a sharp tip has been considered earlier where R a is the radius of curvature at the apex. In Ref. [23], it was established that for a hemiellipsoid, a hyperboloid and a hemisphere diode, the first correction (Eq. 3) holds for other points near the apex as well. In addition, a second correction was provided so that for any point near the apex, where R 2 is the second principle radius of curvature at that point on the surface (at the apex R 2 = R a ). In reality, the curvature dependent terms have coefficients c 1 and c 2 which are close to unity for points on the surface close to the apex. Eq. ( The Line Charge Model (LCM) In the LCM, a field emitter of height h and tip radius R a mounted on a grounded conducting plane in a parallel-plate diode configuration, is modelled as a vertically aligned line charge and its image in an external electric field E 0 = V 0 /D (V 0 is the anode potential and D is anode-cathode distance). An appropriately chosen line charge density together with the external electric field produces a zero-potential surface which mimics the grounded curved emitter on a conducting plane. The line charge density Λ(z) can physically be thought of as the projection of the induced surface charge density σ(z), along the axis of the emitter and can be expressed as, Thus depending on the functional form of Λ(z), different geometrical shapes can be realized. For example, a linearly varying line charge Λ(z) = λz with λ constant, mimics the shape of a hemiellipsoidal emitter where L is the extent of the line charge distribution. The parameters defining the line charge distribution including its extent L, can, in principle be calculated by imposing the requirement that the potential should vanish on the surface of the emitter. In the following, we shall make use of the LCM to explore the nature of the tunneling potential along the normal to the surface of the emitter. To begin with, the surface of a vertically aligned axially-symmetric emitter z = z(ρ) can be Taylor expanded about ρ = 0. At ρ = 0, z(0) = h, dz/dρ = 0 and a , so that close to the apex, the parabolic approximation closely follows the surface z = z(ρ). For non-parabolic emitters, the second derivative d 2 z/dρ 2 = 0 at the emitter tip corresponding to a flat top with R a → ∞. Since our interest here lies in nanotips, the parabolic approximation holds good near the apex. The extent upto which it holds however depends on the shapes of endcaps as we shall discuss later. The electric field lines are normal to this surface and thus in the direction at the point (ρ 0 , z 0 ) on the surface. The quantities ẑ and ρ are respectively the unit normal along the cylindrical axis and the direction perpendicular to it (radial axis). Our aim is to determine E = (E ρ , E z ) using Eq. ( This can be used to determine E.n (the magnitude of the electric field in the direction normal to the surface) and subsequently integrated to determine the potential variation along the normal. A nonlinear line charge density corresponds to a wide class of smooth axially symmetric emitters such as a rounded cone, pyramid or cylindrical post. A general nonlinear line charge density As electron emission predominantly occurs from the apex of the emitter, we shall evaluate the field components in the limit ρ → 0. Thus, by binomial expansion the field components turn out to be while Using partial integration, each of these integrals can be evaluated and keeping terms upto ρ 2 , the above equations reduces to where, Here f (L) = Λ(L)/L and the terms C 0 , C 1 , C 2 , C 3 arise due to the non linearity in the line charge distribution and are zero otherwise. Smooth emitters are characterized by a well-behaved charge distribution and can be expressed as a polynomial function of degree n. Thus, f (t) obeys Bernstein's inequality 36 where x ∈ [-1, 1] and f denotes the maximum value of f in this interval. With x = t/L and applying the inequality, it can be shown that C k are vanishingly small for sharp emitters for which z h L (see Appendix). Also, since 2zL z 2 -L 2 > ln( z+L z-L ) for sharp emitters, the logarithmic term can be ignored. Hence, the field components turn out to be These field components can be used to evaluate the form of external potential for a point on the surface of the emitter in the neighbourhood of its apex. It is instructive to first study the potential along the axis of symmetry. As expected, E ρ → 0 as ρ → 0. With ρ = 0 and z = h + s where s is the distance from the apex along the normal, where we have used L ≈ h in the numerator, f (L) 4π 0 2h Ra = γ a E 0 = E a which is the electric field at the apex along the emitter axis. C. The potential variation away from the axis Field emission of electrons predominantly occurs from the close vicinity of the apex. It is thus necessary to carry out a study on the nature of potential in this region as well. Assuming the field lines to be approximately straight in the tunneling region, let s be the normal distance from a point (ρ 0 , z 0 ) on the emitter surface. Any arbitrary point (ρ, z) along the normal can be expressed as To evaluate the electric field components, the quantity z 2 -L 2 can be expanded as For high aspect ratio emitters h R a , s, ρ 0 and hence keeping only the dominant terms, the above expression reduces to Hence the field components after expansion in ρ 0 can be expressed as In the apex neighbourhood where ρ 0 R a , only the terms upto ρ 2 0 will suffice. Thus the magnitude of the normal electric field is given by Note that, where θ corresponds to the launch angle measured from the emitter axis and E l is the local electric field at the point (ρ 0 , z 0 ). Thus, Hence, finally the external potential is given by ) . ( Rewriting the above expression in terms of the second principal radius of curvature R 2 = R a 1 + ρ 2 0 /R 2 a , we finally have At a local apex field of 6 V/nm, the current distribution peaks around ρ 0 ≈ R a /5 for an emitter with workfunction φ = 4.5eV. Thus, the correction terms may be considered small and the external potential should approximately follow in the tunneling region. We shall verify this using COM-SOL in the following section. The electrostatic potential can be evaluated numerically for various emitter shapes. In the following, we shall present our results using the AC/DC module 37 of COMSOL v5.4 for a parallel-plate diode geometry with the emitter mounted on the cathode plate. Due to the axial symmetry of single emitters, a 2-dimensional domain is used while for emitters on a square lattice, a 3-dimensional modelling is carried out. The emitter is modeled as a perfect electrical conductor which is at ground potential along with the cathode plane. In the 2-dimensional (ρ, z) simulations, the left boundary is the axis of symmetry while the right boundary has Neumann boundary condition (zero charge). The top boundary (anode) is Dirichlet with the potential specified or when the anode is far away, a Neumann boundary condition is used specifying the surface charge to be 0 E 0 We shall interchangeably use the expressions 'exact result' or 'numerical result' to refer to the COMSOL result. As with all numerical methods and the finite nature of the platforms on which they are implemented, the results obtained using COMSOL are at best a close approximation to what may be considered as exact. Our aim in the following is to investigate the appropriateness of Eqns. ( We first present the details of the study of external potential for two different geometries (i) Hemiellipsoid on Cylindrical Post (HECP) and (ii) Hemisphere on Cylindrical Post (HCP), both mounted on a cathode plane with anode far away at a distance more than 5 times the height of the emitter pin. Since these geometries are not analytically solvable, the validity of the formula for external potential is tested using the 'exact' results obtained from COMSOL. For an HECP emitter, the end cap geometry follows the parabolic approximation of Eq (7) upto ρ 0 ≈ 4R a /5. Since field emission at moderate fields (E a ∈ [3, 7] V/nm) 0 0.03 0.06 0.09 0.12 0.15 0.18 FIG. is largely restricted to the region ρ 0 ≤ R a /2, we present in Fig. ( FIG. The hemisphere on a cylindrical post is a special case of the HECP emitter. When the hemiellipsoid endcap FIG. height is typically five times the apex radius of curvature or greater, the parabolic approximation closely follows the emitter shape till ρ 0 = 4R a /5. As the hemiellipsoid height decreases compared to the apex radius, this domain of validity shrinks. When the height of the hemiellipsoid equals the apex radius (hemisphere endcap), the parabolic approximation follows the hemisphere for ρ 0 < 2R a /5. Thus, Eqns. (37) and Eq. ( The analytical results presented in section II deal with an isolated emitter with the anode far away. While these results can be analytically extended to deal with anodeproximity and shielding due to other emitters, we shall instead test the sanctity of Eq. (37) numerically when the anode is brought near or when the emitter is part of an array. The presence of anode cannot be neglected in actual field emission current measurements. Also, it is a known fact that the proximity of anode increases the local electric field at the emitter tip. Hence it is worth investigating how the anode proximity affects the external potential. Consider a hemiellipsoidal emitter pin of height h = 1000nm and tip radius R a = 5nm, mounted on a grounded conducting plane with anode kept at distance FIG. (3) and ( To study the nature of the external potential in an array, consider HECP emitters of total height h = 1050nm placed on a square lattice. The cylindrical post of height 1000nm has a hemiellipsoid endcap of height 50nm and tip radius R a = 5nm. The lattice constant c = 1.5h. Thus, the square domain extends from [-c/2, c/2] in both X and Y direction while the HECP emitter is placed at the origin. The anode is kept close at a distance D = 1155nm. Thus, both shielding and anode-proximity effects are present in this case. The numerical result obtained using COMSOL is compared with Eq. (37) at two locations (i) ρ 0 = R a /10 (Fig Thus, irrespective of the presence of anode or other emitters in close proximity, the form of external potential is approximately universal in the tunneling region. So far we have been discussing the effect of curvature on the potential due to an external applied field. To put things in a proper perspective, it is instructive to look at the full tunneling potential, seen by the electrons emanating from the emitter tip. As in case of the external potential, the image potential is also affected by the curvature of the tip. The last term in Eq. (38) represents the image-charge potential under a local spherical approximation -6 : : : : : : E l = 7V/nm FIG. ext ) and (ii) cubic correction (V In order to determine the importance of the cubic order correction term in the external potential, we need to compare the tunneling potential with and without the cubic correction over typical tunneling distances involved at various values of the local field as shown in Fig. (2) ext and V (3) ext in Fig. with the local field at a point in the apex-neighbourhood denoted by E l and the local second principle radius of curvature denoted by R. The value of R is taken to be 5nm while three values of the local field E l are considered in Fig. ext and V ext is small, at E l = 5V/nm, the difference in tunneling width is significant for V T = -0.25eV. Finally, at E l = 3V/nm, removing the cubic term clearly makes the barrier unphysical. Thus, the cubic order corrected external potential form given by Eq (37) is a better approximation. Since a slight change in the tunneling potential can have a magnified impact on the value of transmission coefficient, our calculations show that it is profitable to use a cubic order corrected external potential at least when dealing with emitter tips having radius less than 20nm at typical local fields of 3 -10 V/nm. We have shown, using the nonlinear line charge model, that the external potential has an approximate universal form for sharp emitters irrespective of the particulars of its shape or endcap geometry so long as it is smooth and parabolic in nature. The universal form given by Eq. ( By knowing the exact form of tunneling potential at all points on the surface of the emitter, one can find the transmission coefficient using approximate techniques such as WKB method, or by numerically solving The correction term C 0 is Substituting x = t/L, and using Bernstein's inequality, x 3 (a 2 -1) 2 (a 2 -x 2 ) 2 (A.2) where a = z/L ≈ h/L ≈ h/ h(h -R a ) ≈ 1 + R a /2h. Thus √ a 2 -1 ≈ R a /h. Generally f /f (L) ≤ 1 since the line charge density peaks at L. For n = 5 and R a /h = 1/1000, C 0 ≤ 0.124. The correction term C 1 is which can in turn be expressed as x(a 2 -1) (a 2 -x 2 ) (A.7) x(a 2 -1) (a 2 -x 2 )(1 -x 2 ) 1/2 (A.8) ≤ n π 2 a 2 -1 (A.9) ≈ n π 2 R a h (A.10) For n = 5 and R a /h = 1/1000, C 1 ≤ 0.248. The correction term C 3 is .11) which in turn can be expressed as x 3 (a 2 -1) 3 (a 2 -x 2 ) 3 (A.12) For n = 5 and R a /h = 1/1000, C 3 ≤ 0.09.