Switchable and active metasurfaces allow for the realization of beam steering, zoomable metalenses, or dynamic holography. To achieve this goal, one has to combine highperformance metasurfaces with switchable materials that exhibit high refractive index contrast and high switching speeds. In this work, we present an electrochemically switchable metasurface for beam steering where we use the conducting polymer poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) as an active material. We show beam diffraction with angles up to 10°a nd change of the intensities of the diffracted and primary beams employing an externally applied cyclic voltage between -1 V and +0.5 V. With this unique combination, we realize switching speeds in the range of 1 Hz while the extension to typical display frequencies in the tens of Hz region is possible. Our findings have immediate implications on the design and fabrication of future electronically switchable and display nanotechnologies, such as dynamic holograms. The manipulation of optical wavefronts via lenses, mirrors, or any other optical devices is present in all our everyday lives. This includes, e.g., bulky lenses made from glasses, Fresnel lenses in smartphone illumination optics, or spatial light modulators and liquid crystals in displays. However, emerging display technologies such as dynamic holography or augmented and virtual reality require ever-increasing pixel densities and thus new smart optical methods with the ability to manipulate optical wavefronts, beam paths, polarization, or similar actively on ultra-small length-scales and yttrium Here, we present an optically active system to perform switchable beam steering realized via a novel hybrid metasurface. It consists of a unique combination of gold plasmonic nanoantennas and the electrically switchable and conducting polymer poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) We show that tuning of geometric parameters allows switching angles and beam diffraction of up to 10°, while the efficiency of the hybrid metasurface and thus the intensity of diffracted light can be actively controlled via an externally applied cyclic voltage between only -1 V and +0.5 V. An increase of the scan-rate of the cyclic voltammetry reveals switching frequencies close to 1 Hz while an extension to typical display frequencies in the tens of Hz range is possible, only limited by the measurement components. In order to design the plasmonic nanostructures, we used the transient solver of CST Microwave Studio Suite in a wavelength range between 600 nm and 1200 nm. Figure The final metasurface consists of gold nanoantenna arrays with progressively rotated elements along one axis For potential applications as light modulators, it is important to determine the modulation efficiency of our metasurface. In detail, we determine two quantities necessary to quantify our metasurface relative to existing literature. The first parameter, the basic efficiency is calculated via the intensity ratio of the diffracted beam I 1 ox and the main beam I 0 ox in the oxidized PEDOT state. Please note that we introduce and experimentally determine the attenuation coefficient a, which originates from the attenuation of the main beam I0 via the QWP (see Figure Consequently, we obtain efficiency values of the metasurface in Figure A second quantity to compare is the figure of merit where I 1 ox , I 1 red , and I 0 ox , I 0 red are the intensities of the diffracted and main beam in the oxidized and reduced state, respectively. C ox and C red denote the contrasts in the oxidized and reduced state, respectively. A complete transfer of the intensity from the main beam to the diffracted beam during switching would result in a FOM =1. For our metasurface in Figure The intensity ratio I1/I0 of our initial metasurface during cyclic voltammetry is plotted in Figure When increasing the scan rate to 400 mV/s we see in Figure In conclusion, we have demonstrated a novel approach for an optically active as well as externally and electrically switchable hybrid metasurface. We presented a unique combination of a metasurface comprising gold nanoantennas and electropolymerized PEDOT which allowed for an electrochemically activated switchable beam steering. The feasibility of this combination for potential nanophotonic applications was demonstrated via a detailed investigation of the optical and temporal properties of the hybrid metasurface. We used Fourier-space imaging to reveal switching and diffraction angles of up to 10° with excellent conservation of beam profiles in the first diffraction order. A temporal investigation of the intensities of main and diffracted beams showed that we are able to actively control the efficiency of the metasurface and thus the intensity of the diffracted and primary light. We reach switching frequencies around 1 Hz while the extension to display frequencies is only limited by the measurement components and not intrinsically by the optical and electrical properties of our hybrid metasurface. Overall, our approach finds immediate implication in the design, fabrication, and realization of optically active nanophotonic systems that are electrically switchable. Our results will help to develop future optical technologies such as virtual and augmented reality as well as dynamic holography. 