Uniform powder spreading is a requisite for creating consistent, high-quality components via powder bed additive manufacturing (AM), wherein layer density and uniformity are complex functions of powder characteristics, spreading kinematics, and mechanical boundary conditions. High spatial variation in particle packing density, driven by the stochastic nature of the spreading process, impedes optical interrogation of these layer attributes. Thus, we present transmission X-ray imaging as a method for directly mapping the effective depth of powder layers at process-relevant scale and resolution. Specifically, we study layers of nominal 50-250 μm thickness, created by spreading a selection of commercially obtained Ti-6Al-4V, 316 SS, and Al-10Si-Mg powders into precision-depth templates. We find that powder layer packing fraction may be predicted from a combination of the relative thickness of the layer as compared to mean particle size, and flowability assessed by macroscale powder angle of repose. Power spectral density analysis is introduced as a tool for quantification of defect severity as a function of morphology, and enables separate consideration of layer uniformity and sparsity. Finally, spreading is studied using multi-layer templates, providing insight into how particles interact with both previously deposited material and abrupt changes in boundary condition. Experimental results are additionally compared to a purpose-built discrete element method (DEM) powder spreading simulation framework, clarifying the competing role of adhesive and gravitational forces in layer uniformity and density, as well as particle motion within the powder bed during spreading. Powder spreading is critical to stable processing and to building high quality components in powder bed additive manufacturing (AM), as the powder layer influences process conditions and component properties in many ways Powder feedstock used in LPBF is typically created via gas or plasma atomization, as the particles produced are spherical and therefore spread more predictably than irregular particle shapes (e.g., produced by water atomization) Even in cases where cohesive forces do not dominate powder behavior, achieving uniform spreading can be challenging. For instance, Wischeropp and coworkers report 1σ standard deviations spanning 6-22% about an average packing fraction of ≈ 50% within powder specimens retrieved from a commercial LPBF machine Electron beam melting (EBM) and binder jetting (BJ) are other common powder bed AM techniques, and likewise rely on uniform powder spreading to achieve consistent processing and component performance. EBM is analogous to LPBF, in that a focused and scanned electron beam is used to locally melt layers of metal powder. A larger particle size distribution than LPBF (typically 45 -106 μm) is necessitated by the physics of EBM, as the increased particle mass (gravitational force) counters electrostatic forces arising from particle charging Many researchers have explored the influence of the spreading tool on layer uniformity. In addition to adapting to underlying component topography, for example, compliant spreading (recoating) blades increase contact area with flowing powder particles and thereby improve uniformity and reduce surface roughness of powder layers Optical imaging techniques are often used to study powder spreading for PBF AM (e.g., X-ray imaging methods provide an alternative to optical sensing. Side-on imaging is described by Escano and coworkers, who use a synchrotron X-ray imaging system to record video while spreading a narrow (5 mm width in beam direction) powder bed Therefore, to advance understanding of powder bed AM, we emphasize the need for an experimental method that directly resolves the volume of powder deposited under industriallyrelevant spreading conditions and size scales. Accordingly, we present an X-ray microscopy technique illustrated in Fig. Figure Model powder layers are created by spreading powder into uniform-depth templates, which are fabricated in silicon wafers per Fig. Template depth is qualified post-fabrication by confocal microscopy (Keyence VK-X1050). Figure Table Angle of repose measurements are also tabulated, performed in-house using a funnel inspired by a Hall Flowmeter Funnel (see Spreading of powder into the etched silicon wafer templates is performed manually using a 1/8 in. thick machinist parallel as a blade. The blade edge is rested on the wafer, several millimeters from the template to be filled, and a gross excess of powder is deposited immediately in front of the blade on the unetched surface. The template is then filled by sweeping the blade across the template in one smooth motion, taking care that the blade is neither permitted to rise off the wafer nor rock as to change the right angle between the template and blade face. Spreading speed is not measured, but is estimated to be ≈ 5 mm/s. This entire process is performed with the template attached to the X-ray specimen stage, as powder shifts if templates are moved. Ambient humidity is known to affect powder spreading mechanics; while powder spreading is not performed under controlled humidity, extremes due to weather fluctuations are avoided. Temperature and humidity are measured when experiments are performed (Extech 42275). Data logged during the experiments collected herein indicate an average temperature of 22.8 • C (range 22.4 • C-23.2 • ) and an average relative humidity of 36.7% (range 22.6%-46.4%). X-ray imaging is performed with parameters selected in view of the material to be imaged (see Section 2.5) and the equipment operating range. The source is set to a tube potential of 50 kV and current of 200 μA, enabling use of the lowest selectable emission spot size (5 μm). Detector exposure time is typically 1 -10 s; this is set empirically, such that maximum observed signal levels are approximately 80% of the dynamic range of the detector, as to avoid saturation nonlinearities. The number of counts collected in a single exposure (signal strength) is generally insufficient to resolve fine differences in material deposition, as discussed in section 2.5.4. Thus, frames are summed to achieve the required signal strength; the requisite number of frames is calculated by dividing the number of counts required by the mean number of counts recorded in a single image. Determining the effective depth of a powder layer requires collection of two images (or sums thereof), namely a reference image I 0 of the empty template and a second image I after spreading powder into the template. Transmission T is simply calculated as the ratio I/I 0 . This step cancels pixel-to-pixel sensitivity variation, as well as unknown photon and quantum efficiencies of the X-ray detector. Great care is taken in dark current (or signal) subtraction to ensure accurate results as, clearly, I/I 0 (I+δ)/(I 0 +δ). The considerable exposure times required make this problem especially significant, as the integrated dark current is proportional thereto and approaches 20% of the detector's dynamic range. Moreover, empirical observation shows that dark current magnitude is a strong function of temperature, which is poorly controlled due to ambient temperature fluctuations and nature of airflow within the X-ray cabinet. Thus, the total number of frames required is divided into subsets, each representing approximately 5 min of net exposure time, and dark frames are recorded before and after each subset to measure this offset. Linear interpolation is then used to determine the dark current midway through each active exposure for subtraction. A radiation transport (RT) model is used to interpret transmission measurements, as graphically represented in Fig. Our RT model computes X-ray source spectra based on the method of Birch and Marshall where the limits run from the tube potential V 0 to V ν , or the potential that confers an electron kinetic energy equal to that of an X-ray photon with frequency ν. The first term under the integral gives a modest relativistic correction in view of the rest mass m 0 of an electron. Q is a differential energy intensity, as a function of the ratio of photon energy to to electron energy, where the empirically determined polynomial given in where ρ is the target mass density and C is a constant (interpolated from those provided by Birch and Marshall). Target geometry, specifically the target angle θ, increases the path length for X-rays to escape the target by a factor of cot θ. This angle is estimated here as ≈ 23 • from observation of the heel effect. Finally, μ ν is the attenuation coefficient of the target material at the frequency of interest. Notably, we have elected not to consider generation of the characteristic (K-shell) X-ray emissions of the target, despite being incorporated into the original Birch and Marshall model. Electron kinetic energy at the selected tube potential (50 keV), as motivated below, lies well below the minimum K-shell binding energy of tungsten (69.5 keV The second component of the RT model calculates transmission spectra according to the presence of objects in the beam path, including the powder layer, between the source target and detector scintillator. For each object, transmission is determined in accordance with Lambert's Law where T is transmission as a function of the attenuation coefficient, μ, and path length (object thickness) l. Critically, μ depends both on the material and on photon energy where w i is the mass-fraction of the i th element comprising the material Figure As an aside, subtracting the transmission curves allows one to understand contrast as a function of photon energy. The scaled difference of the transmission curves in Fig. The last components of the model account for the quantification of X-rays by the detector. Detection occurs by first converting X-ray photons into visible light using a microcolum-nar cesium iodide scintillator. The light yield of this process is approximately 52 visible photons per keV of X-ray photon energy Integration time, or proportionally the aggregate signal reported by the detector in counts, is set as to provide a sufficient signal-to-noise ratio to resolve a 1 μm difference in the material of interest. This is calculated using the formula for error propagation, where σ represents the standard deviation of the quantity indicated by the subscript. Observation of measurement noise indicates that the signal-to-noise ratio is strongly limited by (Poisson distributed) shot noise, allowing the substitutions σ I 0 = √ I 0 and σ I = √ I. Further taking I ≈ I 0 , or that small changes in material thickness cause small changes in I, allows reduction and rearrangement of the formula to Thus, if a 1 μm increase in titanium thickness changes transmission by 2.6 × 10 -3 , I must be ≥ 3.0 × 10 5 counts to resolve the difference. The RT model is validated through X-ray attenuation measurement of stacks of titanium foils (Goodfellow TI000251), as schematically illustrated in Fig. We compare our physical experiments to a Discrete Element Method (DEM) computational model of powder spreading recently developed by Meier et al. For each DEM simulation (e.g., as shown in Supplementary Video 1), in the initial configuration, particles are arranged on a Cartesian grid with an additional random offset (Fig. Numerous powder layer metrics may be extracted from postprocessing of the DEM simulation results, such as packing fraction and surface profile Using the materials and methods described above, we create powder layers that span a range of materials and layer thicknesses, and with differing boundary conditions. Spreading is first studied in uniform-depth templates, selectively considering the central 14 × 14 mm region, and therefore removing spatial variation due to perturbed powder flow at template boundaries. Representative layers of Ti-6Al-4V spread into a 131 μm template are shown in Fig 6 ; qualitatively, one may observe that the finer (15-45 μm and 15-63 μm) Ti-6Al-4V powders result in the densest coverage (see corresponding simulation in Supplementary Videos 1 and 2). Conversely, the 45-106 μm Ti-6Al-4V powder shows structured defects, primarily streaks caused by large powder particles that cannot easily pass between the blade and template (see corresponding simulation in Supplementary Videos In the following sections, these observations are quantified through determination of packing fraction, statistical distribution of effective depth, and defect sizing in the frequency domain. Finally, disturbance of powder flow about abrupt changes in geometry are examined using stepped templates to gain preliminary insights into the uniformity of multi-layer spreading. Analysis begins by calculating the mean packing fraction of the powder layers, defined as the average effective depth divided by the template depth. Figure However, the combination of powder material and size distribution affects the characteristics of layers via changes in the relative magnitude of gravitational and van der Waals forces. In Ti-6Al-4V, larger powder sizes feature considerably lower angle of repose as compared to the fine size distributions, indicating that increased particle mass works to overcome adhesive forces and leads to settling into dense layers as a result. In the opposite direction, the Al-10Si-Mg powder is observed to be the least flowable (AoR of 38.2 • ) and creates the most sparse layers. This indicates strong cohesive forces as compared to gravitational forces, explained by the low mass density of aluminum, and further implies clumping of powder particles during spreading. At low normalized layer thickness the measured packing fractions of all powders studied converge, as driven by two key considerations. First, only the fine particles of the distributions are deposited, e.g., all layers resemble Fig. Critically, typical PBF AM spreading conditions span the full range of normalized layer thickness presented here. In a typical LPBF process employing a solidified layer thickness of 50 μm and 15-45μm Ti-6Al-4V powder (D 50 = 31.5 μm), the first layer, as well as powder spread over unfused material in subsequent layers experience a normalized layer thickness of 50/31.5 ≈ 1.6. As the build continues, the actual thickness of spread powder above previously fused material approaches the nominal layer thickness divided by the packing fraction, as described by Mindt and coworkers Figure The middle panel of Figure The bottom family of curves in Figure Finally, to provide an alternate representation of these data, we present averages of effective depth over progressively larger areas in Fig. Figure With the presence of spatially correlated fluctuations in effective depth established above, we turn to frequency-domain methods to quantify powder layer defect size and severity. Herein, we first apply a discrete Fourier transform (DFT) to the meansubtracted effective depth measurement. The DFT is then squared to yield a 2-dimensional power spectral density (PSD, S ); this is shown in Fig. The DFT maps variance in powder layer depth to defect orientation and characteristic size. For example, variance from large defects with low inverse characteristic dimension (analogous to low frequencies in the DFT of a time-domain signal) are mapped to pixels near the origin of the plot. Conversely, high spatial frequency components arising from small defects are mapped closer to the perimeter. In the context of LPBF, for example, these data inform powder-driven meltpool disturbance as a function of laser focus size. Alternatively, the degree of large and intermediate scale powder layer variance that may be rejected via closed-loop control is also readily determined, with the intersection of controller bandwidth and laser scan speed defining a characteristic length scale. To assist in interpreting the power spectral data, Fig. where polar coordinates are chosen to simplify the integral. The top panel of this figure illustrates the influence of powder size on variance of effective depth in 131 μm Ti-6Al-4V layers. Larger powders have greater total variation in effective depth and the geometric extent of the defects are larger than those present in finer powders. Specifically, we see that half of the observed variance of the 45-150 μm and 45-106 μm powder arises at inverse defect size of 4.6 and 5.1 mm -1 , respectively (220 μm and 190 μm defects). The corresponding point for the finer powders lies at ≈ 6 mm -1 , or 170 μm. We hypothesize that this non-proportional change in defect versus powder size arises both from higher adhesive forces in the smaller powders, causing clustering that persists during spreading, and the qualitative observation that streaks are orders of magnitude longer than typical particle diameters. Finally, low variance is observed across all layers when considering inverse characteristic dimensions below ≈ 0.2 mm -1 (or 5 mm defect dimension). Thus, while the layers of large powders in Fig. In the middle panel, layers of 15-45 μm Ti-6Al-4V are studied in a variety of template depths. A rough trend towards increased total variance with increasing layer thickness is seen, especially as compared to the thinnest layer (50 μm), as particles can settle into more complex configurations in thicker layers. Based upon the similarity of the curves from the thicker layers, characteristics (severity and size) of defects appear to be independent of thickness for sufficiently deep layers. The final panel of Fig. where the θ integral limits restrict the integral to a sector and the factor of two necessarily accounts for the opposite and equivalent range of directions (the reader is reminded that both the Fourier transform and PSD of a real-valued function is symmetric and both sides must be integrated). Using this relation, the PSD is summed in the sector spanning 0 ± 15 • , aligned to the spreading direction, as well as the transverse sector spanning 90 ± 15 • . At an intermediate inverse characteristic dimension, equivalently between 1 and 10 millimeters, we see that more variance is encountered moving along the spreading direction than orthogonal to it. Conversely, more variance occurs in the transverse direction at high inverse characteristic dimension, specifically at length scales approaching those of the largest powder particles in the size distribution. This matches with a qualitative reading of Fig. As described earlier, multi-level templates are fabricated to study how complex boundary conditions influence power layer packing density and uniformity. As such, Fig. Figure The second feature of interest lies in the effective depth of the upper (second) layer where it is spread over the deeper region of the template, as all experimental and simulated experiments agree that increased deposition occurs in this region as compared to the perimeter. Two effects drive the observed increase. First, the average surface of layer 1 lies slightly below the level of the shallow perimeter region, because particles above this level are pushed forward by the spreading blade. Thus, particles spread as part of the second layer can settle into these gaps in low lying regions of the first layer. Second, the DEM simulation shows that particles deposited in the first layer move due to forces exerted upon them when spreading the second layer. Figure We first address the simulation results in Fig. Effective depth data from simulated spreading of layer 1 (red) must be interpreted with care due to the presence the same obstruction effect described above. Specifically, powder flow into the deep region while forming layer 1 is initially unimpeded, and therefore effective depth is constant at X coordinates spanning 2.5 to 3.75 mm, whereas increasing layer density is observed in the region 0.8<X<2.5 mm as the edge at X=0.8 mm is approached. Considering the former portion with steady powder flow, a packing fraction of 0.45 is achieved. An effective depth of ≈ 81 μm is observed when a second layer is spread above this area, substantially higher than the ≈ 69 μm observed from the placed particle case, indicating rearrangement of particles into a configuration of higher packing fraction. Finally, we consider the region between X=0.8 and 2.5 mm in this simulated case. The increase in layer 1 density in the vicinity of the template edge at X=0.8 mm is mirrored by decreased deposition in layer 2, as underlying material of increasingly higher density precludes further densification by spreading forces exerted in creating the second layer. Thus, these results demonstrate that previous powder layers are subject to densification from disturbance forces arising during spreading of subsequent powder layers. The experimental data strike the middle ground between the simulations. No increase in powder deposition is observed at the left edges of the first layers (at X=5 mm), because of the choice of spreading directions and restriction of the area considered, and a packing fraction of 0.40 is observed. Regardless of the spreading direction of the second layer, the effective depth is ≈ 80 μm over the central region, sharply increasing relative to ≈ 45 μm deposited in shallower perimeter region. Gap filling alone is insufficient to explain this 35 μm increase in effective depth over the central template region. Figure Through spatially mapping powder layer density, this paper establishes X-ray microscopy as a high-fidelity technique for the study of powder spreading mechanics in AM. Via experiments and supporting DEM simulations, we demonstrate relationships between relative layer thickness and powder cohesion on layer density, where thin layers and highly cohesive powders result in sparse deposition. Defect morphology is also shown to depend on these variables, and provides preliminary guidance as to the role of stochastic powder layer variations on AM component quality. Specifically, large powders cause correspondingly larger defects, as well as more total variation in effective depth at a given layer thickness. Abrupt changes to spreading boundary conditions are also studied, showing substantial alteration in powder deposition depending on the characteristics of the underlying material and at features that impede free powder flow. Future work will apply these methods in three distinct directions. First, we envision study of powders themselves. Tailored (e.g., skewed or bi-modal) size distributions could be used to increase packing density, and can be directly evaluated by X-ray microscopy. Second, as highlighted in the introduction, optimal spreading tool designs and motion parameters remain an open question. This imaging technique is compatible with in situ installation of a mechanized recoating testbed, and will enable matching of powder properties to recoater implements. Along this direction, the uniformity of effective depth achieved by metered deposition or high applied shear (e.g., roller spreading mechanisms) for spreading highly cohesive powders can be studied. Third, rigorous understanding of layer variation will guide selection of fusion process parameters, as to both mitigate defects arising from stochastic fluctuations in effective depth and provide for feedforward control in view of systematic, boundary-driven changes in powder deposition. Finally, these investigations may be augmented via high-fidelity optical imaging of the spreading process and final layer, as to clarify the relations between powder rheology, particle motion in spreading, and ultimate material distribution. • Video 1 -Perspective view of 15-45 μm Ti-6Al-4V powder spread into a 131 μm Profile A template. Particles are colored by size. Note particle motion is visible under the spreading blade. • Video 2 -Side view of the simulation in Video 1. • Video 3 -Perspective view of 45-106 μm Ti-6Al-4V powder spread into a 131 μm Profile A template. Particles are colored by size. Note defects arising from large particles that cannot readily pass between the template bottom and spreading blade. • Video 4 -Side view of the simulation in Video 3. • Video 5 -Side view of a second layer of 15-45 μm Ti-6Al-4V powder spread into a 131 μm Profile B template. Particles are colored by layer (layer 1 particles are blue, layer 2 particles are red). Note the motion of blue particles as red particles are spread to form the second layer. • Video 6 -Perspective view of a second layer of 15-45 μm Ti-6Al-4V powder spread into a 131 μm Profile B template. Particles are colored by velocity. Note the rapid deceleration of the particle pile as it interacts with the template edge.