This paper reports the impacts of temperature variation on the inference accuracy of pretrained all-ferroelectric FinFET deep neural networks, along with plausible design techniques to abate these impacts. We adopted a pre-trained artificial neural network (N.N.) with 96.4% inference accuracy on the MNIST dataset as the baseline. As an aftermath of temperature change, a compact model captured the conductance drift of a programmed cell over a wide range of gate biases. We observed a significant inference accuracy degradation in the analog neural network at 233 K for an N.N. trained at 300 K. Finally, we deployed binary neural networks with "read voltage" optimization to ensure immunity of N.N. to accuracy degradation under temperature variation, maintaining an inference accuracy of 96.1%. The invention of the convolutional neural network We have fabricated Fe-FinFET using a self-aligned gate-first process on silicon-oninsulator (SOI) using the process described in The program-erase operation was followed by analyzing temperature variation on synaptic characteristics of Fe-finFET devices. Temperature change in real scenarios causes mobility and carrier concentration to fluctuate, leading to change in Gch and Vth for Fe-Fin-FET synaptic devices, thus altering the N.N. weights they represent. The temperature dependence of the FE-FinFET is characterized by first programming the device to a fixed (low or high resistance) state at room temperature (300 K), measuring Id-Vgs with a nondestructive Vgs range, reducing the temperature, and measuring again. The binary program-erase operation is shown in Fig. The impacts of temperature on mobility and threshold voltage are modeled with the following expressions V '( (T) = V '( (300) + KT1 ) The evolution of Vth with the change of temperature for the low-resistance state (LRS, programmed using a +4.5V pulse) is accurately captured (Fig. The results of this study lead to a possible "dynamic read voltage" scheme, where Vg,read is chosen according to the present junction temperature. We expect such a scheme to alleviate the impact of temperature variation and expand the overall design margin. We have fabricated, characterized, and evaluated the performance of deeply scaled FE-FinFETs for neuromorphic computing in the presence of temperature variation. The digital nature of the binarized neural network, with the "0" state programmed deep in sub-threshold and "1" state in strong inversion, is key to robust DNN inference. On the other hand, the apparent channel conductance shift of FE-FET as an aftermath of temperature change may render the neural network inaccurate due to its analog nature. A proper choice of "read voltage" is paramount to ensure the "0" state stays deep in the sub-threshold region for maintaining the ON/OFF ratio for the LRS-HRS state. This study also suggested a dynamic read voltage scheme to maintain inference accuracy in the presence of temperature variation.