Ultra-fast femtosecond (fs) lasers provide a unique technological opportunity to precisely and efficiently micromachine materials with minimal thermal damage owing to the reduced heat transfer into the bulk of the work material offered by short pulse duration, high laser intensity and focused optical energy delivered on a timescale shorter than the rate of thermal diffusion into the surrounding area of a beam foci. There is an increasing demand to further develop the fs machining technology to improve the machining quality, minimize the total machining time and increase the flexibility of machining complex patterns on diamond. This article offers an overview of recent research findings on the application of fs laser technology to micromachine diamond. The laser technology to precisely micromachine diamond is discussed and detailed, with a focus on the use of fs laser irradiation systems and their characteristics, laser interaction with various types of diamonds, processing and the subsequent post-processing of the irradiated samples and, appropriate sample characterisation methods. Finally, the current and emerging application areas are discussed, and the challenges and the future research prospects in the fs laser micromachining field are also identified. Diamond remains a material of choice for applications where extremes of thermal conductivity (2000 W m -1 K -1 ), Young's modulus (1220 GPa), mechanical surface and bulk hardness (100 GPa), optical index of refraction from ultra-violet (UV) to infra-red (IR) range (2.41), dielectric constant (5.7) and electrical resistivity (10 13 -10 16 Ohm-cm) and low thermal expansion (1.1 × 10 -6 K -1 ) are required and after their subsequent removal, impart a final shape to the product Ultra-fast laser micromachining using femto-second (fs) pulses offers many distinct advantages compared to any other laser machining processes. For diamond, the advantages are the following: firstly, the interaction time of laser light with diamond sample is very short (e.g., pulse duration is less than a picoseconds) resulting in a low volume, insignificant amount of heat dissipating into the surrounding bulk of the matter from the irradiated area, which in turn minimises the thermal and mechanical stresses within the surrounding area, the latter can also be further minimised by reducing the laser beam spot size. Secondly, fs-laser light interactions with diamond crystal are independent of its orientation and, subsequently, no specific requirements for diamond sample positioning (in a sample holder) prior to laser processing are required. Thirdly, the laser beam used in material processing, as a 'machining tool' depends only on the optical quality of the beam and therefore, it is not affected by the sample-to-tool interaction, unlike in other conventional MRPs. Owing to these characteristics fs laser micromachining is able to successfully support several high impact engineering applications that exploit devices' complex surface topography and miniaturised features, including electron emitting devices for high-power/high-speed electronics This article reviews the state of knowledge and the research work performed to date on fs-laser micromachining of diamond and addresses several important questions: 1) What light-induced changes occur in diamond and how these changes affect diamond properties and its surface topography (Section 2)? 2) Why fs-laser machining should be preferred to precisely micromachine diamond, despite other (nano-and pico-second) laser processing methods currently available (Section 3)? 3) What are the processing parameters to machine diamond using a laser light, how to select and tailor the laser system and sample processing parameters, and how to select the most appropriate analytical methods to study the topography and chemical structure of machined diamond crystals (Section 4)? 4) What are the current and forthcoming future applications for machined diamond, and what are the future research prospects in this developing field (Section 5 and 6)? We expect this brief review to appeal to the entire carbon research community and the broader laser processing/laser machining community as a whole. Given that the article addresses an intricate combination of diamond physicochemical properties, laser system design, photoinduced ablation mechanism of carbon materials, it will also appeal to laser engineers, optical physicists and materials engineers in other fields. Laser ablation (aka. photoablation) is the process of removing material from a solid or, occasionally, liquid surface by irradiating it with a laser beam. At low laser flux, the material is heated by the absorbed laser energy and evaporates (or sublimates). The nature of the effects of the interaction of the laser light with a solid depends on many factors, among which the most relevant are the laser pulse duration (τ), wavelength (λ), laser power (Pavg) (i.e., beam energy density), exposure time and repetition rate (Rp) (in case of pulsed lasers), the beam characteristics, the optical characteristics of the applicator and physical properties of a solid. Inside the solid, light can be reflected, transmitted, scattered and absorbed. Only absorbed energy can produce the desired ablation effects in a solid, whereas reflected, transmitted and scattered light could affect the shape, the extension and the position of the warmed-up volume within the ablated area. The depth to which a certain amount of energy can ablate a solid depends on its absorption coefficient (i.e., attenuation coefficient) and its enthalpy of vaporization (i.e., heat of vaporization), which for diamond is around 711 kJ/mol The ablation begins above the threshold fluence (TF), which predominantly depends on material properties and the presence of intrinsic and extrinsic defects in the bulk and at/on the surface of an ablated solid. The ablation TF also varies with the pulse duration (see Fig. Ablation threshold for the synthetic diamond in the ultrashort fs regime is about 3 J/cm 2 Laser-based MRPs often employ the application of multiple pulses to reduce the ablation threshold at the ablated surface area owing to the defect accumulation at the uppermost surface of the ablated area There is a considerable difference between the optical absorption of a short-pulse, such as a nano-second and a pico-second (i.e., ns and ps, respectively) and an fs-pulsed laser radiation in diamond Ablation in diamond is strongly affected by the presence of intrinsic and extrinsic defects including ad-atoms, interstitial or substitutional defects in the crystal lattice, point, line (e.g., grain boundary), volume and surface defects In the process of ablation the sp 3 -tetrahedral phase of diamond is generally removed (i.e., sublimed) through a combined process of graphitization, in which the sp 3 phase is thermally converted into olefinic and/or aromatic sp 2 fraction , and ablation and oxidization processes Additionally, it is now known that the MRR increases with an increase of incident fs-laser ablation energy, however only a minimal change in the thickness of an sp 2 -graphitised layer is observed In diamond, carbon, C, atoms form an sp 3 hybridized directional covalent bonds with the neighbouring atoms in tetrahedral orientation with an s orbital overlapping three p orbitals and, hereby, providing strength to the σ bonds at an enclosed C-C-C angle of 109.47  and C-C bond length of 1.54 Å and a bandgap of 5.5 eV In the fs regime, when diamond is irradiated with an applied fluence above its ablation threshold of approximately 3 J/cm 2 , ablation with minimal graphitization is observed (at depths fewer than 50 nm) This phenomenon is graphically shown in Fig. The structure of downconverted sp 2 phase that is formed following the laser irradiation of diamond samples in air is never purely crystalline but is highly amorphous. For example, a 532 nm Raman spectra of the original nitrogen, N, doped CVD diamond commonly displays the characteristic sp 3 vibrational mode at ~1331 cm -1 and, a low intensity broad mode at ~1420 -1425 cm -1 , which is commonly atributed to an N-doped CVD, as shown in Fig. 5 Following the preliminary sp 3 to sp 2 phase conversion and the formation of a graphitised nuclei the photoablation of diamond proceeds as a combined process of vaporization and oxidation. The vaporization process occurs both in air and in vacuum, whereas the oxidation process occurs only in the presence of oxygen. Komlenok et al. The photoelectric properties of diamond, including optical absorption and photon-to-electron quantum efficiency, depend strongly on its intrinsic crystalline structure and the presence of impurities. Owing to its high refractive index, n, that is 2.4 at 590 nm Descriptions of surface topography in applications to laser-processed materials normally refer to the shape of the surface profile (i.e., waviness, type of surface finish) and an average arithmetic surface roughness, Ra, value, which are known to significantly impact the material's bulk properties and its suitability for applied applications. Irradiation of materials surface changes the surface topography depending on the shape, intensity and polarization of an incident laser beam. Laser irradiation results in the formation and growth of an sp 2 graphitized region immediately within the HAZ in diamonds at lower fluence, which can be rapidly and easily sublimated at higher fluence fluence of 1.9 J /cm 2 result in a periodicity of ~170 nm, (b) 8000 pulses at a fluence of 2.8 J /cm 2 produce smoother periodicities of ~190 nm Various features can also be laser written (aka. scribed) on diamond with a suitable periodicity and spacing for applied waveguide applications. Recently, Bharadwaj et al. [65] have shown that in an instance, when nano-crystalline CVD diamond with is subjected to fs laser ablation, the Ra and MRR are almost linearly co-dependent (Fig. Fig. Fs laser irradiation enables precise modification of diamond surface profile depending on laser beam characteristics. However, the increase of MRR in laser machining adversely affects the surface roughness of processed samples, the latter effect to be minimized through a careful selection of process parameters and the use of appropriate to the sample ablation threshold parameters. Laser irradiation, a versatile tool for material processing, enables precise control over the amount of energy focused at a specific location on the sample by selecting appropriate to the sample process parameters The ns-laser ablation process is governed by electrons in an ablated media absorbing laser photon energy and reaching a thermal equilibrium with the lattice during the laser pulse duration It has been reported that excimer lasers commonly operating in the range of 5 -20 ns pulse lengths are capable of producing deep holes in diamond during laser drilling operations the actual depth of the hole that can be created is, however, limited by the generated hydrocarbon plasma plume, which obstructs the laser energy from reaching towards the bottom of the hole and thus reducing the pressure available to expel the melted and graphitised material out. Typical ablation plasma attributes include characteristics such as ion density, ion flow velocity, free electron velocity as well as electron temperature Additionally, it was also observed that a significantly higher threshold fluence (~17 J/cm 2 ) was required for the through-hole laser drilling process compared to the blind-hole shallow drilling process (2 J/cm 2 ) for the same workpiece material type. The latter observation was attributed to an increased photon absorption of dense plasma restricted by the wall of a deep hole. To curtail the photon scavenging effects of plasma plume during laser drilling of CVD diamond Migulin et al. It is often noted that the thickness of the graphitized layer formed on diamond sample is inversely proportional to the projected ns-laser fluence since complete down-conversion from an sp 3 to aromatic sp 2 fraction is only possible when diamond sublimes above its ablation threshold. Mouhamadali et al. Ps-laser machining was found to be more effective compared to ns-pulsed laser processes given a significantly shortened pulse durations and, subsequently, the likelihood of HAZ formation in the ablated volume. Such as Takayama et al. Various methods have been proposed to improve the laser machining performance. For instance, Park et al. Additionally, both the ns-and ps-laser processing has been successfully combined with precision grinding to improve the machining performance by several researchers, such as Brecher et al. A fundamental problem with a ns-laser ablation lies in its inability to generate suitably high ablation rates and acceptable machined surface quality, the problem is also extended to the application of a ps-laser, albeit to a lesser extent. The cracking tendency, the generation of pervasive HAZs and poorly controlled graphitization of machined diamond surfaces are mostly attributed to relatively long (i.e., ns-and ps-) pulse durations compared to electron-lattice relaxation times of 10 -10 -10 -12 s The first reported attempts to develop an ultrashort-pulsed laser with a pulse duration of less than 0.1 ps were made in early 1980s by Fork et al. The ultrashort laser pulses deposit the laser energy in thin layers with the thickness of 1/α, where α is the optical absorption coefficient and, sublime the material through a direct vaporisation from the surface Fs-laser micromachining involves several physical processes with fairly well-defined timescales as shown in Fig. Fig. Namely, it takes a few ps for electrons to transfer absorbed optical energy to the lattice, it takes few ns for a dynamic shock/pressure wave to separate hot and dense focal volume Ultrashort pulsed laser ablation systems are technologically advanced tools capable of processing various materials at extremely high peak powers (up to few GW), while delivering a highly localized energy that enables a non-thermal ablation of even transparent and lowabsorption samples with high precision and accuracy Ytterbium-doped potassium gadolinium tungstate (Yb:KGW) compared to Yb:YAG displays large gain bandwidth enabling sub-100 fs-pulse durations in mode-locked regime and a low quantum defect that is well below 1.0 %, and a relatively high absorption coefficient, k, of 26 cm -1 , high emission and absorption cross sections characteristics. Fibre lasers are low power, sub-500 fs pulse systems with inherently flexible gain mediums which are normally pumped by semiconductor laser diodes and producing a wavelength in N-IR region. A typical fs-laser system is normally equipped with a pump and an oscillator, a chirped pulse amplification (CPA), a 1⁄4-and a 1⁄2-wave plates, a beam expander and prism polarizer, a number of steering mirrors, lenses and objectives, a set of light modulators and phase masks, a translational/rotational stage with a sample holder, an light-emitting diode (LED) for illumination of the sample and a charge-coupled device (CCD) camera for viewing and monitoring the sample machining process as schematically shown in Fig. Additionally, the fs-laser machining system may include a separate sample handling and cleaning stage, and, occationally, a vacuum chamber equipped with an axillary low pressure pump. Since preliminary sp 3 to sp 2 phase conversion in diamond and the formation of a graphitised nuclei occurs via a mutually linked process of vaporization and oxidation, laser machining is normally performed in air under abmient conditions, vacuum chambers, however, can be used in instances, where controlled formation of periodic structures on diamond surface is required. The laser processing parameters include the following: laser wavelength, λ (nm); pulse energy Ep (mJ); pulse duration, τ (fs); pulse repetition rate, Rp (kHz); scanning speed, Vs (mm/s); beam quality, M 2 ; focal length, f (mm); beam diameter, db (mm) and numerical aperture of the focusing objective, NA. Along with these parameters, some common terms are also used, such as laser peak power, Pp (GW); average power, Pavg (mW); beam intensity, Ip (W/cm 2 ); focal spot area, Af (cm 2 ) and focal spot diameter, Df (mm). The peak power Pp is related to Ep and τ as The pulse energy Ep is related to Pavg and Rp as The beam intensity, Ip which is the energy delivered per unit focal spot area per unit time, is related to Pp and Af as Substituting Pp from Eq. 1 into Eq. 3 gives The fluence, F, which is the energy delivered per unit focal spot area, is related to Ep and Af as The focal spot area Af is related to Df as The The size as well as the intensity distribution profile of the projected beam within the irradiated area affect the material response to the applied laser energy Rayleigh range, z0, which is expressed as 1⁄2 of the depth of focus, DOF, in a transparent material with retractive index, n, and free space wavelength, λ, is given in Eq. 11, as Eqs. The number of pulses, N, delivered to a specific spot is related to the Df, Rp and Vs as Eq. 4 shows that a laser beam intensity is directly related to its pulse energy and inversely related to pulse duration and focal spot area. Fluence is linearly related to laser pulse energy and has an inverse square relationship with the beam wavelength (see Eq. 9). A number of pulses delivered at a specific spot on a sample is linearly related to a focal spot diameter and pulse repetition rate, and inversely related to the scanning speed (see Eq. 12). All these parameters influence the characteristics of material ablation and the effect of these laser processing parameters on machining of diamond has been reported in the following experimental studies. It is known that the laser pulse duration is inversely proportional to its beam intensity( see Eq. It was reported that an fs-pulsed laser machining of diamond with circular polarization produces an Ra of ~0.02 m and an MRR of 0.004 mm 3 /s with no detectable surface layer graphitization as shown in Fig. Fs-laser machining with a linear polarized light is normally associated with the formation of so-called light induced periodic surface structures (LIPSS), which appear on the uppermost surface of an ablated workpiece Zalloum et al. However, using pulse energies that are significantly above the ablation threshold (i.e., 0.42 mJ), it was shown that fs pulses produce clear LIPSS-like saw-tooth structures in diamond at a scale below the diffraction limit (Fig. By using higher laser beam power and lower scanning speed an improved material ablation is achieved (refer to Eq. ( Similarly, the machined structure geometry in fs-single shot ablation regime is affected by the fluence as well as an NA, which affects the focal spot radius, as given in Eq. Ionin et al. Vermeulen et al. during fs-pulsed laser (800 nm, τ 50 fs, Rp 1 kHz, Df 77.9 mm) ablation and showed that tunnelling ionization was dominant at high (i.e., 2.35 J/cm 2 ) fluences, whereas multi-photon ionization prevailed at low fluences. However, a transition in the ionization regime was observed around the laser fluence of 3.2 J/cm 2 from the multi-photon ionization to the tunnelling ionization. The tunnelling ionization regime is believed to enhance the graphitization in the high laser fluence stage where a strong surface cracking phenomenon was also observed. The diameter of the dimple in SCD sample was found to increase from 18.5 mm to 71.9 mm with an increase in the laser power from 10 mW to 260 mW, as shown in Fig. This means that the MRR increases with increasing the laser power and incident fluence. between the dimple diameter and the projected fs-laser power, adapted from Likewise, an increase in pulse repetition rate leads to an improved material ablation, due to having a greater number of pulses projected over an irradiated area, for the same pulse energy and pulse duration, as given in Eq. ( Sotillo et al. Kononenko et al. The laser process parameters, including the wavelength, pulse energy, power, pulse duration and repetition rates, the scanning speed, numerical aperture and beam polarization are to be selected carefully to maximise MRRs, attain low Ra values and produce minimal sp 2 -graphitised layer in processed diamond samples. One of the most important laser process parameters is pulse duration, τ, which influences the intensity of the incident beam (refer to Eq. ( Post-processing of the fs laser irradiated diamond samples The fs-laser machining is a relatively clean process, however a small graphitic debris still may form on the machined surface of diamond, which requires removal. The most economical and the simplest method is a chemo-mechanical scrub, in which Q-tips, wipes or soft brushes soaked in hydrocarbon solvents such as ethanol, methanol, acetone, etc. and/or demineralised water with anionic cleaning surfactants are employed to manually dislodge and remove the debris The acid-scrub involves cleaning the samples in a solution of sulphuric (H2SO4), perchloric and nitric (HNO3) acids (mixed at 5:3:1 wt.%) and heated to 200 °C to remove the graphitized layer formed on the machined surface Following the acid cleaning process, the samples are rinsed in deionised water and dried with compressed nitrogen gas Ultrasonic cleaning One of the advantages of fs-laser machining is the easy, economical and uncompromising way by which the samples can be cleaned compared to ns-or ps-laser machined samples. The latter require more rigorous post-processing methods to remove the fused sp 2 -debris including the use of multiple repeated steps of chemo-mechanical, acid-scrub and an ultrasonic cleaning and even mechanical grinding In industrial settings laser irradiated diamond samples are typically analysed employing a limited range of optical and electron microscopy tools to characterise the 3D surface topography and Ra and spectroscopic techniques to characterise their chemical composition. These techniques vary by their processing capabilities and scalability and are often employed for batch sample screening. The pattern and geometry of laser machined surfaces is normally visually inspected using an optical microscope equipped with a high magnification (i.e., 100X) objective lenses Mechanical surface profilometry uses a contact physical probe with contact force feedback and allows a limited but a straightforward characterisation of surface morphology at ~10 μm resolution in samples were surface features are highly pronounced and surface roughness is high SEM with spatial resolution of sub-50 nm generates the image of a sample by detecting the reflected electrons focusing only on the surface. SEM provides a relatively simple, relatively quick and less costly method to study samples with diverse geometries However, application of SEM to diamond batch processing is limited as the measurements require a compensation for a non-conducting (i.e., diamond) sample charge accumulation By using surface profile data the MRR can be calculated by (i) multiplying cross-sectional area by the scanning speed [125] and/or, (ii) dividing the total material removal volume by the laser machining time The physico-chemical and structural characterization of the laser irradiated diamond samples is often performed using Raman and Fourier Transform IR (FT-IR) spectroscopy analysis. The structural transformation in samples can be distinguished by the unique Raman vibrational modes in visible (442 -633 nm) range at ~1332 cm -1 and ~1580 cm -1 for tetrahedral diamond and graphite, respectively Other analytical techniques such as X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis (ESCA), X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) Laser micro-patterned diamond tools Nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centres, which occur when a N atom and a vacancy replace two adjacent sites in diamond crystal lattice The LIPSS that appear on the surface of diamond open new application avenues such as microsolar cells devices In semiconductor manufacturing, diamond can be efficiently sliced into thin semiconductor wafers, a process that is by all means quite challenging, owing to its hard and brittle nature. Since fs-laser internal processing converts an inner layer of diamond to an sp 2 graphite, which can be easily separated, a fabrication of ultra-thin diamond wafers of 1×1 mm 2 is possible Likewise, by using fs-laser irradiation it is possible to fabricate deep-buried graphitic pillars inside the diamond Non-thermal photo-ablation of diamond produces negative electron affinity (NEA), an effect by which a conduction band is shifted higher in energy than the vacuum level Evidently, the fs-laser-induced properties in diamond are technologically significant and await many other industrial applications. Fs-laser processing technology offers new opportunities for unique applications owing to its clean and essentially non-thermal processing nature which produces minimal HAZs, the lowest technologically attainable surface roughness and allows processing of transparent materials through a non-linear absorption mechanism. Compared to the conventional ns-and ps-laser ablation processes, the fs-machining can also generate exceptionally high peak powers and ablate diamond samples with minimal graphitization. The findings of this review can be summarized as follows: 1. Fs-laser irradiation can precisely alter the surface topography and transform the chemical structure of diamond depending on the beam characteristics, its intensity and polarization. The application of multi-photon absorption using a focused fs-pulsed laser with a high spatial and temporal photon density is able to generate high MRRs; 2. The HAZ and Ra can be effectively minimised by using an fs-pulsed laser owing to its ultra-short interaction time. An fs-pulse transfers its energy via a photon-electron coupling prior to phonon-driven thermal diffusion; The laser induced ablation is significantly improved by the presence of intrinsic and extrinsic defects in diamond, which serve as absorption sites; 4. Among all the laser systems, Ti:Sapphire laser can generate the shortest pulses (as short as 5 fs) in mode-locked regime of operation and can be exploited in future applications; The laser process parameters are to be selected carefully to maximise MRRs, attain low Ra and produce minimal sp 2 graphitized region. Among all, the pulse duration, fluence and number of pulses at specific spot are the three (3) most important factors dictating the response of the material to the incident laser energy; 6. The fs-laser processing is a relatively clean process generating minimal sp 2 graphitized layer and requires minimal post-processing; 7. 3D surface topography and Ra can be precisely studied using 3D optical microscopy measurements. MRR can then be calculated from the 3D surface profile. Chemical composition of the micromachined samples can be precisely studied using UV Raman, and especially multiwavelength Raman, spectroscopy; Applications of the fs-laser processing are diverse owing to its unique characteristics, such as non-linear absorption and non-thermal nature, that extend its application to processing of transparent and ultra-hard materials.