Increasing circuit complexity within quantum systems based on superconducting qubits necessitates high connectivity while retaining qubit coherence. Classical micro-electronic systems have addressed interconnect density challenges by using 3D integration with interposers containing through-silicon vias (TSVs), but extending these integration techniques to superconducting quantum systems is challenging. Here, we discuss our approach for realizing high-aspect-ratio superconducting TSVs-10 μm wide by 20 μm long by 200 μm deep-with densities of 100 electrically isolated TSVs per square millimeter. We characterize the DC and microwave performance of superconducting TSVs at cryogenic temperatures and demonstrate superconducting critical currents greater than 20 mA. These high-aspect-ratio, high critical current superconducting TSVs will enable high-density vertical signal routing within superconducting quantum processors. Superconducting qubits are rapidly advancing from prototype, few-qubit systems to the stage where tens of qubits can be manipulated with error rates low enough to outperform the world's leading supercomputer Fully exploiting the third dimension will require multiple layers of traces for both efficient signal routing and the reduction of interconnect density on the qubit plane. Largescale classical computing architectures typically employ monolithic fabrication methods to enable high density traces within multiple metallization layers separated by interlayer dielectrics. In some cases, such as for superconducting digital logic applications, the entire metallization stack is superconducting to avoid issues associated with heating from ohmic losses We have previously described an alternate approach that enables the 3D integration of superconducting qubits with multilayer superconducting circuits Superconducting TSVs that enable extensible qubit circuits must fulfill several basic requirements. First, they must have a small footprint in order to accommodate a high density of interconnects. Current state-of-the-art gate-based superconducting qubits are a few hundred micrometers on a side, resulting in a qubit density of approximately 10/mm 2 . To afford multiple, shielded control and readout interconnects per qubit without reducing qubit density, the TSVs should be of order 10 μm on a side or smaller. Another requirement is that the interposer chip be thick, 100 μm or more, to sufficiently space the qubit chip from the SMCM and to allow for handling and bonding of the interposer chip. Together, the high-density and thick-interposer requirements translate to small-diameter TSVs with high-aspect ratios. Since the superconducting TSVs will be used to carry signals to the qubit chip, it is also important that the material in the TSVs has a critical temperature much larger than the qubit operating temperature, typically less than 100 mK. Finally, the superconducting critical current density must be high enough to support a single TSV critical current of ∼ 10 mA to enable flux biasing of the tunable qubits in common use today. Fabricating superconducting TSVs with high critical temperatures and high critical currents is challenging due to the high-aspect-ratio geometry imposed by our design requirements. Previous work in the field has focused on TSVs that are either very large with low-aspect ratios The TSV interposer fabrication sequence is shown in Figure The final via opening dimensions are 10x24 μm 2 . After the vias are prepared, they are lined with superconducting material. This is challenging as the via aspect ratio is high (>10:1) and the sidewalls are nearly vertical, approximately 89. We evaluated the performance of both individual TSVs and serial chains of TSVs using room temperature and cryogenic measurements. As shown in Figure Chain structures, represented in Figure We have successfully fabricated high-aspect-ratio superconducting TSVs on a thinned 200-mm silicon wafer using a via-first fabrication process, conformal CVD titanium nitride process, and back-side wafer thinning. Room temperature electrical measurements indicate high intra-wafer uniformity of the resistance measured through the TSVs. After dicing individual test chips, measurements are conducted in a dilution refrigerator to evaluate the critical temperature and critical current of the superconducting TSVs; critical temperatures as high as 1.6 K and critical currents as high as 22 mA were measured. We evaluated resonators with embedded TSVs transitions at various positions within the resonator trace and measured quality factors consistent with planar resonators fabricated on each side of the thinned wafer. The high-aspect-ratio superconducting TSVs demonstrated here enable high-density, vertical signal routing within a superconducting quantum processors without negatively impacting current levels of qubit performance.