Structural hierarchy is found in myriad biological systems Structural hierarchy increases mechanical stiffness in animal bones Strained mechanical resonators can have ultralow dissipation owing to the effect of dissipation dilution The hierarchical principle is used in our resonators' connections to their chip frames (illustrated in Fig. where θ is the junction branching angle. Repeating this procedure will reduce the mode gradient further, and after a sufficient number of iterations will result in soft clamping We first explore one-dimensional hierarchical mechanical resonators in the form of binary tree beams. Each binary tree resonator is defined by two self-similar trees joined at their 0 th generation segments. The length of the 0 th generation segment, 2l 0 , determines the fundamental mode frequency of the device. The length of segments in generation k is set by multiplying l 0 with a factor of (r l ) k , where the length contraction ratio r l < 1 is chosen to be sufficiently small to prevent self-contact. The widths of the segments are determined by requiring constant stress throughout the structure, which minimizes static in-plane deformations upon structure undercut. This requirement is fulfilled by multiplying the width of each new generation of segments by a factor of 1/(2 cos θ), which typically makes outer segments wider as is illustrated in the inset of Fig. Fig. We could consistently observe devices with room- temperature Q > 5 • 10 8 . As expected, increasing the number of branching generations, N , increased the quality factor while leaving the fundamental mode frequency approximately constant. This trend was observed up to N = 3. The quality factors of low-order modes of N = 3 devices were generally in good agreement with theory, as shown by the data in Fig. Cooling the binary tree resonators down to 6 K moderately increases their quality factors, up to values as high as Q = 1.1 • 10 9 . Under cryogenic conditions, the resonators also attain their highest thermal noise-limited force sensitivity, which reaches √ S F = √ 4k B T mΓ m ≈ 90 zN/Hz 1/2 for the highest-Q mode with a 38 pg effective mass. The self-similarity found in binary tree resonators leads to distinctive spectral features. Acoustic mode densities are convenient to characterize using the cumulative dis- tribution function, which gives the total number of modes below the frequency ω. For a homogeneous medium in which the frequency of acoustic waves is proportional to their wavevector, CD is proportional to ω d , where d is the spatial dimension. This scaling explains mode densities in simple resonators, such as tensioned strings (where CD ∝ ω) and membranes (where CD ∝ ω 2 Our experimental investigation of mode densities is outlined in Fig. The excess of vibrational modes of binary tree resonators above those of a one-dimensional structure is mainly due to modes localized in high-generation segments as shown in Fig. While binary tree beams have outstandingly low dissipation and mass, two-dimensional membrane resonators exhibit a higher interaction efficiency when they are embedded in Fabry-Pérot cavities or interrogated interferometrically. The integration of a nanomechanical mem- brane in an external optical cavity has enabled quantum optomechanics experiments such as ponderomotive squeezing We apply hierarchical junctions to trampoline membranes, a type of low-mass, high-Q resonator that was introduced recently The fundamental modes of our trampolines are partially soft-clamped, which can be seen from the suppression of mode gradients towards the peripheral clamping points in Fig. These dissipation dilution levels are a factor of three beyond those of previously demonstrated trampoline designs We experimentally demonstrated and explored new classes of resonators which attain exceptional quality factors by combining dissipation dilution with hierarchical design. Our resonators exhibit fundamental mode quality factors on par with the highest values reported for high-order modes of nanomechanical resonators at the same temperature The dissipation of binary tree beams at the lowest frequencies in the examined range is significantly higher than theory predictions. If additional loss mechanisms are identified and suppressed, our highest aspect ratio resonators could exhibit Q > 10 9 at room temperature. Going further, even higher dilution levels could be achieved by introducing strain engineering The thermal noise-limited force sensitivities of the best hierarchical resonators surpass those of state-of-the-art atomic force microscopy cantilevers The intrinsic loss-limited quality factors of flexural modes in high aspect ratio resonators subjected to static tension are controlled by dissipation dilution where Q int is the intrinsic quality factor and D Q is the dilution coefficient. For the Si 3 N 4 films used in our work, Q int was experimentally characterized as described in the following section. The dilution factor, D Q , is equal to the ratio of geometrically nonlinear (tension) and linear (bending and torsional) elastic energies Analytically, the dilution factor can be expressed as where α and β are the boundary and the distributed loss coefficients, respectively, and λ is the stress parameter, Here h is the film thickness, l is the resonator length, σ is the static stress and E is the Young's modulus. The precise definitions of σ and l depend on the resonator type: whether it is a beam, a membrane or a binary tree. In resonators with high dilution (for some devices in our work D Q is as high as 2 • 10 5 ), the stress parameter is much smaller than one and the boundary term naturally dominates the denominator of Eq. 4. This means that the dissipation is dominated by the internal friction in the material in the immediate vicinity of the clamps even if the physical properties are uniform over the resonator surface. Vibrational modes with negligible boundary loss coefficients (i.e. with α → 0), are called soft-clamped Green points in Fig. where n is the mode order. This resonator type is one of the most widely experimentally studied to date. Modes of beams shorter than 3 mm would fall into the green shaded area. Blue points correspond to soft-clamped modes in 3 mm-long phononic crystal beams incorporating strain engineering techniques Red points correspond to fundamental modes of binary tree beams with N = 5 generations of branchings, found using the model from ref. The elastic and anelastic parameters of the employed Si 3 N 4 films (from Hahn-Schickard Gesellschaft für angewandte Forschung e.V.) were estimated by characterization of an array of uniform beams with variable length, fabricated with the same process and machinery used for all the resonators in this work. Frequencies and quality factors of fundamental modes of doubly-clamped beams with uniform widths were measured and are displayed as a function of length in Fig. The deposition stress of the Si 3 N 4 thin film, σ dep was determined by fitting to the resonant frequencies with a linear dispersion model Ω , where ρ = 3100 kg/m 3 is the volume density of Si 3 N 4 , ν = 0.23 its Poisson's ratio, l the beam length and σ dep is the parameter to be determined. The fit result is σ dep ≈ 1.03 GPa. This value reliably predicted all the experimentally observed resonance frequencies of the beam and membrane-type resonators presented in our work. The approximate expression for the resonant frequency is appropriate for the limit of negligible bending stiffness and is valid for high aspect ratio beams with λ = 1 The fabrication process (see Fig. Limiting the undercut of the supports is a crucial design consideration for fractal-like beam resonators (see Fig. Trampoline membranes with branching tethers are fabricated similarly to binary-tree beam resonators. The overall process follows the one described in the Supplementary Material of The KOH etch is typically subdivided in two steps. The first step removes the bulk of the silicon thickness (≈ 10 -40 μm of silicon is retained) and occurs from the back side only, while the front side layer is protected by an appropriate sealing wafer holder Membrane chips are dried from their rinsing baths though CPD as well: despite the low impact of stiction forces by virtue of the presence of an optical window through the whole wafer thickness, we found CPD useful to increase the device yield and decrease the residual contamination associated with the wet etch steps. Structures with internal or external compressive loads are subject to buckling, an elastic instability phenomenon that occurs when local stress surpasses a threshold value While no significant buckling was observed in binary tree beam resonators, it was frequently encountered in trampoline membranes with non-optimized designs. In Fig. In the regions where one principal stress is negative, there is compression along some direction, which can trigger buckling. In the region where buckling is observed in the real device, the simulated minimum principal stress dips to ≈ -30 MPa. Our strategies to avoid buckling in trampoline membranes were a) to ensure that the structures are stresspreserving Another type of static deformation that was observed in our tensile resonators is twisting of film segments. An example is portrayed in Fig. All the measurements presented were performed using a balanced Mach-Zehnder homodyne interferometer (see Fig. The samples and a 3-axis nanopositioning stage, employed for alignment, are housed in a vacuum chamber capable of reaching pressures below 10 -8 mbar, sufficient to eliminate the effect of gas damping for the devices measured in this work. A piezoelectric plate, used to resonantly actuate the devices, is connected to the sample mount. The low frequency fluctuations of the interferometer path length difference are stabilized by means of two cascaded acousto-optic modulators (AOMs): the first shifts the frequency of the local oscillator beam by +100 MHz, while the second shifts it back by -100 MHz, with a small frequency offset controlled using the low-frequency signal from the balanced photodetector couple as an error signal. With this arrangement, the phase difference can be tuned finely with unlimited actuation range. The phase difference is stabilized close to phase quadrature, corresponding to the largest transduction of mechanical displacement. Ringdown measurements are initiated by exciting a mechanical resonance with the piezoelectric plate, then turning the mechanical excitation off abruptly and recording the slowly-decaying amplitude of the displacement signal, obtained by demodulating the photocurrent signal at the excitation frequency. A demodulation bandwidth exceeding 100 Hz is employed, to mitigate the effect of mechanical frequency drifts, induced e.g. by temperature or optical power fluctuations. As detailed in the following, gated measurements are performed in order to minimize the influence of optical backaction of the probing beam; to this end, a mechanical shutter inserted at the output of the laser, is actuated periodically. Thermomechanical spectrum of a trampoline with branching tethers In Fig. The low-frequency spectrum of the trampoline with branching tethers presents flexural mode families similar to those of regular trampoline membranes. We adopt the notation of The spectral properties of the structure are found by acquiring thermomechanical spectra via optical interferometry and identifying the mechanical modes with a peak-finding algorithm. The cumulative distribution function is then computed by counting peaks below a certain frequency. Spectra are acquired at two points on all the branches on one half of the tree (62 spectra in total, including the fundamental branch), as the interferometric thermomechanical signal depends on the mode amplitude at the focus location of the probe beam. As optical driving or damping of the mode is not a particular concern for this measurement, it is performed using higher probe power (≈ 5 mW) than the ringdown measurements. However, due to the narrow linewidth of the fundamental mode, high optical power frequently results in its excitation and appearance of its higher harmonics in the spectra. To avoid this problem, the pressure in the vacuum chamber was increased to 10 -7 mbar to damp the fundamental mode. Data analysis is then performed as follows: first, Lorentzian peaks with a minimum prominence and a minimum frequency spacing are identified on each spectrum. Then we take the union of all the sets of frequency values from all the branches. To avoid double-counting of the modes, the unification is done within a frequency tolerance, meaning that peaks closer than a fixed frequency separation are counted as one, as jitter or thermal drifts cause small changes in the resonant frequencies among different spectra. We also take several spectra from the substrate and Si 3 N 4 pad surfaces and exclude their peaks from the unified set of mode frequencies. This final 'purified' set is counted and shown in Fig. The 780 nm optical probe that was used for the mechanical quality factor characterization in the room temperature setup could exert backaction on vibrational modes and affect the observed energy decay rates. This effect had to be avoided in order to extract intrinsic mechanical properties. The magnitude and the sign of the optically induced damping depended sensitively on the sample type and the position of the laser spot. In many cases, the optical damping was negligible, while sometimes it was strong enough to self-excite resonator modes under continuous illumination. We did not make a detailed physical model for the optical damping, but we conjecture that the mechanism behind it involved the standing wave formed due to the reflection of the probe from the surface of the chip underneath the resonator. To eliminate the effects of optical damping, we gated the ringdown measurements, by keeping the sample illuminated by the probe light only during short intervals of time. The total duration of time over which the probe light was on relative to the entire measurement time was typically between 0.1% and 1% in our measurements. We refer to this ratio as duty cycle. For each resonance, the absence of optical backaction was confirmed by measurements with different duty cycles and/or laser beam positions on the sample. An example of particularly strong optical backaction is illustrated in Fig. When the duty cycle was beyond ≈ 1.6%, the mode was self-excited, as shown by a close-up plot of one of the measurement intervals in Fig. In our cryogenic setup, quality factor measurements on binary tree beams were performed using a 1550 nm gated probe laser, although no signatures of optical backaction were observed. 