Boron-doped diamond granular thin films are known to exhibit superconductivity with an optimal critical temperature of T c = 7.2K. Here we report the measured in-plane complex surface impedance of Boron-doped diamond films in the microwave frequency range using a resonant technique. Experimentally measured inductance values are in good agreement with estimates obtained from the normal state sheet resistance of the material. The magnetic penetration depth temperature dependence is consistent with that of a fully-gapped s-wave superconductor. Boron-doped diamond films should find application where high kinetic inductance is needed, such as microwave kinetic inductance detectors and quantum impedance devices. Diamond is the hardest known natural material and an excellent thermal conductor despite also being electrically insulating with a large band gap. Doping diamond can create either semiconducting or metallic states. We utilize the parallel plate resonator (PPR) technique to directly measure the superconducting inductance and microwave losses of a new class of granular materials, namely granular Boron-doped diamond films. In this approach, a solid low-loss dielectric spacer is placed between two flat and nominally identical superconducting films forming a parallel plate resonator, as shown in the inset of Fig. The resonant frequency of this resonator will be affected by the field penetration into the superconducting plates. The measured temperature dependence of the resonant frequency f 0 stems from the temperature dependence of the superconducting penetration depth λ (T ), and can be written as, where t is the thickness of the two (assumed identical) superconducting samples and f 0 (0) is the resonant frequency at T = 0. Here, we use the BCS s-wave temperature-dependence of the penetration depth in all fits. Note that the PPR technique measures the in-plane electromagnetic response of the superconducting films. was maintained at 850 • C and pressure of the chamber was ∼ 7 Torr. The gases used during the depositions were CH 4 (80 sccm), H 2 (3000 sccm) and B(CH 3 ) 3 with the flow rate maintained in such a way that the B/C ratio was approximately 10,000 ppm. The Hall concentration (n h ) and onset critical temperature (T c,DC(Onset) ) of film "A" were found to be 3.0 × 10 21 cm -3 and 7.2 K, respectively. The film was deposited for 3 h and the thickness was found to be 1.5 μm by cross-sectional electron microscopy. The other three films, covering a range of T c values, were grown under similar conditions with the full list of properties listed in Table The surface impedance measurements were done by means of the PPR technique. Equation ( An order of magnitude estimate for the zero temperature penetration depth for a homogeneous Boron-doped diamond material can be obtained using the London screening length λ L = m μ 0 ne 2 = 97.1nm where n = n h = 3.0 × 10 21 cm -3 is the doping density of sample "A" and e, m are the unrenormalized electron charge and mass. Estimates of λ L by other authors are on the same order of magnitude, The low temperature penetration depth λ (T ) of a homogeneous s-wave superconductor has an exponential dependence on temperature where ∆(0) is the zero temperature BCS superconducting gap. The inset of Fig. Eqs.( The extracted zero temperature penetration depth values for the Boron-doped diamond films are significantly larger than the values reported for other conventional superconductors, which range between 50nm -500nm. The effective surface resistance of these films is obtained from the measured quality factor Q(T ) through R e f f (T ) = π μ 0 f 0 (T )d/Q(T ). The R e f f data shows substantial residual loss in the zero temperature limit, as summarized in Table The effective surface resistance temperature dependence mainly arises from an intrinsic BCS contribution (R BCS (T )) and related extrinsic (finite thickness) contributions 66 where Here R BCS (T ) is the bulk Meissner state BCS surface resistance, σ N using Mattis-Bardeen theory, See supplementary material for the detailed film microstructure and discussion about the screening length in granular superconductors. a Upper limit estimate of resistive losses.