Large scale quantum computing motivates the invention of two-qubit gate schemes that not only maximize the gate fidelity but also draw minimal resources. In the case of superconducting qubits, the weak anharmonicity of transmons imposes profound constraints on the gate design, leading to increased complexity of devices and control protocols. Here we demonstrate a resource-efficient control over the interaction of strongly-anharmonic fluxonium qubits. Namely, applying an offresonant drive to non-computational transitions in a pair of capacitively-coupled fluxoniums induces a ZZ-interaction due to unequal ac-Stark shifts of the computational levels. With a continuous choice of frequency and amplitude, the drive can either cancel the static ZZ-term or increase it by an order of magnitude to enable a controlled-phase (CP) gate with an arbitrary programmed phase shift. The cross-entropy benchmarking of these non-Clifford operations yields a sub 1% error, limited solely by incoherent processes. Our result demonstrates the advantages of strongly-anharmonic circuits over transmons in designing the next generation of quantum processors. Wiring up a pair of superconducting qubits creates an unintentional ZZ-term in the two-qubit Hamiltonian, where Z is the single-qubit Pauli σ z -operator. This ZZinteraction arises from the repulsion between computational and non-computational energy levels of the coupled circuit; the effect would be absent for purely twolevel systems. On one hand, such an interaction realizes a controlled-phase logical operation, inducing a phase shift on one qubit depending on the state of the other one A technologically attractive control scheme would be to tune the ZZ-term in a fixed-parameter circuit using a microwave drive In this work we develop the ideas from Refs. The practicality of our scheme is illustrated by the performance of the controlled-phase (CP) gate with an arbitrary programmed phase, implemented by rapidly turning the ZZ-term on and off. We used the for a fixed drive amplitude (Ω11-21 = 52 MHz). Note, at an appropriate detuning δ, the total qubit-qubit interaction is switched off, we get ξZZ = 0. We describe experiments on two devices with significantly distinct spectral properties. In the main article, we focus on the first device, while the Supplementary Note 7 supports our conclusions with the data obtained with the second device. The device geometry (shown in Fig. Differential ac-Stark shift. The computational states |00 , |10 , |01 , and |11 are separated in energy from non-computational states by at least a few GHz, which exceeds the qubit frequencies by almost an order of magnitude. Within the computational subspace, the twoqubit dynamics obeys the Hamiltonian where Z is the corresponding Pauli matrix and ξ ZZ = ξ static ZZ = -357 kHz is the ZZ-interaction strength in the present device. The quantity ξ static ZZ has a negative sign because the non-computational levels push stronger on level |11 than on the other computational levels. Tuning the magnitude of ξ ZZ by an externally applied microwave drive can be understood as follows. First, let us note that capacitive coupling splits the otherwise degenerate transitions |10 -|20 and |11 -|21 by ∆ = 8.47 MHz. The same is true for other transition pairs, e.g. |11 -|12 , |01 -|02 , or |00 -|03 , |10 -|13 , although the splitting may vary. Consider driving the circuit at the frequency f d , blue-detuned from the |10 -|20 resonance by an amount δ ∆ (see Fig. Tomography of drive-tuned ZZ-interaction. We verify that the qubit-qubit interaction indeed takes the form of Eq. (1) using a tomography protocol depicted in Fig. 2a The immediate application of our differential ac-Stark shift phenomenon is to permanently cancel the static ZZinteraction between qubits. This is achieved by applying a microwave tone at the frequency f d = 4.65 GHz and the amplitude such that Ω 11-21 = 30 MHz (see Fig. As we fine-tune the drive amplitude, the two-qubit Ramsey fringe slows down from the static value of 357 kHz to the value ξ ZZ < 20 kHz, beyond which the oscillations cannot be resolved due to the qubit's finite coherence time. We characterized single-qubit operations, in the presence of the ZZ-canceling drive, using conventional randomized benchmarking sequences Arbitrary controlled-phase (CP) gate. The ZZterm in Eq. ( We start the CP gate characterization by performing quantum process tomography (QPT). The process tomography matrix (the χ-matrix) At φ = π the CP gate belongs to the Clifford group, i.e. it becomes the controlled-Z gate. Hence, it can be characterized using randomized benchmarking (RB), which evades SPAM limitations. Using procedures similar to those described in Ref. Finally, we apply the XEB procedure to a family of CP gates with the value of φ equally spaced by π/16. The extracted gate error grows approximately linearly in φ with a slope of about 3 × 10 -3 per radian (Fig. The off-resonant drive in our experiment essentially replaces the original (undriven) qubit states with the "dressed" ones, e.g. |10 → |10 + (λ/2)|20 and |11 → |11 + (λ/2)|21 in the case shown in Fig. , the dressed qubit transition |00 -|10 inherits a pure dephasing rate λ 2 /8T (2→1) 1 . Remarkably, dressing due to the ZZ-cancellation drive is so weak, λ 2 ≈ 0.04, that even for a low relaxation time T (2→1) 1 ≈ 5 μs in our present experiment, the extra dephasing becomes significant only at the 1 ms level. Thus, the highest measured single-dressedqubit gate fidelity reached 0.999, and it is limited by the undressed coherence time of about 10 -15 μs. In other words, our scheme for eliminating the ZZ-interaction has practically no adverse effects, and hence can be generally used to cancel the quantum cross-talk in fluxonium-based processors. During the CP gate, both ξ ZZ and λ temporarily grow stronger, and hence the energy relaxation of the noncomputational transitions becomes an important contributor to the incoherent gate error. Let us note that the |1 -|2 transition of fluxoniums has the frequency and charge matrix element of typical transmons, whose relaxation time usually belongs to the 10 -100 μs range. Therefore, we expect the same range for T (2→1) 1 in fluxoniums once the fabrication and thermalization procedures are properly optimized. In this case, a ZZinteraction rate in the range ξ ZZ = 5 -10 MHz can be induced with no decoherence exposure at the level of a few hundred microseconds. In fact, the numerical model projects a CP gate error (for φ = π) well in the 10 -4 range for the next generation of fluxonium devices. The demonstrated all-microwave control over the ZZinteraction is technologically attractive for scaling-up superconducting quantum processors. Our scheme does not require a close arrangement of qubit frequencies, in contrast to the case of the cross-resonance (CR) gate Among the previously explored two-qubit gates with a high degree of flexibility, our scheme is most reminiscent of the resonator-induced phase (RIP) gate Experimental setup. We use the same readout and initialization procedures described in Ref. The corrected populations are used to calculate the cross-entropy between the experimental populations and the expected populations starting from the state after the initialization pulse. The cross-entropy yields the XEB sequence fidelity. By fitting the sequence fidelity versus number of cycles with Ap m + B, the Pauli error per cycle r P cycle is given by where N is the dimension of the system. Then we extract the CP gate Pauli error r P CP from the equation , where r P A , r P B are the average single-qubit Pauli error measured from the simultaneous RB experiment described in Supplementary Note 4. The arbitrary CP gate fidelity is calculated by converting Pauli error back to the gate error r CP as shown in Fig. Our device geometry and fabrication procedure follow the one described in Ref. The error matrix M has 6 parameters that account for the incorrect mapping |0 → |1 and |1 → |0 for both qubits and transitions between the two qubits during the readout. The error matrix reads one can predict the Rabi oscillation amplitudes and offsets in the two Rabi measurements of Supplementary Figure Single-qubit randomized benchmarking (RB) is performed on each qubit -individually and simultaneously -by applying a series of randomly chosen Clifford gates listed in Table Supplementary Table have a zero duration. In the individual single-qubit RB sequence, one Clifford gate contains on average 0.83 physical pulses. As shown in Supplementary Figure In our simultaneous RB sequence, there is a possible idle time for one qubit when the other qubit is rotated on the Bloch sphere. So the simultaneous RB sequence is longer than the individual RB sequences with the same number of Clifford gates. The change of fidelity when operating the qubits simultaneously cannot be directly associated to crosstalks. With such sequences, the simultaneous single qubit fidelity is (99.63 ± 0.01)% for qubit A and (99.57 ± 0.01)% for qubit B. These numbers are used to extract the CP gate fidelity in the XEB measurements. We perform a process tomography of the gate operation using a standard procedure described in The density matrix of each output state is reconstructed by maximizing the likelihood of a list of 36 measurements obtained by applying the tomography pulses given in Table where β ij are complex coefficients and σ i are Pauli matrices. β ij are measured by applying the pulses {II, IX π , X π I, X π X π } to the initial state before measuring the output signal. After calibrating the measurement operator, we can predict the output signal for a state ρ after any of the 36 tomography pulses. We parametrize the density matrix with 16 real parameters as ρ = T † T /Tr(T † T ), where T is a lower triangular matrix given by (S5) This Cholesky decomposition ensures that ρ corresponds to a physical quantum state (see section V of the supplementary material of Ref. The process matrix χ is then calculated by linear inversion following the procedure described in Ref. Supplementary Table As stated in the main text, our gate scheme is applicable by driving near any transition from the computational subspace to higher states with a large transition dipole. Indeed, ZZ-interactions can be induced using the four transitions |00 -|03 , |10 -|13 , |01 -|31 , and |00 -|30 . Supplementary Figure Our optimal CZ gate in this frequency window is obtained at f d = 6.665 GHz (blue line in Supplementary Figure We realize the same type of CP gate at a faster speed (40 ns for a CZ gate) in the second two-fluxonium device measured in a different laboratory. This device has a similar design but with different parameters shown in Supple- The simulated gate error for the accumulated phase φ = π is 1 -F ≈ 1.1 × 10 -2 , which agrees well with the experimental value. A natural question to ask is how small this error can be in devices with longer coherence times. For T 1 = T 2 = 500 μs of single-qubit transitions and T 1 = T 2 = 50 μs of the |1 A → |2 A transition, we find that this error reduces to 7 × 10 -4 . When these relaxation and coherence times are further increased by a factor of two to 1000 and 100 μs, we estimate 1 -F ≈ 4 × 10 -4 . To obtain 1 -F < 10 -4 , we additionally need to change the device parameters of Supplementary Table A similar approach to estimate gate error due to relaxation and dephasing applied to the second device, which is discussed in Supplementary Figure We have seen in our simulations that the relaxation and dephasing of the |1 A -|2 A transition of qubit A is responsible for about half of the CP gate error because the population of state |2 A can become as large as 20% during gate operation. Similarly, the microwave tone that is used to cancel static ZZ-interaction results in modified relaxation and dephasing channels within the computational subspace as expected from the hybridization of |10 with |20 and |11 with |21 . However, in comparison to a fast CP gate, where Ω 11→21 ∼ δ -∆, the ZZ-cancellation tone has a lower power of Ω and similarly for |10 λ and |20 λ . The set of states {|00 , |01 , |10 λ , |11 λ } is the computational subspace in the presence of the cancellation tone (the dressed computational subspace). When the system is in one of the dressed states |10 λ or |11 λ , the population of the bare state |20 or |21 is only λ 2 /4 ≈ 0.01, so we anticipate only a weak reduction of the relaxation and dephasing rates of qubit transitions in comparison to their values at λ = 0. To calculate these rates accurately, one needs to apply the transformation given by Eqs. (S25a) and (S25b) to the Hamiltonian describing system-bath interaction, trace out bath degrees of freedom, and obtain a master equation in the new basis We observe that the relaxation channel introduces a small dephasing of the |1 A -|2 A transition and vice versa. In addition, the terms with |10 10| and |11 11| in the r.h.s. of Eq. (S26a) yield additional dephasing of computational transitions. This additional dephasing can be characterized by the rate Γ φ defined as 2Γ φ ≈ (λ/2) Γ 1-2,A 1 . For our parameters, we find 1/Γ φ ≈ 8/ λ 2 Γ 1-2,A 1 ≈ 1 ms, which is much longer than qubit dephasing times in our device. This number is comparable with longest fluxonium coherence times reported so far 