We report experimental coupling of chiral magnetism and superconductivity in [IrFeCoPt]/Nb heterostructures. The stray field of skyrmions with radius ≈ 50 nm is sufficient to nucleate antivortices in a 25 nm Nb film, with unique signatures in the magnetization, critical current and flux dynamics, corroborated via simulations. We also detect a thermally-tunable Rashba-Edelstein exchange coupling in the isolated skyrmion phase. This realization of a strongly interacting skyrmion-(anti)vortex system opens a path towards controllable topological hybrid materials, unattainable to date. Introduction.-Chiral magnets and superconductors host topological excitations known as skyrmions and vortices, whose duality was recognised in the 1980s The first originates from the Rashba-Edelstein effect These interactions can be modulated by adjusting the skyrmion/vortex lengthscales. Stray field coupling is enhanced by increasing skyrmion size, whereas exchange coupling requires Rashba-Edelstein and (anti)vortex currents to circulate with similar radii. This corresponds to the condition ξ < r sk < λ (Fig. Heterostructure design.-MS (chiral Magnet-Superconductor) samples comprise a Nb layer deposited directly onto a [Ir 1 Fe 0.5 Co 0.5 Pt 1 ] 10 film [schematized in Fig. Magnetic layer.-Our selection of [Ir 1 Fe 0.5 Co 0.5 Pt 1 ] 10 is explained in SM II A and its magnetic properties are summarized in Fig. Superconducting layer.-Knowing r sk , we can tune the Nb layer thickness to optimize skyrmion-vortex coupling. In films of thickness d s < λ, Meissner screening is weak and λ is replaced by the Pearl depth Λ = λ 2 /d s Antivortices induced by skyrmions.-Figure The saturation magnetization of our chiral film μ 0 M s = 1.82 T exceeds the lower critical field of the Nb film H c1 ≈ 0.012 T at 2 K (SM III, As H falls, the simulated antivortex density N AVx rises [Fig. Summary.-We have shown that skyrmion stray fields can nucleate stable antivortices in engineered chiral magnet-superconductor heterostructures. This process is independent of SOC, thus simplifying the task of building a topological superconductivity platform from (anti)vortices coupled to chiral spin textures. Coexistence of these hybrid magnetic solitons with superconducting vortices creates a complex yet controllable environment for exploring unique emergent flux dynamics.