Various engineering systems such as naval and aerial vehicles, offshore structures, and mechanical components of motorized systems, are exposed to fatigue failures due to stochastic loadings. Methods for early failure prediction are essential for engineering, military, and civil applications. In addition to the prediction of time to failure (TtF), uncertainty quantification (UQ) is of major importance for real-time decision-making purposes. Usually, time domain or frequency domain methods are used for fatigue prediction, such as rainflow counting and Miner's rule or Dirlik's method. However, those methods suffer from over-simplistic modeling and inaccurate failure predictions under stochastic loadings. During the last years, several data-driven models were suggested for offline fatigue failure. However, most of them are not capable of both accurate real-time fatigue prediction and UQ. In the current work, a probabilistic data-driven model is introduced. A hybrid architecture of a fully-connected artificial neural network (FC-ANN) and Gaussian process regression (GPR) is proposed to ensure enhanced predictive abilities and simultaneous UQ of the predicted TtF. The real-time prediction and UQ performances of the suggested model are validated using both synthetic and experimental data. This novel hybrid method is fully data-driven and extends the forecasting capabilities of existing time-domain and machine learning-based methods for fatigue prediction. It paves the way towards the development of a preventive system that provides real-time safety and operational instructions and insights for structural health monitoring (SHM) purposes, allowing prevention of environmental damage, and loss of human lives. Fatigue failure refers to the malfunctioning of a mechanical component due to the weakening of its material under oscillatory loading below the ultimate tensile strength of the component. Fatigue is considered as one of the main reasons for mechanical failures in machine components, aerospace systems, and offshore structures Fatigue damage under an oscillatory loading is usually estimated by either time-domain or frequency-domain approaches. The most widely-used time-domain approach is based on the rainflow counting method for decomposing the stochastic signal to its underlying amplitudes and corresponding number of cycles, followed by applying the linear cumulative Miner's rule, also known as the Palmgren-Miner linear damage hypothesis Here D(t) is the estimated cumulative damage fraction. According to Miner's rule, failure occurs when D(τ ) = 1, where τ is the estimated failure time (FT). Variable N k is the number of amplitudes considered in the rainflow counting method. Variable S a,i is the stress amplitude that leads to failure after N f,i loading cycles, and n i (t) is the number of loading cycles of amplitude S a,i counted by time t. Parameters A, b and σ uts are the fatigue strength, fatigue exponent and ultimate tensile stress of the component material, respectively. Variable x m is the mean stress of the loading signal. Fatigue life is defined as the number of stress cycles that a specimen sustains before failure. In the current work, we focus on TtF prediction rather than fatigue life as required for SHM purposes and real-time decision making in engineering systems. One of the main challenges in the prediction of fatigue failures is the uncertainty in the material parameters at the microscopic level that leads to an inherent noise and uncertainty in the data and inconsistencies in the resulting failure times (FTs). Hence, due to the uncertainty associated with the material and mechanical properties of the component, systematic experimental noise, and statistical properties of the stochastic loading, the TtF should be treated as a probabilities quantity, which is characterized by a nominal predicted value and a corresponding level of uncertainty. Uncertainty quantification (UQ) becomes critical when it comes to real-time decision-making in systems for which sudden changes in the operating regime might lead to hazardous consequences. For example, a suggestion for emergency landing of a fighter jet due to a predicted failure in absence of a near airport. In this case, the certainty level is crucial for choosing between continuation or cessation of the mission. In the absence of closed-form expressions that link the system's mechanical parameters and signal properties with the TtF, and due to the abundance and stochastic nature of experimental and numerical data, data-driven methods are good candidate models for fatigue prognosis. Machine learning (ML) methods are a set of numerical models that fit a function to a given dataset by tuning a large set of model parameters in a process called learning or training. During the last decade, learning algorithms have gained popularity due to their versatility, the substantial availability of rich datasets, and high-end computational resources. Those models outperformed conservative methods in various tasks, such as image classification and speech recognition, due to their well-known interpolation and generalization capabilities. ML algorithms were proven to have a good ability to capture underlying patterns and correlations in measured data even when the underlying physical rules governing the system's behavior are obscure or unknown. Examples include quantitative analysis of ceramic's fracture surfaces using convolutional neural networks The main goal of the current work, is to develop a fully data-driven method for real-time fatigue failure prediction and UQ under non-zero-mean stochastic loading of unknown underlying power spectral density (PSD). In particular, we introduce a hybrid learning model that combines both a fully-connected artificial neural network (FC-ANN) and Gaussian process regression (GPR) This paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we discuss the input features for the learning model. In Section 3 we introduce the hybrid probabilistic predictive model. In the same section, we give an overview of fully-connected artificial neural networks and Gaussian process regression and describe the contribution of each of those modules to the overall performances of the hybrid model. The proposed methodology is demonstrated in Section 4 where it is applied on an unseen stochastic augmented data in real-time. In Section 5 we validate the hybrid model on experimental data obtained from mechanical systems that experienced fatigue failure under stochastic loadings. Finally, Section 6 provides a summary and brief discussion of the results obtained, possible engineering applications, and future research directions. Before a learning model can be designed or applied, the most informative input variables have to be chosen in advance. Those variables, also called features, have to represent the relevant physical properties of the mechanical component and statistical properties of the stochastic signal. The set of all features that correspond to a given mechanical component in the dataset and that was measured in a given time t is called the temporal features vector u(t) and serves as the input vector of the predictive model. The measured signal can be any physical measure from which the stress at the critical section of the forced component can be inferred, such as displacement, acceleration, or stress at the fatigue-prone location or in its vicinity. As mentioned in the previous section, any data from various sources can be used to train the model and test its performances, such as data obtained from experimental, numerical, and/or approximate analytical models, as long as data of the same type is used both for training the model and evaluating its results. Generally, if the component of interest is subjected to stochastic excitations of various characteristics during its lifetime, it is recommended to include signals that were generated from a set of relevant PSDs to enhance the generalization ability of the learning model. Otherwise, a single PSD can be considered to avoid the necessity of a large dataset and extensive computation time. In the current work, without loss of generality, we use stress signal at the critical section of the mechanical component for reasons of convenience and explainability of the results. The features are generated from a uniform probability distribution over the parameter ranges shown in Table Here χ(t) is a normalized stochastic signal which is bounded between ±1 and generated from an underlying PSD G(f ). Variables x m is the mean of signal x(t) and k s is a scaling factor. Variables f i and φ i are the constructing frequencies and phases of stochastic signal χ(t). All variables in Eq. ( As one can see in (2), the PSD G(f ) does not include a magnitude factor. This is because the intensity of the stochastic signal x(t) which is usually dictated by the magnitude of the PSD, is now fully-defined by the scaling factor k s . The range of scaling factor k s was chosen to ensure that the generated signal will not exceed 85% of the ultimate tensile stress of the material σ uts , and lead to low-cycle fatigue (LCF) Here E denotes expectation. The spectral information in the measured stochastic signal x(t) is embodied in its underlying power spectral density (PSD) Eq. ( Here X(f |t) is the Fourier transform of signal x(t) for a given measurement time t. Since we assume that the PSD of the signal is unknown a-priori, it is estimated in real-time using Welch's method, which computes the periodograms for overlapping segments of the given signal and averages over the results, allowing more accurate PSD estimation with time G(f |t) for longer measurement durations The four moments shown in Eq. ( The bandwidth of a stochastic signal has a direct effect on the distribution of the signal local extrema around the mean value of the signal. Since fatigue failure is dictated by the amplitudes of the loading cycles, this distribution has a significant effect on the cumulative damage and TtF. This distribution is given by the following expression: Here f and P are PDF and probability, respectively. Random variable M is drawn from a set M of all local extrema in the signal x(t) -x(t). random variable M is a drawn from the set of all local extrema M of signal x(t)-x(t), i.e. M ∼ M. Variable ξ is an arbitrary amplitude value and f (ξ) is the PDF over probable ξ values. Function ρ(ξ) describes the probability that a local maximum M is bounded between ±ξ. Assuming ergodic and statistically stationary stochastic signal, for broad-banded and narrowbanded PSDs, the PDF f (ξ) correspond to the Rayleigh distribution and the multi-modal Gaussian distribution, respectively. Comparison between theoretical and numerical results are shown in Fig. Here H(ξ) is the Heaviside step function, and Q is an operator that maps a continuous signal to a set of its local maxima. Parameters μ and σ are the mean and standard deviation of the distribution of the local maxima. For the case of narrow-based PSD, the following relation between mean and STD holds σ 2/π μ. Then, according to Eq. ( 2) is the cumulative distribution function of the standard normal distribution. The inverse relations of Eq. ( The value of ρ is tuned by preliminary analysis to optimize the performances of the predictive on a subset of the dataset, as shown in Appendix A. For a given value of ρ, the percentile amplitude ξ can be estimated using Eq. ( Finally, we obtain a vector that contains indicative information about the properties of the mechanical components and statistical properties of the stochastic signal: The last six features are evaluated in real time using averaging Eq. ( This case is realistic and typical for mechanical systems that experience one excitation regime that is associated with fatigue failure, for example, components of a machine that is powered by a synchronous electric motor. For simplicity and explainability, in the current work, we will focus on the case of a single PSD and therefore use the reduced features vector. In the current work, preliminary investigation shows a strong correlation between the TtF and the characteristic amplitude that corresponds to the 90 th percentile, i.e. ξ(ρ = 0.9) ≡ ξ 90 . For convenience, it will be denoted as ξ. We generate a dataset that consists of N = 1500 statistically stationary and ergodic stochastic signals. All signals were generated from a Gaussian-like PSD using Eq. ( The magnitude of the additive noise is chosen as 2.5% of the feature range. In this section, we introduce a probabilistic model for prediction and UQ of fatigue FTs. This hybrid model combines a FC-ANN and a GPR for both enhanced prediction accuracy and simultaneous UQ. The dataset is divided into three subsets: training-set, cross-validation (CV) set, and a test-set, with a ratio of 60 : 20 : 20, respectively. The first is used for tuning the FC-ANN model parameters θ, the second is used for testing the FC-ANN prediction performances, and to train the GPR, and the third for evaluating the real-time prediction and UQ performance of the hybrid predictive model. Various learning algorithms have demonstrated good regression and generalization capabilities on datasets of a variety of types. Those mathematical models differ from each other in their architecture, principles of operation, and types of data for which they are applicable. One of the most widely-used and versatile learning models is the fully-connected artificial neural network. The FC-ANN consists of multiple interconnected variables called neurons which are organized in layers, from which stems its name. In virtue of the universal approximation theorem, any continuous (and not necessarily smooth) function can be approximated using a sufficiently complex or deep FC-ANN, where its complexity or depth is determined by the number of neurons and layers of the network. The input vector is fed into the first layer of the network, called the input layer. Then it propagates forward through the network until the output is obtained in the last layer, called the output layer. The size, i.e. number of neurons, in the input and output layer have to match the size of the input and output vectors, respectively. Each layer can consist of a different number of neurons, where each neuron is connected to all neurons in the adjacent layers. Each connection is characterized by a value called weight. The value of a given neuron is a weighted sum of the values of the neuron in the previous layer multiplied by their corresponding weights plus an added coefficient called bias. The resulting value is fed into a nonlinear function, called activation function, that gives the network its ability to approximate nonlinear latent functions. In regression problems, the main goal of a learning model is to approximate a latent unknown function f given training-set D tr = {u i (t), τ GT,i }, i = 1, ..., N tr : Where u(t) is the input vector, N N is the approximation obtained by the learning model, and θ N N is the vector of model parameters, i.e. the set of all weights and biases, which are optimized during the learning/training process. During this process, the model parameters are changed to minimize a loss function which is defined a-priori as a distance metric between the ground-truth (GT) and predicted outputs of the model. Model parameters are iteratively modified using the Backpropagation algorithm As mentioned in the previous section, in the current work we aim not only to find a predicted FT but also a CI concerning a desired CL α. The limiting cases in which the CL equals to zero and unity correspond to absolute uncertainty and absence of CI, and perfect certainty with infinitely wide CI, respectively. We use the output of the trained FC-ANN obtained according to Eq. ( Here, θNN is the vector of model parameters obtained after the training process, and D tr is the sets of feature vectors and GT FTs from the train-set. The vector of model parameters θ N N is tuned with respect to the following loss function: Here λ is the regularization coefficient. The regularization term in the loss function is added to avoid over-fitting. The architecture of the FC-ANN is designed iteratively when the complexity of the network is gradually increased until sufficient accuracy is achieved. The main goal of this stage is to find the "simplest" network that yields good predictions to avoid over-fitting and time-consuming training process. Thus, we obtained a three-layers FC-ANN, with five neurons in the input layer (the size of the reduced input vector u(t)), twelve neurons in the hidden layer, and a single neuron in the output layer. Training is performed using Back-propagation, and mini-batch optimization with the Adam method Here, each prediction is described using a single point in the plane. As one can see, the overall performance of the network is described by the distribution of the resulting points around the line of perfect prediction τ GT = η. The prediction points are tightly distributed around the line of perfect prediction, indicating that the network successfully captures the underlying relation between the FT and the features, yielding a good surrogate predictive model. However, as expected, the distribution around the line is not negligible and stems from multiple sources of stochasticity and uncertainty in measurement methodology, values of system parameters, etc. Hence, a probabilistic module than can quantify uncertainty associated with the FC-ANN FT predictions is essential for our model. Figure The variance of the results obtained for each value of η embodies the level of uncertainty associated with the ANN prediction. Moreover, the variance of the distribution of the results varies with η. Hence, we treat the prediction points as representations of the features vector in a reduced-order embedding space η -τ GT . We aim to fit a multivariate PDF above the embedding space that maps each prediction η(u(t)) to a PDF that simultaneously embodies the most likely FT value and corresponding prediction uncertainty. The level of uncertainty will be dictated by the amount of similar data in the training-set, i.e. near points in the embedding space. For highly exploited regions of η the certainty level is high, and we expect to get lower variances, and vice versa. In the next section, we introduce a GPR-based approach for UQ of the predictive results obtained by the FC-ANN for a real-time measured features vector u(t). Gaussian process regressions (GPRs) Here, σ 2 n is the variance of the noise. A Gaussian process (GP) is a collection of random variables, any finite number of which have a joint Gaussian distribution. The main idea behind GPR is to utilize a GP to represent the latent function g(η). This is done in a Bayesian framework, in which the GP serves prior over function-space which in turn is conditioned on the measured data to yield a posterior distribution. The latter enables us to make an inference on the values of the latent function g(τ ) that correspond to unseen input variables η using a finite set of training data D CV . g(η) ∼ GP(μ 0 (η), Σ 0 (η, η )) (18) A GP is completely specified by its mean function and covariance function, μ 0 (η) and Σ 0 (η, η ), respectively. Here E denotes expectation. The mean functions μ 0 (η) of the prior GP embodied a prior knowledge about the latent function g(τ ). Usually, it is unknown and therefore set to zero. The properties of the GP are governed by the covariance function or kernel, which is symmetric and positive semi-definite by definition. The covariance function Σ 0 (η, η ) quantifies the covariance between any pair of points in the dataset with respect to a given covariance function, also called kernel. The most commonly used is the squared exponential kernel, also known as the Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel, or Gaussian kernel. Here parameter l is a characteristic length scale that repents the covariance between a data point to its neighbors and thus is dictating the smoothness of the candidate functions generated by the GP. For example, large values of l, enforce large off-diagonal values in the covariance matrix, which corresponds to smooth candidate function, and vice versa. In general, extrapolation using GPR is reliable only approximately l units away from the training data. Parameter σ l determines the variance of the candidate functions away from the mean μ 0 (η). The set of parameters θ GPR = {σ n , l, σ l }, also called hyper-parameters, are are determined to best fit the data by optimizing over log-likelihood loss function according to the maximum a-posteriori (MAP) principle: Here, K is the symmetric covariance matrix whose ij th entry is the covariance between the i th variable in the group denoted by the first subscript and the j th variable in the group denoted by the second subscript, calculated using covariance function Σ 0 and corresponding hyper-parameters. Vector τ is a vector of the training observations, and K τ ,τ ≡ K g,g + σ n I. The vector of optimal hyper-parameters θGPR is obtained by optimization the log-likelihood loss function over the hyper parameter space Θ GPR : θGPR = arg min Differentiating Eq. ( The computational complexity of this calculation is dictated by the matrix inverse, which is O(N 3 CV ). After the optimal hyper-parameters θGPR over the training-data are obtained, the GPR is fully-determined and inference can be easily made by computing the posterior PDF obtained after conditioning on the training-data D GPR = {η, τ GT }. Here, τ is the estimated observations vector that corresponds to the vector of test inputs η, for which we want to estimate the latent function g(η). μ(η * |D GPR ) and Σ(η * |D GPR )) are the mean and covariance function of the posterior GP, obtained after conditioning the prior of the training data D GPR . One of the main advantages of GPs, is that conditioning the resulting multivariate-PDF on a given input variable yields a Gaussian posterior univariate PDF on the output variable. Hence, the posterior GP is now used to generate a Gaussian PDF over the space of FTs for a given input value η that corresponds to an input features vector u(t), as shown in Eq. ( Here, μ and Σ are the mean and variance of the resulting Gaussian PDF f pr , respectively. The standard deviation of the PDF is defined as follows: σ(η) = Σ(η). Parameters vector θ includes the parameters of both modules of the hybrid model, i.e. θ = { θNN (D tr ), θGPR (D CV )}. The PDF f pr (τ |u(t), θ) is calculated in real-time for each measured features vector u(t). The last information to be fused into the PDF over FTs is the measurement instance t, by eliminating the probability for failure before this instance by introducing a posterior PDF for which f post (τ < t) = 0. This will allow enhanced confidence for relevant FTs and shrinking the CI associated with the failure prediction. Thus, we introduce the following Heaviside likelihood function and calculate the posterior PDF over the FTs using the Bayes rule: Now, FT prediction and the estimation of the corresponding CI are intuitive. According to the maximum a-posteriori probability (MAP) principle, the predicted FT is estimated as the mode of the resulting posterior distribution. The boundaries of the CI, denoted by τ -, τ + , correspond to cumulative distribution of α with respect to the posterior PDF as shown in Eq. ( The variance of the posterior PDF is a measure of the uncertainty associated with the prediction obtained. More specifically, since the posterior PDF is Gaussian or nearly-Gaussian, the boundaries of the CI can now be obtained analytically for a desired CL α as follows: As one can see in Eq. ( As one can see in Fig. After both modules were trained on the train-set (FC-ANN) and cross-validation-set (GPR), the prediction and UQ performances of the hybrid predictive model can be demonstrated on an unseen stochastic signal taken from the test set. To simulate a real-time framework, the signal is sampled at a constant rate of f s = 1Hz. In each sampling, the measured signal x(t) is used to accumulate the temporal features vector u(t) according to Eq. ( Figure The hybrid predictive model is validated using experimental data obtained by the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Due to the existence of the notch, stress concentration effects become significant and magnify the lead to substantial magnification of the stresses in the vicinity of the notch. This effect is considerd by stress concentration factor K t which is defined as the relation between the maximal actual stress measured near the notch σ max and the nominal stress σ nom , as shown in Eq. ( There is a substantial variance among estimation of the stress concentration factor in keyhole specimens reported in the literature, that range between 2.62 to 3.52 As one can see in Fig. For all notched specimen tests, loads were applied to the specimen through a close tolerance monoball fixture which allowed both tensile and compressive loading. The loading signals are given as series of peaks and valleys, disregarding the frequency content of the signals (nominally between 1 -30Hz). For scaling purposes, all signals are normalized to fit the range of ±1. The dataset includes three types of loading signals which differ in their statistical properties: a) A load history obtained from the bending moment on a vehicle suspension component, driven over an accelerated durability course, b) a vibration obtained on a mounting bracket being excited by vehicle operation over a rough road, c) A load history with a drastic change of a mean load obtained from transmission torque measured on a tractor engaged in front-end loader work. In each loading regime, the actual loading signals are obtained by a linear scaling of the normalized signals with respect to three load levels: 15.6kN, 35.6kN, and 71.2kN. The three variable amplitude histories are linearly scales to three levels with three replications of each level and material to produce a variety of FTs. For each experiment, three characteristic instances were recorded: crack initiation, crack propagation, and total life until failure which is the sum of the first two. The SAE dataset includes 57 samples in total. In the current analysis, we consider the time histories that correspond to the second loading type, i.e. 20 samples in total (Fig. Here, β and r are user-defined parameters that control the level of early prognosis and prediction stability, respectively. In the current work, we take the early prediction and stability parameters as β = 60% and r = 75%, respectively. The CL is chosen as α = 95% The results are shown in Table As one can see in Table In contradiction to most of the existing methods, this method allows real-time failure prediction thanks to a real-time features estimation methodology. The usage of confidence interval with an adaptive size, i.e. confidence level, allows obtaining upper and lower boundaries for the predicted FT, which in turn, serves a major role in real-time decision making in terms of safe operation, maintenance, and structural health monitoring. Future research will deal with data-driven probabilistic fatigue prediction for non-stationary stochastic signals. A hybrid data-driven method for real-time prediction and uncertainty quantification (UQ) of fatigue failure under stochastic loading was formulated. The developed approach combines two powerful learning models, fully-connected artificial neural networks (FC-ANNs) and Gaussian Process Regression (GPR), to answer an essential engineering need of real-time prediction of time intervals that are prone to fatigue failures with a given certainty level (CL). The proven ability of the FC-ANN to represent high-dimensional data in a reducedorder embedding space is utilized by the GPR for enhanced prediction and simultaneous UQ. After the prior training process of both predictive modules, the predictions are obtained at an extensive speed, making the methodology suitable for real-time purposes. Moreover, a full methodology was suggested for real-time evaluations of the input features calculated based on the measured signal, both for the case in which the signals are generated from a single PSD or multiple PSDs. The suggested method is applicable for stochastic signals of various physical properties, such as stress and strain, that are correlated to the stress in the critical section of the studied mechanical component. The proven prediction and generalization abilities of the FC-ANN to represent the data in a latent embedding space are used by the GPR for simultaneous prediction and uncertain quantification. Moreover, a full methodology was suggested for real-time evaluations of the input features calculated based on the measured signal, both for the case in which the signals are generated from a single PSD or multiple PSDs. The method is applicable for measured data obtained by experiments, numerical analysis, time-domain, or frequency-domain methods. We have demonstrated the real-time performances of the model for an unseen signal, and a posterior updating rate of f s = 1Hz. The FT was accurately predicted in a safety interval of 50% of the signal duration. The suggested hybrid method paves the way towards the development of predictive systems to be used for generating safety and operational instructions in real-time for failure prevention in mechanical systems under stochastic loadings, structural health monitoring (SHM) purposes, and protection from irreversible damage to the environment and human lives.