Among the major approaches that are being pursued for realizing quantum bits, the Majoranabased platform has been the most recent to be launched. It attempts to realize qubits which store quantum information in a topologically-protected manner. The quantum information is protected by its nonlocal storage in localized and well-separated Majorana zero modes, and manipulated by exploiting their nonabelian quantum exchange properties. Realizing these topological qubits is experimentally challenging, requiring superconductivity, helical electrons (created by spin-orbit coupling) and breaking of time reversal symmetry to all cooperate in an uncomfortable alliance. Over the past decade, several candidate material systems for realizing Majorana-based topological qubits have been explored, and there is accumulating, though still debated, evidence that zero modes are indeed being realized. This paper reviews the basic physical principles on which these approaches are based, the material systems that are being developed, and the current state of the field. We highlight both the progress made and the challenges that still need to be overcome. In the realm of condensed matter physics, Majorana zero modes (MZMs) The beauty of this vision is obvious to anyone who has ever experienced the desire to eat a cake and have it, too. This short review is aimed at giving the reader a status report on the baking of this cake. We introduce the general concepts underlying the field, survey several material systems that are being experimentally studied, discuss the difficulties in identifying the MZMs in these experiments, and conclude with an outlook for the future. The research effort involved is rather broad in scope, and is difficult to cover in a short review paper. Various aspects of the field have already been described in several review papers The key concept behind the notion of Majorana fermions, or MZMs, as they are more properly called in the condensed matter context, is that of a topologicallyprotected degeneracy of the ground state. In a system with 2N MZMs, the ground state is 2 N -fold degenerate. The MZMs are described by operators γ i , with i = 1, . . . , 2N , that take the system from one ground state to another, at zero energy cost, hence the name zero modes. These operators are hermitian and obey fermionic commutation rules, and hence the name Majorana fermions (see Box 1 for more information). The number of such modes must be even, and it is this constraint that protects them. If the MZMs are localized and spatially distant from one another, a local perturbation cannot shift any of them away from zero energy. As a consequence, both the ground-state degeneracy and the state vector in this manifold are protected against any local perturbation, or at least any perturbation that does not add or remove single electrons from the system. Single-electron processes, however, are exponentially suppressed due to the existence of an energy gap. For a fermionic operator to be hermitian, it must be a superposition of a creation and an annihilation operator, and such excitations occur primarily when superconductors are involved. Thus, most realizations of Majorana fermions involve a superconducting element in the system. Conceptually the most straightforward of all, the Kitaev chain, is a one-dimensional system of spinless fermions which are made superconducting by a p-wave order parameter. In the topological phase, the chain hosts one MZM at each of the two ends Unfortunately, conceptual simplicity and natural abundance do not go hand in hand here, and p-wave superconductors are, at best, rare. Fortunately, their topological properties can be realized based on more conventional s-wave superconductors, if the latter are combined with spin-orbit coupling and a magnetic field (or another time-reversal-symmetry breaking agent). Indeed, most candidate systems for realizing and exploring MZMs involve these three ingredients -spinorbit coupling, magnetic field, and superconductivity. Below, we survey different ways in which these ingredients are combined (Sec. II), before discussing the extent to which MZM physics has already been realized (Sec. III) and providing an outlook (Sec. IV). Majorana zero modes would be much more commonplace if only they were carried by the "usual suspects" of superconductivitys-wave superconductors such as aluminum or niobium. The reason this is not the case is that a MZM is an isolated zero mode which is localized far from any other zero mode. For s-wave superconductors, the symmetry of the pairing makes each excitation mode doubly degenerate, a degeneracy whose roots lie in the Fermi surface having two degenerate copies, one for each spin state as dictated by Kramers' theorem. With the existence of two Fermi surfaces being an obstacle to realizing MZMs, there are two directions to pursue for reducing that number -either looking for systems which have only a single Fermi surface, or starting with a system that has two surfaces and finding a mechanism to gap one of them. The first direction was suggested by Fu and Kane The one-dimensional edge state of a two-dimensional topological insulator may be gapped in two ways. A gap may develop by spin-flip scattering between opposite momenta, which is allowed only when time-reversal symmetry is broken. Alternatively, superconductivity gaps the edge of the two-dimensional topological insulator by forming a Cooper pair with the two electrons being from the two counter-propagating branches, breaking charge conservation on the edge. When adjacent regions of the edge are gapped by these two different mechanisms, the transition from one type of gapping to the other requires a closure of the energy gap, and the localized gapless mode at the interface is a MZM. In the case of a three-dimensional topological insulator, proximity to an s-wave superconductor creates a superconductor of a single Fermi surface, but not yet a MZM, for two reasons. First, we need to find a location for the MZM to localize. And second, we need to break time reversal symmetry that enforces a twofold Kramers degeneracy of the excitation modes. Both needs are addressed by introducing vortices in the proximitycoupled superconductor. Indeed, the core of each such vortex carries a single MZM. The observation of vortex-bound MZMs is complicated by the existence of additional (Caroli-Matricon-de Gennes) states localized in the vortex cores. For weakcoupling superconductors, with the energy gap ∆ much smaller than the Fermi energy E F , the energy of these additional intra-core states can be close to zero, with a level spacing of ∆ 2 /E F . Thus, the spectral difference between topological and trivial superconductors is that the lowest state has zero energy for the former and an energy of order ∆ 2 /2E F for the latter. Since ∆ 2 /2E F is typically much smaller than attainable temperatures, this difference is challenging to detect. Other differences involve the shape and spin polarization of the wave function of the intra-core states Experimentally, a natural tool to observe a MZM in a vortex core is a scanning tunneling microscope (STM). However, if the MZM is buried at the interface between a topological insulator and a superconductor, the STM cannot approach it. An elegant solution to this inherent problem may be provided by iron-based supercondutors, in which several bands overlap in energy, with one band being topological and insulating, hence carrying a surface state, and the other bands forming a 3D superconductor that proximity couples to the surface state. Experimental studies of these surfaces have discovered states at the cores of vortices Alternatively, MZMs can be created on a topologicalinsulator surface along a one-dimensional domain wall separating an island which is gapped, say, by an s-wave superconductor from its surrounding, which is gapped by a magnetic field (or the exchange field of a ferromagnet). In this case, the MZM is a one-dimensional object and part of a propagating chiral Majorana mode, whose direction of propagation can be reversed by switching the direction of the magnetization, or the roles of superconductor and magnet Inspired by the Fu-Kane proposal to use topological insulators and their built-in nontrivial topological structure, researchers realized that a similar situation can be engineered by a combination of more conventional materials with sufficiently strong spin-orbit coupling, proper breaking of time-reversal symmetry and, as in the Fu-Kane scheme, a strong interface to an ordinary swave superconductor Several of these proposals have since been experimentally realized As mentioned in Sec. II A, creating MZMs requires a single -or more generally an odd number of -Fermi surfaces. For a quasi-one-dimensional material, this corresponds to an odd number of Fermi points with positive momenta. This can, of course, be arranged by applying a sufficiently strong magnetic field to a wire and adjusting the chemical potential such that, say, only the lowest spin-split energy band is occupied. However, gapping such a spin-polarized system by superconducting pairing would seem to require a triplet superconductor. Extending ideas developed for two-dimensional systems The Rashba spin-orbit coupling exposes the electron spin to an effective Zeeman field whose direction is perpendicular both to the electric field exerted on the electron by the crystal and to the electron's velocity. This effective Zeeman field points in opposite directions for electrons of opposite velocities, so that the spinorbit coupling twists the spin directions at the two Fermi points in different directions. As a consequence, a pair of electrons with opposite momenta now has both a triplet and a singlet component, allowing them to be proximitized by a conventional superconductor. When the electron dispersion is approximated as parabolic, the corresponding energy scale is parametrized as αk F , where α encodes the magnitude of the electric field and k F is proportional to the velocity. For a strong magnetic field, B, and weak spin-orbit coupling, αk F , this physical picture implies that the proximity-induced gap in the nondegenerate band (i.e., the "topological gap") is proportional to the product of the gap ∆ ind induced by the superconductor into the semiconductor and the angle by which spin-orbit coupling tilts the spins away from being parallel to one another, αk F /gμ B B. (Here g is the semiconductor's g-factor, and μ B is the Bohr magneton.) It is this tilting that enables proximity coupling between a semiconductor and an s-wave superconductor, where Cooper pairs are spin singlets. The important material parameters are thus the spin-orbit coupling and the g-factor. From the above estimate, it would seem that the g-factor should be small such that the gap becomes large, but this in fact is not the case, because the Zeeman energy, 1 2 gμ B B, should also be larger than the induced gap, for the system to enter the topological phase. In fact, the precise criterion is where μ is the chemical potential of the unsplit one-dimensional band, measured with respect to the midpoint of the Zeeman-induced gap. From this expression, we see that the Zeeman energy needs to be larger than the induced gap. At the same time, the Zeeman energy should not suppress the superconducting gap ∆ S of the parent superconductor too strongly, and one therefore also requires g S μ B B < ∆ S (with g S the g-factor of the superconductor). The optimal parameter regime is thus large g/g S , large α, and large ∆ ind /∆ S . In the original theory papers Using the sample shown in Fig. Encouraged by the initial experiments The cleaner and more homogenous interface was shown to be key to induce a hard gap in the semiconductor. This type of devices led to further studies of near zero-bias peaks, as well as more detailed topological phase diagrams A key prediction for the Majorana zero-bias peak of a normal metal-topological superconductor junction is that its height is quantized to a value of 2e 2 /h Tunneling spectroscopy as discussed so far can only give indirect information about the nonlocal properties of Majorana bound states. Other transport measurements which provide somewhat complementary information include Coulomb-blockade Proximitized nanowires are presumably the beststudied Majorana-candidate system, with numerous detailed experiments -including tunneling spectroscopy, Coulomb-blockade measurements, multi-terminal transport, or Josephson junctions -probing various aspects of the expected Majorana physics. While several observations are consistent with a Majorana interpretation, it should be noted that the observed signatures may also have alternative interpretations. This is discussed further in Sec. III below. One challenging aspect of the proximitized nanowires discussed so far is that the magnetic field required to enter the topological regime is frequently rather high. This may induce states within the superconducting gap and soften the gap considerably. The required spin splitting can alternatively be induced by proximity to a ferromagnetic insulator, as was proposed in a variety of contexts a. Full-shell quantum wires. Wires which are entirely surrounded by a layer of superconductor are referred to as full-shell wires (Fig. Despite this intuition, an experimental group went ahead and investigated the end-state spectrum of corresponding nanowires by tunneling spectroscopy Based on this observation, Ref. Two realizations of engineered topological superconductors based on semiconducting nanowires proximitized by conventional superconductors. The first experiment a later experiment The same technique that allows near-perfect epitaxial growth of thin aluminum layers on GaAs or InAs wires, can also be used to grow two-dimensional layers of superconductor on a semiconductor heterostructure, based for instance on InAs a. One-dimensional wires in a two-dimensional setting (S-stripes). The S-stripe geometry showed zerobias peaks similar to what was seen in nanowires. This was used to perform the above-mentioned study of the temperature dependence of the peaks for various tunnel couplings b. Planar Josephson junctions (N -stripes). The quantum-wire realization of one-dimensional topological superconductivity exploits the chemical potential, the Zeeman field, and the superconducting pair potential as tuning parameters. Within this parameter space, there are regions where the wires carry Majorana end modes. In particular, the chemical potential needs to be tuned to a region in which one pair of Fermi points is gapped by the Zeeman field, while the other is gapped by superconductivity. Tuning the chemical potential is experimentally challenging, given that the potential exerted by metallic gates is heavily screened by the superconductors in proximity to the wires. The Josephson junction geometry (N -stripes) considerably weakens the dependence of the phase diagram on the chemical potential and also reduces the magnetic field required for achieving topological superconductivity In the ideal limit of semi-infinite superconducting banks and spin-orbit coupling much stronger than the Zeeman energy, the phase diagram depends primarily on two parameters, the phase difference φ between the two superconductors and E Z W/v F , the Zeeman energy multiplied by the time it takes an electron to cross the junction of width W . (Here, v F is the Fermi velocity). The phase diagram is shown in Fig. Although the topological superconductivity realized in this system is one dimensional, the system itself is two dimensional, since the normal part may in principle host many subbands. Semiclassically, then, the electron motion has components both along and across the junction and the magnitude of the velocity is equal to the Fermi velocity. Every reflection from one of the superconductors involves an amplitude for Andreev reflection, converting an electron to a hole or vice versa, as well as an amplitude for a normal reflection, in which the reflected particle is not converted. In the ideal limit as defined above, the Andreev amplitude dominates. Away from the ideal limit, the phase dependence weakens, the dependence on chemical potential sharpens, and the junction becomes more similar to the quantumwire case For an infinitely long junction, the spectrum of in-gap excitations associated with the normal channel may be characterized by the wavevector k x along the channel. The topological phase diagram can be deduced from the properties of the junction at k x = 0, which corresponds semiclassically to electrons and holes propagating across the junction. The energy gap, in contrast, is smallest for electrons that move primarily along the channel, since they are least affected by the superconducting banks. Realizing and probing a topological phase in experiment frequently depends on a sufficiently large energy gap. Here, enhancing the gap requires means to limit trajectories that move long distances parallel to the superconducting banks. A simple and straight-forward way to limit such a trajectory is to design the normal part of the junction in a zig-zag shape, forcing the semiclassical trajectories to undergo Andreev reflections whenever the zig-zag changes direction Long parallel trajectories are also naturally limited by disorder in the channel. Indeed, when the effect of weak disorder is analyzed perturbatively, it is found to enhance the localization of the MZMs close to the junction ends This setup has been examined experimentally by several groups, using different material systems. In one experiment A paradigmatic model for one-dimensional topological superconductors is provided by the Kitaev chain with nearest-neighbor hopping and pairing between adjacent single-orbital sites The mechanism of inducing p-wave pairing depends on the magnetic ordering of the adatoms. The YSR states are spin polarized, so that the spinsinglet Cooper pairs of s-wave superconductors cannot proximity couple to a strictly ferromagnetic chain. Proximity coupling becomes possible in the presence of spin-orbit coupling, for instance in the substrate superconductor. Alternatively, p-wave superconducting correlations can be induced when the adatoms form a helical magnetic state in which the spin polarization of the YSR states rotates along the chain, thus creating an alternative coupling between spin and orbital degrees of freedom Several works suggested that a topological phase can form in a self-organized fashion without a need for tuning the chemical potential Coupling a one-dimensional electronic system to magnetic moments induces a tendency to form a spiral spin structure as a result of the Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) interaction. Due to its wavevector of 2k F which is inherently tied to the Fermi wavevector k F of the electronic channel, the spin spiral opens a partial gap at the Fermi level. In conjunction with superconducting correlations, this leads to a topological superconducting phase without tuning of the chemical potential. A realization of these dilute-chain scenarios for topological superconductivity remains an outstanding experimental challenge. Existing experiments on topological superconductivity with magnetic adatoms are presumably based on chains in which the adatoms themselves are strongly coupled. Direct hybridization of the adatom d orbitals causes the formation of spinsplit bands First experimental evidence for MZMs in chains of magnetic adatoms was found by Nadj-Perge et al. [81] using a self-organized chain of Fe adatoms on a superconducting Pb substrate. Probing the chains by scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) using a normalmetal STM tip revealed zero-bias peaks localized at the end of the chain, but no such peaks elsewhere along the chain (see Fig. Measurements with superconducting tips can improve resolution owing to the suppression of thermal excitations by the superconducting gap and the sharp coherence peak in the superconducting density of states. With superconducting tips, MZMs no longer appear as zerobias peaks. Since the tunneling process leaves an unpaired electron behind in the tip, they rather appear at a bias voltage given by the superconducting gap of the tip (see also Additional experiments with Fe chains on Pb substrates have probed the zero-energy end states by spin-polarized tips Pb substrates are not suitable for controllably manipulating the adatom positions by an STM tip. Atom-by-atom construction of chains of Fe adatoms by means of the STM tip was possible on Re The spin-orbit coupling that is found in semiconductors is weaker than the record couplings found in metallic systems. In particular, Au has a strongly Rashba split surface state. This makes it an attractive system in the context of the search for topological superconductivity and MZMs The study of Majorana zero modes in condensed matter systems is strongly motivated by the prospect of topologically protected operations on Majorana qubits and the search for Majorana bound states has indeed stimulated enormous progress in the material science and device fabrication of hybrid systems. A significant body of transport experiments has provided data which are consistent with an interpretation in terms of Majorana bound states. But despite this success, the community remains unable to conclude whether single localized Majorana bound states have been observed. The difficulty of demonstrating the existence of MZMs is inherent in two of their defining properties. First, MZMs are largely robust against many interactions with their environment. Given that experiments typically rely on the response of the measured system to perturbations introduced by the experimental apparatus, this is a difficulty. As described above, several properties of MZMs allow one to circumvent this challenge, most notably the tunneling conductance at zero bias. Second, identifying features of a MZM should be insensitive to variations of parameters. This is a difficulty as it forces one to look for negative results. Clearly, there are numerous parameters that would not affect a zero-bias peak in the conductance, but for most this is just reflecting a lack of coupling to the measured system. This difficulty can be handled by studying how parameters cease to affect one-dimensional topological superconductors as they become longer and the MZMs tend to decouple. In addition to these two inherent difficulties, there is another challenge that obstructs the identification of MZMs in several of the experimental systems, namely, the possible existence of multiple almost-zero-energy end states which exist in parallel with (or instead of) the MZMs. These may have topological or nontopological origins. In particular, under certain conditions, both multi-subband wires and planar Josephson junctions approximately obey a composite anti-unitary symmetry that places them in symmetry class BDI. In contrast to the binary Z 2 classification of class D, which allows for only one Majorana mode at each end, class BDI is characterized by a topological Z index which counts the number of Majorana zero modes at the system's ends and can take on any integer value (see The simplest example of this difference is furnished by wires with several subbands at the Fermi energy Each subband may be regarded as a separate single-subband wire realizing either a trivial or a topological superconductor. The number of MZMs at the ends is then equal to the number of topological subbands. A variation of the electrostatic potential towards the wire's end may induce individual subbands to become trivial close to the wire's end. This pushes the MZMs of those subbands into the wire's bulk, thus changing the number of modes that are coupled to the leads. Moreover, the additional symmetry that protects the MZMs at the ends from hybridization is nonlocal and as such easily broken, e.g., by disorder or the confinement potential close to the system's ends. Then, MZMs on each end may hybridize and split, possibly leaving different numbers of unsplit modes on the two ends. In the simplest example, two modes may be left unsplit on one end, appearing as a zero-energy Andreev state In principle, the experimental tools we described so far should be able to distinguish between a one-dimensional topological superconductor with a single MZM on each end and a system with a different distribution of MZMs. In practice, this is a difficult task. Tunneling measurements, regardless of whether they are based on a scanning tunneling microscope or static tunnel contacts, measure tunneling peaks at zero voltage bias when they couple to MZMs. But they do not easily discern the number of MZMs. In the right range of temperatures, the height of the zero-bias peak caused by a single MZM is universal while the height of a a similar peak caused by several overlapping MZMs is nonuniversal. However, there may be other reasons for not observing the universal value. Coulomb-blockade experiments, in principle, probe whether the ground state is degenerate due to the presence of MZMs. However, they do that only if the MZMs couple to the outside world and, moreover, the experiments cannot easily discern between different possible numbers of degenerate ground states. Experiments probing the system by electromagnetic waves, measuring for example absorption or reflection, couple only to excitations that conserve the number of electrons and therefore do not probe ground state degeneracies. Photon-assisted tunneling in transport experiments are different and provide additional energy resolution Indeed, features which have been taken as evidence of Majorana physics in transport experiment have also been explained in terms of model systems with an even number of spatially-overlapping Majorana bound, or so-called Andreev states With these difficulties in mind, it is plausible to expect that transport experiments of the types that have been performed so far will confirm the existence of MZMs only with an ever growing level of confidence. An improved set of transport experiments to accumulate evidence for the existence of a single pair of MZMs in a one-dimensional topological superconductor could combine measuring the tunneling density of states on both ends simultaneously with a measurement of the bulk energy gap, in such a way that the trivial phase, the topological phase, and the gapless transition points between them can all be identified and shown to be insensitive to gap-preserving variations of relevant parameters such as magnetic field or chemical potential (see A more refined level of confidence will, however, most likely require new types of experiments that address the nonlocal and nonabelian properties of Majorana states (see Box 3 for an introduction to the nonabelian properties). An important class of experiments would probe the low-energy subspace of many-body states that is spanned by the MZMs. At fixed fermion parity and in the absence of above-gap Bogoliubov quasiparticles, a system with four MZMs spans a twodimensional subspace and can be regarded as realizing a single qubit. Multiple qubit degrees of freedom can be realized in systems containing more than four MZMs This readout capability would open the door to probing the dynamics of the system within the qubit subspace. In an ideal topological qubit, the overlap of the MZMs is negligible and all qubit states have the same energy. Experiments can then probe the (anti)commutation relations between the Pauli operators of a qubit. Consecutive projective measurements of the qubit Pauli operators give characteristic results, as familiar from Stern-Gerlach experiments, and would provide strong evidence for the realization of MZMs. Alternatively, transport measurements probing interference can implement simultaneous weak measurements of two distinct Pauli operators and reveal signatures of their noncommutativity The noise-induced dephasing of this quantum dynamics of Majorana qubits may also be a sensitive probe of their nonlocal nature and help distinguish truly isolated MZMs from situations which are akin to Andreev bound states with near-zero energy It is important to stress that the above-mentioned experiments relying on the degenerate subspace spanned by MZMs critically depend on the topological state having a sufficiently hard gap. Otherwise, the quantum state stored in the parity degree of freedom will be corrupted by quasiparticle exchanges with non-Majorana subgap states, resulting in a very short parity lifetime. It is presently unclear whether a sufficiently hard gap can be realized in any of the engineered topological superconductors. A fundamental obstacle might be the absence of Anderson's theorem for pwave superconductors. Thus, imperfections in the crystal structure or inhomogeneous electric or pairing potentials will in general induce subgap states. With an almost continuum of trivial (Andreev) subgap states, the parity degree of freedom associated with the MBSs effectively spreads out. Topological protection may still be maintained if the subgap states are localized by disorder, and the separation of the MZMs is larger than the localization length of the in-gap states Once it is experimentally verified that a set of MZMs spans a degenerate subspace of ground states with a sufficiently long parity lifetime, braiding experiments probing the nonabelian properties of MZMs come within reach. There are various proposals for experimental setups that could probe and exploit braiding of MZMs. A full account of these ideas is beyond the scope of this review (see Refs. MZMs spanning a degenerate subspace are also a prerequisite for quantum-computing applications of MZMs. There have been numerous proposals for implementing quantum information storage and quantum information processing using Majorana-based qubits The nonabelian nature of MZMs in conjunction with Coulomb charging effects provide a starting point for numerous intriguing constructions (see also Readers who hope that this paper ends with the authors' bet for the date by which nonabelian physics will be harnessed for processing topologically protected quantum information are heading for a disappointment, we are afraid. In our opinion, it does seem that the observed MZM signatures in the systems that we reviewed are caused by the relevant physics, i.e., roughly the right combination of spin-orbit interactions, superconductivity, and breaking of timereversal symmetry. However, it could be that there still need to be critical developments in the material and device-fabrication technology to reach a point where the nonabelian nature of the MZMs will dominate the physical properties of the systems, and will survive the detrimental effects of in-gap states and unwanted almostzero modes. Topological phases of fermionic systems with a bulk gap are frequently characterized by gapless boundary modes. Historically, the first example of this bulkboundary correspondence were the chiral edge modes of the integer quantum Hall states, later complemented by the helical edge modes of the quantum spin Hall state and many more. Topological superconductors also support gapless edge states, which are Majorana modes as a result of particle-hole symmetry. In one-dimensional systems, these edge modes are MZMs localized at the ends of the wire or at domain walls between the topological superconductor and a gapped nontopological phase. In superconductors, fermionic quasiparticles are superpositions of electrons and holes. Their effective lack of charge conservation is made possible by the superconducting condensate of Cooper pairs with charge 2e. The creation operator of a quasiparticle of energy E has the form where Ψ † σ (x) is the electron creation operator that creates an electron with spin σ at position x, and the subscripts h, e stand for holes and electrons. The particle-hole symmetry inherent to superconductors implies that each quasiparticle described by Eq. ( A localized zero energy mode (E = 0) therefore satisfies f e,σ = f * h,σ for both spin components. Thus, for a MZM the amplitudes of electrons and holes have the same absolute values. Any deviation from E = 0 tips the balance towards one sign of charge. Furthermore, Eq. ( We can now understand the resilience of the system's ground states to local noise: A local (for example electrical) disturbance couples to the local charge in the superconductor: If the extent of the disturbance is smaller than the distance between the Majorana end modes, there is no way that it can involve both γ 1 and γ 2 . The quantum information stored in the d fermion degree of freedom is hence immune to (local) noise, at least up to corrections controlled by the overlap of the localized MZMs. Their localization length, ξ = v F /∆, is determined by the bulk gap, ∆, of the topological superconductor and the Fermi velocity, v F . Thus, in principle the overlap between MZMs can be made exponentially small when their separation is large compared to the coherence length ξ. A systematic approach shows that there are different topological superconducting phases, depending on the symmetries of the system Experiments recording current-voltage characteristics frequently probe the existence of subgap states at zero or near-zero energy. When tunneling into a topological superconducting wire through a tunnel barrier from a normal-state electrode, the zero-energy end state will lead to a zero-bias peak in the differential conductance. At subgap voltages, tunneling occurs via resonant Andreev reflection with an electron tunneling, say, into the wire and a hole tunneling out into the lead, see Fig. Majorana zero modes have also been probed with superconducting leads, especially in the context of STM experiments When a semiconducting quantum wire is proximitycoupled to a superconductor which is sufficiently small and is only weakly connected to the outside world, the hybrid semiconductor-superconductor wire has a finite charging energy E C . When changing a gate voltage applied to a wire in a nontopological superconducting state, electrons are added in pairs (2e processes) when ∆ > E C and individually (1e processes) when E C > ∆. In the latter case, the gate voltage spacing between consecutive additions of electrons exhibits an even-odd alternation, reflecting the fact that an odd electron remains unpaired and requires an additional energy cost of ∆, see Fig. Coupling two superconductors by a tunnel junction or a normal-metal region leads to the Josephson effects. When coupling two conventional superconductors, Cooper pairs moving between the superconductors lead to a Josephson current which is periodic in the phase difference φ of the two superconducors with period 2π. When coupling two topological superconducting wires, the pair of MZMs hybridize across the junction, allowing for the coherent exchange of single electrons which manifests itself in a 4π-periodic Josephson effect The topological nature of Josephson junctions can also be revealed by spectroscopically probing the subgap states localized at the junction. While tunneling changes the fermion number parity, microwave experiments give access to excitations at fixed fermion parity. Thus, at zero temperature, absorption of a microwave photon must be associated with the creation of two quasiparticles Perhaps the most coveted property of Majorana zero modes is their nonabelian exchange properties, sometimes referred to as "nonabelian statistics" even though the MZMs are not particles. As discussed in Box 1, the ground state becomes 2 N -fold degenerate in the presence of 2N MZMs. Adiabatically exchanging the positions of the Majoranas leaves the system in this ground-state manifold, but not necessarily in the same state. Instead, the state changes by a unitary transformation, which depends on the order in which the exchanges are being performed. This nonabelian exchange "statistics" contrasts sharply with the case of bosons, fermions, or abelian anyons, for which exchanges merely modify the state by factors of +1, -1, or e iα , respectively. Physically, braiding operations can be implemented most directly by explicitly moving Majoranas around each other in real space. This can be done for Majoranas in two dimensions or on a network of wires The unitary transformation implemented by braiding γ i with γ j may be obtained from rather general arguments. Since the MZMs are hermitian, we expect U γ i U † = ±γ j , where the sign remains to be determined. Moreover, U should conserve fermion number parity and involve only the braided MZMs, γ i and γ j . These considerations fix U to be One readily checks that these transformations do not necessarily commute. Experimentally, braiding can be implemented by using a variety of knobs -such as gate voltages, charging energies, or supercurrents -that move MZMs around and/or control their couplings. The simplest braiding scheme involves two wires, with the pair of MZMs of each wire initialized in a state with, say, even fermion number parity. A single braid of MZMs from the two wires would transform the system into a superposition of even and odd parities, with equal probabilities. Strikingly, two consecutive braids would leave both wires in oddfermion-number states. This outcome is independent of the details of the braiding process as long as the groundstate degeneracy remains unchanged. The nonlocal and nonabelian properties are at the heart of quantum information processing in topological quantum computers. Information stored in the manifold of ground states is topologically protected against local sources of decoherence as long as the excitation gap does not close. However, this also implies that local (say, electric or magnetic) fields do not manipulate the quantum information. Here, the nonabelianess comes to the rescue. Braiding processes can be used to change the state of the qubits and thus to process the quantum information, depending only on the topology of the exchange process and not on the detailed trajectory. In general, universal quantum computation can be realized on the basis of the single-qubit Clifford gates (Hadamard and phase gate), the T -gate, and the entangling controlled-NOT (CNOT) gate acting on a pair of qubits. For a Majorana-based quantum computer, braiding alone only implements the single-qubit Clifford gates. It thus cannot implement universal quantum computation in a manner which is fully topologically protected. Nevertheless, the CNOT gate can be implemented when including additional ancilla qubits combined with two-qubit-parity measurements. The T -gate can in principle be enacted in an accurate, though not topologically protected manner, by magic state distillation 