The kagome lattice of transition metal atoms provides an exciting platform to study electronic correlations in the presence of geometric frustration and nontrivial band topology, which continues to bear surprises. In this work, using spectroscopic imaging scanning tunneling microscopy, we discover a cascade of different symmetry-broken electronic states as a function of temperature in a new kagome superconductor, CsV3Sb5. At a temperature far above the superconducting transition Tc ~ 2.5 K, we reveal a tri-directional charge order with a 2a0 period that breaks the translation symmetry of the lattice. As the system is cooled down towards Tc, we observe a prominent V-shape spectral gap opening at the Fermi level and an additional breaking of the six-fold rotation symmetry, which persists through the superconducting transition. This rotation symmetry breaking is observed as the emergence of an additional 4a0 unidirectional charge order and strongly anisotropic scattering in differential conductance maps. The latter can be directly attributed to the orbital-selective renormalization of the V kagome bands. Our experiments reveal a complex landscape of electronic states that can co-exist on a kagome lattice, and provide intriguing parallels to high-Tc superconductors and twisted bilayer graphene. Quantum solids composed of atoms arranged on a lattice of corner-sharing triangles (kagome lattice) are a fascinating playground for the exploration of novel correlated and topological electronic phenomena AV3Sb5 (A=K, Rb, Cs) is a recently discovered class of kagome metals that does not exhibit resolvable magnetic order CsV3Sb5 is a layered superconductor (Tc~2.5 K) In the remainder of the work, we focus on the Sb-terminated surface, located directly above the V kagome layer. Differential conductance dI/dV spectra, proportional to the local density of states, exhibit several distinct features, which are denoted by arrows in Fig. Average dI/dV spectra also show a partial suppression of the spectral weight in the vicinity of the Fermi level (inset in Fig. As the system is cooled down further, the electronic structure of CsV3Sb5 begins to display a pronounced unidirectional character. While 3Q-CO charge order is still present at ~4.5 K, STM topographs exhibit another periodic modulation with a 4a0 wave length propagating along only one lattice direction (Fig. In addition to static charge ordering, our SI-STM measurements reveal another intriguing aspect of the electronic structure. At low energies, FTs of dI/dV(r, V) maps display long parallel features in reciprocal space, which we label as q2 and q2 based on their q-space position (Fig. Remarkably, q2 and q2 are only observed along a single lattice vector parallel to q 1Q-CO , while they are notably absent at the equivalent q-space positions along the other two lattice directions (dashed rectangles in Fig. By a closer inspection of q2 and q2 in QPI maps away from the Fermi energy, we find that these vectors get suppressed above ~12 meV, around the same energy at which the equivalent vectors along the two other lattice directions emerge (Fig. We establish a rich landscape of symmetry-broken states that can emerge and co-exist on a kagome lattice. We hypothesize that the 3Q-CO arises from the nesting between the saddle points at M, giving rise to a charge order with exactly 2a0 wave length. The 4a0 1Q-CO on the other hand does not fit the existing theoretical models of charge ordering proposed to exist on a kagome lattice Lastly, we note that sub-Kelvin SI-STM measurements reveal that symmetry-broken states persist well below the superconducting Tc (Fig. 