Chiral superconductors are expected to carry a spontaneous, chiral and perpetual current along the sample edge. However, despite the availability of several candidate materials, such a current has not been observed in experiments. In this article, we suggest an alternative probe in the form of impurity-induced chiral currents. We first demonstrate that a single non-magnetic impurity induces an encircling chiral current. Its direction depends on the chirality of the order parameter and the sign of the impurity potential. Building on this observation, we consider the case of multiple impurities, e.g., realized as adatoms deposited on the surface of a candidate chiral superconductor. We contrast the response that is obtained in two cases: (a) when the impurities are all identical in sign and (b) when the impurities have mixed positive and negative signs. The former leads to coherent currents within the sample, arising from the fusion of individual current loops. The latter produces loops of random chirality that lead to incoherent local currents. These two scenarios can be distinguished by measuring the induced magnetic field using recent probes such as diamond nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centres. We argue that impurity-induced currents may be easier to observe than edge currents, as they can be tuned by varying impurity strength, concentration and correlations. We demonstrate these results using a toy model for px ± ipy superconductivity on a square lattice. We develop an improved scheme for Bogoliubov deGennes (BdG) simulations where both the order parameter as well as the magnetic field are determined self-consistently. A superconductor is said to be chiral if it spontaneously breaks time reversal symmetry Several materials have been proposed as candidates for chiral superconductivity. The most prominent is Sr 2 RuO 4 , long thought to be a p + ip superconductor. However, experimental studies have proved inconclusive. Recent studies have revived this debate In this backdrop, recent technologies to detect microscopic currents can break new ground. The most prominent of these uses nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centres -atomic defects within a diamond probe. A spectroscopic measurement of excitations at the defect conveys information about the local magnetic field We consider a simple model with electrons hopping on a square lattice. The Hamiltonian is given by We restrict hoppings to nearest neighbours for simplicity. The hopping amplitude, t, sets the energy scale for the problem. Each hopping element carriers a Peierls' phase that encodes the vector potential, with A ij = j i A(r)•dl. We have denoted the charge of the electron as e. The vector potential here originates from supercurrents in the sample and not from an externally imposed magnetic field. Its precise form will be discussed below. We choose an artificial interaction term designed to give rise to chiral superconductivity, The sum runs over all nearest neighbour pairs of sites. The coupling constant, g, is taken to be positive. We introduce a two-site Cooper pair annihilation operator, where the σ's are Pauli matrices. While a generic triplet Cooper pair can contain three components with spin m z = -1, 0, 1, we have only retained the m z = 0 component in D ij . In order to gain energy from the interaction term, the Cooper pair operator acquires a non-zero expectation value with D ij = ∆ ij , a complex scalar. However, this expectation value must satisfy certain constraints. From fermionic anticommutation relations, we see that ∆ ij = -∆ ji . This signifies that the order parameter has p-wave symmetry, changing sign under a πrotation. For instance, upon a π rotation about a bond centre, the bond direction changes from ij to ji so that the order parameter flips sign. Each site has four bonds emanating from it. In order to lower energy on each of these bonds, the order parameter naturally develops chiral p x ± ip y symmetry. Moving counterclockwise around a site, the phase of the order parameter changes by ±π/2 from one bond to the next. A detailed study of this model can be found in Ref. 23. In summary, the system spontaneously chooses between one of two chiralities, i.e., between p x + ip y and p xip y character. Ordering introduces a quasiparticle gap in an infinite system (or in one with periodic boundaries), with the same spectrum for either choice of chirality. However, in the presence of an edge, we find a sharp signature that distinguishes the two chiralities. The quasiparticle spectrum hosts a mode within the bulk gap that propagates along the edge. The direction of propagation is determined by the chirality of the bulk order parameter. It is this mode that carries the edge current, providing a signature of chiral superconductivity. As a quasiparticle mode in a superconductor, this mode is a mixture of particle and hole components. As a consequence, it does not carry a quantized charge current -unlike an edge current in a Chern insulator. We now introduce impurities into the problem in the form of potentials on a certain fraction of sites. For simplicity, we assume that each impurity generates a local potential with a fixed amplitude, denoted as W . As for the sign of the impurity potential, we consider two schemes: (i) correlated disorder -with every impurity carrying the same sign, and (ii) random disorder -with each impurity having a random sign. We represent these as In both cases, the sum over i runs over a randomly selected subset of sites. We consider the fraction of impurity sites to be a tuneable parameter, η. In the random case, δ i = ±1 is an Ising-like random variable that is independently chosen at each impurity site. These two impurity schemes can be realized by placing a collection of adatoms on the surface of a chiral superconductor. If all adatoms are of the same type, this corresponds to the situation encoded in H corr. . Here, the sign of the potential is decided by the relative electronegativity of the adatom with respect to the substrate. On the same lines, deposition of two species of adatoms can realize H rand. . We consider the system on a L×L lattice with periodic boundary conditions. We perform a mean-field decomposition of the interaction term in Eq. 2, by defining bond variables ∆ ij ≡ D ij . This allows us to write the Hamiltonian as a quadratic form with Ĥ = Ψ † M Ψ, (6) where Ψ = {. . . c i,↑ . . . c † i,↓ . . .} T . The 2L × 2L Hamiltonian matrix can be written as The diagonal blocks, K(t, A, W ) encode hoppings with Peierls' phases and impurity potentials. The off-diagonal blocks contain the mean-fields, with ∆ mn defined on the nearest-neighbour bond connecting sites m and n. In typical Bogoliubov deGennes (BdG) calculations, the superconducting order parameters are determined using ∆ mn ≡ D mn . At the same time, the vector potential is either ignored or assumed to be fixed by a strong (nonself-consistent) external field. In this article, we present an improved BdG scheme where the vector potential is also determined self-consistently. To determine the vector potential, we note that each bond carries a current. By adapting the arguments in Ref. 24, we define the bond current operator as J mn = (∂ Ĥ/∂A mn ) , where Ĥ is the Hamiltonian of Eq. 6 and < • > represents the expectation value. Here, (m, n) represents a pair of neighbouring sites. We obtain J mn ≈ e Ĵmne 2 Kmn A mn + O(A 2 mn ), (8) where In the absence of a vector potential, Ĵmn and Kmn would encode the bond current and the bond energy respectively. We neglect O(A 2 mn ) terms here, assuming that A mn is small on every bond. This is justified in the limit of weak disorder. Currents in our system are induced solely by disorder. Weak disorder will give rise to weak currents and, in turn, to a weak vector potential. We next discuss the vector potential induced by the bond currents of Eq. 10. Assuming the Coulomb gauge condition ( ∇ • A = 0), a closed form expression can be derived for the vector potential induced by a set of static source currents in two dimensions, where J(r ) is the current density, i.e., current per unit cross-sectional length. This relation follows from the Biot-Savart law and the integral solution to the Poisson's equation. We adapt this equation to our lattice problem using Here, represents the lattice constant. The index ij represents the reference bond where the vector potential is to be determined. The position of the centre of the bond is denoted as R ij . The sum runs over kl, all other bonds that are parallel to ij, i.e., if ij is a bond in the x-direction, kl runs over all x-bonds except ij. The centre of each of these bonds is denoted as R kl . We calculate inter-bond distances (|R kl -R ij |), in units of , the lattice constant. The last term in the above equation represents the contribution from the very same bond, ij. Naively this represents a singular contribution as the source current and the target bond coincide, i.e., |R kl -R ij | vanishes. However, this contribution will be cut off by microscopic length scales which can be visualized as follows. We may view each bond as being composed of a bundle of wires, with each wire corresponding to an orbital overlap. If the wires are slightly displaced from the bond vector, the singular contribution is regularized. We phenomenologically model such effects using a cutoff length scale denoted as δ . We obtain the order parameters and the vector potential self-consistently. Starting with random values of ∆ ij 's and A ij 's, we obtain a new set of values as described above. We iterate this process until self-consistency is achieved. The calculations are carried out while respecting periodic boundary conditions. Each distance (R ij -R kl ) in Eq. 12 is chosen in accordance with the periodicity of the lattice. For example, two bonds are placed in neighbouring unit cells if that gives the lowest distance between them. We note that our approach does not give consistent results with open boundary conditions. In the presence of an edge, the vector potential outside the sample cannot be taken into account. This prevents us from ensuring ∇ • A = 0, a necessary condition for the use of Eq. 11. We emphasize that our scheme is an improvement over standard BdG approaches. As the vector potential is determined self-consistently, our approach allows for 'screening' currents. These can be viewed as a manifestation of the Meissner effect, with any magnetic field diminished by counter-currents that naturally arise in a superconductor. In the context of Sr 2 RuO 4 , it has been shown that edge currents are indeed strongly screened In the BdG scheme outlined above, the input parameters are the hopping strength (t) and the coupling constant (g). The vector potentials on bonds, A ij 's, are the desired output as they immediately yield the magnetic flux through each plaquette. The currents and the vector potentials require particular attention as they are accompanied by dimensioncarrying constants. They can be determined in a consistent fashion as follows. We first assert that the bond currents in Eq. 10 are proportional to (te/ ), a combination that carries dimensions of current. Operationally, we determine the currents up to this factor. Similarly, we calculate the vector potentials in Eq. 12 up to (μ 0 /4π)(te/ ), a combination that carries dimensions of the line integral of the vector potential ( A• dl). We have a lower power of as compared to the prefactor in Eq. 12 as the lattice distances (|R kl -R ij |) are also proportional to . The factor of (te/ ) comes from the current term (J kl ) on the right hand side of Eq. 12. To determine currents and vector potentials, we require numerical values for two dimensionless parameters: 1. ζ ≡ (μ 0 /4π)(te 2 / 2 ): this quantity appears in two places. The first is in the Peierls' phases of Eq. 1 where the vector potential, A ij , is multiplied by e/ . The second is the current expression of Eq. 10, as a prefactor to the second term on the right hand side. This quantity, ζ, contains two material-dependent parameters t and , apart from fundamental constants. To estimate its numerical value, we take = 10 Å and t ∼ 2.5eV so that ζ ∼ 10 -4 . 2. δ / : this quantity encodes the regularization parameter in Eq. 12. In our calculations, we assume an ad hoc value for this parameter, δ / = 0.1. We first consider the case of a single impurity in the chiral superconductor. Before discussing our results, we review some basic ideas. Chirality allows for a spontaneous local current that circulates around an impurity. This can be understood as follows. We imagine a hole cut into the superconductor. As the superconductor is chiral, it hosts a chiral boundary current that propagates along the edge. The hole can be replaced by a plateau-shaped potential which repels electrons from the interior region. We now imagine shrinking the radius of the 'hole', with the boundary current smoothly deforming to cling to the shrinking perimeter. When the radius approaches zero, we are left with a point-like potential. In this limit, the boundary current takes the form of a local current encircling the impurity. The current is no longer quantized as we can now have scattering between opposite edges of the hole. Nevertheless, we expect a non-zero current strength. Based on similar arguments, a impurity-induced current has been studied in a Chern insulator Before presenting results on impurity response, we discuss chirality in our mean-field solutions. In clean as well as in disordered systems, we find two mean-field solutions that correspond to a choice of chirality. They can be understood as ∆ x ± i∆ y configurations: the order parameters on the x and y bonds differ by a phase of ±π/2. The chirality of the configuration is determined by the choice of initial values in our BdG scheme. If the initial values are chosen to be unbiased towards either chirality, the system picks one of the two chiralities at random. For the situations considered in this article, we did not find 'domain-wall' solutions containing regions of differing chirality. For concreteness, in the discussion below, we restrict our attention to solutions of the form ∆ x + i∆ y . Our results for the response to a single impurity are shown in Fig. x/y is the order parameter on the bond emanating from site i in the positive x/y-direction. In these plots, we see that the impurity creates a local distortion in order parameters. In addition, magnetic fields are generated as shown in the third column. The fields (fluxes, to be more precise) are defined on plaquettes, given by the sum of Peierls' phases (vector potentials) along four bonds. The field is strongest at the plaquettes that are immediately adjacent to the impurity, weakening as we move further. Crucially, the direction of magnetic flux on a given plaquette is determined by the sign of the impurity potential. This field originates from a current that circulates around the impurity, as shown in the panels on the right. The current is only appreciable on bonds that are close to the impurity. For a given background chirality, the direction of the current loop is set by the sign of the impurity potential. In Fig. We next consider the response to multiple impurities. We first take up the case of correlated impurities, as defined in Eq. 4. As discussed in the previous section, each impurity induces a local current loop whose chirality is determined by the sign of the impurity potential. As all impurities are of the same sign, we have many current loops with the same chirality. As a result, where impurities are close to one another, their currents fuse to form a larger loop as depicted in Fig. The fusing of current loops lead to observable macroscopic consequences. In Fig. x/y = |∆ j x/y |e iθ j x/y , where j is a site index and the θ j x/y is the order parameter phase. In the panels on the left, we show the amplitudes of the order parameters, |∆ x | and |∆ y |. We see that impurities locally suppress the amplitudes of both ∆ x and ∆ y components. This is a consequence of the positive sign of the impurity potential. When the negative sign is used, we 0.00 < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " N T q w X 6 9 3 6 m I 8 W r H z n A P 7 A + v w B u X 2 S f w = = < / l a t e x i t > FIG. H e n Y 9 F a 8 H J Z 4 7 h D 5 z P H / J i j P 8 = < / l a t e x i t > 16 < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " Q 8 j 5 5 c z A 9 r q o e r X q 9 X 2 t U r / J 4 y j C C Z z C O X h w C X W 4 g w Y 0 g U E I z / A K b 8 7 Y e X H e n Y 9 F a 8 H J Z 4 7 h D 5 z P H / J i j P 8 = < / l a t e x i t > 16 < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " Q 8 j 5 5 c z A 9 expect (θ xθ y ) = ±π/2. The sine of this quantity takes the value of ±1, serving as an indicator of chirality. In the figure, we see that chirality is robust to impurities. Within the parameter regime that we have explored, we do not see any domain walls separating regions of differing chirality. In the fourth column in the figure, we show the spatial distribution of the magnetic field. At low impurity concentration, we see localized (negative) magnetic fields around each impurity. At larger impurity concentrations, these field regions come closer to one another. In the fig-ure, for the two concentrations shown, we see field distributions that are skewed towards negative values. This is tied to the sign of the impurity potential. The spread is set by W , the magnitude of each impurity potential, as well as the impurity concentration, η. This field distribution is a measurable signature of impurities that can be accessed by probes such as NV centres. We next consider disorder with random sign as given by Eq. 5. Here, impurity-generated current loops have random chiralities. As shown in Fig. In the third panel, we plot sin(θ xθ y ), an indicator of chirality as described above. The chirality remains robust with no sign of domain formation. This is similar to the case of correlated disorder, shown in Fig. The fourth column depicts the induced magnetic flux. Each impurity gives rise to a local flux, with the flux direction fixed by the sign of the impurity. Away from impurities, the flux is close to zero. Around a positive or negative impurity, the flux takes a negative or positive value, respectively. This leads to a broad distribution with roughly equal spread on either side of zero. The width of the distribution is set by W , the strength of the impurity potential, as well as η, the impurity concentration. The field distribution here is visibly different from that induced by correlated disorder, especially at low impurity concentrations. In the correlated case, as seen in Fig. We focus on magnetic field distributions, as they are particularly suited for measurements by N V centre probes. In Fig. Correlated disorder creates a skewed distribution as each impurity induces a current loop with the same chirality. The distribution has a longer tail on one side as seen from Fig. We compare quantitative measures of these distributions in panels (c) and (d). Random disorder leads to a higher variance for a given disorder concentration. This reflects a wider spread in field values, as can be seen visually by comparing the histograms in panels (b) and (a). In panel (c), we see that the variance in the field distribution changes non-monotonically with disorder concentration. This is because strong disorder suppresses order parameter amplitudes and, in turn, the supercurrents in the sample. We next compare the skewness of the distributions, defined as μ3 = E[{(X -μ)/σ} 3 ]. This quantifies the asymmetry of the distribution about the mean. As seen in Fig. Measurements with N V centres are particularly suited to finding statistical properties of field distributions. As shown above, correlations in the field distribution reflect underlying correlations of the disorder realization. This makes the case for an additional tuning handle in the form of disorder-correlations. This provides for an additional layer of measurable signatures in a chiral superconductor. With adatoms on a candidate material, these measurements can reveal the character of the underlying superconductor. In particular, the contrast between random and correlated disorder serves as a clear signature of chiral superconductivity. < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " y s i U y w x 0 S a f P A R 3 / e V N 0 r 2 x 3 b r d e q j X 2 r d F H G W 4 g E u 4 B h c a 0 I Z 7 6 I A H B B g 8 w y u 8 W c J 6 s d 6 t j 1 V r y S p m z u E P r M 8 f E s u N k Q = = < / l a t e x i t > 0.99 < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " R J y l D j v U N X v 0 5 o q t Z L j i 0 e X c + 5 q 0 r T j F z B H / g f P 4 A x A e N b A = = < / l a t e x i t > 0.2 < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " J G i 2 S + r 0 0 n z P Y S 3 1 R i 0 + F q 0 l p 5 g 5 h j 9 w P n 8 A w P + N a g = = < / l a t e x i t > 0.0 < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " p 1 H y L m 9 g 4 / k Y W B t M f 6 U t 6 U q 8 1 x s = " > H e n Y 9 F a c H J e 4 7 h D 5 z P H 1 X Y j T I = < / l a t e x i t > 0.1 < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " s v 3 s E 7 5 a D 1 j m 9 z s G n 0 e c j 2 9 a Z I 0 1 < / l a t e x i t > FIG. Our analysis is based on a toy model for chiral p x ± ip y superconductivity on a square lattice. However, our results are not model-dependent. Rather, they reflect a generic symmetry-allowed phenomenon -an impurity in a chiral (quasi-)two-dimensional system gives rise to a localized circulating current. This idea can be traced back to studies on integer quantum Hall systems with plateaushaped potentials Impurity-generated currents have been previously reported in chiral superconductors by Guo et. al. Our approach complements earlier studies on impurities in chiral superconductors. In particular, Refs. 32 and 33 present detailed studies of impurity-induced ingap states. They further discuss periodic arrangements of impurities, where bound states hybridize to form bands that can have topological character. Here, we do not focus on bound states or quasiparticle bands. Rather, we discuss currents induced in the superconducting ground state and in turn, the magnetic fields that they generate. In the discussion above, we have restricted our attention to weak disorder and zero temperature, a situation in which impurity-induced bound states do not play a role. In future studies on realistic systems, their effects can be taken into account. Going beyond isolated impurities, we have discussed currents generated by two disorder schemes. We show that correlated disorder can lead to long-ranged current loops within the sample. This is reflected in the magnetic field distribution, providing more complex signatures of chirality. Our two disorder schemes are inspired