We investigate the operation of dual-gate reconfigurable field-effect transistor (RFET) in the programgate at drain (PGAD) and program-gate at source (PGAS) configurations. To this end, dual-gate silicon nanowire (SiNW) FETs are fabricated based on anisotropic wet chemical silicon etching and nickel silicidation yielding silicide-SiNW Schottky junctions at source and drain. Whereas in PGAD-configuration ambipolar operation is suppressed, switching is deteriorated due to the injection through a Schottky-barrier. Operating the RFET in PGASconfiguration yields a switching behavior close to a conventional MOSFET. This, howewer, needs to be traded off against strongly non-linear output characteristics for small bias. I N recent years, device scaling close to the physical limit has spurred the move from geometrical to equivalent scaling The aforementioned issues are best addressed if doping in source/drain and channel can be avoided altogether. Recently, reconfigurable FETs (RFETs) have attracted an increasing attention because they utilize electrostatic doping to create virtual n-/pregions avoiding dopant related issues. Moreover, they can be tuned to operate as n-/p-transistors with unipolar device operation similar to conventional MOSFETs [3]- Reconfigurable silicon nanowire FETs are fabricated using a top-down approach with a two-step wet chemical etching as described in The dry oxidation is carried out for 3 min at a temperature of 1100 • C, i.e. higher than the viscous flow point. Although such a high temperature prevents a self-limiting oxidation I-V characteristics of the reconfigurable field-effect transistors are measured in PGAD-and PGAS-configurations and compared with each other. In both (PGAS and PGAD) configurations, a constant voltage applied to the PG generates a virtual por n-type doping section whereas the other gatecalled control gate (CG) -is used to switch the transistor. Figure Figure The different behavior of the output characteristics of the two device configurations may at first be surprising since it is generally argued that the non-linearity of the I d -V ds curves stems from the forward biased drain Schottky junction. As will become clear below, this is not the case: while the nonlinearity of the PGAS configuration is indeed due to a forwardbiased drain Schottky-junction, the non-linearity of the PGAD configuration is due to an increased tunneling through the source-side Schottky-barrier. In order to elaborate further on the behavior of RFETs and in particular to understand the difference in the non-linear behavior of the PGAS and PGAD configurations, self-consistent device simulations using the non-equilibrium Green's function approach on a finite difference grid have been carried out An important ingredient here is the inclusion of Buettiker probes (cf. 1.5x10 ds source drain Fig. In conclusion, with only two individually controllable gates, the PGAS configuration yields an almost ideal switching behavior while its output characteristics are deteriorated when compared to PGAD which exhibits improved output but deteriorated transfer characteristics. Reconfigurable FETs with wet chemically etched SiNWs and Ni silicidation are fabricated and characterized for both PGAS and PGAD configurations. The top-down fabrication approach yields localized SiNWs with atomically flat surfaces and minimal plasma damage manufacturable with conventional h-line contact lithography. The one-step silicidation process at 450 • C creates a silicide composition that has a Fermi level close to the valance band of silicon. In PGAS configuration, the RFET demonstrates a steep inverse subthreshold slope comparable to a state-of-the-art conventional MOSFET. However, V ds should be kept low to prevent leakage current increase induced by the other carrier type. In PGAD configuration, the RFET is a Schottky-barrier MOSFET with suppressed ambipolar behavior. The price paid for a lower off-state leakage current and more unipolar device behavior is a deteriorated switching behavior. The quasi Fermi level through the device simulated with Buettiker probes to mimic scattering explains the difference in output characteristics for both PGAS and PGAD configurations. Note, that this is the case due to the large difference in V PG and V CG : For larger CG voltages as displayed in Fig.5 (b), the output characteristics also become non-linear in the PGAD configuration.