In the last two decades, optical vortices carried by twisted light wavefronts have attracted a great deal of interest, providing not only new physical insights into light-matter interactions, but also a transformative platform for boosting optical information capacity. Meanwhile, advances in nanoscience and nanotechnology lead to the emerging field of nanophotonics, offering an unprecedented level of light manipulation via nanostructured materials and devices. Many exciting ideas and concepts come up when optical vortices meet nanophotonic devices. Here, we provide a mini review on recent achievements made in nanophotonics for the generation and detection of optical vortices and some of their applications. With the rapid advancement of information technology, optical communication that allows an improved data transmission rate for long distances has become an essential part of our daily life. Developing high-capacity optical communications for free-space wireless and fiber-optic networks is of great importance for meeting the ever-increasing demands for high-speed internet, augmented reality, and the internet of things. Unlike electronic devices being able to address signals only in the temporal domain, optical devices can process information coded in both spatial and temporal domains, significantly improving the capacity of optical devices. In this context, optical multiplexing has been developed as a viable approach for increasing the capacity of optical communication systems, through encoding and decoding optical information channels onto different degrees of freedom, including amplitude, phase, polarization, wavelength, and the angular momentum of light. Even though optical multiplexing opens the door to boost the capacity of optical communication systems, it generally uses bulky optical devices with large footprints to process the (de)multiplexed optical information. This has limited the scope of integrating high-capacity optical multiplexing systems for on-chip photonic and quantum information processing. Nanophotonics, a recently emerged field at the interface between nanotechnology and photonics, offers an unprecedented level of light manipulation via nanostructured materials and devices. In this context, nanophotonic multiplexing of light opens the possibility of miniaturizing high-capacity optical devices and systems for on-chip applications, such as multiprocessor system-on-chip where εε 0 is the vacuum permittivity, EE and BB are the vectorial electric and magnetic fields of an electromagnetic wave. The angular momentum can be separated in the paraxial limit into two parts: the spin angular momentum (SAM) associated with circular polarization, and the OAM manifested by an optical vortex beam with a helical wavefront. For both paraxial and nonparaxial beams (e.g., a tightly focused beam and near-field optics), the total angular momentum: is a conserved quantity, where ss and ll are the quantum numbers of the SAM and OAM, respectively. The discovery of the SAM of light can be traced back to Poynting In contrast to the intrinsic SAM related to the vector nature of light, light can also carry OAM having both intrinsic and extrinsic terms It should be noted that there are some practical limitations in the use of higher order OAM vortex modes, although the OAM has a theoretically infinite number of orthogonal modes. Firstly, the number of cycles of phase shifts (from 0 to 2π) in the azimuthal direction determines the helical mode index of an OAM vortex mode, as such, it is challenging for practical optical devices (e.g., spatial light modulators) to implement higher-order OAM modes (e.g., |ii|>500) that require rapid phase changes. Secondly, even though increasing the aperture size of optical devices could accommodate more rapid phase changes for higher-order OAM modes, the increased size prevents their devices from compact OAM generation and detection. Thirdly, higher-order OAM beams diverge faster than their lower-order counterparts and become more lossy in free-space propagation Even though an OAM-carrying optical vortex beam can be produced and detected via free-space optics based on either refractive or diffractive optical elements, such as cylindrical lenses Optical vortices carrying the OAM of light have played a vital role in both fundamental lightmatter interactions and photonic applications. There is a continuing trend towards miniaturization of photonic devices for creating optical vortices. In the following section, we will review recent breakthroughs in nanophotonic generation of optical vortices and highlight some milestone works in the field. Based on their implementation principles, nanophotonic devices used for the generation of optical vortices are mainly divided into two categories: metasurfaces In addition to the dynamic phase response in plasmonic resonators, metallic metasurfaces have also been employed to implement the Pancharatnam-Berry geometric phase. The geometric phase offers an accurate phase manipulation approach through the spin-to-orbit conversion that couples an incident circularly polarized beam into an opposite helicity. Owing to the total angular momentum conservation, the incident SAM of a circularly polarized light changes its helicity after passing through the geometric metasurface, giving rise to an OAM state with ii = ±2 in the crosspolarization state. As such, a plasmonic geometric metasurface Here the geometric metasurface with strong circular birefringence acts as a spin-to-orbit angular momentum conversion plate. In general, one metasurface imprinted with a single spiral phase pattern can only create a given OAM state, limiting its application prospects. To further expand the access to more OAM states by a single metasurface, the shared-aperture antenna array initially developed for radar applications The shared-aperture antenna concept is an effective design strategy by combing sets of antennas to achieve multiple functionalities, without increasing the size of the shared-aperture device. This concept was applied to the design of a geometric metasurface, providing a new route to create multifunctional metasurfaces. As an example, an interleaved geometric metasurface Even though tremendous research progress has been made in plasmonic metasurfaces based on noble metals, their applications are often limited by strong material loss in the ultraviolet and visible spectral ranges due to the interband transitions. All-dielectric metasurfaces based on the principles of either geometric phase or Mie resonances have recently attracted strong interest, paving the way for developing efficient flat optics for optical vortex generation. In this context, the recent development of J-plates (J represents the total angular momentum) marks a milestone of using dielectric metasurfaces for optical vortex generation The basic principle of a J-plate is based on the simultaneous modulation of both propagation phase and geometric phase responses of a meta-atom. This allows the geometric phase principle to be extended from circular polarization states to any orthogonal polarization states, and each state can carry an arbitrary OAM state. As an example, Figure In addition to metasurfaces, soft materials have also been used for the generation of optical vortices. In this context, cholesteric liquid crystals (ChLCs) are liquid crystalline phases in which the director of rod-like molecules self-assembles into a helical structure, forming a onedimensional soft photonic crystal Notably, the intrinsic stimuli-responsive characteristic of the soft matter material (e.g., ChLCs) will endow corresponding elements with the dynamic tunability. This feature makes such selforganized ChLCs a promising platform for active flat optics, although the performance of their devices is limited by their large pixel sizes on the order of several micrometers. A recent approach combines nanostructured metasurfaces with liquid crystals, demonstrating active control over light beams by high-resolution metasurfaces for dynamic beam steering with large angles Therefore, the integration of metasurfaces with tunable material platforms, including liquid crystals More specifically, a silicon-integrated WGM resonator was designed to generate different OAM modes in the near-infrared wavelength regime The outcoupled optical vortex mode can be determined from the periodic angular gratings, leading to the generation of eight different OAM beams with -4 < ii < +4. Since the WGM features a very large quality factor (~10 8 ) Although WGM resonators offer compact generation of optical vortices, their inherent narrow bandwidths prevent them from being compatible with wavelength-division multiplexing in optical communications. A silicon-based OAM multiplexer chip with a broad bandwidth ranging from 1450 to 1650 nm was demonstrated (see Fig. In addition, 2D plasmonic crystals were designed to observe polarization vortices in momentum space On the other hand, plasmonics opens the possibility of producing subwavelength plasmonic vortices carrying different OAM modes Another key aspect of OAM research and applications is the detection of optical vortices using nanophotonic devices. Conventional vortex beam detection commonly relies on the interference of a helical wavefront with a reference beam Recently, a new concept of on-chip noninterference OAM multiplexing of broadband light was introduced (see Fig. Tremendous progress has been made in understanding the fundamental physics of the combined fields of plasmonics and metamaterials and in utilizing them for a great variety of applications. However, the scope of plasmonic metamaterials is often limited by energy dissipation of noble metals in the UV to visible spectral range. Traditional noble metals such as gold and silver suffer from high losses due to interband transitions OAM detection commonly relies on the design of structures to offer OAM selectivity that can separate different helical wavefronts in space, since photodetectors are only sensitivity to the intensity of light. Recently, a novel concept of OAM-dependent photocurrent detection has been introduced (see Fig. Since the pioneering work by Allen et al. on the OAM in an optical vortex beam, twisted light has been applied for many photonic applications, including optical trapping Optical tweezers can grab particles, atoms, molecules, and living cells with the use of a focused laser beam. For typical optical tweezers, a tightly focused Gaussian beam creates a bright spot to push small particles towards the center of the beam and to hold them there. In 1995, Rubinsztien Dunlop et al. experimentally confirmed that an optical vortex trapping carrying the OAM can optically induce a rotation force to a particle Early work OAM traps open the possibility of control over small particles away from the optical axis, through converting the OAM in an optical vortex beam into a mechanical force that can move the particle around. Depending on the SAM and OAM components in an optical vortex trap, a particle can be rotated either around the its own axis or a circular orbit, respectively (see Fig. As shown in Fig. In additional to the application of optical trapping, optical vortex beams have also been used for improving image quality Notably, unlike the polarization-dependent edge enhancement that is effective only in one direction determined from the incident polarization, OAM-based edge enhancement is isotropic. This work based on an ultrathin metasurface further extends the application of OAM for edge detection and advanced image processing. including polarization Recently, the concept of twisted light holography was introduced, opening the possibility of storing holographic information in different OAM modes To preserve the OAM property in each pixel of a reconstructed holographic image, it is necessary to spatially sample the holographic image by an OAM-dependent two-dimensional Dirac comb function to avoid spatial overlap of the helical wavefront kernel, i.e. creating OAM-pixelated images. In this context, the constituent spatial frequencies (kg in the momentum space) of an OAM-conserving meta-hologram add a linear spatial frequency shift to an incident OAM beam (kin). As such, outgoing spatial frequencies leaving the meta-hologram (kout) possess a helical wavefront inherited from the incident OAM beam, which implies that the OAM-conserving metahologram could create OAM-pixelated holographic images. Mathematically, adding a spiral phase plate that features a phase distribution of lφ (l and φ refer to the topological charge and the azimuthal angle of a phase change, respectively) on an OAMconserving meta-hologram leads to an OAM-selective meta-hologram, of which the constituent spatial frequencies (kg) carry a helical wavefront (Fig. Recent advances in nanotechnology have been a major propellant of using miniaturized nanophotonic devices for the generation and detection of optical vortices, opening new frontiers in wide-ranging photonic applications. In this article, we provided a mini review on recently developed nanophotonic devices for the generation and detection of different optical vortices. The highlighted nanophotonic devices by this article, however, take up a small portion of cuttingedge nanophotonic devices developed for twisted light manipulation. Indeed, the field of nanophotonic manipulation of twisted light has undergone rapid growth in the last decade, generating a large volume of milestone works that cannot be fully covered by this paper. Readers having more broad research interests in the field can benefit from other review articles We have also highlighted some of applications of twisted light, focusing on optical trapping, phase-contrast imaging, and optical holography. Our recently introduced OAM holography concept has the potential to significantly boost the image storage capacity of a single passive hologram, which may greatly improve the future information systems. We believe nanophotonic manipulation of twisted light will continue to make strong impact not only on fundamental understanding of light-matter interactions that harness the OAM, but also on wide-ranging applications that demand ultracompact, ultrahigh-capacity, and ultrahigh-speed optical devices and systems.