We present a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) architecture for inverse Raman amplifier design. This model aims at finding the pump powers and wavelengths required for a target signal power evolution, both in distance along the fiber and in frequency. Using the proposed framework, the prediction of the pump configuration required to achieve a target power profile is demonstrated numerically with high accuracy in Cband considering both counter-propagating and bidirectional pumping schemes. For a distributed Raman amplifier based on a 100 km single-mode fiber, a low mean set (0.51, 0.54 and 0.64 dB) and standard deviation set (0.62, 0.43 and 0.38 dB) of the maximum test error are obtained numerically employing 2 and 3 counter, and 4 bidirectional propagating pumps, respectively. In long-haul optical communications, amplifiers play a crucial role in compensation of the link losses. Designing a desired optical amplification scheme is challenging as the requirements in noise figure (NF) and gain profile can be strict. Regarding this, Erbium-doped fiber amplifiers (EDFAs) and distributed Raman amplifiers (DRAs) have been extensively researched. EDFAs are more power efficient while DRAs provide low NF. Moreover, DRAs' power profile can be adjusted easily by changing the power and wavelength of the pumps One of the main challenges with inverse DRA design is to realize the pump configuration based on a desired gain at the end of the link. Several machine learning solutions have been proposed for this problem in the literature. In Alternatively to designing the power spectral density at the amplifier output (frequency domain), being able to control the power evolution over the transmission span (spatial domain) offers a variety of advantages. Uniform distribution of the power along the span results in a quasi-lossless transmission which minimizes the amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) noise level In this paper, we propose a supervised deep CNN architecture for inverse DRA design in a SMF link to find the pump powers and wavelengths based on the two dimensional signal power profile in frequency and distance along the fiber. The proposed method employs two networks trained in an end-to-end procedure: A CNN network as the feature extraction followed by a multi-layer NN as the regression for predicting the pump power and wavelength values based on the extracted features. The proposed method reduces the high spatial redundancy of the signal power in frequency and distance and also extracts informative features for prediction of the pump parameters. For the evaluation of this framework, numerical simulations are demonstrated in C-band utilizing both counter-propagating and bidirectional pumping schemes. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section II, systems level CNN-based architecture and the training configuration for inverse DRA design is described. Section III demonstrates the numerical simulation results of the proposed method for counter and bidirectional propagating schemes in C-band. Finally, section IV concludes the paper. A. CNN architecture for inverse DRA design Considering a system with a forward mapping denoted as Y = f (X), the inverse design problem aims at modeling the mapping f -1 (.) in order to find the input X providing a desired target output Y. In many cases, the forward mapping is straightforward and can be solved numerically, while the inverse mapping may be very complex or even unknown. Regarding this, machine learning methods, especially deep learning algorithms, have shown a promising performance in learning the approximate inverse mapping between X and Y only based on samples (X s , Y s ) generated from the forward model f (.) In inverse DRA design for a SMF link based on signal power evolution, the forward mapping can be described as P s ( f , z) = f ([P pump ; λ pump ]) where P s ( f , z) = [p ij ] N ch ×N z is the two dimensional signal power in which p ij is signal power at i-th frequency channel and j-th distance index in a WDM system with N ch number of channels and N z distance points, f (.) is a system of nonlinear differential equations for Raman amplification scheme To be able to simultaneously predict the pump powers and the wavelengths, we present a deep learning algorithm to model the inverse mapping [P pump ; λ pump ] = f -1 (P s ( f , z)). The dimensionality of the problem does not allow to simply apply the frameworks of For a CNN-based demonstration of inverse DRA design, we consider the distance-frequency power evolution matrix P s ( f , z) as a two dimensional input to the network aiming to predict the pump configuration leading to the target P s ( f , z). Diagram of the CNN-based method is illustrated in Fig. and a regression network, F(.; θ F ) : R (q×r×n with trainable parameters θ R and θ F , respectively. First, a pixelwise min-max normalization is performed on the input data as a pre-processing step. The minimum and maximum values selected for each frequency-distant points are equal to the the minimum and maximum values of the points in the training set, respectively. Afterwards, the normalized profile is passed to the feature extraction network R(.; θ R ) which consists of three CNN layers with n 1 , n 2 and n 3 filters of size f 1 × f 1 , f 2 × f 2 and f 3 × f 3 , respectively. Moreover, each CNN layer is followed by rectified linear unit (ReLU(x) = max(0, x)) as the activation function which can speed up the training process due to its simplicity in gradient calculation. Furthermore, spatial pooling is carried out by three average-pooling layers inserted in between successive CNN layers with the window size of m 1 × m 1 , m 2 × m 2 and m 3 × m 3 , respectively. The function of pooling layers is to progressively reduce the spatial size of the input feature maps resulting in lower amount of parameters and computations in the network. It is worth noting that the reduction of the scale of representation by each pooling layer is equal to its window size. Consequently, each layer of this network generates informative and compact representations of the input through nonlinear mappings. The output of the last CNN layer is a three-dimensional representation of the input profile consisting of n 3 different two-dimensional representations generated by the different filters of the last layer each with the spatial sizes of q = N ch /(m 1 × m 2 × m 3 ) and r = N z /(m 1 × m 2 × m 3 ). This 3D-representation is converted thereafter to a vector of length q × r × n 3 by the flatten layer and then is passed to the regression network F(.; θ F ). The objective of this network, modeled as a deep fully-connected, is to map the extracted features to the pumping setup. This network has four layers including the layer of size q × r × n 3 , two hidden layers of size N h1 and N h2 and the last layer of size 2N p , representing the pumping configuration vector. The values of N h1 and N h2 are optimized depending on the proposed pump configuration. Since the proposed approach relies on supervised learning, a data-set D = {Y k , X k |k = 1, • • • , K} needs to be generated where K is the number of samples, Y k = [P k pump ; λ k pump ] and X k = P k s are the pumping configuration vector and the corresponding 2D signal profile of the k-th sample, respectively. In this paper we focus on a data-set generated by solving the Raman amplifier differential equations in which y min m and y max m are the minimum and maximum values allowed to be taken by the m-th value of Y, respectively. After the data generation, same as the most supervised learning approaches, we divide the data into separate training, testing and validation sets. Also, we make sure that the training set contains the minimum and the maximum values of each dimensions of the input signal power evolution matrix X k to have a good generalization property in which both R and F are jointly trained to minimize the average cost function C between the original target value Y l and the approximated value Ŷl = R(F(X l ; θ F ); θ R ) of the training set: where L is the number of training samples and for each sample, C is the mean square error (MSE) value between the target and the approximated pump set-up values Y l and Ŷl , respectively: The parameters of the network are updated in an iterative approach by means of gradient descent algorithm and backpropagation Once the training of the network has been completed, we fix the set of the learnt parameters of the network θ = {θ R , θ F } to evaluate its performance. To this end, we put the network into a schematic as illustrated in Fig. In this section, we investigate the CNN-based framework presented in the previous section for the design of Raman amplifiers in C-band. The data-set are generated using the Raman Solver provided by GNPy We consider a single span and analyze the evolution of the power profile jointly over the distance and the entire C-band (between 192 and 196 THz). Also, three propagation cases are deployed for the evaluation of the proposed method: two counterpropagating cases with 2 and 3 pumps and a bidirectional propagating case with 4 pumps (2co+2counter). The ranges for pump powers and wavelengths are specified in Table In order to determine the size of the training data, for each pumping case, different sizes from 1000 to 8000 have been investigated. Models trained on training data-sets with different size, have been evaluated by the MSE on a validation data-set with 1000 points generated separately. Fig. 